HEXAPLA: THAT IS, A SIX-FOLD COMMENTARY upon the most Divine Epistle of the
holy Apostle S. PAVL to the ROMANS: wherein according to the Authors former
method six things are observed in every Chapter. 1. the Text with the diverse
readings. 2. Argument and method. 3. the Questions discussed. 4. Doctrines
noted. 5. Controversies handled. 6. Moral uses observed.

Wherein are handled the greatest points of Christian religion: concerning
justification by faith, c. 3, 4. the fall of man, c. 5. the combat between the
flesh and the spirit, c. 7. Election, c. 9. the vocation of the Jews, c. 11.
with many other Questions and Controversies summed in the end of the Table.

Divided into two books: the first unto the 12. chapter, containing matter of
Doctrine: the second belonging to Exhortation, in the five last Chapters.

THE FIRST BOOK.

Act. 10.15. He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the
Gentiles, etc.

Ambros. de Joseph. c.10. Binae stolae datae Benjamin, sic praecellit Paulus
and eius exvberit port^^^^^* Double garments was given to Benjamin, so Paul (of
Benjamin) excelled, and his portion did exceed.

PRINTED BY CANTRELL LEG, PRINTER TO the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1611.

TO THE MOST CHRISTIAN, RIGHT NOBLE, MOST EXCELLENT AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES
by the grace of God, KING of Great BRITAIN, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the true Christian Faith, etc.
GRacious Sovereign: As I have heretofore (by Gods special grace assisting
me) travailed in some books of the old Testament, so now I have assayed to do
the like in the new: Non potest quisquam mare navigare increpidus, nisi qui
ante in fluminibus navigarit, Ambros de Abraham, lib 4. Sicut frumentu gemino
molarum opere curatum nite^cir, Hierome. (...). Prophetis and Euangelio, non
tria, sed vnum tabernaculum. hom. 5. in Leuit.
For like as one cannot sail in the Sea without fear, that has not first
tried the rivers: so the deep Sea of mysteries in the new Law cannot well be
sounded, unless we have first coasted by the old: and between them both, as
the wheat between the two milstones, so the truth is tried out: Origin well
obsetueth, that this was S. Peter's error when he would have had three
tabernacles, for Christ, Moses, and Elias: for I have read (says he) that for
the Prophets and the Gospel, there are not three but one tabernacle: There is
the same substance of both, and one truth: both the Prophets and Apostles were
ministers of the same house, wherein are diverse mansions: the one showing us
only (as it were) the nether rooms, the other bring us into the upper
chamber, where Christ ear his passover with his disciples: Mark. 14.15.
Bernard well notes that the divine Scriptures have a threefold grace; Diuinae
Scripturae triplicem habent gratiam, deliciotae ad faporem, solidae ad
nutrimentu, efficacesad medecinam, in Cantic. ser. 67.
they are pleasant to the taste, solid for nourishment, and efficacious for
medicine: the first of these is seen specially in the old Scriptures, which is
adorned with prophetical types and figures, as meat curiously addressed to
the taste: but the soundness of nourishment, and efficacy to heal, is most
found in the new.

And thus having made an entrance into the Apostolical writings, I have made
choice of S. Paul's epistles, and among them of this to the Romans, which is as
a key unto the rest: which as Augustine says of the Gospel of S. John, est
contra omnes haereticos, is against all heretics: this one epistle beats
down all both old and new heresies: In Scripturis tibi loquitur Deus, non
minore fide, quam si tibi ore ad os loqueretur. de duplic. Martyr.
and that which Cyprian affirms of the Scriptures in general, that God
speaks there as verily, as if he spoke unto us face to face: so in this
divine epistle such heavenly oracles are uttered, as if they were delivered
with Gods own mouth.

There are few either old heretical positions, or new popish errors, which if
they be propounded plainly, may not be confuted by this epistle; If I say,
Ecclesiae victoria est, vos aperte dicere, quod sentitis, etc sententias
vestras prodidisse superasse est. Hierome ad Cresiphon.
If I say, they will utter their mind plainly without equiuocating tricks,
and sophisticated doubting: for as Hierome says, it is the victory of the
Church for you to speak plainly that you think, and to bewray your opinions
is all one as to convince them.

We bless God, who has raised up your Majesty as a notable instrument both
of discovering and dissuading Popish error and superstition: to these your
gracious proceedings in the building of Gods spiritual house, all your
faithful subjects and true hatred Christians use those joyful acclamations,
which the people did to Zorobabel, Zachar. 4.7 9.
when he brought forth the head stone, saying, grace, grace unto it: of
Zorobabel it is said, his hands have laid the foundation of this house, his
hands also shall finish it. And we all heartily pray, that by your Princely
hands, this work by you happily begun, utterly to extirpate Popish
superstition, Nondum vindicatus est, qui vindicat, q^t in coeli^ adoratur,
nondum vindicatur in terti. de bon. pattent.
may in good time be perfitly accomplished: We crave not revenge upon our
adversaries for their malice, for as Cyprian says, Christ is not yet revenged,
who shall take revenge, and he who is worshipped in heaven, is not yet revenged
in earth: But our desire is, that such wholesome laws as are already enacted,
may effectually be executed, to bridle Popish recusancie, to cause those to
return, which are already seduced, and to keep them from infection, which
are not yet perverted: Ille haereticum interficit, qui haeriticum non patitur:
nostra autem correctio viuifecatio est. lib. 3. ^on. P^lag.
for as Hierome well says, he kills an heretic that suffers him no longer
to be a heretic: as for our correction, it is their quickening. God has made
your Highness as the Pilote and steeresman to guide this little ship of the
English Church, that it dash not upon the rocks of false religion: the
ministers of God are as the oatemen: they which are lusty and strong to work,
Ingemui tanta nobis in esse negligentiam, vt nec veritatem possemus astrucre,
cum alij valiant pro veritate inculcare mendacium. de vir. perfect. Tanta debet
esse merces euangelizantis regnum, qua neque contristetur, neque txtollatur. in
1. Tim. 3 Illam stellam servants, quae Magos perduxit ad Christum.
would be set to their tackling: of such we may complain with Hierome, I
mourned to see such negligence among us, that some cannot defend the truth,
whereas they are forward to thrust upon us lies for truth, etc. others would
labor at the oars, but they are feeble and want strength: such would be
encouraged, as Ambrose says, such ought to be the reward of him that preaches
the glad tidings of the kingdom, that he neither thereby be discouraged, nor
lifted up, etc.

Thus while both the sturdie mariners do fall to their business, and the weak
sailors are hartened to play their parts, your sacred authority guiding the
helm, we may at the length bring the ship by Gods grace safely to the shore,
fearing nothing while we follow our load-starre Christ Jesus, and as Ambrose
says, observe that star which brought the wisemen unto Christ: who in his
good time, we trust, shall conduct this our ship, with our Sovereign Pilote,
the noble officers, the painful mariners, and the patient passengers, unto
the haven of everlasting life: Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble subject, ANDREW WILLET.

The Preface to the Christian Reader.
HEre I offer unto thy judgment and charitable view (Christian brother) a
Commentary upon the most divine Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans: wherein are
handled the chief points of Christian religion, concerning justification by
faith, the combat between the flesh and the spirit, election, vocation of the
Gentiles, the reiection, and final conversion of the Jews: whereof I may say
as Ambrose, of Beniamins sack: facco soluto reluxit argentum, the sack being
loosed, the silver appeared: so this epistle being unfolded, the treasure hid
therein will show it self.

Blessed Paul is by the Lords own mouth called electum vas, a chosen vessel:
Act. 10.15.
and this epistle of his is as a precious vessel, that contains in it most
heavenly liquor: S. Peter gives this testimony of S. Paul's epistles, 2. Pet.
3.15.
that he writ according to the wisdom given unto him: his writings are both
divine and wise: Augustine well calls him, nutritorem Ecclesiae, the
nourisher of the Church: as he says to the Corinthians, that he gave them
milk to drink: 1. Cor. 3.2.
quae Pauli epistola non melle dulcior, non lacte candidior? de sanct ser. 2^.
what epistle of Paul (says Augustine) is not more sweet then honey, and
whiter then milk?

But of all other writers Chrysostom is most ample in setting forth the
commendation of this our Apostle: comparing the cleernesse of his doctrine,
with the brightness of the heavens, yea preferring it: The heavens (says he)
all this while have been seen, yet move not much: but Paul preaching but a
short time, totum orbem attraxit, has drawn the whole world after him: the
heauen's do keep their course and go no further: mentis Paulum sublimitas
omnes coelos transcendit, but the sublimitie of Paul's mind went beyond the
heavens: astra cum fierent, etc. the Angels wondered at the stars when they
were made, hunc vero Deus admiratus est, etc. but God himself wondered at Paul:
saying, this is a chosen vessel unto me: the heavens are often cast over with
clouds, Pauli mentem nulla abnubilauit tentatio: in cap. 1. epist. ad Roman.
morali.
but no tentation did ouercast the mind of Paul: Thus excellently Chrysostom.

In the reading of this Commentary, let the Reader observe: that in the
diverse readings, V. stands for Vatablus, L. for the vulgar Latin, Be. for
Beza, S. for the Syriake, T. for Tremellius translation, B. for the great
Engish bible, Ge. for the Geneva translation, Gr. for the Greek, and sometime,
Or. for the original.

Those my travels I commend unto the Church of God, praying for the prosperity
thereof, and craving again their mutual prayers: that as S. Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
the word of God may have a free passage, and be glorified, etc. As for my
self, I trust I shall be more and more resolved to say with S. Paul, I pass
not at all, neither is my life dear unto my self, so that I may fulfill my
course with joy, and the ministration which I have received of the Lord Jesus,
to testify the Gospel of the grace of God: To whom be praise for ever, Amen.

THE MOST DIVINE EPISTLE OF THE MOST holy Apostle S. PAVL to the Romans
explaned.
Certain observations premised of the New Testament in general.
1. The Argument and matter of the New Testament.
THe New Testament though it had the same Author with the Old, namely CHRIST
JESUS, and the same end and scope to bring us unto Christ, for the Law was a
schoolmaster to the same end, Gal. 3.19. yet it differs from the old: 1. in
the substance and doctrine, 2. in the ratification, and confirmation, 3. in the
rites and manner, 4. in the persons, to whom it was delivered and committed.
1. Whereas the old Testament promised eternal life under the condition of
perfect obedience of the Law, the Gospel only requires the obedience of
faith, Romans 10.5, 6. 2. The old Testament was confirmed by the sprinkling of
the blood of beasts, Exodus 24.8. but the New was sealed and ratified by the
blood and death of Christ, Hebr. 9.14.17. 3. There were other rites and
ceremonies of the old Law, as the sacrifices and oblations, circumcision, the
paschal lamb, and such like: Christ has instituted new Sacraments of the
Gospel, Baptism, and the Eucharist. 4. The old Testament was made only with
the Hebrews: but the new is commended unto the Church of God dispersed over
the world, and therefore it is called Catholic.

The books of the New Testament, are 1. historical, as of the acts, the
sayings and doings of our blessed Savior, in the four Evangelists: or of the
Apostles, in the book of the Acts. 2. or doctrinall, which specially concern
doctrine and instruction, without a continued historical narration: such are
the Epistles of the holy Apostles. 3. or Prophetical, as the book of the
Revelation: yet though the books may be thus divided in general, there are
both heavenly doctrines intermingled in the historical books, as the heavenly
sermons of our blessed Savior in the Gospel, and prophesies also are inserted
both in the historical and doctrinall books, as that of the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the end of the world, Matthew. 24. and of the calling of the
Jews, Romans 11. of the coming of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

2. Of the language and tongue wherein the New Testament was originally written.
As the Old Testament was written originally in Hebrewe, because it was
committed unto the Hebrews, Romans 3.2. so the New was set forth by the Apostles
and Evangelists in the Greek tongue, which was then general, and used of the
most famous nations, because it concerned the Church of God, which was
dispersed in all countries.

There are three other languages, wherein the New Testament, or some part
thereof was written: first the Gospel of S. Matthewe, is held to have been
written in the vulgar Hebrew tongue, which was then the Syriake, Iren. l. 3. c.
1. Hierom. praefat. in commentar. in Matthew. which Athanasius thinks to have
been translated into Greek by S. James, some think by S. John: likewise the
Epistle to the Hebrews is thought by some to have been first written in the
Hebrewe tongue: But neither of these is certain: 1. It is rather like that S.
Matthewe writ his Gospel in Greek: because he cites many places of the old
Testament according to the Septuagint: as that Isay. 40.3. alleged, Matthew.
3.3. and Psalm. 22.18. cited, Matthew. 27.35. and the like is to be seen
elsewhere. As also Matthew. 27.46. these words, Eli, Eli, Lamasabacthani, are
interpreted by the Evangelist in the Greek tongue: which interpretation had
been superfluous if he had written in the Syriake or vulgar Hebrewe tongue: 2.
for the same reasons, it is most probable, that the epistle to the Hebrews was
not written in the Hebrew, but in the Greek tongue originally: because the
Apostle follows the translation of the Septuagint: and c. 7. he interprets
the word Melchizedek in the Greek tongue, which signifies the king of
righteousness.

An other language, wherein the new Testament is written, is the Syriake: into
which tongue the Syrians do think that the New Testament was translated by
S. Mark: But 1. this is not like, that this Syriake translation should be so
ancient: for then these ancient fathers Origin, Clemens Alexandrin, Epiphan.
Hierome, Theodoret, Damascene, which were Bishops and Presbiters in Syria, or
Egypt, would have made some mention thereof in their writings, which they do
not. 2. And though the Syriake translation could be proved, to have been of
such antiquity, yet it must give place unto the authentical Greek, whereout
it was translated.

A third tongue is the Latin, in the which Bellarmine out of Adrianus Finus,
lib. 6 flagell. Iudcor. c. 80. and Damasus pontifical. would prove that S.
Mark writ his Gospel first at Rome, and afterward turned it into Greek at
Aquilea: But this is very improbable. 1. Because the Greek tongue was then
more generally used then the Latin, and S. Paul writing to the Romans, spoke
in the Greek tongue for the reason, so also would S. Matthewe have done. 2. If
the Greek were translated out of the Latin, why then do not the Romanists
use a Latin translation answerable to the Greek? whereas their vulgar
translation much differs from the Greek: some where it adds, as Mark. 1.1.
the name (Isaia) the Prophet is inserted: sometime it leaves out, as Mark.
6.11. all that clause is omitted: verily, verily, I say unto you, it shall be
easier for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, then for that city:
sometime it choppeth and changes, as c. 5.1. Garasenes for Gadarens: It
remains then that the New Testament was originally written in the Greek
tongue for the reasons before alleged.

3. The questions discussed.
Quest. 1. Of the word Testament, what it signifies, and of what things it
must be understood.
1. The Hebrew word berith, signifies both (...), a compact or covenant made
between parties, as Aquila translateth, as Hierome witnesses, in Malach. 2.
and (...), a testament, or disposition of ones last will, as the word is used
by the Apostle, Heb. 9.17.

2. Both these acceptions and takings of the word agree unto the holy Gospel:
first it is a covenant between God and his people: the Lord offering
reconciliation on his part, and requiring conditions to be performed on our
part: as in the Law obedience, and perfect keeping of the law, so now the
obedience of faith in Christ, our Mediator, and Reconciler: It is also a
Testament not with any relation unto us, but only in respect of the Testator,
and will-maker Christ Jesus, who ratified and confirmed both the Old and New
Testament by his death, in the one prefigured and promised, in the other
exhibited and performed: the testamentorie tables are the holy Scriptures both
of the Old, and New Testament: the witnesses are the Prophets and Apostles,
the writers also of this Testament: the seals are the Sacraments both of the
one and the other.

3. The Old and new covenant and Testament are one and the same in substance,
both in respect of the parties between whom the covenant and conuention is
made, God, and his Church, and of the end and scope, which is to bring us unto
the everlasting inheritance: but the manner of dispensation is diverse,
according to the condition of the times, and the quality of the persons.

4. This covenant made between God and man some distinguish into the covenant
of nature and grace: but every covenant now indeed is rather of grace: the
natural covenant made between the Creator and Man in Paradise, was violated
by his transgression and disobedience: the covenant which now remains, is
wholly to be ascribed unto grace, and it is either of some temporal grace and
benefit, and that either general, as was that which the Lord made with Noah,
not to destroy the world any more with waters, Genesis 9. or particular, as was
the promise made to Abraham, to inherit the land of Canaan, Genesis 15.18. and
that made to Phineas concerning the priesthood, Numb. 25.12. either of
spiritual graces, as of the remission of sins, and the inheriting of
everlasting life in Christ.

2. Quest. Of the diverse significations of the old and new Testament.
1. The old Testament is 1. either taken for the doctrine of the law, which
required exact obedience to the commandments, under the most grievous
commination of malediction unto the transgressors: yet covertly was propounded
unto them the doctrine of repentance and faith in Christ, under the shadows
and rudiments of the Law, which were imposed upon that people, partly to humble
them, and to bow down their stiff necks, partly to discern them from other
nations, and partly to lead them by the hand as unto Christ: so in this sense
the old Testament 1. comprehends the doctrine of legal obedience, 2. the
ceremonial and ministerial part of their legal rites and service, 3. the
external policy and regiment: in these respects the old Testament is
abolished, and the Lord says he will make a new covenant with the house of
Israel, Ierem. 31.31. 2. the old Testament is taken for the writings and tables
of the scriptures: in which sense it is not abolished: one iotte thereof shall
not perish, Matthew. 5.18.

2. The New Testament also is taken diuersely. 1. either for the spiritual
doctrine, which requires obedience of faith in Christ, without any legal
observations. 2. or for the Sacraments: as Christ calls the Eucharist the
New Testament in his blood in the institution of his last supper. 3. or for
the writings of the Evangelists, and Apostles: So it is new, 1. because it
succeeded the old. 2. because it sets forth the new doctrine of faith
without legal rites. 3. it has new sacraments, a new form of worship, a new
kind of Church. 4. it is confirmed after a new manner, not by the blood of
beasts, but by the most holy blood of the Blessed Mediator.

3. Quest. Of the books of the new Testament their number and authority.
1. Concerning the number, and authority of the books of the New Testament,
there is no question among the Christians, though the obstinate Jews wilfully
refuse them all: they are 27. in number, which Athanasius in Synops.
distinguishes into these five orders: 1. the four Evangelists. 2. the Acts of
the Apostles. 3. the 7. Canonical Epistles: one of S. James, 2. of S. Peter,
3. of S. John, and one of S. Jude: 4. the 14. Canonical epistles of S. Paul.
5. the Prophetical book of the Revelation: But all these may be reduced to 3.
kinds: the historical, doctrinall, prophetical books: as is before showed in
the argument.

2. But these books of the New Testament were not always received with the
same approbation. 1. Some were ever held to be of undoubted authority, as the
4. Evangelists, the Acts of the Apostles, the 1. of S. Peter, the 1. of S.
John: all S. Paul's Epistles, excepting only that to the Hebrews. 2. Some were
doubted of by a few, but of the most received, as the 2. of Peter, the 2. and
3. of John, one of James, one of Jude, that to the Hebrews, and the
Apocalypse: But at the length these books were received and acknowledged for
Canonical by a general consent: 3. Other books besides these, were privately
received by some in the Church, and were called Ecclesiastical, as the Acts of
Paul, the Epistle of Barnabas, the Revelation of Peter, the Gospel according
to the Hebrews. 4. Some books were foisted in by Heretics, and more generally
rejected of the Church: as the Gospel of Andrew, Thomas, Matthias: the Acts of
Peter, Thomas, Matthias, and of the other Apostles: which were judged to be
Apochryphall books, and of no authority. 1. because in the writings of those,
which succeeded the Apostles no mention is made of them. 2. the style is
diverse from the style of the Apostles. 3. and the doctrine contained in those
books dissenting from the doctrine of the Apostles.

3. Beside these two latter sorts of books, all the rest are undoubtedly held
to be Canonical, and of equal authority: and therefore that distinction of
Sixtus Senensis is to be taken heed of: who calls some books of the New
Testament (...), canonical of the first sort, some (...), canonical of the
second sort, which were sometime doubted of: for by this means should they not
be of equal and the like authority: And beside, he says, that these latter
were held by some of the fathers to be Apochryphall books, understanding
Apochryphal books for such, as had an hid and unknown author: But indeed the
Apochrypha are so called, not for that their author was unknown, for then
diverse of the Canonical books should be Apochrypha, but because they were of
an hid and obscure authority: in which sense none of the fathers ever held any
of the Canonical books of the New Testament to be Apochrypha.

4. As the Heretics brought in counterfeit books of their own into the New
Testament: so they rejected diverse parts of the Canonical books. 1. Faustus
the Manichie held diverse things to be false in the New Testament: Augustine.
lib. 33. cont. Faust. c. 3. 2. The Ebionites received none but the Gospel
according to Saint Matthew, Iren. l. 1. c. 26. 3. the Marcionites only allowed
S. Lukes Gospel, Epiphan. haeres. 42.4. the Acts of the Apostles, and S. Paul's
epistles the Tatiane, and Seueriane heretics rejected, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 29. 5.
Marcion and Basilides the epistles to Timothy, Titus, and to the Hebrews,
Hierom. praefat. ad Titum.

4. Places of doctrine in general.
1. Doct. Of the excellency of the New Testament above, and beyond the Old.
1. It excels in the the matter and doctrine, the law promises life only
to those that keep it, the Gospel unto those which believe in Christ, Romans
10.5, 6.

2. In the subject: the law was written in tables of stone: but the Gospel is
written by the spirit of God in the fleshie tables of our hearts, 2. Cor. 3.2.

3. In the end: the old Testament was the ministration of death, and the
killing letter: the other is the ministration of the spirit which gives life,
2. Cor, 3.6, 7.

4. In the condition and quality: the law imposed the hard yoke, and servitude
of ceremonies, which was impossible to be borne, Act. 15.10. but Christ's yoke
is easy: Math. 11. which of servants adopteth us to be the sons of God, Romans
8.15.

5. In the minister: Moses was the typical Mediator of the Old Testament: but
Christ the Lord and builder of the house, is the Mediator of the New, Heb. 3.3.

6. In the fruits and effects: the Old Testament could not purge the
conscience from sin: but the sprinkling of the blood of Christ purges the
conscience from dead works, Heb. 9.13, 14.

7. In the manner: the old Testament was folded up in types and figures: as
Moses veiled the glory of his face: but now we see the glory of the Lord in
the Gospel with open face, 2. Cor. 3.18.

8. In the ratification: the old Testament was confirmed with the blood of
beasts: the New by the death of Christ, quest. 17.18.

9. In the seals: the old was attended upon by bloody sacrifices, and other
such like hard Sacraments, as circumcision, which was painful to the flesh:
the New has easy and unbloody sacraments as the seals, neither so many in
number: namely Baptism and the Eucharist.

10. Another excellency is in persons, whom this New Testament concerns:
which is not given only to one people, and nation, as the old was: but unto
the Catholic Church of God dispersed over the face of the earth: as the
Apostles are commanded to go and teach all nations, Matthew. 28.19.

In these respects, the Apostle thus gives pre-eminence to the New Testament
before the old: Heb. 8.6. he has obtained a more excellent office, in as much
as he is the Mediator of a better Testament, which is established upon better
promises: Not that Christ was not Mediator also of the old Testament (for
without him neither can there be any Church, nor covenant made with the Church)
but because Christ, but shadowed forth in the old Testament, is more fully
revealed, and manifested in the New.

5. Places of confutation.
1. Controv. Against those which think it is against the nature of the New
Testament to be committed to writing.
Of this opinion are certain of a fantastical spirit, which to this purpose
abuse that place of Jeremy. 32.33. I will write my law in their hearts: and
that of S. Paul, 2. Cor 3.3. You are our epistle written not with ink, but
with the spirit: whence they would infer, that the New Testament is not to
be written, but that it consists in revelation and the instinct of the Spirit.

Contra. 1. If the New Testament were not to be extant in writing, then the
Apostles had done a superfluous and unnecessary work, in writing the books
of the New Testament, whereunto they were directed by the spirit of God: and
S. John is directly commanded to write, Apocal. 14.13. and S. Paul says, that
all Scripture is given by inspiration: 2. Tim. 3.16. The spirit of God then
moved them to put in writing these holy books of the New Testament; which
are part of the Scripture.

2. It follows not because the Lord writes the Gospel in our hearts by his
spirit, that therefore it is not to be written: for by the writing thereof
which is preached and read, says is wrought in the heart by the operation of
the spirit: as the Apostle says, Romans 10.17. that faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word. And again the Prophet there shows a difference
between the law and the Gospel: the law gave Precepts, but could not incline
the heart to obedience: but the Gospel does not only command faith, but by the
operation of the spirit works the same thing which it requires.

3. In the other place of the Apostle, 1. they would make the Apostle contrary
to himself, as though he should speak against the writing of Euangelical
precepts, whereas the Apostle did write that very epistle with ink. 2. he
speaks not of the Gospel, but of the Corinthians, whom he calls his
Epistle. 3. and by the latter in that place he understands not the writing
with ink, or such like, but the external doctrine without the grace and life
of the spirit: such as the doctrine of the Law was.

2. Controv. Against the Romanists, which hold, that the writing of the Gospel,
and other Scriptures, is not simply necessary to salvation.
First, we will examine the arguments which are brought by them to confirm
this their unsound opinion. 1. Bellarmine thus reasons: that the Apostles did
reach the Church at the first without Scriptures, therefore they are not simply
necessary, but only for the greater profit of the Church: like as an horse is
necessary for ones journey, for his more speedy travail, but not simply
necessary, because he may go a foot, Bellar. l. 4. de verb. c. 4.

Contra. 1. True it is, that the writing of the Scriptures are not simply
necessary in respect of God, for he by his absolute power could find a way to
teach his Church otherwise, but in respect of Gods ordinance, which has
appointed the Scriptures for edifying of his Church, they are necessary: as
bread is necessary for man's sustentation, though God can nourish and maintain
life without bread. 2. It is not true that the Apostles did teach without
Scriptures; for they had the prophetical writings first, and afterward their
own, and while the Apostles themselves were living and present, the writing of
the Gospel was not so necessary, as afterward. 3. The writing then of the
Gospel was necessary, 1. both in respect of that age present, for the
preventing and stay of heresies, which might be more strongely resisted and
gainesayed, by an evident and extant rule of faith. 2. in regard of those
Churches, to whom the Apostles preached not by lively voice, it was necessary
that they should have some perfect direction by writing. 3. and that the ages
also to come might have a rule of their faith.

Arg. 2. The Church may as well now be instructed without the Scriptures, as it
was for the space of 2000. years before the law was written, Bellar. ibid.

Contra. 1. In the first age of the world, the light of nature was not so much
obscured, as afterward, when the law was written, and therefore the argument
follows not, the Scriptures were not necessary then, therefore not now. 2.
because the old world wanted the Scriptures to direct them, that was the cause,
why they were given over generally to all kind of profaneness: and therefore
to prevent the like mischief afterward, the Lord thought good to give his
written word to his Church.

Argum. 3. The Apostles did preach much more, then they did write, and many
things they delivered to the Church by tradition: so that not the Scriptures by
themselves, are a total rule and direction of the faith, but partial together
with the traditions and ordinances of the Church.

Contra. 1. The Apostles did indeed speak more, then they did or could write,
but yet they preached the same things, and delivered no other precepts
concerning faith and manners, but the same, which they committed to writing. 2.
many things concerning orders, and especially in particular Churches, the
Apostles left by tradition: but no other precepts and rules of faith, then they
had written. 3. The Scriptures are no partial, but a total and perfect rule
of faith: for mensura adaequata esse debet mensurate, the measure must be
equal unto that which is measured: it must neither be longer nor shorter: if
then the Scripture should come short of faith, it were no perfect rule, nay it
were no rule at all, Pareus.

Now on the contrary that the Scriptures are necessary, thus it is made
plain. 1. From the author: the Prophets and Apostles did write by the instinct
of the spirit: but the spirit moves not to any unnecessary or superfluous
work. 2. from the office of the Apostles, which was to teach all nations,
Matthew 28.19. which seeing they could not do in their own persons, it was
necessary that they should preach unto them by their writings. 3. from the
end and use of the Scriptures. 1. whether for instruction in doctrine: for all
Scriptures are written for our learning, Romans 15.4. or direction unto virtuous
living, or decision of Questions, and confuting of errors, it was necessary
that the Scriptures should be written to these uses, as the Apostle shows, 1.
Timoth. 3.16. that the man of God may be perfect. The Scriptures then were
necessary to be extant for the aforesaid purposes: in so much that the Apostle
says, if any Angel from heaven do preach any other Gospel, etc. let him be
accursed: whereupon Chrysostom says, Paulus etiam Angelis de coelo
descendentibus proponit Scripturas, Paul even propounds the Scriptures to the
Angels descending from heaven, in Galat. c. 1.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Of the happiness of these times under the Gospel, in comparison of
the former times under the Law.
In that the Lord has clearly manifested and opened unto his Church by Jesus
Christ, the high mysteries, which lay hid before, therein appears the
singular love of God to his Church, and the great pre-eminence, which the
faithful now have in comparison of the people of God under the Law: as our
Savior says unto his Apostles, Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your
ears for they hear, for verily I say unto you, that many Prophets, and
righteous men have desired to see those things which you see, and could not see
them, etc. Matthew. 13.16, 17. the use hereof is to stir us up unto
thankfulness unto God, for this so great mercy showed unto his Church.

2. Observe. The dangerous estate of those, which are found to be contemners of
the Gospel and New Law.
The greater light is revealed, and the more knowledge that men have, the
greater obedience does God look for at their hand: disobedience then now unto
the Gospel of truth, is so much more greiuous, then was transgression under the
law, as the times of light and knowledge in brightness exceed the days of
ignorance and blindness: thus the Apostle reasons, the night is past, and
the day is at hand, let us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and
put on the armor of light, Romans 13.12. So also Hebr. 2.2. the Apostle says,
if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression, etc.
received a just recompense of reward: how much more if we neglect so great
salvation, etc.

More special observations upon the whole Epistle.
1. The Argument and Method of S. Paul's epistles in general, and specially of
this Epistle.
1. Nicephorus lib. 2. c. 34. makes the end and scope of Saint Paul's Epistles
to consist in these two things. 1. that the Apostle, what he preached being
present, he committed to writing, to put them in memory, when he was absent.
2. And that which he did more obscurely deliver by word of mouth, or passed
over in silence, he did in his writings handle and set forth more fully and
plainly: But the Apostle had diverse other occasions offered him in his
epistles, then fell out in his sermons, and therefore it is to be thought, that
although his sermons and writings agreed in the substance of doctrine, yet he,
as occasion did move him, in his epistles otherwise handles matters, then he
did in his preaching.

2. His Epistles then may be reduced to these five kinds. 1. Some belong unto
doctrine, wherein he lays the foundation of faith and of Apostolical
instruction: as in the Epistles to the Romans, Ephesians, Philippians,
Colossians, the first to the Thessalonians, to the Hebrews. 2. Some do
confute and refell errors of doctrine, and life, as the 1. to the Corinthians,
the epistle to the Galatians, to the Colossians in part, the 2. to the
Thessalonians. 3. Some are apologeticall, wherein the Apostle makes Apology,
and uses defense for himself, against the false Apostles, as in the 2. to the
Corinthians. 4. Some specially concern Ecclesiastical offices, as the Epistles
to Timothy and Titus. 5. Some are written by way of mediation and
intercession, as the epistle to Philemon.

3. The end and scope of S. Paul's writings, as of the rest of the Scriptures,
were these. 1. to set forth the true and sincere doctrine of faith. 2. to
confute and convince errors. 3. to reclaim men from vice and corruption of
life. 4. to instruct them in the works of righteousness: these sower are
touched by the Apostle, 2. Timoth. 3.16. where he shows a fowrefold use of
the Scripture, it is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and instruct
in righteousness. 5. the edifying of the weak, is an other end, that they
fall not away from the faith. 6. and the exhorting of those which are slack,
that they may go on in their Christian course. 7. the comforting of the
afflicted, that in tribulation they despair not or faint: these three ends
also the Apostle speaks of, 1. Cor. 14.3. He that prophesies, speaks unto
men to edifying, to exhortation, and comfort.

Of the occasion, argument, and Methods of this Epistle of S. Paul to the
Romans.
1. The occasion of the writing of this Epistle seems almost to have been
the same that the Apostle took to write unto the Galatians: which was this,
the believing Jews, dispersed among the Gentiles, did think that the
ceremonies and observations of Moses law were still to be retained: whereupon
did arise great stirs between the believing Jews and Gentiles: the one
despising the Gentiles, thinking themselves to be privileged by the promises
made to the seed and posterity of Abraham, and urging the rites of Moses law,
as though they helped unto justification: the other insulted against the Jews,
as glorying too much in their Christian liberty, and exemption from Moses
law, and taking the Jews, to be rejected of God: the Apostle to compound this
dissension among them, writes this Epistle; this was the occasion.

2. And accordingly the Apostle frames this Epistle: first generally, showing,
that neither the Gentiles by their natural knowledge, nor the Jews by the
works of the Law could be justified: but that both the one and the other were
freely justified by faith in Christ: this general tractate of justification by
faith, is extended unto the 9. Chapter. Then particularly he comes to
suppress the insolency of the Jews, showing that the promises were not made
unto all that were of Abraham's carnal seed, but only to the true Israel, so
many as were of the faith of Abraham, c. 9.10. then he also turns him to the
Gentiles, that they should not as it were insult in the reiection of the Jews:
for it was not total, not final, God would have mercy on them, if they
continued not in vnbeleefers. 11. The rest of the Epistle is spent in Christian
exhortation, 1. to the mutual offices of charity among brethren, c. 12. of
duty toward Magistrates, c. 13. how they should behave themselves toward the
weak brethren, c. 14, 15. And then after diverse salutations he concludes.

The Method then and parts of the Epistle are these two, the first is
doctrinall, unto the 12. chapter, the second exhortatorie, in the 5. last
chapters, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

In the first the two chief points of Christian religion are handled at large,
namely of justification, to c. 9. and of election and reprobation, c. 9, 10, 11.

In the doctrine of justification, 1. the manner and form thereof is declared:
2. the fruits: in the first, the false way unto justification by works is
rejected and refused, c. 1, 2, 3. to v. 21. then the true way, which is by
faith, is affirmed and proved, c. 3.21. v. c. 4. the effects of justification
follow, as the peace of conscience, c. 5. the newnes of life, c. 6. exemption
and freedom from the law, c. 7. constancy and perseverance in affliction, c.
8.

In the doctrine of predestination and election: 1. he treats of the
reiection of the Jews, c. 9. 2. of the vocation of the Gentiles, c. 10. 3. of
the restoring of the Jews again, c. 11.

2. In the exhortatorie part: there are first exhortations general concerning
all Christians, c. 12. then particular, as of duties toward Magistrates, c. 13.
toward the weak, c. 14, 15. secondly he concludes with salutations, both of
himself, wherein he professes his love toward them, and purpose to come unto
them, c. 15. v. 15. to the end, then of others, c. 16.

2. Of the style and phrase which S. Paul uses in this Epistle.
1. S. Paul, as he uses not any affected eloquence, or elegant style, or
entising speech, whereof he gives this reason, that your faith should not be
in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God, 1. Cor. 3.2. So neither yet is
the Apostles style base or barbarous, but ex vtroque temperatus, of a mixed kind
betwixt both: who by a pithie and sententious kind of writing, full of
arguments, and forcible persuasions, in grave but plain words, delivers high
mysteries. There is a double kind of eloqu^ce, one which consists in the
eloquence of speech, and the curious choice of words, such as the Orators
among the heathen excelled in: this shall we not find in Paul: there is an
other which is grave, sober, consisting rather in the force of persuasion, then
in the number of words: and this kind of eloquence S. Paul uses: Martyr. So
that, as Chrysostom says, lingua illius supra solemn emicuit, doctrinaeque
sermon supra reliquos omnes exuberavit, his tongue or speech was brighter then
the Sun, and in the utterance of doctrine he excelled all the rest, etc. and
they all gave place unto him for speech, vnde and Mercurius ab infidelibus
putabatur, quod sermoni praesset, whereupon he was of the Infidels called
Mercury, because the office of speaking was committed to him, etc. Chrysostom.
argum. in epist. ad Roman. Augustine herein concurreth with Chrysostom, that
although he affected not eloquence, ea tamen sapientiam eius comitata est, yet
it did follow and accompany his wisdom. lib. 4. de doctr. Christ.

2. But there are which think otherwise of S. Paul's style. 1. Origin says,
that Paul has many hyperbata, and auantopedota, many imperfect transitions,
and clauses of sentences not one answering an other, but breaking off abruptly:
and M. Beza in his preface to Oleviaues commentary, makes mention of a famous
man, nostra memoria magnus, of great name in our memory, who therein concurred
with Origin, but he leaves it in doubt, whether this defect in the style were
to be ascribed unto Paul himself, or to Tertius his Scribe. 2. Hierome
although he be variable and diverse in this matter, yet thinks that S. Paul
though he were eloquent in his own tongue, yet has no pure Greek style, but
such as the Cilicians used, and was very full of Hebraismes. 3. Yea S. Paul
himself seems to acknowledge his want of eloquence, 2. Cor. 11.6. Though I
be rude in speaking, yet am I not so in knowledge. 4. and S. Peter says of S.
Paul's Epistles, that many things therein are hard to be understood. Thus it is
objected against S. Paul's style.

Contra. 1. The reason why S. Paul seems sometime to break off abruptly, and
leave his sentences imperfect, is, because of the sublimitie and depth of those
great mysteries which he handles, whereby he is forced often to break forth
into admiration, as Romans 11.33. O the deepenes of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, etc. And
this proceeds also from the earnestnes of the apostle, that sometime he
seems extra se raptus, to be ravished beside himself: Martyr. But as for his
Scribe Tertius, it is not to be thought, that he writ otherwise then S. Paul
endited: and therefore the style and manner of writing is to be imputed to Paul
the author, not to the writer: which is such, that as Beza well infers, nihil
p^ruisse de tantis rebus, non modo divinius, sed ornatius aut accommodatius
dici, nothing could be more divinely, or elegantly said of so great matters,
etc. And this divine kind of writing, which is frequent with the Apostle, to
fall into admiration and other such like affectionate speeches, Origin well
expresses with this similitude, that it fares with the Apostle in treating of
such divine things, as with a man, that is brought into a Princes palace, and
lead out of one chamber into an other, to behold the glory and beauty
thereof, which while he takes a diligent view of, he is astonished, and
begins to wonder, forgetting, vnde illuc venerit, aut qua egressurus sit,
whence he came in thither, or how he should got out again, ex praefat. Martyr.

2. And as touching Paul's Cilician speech, it was fit and convenient, seeing S.
Paul did write not only to the learned, but unlearned also, that he should
attempes his speech to the capacity and understanding of all: and because the
Hebrew Scriptures were translated into the Greek tongue, which the believing
Gentiles were conversant in, it was also meet, that the Apostle should so
frame his Greek style, as that it might have some relish of the Hebrew tongue,
out of the which the Scriptures were translated.

3. Neither does S. Paul acknowledge any imperfection in his speech or writing,
which he was persuaded, he endited by the spirit of God, but he so confesses
by way of concession, because the false Apostles objected against him the
weakness of speech: so he says thus much in effect, admit it be so, number rerum
scientiam etiam mihi adimetis? will ye also deny unto me the knowledge of
things?

4. S. Peter does not impute the hardness of S. Paul's epistles to the obscurity
of the style, but rather to the sublimitie and profunditie of the great
mysteries, which he treats of: which must needs be hard unto our weak
understanding: neither were his epistles hard, but only some things in his
epistles: and that not to all, but to the unstable and unlearned, who peruerred
those things to their own destruction, 2. Pet. 3.16. Gryneus. So that
notwithstanding any thing objected against S. Paul's style, it appears to be
answerable unto the matter, which he writes of: that as he entreats of high,
grave, and divine matters, so is his speech grave, divine, peircing, as Hierome
himself confesses, that when he read S. Paul, non verba, sed toni^ru
percipere, that he perceived thunder, rather then words: And Origin likewise,
though sometime he extenuateth S. Paul's style, yet thus excellently writes
thereof against Celsus, lib. 3. Sat scio, si se attente illorum lectioni
dederit, aut admirabitur mentem viri vulgari dictione egregias complecti
sententias, aut nisi admiratus fuerit, ipse ridiculus videbitur; I know well,
if he read the Apostle well, either he will wonder, that such excellent matter
is contained in so plain speech, or if he wonder not at it, he will show
himself ridiculous.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. Whether S. Paul were the Author of this Epistle.
Beside the general consent of the Church of God both in times past, and now,
that this Epistle was written by S. Paul, as Ireneus lib. 5. cont. Valent.
Hierom. epist. ad Paulin. Eusebius Ecclesiast. histor. lib. 3. c. 3. with
diverse others of the Fathers, do acknowledge this divine Apostle to be the
author; it thus appears by better evidence out of the book it self:

1. By the inscription of the Epistle, where the name of Paul is prefixed as in
all other his epistles, saving that to the Hebrews, in the which he concealeth
his name, as Hierome says, propter invidiam sui apud eos nominis, because his
name was envied among them: catalog. scriptor.

2. But beside the inscription of his name, this Epistle ends with that
usual salutation, which S. Paul annexeth in the end of all his Epistles, The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen: Romans 16.24. which form
of salutation written with S. Paul's own hand, was his sign and mark in every
epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 3.18. Paraeus.

3. Beside, the style of the epistle, and the matter agreeable to other
writings of the holy Apostle, do evidently proclaim him to be the author:
Gryneus in c. 1. v. 1.

4. And it being resolved upon, that S. Paul was the author, it follows,
that this Epistle is of Canonical authority, because it was written by the
spirit of God speaking in Paul: for, he says, I think that I have the spirit
of God, 1. Cor. 7.40. and that Christ spoke in him, 2. Cor. 13.3. and that he
received not his doctrine from man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal.
1.12.

2. Quest. Of the birth, the life, acts, and death of S. Paul.
1. For the place of his birth, Hierome thinks, that he was borne in Giscalis
a town in the tribe of Benjamin, which being taken by the Romans, he then
removed with his parents to Tarsus: but this agrees not with S. Paul's own
narration, that he was borne in Tarsus a city of Cilicia, Act. 22.2. which if
it had not been so, his adversaries would have intrapped him, and detected him
of an untruth.

2. For his kindred, he himself testifies, that he was of Israel, an Ebrew of
the Hebrews, of the tribe of Benjamin, Philip. 3.5.

3. For his education, he was brought up under the feet of Gamaliel, Act.
22.3. who was of great authority among the Jews, as it appears Act. 5.
where the whole Council followed his sentence: by profession he was a
Pharisie, Philip. 3.5. which was the most tolerable sect among the Jews.

4. Concerning his life and conversation: even before his conversion, he did
lead an unblameable life touching the law: being very zealous in defending the
rites and ceremonies thereof: but he was withal a most fierce persecutor of
the Church of Christ, Philip. 3.6. and after his conversion, he was a zealous a
preacher of the Gospel.

5. Touching his gifts, he was not only learned in their own law, but also
well studied in humane learning, as appears by the alleging of forten
testimonies, as of Aratus, Act. 17. of Menander, 1. Cor. 15. of Epimenides,
Tit. 1. He excelled in the gift of utterance, and had a singular grace of
speech, as is evident by the Apologies and extemporall speeches which he made,
Act. 22.23. Beside, he was forceable in persuasion, pithie in argument, and
ready in disputation: as appears by the conflicts which he had diverse times
with the Jews, and with the Philosophers at Athens, Act. 17. His labor and
pains was answerable to his gifts: the grace of God was not in vain in him,
for he labored (both by writing and preaching) more then all the Apostles
beside, 1. Cor. 15.10. he caused the Gospel to abound from Jerusalem to
Illyricum, Romans 15.19. even unto Spain, v. 24. in all Asia minor, and in the
most famous countries of Europe, he preached the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

6. Now concerning the end of this holy Apostle, in the 23. year of his
Apostleship, after his conversion (which is held to have been in the 3. year
after the ascension of Christ in the 20. year of Tiberius) in the 2. year of
Nero he was carried prisoner to Rome, and there remained in free custody two
years: from thence it is thought he was delivered, and went and preached the
Gospel in the West parts: as Hierome collecteth out of that place, 2. Tim.
4.17. that the Lord delivered him out of the lions mouth, (meaning Nero) that
by me the preaching of the Gospel might b^ fully known, and all the Gentiles
might hear. Afterward in the 14. year of Nero, and the 35. of his
Apostleship, and 37. after Christ ascension, and from the nativity of Christ
70. he was beheaded at Rome: and during his bonds, he writ 7. of his Epistles,
but whether in his first or second bonds, it is uncertain: Paraeus. Aretius
thinks he wrote them in the time of his first imprisonment, but that is not
so certain.

But there are other particular matters recorded, which fell out in S. Paul's
death, which are not of like certentie: Hierome thinks that S. Paul and S.
Peter suffered in one day at Rome: and some add, that when he was beheaded, in
stead of blood there issued forth milk, to show his innocence: August. in
orat. de sanctis. But Nicephorus reports a thing more strange, that Paul
before he suffered had conference with Nero, and told him, that he would
return unto him the third day after: and so his shadow appeared accordingly,
which Nero catched at, but it fled from him: Niceph. l. 2. c. 36. The first of
these is probable, though not necessary to be believed; the second is not
impossible, though of no great certentie; the third seems to be fabulous: as
many such miracles have been devised in former times of the Saints, to
increase superstition: Aretius.

3. Quest. Of S. Paul's place of birth.
1. Absurd is the opinion of the Ebionites (as Epiphanius reports and
confuteth their heresy, haeres. 30.) that S. Paul was a Grecian by nation, and
borne of Greek parents, but coming to Jerusalem he was in love with the
Priests daughter, and desiring her to wife, he became a Proselyre, and was
content to be circumcised. But this is contrary to Paul himself, who
affirms, that he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews, and of the tribe of Benjamin,
Philip. 3.5.

2. Hierome sometime seems to be of opinion, that Paul was borne at Giscalis
a town of Judea, which being taken by the Romans, he departed to Tharsus
with his parents, and thereupon he was counted of Tharsus: libr. de Ecclesiast.
script. but after this in an epistle to Algasia, he resolves that he was borne
at Tarsus. Beda is of the same opinion, that Paul was borne at Giscalis, in c.
21. Actor. and Andreas Masius in c. 19. Joshua.

3. But the more general and received opinion is, that Paul was borne at
Tarsus, and not at Giscalis, which is thus confirmed: 1. Giscalis was a town
of Galile, not of Judea, and taken by Titus the Emperor after S. Paul's death,
who was crowned with Martyrdom in the 13. year of Nero: Joseph. l. 4. de
bello Iudaic. it was not then taken by the Romans so long before. 2. S. Paul
was a Roman borne, Act. 22.26.28. that is, borne in a city privileged with
the Roman liberties: but so was not Giscalis: Tharsus was, as Dio testifies,
lib. 47. and Plin. lib. 5. c. 27.3. Ignatius writing to them of Tharsus,
calls them cives, and discipulos Pauli, S. Paul's disciples and citizens. 4.
But the Apostle himself puts this matter out of doubt, affirming that he
was borne in Tarsus in Cilicia, Act. 22.2.

4. Quest. Whether S. Paul were noble by birth.
1. August. sermon. 15. de verb. Apost. thinks that S. Paul was of noble birth,
upon those words, Philip. 3.3. Though I might have confidence in the flesh: for
it had been no great matter, says he, for the Apostle to have contemned
nobility, having none himself: And beside he was of the sect of the
Pharisees, which was a noble sect among the Jews, they were not of the
contemptible sort: to this purpose Augustine: Whereunto this may be added, that
the high Priest would not have given so great authority unto S. Paul as he
did, if he had bin of obscure birth or parentage.

2. But Chrysostom seems to be of the contrary opinion: fuisse Paulum
inopem and coriarium, that Paul was a poor handicraft man, a worker of
leather: hom. 4. in 2. epist. ad Timoth. And hereof this argument is yielded,
that S. Paul was not of noble birth, because he was exercised in an handicraft
in making of tents, and therein brought up before his calling, as may be
gathered, Act. 18.3. But it was not the use of noble men to follow such base
trades: And S. Paul says, not many noble are called, 1. Cor. 1.25. which is
understood chiefly of the calling of the Apostles.

3. The resolution is this, that though S. Paul were not noble according to the
Roman estimation of nobility, being of an handicraft, which suited not with
nobility among the Romans; yet among the Jews he was not of unnoble birth:
v.ho counted nobility by the noblenes of the tribe, and the antiquity of the
family: in which respect Joseph the husband of Marie was noble, though a
carpenter by his trade, as being descended of the royal tribe of David. So
Paul was noble being borne of the noble tribe of Benjamin: which was famous,
both because the first king of Israel Saul was chosen out of that tribe, and
the tribe of Benjamin revolted not from Judah, as the other ten tribes had
done: As also S. Paul was of a noble profession among the Jews, by sect a
Pharisie.

4. But this will be objected further, that S. Paul could not be privileged
with the liberty of a citizen of Rome: which immunitie no tradesmen were
capable of, but only husbandmen and soldiers: as Halycarnesseus writes, lib.
2. and 6. But the answer is, that this constitution or provision made by
Romulus, was afterward abrogated by Numa Pompilius, who admitted artificers to
the privilege of citizens: as Terentius Varro was Consul, and Marcus Scaurus,
whose fathers were handicrafts men, the first a butcher, the second a colliar.

5. Quest. Whether S. Paul were brought up in the learning of the Greeks.
1. Chrysostom thinks, that S. Paul was utterly ignorant before his
conversion of the Greek tongue, and learning, and that he only knew the
Hebrew tongue: hom. 4. in 2. ad Timoth. But it is not like that S. Paul being
brought up in a city of Cilicia, where they used the Greek language, was
utterly ignorant of the common speech then used.

2. Neither yet do I think with Hierome, that Paul learned the Greek tongue
at Tarsus, where he was brought up, yet was not very skillful or eloquent in
the Greek tongue: seipsum in Graeca lingua interpretari cupiens, revolvitur,
he desiring to interpret himself in the Greek tongue is enwrapped and
entangled: in 3. ad Philip. and where S. Paul says, he was rude in speech: he
thus said, non ex humilitate, sed ex scientiae veritate, not of humility, but
according to truth: epist. ad Algasiam. and that he used Titus his interpreter
for the Greek tongue, as Peter used Mark: epist. ad Hedibiam.

3. But that S. Paul was neither ignorant of the Greek learning, as thinks
Chrysostom, appears by the alleging of the Greek poets, Aratus, Meuander,
Epimenides, and by the commendation, which Strabo gives of the Tharsensians,
and in the study of Philosophy, and other arts exceeded them of Athens, and
Alexandria: Strabo lib. 16. Neither was he so rude in speaking, as Hierome
thinks: for he himself says, 1. Cor. 14.18. I thank my God, I speak
languages more then ye all: and he so confesses by way of concession, because
the false Apostles so objected. But S. Paul uses indeed no affected
eloquence, both because he was to temper his speech to the capacity and
understanding of all: and the depth of the divine mysteries which he handles,
and his passionate speeches, breaking forth into zeal, do carry him often
away from hunting after or laboring for curious elocution.

Quest. 6. Of the years of the reign of the Emperors of Rome unto Nero,
under whom S. Paul suffered.
Because we shall have occasion afterward in the handling of some Questions to
have recourse unto the years of the Roman Emperors, in whose time S. Paul
lived, it shall not be amiss, to make a just computation of their years,
wherein I find great difference among Chronographers.

1. Tiberius Caesar, who succeeded Augustus, in the 18. year of whose reign
Christ our Blessed Savior suffered, according to Suetonius, in Tiberio, c. 73.
and Orosius lib. 7. c. 2. Eutropuis lib. 7. Beda de sex aetatib. reigned 23.
years, according to Sextus Aureulius, 24. as Clemens Alexandrin. lib. 1.
stromat. 22. years: as Dio counts, lib. 58.22. years and 7. months, and so
many days: as Tertullian. lib. aduers. Iudaeos, c. 5. 22. years, 7. months,
and 28. days: Josephus lib. 18. antiquit. c. 14. reckons 22. years, and 6.
months. But the true account is this: Tiberius reigned full 22. years,
counting from the Calends of January after he began to reign, to the
Calends of January next before he died: but he entered his reign the 19. of
August, when Augustus died, from whence to the Calends of January, are 4.
months, and 13. days: and he died the 16. of March, two months and sixteen
days after his 22. years expired at the Calends of January: so in all he
reigned 22. years and 7. months: so that by this computation appears the
difference, why some do give unto him but 22. years, some 24. some but 23.
because some count only the full years, some the months of his first and
last year, for whole years; some put the odd months together, and make one
year of them. Hence then it is evident, seeing our Blessed Savior is held to
have suffered in the 18. year of Tiberius about the beginning of April, that
Tiberius reigned after our Blessed Saviors passion 4. years, an 11. months,
and 18. days: for of his 1^. year there remained from the beginning of April
unto the 19. of August, when Tiberius began to reign, 4. months and 18.
days: and after the 18. year, he reigned 4. years, and almost 7. months,
for he-raigned in all as is showed before, 22. years, and 7. months.

2. Caius Caligula, reigned according to Suetonius, and Eutropius, 3. years,
10. months, and 8. days: according to Clemens, and Tacitus, and Sextus
Aurelius 4. years: after Beda, 4. years, 10. months, and 8. days: according
to Dio, 3. years, 9. months, 28. days: as Tertullian, 3. years, 8. months,
and 13. days: as Josephus, 3. years, and 6. months. But the right
computation is this: Caligula began his Empire the 16. day of March: from
whence to the Calends of January following are 9. months, and an half: then
he reigned from the first Calends of January full 3. years, and died the 24.
of January following: so the whole time of his reign was 3. years, 10.
months, and 8. days: they which give unto him full four years, count the
odd months, and days for a whole year.

3. Claudius, who was next Emperor, according to Tacitus, Suetonius, Clemens
Alexandrin. Eutropius, Orosius, reigned 14. years, according to Dio and
Josephus, 13. years, 8. months, and 20. days: after Eusebius, 13. years,
and 9. months: after Beda, 14. years, 7. months, and 28. days. But the
certain computation is this: Claudius began his Empire upon the 24. of
January: whence to the Calends of January following, when the Roman year
begins are 11. months, and 7. days: then he reigned full 12. years, and
in his 13. year he reigned 9. months, and 13. days: from the Calends of
January unto the 3. day before the Ides of October, which was the 13. day of
that month, when he died, as Tacitus and Suetonius write: so the whole time of
his reign was 13. years, 8. months, and 20. days: they then which give unto
him 14. years, do count the odd months for a whole year.

4. Unto Claudius succeeded Nero, who according to Tacitus, Clemens Alexandrin.
and Eutropius, reigned 14. years: according to Dio, 13. years, and 8.
months: as Beda, 14. years, 7. months, 10. days: after Suetonius not much
under 14. years: Tertullian counts but 9. years, 9. months, and 13. days:
But herein he is much deceived. The most do give unto Nero 14. years, but not
complete: the reason of this uncertainty is, because it is not certainly known
when Nero died: Onuphrius thinks he died about the 10. day of June, and he
began to reign about the 13. day of October, when Claudius died: so that by
this account he should reign but 13. years, 7. months, and 28. days: ex
Perer. but because the most do allow unto him 14. years, we will follow the
usual and common reckoning. And this shall suffice to have been inserted here
concerning the years of the reign of the Emperors: see more of the years of
the Emperors, Hexapl. in Dan. c. 9. qu. 75. where the account somewhat
differs from this in certain months, because there Eusebius computation is
followed.

7. Quest. In which year after the passion of Christ Paul was converted.
It follows now, that such matters be briefly touched, which concern this
holy Apopostle after he was converted to the faith of Christ: and first of the
time of his conversion.

1. Whereas it is most evident, that S. Stephen was stoned to death, after the
most glorious ascension of Christ, and that S. Paul's conversion followed after
that blessed Martyrs death: some do think that Stephen was put to death 7.
years after Christ's ascension, and so consequently S. Paul's conversion
happened likewise 7. years after: this opinion Nicephorus lib. 2. c. 3.
ascribes to Euodius the successor of S. Peter in Antioch. But there is no
probability of this opinion: for it is not like, that the Church had rest
without persecution so long, that is, 7. years after Christ's ascension. And
the conjecture of some is, that 7. years are put for 7. months, by some
corruption and fault in the copies: for so many months there are between the
ascension of Christ, and the martyrdom of S. Stephen.

2. Some think, that Paul was converted in the first year after the passion
of our blessed Savior, upon the 25. day of January: so Eusebius and Beda: But
because S. Stephen is held to have suffered upon the 26. day of January, in
the first year after Christ's passion: from which day to the 25. day of
January, when S. Paul, according to the received opinion, was converted, is
not above a month; in which time all those things could not be fulfilled,
which are recorded by S. Luke, Act. c. 8. S. Paul's conversion could not fall
out in the first year after the passion of Christ. This matter is not helped
by the author of the scholasticall history, upon the Acts of the Apostles, c.
46. who thus distinguishes, that if the first year of Christ's passion be
reckoned according to the usual account, that is from January, when the
Roman year began, then S. Paul was converted in the second year: but if
from the time of Christ's passion, then it was in the first year: for still the
same doubt remains: that in this reckoning there was but one month, between
the martyrdom of S. Stephen, and the conversion of S. Paul.

3. Wherefore the opinion of Oecumenius, upon the last chapter of the Acts of
the Apostles, is more probable: that S. Paul was indeed converted in the
second year, counting from the time of Christ's passion: so that from the most
holy death of our blessed Savior, unto the conversion of Saint Paul, which is
held by a general received opinion, to have been upon the 25. day of
January, there was run one whole year and ten months.

8. Quest. At what age S. Paul was converted.
1. Ambrose, and Theodoret upon the 7. chapter of the 1. epistle to the
Corinthians, think that S. Paul at the time of his conversion, was so young a
man, that he was not meet for marriage: so that in their opinion, he could not
then be above 20. years old: this their opinion may seem to be grounded upon
this reason, because Act. 7.58. Saint Luke speaking of Saint Paul, says, that
the witnesses laid down their garments at the feet (...), of a young man,
called Saul: But that word has not so much respect unto his age and youth, as
to his courage, and fierceness, as the word signifies, as Budeus shows:
whereupon Euripides calls bold and insolent speech, (...). And that Saint
Paul was not so very a young man, appears, because he is termed by an other
word: Ananias says, chap. 9.13. We have heard by many, (...), of this man.

2. And further, that S. Paul was not so young a man at the time of his
conversion, may be showed by these reasons. 1. S. Paul himself says, Act.
26.6. As touching my life from my youth, and what it was from the beginning
among mine own nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews: it seems then that
he spent his youth among the Jews, before his conversion. 2. Those things
which S. Paul reports to have been done by him before his conversion, agree
not unto S. Paul's youth: Act. 26.9. I also verily thought in my self, that I
ought to do many contrary things against the name of Jesus, etc. many of the
Saints I put in prison, having received authority of the high Priests, and
when they were put to death, I gave sentence: this judgment of S. Paul, and
authority committed unto him, were not incident unto a very youth. 3. If S.
Paul were but about 20. years of age, when he was converted, it would follow,
that he exceeded not 46. years in the 4. year of Nero, when he is thought to
have written his Epistle to Philemon; but then he called himself aged Paul:
for from the 20. year of Tiberius, which was the 2. year after Christ's
passion, when Paul was converted, unto the 4. of Nero, are but 25. or 26.
years. It would follow also hereupon, that S. Paul suffering, as Hierome
thinks, in the 37. year after the passion of Christ, H^mil. de princip.
Apost. romans 3. edit. Parisien.
was not above 55. year old: whereas Chrysostom thinks, that he was above
68. years when he suffered: so that by this account he will be found to have
been more then 30. years of age when he was converted.

9. Quest. How long S. Paul after his conversion was ravished in spirit, and
taken up into Paradise.
1. Some are of opinion, that in the space of those three days, while Paul
continued blind, after Jesus had spoken to him by the way, Act. 9.9. that he
then was taken up into the third heaven, and heard such things, as were not to
be uttered: of which his rauishing in the spirit, S. Paul writes, 2. Corinthians.
12. of this opinion are Thomas, Lyranus, Carthusianus upon that place: Ioannes
Driedo, lib. 1. de scriptur. c. 2. But this opinion is easily refuted: for the
Apostle says, that thing happened unto him 14. years before he writ that
epistle: now this second epistle to the Corinthians, he is held to have written
in the beginning of the reign of Nero: from thence counting 14. years, we
still come to the beginning of Claudius reign: but S. Paul's conversion was 8.
years before that, in the 20. year of Tiberius: for there remained three
years of Tiberius reign, and 4. years almost of Caligula, whom Claudius
succeeded.

2. But it is most like, that S. Paul in that three days space had revealed
unto him the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and of his Gospel, which the Apostle
says, he received by revelation of Jesus Christ, Galat. 1.12. so thinks Beda
in 9. c. Actor. and the author of the scholastical history, c. 46. upon the
same book. And it is evidently gathered by the history of S. Paul's conversion
set forth by S. Luke, Act. c. 9. how presently upon his conversion S. Paul
began to preach in the Synagogues, that Christ was the Son of God. He would
not have so preached unto others, if he had not been before himself
instructed in the ways of Christ.

3. Sixtus Senensis then is greatly deceived, who 1. tom. bibliot. delivers
this out of Origin, that S. Paul had learned the history of the Gospel of S.
Luke: for both S. Lukes own narration is against it, who says, that straitway
after S. Paul had recovered his sight, by the laying on of the hands of
Ananias, he began to preach in the name of Jesus, Act. 9. And S. Paul
restifieth otherwise of himself, Galat. 1.11. Now I certify you, brethren,
that the Gospel, which was preached of me, was not after man: for neither
received I it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ.

10. Quest. At what time Paul was first in bonds, and of his going to
Jerusalem, how often he went thither, before he came into bonds.
Because S. Paul did write diverse of his Epistles while he had his liberty,
and some after the time of his imprisonment, it shall not be amiss to examine
this matter briefly, when Paul began first to be restrained of his liberty:
which falling out at Jerusalem, it must first be known, how after and upon
what occasion he went up to Jerusalem: his iourneis then to Jerusalem are found
to have been these four.

1. First he went to Jerusalem to see Peter, which was three years after his
conversion; And from Damascus where he was converted, he went into Arabia, and
thence to Damascus, and so to Jerusalem. But here two doubts are moved: the
first is, that Saint Luke presently after S. Paul's escape out of Damascus,
makes mention of his coming to Jerusalem, Act. 9.26. but the answer here is,
that S. Luke in that story omitteth many things which were done, and so
passes over for brevity sake that journey of S. Paul into Arabia. The other
doubt is, whether S. Paul preached at this his going to Arabia: Hierome
thinks that he did not, but that he was let by the Spirit to preach the
word in Arabia, as afterward in Asia: Act. 16.7. Pareus also is of the same
judgment: because S. Paul speaking before king Agrippa, how he preached at
Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and in Judea, Act. 26.20. makes no mention of his
preaching in Arabia. But seeing there were three years run, after S. Paul
went from Damascus to Arabia, before he returned to Jerusalem, it is not like,
that S. Paul all this time was idle: and in the same place, Act. 26.20. though
he make no particular mention of his preaching in Arabia, yet he says in
general, that he preached to the Gentiles: wherefore I rather subscribe here
unto the sentence of Chrysostom, who thinks, that S. Paul at this time
preached in Arabia, and did other memorable things, which for modesty sake he
passes over in silence.

2. The second voyage of S. Paul to Jerusalem, was, when he with Barnabas
carried releese from Antioch unto the brethren at Jerusalem and in Judea,
because the great famine which was through the whole world, which fell out
under Claudius Caesar: as we read, Act. 11.30. and 12.35.

3. The third travel of S. Paul to Jerusalem, was that, whereof he writes,
Galat. 2.1. Then fourteen years after I went up to Jerusalem. But here
likewise arises a double doubt: first, whether this journey, and that
described Act. 15. were one and the same: the second, how these fourteen
years are to be counted, and where they must take beginning. For the first,
Chrysostom and Hierome upon the 2. to the Galatians, seem to be of opinion,
that these were two diverse iourneies: and there may seem some probability
hereof; because S. Luke says, that Barnabas went with Paul, Act. 15. But S.
Paul says, beside Barnabas he took also Titus: and S. Luke shows this to be
the occasion, that Paul and Barnabas were sent up about the deciding of the
question concerning circumsision: But S. Paul says, he went up by revelation,
Gal. 2.2. Yet hereunto it may be thus answered, that though Luke make no
express mention of Titus, yet he may be included in that general addition,
They ordained that Paul, and Barnabas, and certain other of them should go,
etc. Act. 15.2. And S. Paul might go up by revelation, and yet that other
occasion also concur therewith. Wherefore the opinion rather of Theodoret, in
2. ad Galat. and of Beda, in c. 15. Actor. seems to be more sound; that both
these were but one journey: both because after this immediately Paul and
Barnabas divided themselves, Act. 15.39. and travailed not together afterward
to Jerusalem: and Paul after this went not to Jerusalem, but when he was there
apprehended and taken, Act. 21.

The other doubt is, where the computation of these 14. years must begin. 1.
Beda, and the author of the scholasticall history upon the 15. of the Acts,
and Thomas, Lyranus, Caietanus, upon the 2. to the Galat. think that they are
to be counted from the time of S. Paul's conversion.

2. But the opinion of Hierome and Anselme is more probable, that these 14.
years begin from S. Paul's first coming to Jerusalem, which was 3. years
after his conversion, whereof the Apostle makes mention, Galat. 2.18. for
seeing he had spoken before of his first going to Jerusalem, After three years
I came again to Jerusalem: and says afterward, c. 2. Then fourteen years
after I went up again to Jerusalem: these 14. years must properly begin,
where the other 3. years end: so that these 14. years, were indeed 17.
years from his conversion.

But Pererius obiecteth, that then the 17. year would fall out into the tenth
year of Claudius Caesar: which can not be, for the Jews were expelled from
Rome by Claudius after this third going up of Saint Paul to Jerusalem: for
Saint Luke in the 15. chap. makes mention of Saint Paul's going up to
Jerusalem: but the Jews departure from Rome, by the commandment of Claudius,
afterward he remembers, c. 18.2. now, this dismissing of the Jews from
Jerusalem was in the ninth year of Claudius, as Orosins writes, lib. 7. c. 4.
and Beda lib. de 6. atatib. Which objection of Pererus may easily be answered:
for, 1. he relieth only upon the credit of these two, that this inhibition was
in the 9. year: it might be after. 2. admit it were in the ninth year, yet S.
Paul's going up in the 17. year of his conversion might be before: for seeing
he was converted in the beginning of the 20. year of Tiberius, upon the 25. of
January, as is commonly held: his going up to Jerusalem may be supposed to
have been in the beginning likewise of the 17. year, which falls out in the
beginning of the 10. year of Claudius: and this eiection of the Jews might be
in the end of the year. 3. S. Luke says not, c. 18.2. that then the Jews
were first expelled: but that Aquila was lately come from Rome, because
Claudius had given commandment, etc. there is no precise time set: and there
might be some space allowed for their departure, after that the commandment
was given.

11. Quest. Of Paul's being in bonds first at Cesarea, and afterward as Rome.
The fourth journey of S. Paul to Jerusalem was, when he was taken by the
captain Lysias, and sent to Cesarea to Felix the governor: as S. Luke sets
forth the history, Act. 21.22, 23. and at Cesarea he continued under Felix two
years in bonds, Act. 24.28. But there are diverse opinions concerning this
matter.

1. Some do think that the two years there mentioned, are understood of the
time of Felix government: but that can not be: for S. Paul says, Act. 24.10.
that Festus had been of many years a Judge unto that nation: he had been
then their governor more then two years: and I^sephus writes, that Festus
was sent thither in the 11. year of Claudius, lib. 20. Antiquit. c. 5. and he
was displaced from his regiment in the 2. year of Nero: so that he held his
government five years at the least.

2. Baronius thinks, that the two years there mentioned must be restrained
to Neros reign: for in his second year Felix was removed, and Paul brought
prisoner to Rome: he denies that he was two years in bonds at Caesarea: But
Pererius well refuteth this assertion, because no mention is made at all of
Nero by S. Luke: and therefore to his reign, these two years can have no
relation.

3. The author of the scholasticall history will have these two years counted
from the time, when the Jews first accused Paul before Caesar, in Act.
Apostol. c. 3. But neither does S. Luke make mention there of any such thing.

4. Wherefore, whereas the words stand thus, when two years were expired,
Pontius Festus came into Felix room, and Felix willing to get favor of the
Jews, left Paul bound: the best sense is to begin these two years from the
first imprisonment of S. Paul at Caesarea: of this opinion are Lyranus, gloss.
interlinear. Occumenius in vltim. cap. Actor. Beds in c. 24. Actor. And so much
may be gathered out of the text: because it is said, that Felix sent for Paul
the officer, and communed with him, hoping that some money should have been
given him, v. 27. this often communing with S. Paul shows that S. Paul was
detained there sometime in bonds, and it is said also that he left Paul bound:
so that the two years expired, which are mentioned in the same place, are most
fitly referred to Paul's bonds.

Now after Paul had been two years prisoner at Caesarea, he thence was sent
bound to Rome, in the second year of Nero, and continued there free prisoner
two years in an house which he hired, Act. 28.30. So he came to Rome in the
23. year after his conversion, and the 25. year after the passion of Christ:
But afterward he was loosed out of his bonds and dismissed from Rome, as shall
be showed in the next question: and in this first two years imprisonment at
Rome, it is like that S. Luke wrote the history of the Acts, and there ends,
because it is not like that he was after that S. Paul's perpetual and
inseparable companion.

12. Quest. Whether S. Paul was set at liberty after he was prisoner at Rome,
and where he bestowed himself afterward.
1. This is evident by S. Paul's own testimony, who in diverse of his Epistles
while he had been prisoner in Rome, promises to visit the Churches again
where he had preached the Gospel, and speaks thereof very confidently: as
Philip. 1.25. writing from Rome, he says, This I am sure of, that I shall
abide, and with you all continue, for your furtherance, and joy of your faith:
likewise to Philemon he thus writes, v. 12. Prepare me lodging, for I trust,
that through your prayers I shall be given unto you. So also Heb. 13.23. Know
that (our) brother Timotheus is delivered, with whom, of he come ^^rely I will
see you. And yet more evidently he says, 2. Tim. 4.16, 17. At my first
answering no man assisted me, etc. notwithstanding the Lord assisted me, and
strengthened me, that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all
the Gentiles should hear, and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.
All these places do evidently show, that Paul was delivered after his first
imprisonment at Rome.

2. The reason is thus alleged by Eusebius, Neronem in principio
imperi-mitiorem fuisse, that Nero in the beginning of his Empire was more
gentle and mild: but afterward, when Paul was taken again, Nero then being
become a most cruel Tyrant, caused the holy Apostle to be put to death. Thus
Eusebius lib. 2. histor. scholast. c. 21. to the like purpose also writes
Hierome in Paulo.

3. Now after S. Paul was delivered, he visited the Churches, where he had
preached, and other places likewise where he had not been before. 1. Hierome
thinks, that he preached only in the West parts: for he had a purpose to go
into Spain, Romans 13.28. but it is not like that he spent all the time of his
liberty after his first imprisonment, which was 10. years, only in the West
parts. 2. Caietanus thinks that he visited Macedonia, and Achaia, as he had
promised in his Epistles: and so much he infers upon those words, 2. Tim.
4.13. The cloak which I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou come, bring
with thee: and v. 20. Trophimm I left at Miletum sick: these things were not
done when S. Paul went first to Rome (says Caietane) for no such thing is
mentioned in the story of the Acts: these things then fell out before his
second coming to Rome: which being 10. or 11. years after the first, he
would not write for his winter cloak, which he had left so long behind him:
neither is it like that Trophimus sickness continued 10. or 11. years. But
Caietans collection here is not sound: for it is evident that S. Paul wrote
this epistle at his first imprisonment in Rome: for he says, v. 17. that he
was delivered out of the mouth of the lion. And many things were acted by the
Apostles, which are not written in the history of the Acts: yet Caietans
opinion is true, that S. Paul visited the East Churches, because he so purposed
and promised in his Epistles. 3. But he did not visit only the East Churches,
but as Eusebius says, it is like, ad Evangelium passim praedicandum se denno
recepisse, that he returned to preach the Gospel again every where.

4. Yet to Ephesus it is certain he returned not: for he himself had told
them, that they should see his face no more, Act. 20.38. And whether ever he
were in Spain, it shall be showed, when we come to that place in the 15.
chapter.

13. Quest. In what year after the passion of Christ, and of Nero his reign,
S. Paul was put to death at Rome.
1. Pererius, alleging for his authors, Metaphrastes, Dyonisius Bishop of
Corinth, Onuphrius in his Chronicle, and Baronius, thinks that S. Paul was
martyred in the 13. year of Nero his reign, in the 8. month: and in the 36.
year from the passion of Christ. 2. Beda upon the 15. c. of the Acts,
assigns Paul's death to the 38. year after the passion of Christ. 3. Thomas
yet goes further, and says it happened in the 40. year after Christ's
passion, in 2. cap. ad Galat. But if either of these two latter opinions were
true, S. Paul should not have suffered under Nero, which is against the common
received opinion of all. 4. Therefore it is more probable, according to the
received tradition, that S. Paul died in the 14. year of Nero his reign, and
in the 37. year after the passion of Christ: as Eusebius in Chronic. and
Hierom. lib. de script. Ecclesiast.

Pererius objection, that Nero died about the 10. of June in his 14. year,
whereas S. Paul and S. Peter suffered the 29. of June, and therefore they could
not be put to death in Neros reign, may be thus answered: that it is
uncertain at what time of the year, or in what month Nero died: he builds
only upon the conjecture of Onuphrius, as has been showed before, qu. 6.
toward the end: whose testimony is not sufficient, to weigh against the
authority of Eusebius, Hierome, and others, who place S. Paul's death in the
14. year of Nero.

But Epiphanius is far wide, who thinks S. Paul to have died in the 12.
year of Nero, in haer. 27. which was the 35. year after the passion of
Christ: who herein is against the opinion of all other.

14. Quest. Of Paul's person, and of the manner, and place of his death.
1. Concerning S. Paul's person, Nicephorus thus describes him, lib. 2. c. 37.
that he was of stature small, and somewhat stooping: of a whitely face, small
head, comely eyes, low eyebrowes, a coming nose: a thick beard somewhat long,
full of gray hairs, as likewise was his head: of comely grace, showing some
divine thing to be in him. Chrysostom in his homily de principib. Apostol.
says, that, for his stature, he was but 3. cubic high, whereas a man's usual
stature is toward four cubits: which if it were so, the reason may evidently
appear, why the false Apostles said that Paul's bodily presence was weak, 2.
Cor. 10.10. they might disdain his person, for his small stature.

2. For the place where S. Paul was beheaded, the general opinion is, that it
was in the way Hostrensis, where Constantine erected a Temple bearing S. Paul's
name, and there was he buried. But Pererius by the authority of Gregory,
thinks that he was put to death, ad aquas Salvia^, in a place called the
Salvian waters: the matter is not great, yet there is more probability for the
former opinion.

3. It is also generally received, that S. Paul and S. Peter were both put to
death on the same day at Rome: But Prudentius in his verses, de festo
Apostolor, and August. Tom. 10. sermon. 4. de fest. Apost. are of opinion that
Paul suffered upon the same day, that Peter did, but a year after: the matter
is not great: though Gelasius condemn them as heretics which deny that S.
Peter and S. Paul suffered in one day together.

15. Quest. What moved Nero to put the holy Apostle to death.
1. Some do think that this was the cause: when Simon Magus to prove
himself to the Romans to be a God, by the help of the Devil did fly aloft
in the air, by the prayers of Peter the Devil being driven away, that wicked
Sorcerer fell down, being forsaken of his spirit, and so was broken in
pieces: whereupon Nero was incensed against the Apostle: thus Hegesippus lib.
3. c. 2. Ambr. lib. 5. epist. de tradend. basilic. Arnob. lib. 2. advers.
Gentil. with others: But this reason, if this report were true, as it may be
doubted of, rather shows the cause, why Peter was put to death, then Paul.

2. Chrysostom and Theophylatt upon the 4. c. of the second to Timothy, do
allege this to be the cause, because Paul had converted to the Christian
faith Neros butler, whom he made great account of: and thereupon he commanded
him to be beheaded.

3. Simeon Metaphrastes in commentar. peregrinat. Petri and Paul. affirms out
of Chrysostom, that Nero raged against S. Paul, because he had converted one
of Nero his concubines, which afterward refused to have company with him. But
these two may seem to be but men's conjectures: if this had been the cause,
Nero would have put Paul to death at his first imprisonment: for then he had
converted diverse of Cesars household, whose commendations he sends to the
Philippians: but after this he was enlarged, as may be collected, c. 1.25.

4. Severus Sulpitius, lib. 2. gives an other reason, why Nero persecuted Paul
to death, which was this: Nero having set Rome on fire, and laid it unto the
Christians charge, whereof there was then a great number in the city: and this
occasion Nero took to persecute the Christians, and put them to diverse
torments: some he caused to be covered with beasts skins, and to be woorried
with dogs: some were nay led to crosses: some were burnt in the night, that
their fires might qualify the darkness of the night: and in this hot
persecution moved upon this occasion, Paul was put to death. But Pererius
confuteth this opinion by this reason: this setting of the city on fire
happened in the tenth year of Nero, as Eusebius notes in his Chronicle, but
S. Paul suffered in the 14. year of Nero.

5. But we need assign no other cause of Nero his rage against this blessed
Apostle, then this, which Eusebius and Hierome both do touch, as is partly
showed before, Quest. 12. that Paul's defense was at his first imprisonment
admitted, and thereupon delivered, because Nero at the first carried himself as
a gentle Prince, but in the end he became a most savage Tyrant, and then his
hatred was such against the Christians, that Paul could not escape his bloody
hands. It was then the cruelty of that bloody Tyrant joined with a wicked
detestation of the Christian faith, that provoked this beastly Tyrant, to show
his rage, in putting to death this holy Apostle: we need not seek for any
further reason. And thus far we have proceeded in such questions as concern
the person of this Apostle: now follow such matters, as are to be observed
touching his writings, and specially this Epistle to the Romans.

16. Quest. Of the Epistles of S. Paul the number of them.
1. The Epistles which S. Paul writ, are in all 14. in number, he writ nine of
them to the 7. Churches: 1. to the Romans, 2. to the Corinthians, 1. to the
Galatians, 1. to the Ephesians, 1. to the Philippians, 1. to the Colossians, 2.
to the Thessalonians, and one to the Hebrews: and 4. beside to private
persons, 2. to Timothy, 1. to Titus, 1. to Philemon. The reason of this
number, Gregory, whom Anselmus follows yields to be this: this number of
14. consisting of 10. which signifies the moral Law, and of four which
notes the 4. Evangelists, shows the harmony and consent of Law and Gospel,
and that S. Paul, Iegis and Euangelij secreta rimatus esset, had searched out
the secrets both of the Law and Gospel: But this reason is too curious.
Cyrillus de Hieros^lym. Catech. 10. better shows the reason, why S. Paul did
write more epistles then the rest of the Apostles: non quod minor esset Petrus,
ant Ioannes, not because Peter, or John were less or inferior: sed quia antea
fuit mimicus, but because he had been an enemy before, it pleased God he
should write most: that we might be the better persuaded that he taught the
truth.

2. These epistles of S. Paul are extant, some other he did write, which are
not extant, as 1. Cor. 5.9. he makes mention of an epistle, which he had
written to the Corinthians before that: for thus he says, I wrote unto you, in
an epistle, that you should not company together with fornicators: which words
Chrysostom thinks to have relation to the 2. and 7. verses of the chapter,
but the 11. verse following, But now I have written unto you, does show that
it was at another time, that he so had written. Indeed those words of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 3.3. as I have written before, (or above) in few words, may
have relation to the beginning of the same epistle, c. 1. v. 9. yet in this
place it may be gathered that S. Paul had written a former Epistle to the
Corinthians, Pareus: which may be his meaning, where he says, this is the
third time that I come unto you, 2. Cor. 13.1. which he may understand of his
three epistles, which he had written unto the Corinthians: for that some of the
Apostles writings may be missing in the New Testament, as some of the Prophets
in the old Testament, as Solomon is said to have spoken three thousand
Proverbs, and a thousand and five songs, 1. king. 4.32. whereof the greater
part is lost, may be granted without any inconvenience: seeing that part of the
Scripture, which the Lord has thought good to preserve for the edifying of his
Church is found to be sufficient.

3. Yet diverse books were forged and foisted in under S. Paul's name: as
Augustine cites the Apocalypse or Revelation of S. Paul, in 16. c. Joan.
whereof Niceph^rus also makes mention, lib. 12. c. 34. which they said was
found in Paul's fathers house at Tarfus in a marble coffet in the time of
Theodosius the Emperor, which was proved to be false by the confession of an
old man: such was the book of the Acts of Paul, mentioned by the same
Nicepherus, lib. 12. c. 46.

4. Of the same sort was the Epistle to the Laodiceans imagined to be of S.
Paul's writing: 1. which neither was S. Paul's writing, but the Church rejected
it, whether S. Paul wrote any Epistle to the Laodiceans.
that there might be but 14. epistles in all: to show, that the Apostle had
attained to the secrets of the Law and Gospel: for run signifies the Law,
and four the Evangelists, thus Anselmus in 4. epist. ad Colossens. following
Gregor. lib. 35. moral. c. 25. for the Church has no authority to reject any
part of the Apostolical writings. 2. neither was it of S. Paul's writing, but
now perished, as Bellarmine thinks, lib. 4. de verbo Dei, c. 4.3. nor yet was
that epistle sometime extant, of S. Paul's writing, as Epiphanius makes mention
thereof, in the heresy of the Marcionites: for S. Hierome well says, legunt
quidam ad Laodiceuses, sed ab omnibus exploditur, some do read also the
Epistle to the Laodiceans, but it is rejected of all, catalog. scr^ptor. for
the words are (...), from Laodicea, Coloss. 4.16. which the vulgar Latin
corruptly translateth, quae Laodicensium est, which is of the Laodiceans. 4.
neither was it the same epistle which the Apostle had written from Laodicea,
which some think to have been the first epistle unto Timothy: for it is
evident Coloss. c. 2.1. that S. Paul when he wrote this Epistle had not seen
the Laodiceans. 5. So Philastrius, har. 59 makes mention of such an Epistle
which was taken to be S. Paul's, but it was not publicly received, because of
some doubtful sentences thrust in by some: but it was not S. Paul's Epistle,
neither in part nor whole, for the reason before alleged, as Theodoret
thinks that it is a seyned and forged epistle. 6. Sixtus Senens. writes,
that there is an epistle of S. Paul's to the Laodiceans to be found in Paris, in
an old book, in the library of Sorbon, and at Padway in the library of S.
John: But that is not S. Paul's epistle, for it contains nothing worthy of
him: and whatsoever that epistle has is more distinctly handled in the epistle
to the Colossians: so that there was no reason, why S. Paul should will the
Colossians to read that epistle. 7. this epistle then from Laodicea, was some
epistle, which either the Laodiceans writ to S. Paul, whereunto he partly
makes answer, in that epistle to the Colossians, as Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Oecumeneus, or which they had written to the Colossians, Beza.

Quest. 17. Of the order of time, wherein S. Paul's several epistles were
written.
This Epistle to the Romans, though it be placed first, yet is thought to have
been written last of all those, which S. Paul did write before he was
imprisoned at Rome. His epistles then are thought to have been written in this
order: 1. the former epistle to the Thessalonians, seems to have been first
written, which he sent unto them from Athens by Tychicus: for from Thessalonica
he removed to Berea, from thence to Athens, Act. 17.2. And the same year
while he was at Athens, he did write the second epistle also to the
Thessalonians, explaining in the latter, that which he had written in the first
concerning the coming of Christ, and the end of the world: this was about the
17. year of his Apostleship, and the 9. year of the reign of Claudius the
Emperor, Pareus. Chrysostom gives this conjecture, why the epistles to the
Thessalonians should be written before those to the Corinthians, because he
says, 2. Cor. 9.2. that Achaia was prepared a year ago: whereby he
signifies that he had formerly dealt herein with the Thessalonians, unto whom
he thus writes, 2 Thessalonians. 4.9. as touching brotherly love, ye need not, that
I write unto you, etc. yea and that thing ye verily do to all the brethren,
which are throughout all Macedonia. It seems then that he had propounded this
matter of benevolence, and alms to the Thessalonians, before he had written
thereof to the Corinthians, Chrysostom. in argum.

But here are two doubts moved concerning this epistle: from whence it was
sent, and by whom: Barenius, to whom Pererius consents, thinks it was
written from Corinth: because S. Paul makes mention, c. 3.6. of Timothy his
return unto Paul, before this epistle was written, who found S. Paul at
Corinth, Act. 18.1.5. But there it is said, that Silas and Timotheus came from
Macedonia, when they found Paul at Corinth: therefore that might be an other
return, then this here mentioned, when Timothy came from Thessalonica: And
that Paul was then at Athens, when he wrote this epistle is evident, c. 3.1. we
thought it good to remain at Athens alone, etc. And of this opinion also are
Athanasius in Synops. and Theodoret, that this epistle was sent from Athens.

But these forenamed fathers think also, that this epistle was sent by
Timothy: because it follows, c. 3.2. and have sent Timotheus our brother,
etc. who they think carried this epistle: yet it is more probable that it was
sent by some other, and most like by Tichicus: Pareus: for the inscription of
the epistle is in Paul, Siluanus, and Timotheus name: it is not like, that he
would send Timotheus salutation, he being the messenger to carry the epistle:
for salutation and greeting is sent in the name of those which are absent.

3. The third epistle in order was the former Epistle to Timothy, which he
wrote from Laodicea, the chief city of Phrygia parationa, while he passed
thorough that country, Act. 18.2.3. before he came to Ephesus, c. 19.1. for
when S. Paul writ to Timothy, he purposed to see him shortly, 1. Tim. 3.14. as
he did, out of Phrygia coming to Ephesus: this seems to have been about the
19. year of his conversion.

4. Next was written the former epistle unto the Corinthians: which was dated
not from Philippi, as it is in the Greek subscription, but rather from
Ephesus, as the Syrian and Arabian translation has: for at this time Paul was
at Ephesus, 1. Cor. 16.8. I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost: and as yet
he was not come to Macedonia, where Phillippi was, as he says, v. 5. I will
pass thorough Macedonia: it seems then, that this epistle was written while
Paul stated at Ephesus, before that commotion made by Demetrius: Beza annot. 1.
Cor. 16.5 about the 19. year of Paul's conversion, the 54. year of our Lord,
and in the 12. year of Claudius. Pareus.

5. Then followed the second epistle to the Corinthians, which was written from
Philippi, as the usual subscription shows: for after the tumult ceased in
Ephesus, Paul departed to go into Macedonia, Act. 20.1. and from thence into
Grecia, where he stayed 3. months: as he promised to come unto Corinthus with
them of Macedonia, 2. Cor. 9.4. which he at that time performed.

6. About the same time also was written the Epistle to Titus from Nicopolis,
which is not far from Philippi in Macedonia, whether he sent for Titus to
come unto him: because he purposed there to winter, Tit.. 3.12. yet the Apostle
afterward changed his mind, for he stayed three months in Grecia, and there
wintred, Act. 20.3. as it is most like at Corinthus, Pareus. Aretius thinks
that this epistle was written before the latter to the Corinthians: the matter
is not great: they were both written in a short time one after another: but it
seems he first came to Philippi, whence he wrote to the Corinthians, and then
to Nicopolis.

7. The last of all these, was written this epistle to the Romans, from
Corinthus in his last passing thorough Macedonia and Grecia, when he went to
Jerusalem, whence he was sent captive to Rome: for now he had received the
alms to minister unto the Saints at Jerusalem, Romans 15.25. which he had
written before to the Corinthians to be gathered, 1. Cor. 16.2. 2. Cor. 8.6.
which alms he now carried to Jerusalem, when he wrote this epistle, as he says
Act. 25.17. that he brought alms to his nation: This epistle to the Romans,
as it was the last of those, which were written before he came to Rome, so yet
was it before all the rest, which he sent from Rome, being there in bonds:
Romanorum enim vnbem nondum accesserat, for he was not yet come to the city of
Rome, when he wrote this epistle, Chrysostom.

These seven former epistles, S. Paul did write before he was carried prisoner
to Rome: the other seven he sent after he came to Rome, for in all of them he
makes mention of his bonds: but whereas Paul is thought to have been twice in
bonds at Rome, for otherwise being held to have come to Rome in the 2. year
of Nero, he must either be thought after 2. years imprisonment at Rome to have
suffered in the 4. year of Nero, which is against the opinion of all, or that
he remained there 12. years prisoner, which is not like: Now then whether he
writ these Epistles following, in his first, or second imprisonment and bonds
at Rome, it is uncertain, Pareus.

8. The first written from Rome was the epistle to the Galathians, wherein he
makes mention of the marks of the Lord Jesus, which he did bear in his
body, c. 6.17. meaning his chains, or torments, which he endured: this may
seem to have been in the beginning of his second boads, Pareus. Chrysostom
thinks, that the epistle to the Galatians was before this to the Romans: but
that cannot be: for when he sent this epistle to the Romans, he had not yet
seen them, for he says, c. 1.11. I long to see you, etc. neither had been at
Rome: but from Rome he sent the Epistle to the Galathians, then being in bonds,
as both the subscription of the Epistle shows, and the mentioning of the
marks of the Lord Jesus, c. 6.17. Aretius thinks that this was written last
of all, saving the epistle to the Hebrews: because the Apostle says, c. 6.17.
from hence let no man put me to business: ego enim modo immolar, for I now am
ready to be offered: but these words are not there: he says, for I bear in my
body the marks, etc.

9. The next was the epistle to the Ephesians, where he makes mention also of
his bonds, c. 6.22. Pareus.

10. Then the epistle to the Philippians, in the which he makes mention of
some in Caesar's household, which sent salutations, c. 4.22. Pareus. Aretius will
have this the first epistle sent in his bonds, because he makes mention
thereof as of a new thing, c.i.v. 7. but by this reason the epistle to
Philemon should be first, because in the very title he says, Paul a prisoner
of Jesus Christ: These epistles, the order whereof cannot be proved otherwise
out of the epistles themselves, are best holden to have been written in that
order wherein they are placed.

11. The last of all the epistles written in S. Paul's first bands seems to be
the epistle to the Hebrews: Pareus makes it the first written from Rome: but
because he says, they of Italy salute you, c. 13.23. it may seem he was
dismissed from Rome, and preached in Italy: Baronius, and before him Aretius,
think it was the last of all S. Paul's epistles: but that is not like, because
it seems when he writ this epistle, he was delivered from his bonds at Rome,
and was in Italy: therefore I think that it was upon the same reason, the
last which S. Paul did write in his first imprisonment, as Pererius.

12. The next was the epistle to Philemon, but written in S. Paul's last bonds:
Pareus and Aretius think the Epistle to the Colossians was written first: but
Chrysostom gives the prioritie of this epistle to Philemon, upon this reason:
because, Coloss. 4.9. the Apostle makes mention of Onesimus a faithful and
beloved brother whom he sent with Tiobicus unto the Colossians: but it is like
he had first reconciled him to his master Philemon, whose servant he had been,
without whose mind he would do nothing, Philem. 14. him therefore it is like
he first of all sent to Philemon his master, with that epistle, before he would
employ him.

13. Then follows the epistle to the Colossians, wherein he prays them to
be mindful of his bonds. These two last epistles, 1. I neither think with
Pererius to have been written in S. Paul's first bonds, because he calls
himself now in the epistle to Philemon, which was written before this to the
Colossians, Paul aged: and though he writes v. 21. as hoping to be delivered,
yet it pleased God otherwise. 2. neither yet do I think with Pareus, that all
but the Epistle to the Hebrews written from Rome, are to be referred to S.
Paul's last bonds: because in some of them he writes very confidently of his
deliverance, as Philip. 1.25. This I am sure of, that I shall abide, etc. these
two then, with the latter epistle to Timothy, were written in S. Paul's last
bonds.

14. The last was the second epistle to Timothy, which was after the other to
the Colossians: for Demas was now fallen away, 2. Timoth. 4.10. who yet
continued with Paul, when he writ to the Colossians, c. 4.14. Aretius. And that
this was the last of all, is evident, 2. Tim. 4.6. where he says, I am ready
to be offered up, and the time of my departure is at band. Chrysostom. Pareus.

But Pererius much differs and dissenteth, as touching the order of time of
the writing of these epistles: whose placing of them with the reasons of his
opinion shall briefly be examined.

1. The Epistles to the Corinthians he thinks to have been written before
the 1. epistle to Timothy: which is affirmed to have been written in the
third place before either of these epistles: for if Paul writ the 1. epistle to
the Corinthians from Ephesus, as Pererius confesses, and it is evident, 1.
Cor. 16.8. then must the 1. epistle to Timothy be the former: for when S. Paul
writ to Timothy he had not yet been at Ephesus, but he purposed to see
Timothy shortly, 1. Tim. 3.14.

2. Next to the epistles to the Corinthians, he places the former to Timothy,
which must go before upon the reason alleged.

3. After the epistles to the Corinthians he sets the Epistle to Titus,
which followed indeed in that order, as is showed before: saving that he
thinks it was not written from Nicopolis, which is most probable, because he
says, c. 3.12. Be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis, for I am determined
there to winter: for although these words may bear that sense, that he was not
yet come to Nicopolis, but had it in his mind to be there: yet the
subscription to the epistle, affirming that it was written from Nicopolis,
ought to sway that way especially, the text favoring that sense.

4. The epistle to the Galatians he thinks to have had the 5. place next to
that to Titus, with Chrysostom: But Theodorets opinon is rather to be
received, who thinks it was written from Rome, and therefore after the
epistle to the Romans, as is showed before, loc. 9.

5. The Epistle to the Romans was the last of those which S. Paul writ before
he was in bonds at Rome, as has been showed before, loc. 7.

6. Then follow the other epistles to the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians,
Philemon, Colossians, Hebrews: saving that Pererius will have the epistle to
the Galatians before this to the Romans: and the epistle to the Hebrews last
of all, but the two epistles to Timohie: whereas the Epistles to Philemon, and
the Colossians, were after it: see before, loc. 13.

7. Last of all Pererius places the second to Timothy: which was written last
of all, when Paul was ready to be offered up, as he writes 2. Tim. 4.6. and
that the time of his departure was at hand: Baronius therefore is deceived, who
thinkeh it was written before the epistles to the Philippians, Ephesians,
Colossians, Philemon, and to the Hebrews: And whereas it will be objected,
that S. Paul when he writ this epistle was delivered out of the mouth of the
lion, meaning Nero, 2. Timoth. 4.17. and therefore this epistle was written in
his first, not in his second bonds. Chrysostom and Theodoret do answer, that
S. Paul speaks here of his first bonds, that at his first answearing he was
delivered: But (...) the former places, he speaks of his state and condition,
wherein he then presently was, every day expecting death, and looking for the
time of his dissolution.

Quest. 18. That it is no point of curiosity, but a thing very requisite to
know the diverse times of the writing of S. Paul's Epistles.
1. Not for that reason, which Origin supposes, to know how the Apostle
profited, v^detur in hac epistola perfectior fuisse quam in caeteris, he
seems to have been more perfect in this epistle then in the rest: for to the
Corinthians he writes, 1. Cor. 9. Least when I have preached to others, I
should be a reprobate: he so says, quasi res non indubitata esset, as though
it were a thing which he was not fully resolved of: and to the Philippians he
says, 3.12. not as though I had already attained unto it: But in this epistle
he speaks as a man thoroughly resolved: he was persuaded that nothing could
separate him from the love of God in Christ, c. 8.38, 39. sic fere Origenes.

Contra. 1. The places alleged prove no such uncertainty of assurance of
salvation in Paul: for in the first, he speaks not of reprobation before God,
but in the opinion of men, least they might judge him as a reprobate, if his
life should be contrary to his doctrine: in which sense he uses the word, 2.
Cor. 13.7. though we be as reprobates, that, is in man's judgment: In the other
place he speaks of the full possession of the inheritance, not of the perfect
assurance. 2. the epistle to the Philippians was written after that to the
Romans, as has been showed: therefore it is impertinently alleged to
prove greater perfection to have been in the Apostle, when he writ to the
Romans, then when he indicted the epistle to the Philippians. 3. The same
assurance of salvation, which S. Paul professes Romans 8. he shows also, 2.
Cor. 2.9. the things which eye has not seen, etc. which God has prepared for
those that love him: But God has revealed them unto us by his spirit, etc.
Here the Apostle, in saying ( us) persuaded himself to be one of those, to
whom these things were revealed and prepared.

2. But Chrysostom better shows the reason, why it is profitable to
distinguish of the time of the writing of these epistles: because the Apostle
handles the same things diuersely, treating of circumcision and other
Ceremonies: for to the Romans he says concerning such things, c. 14. him that
is weak in the faith receive unto you. But to the Galatians, he writes more
sharply, c. 5.2. If ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing: and to
the Colossians he calls them the ordinances of the world, the commandments
and doctrines of men, Coloss. 2.20.22. the reason of which difference
Chrysostom alleges to be this: quia principio condescendere oportuit,
successu temporis non item, because in the beginning the Apostle was to
condescend and yield somewhat, but not so afterward: like as physicians and
schoolemasters do more gently and tenderly use their patients, and young
scholars at the first, then afterward.

Quest. 19. Of the order of placing the Epistles, and why this to the Romans
is set first.
1. Athanasius in Synops. places the 7. canonical epistles before S. Paul's,
which are fourteen in all: and of them the epistle to the Hebrews he makes
the tenth next before the epistles to Timothy: Luther sets the epistle to
the Hebrews after S. John's epistles, and divides it from S. Paul's: Tertullian
lib. 5. cont. Marcionem, places them in this order, the epistles to the
Galatians, Corinthians, Romans, Thessalonians, Ephesians, Colossians,
Philippians: But the best order is, that which is usually received, to the
Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians,
Thessalonians, to Timothy, Titus, Philemon, to the Hebrews.

2. And why the epistle to the Romans is prefixed before the rest, the reasons
are these: 1. not for that it was the first in time, for the contrary is
showed before. 2. nor so much for the prolixitie and largenes thereof, as the
prophecy of I say in that behalf is set first, Pareus. 3. or for the dignity
of that nation, because the Romans, were chief Lords of the world, Aretius.
for this had been but a temporal respect. 4. or for the dignity and
excellency of the Roman Church: for he gives the pre-eminence to the Jews:
whom he calls the olive tree, and the Gentiles the banches of the wild olive
tree, c. 11.5. But the chief reason was, because of the excellent matter: this
epistle treats of that principal question of justification by faith (which
is handled also in the epistle to the Galatians, but here more at large) and of
the chief questions beside of Christian religion, as of the works of nature,
c. 1.2. the force of the law, c. 7. the fruits of justifying faith, c. 5. of
election and reprobation, c. 9. of the calling of the Gentiles, and the
reiection of the Jews, c. 11. of the diversity of gifts, c. 12. of the duty
toward Magistrates, c. 12. of the use of indifferent things, c. 14.15. so that
this epistle is as a catechism and introduction to Christian religion, and
therefore is worthily set before the rest: Aretius, Pareus.

Quest. 20. Unto whom this epistle to the Romans was written, and from whence.
1. It was not written generally to the whole Roman state: for the Emperor of
Rome with his Princes, ministers, and officers, were persecutors of the Church
of God: but it was directed to those among the Romans, whether of that nation
or strangers, both Jews and Gentiles, that had embraced the Gospel of Christ:
Aretius, Faius. As now in the Roman papal state we doubt not but there are
many, which profess the gospel of Christ, and are members of the true Church.

2. And although this epistle were personally directed to the Romans, yet it
entreats of the common faith, which concerns the whole Church of God, and
to the use thereof is general: and that which was written unto them, is
written unto us. As that which our Blessed Savior said unto his Apostles, he
said unto all, Mark. 13.37. So that which the Apostles did write to some
special Churches, they did write unto all, Gryneus.

3. This epistle was written from Corinthus, as not only the subscription
shows both in the Greek and Syriake, but Origin beside does collect so much
by these three arguments out of the text it self: 1. It was sent by Phebe a
servant of the Church of Cenchrea, Romans 16.1. which Cenchrea is near unto
Corinth, yea, portus ipse Corinthe, the very haven of Corinth. 2. he says,
Gaius mine host, and of the whole Church saluteth you, c. 16.23. which Gaius
dwelt at Corinth: as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 1.14. I baptized none of you,
but Crispus and Gains. 3. he adds further, Erastus the chamberlain of the
city saluteth you: which Erastus is the same, whom Paul left at Corinth, 2.
Timoth. 4.20.

Quest. 21. Of the excellency and worthiness of this epistle.
Three things do commend this epistle, 1. the matter, 2. the form, 3. the
kind and method.

1. Concerning the matter, it contains the chief articles, and most weighty
points of the Christian faith, as is partly showed before, qu. 6. Origin
further sets it forth thus: multa de lege Mosis connectuntur, etc. many
things are knit together in this epistle, as of the law of Moses, of the
calling of the Gentiles, of Israel, which is according to the flesh, and of
Israel not according to the flesh: of the circumcision of the heart, and of the
flesh, of the spiritual law, and the law of the letter: of the Law of the
members, and the law of the mind, of the law of sin, of the inward and
outward man: to this purpose, Origin. praefat. in epistol. ad Romanos.

2. The form and method of this epistle is most exact: consisting of the
definition of that, which is handled, and the tractation and explication
thereof: for the most perfect and artificial Method is that which begins
with the definition: as the Apostle shows what the Gospel is, it is the power
of God to salvation to every one that believes, c. 1. v. 16. in the which
definition are expressed all the causes thereof: the efficient and author,
(God) the end salvation, the material cause Christ Jesus, the formal, faith
and belief in us, and on Gods behalf his efficacious power: Gryneus. In the
amplyfying and tractation of this definition, all the rest of the epistle is
bestowed: as this proposition, that we are justified by the Gospel, that is by
faith and belief in Christ, is further amplified by the contrary, that we
cannot be justified either by the works of nature, c. 11.2. or of the Law, c.
3. but by grace, and faith, c. 4. by the effects of justifying faith, inward,
the peace of conscience, c. 5. outward, the fruits of holiness, c. 6. by the
contrary operation of the law, which reuealeth sin, c. 7. but the Gospel
freeth from condemnation, c. 8. by the cause, the free election of God, c. 9.
by the subject, the Gentiles called, the Jews rejected, c. 11. See more hereof
concerning the Method, in the general argument of the epistle before.

3. For the kind of epistle: It is principally definitive and demonstratiue:
for he defines and determines that we are justified, neither by the works of
nature, nor of the law, but by faith in Christ; and proves the same by most
evident demonstration: Beside this epistle has somewhat of all other kinds of
epistles, which are called accessaria, accessarie and secundarie: as it is both
gratulatorie, rejoicing for their faith, c. 1. and it is reprehensorie,
rebuking the Gentiles for their licentiousnes: it is also exhortatorie,
exhorting to holiness of life, c. 6.12. and it is deprecatorie, he prays and
makes request, praying for increase of grace in them, and for himself, that
he might have some good occasion to come unto them. Aretius.

4. Places of doctrine.
1. Doct. Of the godly custom and use of the Church, in laying the foundation
of religion, which is Catechizing.
This commendable use was taken up by the Apostles themselves: as the Apostle
shows, Hebr. 6.1. he calls it the doctrine of beginnings, and the laying of
the foundation: as of repentance, faith, baptism, the resurrection, of
eternal judgment: And so in this epistle, the Apostle delivers a perfect
form of catechism: which consists of three parts, of the misery of man by
nature, his reparation and restitution by grace, and then of his thankfulness
afterward, in his obedience of life, for the benefits received: which three
parts, the Apostle does at large handle in this epistle: what man is by nature,
he shows, c. 1.2.3. what by grace, c. 4.5.8. and of the fruits of
regeneration he entreats, c. 6. c. 12. So that it is false which Bellarmine
affirms, that the Apostle delivered no form of catechizing, to the Church:
l. 4. de verb. Dei. c. 4. for he does it most plainly and evidently in this
epistle. Pareus.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Contr. That it is known, that this Epistle was written by S. Paul, and is
of divine authority, by the Epistle it self.
Bellarmine affirms, that to know, that any Scripture is divine or
Canonical, it can not be concluded out of the Scripture it self: neither
which were the writings of S. Paul, or that the Gospel of S. Matthew was
written by Matthew, without the tradition of the Church. Bellar. lib. 4. de
verb. c. 4.

Contra. 1. That the Epistles of Saint Paul are of divine, and Canonical
authority, it appears evidently out of the writings themselves: for they
being written by Saint Paul, who had the spirit of God, 1. Corinthians. 7.40. and
had Christ speaking in him, 2. Cor. 13.13. and was taught of God, from whom he
received his doctrine by revelation, Gal. 1.12. it is not to be doubted, but
that his holy writings proceeded from the spirit of God, and so are of divine
authority: and he himself doubts not to make them canonical, as he says,
Gal. 6.16. Whosoever walks according to this canon or rule, etc. And he
denounces anathema, if any, yea an Angel, should teach any other Gospel, then
he had preached, Gal. 1. 2. Likewise that S. Paul was the author and writer of
them, it is evident, both by the inscription and title, and by the salutation
in the end of every epistle, and the benediction which he uses, The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all: which he says is the token or mark to
know his epistles by, 2 Thessalonians. 3.17. 3. The tradition of the Church is an
uncertain thing: that which is uncertain can not be a rule and measure of that,
which is most certain: the testimony of men, can not assure us of the
testimony of God, Christ says, Ioh. 5.33. Ye sent unto John, and he bare
witness unto the truth: but I receive not the record of men, etc. 36. I have a
greater witness, then the witness of John, etc.

2. Contr. That S. Paul's epistles are not so obscure, that any should be
terrified from the reading thereof.
In the Preface to Toletus commentary, the epistles of S. Paul are affirmed to
be hard, out of Hierome and Origin, contr. Whitakerum hareticum, against
Whitaker that heretic: as it pleases that railing taxer, to call that learned
godly man.

Contr. 1. True it is, that as S. Peter says, some things are hard in S. Paul's
epistles, 1. Pet. 3.16. he says not, that many things are hard, or that the
Epistles are hard, but only some (few) things in them: this lets not, but
that his Epistles may safely be read of all, that read them with an humble
mind, desirous to profit thereby: the danger is only to the unlearned, and
unstable which pervert them, as they do the rest of the Scriptures, as S.
Peter in the same place says. 2. And even those hard places may be made easy
by diligent reading: as Chrysostom gives this instance; like as we know their
mind whom we love and observe, and are familiar with them, and vtique si
lectioni cum animi alacritate volueritis attendere, etc. so you if you will
with cheerful attention give your selves to reading, ye shall need no other
help, etc. hinc vt innumera mala nata sunt, quod scripturae ignorantur, hence
so many evils have sprung up, because the Scriptures are not known; hence so
many heresies, etc. the ignorance then, not the reading of Scripture, breeds
heresies: and thus he concludes, oculos ad splendorem Apostolicorum verborum
aperiamtu, let us open our eyes to receive the brightness of the Apostolical
words, etc. they do not then cast darkness upon our eyes, but bring brightness
and clearnes. Chrysostom. argum. in epist. ad Romans

3. Controv. Against the Ebionites, which retained the rites and ceremonies of
Moses.
Whereas the Ebionites thought the rites of the Law necessary, and joined them
together with the Gospel, which heresy did much trouble the Church in the
Apostles time, and is at large confuted in the epistles of S. Paul to the
Galatians, and Colossians: the same also in this epistle is convinced, and
confounded: for the Apostle renounceth the works of the Law, whether the
ceremonial and moral, as having no part in the matter of justification, which
he concludes to be by faith, without the works of the law, c. 3. And he
shows directly, c. 4.10. that Abraham's faith was imputed to him for
righteousness, when as yet he was uncircumcised, least his justification might
be thought to have depended upon his circumcision.

4. Controv. Against the Marcionites, which rejected the law of Moses.
These wicked heretics too much depraved the law of Moses, with the rites
thereof, (as the other extolled it too much) affirming that it was not
appointed nor commanded, by the good and gracious God, but by the Prince of the
darkness of this world. But these also are sufficiently confuted in this
epistle: for S. Paul commends the ceremonies of the old Testament, as fit for
those times, and figures of things to come: as he calls circumcision the
seal of the righteousness of faith, c. 4.11. and this testimony he gives of
the moral law, Romans 7.12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the commandment is
holy, just, and good, etc.

5. Controv. Against the Romanists, which deprave the doctrine taught by S.
Paul in this epistle.
Bellarmine in his controversies, and Stapleton in his Antidotes, do
apparently impugn the holy doctrine of the Apostle in this epistle in diverse
points. 1. Justification by the imputation, and apprehension of faith, which we
call imputative justice, they condemn, as a lie and untruth: whereas the
Apostle directly teaches, c. 4.5. That to him that works not, but believes
in him that justifies the ungodly, faith is counted for righteousness: and v.
8. Blessed is he, to whom the Lord imputes not his sin. So that it is
evident by the Apostle, that our justification before God, is in the not
imputing of sin, and in the imputing of Christ's righteousness by faith.

2. The Romanists do teach, that a man, as long as he lives here, can not be
certain of faith, whether he believes, of remission of sins, whether he be
justified, of reconciliation, whether he be in the state of grace, of adoption,
whether he be the child of God, of life eternal, whether he shall be saved.
Contrary to the Apostle, who shows, that by faith, we may be assured of all
these: as of remission of sins, for otherwise we could not be at peace with
God, which we obtain being justified by faith, c. 5.1. of adoption, that by
the spirit we can call God, Abba, father, c. 8.15. of everlasting salvation,
for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, c. 8.1.

3. Whereas the Apostle would have every soul subject to the higher powers, c.
13.1. they exempt all their Clergy from the power of the Magistrate, and so in
a manner the one half of the multitude: for if their Cardinals, Prelates,
Priests, Monks, Friars, Pardoners, with all their ministers, be put together, a
media multitudinis puto vix aberit, they will not want much of the half part.
Pareus in praefat. But these controversies shall more fully be handled, when we
come to deal with them afterward in particular.

6. Controv. Against Socinus, that blasphemously subuerteth the doctrine of our
redemption by Christ, and justification by faith.
This blasphemous Socinus not many years since, set forth a book in Polonia,
wherein he makes Christ no otherwise the Savior of the world, then Moses, in
teaching the people by his example to live well: and so doing, they shall
inherit eternal life: he further most impudently affirms, that we have no
need of any Reconciler or Redeemer with God: but that he died for our sins,
no otherwise then the Martyrs, not to make any satisfaction for us, but only
to give us example. These and other such wicked assertions, has he published
in that book: Pareus in praefat.

Thus this wicked heretic opposes himself to the most holy doctrine of S.
Paul: who evidently teaches, that as faith was imputed to Abraham for
righteousness, so is it to us, c. 4.24. and that when we were enemies, we were
reconciled unto God by the death of Christ, c. 5.10. and that by Christ's
obedience we are made righteous, c. 5.19. But such wicked assertions, need no
confutation, it is sufficient to propound them: for who can not, that has the
least spark of grace, but at the very first naming of them abhor them?

7. Controv. Whether Paul may be thought to have been married.
The Rhemists much mislike our English translation, because we read, Philip.
4.3. faithful roake-fellow, so translating the Greek words (...), as though
we thereby intended to prove that S. Paul had a wife: which they say is
contrary to the Apostles words, 1. Cor. 7.8. where he wishes the unmarried to
abide as he did: Anxot. Philip. 4.3.

Contra. 1. The Protestants do not much insist upon it, whether Paul had a
wife or no, neither do they much urge this place to that purpose: yet Clemens
Alexandrin. out of this very place infers so much, that the Apostle by
yoake-fellow, understands his wife: lib. 4. stromat. Eusebius also is of the
same mind, that Paul was married, joining him with Peter and Philip, which were
both married. 2. Yet it follows not, because Paul was unmarried, when he writ
unto the Corinthians, that he was so always. 3. And what though Paul were not
married, it is sufficient, that he had liberty to take a wife, as the other
Apostles did, 1. Cor. 9.5. Aretius.

But we will somewhat more distinctly yet consider of this question, of S.
Paul's marriage, whereof there are diverse opinions.

1. Some think that he was a perpetual virgin and never married, of which
opinion is Tertullian, who calls S. Paul, Euangelicum spadonem and custratum,
the Evangelical Eunuch, who had made himself chaste: and he says further,
Petrum solum invento maritum, I find Peter only, of the Apostles to have
been an husband: lib. de Monogom. So thinks Hierome, that Paul was a virgin:
epist. 22. And Epiphanius, haeres. 58. reckons among those, qui perpetuo
coluerunt virginitatem, which were perpetual virgins, Helias in the old
Testament, and Paul in the new. Ambrose likewise, and Theodoret, do give this
reason, that S. Paul before his conversion was too young to be married: and
after he was converted, it is not like he desired marriage, which he had
neglected before. Of the same judgment are Theophylact, Oecumenius, Beda upon
the 7. c. 1. epist. ad Corinth. The chief reason of Paul's virginity they
ground upon these words, 1. Cor. 7.8. I say unto the unmarried, and unto the
widows, it is good for them, if they abide, even as I. But this only shows
that S. Paul at that time was not married, not that he never had been married:
and that conjecture that Paul was not of age to be married before he was
converted, has no probability, seeing he was put in great authority by the
high Priest, of whom he received letters to persecute the Disciples at
Damascus, Act. 9.1, 2.

2. An other opinion is, that S. Paul had a wife both before his conversion and
after: so Ignatius epist. ad Philadelphens. Clemens Alexandr. lib. 3. stromat.
Leo 9. distinct. 31. c. 11. Catetanus and Catharinus, in 4. cap. ad Philippens.
and Erasmus likewise: their grounds are out of two places, 1. Cor. 9.5. Have we
not power to lead about a wife being a sister, as well as the rest of the
Apostles? and, Philipp. 4.3. I beseech thee, faithful yoakefellow, help those
(weomen,) which labored with me in the Gospel.

But neither of these places prove any such thing. The first we refuse not,
neither upon Tertullians reason, because it goes before, Have we not power to
eat and drink? lib. de Monog.
that he speaks of such women which ministered unto them victuals: or
Hieromes, lib. 1. contr. Iovinian.
who thinks because the name sisters is added, he understands rather other
women, then their proper wives, as the word (...) signifies both a wife and a
woman: for their wives also were their sisters in profession: or Augustines,
who says the Apostle, lib. de oper. Monach.
non ducendi, sed circumducendi ^ocabulo vsus est, used not the word of leading
to marry, but leading about: But the special reason, why we refuse this place
is, because at the same time, that S. Paul wrote this epistle, he counted
himself among those which were unmarried, 1. Cor. 7.8. This place only
shows, that S. Paul had power to carry about a wife, as the rest of the
Apostles did: but not that he used this power: as likewise he had liberty not
to work, as it follows in the same place, v. 6. Or I only and Barnabas,
have we not power not to work? yet he wrought with his hands notwithstanding.

The other place is rather to be understood of some helper, that was most
nearly joined unto S. Paul in the work of the Gospel, then of his wife: for
as Caietane well notes, seeing S. Paul was unmarried before, when he was at
liberty, and wrote the first epistle to the Corinthians, it is not like he
took him a wife afterward, being now a prisoner at Rome, when he sent this
epistle to the Philippians: and beside, the Syrian translatour puts it out
of doubt, who uses here the masculine gender, as Beza notes, which is
ambiguous in the Greek.

3. Some other leave the matter in suspense, not determining, whether S. Paul
were married or not: as Origin in the beginning of his commentary upon this
epistle: to which opinion it is safest to subscribe: to hold it as a matter
indifferent, whether S. Paul were at any time married or not, seeing it is not
expressed in Scripture. It suffices, that he says he had power to lead about
a sister a wife, as well as the rest.

But now Pererius out of some fathers, as Hierome, Augustine, contendeth that
it must rather be interpreted, a woman being a sister, for the word (...),
here used, signifies both a woman, and a wife: which conceit is removed by
these sufficient reasons:

1. They in thus reading, a woman a sister, do inuert the order of the words:
which stand thus in the original, (...) a sister a wife: if they will have it,
a sister a woman, that were superfluous, seeing the word sister also includes
the other: for she could not be a sister, but she must be a woman too.

2. It was more seemly, that seeing the Apostles had women in their company
to minister unto them, it was more fit and convenient, that their own wives
should go about with them, then other women, which had not been without
offense.

3. Likewise the very phrase, of leading about a sister, shows some
authority and command, such as husbands have over their wives, and masters
over their servants, as Peter Martyr well note^h: the Apostles had power to
lead about their own wives, who were not to forsake their husbands: but over
other women they had not that power.

4. And if this were to be understood of rich and wealthy women, which
accompanied the Apostles, and ministered unto them of their substance, they had
been no charge unto the Churches, whether the Apostles came: and so this had
been no privilege to the Apostles, to bring such women with them, as should
support their charges. But the Apostle here stands upon his privilege and
immunitie, if he had thought good to have used it, that he might, as the other
Apostles, have lead about a wife: Beza. So that whether S. Paul were married or
not, it suffices, that he might have taken a wife, if he would.

Moral observations out of the whole Epistle.
1. Observe. Of the singular profit that may arise by reading of this Epistle to
the Romans.
This Epistle has a double use, either to instruct us in the right judgment
of the greatest mysteries of Christian Religion, as of justification by faith,
of the Law, of Election, of certentie of salvation, as also to stir us up to
the works of piety. Origin only commends the reading of the latter part of
the Epistle, from c. 12. to the end: the other part, he thinks not to be so
necessary, as handling only questions about the ceremonies of the Law: but
herein I prefer rather the judgment of Chrysostom, who often caused S.
Paul's epistles to be read in his hearing, even twice every week: argument. in
epist. ad Roman. and Augustine professes he was much addicted to the reading
of S. Paul, lib. 7. confess. c. 3. It was an ancient use in times past in the
Church, that they which were appointed to the Ministry, should get without
book, the Psalms and the prophecy of Isai in the old Testament, and the
Gospel of S. Matthew, with S. Paul's epistle in the new: It shall be profitable
for every Christian likewise to follow the same godly use, especially to
acquaint themselves with the divine writings of S. Paul: and every one may say
with Chrysostom, gaudeo equidem, quod spirituali illa tuba frui datum sit, I
am glad, that I may enjoy that spiritual trumpet, etc. in argum. ad. Roman.

The first Chapter.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
PAul a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, put a part to preach
the Gospel of Christ,

2 (Which he had before promised by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures)

3 Of his Son ( Jesus Christ our Lord. G.) made ( not begotten. V.T. or made
to him. L.) of the seed of David according to the flesh: (not of the seed of
David in the flesh. T.)

4 Declared to be the Son of God ( not known. T. or predestinate. L. or
destinate to be the Son of God. V.) in power, L. (not mightily. G. Be. or by
power. V. according to the spirit of sanctification. G. Be. V. not according to
the holy spirit. T. or the spirit that sanctifies. R.) by the resurrection
from the dead: T.B.G.Be. (not of the dead) even Jesus Christ our Lord: Be. T.
(not of Jesus Christ our Lord. L.V.R.B. for it must be suferred to the
beginning of the third verse: and all that follows must be enclosed in a
parenthesis: so the Genevens. do transpose it: but it is safest to put it in
the last place, according to the original: with reference, as is said before.)

5 By whom we have received grace and Apostleship, for obedience to the faith
( that obedience might be given to the faith. B. G.) among all the Gentiles for
his name: ( that they may obey the faith of his name. T.) ( in his name among
all heathen. B.G.)

6 Among whom ye are also the called of Jesus Christ: ( the called in Jesus
Christ. T.)

7 To all that be at Rome, B. ( you, that be. B. G. Be. V. they that be. L. T.
(...), being) called to be Saints: Grace be to you, and peace ( grace with
you. T.) from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

8 First verily I give thanks to my God ( I thank my God. B.G. but in the
original it is put in the dative, to God) thorough Jesus Christ, for you all,
because your faith is published in the whole world. (not, heard. T. or
renowned. R. the word is (...), annu^ciator, published.)

9 For God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit ( with my spirit. B.) in
the Gospel of his Son, that without ceasing, I make mention of you V.B.G.Be.
( make memory of you. R.L. which phrase is neither good in Latin or English.)

10 Always in my prayer, beseeching, if by any means sometime at the length
T.B.L. V. (at one time or other. B.G.) I might have a prosperous journey by the
will of God to come unto you.

11 For I long to see you, that I might impart unto you Be. L. ( bestow among
you. B.G.) some spiritual gift; that ye may be stablished, Be. B. ( or
confirmed. T.V. to confirm you. L. R. but the word is in the passive.)

12 That is, to be comforted together among you, Be. ( in you. L. R. with you.
B.G. to be exhorted together. B. Par. but the Apostle was comforted rather,
then exhorted by their faith) by our mutual faith, yours, and mine.

13 Now I would not have you ignorant (brethren) Be. Par. l. Or. (I would have
you know. T.B.) how that I have oftentimes purposed to come unto you, (but have
been let hitherto) that I might have some fruit also among you, Be. Par. (
in you. L. T.R. the Greek preposition signifies (in) properly, but here it is
taken for, among) as also among other Gentiles.

14 Both to the Grecians, and to the Barbarians, both to the wise, and unwise
am I a debtor: ( to every man am I a debtor, to preach. T. this is not in the
original.)

15 So that, as much as in me ( is,) I am ready to preach the Gospel, to you
also that a^^ in Rome. ( verbat. that which is in me, is ready to preach.)

16 For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God
unto salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Grecian.

17 For by it, the righteousness of God is revealed, from faith to faith, as it
is written, But the just shall live by faith.

18 For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against ( upon. L.) all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which withheld the truth in
unrighteousness,

19 Forasmuch as that which may be known of God, Be. G.V.B. ( which is known
of God. L.R. the knowledge of God. T. (...), here signifies that rather, which
may be known) is manifest in them: for God has showed it unto them.

20 For the invisible things of him, from the creation of the world, (or since
the foundation) T.L. Par. (not, thorough the creation of the world. V.G.B. see
qu. 51.2.) being understood by ( his) works, are seen; both his eternal
power and Godhead ( which words the Genevens. transpose to the beginning of the
verse) that they should be without excuse: T. (not, so that they are
inexcusable. L. R. B. or to the intent, that they should be without excuse.
B.G. Par. see qu. 54.)

21 Because, that when they knew God, they glorified him not, as God, neither
were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart
was darkened, (...). Be.L. (blinded. B. full of darkness. G.)

22 When they professed themselves to be wise: B.G. (saying themselves to be
wise. L.R. counting, B. thinking. T. but (...), is better translated,
professing) they became fools.

23 And they turned (for they turned, Be. G. but the word in the original is
(...) and) the glory of the corruptible God, into the similitude of the image
(by the similitude, etc. V. into the formed image, Be. made after the
similitude, etc. B. but in the original it is, in the similitude) of a
corriptible man, and of birds, and of four footed beasts, and of creeping
things.

24 Wherefore God gave them up to their hearts lust, unto uncleanness ( not, to
unclean lusts of their hearts. T. or to uncleanness thorough the lusts of their
hearts. V.B.) to dishonor or disgrace, ignominia afficiant.T.V.L. (defile,
Be.B.G. but the word (...), properly signifies to disgrace) their own bodies
between themselves:

25 Which turned the truth of God into a lie ( not, his truth for a lie, V.B.)
and worshipped and served the creature beside the Creator, (or forsaking the
Creator ( not, above the Creator, V. or more then the Creator. B. or rather
then the Creator: the word is (...) beside) who is blessed for ever, Amen.

For this cause, God gave them up to vile affections: for even the women did
change the natural use into that which is beside nature: ( contrary to
nature. L.B.G. the word is (...), prater: and used that which is not of nature.
T. but here he interprets, rather then translateth.)

27 Likewise the males (the men. B.G. but the word is (...), males) left the
natural use of the women, and burned in their lust one toward an other, and
the males with males ( men with men. B.G. the word is (...), males) wrought
filthiness, and received in themselves such recompense of their error, as was
meet: ( as they should. L. as was according. B. (...), which it beheoued, or
was meet)

28 For as they regarded not to know God, even so God delivered them to a
reprobate mind, G.V. (rather then a lewd mind. B. reprobate sense. L. vain
mind. T. mind void of judgment. B.P. the words are (...), reprobate mind)
to do those things, which are not convenient.

29 Being full of all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness,
maliciousnes, (rather then, iniquity, malice, fornication, wickedness. L. B.
for the order is inuerted: for the most Greek copies, and the Syriak put
fornication in the second place, see qu. 73. following) full of enure, murder,
debate, deceit, evil conditioned, V.B. (taking things in the worse part, G.
full of evil thoughts, T. malignitie. L.Be. the word is (...), churlishnes,
morositie)

30 Whisperers, backbiters, haters of God (not hateful to God. L. for the
Apostle sets down the sins of the Gentiles) despitefull, B. (or
contumelious, L. doers of wrong. G.) proud, boasters, inuenters of evil
things, disobedient to parents, without understanding, covenant breakers, (
dissolute, L.R. the word is (...), not standing to composition) without
natural affection, such as can not be appeased ( without fidelity, L.R. truce
breakers, B.V. but that was said before) merciless.

31. Which knowing the justice of God (the righteousness. B. law. G. right of
God. G.Be. judgment of God, the word is (...), justice) that they which do
such things, are worthy of death, Be.B.G.V. (not, did not understand, that
they which do such things are worthy of death. L. for these words, did not
understand, are not in the original: nor, that it condemns to death those
which do such things. T. for the word is in the plural, (are worthy of death)
but favor, G. or applaud. Par. or have pleasure in. B. or patronize. Be. not
consent. L. the word signifies more, then a bare consent) those which do them.

2. The Argument and parts of the Chapter.
IN this Chapter the Apostle after the salutation, and exordium of the Epistle,
falls to prove justification by faith against the Gentiles: first, showing
their manifold sins, and bad works, whereby they were so far from being
justified, that thereby they incurred everlasting damnation.

The parts are 1. the inscription to v. 8. 2. the exordium or introduction to
the matter, to v. 17. 3. the proposition and argument concerning justification
by faith, v. 17.18.4. the confirmation or proof, tow. 31.

1. The inscription or salutation shows, 1. the person that saluteth and
sends greeting, which is Paul, described by his office and calling, in
general, a servant of Jesus Christ: in special an Apostle, to what end, to
preach the Gospel, v. 1. which is set forth, 1. by the antiquity, v. 2.2. the
excellency of the subject thereof, Christ Jesus: who is described by the
singularity of his person, God and man, v. 3.4. and by his office set forth in
general, by the work of our redemption, which was finished by his
sanctification and resurrection, v. 4. and in special, he was the author of
the conversion and calling of the Apostle, v. 5.3. by the effect of the Gospel,
to win obedience to the faith among the Gentiles.

2. The persons saluted are the Romans, whom he sets forth by their
external condition, general, they were Gentiles, special, at Rome, and
spiritual, what they were, called, by whom, by Christ, to what, to be Saints,
v. 6.7.

3. The salutation it self, v. 7. he wishes unto them grace, and peace.

2. In the exordium or proeme. 1. there is his gratulation or giving of thanks
for their faith, v. 8.2. the testification of his love toward them confirmed by
an oath: in which his love is expressed by two effects, 1. his earnest prayer
to God to come unto them, v. 9.10. 2. his longing desire in himself to see
them, v. 11. with the end, v. 12.3. a preoccupation of a question, or
purgation of himself, that he yet came not unto them: where he shows 1. the
lets of his purpose v. 13.2. his purpose, which yet he continued to come unto
the^: which is confirmed both by the end, to have some fruit among them, v.
13.2. and by his calling, in general, he was a debtor to all the Gentiles, who
are set forth by distribution, v. 14. in special, and so consequently he was
ready to preach the Gospel unto them: And by this mention made of the Gospel,
he takes occasion to pass unto the matter.

3. The third part is the proposition: that justification is by faith: where we
have first the occasion, whereupon he brings it in: I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ: then the proposition it self: that the Gospel is the power
of God to salvation to every one that believes, v. 16. and the proof thereof
taken from the Prophet Habacuke, v. 17.

4. The fourth part is the confirmation of this proposition, that men are
justified by faith: which he shows by this disjunction: they are either
justified by faith, or by works: but not by works: which he proves by this
distribution: first that the Gentiles cannot be justified by works, in this
chapter to the 17. v. of the next: then, that neither the Jews can challenge
any thing by their works, thence to the end of the 2. chapter: the Gentiles
cannot be justified by their works, because by their works being full of
impiety and iniquity, they are made guilty of eternal death, and of the
wrath of God: the argument stands thus: they which are full of impiety and
iniquity, are subject to the wrath of God: this proposition is expressed, v.
18. But the Gentiles are such, full of impiety and iniquity: Ergo: the
assumption or second part is proved distributiuely: first their impiety is
showed toward God, to v. 28. then their iniquity toward men. v. 32.

In the proof of their impiety: first the sin is showed, then the
punishment: their sin, in that wittingly and against their knowledge, they
depraved the worship of God: their knowledge is set forth both by the light of
nature in them, v. 19. and by the creatures, v. 20. their deprauation of Gods
worship, is expressed, in the causes, their unthankfulness, which brought
forth vanity of mind, and foolishness, v. 21.22. the effect, in worshipping
corruptible things in stead of God, v. 23. then the punishment follows, they
were given up to their hearts lusts, v. 24.

2. As they depraved Gods worship wittingly against their knowledge, so they
did it willingly: their sin is showed, in their voluntary forsaking of the
Creator, v. 25. their punishment, in being given over both women and men to
vile affections, v. 26.27.

Then follows the demonstration of their iniquity: which consisted, 1. both
in doing things not comely, which is declared, both by showing the cause
thereof, then being given over to a reprobate mind, procured by their
contempt, and wilful neglect of the knowledge of God, v. 28. and by a
particular enumeration of the diverse sins, which they committed: the
several distribution whereof see afterward, qu. 72. 2. they did not only
commit such things themselves, but they also favored and patronized such as
did them, v. 32. so then the conclusion must follow, that the Gentiles made
themselves, by those their evil works worthy of death, and so consequently
thereby deprived themselves of life and salvation.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. Why Paul sets his name before this epistle.
1. Chrysostom gives this reason, why neither Moses prefixeth his name before
his books, not yet the Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, before their
gospels, ille quippe praesentibus scribentes, etc. for they writing unto these
which were present, had no cause to set to their names: But Paul, quia long
remotis scribebat, etc. because he did write to those, which were a far off,
had reason to set to his name, after the manner of epistles. 2. But Paul for an
other reason does suppress his name, writing to the Hebrews, quia non erunt
amico in Paulum animo, because they had no friendly mind toward Paul: and
therefore as soon as they had heard his name, they would presently have
rejected the whole epistle, Chrysostom. 3. And S. Paul being appointed to be
the doctor of the Gentiles, uses rather to instruct them by epistles, then by
sermons, as the Prophets, or commentaries, as the Evangelists, or dialogues, as
lob: because he did write unto many Churches: And so as the form of epistles
requires, he sets his name in the inscription, that it may be known whose
epistle it was. Hyperius.

Quest. 2. Of the two names of the Apostle, Saul, and Paul, what they signify.
1. Concerning Saul: Ambrose in his commentary thinks it signifies unquiet,
restles, alluding unto the Greek word (...), which signifies the troublesome
motion of the waves of the Sea: and the letter u being put unto it, it makes
(...), Erasm. annot. But Saul being an Hebrewe name, the deriuation thereof
must be taken from the Hebrewe: Saul then is derived of the Hebrewe word,
shaal, and it signifies asked or begged, Erasm. ibid. Tolet.

2. Of the deriuation of the name Paul, there are diverse opinions. 1. Hierome
sometime thinks, that it should come of the Hebrewe word pelah, which
signifies wonderful, comment. in Philemon. 2. Some will have it rather
derived of paghal, which signifies to do, or work, because he was Gods
workman, and the Lord wrought by him as his instrument, Tolet. 3. Remigius
says, it signifies in the Hebrewe os tuba, the mouth of a trumpet: for so S.
Paul was the Lords trumpet to found forth the gospel, Gorrham. but Aretius
says well, ex proprijs linguis derinatio nominum petenda, that the deriuation
of names must be fetched from the proper languages: from the Hebrewe tongue
then, words which are not Hebrewe, cannot take their deriuation. 4. Some do
make it a Greek name, and to be derived of (...), quietness, of the word (...),
to rest, to be quiet. But Aretius well notes, that Paul is found to be no
proper name among the ancient Greek writers, Homer, Hesiode, Herodotus,
Thucydides: but only in the late Greek historians, Plutarke, Appion, Dion,
which turned the Latin histories into Greek. 5. Augustine thinks that it is
a Latin name derived of the aduerbe paulum, little: whereby S. Paul signified
his humility: and herein Bed^ follows Augustine. 6. But their conjecture is
best, that take it to be a proper name used among the Romans: as Paulus
Aemilius and other famous Romans were called by this name, Beza.

Quest. 3. Upon what occasion the names Saul was turned to Paul.
1. Origin thinks, that the Apostle had two names from the beginning, as
Matthew was called Leui: and it was the manner of the Hebrews to use diverse
names: and he gives this reason, because it is said, Act. 13.9. Saul, which is
called Paul, that be began not then to have two names, but was so called
before: and his parents because they were Jews of the tribe of Benjamin called
him Saul, and being citizens of Rome also by privilege, they called him Paul,
according to the Roman names: But Toletus thus obiecteth, that if he had two
names from the beginning, S. Luke would have expressed them before, whereas he
is only called Saul in the history going before the 13. chapter: otherwise
there is great probability in this opinion, that the Apostle was called both
Saul and Paul, but not at the same instant, neither from the beginning, but
afterward.

2. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, Theodulus, all these are of opinion,
that the Apostles name was changed from Saul to Paul, by God himself, as
Abraham and Jacobs names were changed, and Peter's, that herein he should not be
inferior to Peter. But Hierome in commentar, in Philemon, and Sedulius, do
refute this opinion by this reason, because mention is made in Scripture of the
change of their names, so is there not of this: and Tolet adds further that
Peter's name was not changed, but somewhat added to it: he was called Simon
Peter: But after the Apostle began to be called Paul, he is no more named
Saul.

3. Hierome in epist. ad Philem. whom Lyranus follow, think, that Paul after
the conversion of Sergius Paulus, would be called by his name, as a monument of
that triumph in converting a chief man of the Gentiles to the Christian faith:
Sedulius and Anselme do reject this opinion, because there is no such use and
custom in the Scripture for Saints to take unto them names upon any such
occasion: And again, this had not beseemed Paul's humility to have taken the
glory of that victory to himself, which was due unto Christ, Tolet. and
rather Sergius should have been called by Paul's name by whom he was converted
and baptized, then Paul by his. Perer.

4. Ambrose and Augustine, think that the Apostles name was changed at the
time of his conversion: and Ambrose gives this reason, ex Saulo inquieto
factum Paulum quietum etc. of unquiet Saul he was made quiet Paul, of a
persecutor a preacher of the Gospel: But here Ambrose alludeth unto the Greek
signification of these words, whereas Saul is an Hebrewe name, and Paul a
Latin, as is showed before: But Augustine renders an other reason, which Beda
follows: Saulus factus est Paulus, primo superbus, postea humilis, Saul was
made Paul, first proud, then humble: for Saul was a proud and cruel king, and
persecuted David, and so Saul before his conversion persecuted the Church: this
opinion Tolet approoueth. But if Paul had been so called upon any of these
occasions, S. Luke would have called him by that name before, presently after
his conversion, whereas he makes no mention of Paul until he came to the 13.
chapter.

5. Therefore this is the most probable conjecture, that as long as S. Paul
labored among them of the circumcision, he was called by his Hebrewe name
Saul. But after his calling to preach unto the Gentiles, he was called by a
Roman name, Paul, not so much to show that he was a Roman by privilege, as
to testify and profess himself the Apostle of the Gentiles, because the name
of Paul was more acceptable unto the Gentiles, as being a Roman name: And
Saul and Paul may be thought to be one and the same name in effect, and to
differ no more, then Theodoricus in Latin, Dietrich in the Germane tongue, and
Tierrie in French: as Iochanan in Hebrewe, Ioannes in Latin, and Iean in
French: Beza annot. Act. 13.9. with whom agrees Pareus. But Aretius obiecteth,
that Saul and Paul cannot be the same name, and one derived of the other,
because Saul is an Hebrewe name, and Paul a Latin or Roman: Tolet adds
further, that if they had been one and the same name, S. Luke would not have
said, Saul which also is Paul.

Answ. 1. We do not say that Paul is derived of Saul, or of the same
signification in the Latin, which Saul has in the Hebrewe: but that in
likeness of sound the one comes near the other, and so one might be taken
for the other. 2. And though they be one name in effect, yet being diverse in
language, and so differing, S. Luke may make mention of both, as John does of
Simons new name, which was Cephas in Hebrewe, and Peter in Greek, John 1.42.
And this is an evident argument, these were not two diverse names of the
Apostle at the same instant, because as soon as the Apostle began to be
called Paul, he ceased to be named Saul.

Quest 4. At what time the Apostles name began to be called Paul.
1. Origens opinion is, that from the beginning even of his nativity he was
called by two names by his parents, so also Pererius: but that is not like, for
then from the beginning of the story, S. Luke would have called him
indifferently by the one name, as well as the other.

2. Ambrose and Augustine think, that this change was made at the time of
their conversion: whose opinion is seen before: but this is unlike upon the
former reason, because S. Luke makes no mention of the name of Paul, at his
first calling and conversion.

3. Hieromes opinion is, that he then first was called Paul when he converted
Sergius Paulus: But he is so called before S. Luke sets down the manner of
his conversion, Acts. 13.9.

4. I prefer therefore their opinion, that think that Saul began then to
be called Paul, when he was set apart by the Church of Antioch by the instinct
of the spirit to preach among the Gentiles: thus Beza annot. and Catharinus a
Popish writer. Pererius obiecteth that after the Apostle was thus separate, and
set apart by the Church, he is called Saul, and Barnabas was also separate with
him, and yet his name is not changed: Answer. He is not called Saul after he
was sent forth by the Church: but the last place wherein he is called Saul
only, is v. 2. Separate me Barnabas and Saul, etc. But being now sent forth,
they came first to the Isle Salamis, the deputy whereof was Sergius Paulus:
and then he is called Saul, otherwise Paul, and ever after that, in all that
history Paul only.

5. Quest. In what sense Paul calls himself the servant of Jesus Christ.
1. Origin assigns sour causes why Paul calls himself, the servant of
Jesus, 1. propter humilitatem to show his humility. 2. propter imitationem
Christi, to imitate Christ, who said, I am in the mids among you, as one
which ministers. 3. And because he is thought to have been called, having a
wife, in that respect he was a servant. 4. as long as we are in this body, we
have not attained to perfect liberty, and therefore are as servants still: But
all this being admitted to be true, that in all these respects Paul was a
servant to Christ: yet they are too general, and agree unto other servants of
Christ: whereas S. Paul does make this somewhat more peculiar to himself. 3.
Chrysostom says, that three ways we are servants unto God: by the right of
creation, by the obedience of faith, and the obedience of life and
conversation: but yet these considerations are somewhat too general, and do
not show, why the Apostle does use this title specially of himself. 4. Some
give this reason: the servant must be addicted to his masters religion: as
Exodus 12.22. the servants bought for money, were to be circumcised: so Paul
professes himself a servant of Jesus Christ's, that is, of the Christian
religion: so that writing to Christians, he might better persuade them hereby,
professing the same religion, Aretius, Toletus. But in this sense, not only
Paul, but every Christian is the servant of Jesus Christ. 5. Sedulius
understands Paul to be a servant in respect of his ministry, which is a
kind of service: But Tolet misliketh this, because his office and ministry is
expressed in the next word following, wherein he makes mention of his
Apostleship. 6. Ambrose, Theodoret, Theodulus, interpret him to be a servant,
because he was alege liberatus, delivered from the Law: But this was not a
peculiar privilege to Paul, but general to all Christians. 7. Therefore this
holy Apostle in a peculiar, and special regard, calls himself the servant
of Jesus, in respect of his singular and miraculous conversion: by the which he
was so obliged unto Christ, that he devoteth himself wholly to his service: so
that both by his condition, he professes himself Christ's servant, being by
him redeemed from the tyranny and servitude of Satan, of a cruel persecutor
and blaspemer, being made a worthy Apostle and preacher of the gospel: and so
by his office also and ministry, he wholly does consecrate himself to the
setting forth of the Gospel of Christ.

Quest. 6. How Paul calls himself a servant, seeing Christ says, I will not
call you servants, John. 15.15.
1. Hierome gives this solution, initio. comment. in epistol. ad Titum.
that there is a double kind of service, one is a service of men, of the whith
Christ speaks, I will not call you servants, but friends: the other is a
service unto God, whereof David speaks, I am thy servant, and the son of
thine handmaid, Psalm. 116.15. 2. Origin gives this satisfaction, seruit
Christo non in spiritu seruitutis, etc. he serves Christ not in the spirit of
servitude, but in the spirit of adoption: quia omni liberate nobilior est
Christi seruitus, for Christ's service is more noble then any liberty. 3. But
yet to speak hereof more distinctly: there is a theefold kind of service,
seruitus peccati, the service of sin: whereof our Savior speaks, Ioh.
8.34. he that commits sin is the servant of sin: there is seruitus
humana, the service of men, from the first we are freed by faith in Christ, but
not from the second: for the Apostles exhort those which are called being
servants, to be obedient to their masters in the flesh: the third kind is the
service of God: which is of two sorts, voluntary, as in the Angels and Saints:
the which S. Paul means here, and constrained, as in the devils, which are
forced to be obedient to Gods will: now there are two special bond of this
service, both by right of the creation, we are Gods creatures, and the
workmanship of his hands, and therefore bound unto his service, and of our
redemption in Christ, Perer. 4. And of this service unto God, there is a
threefold consideration: there are servants, natura, condition, statu, by
nature, as by the right of creation, by condition, by the right of redemption:
thus the faithful remain servants unto God: but they are not in the state of
servants, but are freemen, though the Lords servants, Tolet. 5. And of these
servants unto God there are three kinds, 1. the worst sort is of those which
serve only for fear: the middle sort is of such, which serve only for hope
of reward: the third of those, qui Deo propter Deum serviunt, which serve God
only for his own sake, Pererius.

Quest. 7. How S. Paul says, called to be an Apostle.
1. Pererius note is somewhat curious here, as if the Apostle should have said,
I dare not call my self an Apostle, but I am so called of all: for here the
Greek word (...), called, is not of the nature of a Participle, but rather of
a noune, as Erasmus notes and Beza, and it is as much, as if he should say, by
calling an Apostle: so that this word rather shows the authority by the
which he was called, then the calling it self. 2. here may be noted the
difference which the fathers make between (...) and (...), which both signify
called: but the first is used of them which are called, and obey not, the other
of them which are effectually called, and obey their calling which difference
though it may well be observed here, yet it is not derpetuall, as Math. 22.19.
Many are called, and few chosen, the word is there (...) Beza. 3. not much
unlike is Origens distinction: between, electus and vocatus: elected to be an
Apostle, and called to be an Apostle, Judas was an Apostle called, but not
elected: which distinction, if by election be understood predestination, it
holds well: otherwise in respect of the outward calling, Judas was both
elected and called to be one of the twelve, Tolet. 4. the difference which
Augustine here notes between vocari, and congregari, to be called and
congregate, or gathered together, is not generally true: the first he thinks
to be peculiar to the Church of Christ, the other to be used of the synagogue
and Church of the Jews: for the Prophets in the old Testament do use the word
of vocation and calling, Beza. 5. there are two kinds of calling, one is
general, as to be called to the knowledge of God: in what sense it is said,
many are called, but few chosen: there is a special kind of calling, as to be
called to some special office: as the Apostle says, No man takes this honor
to himself, but he that is called of God, as Aron, Heb. 4.5. S. Paul was
called both ways, first to the knowledge of Christ when he was converted, Act.
9. then he was separated to the office of his Apostleship, Act. 13. Tolet. 6.
And hereby S. Paul, in saying, called to be an Apostle, notes two things: 1.
that he did not take this honor upon him by intruding himself, but he was
thereunto appointed of God, Erasm. 2. he shows that the Apostolic dignity
is not attained unto by any humane merits, but by the grace only, and free
gift of him that called, Perer. ex Thoma.

Quest. 8. Of the office and calling of an Apostle, what it was.
1. The word Apostle is taken, either aequivoce, in an equivocall and improper
sense: and either in the better sort, as Andronicus and Iunta are said to be
notable among the Apostles, Romans 16.7. where the word is generally taken for
one that is sent: or in the worse, as some are called false Apostles, 2. Cor.
11.13. 2. or the word is used vnivoce, properly: and that either in a kind of
excellency, as Christ is called our high Priest and Apostle, Heb. 3.1. or else
it is applied to the chief Ministers of the New Testament, which were properly
called Apostles, Gryneus. 2. Hierome makes four kinds of Apostles, that is of
such as were sent, as the word signifies. 1. Some were only sent from God, as
the Prophets Isaias, Ieremias, with the rest. 2. Some were ordained of God, but
by men, as Moses consecrated Aaron to be high Priest: and Iosuah to succeed
him. 3. Some are sent by men, and not of God, as they which enter by corruption
and bribes. 4. some intrude themselves being neither sent of God, nor by men.
3. the word Apostle generally signifies any, that is sent, yet it properly
also expresses the highest office and dignity of Apostles in the New
Testament: as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 12.20. God has ordained some in the
Church: as first, Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly teachers. 4. And though
S. Paul were none of the 12. Apostles, yet he and Barnabas were also ordained
of Christ, to be Apostles, of equal authority with the twelve.

Quest. 9. Diverse points, wherein consisted the excellency of the Apostleship.
1. The Apostles were such as were immediately called by Christ, to preach his
gospel through the world, as Matthew. 28.20. Go and teach all nations.

2. They were such as had known Christ in the flesh, and were eyewitnesses of
his miracles, and heard his sermons: as S. John says, That which we have
seen, and heard, declare we unto you, 1. epist. 1.3. And S. Paul though he had
not known Christ in the days of his flesh, yet he saw him now being
immortal and in glory by revelation.

3. They had the keys of the kingdom of heaven after a more special manner:
that whatsoever they bound, or loosed in earth, should be bound and loosed in
heaven, as Peter did bind up the sin of Simon Magus, and gave sentence
against Ananias and Saphira his wife.

4. They had authority both to discern the canonical Scripture, from that
which was not canonical, as also to write new canonical books: as Paul,
Matthew, Peter, John, Jude.

5. They had power to work miracles: to heal all manner of diseases: and to
cast out devils: yea the very shadow of Peter as he passed by, was able to
heal the sick, Act. 5.15. and the partlets and napkins that were brought from
Paul's body to the sick, helped them, Act. 19.12.

6. They had the gift to speak with diverse tongues and languages: Pererius
here adds further, that they had another special grace: that speaking but in
their own tongue, yet men of diverse languages did so understand them, as if
they had spoken diverse languages: of the same opinion is Erasm. annot. Act.
2.8. But Beza well obiecteth, that if this had been so, the miracle had not
been in the Apostles speaking, but in the peoples understanding: neither yet
is it to be thought, that they spoke diverse languages, at one and the same
instant (as Erasmus obiecteth) but that they spoke diversely, unto several
people, of diverse languages, as they were offered unto them.

7. This special prerogative the Apostles had, to be judges of men at the
latter day: as our Savior says, Matthew. 19.28. That they shall sit upon 12.
seats, and judge the 12, tribes of Israel: not that they shall sit as Judges
to give sentence: but by the word and doctrine, which they had preached, and
the world refused, shall men be judged as our blessed Savior in this sense
says, Ioh. 12.48. He that refuses me, and receives not my words, the word
that I have spoken, it shall judge him in the last day.

8. The Apostles had power by laying on of their hands, to give the holy Ghost:
which Simon Magus seeing, would by money have purchased the like power, Act. 8.

9. It was given them in all their doctrine to be free from error, as Christ
promises, Ioh. 16.13. that the spirit should lead them in all truth.

10. The Apostles in the knowledge of the mysteries and high things of the
Gospel exceeded all other, as S. Paul says, Ephesians. 17. According to his rich
grace, whereby he has been abundant toward us in all wisdom and
understanding.

11. Two other prerogatives Pererius adds, the one uncertain, the other
false: first he says, that the Apostles composed and framed the symbol,
containing the 12. articles of the faith, commonly called the Apostles Creed,
which is not certain: both because some of the articles, as that of the
descension came in many years after the Apostles, as is elsewhere showed: see
Synops. page 2055. edit 3.
and if the Apostles had set down this rule of faith, it is not like that
diverse Churches would after them, have framed so many diverse forms beside of
the Creed.

12. But the last privilege, that the Apostles post acceptum spiritum sanctum
fuerint impeccabiles quantum ad peccatum mortale, after they had received the
spirit, were without sin, etc. for 1. in this sense, that distinction of
venial and mortal sin, is not to be allowed, that some are venial in their
own nature: by the grace of God all sins were venial to the Apostles, and
to all other believers: but in it own nature every sin deserves death, and
so is mortal, Romans 6.23. 2. and that the Apostles were apt to sin, is
evident by Peter's oversight, for the which he was openly rebuked of S. Paul,
Gal. 2.11. where he says, he was to be blamed.

10. Quest. How S. Paul is said to be set, or put apart for the Gospel of God.
The word which the Apostle here uses, is (...), separated, or set apart. 1.
Ambrose thinks that here there is an allusion to the sect of the Pharisees,
whereof S. Paul was, who were so called, because they were in a more strict
kind of living separated from others. 2. Whereas S. Paul says likewise, Galat.
2.15. that God separated him from his mothers womb, some interpret, ab vtero
synagogae, he was separate from the womb of the Synagogue, gloss. interlin. a
doctrina Phariseorum, from the doctrine of the Pharisees, gloss. ordinar. but
this S. Paul expresses in the words following, and called me by his grace,
Gal. 2.15. 3. Hug. Cardin. segregatus a grege, he is said to be separated from
the rest of the flock: but so were the other Apostles also. 4. Oecumen. alij
ad alia, ego ad Euangelium, some were set apart for other things, I for the
Gospel: but this was general also to all the other Apostles. 4. Anselmus, he
is said to be segregatus, set apart, prae caeteris discipulis, etc. in respect
of other disciples, which were with him, then at Antioch: when the Spirit said,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul, Act. 13. but the Apostle speaks of a
separation even from his mothers womb, as he expounds himself, Gal. 2.15.
5. As these have special reference to Paul's actual separation, when he was
called: so others refer it to the electing and foreordaining Paul to this
work in the counsel of God. But Origin and Sedulius, ascribe this separation
to Paul merits, that the Lord foresaw his merits and labors, which he should
take in the Gospel, and therefore elected him to be an Apostle. But Tolet well
confureth this, because it is contrary to S. Paul's own doctrine, Romans 9. who
ascribes election to the mercy and grace of God: and he himself professes,
that he was called by the grace of God, Gal. 2.15. therefore not by any merits.
6. Chrysostom understands this separation, of his preordaining unto the
Apostleship: as the Lord likewise says to Jeremy, c. 1.5. Before thou came
out of the womb, I sanctified thee: and so, inculcat divinam electionem, he
does urge his divine election, that his Epistle might be received with great
authority: so also Peter Mart. he shows his calling initium habuisse ex
praedestinatione, to have taken beginning from Gods predestination: which he
makes mention of, to show a difference between his calling to be an Apostle,
who was thereunto also elected, and theirs, which were called, but not elected,
as was Judas. Hyperi^. And further, apponit vitae priori, he sets this
against his former life: while he was a persecuter, all that he did, was per
accidens and (...), as by the way, and out of course: but this was that
whereunto he was ordained. Aretius. 7. But beside this eternal separation in
Gods prescience, here is somewhat noted, quod Paulus ab alijs Apostolis habuit
peculiare, which Paul had peculiar even from other Apostles: he was appointed
an Apostle to preach among all the Gentiles, as it follows, v. 5. for the
rest of the Apostles remaining in Judea, he first with Barnabas was separated
to preach to the Gentiles, Act. 23. Tolet. And so consequently his office was
to preach to the Romans among other Gentiles, Aretius. Here also he
insinuates his extraordinary calling to be an Apostle, diverse from the rest:
he was separate from them, being an Apostle above the number of the twelve:
Mathias was chosen in the place of Judas, and so did but fill up that number:
but S. Paul was over and above, Tolet. so S. Paul was separate first unto
eternal salvation, then unto the knowledge of Christ, and thereby to be an
Apostle. Faius.

11. Quest. Of the description of the Gospel, v. 1, 2, 3.
v. 1. The Gospel of God, which was promised, etc. 1. The Gospel is taken two
ways, either for the doctrine concerning Jesus Christ, which contains four
things: 1. of the coming of Christ in the flesh, which comprehends the whole
history of the incarnation of Christ, and all his acts: both his holy sermons,
and speeches, and his holy and powerful works: 2. the effects of his coming,
as the remission of sin, the subduing of the kingdom of Satan, the
reconciling us to God, opening the kingdom of heaven, and the like: 3. the
third is the verity of those things, which in the Gospel are prescribed to be
believed; the holy doctrine and precepts of the Gospel: 4. the observation of
such things as Christ commanded, Matthew. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all
things, which I have commanded you: Tolet. secondly, the Gospel is taken for
the publishing, preaching, and annuntiation of it: in which sense the Apostle
says, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to the^ which are lost.

2. Here all the parts of the Gospel are expressed: 1. the efficient, it is
called the Gospel of God: to show that it was no humane invention, Gualter. 2.
the form thereof, it was promised before: as the Apostle says, Gal. 3.23.
Before faith came, etc. we were shut up unto the faith which should be
revealed: Gryu. which promises concerning Christ to come were made unto the
fathers for these five reasons. 1. for their comfort in the expectation of the
Messiah to come: as Isa. 40.2. Speak comfortly to Jerusalem, and cry unto
her, that her warfare is accomplished, etc. 2. to stir up their desire to
long for the coming of the Messiah: as Isa. 64.1. O that thou would break
the heavens, and come down. 3. to set forth the honor and glory of the
Messiah, that sent his forerunners, and messengers the holy Prophets before
him, to proclaim the coming of the great king: as the Prophet says, Isa.
40.3. A voice cries in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, etc. 4.
that none might be excused by their ignorance, as touching the coming of the
Messiah: as Abacuck 2.2. Write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that
he may run that reads it. 5. that the fathers should not rest in the
figures, but by them should be brought to the understanding of these things,
which were shadowed forth by those figures: as the Apostle says, Hebr. 10.1.
That the law had the shadow of good things to come. Hug. Card. 3. The ministers
and instruments of these promises, or the Gospel promised, were the Prophets in
the Scriptures, Gryneus, Aretius: and here by Prophets we understand not only
them, which were writers of the prophesies, but they also which preached to the
people, as Nathan to David: and to whom those promises were made concerning
Christ, and so Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Iaakob, and the rest of the Patriarks are
here also comprehended. Hyperius. 4. The subject and matter of the Gospel, is
Jesus Christ the Son of God: who is described in his person, the Son of
God, in his offices, he is Jesus, the Savior, and Christ, the anointed of
God, and his two natures, his humanity, v. 3. his divine nature, v. 4.

Now, this Gospel is sometime called the Gospel of God, as in this verse,
sometime the Gospel of Christ, v. 16. the one in respect of the author of the
Gospel, the other of the matter and subject. Gryneus.

12. Quest. Whether the Gospel be comprehended in the old Testament.
1. This is evident by diverse reasons, that the fathers under the old Testament
enjoyed the Gospel of Christ. 1. If they had not the Gospel, they could not
consequently have faith: for how could they believe in him, of whom they had
not heard? and faith comes of hearing, Romans 10.14, 17. but the fathers had
faith, as the Apostle proves at large, Heb. 11. 2. If they had not the
Gospel, then were they not saved by the grace of Christ, which is by the
Gospel: for the law was given by Moses, but faith and truth came by Jesus
Christ: now the fathers were saved by the grace of Christ, Act. 15.11. 3. The
fathers had the knowledge of God, but that comes by the revelation of Jesus
Christ, Ioh. 1.18. 4. The fathers did eat and drink Christ, 1. Corinthians. 10.3.
but he is only eaten and drunk by faith: therefore the fathers were not
without the faith of the Gospel.

2. But it will be thus objected on the contrary: 1. the Gospel was only
promised to the fathers, as here the Apostle says, which he had promised
before by the Prophets: but that which is promised, a man has not in deed: 2.
again the Apostle says, that the mystery of the Gospel was kept secret since
the world began, Romans 16.25. therefore it seems to have been unknown to
the fathers: 3. S. Mark also thus begins his Gospel, Mark. 1.1. The
beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: if the Gospel began but then, it
will follow that the Patriarks had it not before.

3. For answer hereunto, the Gospel must be distinguished: for it either may be
taken for the Gospel promised, or the Gospel complete and exhibited: the Gospel
promised, is the doctrine of grace by Christ to come: the Gospel complete and
exhibited, is the doctrine of grace in Christ already exhibited, and performed
to the world. By this distinction the several objections propounded may be
answered.

1. That which is promised, a man has not in full complement and perfection,
but he may have it in certain and assured hope: so the fathers had not in deed
the Gospel exhibited, but they had it promised, and so enjoyed it in hope. 2.
Likewise the mystery of the Gospel which lay hid from the beginning of the
world, must be understood of the Gospel exhibited. 3. And S. Mark also
understands the beginning of the Gospel, not accomplished, but only
exhibited, and manifested. Pareus.

13. Quest. How Christ is said to be made of the seed of David after the
flesh. v. 3.
1. Some do read, genitus, begotten, as Vatablus, or natus, borne, Erasm. but
the word (...), properly signifies made: which does better set forth the
admirable conception of Christ of a virgin, without the help of man: which is
not so well expressed in the other reading: to say he was borne, or begotten.
Beza, Tolet.

2. Chrysostom well notes, why it is added, after the flesh, significans quod
and iuxta spiritum generationem habeat, signifying, that he had a generation
also after the spirit, as he had one according to the flesh. And this
generation also after the flesh is first spoken of, not because it was first in
order, but this infinite generation, commodius auditorem subducit, does more
fitly bring the hearer, to the other divine and first generation.

3. By flesh is here understood the substance of Christ's humane nature, as it
was infirm and weak (which weakness notwithstanding continued but for a time)
not as it is corrupt: as it is taken, Ioh. 1.14. 1. Tim. 3.17. And although
mention be not made here of the soul of Christ, it must neither be understood
to have had the same beginning with the flesh of the seed of David: nor yet
(as Origin) is it here understood by the spirit of sanctification, which
shows the divine nature of Christ, Beza: but Christ's soul was infused of
God, and seeing he took our flesh, and became very man, it follows
consequently, that having an humane and organicall body, he was also endued
with an humane soul: Gryneus.

4. Now he is said to be of the seed of David, that although he was not
conceived by any humane seed, yet, ex ea carne formatus est, quae constat ex
semine, he was formed of that flesh, which came of (humane) seed: gloss. ex
August. so that this word seed, does not only note here the Virgin Marie,
which was of the posterity of David, but ipsam carnem de Virgin assumptam,
the very flesh taken of the Virgin: Beza.

5. And though he came also of the seed of Abraham, and of other the holy
fathers: yet mention is made of David for these reasons: 1. because the Messiah
was promised to come of David, Hugo. 2. vt ex rege natus oftendatur, that it
might appear he was borne of a king. 3. and quia David criminosus, and because
David was a sinner: that he was not borne of his seed for any merit of his,
but of grace: Haimo: and because he vouchsafed to be borne of sinners, to show,
quod non dedignetur peccatores, that he disdaineth not sinners, Gorrham.

14. Quest. How it can be showed that Christ was borne of the seed and
posterity of David.
Seeing both Matthew and Luke do set down the genealogy of Joseph the
reputed husband of Marie, the question is how this concerns the birth of
Christ, who only took his flesh of Marie.

1. Ambrose gives a good reason, why the genealogy is derived by the man, not
by the woman: because it is the manner of the Scripture, to express the
generation of men, not of women: secundum carnem natus, vsum debuit sequi
carnis, he that is borne after the flesh, was to follow the use and custom of
flesh, which is to count the petigree by the men.

2. Then the genealogy of Joseph thus concerns Christ: because Joseph being
a just man, took a wife out of his own tribe: Origin also with Ambrose
propounds this solution, yet he insisteth not upon it, but runs to
allegories; that Joseph was not the natural, but spiritual father of Christ:
But it is evident, that the Evangelists do set down the natural generation,
and descent of Christ.

The best solution then is the former, that Joseph married with Marie being of
his own tribe: and so they were both of David, and therefore they went both up
unto Bethlem a city of David to be taxed, Luke 2.4.

3. But where it will be objected, that Elizabeth, which was married to Zachary
a Priest of Levi, is called Mary's cousin, and therefore Marie is not like to
have been of Judah: it is not sufficient to say with Origin, that Elizabeth was
Mary's cousin, not in respect of the tribe, but the nation, because they were
both of Israel: for so Elizabeth had been no more her cousin, then any other
beside. Theophylact in Luke 1. thinks, that the kindred came in thus; because
Aaron married Elizabeth the daughter of Aminadab of the tribe of Judah, Exodus 6.
and so this Elizabeth was descended of Judah, by her great grandmother
Elizabeth. But this kindred was too ancient, and would have grown in so many
descents out of knowledge: whereas it seems that Marie and Elizabeth were so
of kindred, that they were of acquaintance also, for Marie went to visit
Elizabeth, Luke 2.41. Augustine thinks it might be thus: that some woman of
the tribe of Levi was married into the tribe of Judah, and so Christ was
descended not only of the kingly, but the priestly stock also, quaest. super.
Iudic. 47. But the best solution is, that some rather of the tribe of Judah was
married into the tribe of Levi: for though the other tribes might not one marie
within an other, to avoid confusion, yet the Levites might take their wives
out of any tribe, for they had no inheritance, and so there was no danger of
any such confusion: So Iehoida the high Priest married Iehosabath the daughter
of king Ioram, the sister of Ahaziah the king, 2. Chron. 22. Pareus, Genevens.

4. Now as Matthew does set down the pettigree of Joseph, the reputed husband
of Marie, so Luke does prosequute the genealogy of Marie: for Heli whole son
Joseph is said to be, was the father of Marie, and father in law to Joseph: for
sons and daughters in law in Scripture are called by the names of sons and
daughters simply: as Naomi calls Ruth her sons wife her daughter: Beza,
Pareus. But Ambrose has an other answer, that Heli and Jacob were brethren,
and Jacob dying without children, Heli according to the law took his wife, and
raised seed to his brother: Ambr. lib. in Luc. 3. of these two the first
solution is the best: for Matthew says that Jacob begat Joseph: Heli then
begat him not, but he was the natural father of Marie.

15. Quest. Whether Christ descended of David by Solomon, or Nathan.
But an other doubt there is about this genealogy: for Matthew descends by
Solomon, Luke by Nathan. Hereof a question arises of which of these, Solomon
or Nathan, Christ came after the flesh.

1. Eusebius thinks, that he was descended of Solomon, which he would prove
by the 72. Psalm. v. 1. Give thy judgment to the King, and thy righteousness to
the kings son: where by the king, he thinks Solomon to be understood, and
by the kings son, not Rehoboam, but Christ, which was to come of him. Eusebius.
Demonstr. l. 7. c. 7. Origin before approved the same opinion, who gives this
reason thereof, because in Matthewes genealogy, the word, he begat, is
repeated still, and so is it not in S. Lukes catalogue: and therefore he
thinks that Christ came of Solomon, whom Matthew makes mention of, not of
Nathan, whose generation S. Luke rehearses.

Contr. 1. That Christ was not lineally descended of Solomon, it is evident,
because all Salomons posterity ended in Iechoniah: as is evident, Ierem.
22.30. Write this man destitute of children. 2. In the place objected out of
the Psalm: by the king, is understood David, by the kings son, Solomon, who
was a figure of Christ. 3. Neither in Matthewes genealogy, properly is every
one said to beget: for Iechonias is said to beget Salathiel, who was in deed
the son of Neri, as S. Luke sets it down in his genealogy: but Iechonias
dying without heir, appointed Salathiel his next heir.

2. Origin, Ambrose, and Beda think, that Christ came of Nathan both a Priest
and Prophet: but that can not be, for it is certain Christ came of Judah, not of
Levi: Hebr. 7.14. It is evident, that our Lord sprang out of Judah: and
therefore Apoc. 7, he is called the lion of the tribe of Judah.

3. Wherefore our Lord descended of David by Nathan his son, who is thought
to have been brother unto Solomon, not only by his father, but by his mother
also, 1. Chro. 3.5. Damascen. lib. 4. c. 15. Pareus.

16. Quest. Of the meaning of these words, v.4. Declared mightily to be the
Son of God, etc.
1. The usual interpretation is, to gather from hence three arguments of
Christ's divine nature: 1. by the power of miracles: 2. by the holy Ghost, which
he gave unto them, which believed in him, and specially in the feast of
Pentecost. 3. by the raising of himself up from the dead: to this purpose
Chrysostom, Hyperius, Aretius, with others.

But the better interpretation is this: that here three things are expressed
concerning Christ: what he was declared to be, the Son of God mightily, or in
great power: by which nature, namely his divine: by the spirit of
sanctification, whereby he sanctified his own flesh, and his mystical body the
Church: and by what argument, namely by his resurrection from the dead: wherein
he manifestly showed himself by his own power, being able to raise up his
own body from the grave: Beza, Pareus. But these three clauses, declared
mightily to be the Son of God, according to the spirit of sanctification, by
the resurrection from the dead, it shall not be amiss to handle distinctly,
because of the difficulty, and diverse expositions of them.

17. Quest. Of the meaning of these words, Declared to be the Son of God in
power.
1. Some read, predestinate to be the Son of God: which they expound
diversely. 1. Ambrose gives this sense, he was predestinate, not to be the
Son of God, for he was from the beginning, sed vt manifestetur, but to be
manifested in the flesh. But then had S. Paul spoken very imperfectly and
doubtfully, saying only, predestinate to be the Son of God, without any
other addition. 2. Augustine joins it with the last clause, by the
resurrection of the dead: he was predestinate to be the first and chief of
those, which should rise from the dead, August. in 1. ad Roman. But by this
exposition the order of the words is transposed. 3. Anselmus, and so also
Lyranus thus expound, that Christ as the Son of God, could not be
predestinate, being coeternall with his father: sed vnio illa facta est a dei
praedestinatione, but that union between the humane and divine nature came to
pass according to Gods predestination. But this devise Tolet overthrows by
this argument; that it can not be said, that Christ as man was predestinate to
be the Son of God: for, when we say Christ, we affirm him to be God: as we
can not say, a man is predestinate to have a soul: for he can not be a man
without a soul: ad quod aliquid praedestinatur, est extra ipsam, quod
praedestinatur, that whereunto any thing is predestinate, is an other thing
beside that which is predestinate: Christ then can not be predestinate to be
the Son of God, because Christ is always the Son of God: therefore not
Christ, but the humane nature of Christ was predestinate to be united to the
divine. 4. Tolet understands this predestination, not of the prioritie of
time, but of order: that Christ was predestinate, that is, prae omnibus
declaratus filius, before all declared to be the Son of God, for he only is
the true natural Son of God. But predestination is not taken in that sense:
and this being admitted, that Christ was preordained to be the Son of God,
then he was ordained: but that can not be said, seeing he was always the Son
of God. And all these expositions do fail in mistaking the Greek word, which
is (...), not (...), ordained or defined, not preordained.

2. Origin mistaketh the word predestinate, and therefore reads simply
without the preposition, destinate, or appointed: for praedestinatur, quod non
est, destinatur, quod est: that is predestinate which is not, that is destined
which is. But Origens distinction holds not: for even Christ, in respect of
his office, though not as God, is said by the Apostle, to be ordained before
the foundation of the world. 1. Pet. 1.20.

3. There is then a third exposition, which is best of all: to interpret the
word (...), declared, demonstrated, as Chrysostom. Theophyl. Tertullian. advers.
Propeam. so also Erasmus, Beza, with most of our new writers: so the word (...)
signifies not only to decree, define, but to demonstrate, prove, declare:
and this sense is most agreeable to the words following, according to the
spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection, etc. that is, in his divine
nature showing it self by Christ's raising of himself from the dead, he was
declared to be the son of God.

4. And touching the word (...), in power, it neither is to be restrained to
the miracles and signs, which Christ wrought, as Chrysostom, for that
expresses not the full meaning of the Apostle: nor yet is it to be referred to
the word declared, that he was mightily declared, though that be true also,
Genevens. but rather unto the last words, the Son of God: he was declared to
be the Son of God, omnipotent, of the same power and majesty with his
Father. Beza, Pareus, Gorrham.

18. Quest. Of these words, according to the spirit of sanctification, v. 4.
1. Some do here understand by the spirit of sanctification, the holy Ghost,
the third person in Trinity: and in this sense it is diversely applied. 1. Some
refer it to the clause before of Christ's birth, he was made according to the
seed of David after the flesh, etc. by the spirit of sanctification, because
he was conceived by the holy Ghost. gloss. ordinar. 2. Some do join it with
the 1. v. put apart for the Gospel of God, etc. by the spirit of
sanctification: but the order of the Apostles words, will admit neither of
these interpretations. 3. Chrysostom expounds it of the gifts of the spirit,
which Christ distributed at the sending of the holy Ghost: so also Tolet
understands it of the virtue and operation of the spirit, whereby the
Apostles wrought wonders and signs. But the phrase will not bear this
exposition, which is (...), according to the spirit, not by the spirit, which
are two diverse things, as Beza notes: if any of these interpretations be
received, the Apostle would have said, by the spirit, not, according to the
spirit. 4. Gorrham shows how Christ was declared to be the Son of God, by
the spirit of sanctification, these 7. ways: 1. because he was conceived by
the holy Ghost, 2. he was replenished with the gifts of the spirit, 3.
manifested by the spirit, when it descended upon him in the likeness of a dove,
4. he was glorified by the spirit, Ioh. 16.14. 5. he breathed the spirit upon
his disciples, 6. he sent the holy Ghost upon his Apostles, 7. he gives his
spirit to all that believe in him: Ephesians. 1.13. Ye were sealed by the holy spirit
of promise.

2. Origin by the spirit, understands the soul and spirit of man: but that
manifested Christ to be man, not the Son of God.

3. But by the spirit of sanctification, is not here meant the holy spirit, the
third person of the Trinity: but the divine nature of Christ. And whereas
Tolet obiecteth, nec divi^i^^^ in Scriptura vnquam tali voce significatio, that
the divine nature is never signified by this manner of speech; it is evident,
that where S. Paul says, 2. Tim. 3.16. justified in the spirit: and Heb. 9.14,
he offered himself through the eternal spirit, that the divine nature is here
understood: which is said to sanctify, because of the effects: by his divine
spirit he sanctifies his own body (...), hypostatically: and his mystical
body the Church (...) powerfully, or effectually. This to be the meaning, is
evident by the opposition, between the flesh and the spirit: as he was made
according to the flesh, so he was the Son of God according to the spirit.
Beza, Pareus. And before them Ambrose so expounds, which was the Son of
God, according to the sanctifying spirit: that is, secundum Deum, qui spiritus
est, and sine dubio sanctus, according unto God, who is a spirit, and without
all doubt, holy.

19. Quest. Of those words, by the resurrection of the dead.
1. Because it is said, of the dead, not from the dead, Origin understands it
of those which were raised with Christ in his resurrection: But his power was
more seen in raising himself, which never any did beside, then in raising
others: which even the Prophets did, though not by the like power.

2. Augustine following the vulgar Latin, which reads, the dead of Jesus
Christ our Lord; applies it unto the faithful, which are called the dead of
the Lord Christ, to distinguish them from the infidels which were dead: in
exposition, inchoat. But the words following, of Jesus Christ our Lord, are
rather referred to the beginning of the third verse, concerning his Son, etc.
(and then all the rest follows, enclosed in a parenthesis, which was made of
the seed of David, etc.) even Jesus Christ our Lord. Chrysostom thus reads,
because Jesus Christ rose from the dead: but the Greek construction will not
bear it, Jesus Christ being put in the genitive case, (...).

3. Tolet interprets, post resurrectionem, after the resurrection, when as
Christ by the manifold graces of the spirit, declared himself to be the Son
of God: but then it should be (...), after the resurrection, whereas the words
are (...), by the resurrection.

4. Some by the dead, understand such as were raised by the first resurrection
from the dead works of sin, unto newnes of life: Hugo Cardin. but that had
not been so evident a sign of the divine power.

5. Wherefore, by the resurrection of the dead, the resurrection of Christ from
the dead, is signified: for in Scripture the resurrection of the dead, is so
taken for the resurrection from the dead, as 1. Cor. 15.42. Hebr. 6.2. Beza,
Perexius: and Pareus observes well, that the preposition (...) is omitted,
because it was used before, that it should not be twice repeated: so he says,
(...), for (...): by the resurrection of the dead, for from the dead. By this
his glorious resurrection Christ manifested himself to be God in the flesh: as
Ioh. 5.26. As the Father has life in himself, so he has given unto the Son
to have life in himself: and again, Ioh. 9.19. Destroy this Temple, and in
three days I will raise it up again. Thus Chrysostom expounds this place,
ex resurrectione, per quam mortis evici^ tyrannidem, by the resurrection,
whereby he overcame the tyranny of death: likewise Oecumenius understands
the resurection, qua ipse Dominus Jesus exurrexit, whereby the Lord Jesus
himself rose again.

Quest. 20. Of these words, v. 5. By whom we have received grace and
Apostleship.
1. By whom, that is as Origin, Ambrose, Lyranus expound, per Christum
Mediatorem, by Christ the mediator of God and man: and make this the sense,
that he was called of God to be an Apostle by the mediation of Christ: But
Chrysostom better understands Christ here as the principal author of his
calling: which is indifferently sometime ascribed unto Christ, sometime unto
the holy Ghost: as Act. 13.2. The holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and
Saul. And hereby S. Paul shows a difference between his calling, and of
others, that he was immediately constituted an Apostle by Christ himself, and
not by men, Beza annot.

2. By grace and Apostleship. 1. Theodoret understands two distinct things,
by grace the gifts of the holy Ghost, wherewith he was furnished, and by
Apostleship, his vocation it self: so also Lyranus, concedens dignitatem
apostolicam, simul dat gratiam ad exequendum, granting unto him the Apostolic
dignity, he also gives grace to execute it. 2. Origin interprets grace to
be the fruit of patience, whereby he endured so many labors in the Gospel. 3.
Ambrose takes it to be the grace of remission of sins, common withal other
faithful, so also Gorrham. 4. some understand gratiam conuersionis, the grace
of his conversion, Tolet. Pareus. 5. Gryneus of the gift, in fructu
Evangelizandi, of preaching the gospel with profit and good success. 6. But
hereby better is understood, the grace of his Apostleship: as S. Paul himself
expounds, Ephesians. 3.8. Even unto me the least of all Saints, is this grace
given, that I should preach anong the Gentiles, etc. Beza. so also Chrysostom
and Oecumenius understand it of his Apostleship, which he received not by his
merits or worthiness, but by the grace of God: as he says, 1. Cor. 15.8. I am
the least of all the Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an Apostle,
etc. but by the grace of God, I am that I am, Gualter. And though it be said
grace and Apostleship: yet it follows not, as Tolet obiecteth, that they
should be two distinct things but the particle (...), and, is put by way of
exposition, grace, that is Apostleship, Beza. or (...), Apostolatus, the grace
or gift of the Apostleship, Faius. and so it is taken pr^ Apostolatu gratis
collati, for his Apostleship freely bestowed or conferred, Hyperius.

3. In his name, or for his name. 1. Ambrose expounds it, vice eius, in his
stead: as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5.20. We are embassabours for Christ: so
also Pareus. 2. Chrysostom reads de nomine eius, of his name, that is, that
they might believe in his name, and so Hyperius takes it for the matter of his
preaching, that he should publish the benefits received by Christ: and
therefore Act. 9.15. Christ says to Ananias, He is a chosen vessel to bear my
name among the Gentiles, Beza. Faius. 3. But it rather shows the end of S.
Paul's preaching: for his name, that is, pro Christi gloria, to set forth the
glory and praise of Christ, Gualter. Lyranus. yet both these last
interpretations may well stand together.

Quest. 21. Of the persons, whom the Apostle saluteth, to all you that be at
Rome, etc.
There are three parts of this salutation: he describes them 1. by the place,
to all at Rome. 2. by the cause and fountain of their vocation and calling:
beloved of God. 3. the end, called to be Saints, that they should be holy: he
writes not generally to all at Rome, but with a restraint, he writes
fidelibus, non alijs, to the faithful, not to any other, Gorrham, and writes
unto all the faithful, without any respect of persons, sieve essent ex
primatibus, and consulibus, whether they were of the chief men or consuls, or
private and poor men, Chrysostom. and he writes not only to those which were
Romans by nation, but even unto the strangers at Rome also which were
converted to the faith, so that they are deceived, which think that this
epistle was written in the Roman tongue, because it is written to the Romans:
there were Grecians, and of other nations at Rome, in so much that Iuvenal
calls it Graecam vrbem, a Greek city, because of the abundance of strangers
there, Erasmus.

2. Beloved of God. 1. because God loved us before any merits of ours, gloss.
ordinar. 2. there is a twofold love of God, vna predestinationis, one of
predestination, as it is said, Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated: alia
presentis iustificationis, another of present justification: as it is also said
in the Proverbs, c. 8.17. I love them, that love me: of the former the Apostle
speaks in this place, Hugo Cardin. delectis per praedestinationem, beloved in
Gods predestination, Gorrham. 3. herein Gods love is unlike unto man's: for man
loves upon some cause, or desert going before: but God loved us without any
desert of ours, Tolet. so then the word (...), beloved, is here taken
passiuely, not actiuely, not for the lovers of God, but for them which are
beloved of God, Aretius.

3. Called Saints. 1. Chrysostom here notes, that thrice S. Paul has used
this word, called, of himself, v. 1. and t^ice of the Romans, v. 6.7. which
he does not superfluously, but volent illis, beneficij admouere, willing to put
the^ in mind of the benefit, that they should ascribe all to the calling of
God: and that S. Paul being called writes to those that are called, he
prepares them to hear him: seeing he was ab eodem vocatus, called by the
same, by whom they were called, Aretius. 2. they are called Saints, that is,
called, ^^ sint sancti, to be Saints, Tolet. and hereby the Apostle makes a
difference between their former state wherein they lived, which was unholy and
impure, and the condition to the which they were now called to be holy,
Aretius: and hereby is taken away the difference between the Jews and the
Gentiles, that the Jews should not exalt themselves a^ the only holy people:
but the Gentiles also were called to the same glorious condition of holiness,
Erasm. here the name of Saints, non perfectionem denotat, does not note a
perfection, but signifies him which was consecrate unto God, Gualter. he is
counted holy, qui affectu tenet sanctitatem, which retains holiness in his
affection, though he have some imperfections: And though there might be some
hypocrites and carnal professors among them, yet respicit ad meliorem par^em,
he has respect to the better part of the Church. Aretius.

Quest. 22. What the Apostle understands by grace and peace. ver. 7.
In these words is contained the salutation it self: wherein two things are
expressed. 1. what the Apostle wishes unto them, and from whom.

1. Grace and peace. 1. Origin here notes, that this benediction of the
Apostle was nothing inferior unto those blessings pronounced by the
Patriarchs, as the blessing of Noah. upon Sem and Iapheth: and Melchisedekes
benediction upon Abraham: because Paul also blessed by the spirit: as he says,
1. Cor. 7.40. I think that I also have the spirit of God: But it is not usual
in the old Testament to use this blessing of grace: and the reason may be this,
because the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ,
Ioh. 1.17. Hyperius. 2. By grace, Ambrose understands remission of sins; by
peace, reconcillation with God: Lyranus, gracia in praesenti, gloria in futuro,
grace in this life present, and glory in the next: Hugo, gratias agant Deo,
pacem habeant cum proximo, that they should give thanks to God, and have peace
with their neighbors: Tolet by grace understands donum animae, etc. a gift
of the mind, whereby a man is made acceptable unto God: but there is no gift
conferred upon the soul, that can make it acceptable unto God, but the grace
and favor of God in Christ: therefore by grace rather is signified the grace
and favor of God, whereupon follows the collation of all other graces
beside, and by peace, prosperous success, but especially the tranquillity of
mind, which is the special fruit of justification by faith, Romans 5.1.
Gryneus: and so this benediction answeareth to the salutation of the Angels,
Luke 2.14. Peace in earth, toward men good will: for the mercy and gracious
favor of God, is the fountain of our peace.

2. From God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 1. the Greek construction
is doubtful, whether we understand thus the Father of us and of our Lord Jesus
Christ, or refer the last clause to the first preposition, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ: whereupon Fransiscus David a Samosetian heretic takes
advantage, that Paul does not wish grace from Jesus Christ, but from the father
only: But this cavil is easily removed, for Ioh. 2.2. the preposition (...),
from, is repeated, from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, and so
must it be taken here, Pareus. 2. Some distinguish these two thus, that grace
is wished from God the father, as the author of grace, and peace from Jesus
Christ, who is our reconciler, Aretius. But Haymo misliketh that, and would
have this grace and peace indifferently to be conferred and equally, by God the
father, and the Lord Jesus. 3. Tertullian gives this reason, why the title of
God is given unto the father, of Lord unto Christ, least the Gentiles might
hereby have taken occasion to think of the plurality of gods: but when the
Apostle speaks of Christ alone, he says, who is God over all, blessed for
ever, Romans 9.5. Tertullian. aduers. Praxeam. But the reason rather is this, why
Christ is called Lord, because the father has committed unto him all
authority: for he is called the Lord which has plenarie power, and
authority: and yet the father is so called God, as that the Son is not
excluded: and the Son is also Lord, as that the father be also included: and
this name (...), Lord, answers to the Hebrewe, Jehovah, which shows that
Christ is very God with his father, Aretius. 4. but further the question is
moved, why there is no mention here made of the holy Ghost: Haymo answers,
that intelligitur in donis suis, he is understood in his gifts, because grace
and peace are also the gifts of the holy Ghost: so also gloss. ordinar. But the
better answer is, that seeing these graces do equally flow from the whole
Trinity, the Apostle by naming the father and the Son, includes also the
holy Ghost: and sometime he expresses them all, as 2. Cor. 13.13. The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost
be with you all.

Quest. 23. Of Paul's giving of thanks for the faith of the Romans, which was
published abroad, v. 8.
1. In this thanksgiving four things are observed, to whom he gives thanks,
to God, by whom, thorough Christ, for whom, for you all, and for what, because
their faith was published through the world: And this wise beginning S. Paul
makes, thus insinuating himself, that his admonition afterward might seem to
proceed from a loving mind, Tolet.

2. I thank my God. 1. he says my God, not theirs, to signify that their
faith was imperfect: as Ambrose, for in the words following he sets forth an
ample commendation of their faith. 2. some think he so says, because he
acknowledged this benefit, that the Romans believed, to be as conferred upon
himself, Tolet. 3. But the manner of the Saints is so to speak, as David does
often in the Psalms, ex privato sensu diuinae bonitatis, of a private and more
lively sense and feeling which they have of the goodness of God: and in
respect of some singular gifts, which they have received, Marty. so also
Chrysostom: id magno facit affectu, he does it with a great affection: And so
the Prophets and other holy men, cum qui communis est omnium Deus, sibt
proprium facientes, making the common God of all peculiar to themselves: even
as the Lord did call himself the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, tanquam
seorsim illorum tantum esset, as though he were severally their God only.

3. Thorough Jesus Christ. He offreth thanks throrough Christ: 1. the meaning
whereof is not, as Ambrose, to give thanks for a benefit received by Christ. 2.
but as Origin, per Christum tanquam sacerdotem, he offreth this sacrifice of
thanks by Christ, as the high Priest, by whom all our oblations are acceptable
unto God: for we must take the same way in giving of thanks, which the father
does in conferring graces: that as he bestows his graces upon us in Christ,
so in him again, we should return our thanks, Aretius.

4. For you all: 1. not as in their stead, as David desired to die for
Jonathan, but because of them, that they had received such an excellent gift of
faith: 2. the Apostle, sui oblitus, forgets himself, and gives thanks for
the Church, Pareus. 3. he gives thanks for them all, incipientibus,
proficientibus, perfectis, for the beginners, for them which profited and
proceeded, and for them which were perfect, Gorrham.

Quest. 24. How the faith of the Romans was published through the world.
1. Origin by the whole world, understands the Angels in heaven, which did
rejoice for the conversion of men in earth: but this sauoureth of his
accustomed curious speculations: the like phrase the Apostle uses of the
Thessalonians, 1. epist. 1.8. Your faith spread abroad in all quarters: he
means then the world of men, not of Angels. 2. Hierome makes this the sense:
because the same faith which the Romans had received, was preached by the
Apostles in all the world: but the Apostle here does give a special
commendation of the faith of the Romans. 3. therefore here an hyperbole, or
rather a Synecdoche, is to be admitted, that many parts of the world are taken
for all: because the more known parts of the world were now subject to the
Romans: so S. Luke says, c. 2.1. There came a commandment from Augustus
Caesar, that all the world should be taxed, Pareus. And Chrysostom gives this
reason: Rome was quasi in quodam orbis vertice collocata, placed as in the
top of the world, whence it might be seen and discerned of all the earth.

Quest. 25. Of the singular faith of the Romans.
1. First their faith was commendable and famous, for the worthiness and
excellency thereof: both for the soundness of doctrine, which they had
received, as S. Paul testifies, c. 16.17. I beseech you, observe those, which
cause division and dissension among you, contrary to the doctrine which ye have
learned, and beside their knowledge was joined with goodness and fervent love:
as he again says, c. 15.12. I am persuaded of you, that ye are full of
goodness, and filled with all knowledge, and that ye are able to admonish one
another. 2. Again they had many lets and impediments, which made their faith
the more famous. 1. diuitijs and delicijs corrupti erant, they were corrupt
with riches and other delicates, and so were hindered from believing. 2. qui
praedicabant erant piscatores, they which preached the Gospel were fishermen,
and Jews, which nation was odious unto the Gentiles. 3. they taught to worship
a man that was crucified. 4. vitam exagebant austeriorem, they exacted a more
strict and austere kind of life, Chrysostom. 5. unto this may be added that
the most grievous persecution of the faith was at Rome, and the Christians
there were as under the paw of the lion, and so in greatest danger: yet
notwithstanding, all these lets and impediments they received the Christian
says. 3. And further the Roman Church is commended in respect of the founders
thereof, and the planters of their faith, which was first founded by S. Paul,
and then by Peter, who both lived and preached there, and there ended their
life: from thence also it is thought that John the Evangelist was banished into
the Isle Pathmos: Chrysostom therefore thus says of Rome, ob id maxim Romam
praedico beatam, etc. I do chiefly for this count Rome happy: because Peter
and Paul, did so love it, that they taught the faith of Christ there, and
finished their life among them, hom. vlt. in epist. ad Roman. 4. But concerning
the last commendation of the Romans faith, which Pererius produces, that the
Church of Rome, inviolatam and intaminatam conservauit, etc. has kept
inviolably, and pure the faith received from the Apostles: that it is
manifestly false, shall afterward be showed in the places of controversy.

Quest. 29. Whether the Church of Rome were first founded by S. Peter.
1. It is the received opinion of the Romanists, that Peter was the first
founder of the Roman faith: for the proof whereof they allege certain
authorities, as of Eusebius, who writes that in the 2. year of Claudius Peter
came to Rome, and there confounded Simon Magus, and preached the faith to the
Romans: at which time they entreated Mark to write the Gospel as they had
heard it from S. Peter's mouth, Eusebius. 2. histor. Ecclesiast. c. 13.14. likewise
Chrysostom, affirms the same that Peter preached at Rome first, qui
praedicabant erant piscatores, they that preached were fishers, ex Perer.
Bellarmine to the same purpose also produces Epiphanius, Orosius, Leo, with
others, that the faith was first planted by Peter at Rome, lib. 2. de Pontif.
Romans c. 1.

2. Contra. 1. Concerning Peter's coming to Rome there is great uncertainty:
Hierome and Eusebius, say it was in the 2. year of Claudius: But Beda in 15.
c. Actor. affirms it to have been in the 4. year of Claudius: Onuphrius
assigns the 3. year of Claudius, in Chronic. Damasus says, that he came to
Rome in the beginning of Neroes Empire, and sat there 25. years, whereas Nero
reigned but 14. years in all: and he further affirms that Peter's disputation
and combat with Simon Magus, was in the presence of Neto the Emperor, which
Eusebius reports to have been under Claudius. 2. Chrysostom speaks of the
preaching of fishermen, but not of the first preaching at Rome: the Apostles
being fishermen, and of no note in the world first began to preach the
Gospel in the world: not only Peter, but Andrew his brother also, and James
and John were fishermen: he may as well prove hence, these to have been
founders of the Roman Church, as well as S. Peter. 3. Epiphanius as Bellarmine
cites him haeres. 27. says, primi in Roma fuerunt Petrus and Paulus, the
first in Rome were Peter and Paul, etc. he gives no prioritie to Peter before
Paul. 4. Orosius says, l. 7. c. 7. Exordio regni Claudij, etc. in the
beginning of the reign of Claudius, Peter came to Rome, atque exinde
Christiani Roma esse coeperunt, and that from that time Christians began to
be in Rome, etc. But it shall be showed afterward, that there were Christians
in Rome before Claudius reign: and the same Orosius makes mention of a decree
made by the Senate in Tiberius reign, exterminandos esse ex vrbe Christianos,
that the Christians should be expelled out of Rome. 5. Leo writes thus, sermon.
1. de natal. Apostolor. Cum Apostli imbuendum Euangelio mundum, etc. when the
Apostles had undertaken, parting the earth among them, to season the world with
the Gospel, beatissimus Petrus, etc. ad arcem Romani destinatur imperij,
blessed Peter was appointed to the chief place of the Roman Empire, etc. But
this is contrary to that which S. Paul writes, Galat. 2.7. that the Gospel
over the uncircumcision was committed to Paul, as the Gospel over the
circumcision was committed to Peter: Then is it evident that S. Peter's lot fell
out among those of the circumcision.

3. Now it shall be showed that S. Peter could not be the first founder of the
Roman Church. 1. S. Paul in his salutation, Romans 16.7. makes mention of
Andronicus and Iunia, which were in Christ before him: they were converted to
the faith before S. Paul: but he was converted the 2. year after Christ's
passion, about the 20. year of Tiberius: from which time to the second year
of Claudius, when Peter is held first to have come to Rome were about 9.
years, there remained 3. of Tiberius reign, 4. of Caligula, and 2. of
Claudius. It is evident then that 9. years, before Peter came to Rome, Paul
was converted, and before Paul's conversion, there were some at Rome which had
received the Christian faith. 2. Vellenus whom Bellarmine confuteth, alleges
out of Orosius lib. 7. that there were Christians in Rome in the reign of
Tiberius: when there was a decree made by the Senate, that the Christians
should be banished from Rome: Bellarmine answeareth, that the meaning of the
decree was, vt non reciperetur vllo modo Christiana religio, that the Christian
religion should not by any means be received into the city: But the words are
exterminandos esse ex vrbe Christianos, that the Christians should be
exterminate or expelled out of Rome: they could not have been expelled, if
they had not been there before. 3. Clemens in his recognitions, and Dorotheus
in Synops. do affirm, that Barnabas was the first, that preached at Rome, and
converted them to the says: which report Bellarmine and Pererius hold to be
but a fable: neither will we contend for the truth thereof: for S. Paul is as
like to have been the first planter of the says there, as Barnabas: But by
this is appears even out of these writers, which the Romanists make account
of, when they may serve their turn, that it was not held of any certainty
that S. Peter first preached the faith at Rome. 4. Further, seeing the Gospel
of the uncircumcision was committed to Paul, of the circumcision to Peter, it
is not like that Peter would intrude himself within S. Paul's division: who if
he had so soon come to Rome, and planted a Church there, whose example the
rest of the Gentiles, depending upon the Romans, would have followed, he
rather should have been the Apostle of the uncircumcision then S. Paul. 5.
Wherefore it is not probable, that the Roman Church was first planted by S.
Peter's preaching: neither yet was Paul the first that there preached: for as
yet he had not been at Rome when he wrote this epistle: Therefore it is most
like, that some other of the disciples, and believers first laid the foundation
of faith, at Rome, which afterward was builded further by the Apostles, Faius.
And herein I mislike not the opinion of Hugo Card. andierant a quibusdam
fidelibus qui Roman^ venerant Hierosolynsis, they had heard of certain
faithful, which came to Rome from Jerusalem: to the same purpose Gorrbam:
quidem acceperant fideru a Petra and hierant been edocti, quidam a Indais
disciputis, and by non pleur, some had received these faith of Peter, and they
were well taught, some of the Jews being disciples, and they were not fully
instructed, etc. They are of opinion, that the Romans first received their
faith by certain disciples, that came unto them: though afterward they were
more fully instructed by Peter.

Quest. 27. The place, Act. 28.21. reconciled.
1. Whereas the Jews say there unto Paul, We neither received letters out of
Iudaea concerning thee, neither came any of the brethren, etc. the question
here moved is, how these dwelling at Rome could thus say unto Paul whereas
this epistle had been written long before. 2. Hereunto the answer is, that
those Jews, were not Christians or believers, and so not of the number of the
brethren to whom S. Paul had written this Epistle, namely to such as were
Saints by calling: but such as had not yet received the Gospel: for they say,
concerning this sect we know, that every where it is spoken against, Parens.
and beside, whereas S. Paul had declared unto them, how the Jews had resisted
him, and constrained him to appeal unto Caesar, they make answer, that they
had received no letters concerning such things as had happened unto him.

Quest. 28. Whether this be an oath, God is my witness, v. 9.
Although the usual form of an oath be not here kept: as when men swear by
the name of God, of Jesus, using the preposition, per, by, yet it is evident
the Apostle here does take a solemn oath: as it may appear by these reasons.
1. first by the definition of an oath, which is a calling of God to witness,
of that which we say: as the Apostle here does, so that to say, God is my
witness, is as much as if he should say, I swear by God, Tolet. 2. Augustine
gives instance of other places where the Apostle uses the like oath, as
Galat. 1.20. The things which I write unto you, I witness before God, that I
lie not: and 2. Cor. 11.31. The God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which is blessed for evermore knows that I lie not: like unto these oaths is
this which the Apostle takes here: Augustine. lib. 1. de sermon. Dora. and Beda
upon this place.

29. Quest. Whether it be lawful to swear, and upon what occasion.
1. That it is lawful to swear, thus it appears. 1. Christ came not to
dissolve the law, Matthew. 5.17. now the law not only permits, but
commands to swear, where cause is, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. 2. the Lord
himself swears, Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 6.17. therefore it is not sin to swear.
3. the holy Fathers and Patriarchs used to take an oath, where it was lawfully
required: as Abraham, Genesis 21.24. Jacob, Genes. 31.53. David, 1^ Sam. 24.23.

2. But it will be thus on the contrary objected. 1. Christ says, Swear not
at all, neither by heaven for it is the throne of God, etc. Answer. Christ
forbids not to swear by God, but not by creatures, as by the heaven, the
earth, by the Temple, by the head. 2. where he says, let your communication be
yea, yea, nay, nay. Christ forbids not the lawful use of an oath, when
there is just cause: but the often and unnecessary using of it in common
talk: where then, it concerns the salvation, or edification of our brethren,
it is lawful to take an oath: as it was requisite that the Romans should be
well persuaded of S. Paul's affection toward them, who had yet never seen them,
as Chrysostom says, quouiam neminem hominum animi sui testem sistere poterat,
etc. because he could not set forth any man to be a witness of his mind, he
calls upon God, who searches the heart.

3. It will be again objected, that in the New Testament an oath is not
lawful, as it was in the old, Basil. in Psalm. 14. Answer. The abuse of an
oath was unlawful both in the Old Testament and in the New: But to take an
oath lawfully is as well permitted to the Church of Christ now, as it was to
the Church of the Jews: As the Prophet Isaiah prophesies of the New Church,
that they shall swear by Jehovah, Isay. 19.18. and c. 43.23. Ierem. 4.3.

Quest. 30. How Paul is said, to serve in the spirit.
1. Chrysostom by the spirit understands the holy Ghost, omnia spiritus
sancti imputat virtuti, he ascribes all to the virtue of the holy spirit,
nothing to his own diligence: But in that he says (in my spirit) this
interpretation is avoided: Paul would not so call the holy Ghost, my spirit. 2.
Theodoret by spirit thinks to be meant the gift and grace given unto Paul,
whereby he was furnished for his Apostleship: whereof he spoke before, v. 5. by
whom we have received grace and Apostleship: so also Oecumenius, he is said to
serve him in tradito sibi dono, in the gift given unto him: but so much is
expressed in the words following, In the Gospel of his son: that shows his
ministry and employment in the Gospel. 3. some give this sense, whom I serve
in the spirit, that is not in the flesh, non in carnalibus observantijs, not in
carnal observations, such as were the ceremonies of the law, gloss. interlin.
so also Aretius, I serve God, non vt hypocritae ceremonijs, not as hipocrites
with ceremonies: but the mentioning of the Gospel following, excludes all
legal ceremonies. 4. Origin here makes a distinction between the soul and
the spirit, which he takes for the superior and higher part of the soul,
wherein he served God: Ambrose also by the spirit understands the mind:
which is true, that inwardly he served Christ in his spirit and mind, but the
feign not considered in the natural condition thereof, as Origin seems to
have relation thereunto, but renewed and regenerate by grace., 5. S. Paul then
by his spirit, understands his ardent and earnest affection, wherein he
served God, most earnestly and zealously in the ministry of the Gospel, Beza.
The like saying the Apostle has, 2. Tim. 1.3. I thank God, whom I serve from
mine Elders with a pure conscience: he served God with an upright and innocent
heart, not in show and oftentation: and in this sense our Savior says, Ioh.
4.24. They that worship God, must worship him in spirit and in truth. Martyr.

31. Quest. v. 10. What prosperous journey the Apostle means.
v. 10. That I might have a prosperous journey by the will of God. 1. Paul
simply prays not for a prosperous journey, but according to the will of God:
there is a prosperity, not according to the will of God, as the wise man
says, Prove. 1.32. The prosperity of fools destroys them, Gorrham. But, the
Apostle esteems not of such prosperous things, quae sine voluntate dei
eveniunt, which come to pass without the will of God. Haymo. 2. The word
(...), which signifies, that I may have a journey given me according to my
mind, Erasm. in which desire, the Apostle non deprecatur omnia pericula, does
not pray against all perils and dangers: for he suffered shipwreck, and
endured other casualties in his journey to Rome: but he counted it a prosperous
journey, which howsoever might bring him unto them, to bestow some spiritual
gift upon them. Aretius. Such a prosperous journey was that, which S. Paul
took into Macedonia, where though he suffered imprisonment, and were beaten
with rods, yet his journey prospered, in respect of the good success, which
he had in preaching of the Gospel. Martyr. 3. And this desire of Paul to see
the Romans might be one cause, of his appeal, which he made to Rome, Act. 25.
Lyranus.

32. Quest. Whether S. Paul needed to be mutually strengthened by the faith of
the Romans.
v. 12. That I might be comforted through our mutual faith, both yours and
mine. 1. Chrysostom thinks, that Paul spoke not this, quod ipse illorum opus
habeat auxilio, as though he had need of their help, seeing he was a pillar
of the Church: but that he so says to qualify his former speech, v. 11.
because he had said, that I might bestow upon you some spiritual gift to
strengthen you. 2. But although the Apostles modesty appear herein, that
joins himself with them, as having need of their mutual comfort, yet in
truth he professes himself not to be so perfect, as though he needed no
helps: non ponit se in supremo gradu, he does not place himself in the highest
degree: for he other where does acknowledge his imperfection both in knowledge,
1. Cor. 13. and in the gifts of regeneration, Romans 7. Pareus: like as a
minister coming to visit one that is sick to comfort him, may be comforted
again by him: Olevian. to this purpose P. Martyr. 3. This mutual consolation,
Theophytact understands of the alleviating of their afflictions by their
mutual comforts: Tolet with others, of the mutual joy, which they should have
one in an others mutual faith, Lyranus: that they should be comforted by
faith, which was common to him and them, for there is but one faith. But, as
Chrysostom says, here this consolation may be taken pro fider incremento, for
the increase of faith: for the faithful mutuis exhortationibus in fide
proficiunt, by mutual exhortations do profit in faith. Pareus. 4. And
although S. Paul had given such excellent commendation before of their faith,
yet they might notwithstanding have need to be strengthened: as Peter, when he
began to sink in the waters, had faith, when he cried to Christ, Save me, or
else I perish: yet Christ says unto him, Why did thou doubt, O thou of little
faith? his faith had need to be increased. 5. So here are three reasons of the
Apostles desire to see them: 1. that he might bestow upon them some spiritual
gift: 2. to confirm and strengthen them: 3. to be mutually comforted with
them. Aretius.

33. Quest. Of the impediments whereby S. Paul was let to come unto the
Romans.
v. 13. I have oftentimes purposed to come unto you, but have been let
hitherto. 1. Chrysostom thinks he was hindered and let by the Lord: and so
also Theophylact, Dei iussis prohibeor, I am inhibited by the commandment of
God: as Origin gives instance of that place, Act. 16.7. where Paul was not
suffered by the spirit to go into Bithynia. 2. But Basil thinks he was
hindered by Satan: as the Apostle says, he was let by Satan to come unto
the Thessalonians, 1. Thessalon. 2.18. where is to be considered a double
difference between Gods hindering and Satan's: first Satan may hinder the
outward actions, but the inward purpose and desire he can not let: but God can
stay both: secondly, when Satan hinders, it is by Gods permission, for
otherwise he could do nothing, but God often hinders without the ministry
of Satan at all. Now in this place the first opinion is more agreeable,
because he entreated of God by prayer, that he might have a prosperous journey:
therefore it seems that he let him, unto whom he prayed, that he might
have opportunity given him. Tolet. 3. Origin joins both together, that he
might be hindered first in the Lords purpose, and then impediments might be
cast in his way by Satan: so also Pareus, Genevens. and Aretius: But for the
former reason, the first opinion is rather to be received.

4. It being resolved upon, that God stayed S. Paul's coming, yet there is
some diversity concerning the causes, why the Lord should thus let him ^^.
Sedulius thinks, that God saw not the hearts of the Romans yet prepared to
believe: and therefore the Lord sent Paul then, and not before, quando
praesc^^t eos credit^nos, when he foresaw, that they would believe: But
Sedulius is herein deceived, thinking that it was in the Romans free will to
prepare their own hearts to believe: whereas every good gift is of God; Sam.
1.17. And if it were in man's power to believe, every one might attain unto
faith, that would: but the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. all men have not
says. And again, seeing the Apostle gives such commendation of the Romans
says, there is no doubt but God had prepared their hearts. 2. Hugo thinks,
that Saint Paul was prohibited propter peccata Romanorum, because of the sins
of the Romans: This indeed sometimes is a let, as Paul and Barnabas did shake
off the dust of their feet against the Jews, and would no more preach unto
them, because of their obstinacy, and wilful refusal, Act. 13.51. Hyperius:
But this seems not to have been the cause here, seeing the Apostle gives
such commendation of their faith, v. 8. and of their goodness, c. 15.14. and
obedience to the faith, c. 16.19. 3. There are also external lets and
impediments, as his bonds, imprisonment, persecution, Tolet. and he suffered by
the way shipwreck, and other casualties, Aretius. 4. But the most likely
reason, why the Lord stayed S. Paul's coming to Rome, was the necessity of
other Churches, which the Lord would have first established. Gregory teaches
this reason, lib. 21. Moral. c. 13. that God therefore let him, that he
might more profit those Churches where he remained: and S. Paul himself
renders this reason, Romans 15.20. Therefore I have been often let to come unto
you, but now seeing I have no more place in these quarters, and also have been
desirous many years again to come unto, you, etc. his employment in other
Churches, deferred his coming to Rome: Beza. annot.

34. Quest. Why S. Paul expresses not the cause in particular, which let
him.
1. Gualter gives this reason, why the Apostle having diverse lets, as namely
new occasions continually offered in preaching the Gospel, and beside his
persecutions and afflictions, and manifold troubles, yet he makes mention of
none of these, quia de his non poterat sine iactantiae suspicione, because he
could not speak of these things, without suspicion of boasting.

2. But I rather approve Chrysostomes reason, non scrutatur Dominipropositum,
the Apostle does not search into Gods purpose, why such an Apostle was kept so
long from such a famous city, when there was great hope of winning many unto
Christ: it was sufficient that he was let, he is not curious to know the
cause, teaching us thereby, ne factorum rationem vnquam a Deo exigamus, that we
never require a reason of Gods works.

3. And indeed Gods secret counsel herein is diverse ways unsearchable: 1. in
respect of the teachers: why sometime God sends many, sometime few, why some,
and not others, why some are true pastors, some wolves, some true teachers,
some false. 2. in regard of them, which be taught, why God sends preachers to
one place, and not unto an other: why Christ wrought miracles in Corazin and
Bethsaida, not in Tyrus and Sidon, to bring them to repentance, Matthew. 11.21.
3. and for the places, why the Spirit suffered not Paul to preach in Asia and
Bithynta, Act. 16.6, 7. And why in our days, in some certain cities, as at
Constance God suffered the preaching of his Gospel to be intermitted. 4. for
the time, why the Gospel is preached in some age, and not in an other, and some
enjoy it long, some but a short time. 5. for the manner, why sometime the
Gospel is preached obscurely, and darkely, sometime openly and manifestly, why
some preach it of envy, some of sincerities. All these considerations do set
forth unto us how the judgments of God are hid, and unsearchable. Gryneus.

4. And by this reason may the like objection be answered, why the Apostle was
let, seeing his purpose was good, that he might have some fruit among them:
Because the Apostle being the Lords minister, was not to prescribe the times
and occasions fittest for the work of the Gospel, but to depend upon God
therein, who best knew, how to sort out the best time for every purpose.

Quest. 35. Whether S. Paul's desire to go to Rome, being therein let, were
contrary to Gods will, and so sinned therein.
1. S. Paul's desire was not absolute, but conditional, if it were the will of
God, for so he says, that I might have a prosperous journey by the will of God
to come unto you. 2. But here we must consider of the will of God, as it is
secret and hid, and as it is manifest and revealed: against the will of God
revealed, all desires and attempts cannot be without sin: against his secret
will, somewhat may be desired, and yet without sin, so there be^^
subordination of our wills to the will of God: as Augustine shows, how
sometime homo bona volutitate souls, quod Deus non vult, a man with a good mind
wills that, which God wills not, as a good child desires his fathers life,
whom the Lord will have to die: So David prayed for his child's life of a
fatherly affection, when yet God purposed that the infant should die: And
again, says Augustine, it may be, vt homo velit voluntate mala, quod Deus
vult bona, that a man may wish and will that with an evil mind, which God
wills well: As an evil child may desire his fathers death, which the Lord
also purposes, August Enchirid. c. 101. So Paul in desiring here that, which
God willed not, to come unto the Romans, yet sinned not: both because Gods
will therein was not revealed unto him, and beside he interposeth a condition,
if it were Gods will. ex Pareo.

Quest. 36. How S. Paul was a debtor unto all, v. 14.
v. 14. I am a debtor. 1. The Apostle shows a thresold desire that he had to
the Romans, first to come unto them, then to set them, and now to preach unto
them: which he amplyfieth by three reasons. 1. from his own office and
calling. 2. from the virtue and power of the Gospel, v. 16. 3. on Gods behalf:
the righteousness of God was revealed; etc. Gorrham.

2. This debt some take to be the gift of tongues, which the Apostle had
received, in which behalf he was a debtor to all nations, speaking with the
tongues of them all, Origin, Theodoret: But the other Apostles also had
received the gift of tongues, as well as Paul: therefore in that sense they
were debtors as S. Paul was.

3. Oleviane here makes mention of a threefold debt. 1. of nature, as Esaias.
58.7. hide not thy self from thine own flesh: every one is bound to succor
his brother, as being his own flesh. 2. the second bond of our debt is in
regard of our redemption, that we should willingly minister unto them for whom
Christ died. 3. the third debt is in respect of our vocation and calling: which
the Apostle here has relation unto.

4. So then Chrysostom and Ambrose do well expound this debt of S. Paul's
Apostolic calling, so also Lyran. Pareus, with others. As he says, there was
a necessity laid upon him, and woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel, 1.
Cor. 9.17.

5. But he is a debtor first unto God, who is the creditor of whom he received
all those graces which he had: and therefore he was to dispose and employ them
according to the will and Law of the Creator, Faius: who sent him unto the
Gentiles, Act. 13.3. Separate me Paul and Barnabas, etc. which debt the Apostle
is willing to discharge, Hugo. and because he could not yet come in person to
preach unto them, he discharges his debt by writing, Bucer.

6. And he uses this term of debtor, least that he might be thought to be a
busy body, and noted of arrogancy for writing unto the Romans, Mart.

Quest. 37. Whom S. Paul understands by the Grecians and Barbarians.
1. Sometime the Apostle distinguishes the nations into Jews and Greeks, v.
16. sometime into Jews and Gentiles, as Romans 3.29. sometime he reckons up
altogether, the Grecian, the Jew, Barbarian, Scythian, Coloss. 3.12. here he
divides all other nations beside the Jews, into Greeks and Barbarians: the
Jews he mentions not, quia magister Gentium, because he was the teacher or
master of the Gentiles. gloss. 2. The Romans are comprehended under the
Grecians, because from them they received their laws, and the knowledge of
arts, Martyr. 3. Whereas he adds, both to the wise men, and unwise, some take
it for an exposition of the former, by the Greeks understanding the wise, and
by the Barbarians the unwise: Anselme, Calvin, Pareus. But Chrysostom and
Theodoret, Gorrh. so also Beza annot. Faius, do better refer it unto
particular men among the Greeks and Barbarians: for there were among either of
them some wise, some unwise. 4. Anselme by the wise, understands righteous
men, by the unwise, sinners: some, believers, and unbelievers: But Chrysostom
and Theodoret better interpret those to be wise men among the Gentiles, which
had humane wisdom and knowledge: those to be unwise, which were ignorant and
unlearned. 5. By this the Apostle shows, that their humane wisdom, was not
sufficient to bring them to the knowledge of God. And Chrysostom here well
notes, how Plato a wise Philosopher, thrice coming into Sicilia, could not
convert one Tyrant, but went away without any success: but Paul a tent-maker,
did not only convert Sicilia and Italy, but run thorough (preaching) almost
the whole world 6. S. Paul here answers a secret objection: it might have
been said unto him, You may not spend so much time among the Grecians, they
are a people wise enough therefore he says, that not only the unwise, but
even the most learned among them, had need to be instructed in the Gospel.
Tolet. 7. And Paul illud inculcat ob Iudeos, does urge this because of the
Jews, who thought that the preaching of the Gospel did only belong unto them.
Erasm. 8. Celsus, against whom Origin did write, did object this place to
discredit the Gospel, because it was offered to the unlearned: whereas he
takes that to be the most excellent doctrine, that can be perceived only of
the wise and learned. But herein rather appears the dignity and excellency
of the Gospel, which propounds the way of salvation unto all of what degree
soever. Faius. And Gods wisdom herein shows it self, that the Gospel being
preached to the wise and unwise: both the one might be humbled, when they see
themselves to be fellow-schollers even with the unlearned; whom they taught
before: and that the ignorant and simple should not despair, but that they
also may come to the knowledge of salvation. Calvin. 9. And seeing the Apostle
names the wise and unwise, not the rich or poor, noble, unnoble: because he
speaks of the knowledge of the Gospel, which might seem not so necessary
for them, which were wise and learned. Tolet. 10. And here is set forth a
double commendation of the Gospel: both from the excellency thereof, which was
worthy the searching even of the wise and learned Grecians: and a facilitate,
from the facility thereof; because the very unlearned might be also capable of
it. Aretius.

38. Quest. How Paul is not ashamed of the Gospel, v. 16.
1. It might have been objected unto Paul: The Gospel is every where scorned
and derided among the Gentiles, and every where it is spoken against: therefore
the Apostle professes, that he is not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, though
it seem never so contemptible unto the world. Olevian. 2. And as he was not
ashamed to preach the Gospel himself, so he insinuates unto them, that they
should not be ashamed to hear it. Mart. 3. Chrysostom moves a question, why
S. Paul says not here, that he is not only not ashamed, but rejoices also in
the Gospel of Christ: as he says, Gal. 6.14. God forbid; that I should
rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: And thus he answers,
that because the Romans were lifted up in their mind, because of their honor,
riches, and estimation in the world, and Paul preached Christ Jesus, who was
crucified, and counted as nothing in the world: he therefore first of all would
win them not to be ashamed of the Gospel: and then they would come also to
glory in it, etc. But S. Paul in effect, faith as much, as I glory in the
Gospel: minus dicitur, plus intelligitur, less is spoken, and more understood:
Pareus, Mart. Faius. for the reason following, for it is the power of God, etc.
shows that he did even glory in it. 4. But whereas two things might have
hindered Paul, shame, and fear, of the two which, fear seems to be the
greatest pull-back: for shame is de amissione honoris, but for the loss of
honor, fear is de amissione vitae, for the loss of life: S. Paul yet says
rather he is not ashamed, then he fears not: both because his not fearing,
had commended himself, but his not being ashamed, commends the Gospel, as
not being a vile and contemptible things: as also persecution was not yet
generally moved among the Christians, which the Apostle needed to fear, but
yet it was generally contemned. Tolet.

39. What the Gospel or Evangel signifies.
1. Euangel um, the Euangel, is sometime taken for the sacrifice, which used to
be offered unto the gods among the heathen, for the bringing of good news and
tidings: in which sense Cicero takes it, a suaves epistolas quibus Evangelaum
de beri fateor: ad Attic. O sweet epistles, which I count worthy of an
Evangel: that is, of such an offering or sacrifice. 2. It signifies, the
bringing of any good news, or tidings: as Ior. 20.15. Cursed be the man, that
brought my father tidings, saying, A man child is borne unto thee: the word is
bessar, which the Septuagint do translate by the word (...) to bring good
news. 3. This word is appropriated to signify the glad tidings of our
redemption purchased by Christ: as the Angels say unto the shepherds, Luke
2.10. Behold, I bring you tidings of great joy: the word (...): and Romans 10.15.
Beautiful are the feet of them, which bring glad tidings of peace, and bring
glad tidings of good things: where the feign word is used in the Greek, but in
Isa. 52.7. from whence that testimony is taken, the word is bissar, which
betokens the bringing of good news or tidings: some times formore evidence,
the word good, is added: as 2. Sam. 18.27. besarah tobah, good tidings.

40. Quest. Of the definition of the Gospel, It is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes.
This definition consists of three parts, 1. of the efficient cause, the
power of God, 2. the end, to salvation, 3. the form, to every one that
believes.

1. It is the power of God. 1. The power of God is diverse: there is his
creating power, whereby he made the world: but this power is that which is
joined with his love and favor in Christ, whereby he wrought the redemption of
man: which is so much greater then the other, because when he made the world,
none resisted him: but Satan opposes himself in the work of our redemption.
Faius. 2. There is a power also of God unto perdition, and damnation: but this
is his power unto salvation Chrysostom. Origin. 3. But how is the Gospel the
power of God, seeing it sets forth the humility of Christ in his
sufferings, death, and passion? Answ. These were infirmitates voluntary
assumptae, infirmities which our blessed Savior did voluntarily take upon him:
and therein he most of all showed his power, in destroying the kingdom of
Satan by such means, Hugo. 4. Neither do we here understand the essential
power of God, but his organicall power, Pareus: or by a metonymie, the
declaration of his power, whereby the preaching of the Gospel is made
effectual. Faius.

2. Unto salvation. 1. This salvation consists presently in the remission of
sins, and afterward in the inheritance of eternal life: not like the
salvation, which is promised by men, as by Magistrates to their subjects, by
Physicians to their patients: but it is the everlasting salvation of our
souls. Mart. 2. Though outwardly the Gospel appear vile and contemptible, yet
it has a secret virtue, to work unto eternal life: As there be certain
natural things, which make no show outwardly, yet inwardly are full of virtue:
as pepper feels outwardly as cold, but it is hot in operation: Theodor, as a
pill which the Physician gives, though it seem nothing, yet it is, of great
efficacy to expel diseases, Tolet. 3. The Gospel works to some unto
condemnation: it is the savor of death unto death: but that is not properly
the effect of the Gospel, which is given unto salvation, but by reason of men's
incredulity: so the Gospel, not by it own proper effect, but accidentally
works unto condemnation. Mar^.

3. To every one that believes. 1. The Gospel is offered unto all, but it
only profits unto salvation unto those that believe: like as a medicine, is
only effectual to those that receive it, Pareus. 2. Christ is the efficient
cause of salvation: but faith, is organon appre^^sivum, etc. the apprehending
instrument: like as the light is the cause of our seeing, but the eye also must
be rightly disposed, which is the organs of seeing. Aretius. 3. Neither is this
understood of every belief; believers are not here taken for such, as to whom
the history of the Gospel is only known, but such as are sealed by the
spirit of grace, and are assured they are the sons of God, and cry, Abba,
father, Romans 8.15. Gryneus. 4. And thus the Apostie falls into the very
chief argument and scope of this whole Epistle; that we are justified by
faith, and not by the works of the law. Gualter.

41. Quest. Of the difference between the Law and the Gospel.
1. In that the Gospel requires belief unto salvation, therein it differs
from the law: whose righteousness is this, not to believe, but to do those
things, which are therein commanded, as the Apostle shows, Romans 10.5. Mart.
2. The Gospel is the power of God, that is effectual, mighty, lively in
operation: but the law is weak and impotent, Romans 8.3. it was weak because of
the flesh. 3. The Gospel unto salvation, but the law is the ministry of
condemnation, 2. Cor. 3.9. 4. The Law was given only to the people of Israel:
but the Gospel is proposed to all, both Jew and Gentile. 5. The Law consisted
in observatione ceremoniarum, and externa cultu, in the observation of
ceremonies, and external worship: the Gospel in interiori cultu fidei, in the
inward worship by faith: so that the law was lex puerorum, the law of children,
which were kept under it as a schoolmaster: but the Gospel is lex virorum, the
law of men come to ripe age. August. lib. de spirit. and lit. 6. They differ
also in the manner, that which was covertly and darkely shadowed in the law, is
manifestly and apertly set forth in the Gospel. 7. In the time they differ: the
law promised things to come, the Gospel presently performed that which was in
the law promised: is Ignatius epist. ad Philadelp. quod supra legem pracipuum
habet Euangelium? nempe praese^tiam adventus Salvatoris: what has the Gospel
above the law? even the presence of Christ's aduent, and coming.

42. Quest. Why the Jews are named before the Grecians, v. 16.
To the Jew first, and also to the Grecian, etc. 1. Here by the Grecians
generally all the Gentiles are understood: because they of all other nations
seemed to be the wisest, and therefore special instance is given in them, that
they also have need of the preaching of the Gospel: Tolet. and at that time
almost all nations used the Greek tongue, and therefore they are called by the
name of Grecians, Gualter, especially when they are set against the Jews,
Beza. 2. Chrysostom thinks, that the Jew is named first, not for any other
excellency or prerogative, sed in hoc solo honoratur, quod primus illam
accepit, but he is honored only in this, because he first had the Gospel
preached: so he gives only unto the Jew the prioritie of other. 3. Origin
thinks that the Jew is set first, because that like as the Grecian preferred
himself before the Barbarian, because of their laws and civil life, whereas
the Barbarians lived without law: so the Jew has pre-eminence before the
Grecian, because they received their laws from God. 4. Lyranus gives this
reason, the Jews had a better preparation unto the Gospel by the knowledge of
the law and the Prophets, then the Grecians, who only had the light of nature,
and the knowledge of the creatures, 5. But the Jew has a pre-eminence before
the Gentile in respect of the prerogative, which was given them of God: unto
their fathers were the promises made, and of them was descended the Messiah
according to the flesh: so that this word (...), first, does not so much
signify ordinem temporis, the order of time, as ordinem dignitatis, the order
of dignity: as when Christ says, Seek ye first the kingdom of God, Matthew.
6.33. that is, chiefly and most of all. Tolet. Pareus. This order our blessed
Savior observed both in himself, saying he was sent only to the lost sheep
of Israel: and gave the like charge, when he sent out his Apostles, that they
should not go the way of the Gentiles, Matthew. 10.5. yea and at his ascension,
he appointed his Apostles to be his witnesses first in Judea. Jerusalem,
Samaria, and then to the uttermost part of the earth, Act. 1.8. This order the
Apostles accordingly kept, Act. 13.46. It was necessary, that the word of God
should first have him spoken unto you.

43. Quest. v. 17. The justice or righteousness of God is revealed: what justice
the Apostle means.
1. There is a justice of God, wherein he is righteous and just in himself: as
Psalm. 11.7: The righteous Lord loves righteousness: but this the Apostle
speaks not of: the essential justice of God is not communicated to us by
faith. 2. There is a justice distributive in God, whereby he renders unto
every man according to his works: Origin understands this justice of God: but
this is not the justice, whereby a man is justified to salvation: for if the
Lord should mark what is done amiss, no man should be able to abide it, Psalm.
130.3. 3. The justice of God signifies his verity and truth in keeping his
promises: so Gorrham takes it here: true it is, that God graciously performs
whatsoever is promised in Christ, but yet his mercy must go before in
promising. 4. Theodoret understands the perfect justice of Christ, whereby he
satisfied the wrath of God for our sins, and accomplished our redemption: and
this perfect justice of Christ is revealed in the Gospel: but the Apostle
speaks evidently of such justice, whereby a man is justified before God,
which is not that perfect justice inherent in Christ, but the applying thereof
unto us by faith. 5. Therefore Chrysostomes exposition is the best, who Homil.
3. takes this for that justice, which is communicated and infused unto us by
that justice of Christ: and so Augustine understands that justice, not
whereby God is just in himself, sea qua hominem induit, cum eum iustificat,
but wherewith he endueth man; when he instifieth him, lib. de spirit. and
liter. cap. 9. of this the Apostle speaks, chap. 3.28. We conclude that a man
is justified by faith without the works of the Law. 6. But this justice is
not an habit infused into the mind, whereby a man is made apt to exercise good
works, as Pererius says, that this justice comprehends two things,
remissionem peccatorum, the remission of sins, and animi rectitudinem, etc.
and the uprightness of the mind, whereby it is now acceptable unto God, and
is exercised in good works: for the Apostle says of this justice of God, that
it is Made manifest without the law, by the faith of Jesus, etc. c. 3.21. But
this infused habit, which is charity and the exercising of good works, is
not revealed without the law: for the law requires and commands charity:
This justice then consists only in the remission of sins, and in imputing
unto us the righteousness of Christ by faith, c.4.5. Blessed is the man, to
whom the Lord imputes not sin, Pareus. 7. It is called the justice of God,
both because it is given us from God, not procured by our own works: and for
that we thereby are made righteous, not before men, but in the sight of God,
Tolet. 8. And this justice is sometime called the righteousness of God, Phil.
3.9. because he is the author thereof: sometime of Christ, he is our
righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.30. because by his obedience we are justified:
sometime of faith, Philip. 3.9. because faith is the instrument whereby Christ's
righteousness is applied unto us, Gryneus.

Quest. 44. Of the meaning of these words, v. 17. is revealed from faith to
faith.
1. Is revealed. 1. Which shows a double pre-eminence of the Gospel: in
respect of the matter: it shows such things, as cannot be otherwise known
then by revelation from God, whereas the law of the Jews, and the Philosophy
of the Gentiles treats of common, and known things: and for the manner: that
which was obscurely set forth in the law, is plainly declared in the Gospel,
Pareus. 2. and it is so revealed, that it is not only made known, but indeed
exhibited, Beza. 3. And herein a difference also is showed, that the Gospel is
revealed unto some, namely to such as believe, but not unto others: it is hid
to them which are lost, 2. Cor. 4.3. Hyper.

2. From faith to faith. 1. Origin and Chrysostom, do thus expound, ex fide
veteris Testamenti in fidem noui, from the faith of the Old Testament, to the
faith of the New. 2. Ambrose, ex fide promittentis Dei in fidem hominis
credentis, from the faith of God promising, to the faith of man believing: so
also Aretius, Gualter. Martyr. 3. Augustine, ex fide praedicantium in fidem
audientium, from the faith of the preachers, to the faith of the hearers, 4.
Anselme, from the faith of one article, to the faith of the rest: but it can be
no true faith, unless it believe all the articles. 5. Theodoret, ex fide
praesentium, in fidem futuruum, from the faith of things present, to the faith
of things to come, as of the resurrection, life everlasting: But unless these
things be soundly believed, there can be no faith at all. 6. ex fide informi,
in fidem formatam, from an imperfect faith without charity unto a perfect
faith: but the Apostle speaks not at all of any such dead faith without
charity, for that faith cannot justify. 7. There remain then these two
expositions, that this be understood rather of the increase of faith: we must
proceed from faith beginning, to faith increasing:: as the like phrase is
used, Psalm. 84.7. they go from strength to strength, Beza; Hyper. Gualter. and
John 1.16. Of his fullness have we all received grace for grace. Thus Clemens
Alexandrin. expounds, stronsat. 3. Apostolus vnicam tantum fidem annuntiat,
^^ but of one faith, which by increasing comes to perfection. 8. And this
meaning it has withal: from faith to faith, to signify, that altogether by
faith man is justified, and only by faith, Pareus, Faius, so also Thomas,
nulle tempore cuiquam, nisi per fidem salus conti^^, that at no time salvation
was attained unto by any but by faith.

3. And by faith here is not understood, 1. either obedience of life, to live
as God has commanded: for faith is here opposed to works: 2. nor yet a bare
and naked assent unto the Gospel that it is true: for such an historical faith
even the devils have. 3. but it is taken for a full assurance, and confidence
of the heart, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart, (...), in the
assurance of faith: by such a faith are we justified, Beza, Pareus.

Quest. 45. Whether the Apostle does rightly cite this place out of the
Prophet, The just by faith shall live, for the words.
1. Object. The Hebrewe word used by the Prophet, Habuc. 2.4. is beomunatho, in
his truth or integrity, but the Apostle translateth it, faith. Answ. The
Septuag. do translate this word by the Greek word (...), faith, and so the
Hebrewe word cemunah, signifies not only truth, integrity, but faith.

2. Object. In the original it is by his faith, which notwithstanding the
Septuag. do thus interpret, (...), by my faith: the reason whereof Hierome
coniectureth to be this, they might mistake the letter vau, for iod, which
only differ in the length: now Synomachus reads, (...), by his faith,
according to the Hebrewe: But S. Paul neither here, nor Galat. 3.11. does
translate the Hebrewe pronoune: but translateth only, the just lives by
faith: to this it may be answered, 1. Hierome says, non erat ei cura de
vorbis, cum sensus esset in tuto, he had no care of the words, retaining the
sense. 2. And beside, loquens eodem spiritu, quo Prophetae, sensum sumit,
speaking by the same spirit, that the Prophets spoke by, he takes the sense,
using his own words, gloss. ordinar. 3. These pronounes are easily understood
in the Greek tongue, though they be not expressed, Beza: 4. And without the
pronoune, the place as the the Apostle alleges, is sufficient to prove his
purpose, that the just lives by faith, Pareus.

3. But the Latin translator here reads amiss, vivit, lives, in the
present tense, whereas it is put in the future, in the original, (...), shall
live.

4. And the order of the words is to be considered: the just by faith shall
live, not the just shall live by faith, for this reading presupposes, that
first he is just, and then lives by faith: whereas he is first just by faith,
before he can live unto God, Mart. Faius, Innius in Paral.

5. And here by the way a slip of Chrysostoms may be noted, who directly names
in his commentary the Prophet Zephanie, whereas this testimony is taken from
Habacuke: which may be observed, to show that those ancient fathers, though
they were excellent men, yet were but men, and might sometime forget
themselves: As Ambrose handling that place a little before, to the Jew first,
thinks, that the Jews were so called of Judas Macchabeus. whereas long
before they were called by that name, as is evident, 2. king. 25. Ierem. 40.
Esther 1.3. Mart. This is no note, to derogate from the credit of the fathers:
but to show a difference between their writings and the holy Scriptures: which
are free from the least error of forgetfulness.

Quest. 46. Whether S. Paul, in citing this saying follows the Prophets sense.
1. Some think, that the Prophet there historically speaks of the
deliverance of the people from the captivity of Nebuchadnezzar, and therefore
exhorts the faithful, that with patience they would expect the promised
deliverance, by which faith, they should live, and be thereby refreshed and
comforted: but typically thereby is signified the deliverance by Christ; and so
this sentence is accordingly applied: which typical application the Apostle
follows: of this opinion is Gualter.

2. Pareus thinks, that the Prophet does indeed comfort the people in
captivity, which was to come, but not only: the Prophet does lead the minds
of the godly to an higher matter, to consider of their everlasting deliverance
by Christ: so he thinks, that both senses, of their temporal and spiritual
deliverance, are comprehended in this sentence.

3. But this is rather the literal and proper sense of the Prophet, specially
to commend unto the faithful, their faith and belief in the Messiah to come.
Thus Eusebius expounds 1.6, de demonst. c. 14. and Hierome says, manifesta
in his verbis de Christi aduentus prophetis est, there is a manifest prophecy
in these words of the coming of Christ: And the Apostle so evidently applies
it, Heb. 10.35. Cast not away your confidence, which has great recompense of
reward, etc. v. 37. For yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry, v. 28. now the just by faith shall live, Perer.
Hyper.

4. But it will be objected, that this sense agrees not with the Prophets
purpose, who c. 1. complains of the enemies and oppressors of the people of
God, and therefore the vision, which the Prophet received c. 2. was to Minister
comfort again the present afflictions of Gods Church. Ans. It is the manner,
which the Lord observes in the visions and prophesies by occasion of temporal
deliverances to raise up the minds of his people to look for their
everlasting deliverer: as Psalm. 72. under the type of Solomon, the kingdom of
the Messiah is properly described: and Dan. 9. the Prophet prays for the
deliverance of his people out of the captivity of Babel, and he receives that
prophecy of the 70. weeks concerning the Messiah who should deliver them from
their sins. And so in this place, the Prophet praying for the deliverance of
the people from their oppressors, receives a vision concerning the Messiah, in
whom whosoever believes, shall live for ever, Pererius.

5. Theodoret thinks that this saying of the Prophet concerned not those
times then present, but was a prophecy of the times of Christ, that then the
just by faith should live: so also Ireneus lib. 4. c. 67. But the Apostle
otherwise applies it, Galat. 3.11. that neither under the law, nor under the
Gospel, any were justified by the law, but by says: for his words there are
general, And that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is
evident, for the just shall live by faith.

6. Ambrose, and so likewise Chrysostom, because the word is put in the future
tense, shall live, do understand this not of this present life, but of
eternal life to come: But it is evident, that S. Paul Galat. 3.11.
understands this life of justification: and so the Apostle calls
justification by faith the life of the soul, Galat. 2.20. I live by faith of
the Son of God: and the future tense with the Hebrews, indifferently is
oftentimes put for the present: yet the Apostle so understands the present
life of the soul by faith and grace, as that he excludes not the other sense
concerning eternal life: as he applies this sentence of the Prophet to the
second coming of Christ, Heb. 10.37. Tolet.

7. Now whereas Moses says, as S. Paul cites him, Romans 10.5. The man that
does these things shall live, the Prophet may seem to be contrary unto him,
saying, the just by faith shall live: but they are easily reconciled: Moses
speaks of the justice of the law, which none could attain unto, the Prophet
of the justice of the Gospel, which the faithful obtain by faith in Christ,
Mart.

8. Thus the Apostle sets down the chief benefits which we have by faith,
salvation, v. 16. it is the power of God to salvation: justice or
righteousness, the just by faith: life, shall live, Matyr.

Quest. 47. How the wrath of God is said to be revealed from heaven against all
unrighteousness, ver. 18.
1. This clause is a probation of the former, that there is no way whereby one
is justified before God, but by faith, which the Apostle proves by the
contrary: because either by works or faith must men he justified: but not by
works, as he proves first in this chapter by particular induction in the
Gentiles, that their works deserved nothing but Gods wrath: and in the Jews,
c. 2. This is the reason of the connection of this verse with the former, Beza,
Aretius, Mart. And the causes, why the Apostle thus begins to reprove the
Gentiles are these. 1. S. Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and therefore
he first deals with them. 2. because the quality and nature of faith, and of
the grace of God, can not be well understood, unless we first look into our
selves, and consider the vileness of our own works. 2. And because such is
man's pride by nature, vt opera sua maximifaciat, that he sets much by his
own works: therefore the Apostle does first begin to beat down the pride
of man. 3. It is the manner of the Prophets and of our Blessed Savior in their
prophesies and sermons, to begin with the Law, and then to proceed to the
promises of the Gospel, Hyper.

2. By the wrath of God is signified, declaratio irae Dei, the declaration of
the wrath of God, Aretius: there is in God no motion or perturbation, as in
man: wrath according to the Hebrewe phrase, is taken for revenge or punishment,
Erasmus.

3. Revealed. 1. three ways is the wrath of God revealed against sin. 1. by
the light of nature: for every man's conscience accuses, or excuses him: 2. by
the Gospel, which threateneth everlasting punishment to the wicked and
unbelievers. 3. and by daily experience, which shows that God is angry with
the sins of the world, Pareus. 2. God does by daily experience testify his
wrath against the ungodly of the world, and even at this time when the Apostle
thus wrote, the world was plagued with war, famine, and other grievous
calamities, for the contempt of the Gospel, Gualter. 3. but this revelation
also may be applied to the Gospel, wherein is revealed the wrath of God against
sinners: as Mat. 3. John Baptist preached, Now is the axe laid to the root of
the tree: and our Blessed Savior says, Luke 13.3. unless ye repent, ye
shall likewise perish. 4. under the law also the wrath of God was declared
against the ungodly, as in the destruction of Sodom, and of the Egyptians in
the red Sea: but the wrath of God did then only show it self in such
external and temporary punishments: But the gospel does threaten everlasting
condemnation: as Matthew. 10.28. fear not them, which kill the body, but rather
fear him, who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell, Perer. And the
Law did only in theft, generally condemn all infidelity: but the Gospel in
hypothesi, in particular condemns incredulity and unbelief in Christ,
Pareus. And then it being a time of ignorance, the judgments of God, though
they were in the world, yet were not marked and observed, but now they are
evident to all men, Aretius.

4. From heaven. 1. Ambrose expounds, ipsos coelos demonstrare, etc. that the
heavens do declare the wrath of God against sinners, and shall be their
accusers, who refused to worship God which made the heavens: so sometime the
Lord calls the heavens and earth to be witnesses against men, Isa. 2.1.
Gryneus. 2. Origin gives this sense, quia spirituales nequitiae in coelestibus
sunt, because the spiritual wickednesses, (that is, the evil spirits) are
above in the celestial places, who are ministers of Gods judgments upon the
wicked. 3. Chrysostom, Theophylact, Oecumenius, refer it to the revelation
of the last and final judgment from heaven, at the second coming of Christ.
4. Caietan and gloss. ordinar. thus understand it, quia Euangelium de toelo
est, because the Gospel is from heaven, wherein this wrath of God is revealed.
5. Some hereby understand the universality of Gods judgments, that they shall
be upon all men under heaven, wheresoever they are, Per. 6. Some refer it to
the manifest appearance of Gods judgments from heaven, tanquam e sublimi loco,
as out of an high place in the sight of all, Faius: so manifest that no man can
deny it, Beza. 7. But the best sense is, that men shoud not think, these
plagues sent upon the world, to be ordinary and natural, (though God therein
may use natural and secondarie causes) sed a Deo inflicta, but that they are
inflicted of God, Martyr. Pareus.

5. Upon all ungodliness. 1. Origin restrains this clause: that though the
wrath of God, be said to be revealed against all impiety, non tamen in omnes
homines, yet not against all men, but only against those among the Gentiles,
which had the knowledge of the truth: such were their wise men and
Philosophers. 2. But Tolet by diverse reasons shows, that all the Gentiles
are here comprehended, whether the wise or unwise. 1. by the generality of the
words, against all impiety and unrighteousness. 2. because they all had the
knowledge of God by the creatures. 3. v. 26. the Apostle makes mention of
their women, whom he would not have counted among the Philosophers and wiser
sort. 4. the Apostles intent is to prove, that all the Gentiles were under the
wrath of God, and therefore also the knowledge of the Gospel, and of faith in
Christ, was necessary unto all, both the wise and unwise. 3. but as Tolet here
reasons well: so yet herein he is deceived: he thinks as this sentence
concerns all the Gentiles, so the former, that the just shall live by faith,
he takes to be meant only of the Jews: whereas v. 17. the Apostle made
evident mention both of Jew and Grecian, that the Gospel was the power of God
to salvation, to every of them that believed, Faius.

6. All impiety and unrighteousness. 1. Tolet following Theodoret, thinks
that these two are applied to idolatry: which is both impiety, because it
denies unto God his worship, and injustice, in giving that which is due unto
God, unto idols. 2. But the usual interpretation is better: which Origin also
has, impiet as peccare in Deum est, iniquit as in homines, impiety is to
sin against God, iniquity against men: so also Chrysostom, non de dogmatis
tantum dicit, sed de vita, he speaks not only of the errors of doctrine, but
of the sins of the life, etc. So impiety comprehends the transgressions
against the first table: unrighteousness, against the second, Pareus. 3. some
by all impiety, etc. understand all impious and unrighteous persons, Perer.
rather it signifies, super omnes impietatis parts, etc. upon all the parts
of impiety, and unrighteousness, Gorrham. whereof these two reasons may be
yielded, 1. that none should be excepted: though they seemed never so righteous
they might have some impiety in them, Beza. 2. and to show the object of Gods
wrath, which was not properly men, but the impiety and vnrightousenesse of
men, Pareus.

Quest. 48. What it is to withhold the truth in unrighteousness, v. 18.
1. Anselme understands this of those, qui veritatem id est Dei scientiam
habent, tamen male vivunt, which have the truth, that is the knowledge of God,
but yet do live ill.

2. Basil of those, qui donis Dei ad proprias voluntates abutuntur, which
having the gifts of God, do abuse them to their own pleasure: But the first
restrains this word verity, or truth, as though it only concerned the
knowledge of divine things: whereas there is a truth also in moral duties: the
second seems only to include those which sin maliciously, and of set
purpose: whereas all the Gentiles were guilty of this in detayning the truth
in unrighteousness.

3. Oecumenius expounds it of those which did know the truth in themselves,
and did keep it in, ne alys splendeat, that it should not appear unto others:
But in this sense only the Philosophers and wise men among the heathen should
be touched, whereas S. Paul shows what was the condition of all the Gentiles
in general.

4. Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Hayme, do specially apply it to the
knowledge of God, which the Gentiles had by the creatures, and abused it, in
leaving the Creator, and worshipping the creature, quod per opera Dei
cognovisti, per opera hominum perdidisti, that which thou knew by the works
of God, thou have lost by the handieworke of men, August. sermon. 55. de verbo
Domini secund. Joan. And Chrysostom thus resembles it, like as one having the
kings treasure committed unto him, to bestow in the kings affairs, should
spend it upon harlots, and other Iewde persons: so also Tolet. Perer. But in
this sense the Apostles reason should be too much restrained: who spoke before
of all impiety and unrighteousness, both against God and man.

5. By truth, then we here better understand, veras notitias de Deo colendo,
and proximo diligendo, the true notice both of worshipping God, and loving our
neighbor: such as the Gentiles had by the knowledge of nature: which notice of
the truth, they by their own concupiscence, and unrighteousness abused, and
did contrary things to this their knowledge, both in their duties toward God,
and their neighbors, Pareus, Martyr, Hyperius. And here the Apostle uses a
sic similitude taken from Tyrants, who oppress the innocent, and imprison
them: so the Gentiles did as it were imprison the truth which they had by
nature, in their own corrupt affections: which were as setters and gives unto
the truth, which would have showed it self, but was kept under.

6. But seeing the truth is powerful and prevalent: why should it be kept
under more at one time, then at an other? Ans. The truth is always powerful:
but the difference is not in the truth it self, but in the instrument which we
use in apprehending it: our natural strength is of small force, but when the
grace of God assisteth us: then the truth breaks forth, and can be no longer
kept under. Martyr.

49. Quest. What the Apostle means by these words, v. 19. That which may be
know of God, is manifest in them, etc.
1. The Apostle here preuenteth an objection: for whereas he had said, that the
Gentiles did hold the truth in unrighteousness, it might be objected, that they
had not the knowledge of the truth at all: the Apostle therefore shows, that
they had the knowledge of God by the light of nature, and by the sight of the
creatures: Pareus. 2. Chrysostom, Oecumenius, likewise Ambrose, Augustine, this
(...), that which may be known of God, they restrain unto the knowledge of
the creatures, making the next verse, an exposition of this, the invisible
things, etc. are seen by the creation: But the Apostle evidently
distinguishes this knowledge from that: for this is said to be manifest in
them, the other is without them: here therefore he means, that natural
light, and those principles of truth, both concerning God, that he is, and,
what he is, and touching moral equity, which are by nature imprinted in the
mind: Pareus, Mart. cognitionem sui naturaliter inseuit and exterius per opera
adiuvit, God both has naturally graft in man a knowledge of himself, and he
does help the same by his works without: Gorrham.

3. That which may be known. 1. which is not set against the knowledge of the
essence of God, which can not be comprehended of any creature: as gloss.
ordinar. but against those things, which are not known without revelation, as
the mystery of the Trinity, of the incarnation of Christ, the redemption of
the world: that therefore is here understood, quod ductu rationis nosci^ile
est, which may be known by natural reason: as that God is, that he is but
one, Gorrham: and his essential attributes, as his goodness, wisdom, power,
Lyran.

4. Is manifest in them. 1. not among them, as Perer. nor in them, that is, in
the crearutes, Hugo: but in them, that is, in their hearts: Anselm. as the
Apostle interprets, c. 2.15. Pareus, Beza. 2. not that indeed, God was thus
manifested and made known unto them, but they had the way and means given
them by nature, whereby they might have attained to the true knowledge of God,
Tolet. 3. P. Martyr by in them, understands the Philosophers, to whom this
natural knowledge of God was revealed, which they kept hid among themselves,
and would not make it common to others: as appears in an epistle, which
Aristotle sent unto Alexander: wherein he writes, that his physickes were so
set forth (that is, in such obscure manner) as though they were not set forth
at all: But it is evident, that S. Paul convinces here all the Gentiles in
general, that they hold the truth in unrighteousness, as is showed before,
qu. 48.5.

4. For God has showed it unto them. 1. Ambrose expounds it thus, faciendo
opus, per quod possit agnosci, that God manifested it by the works which he
did, whereby he might be known: so also Hugo, manifesta ^^it per creaturas, he
did manifest it by the creatures: but the Apostle here speaks evidently of a
manifestation in them, not without them. 2. And he says, he has manifested,
not revel^e^, ne lumen gratiae immiserat, that it should not be taken for the
illumination of grace, Perer! or that he did manifest it, per inspirationem, by
inspiration, gloss. interlin. 3. Some understand it of the natural infusion of
those principles and notions of God imprinted in the mind, Martyr, Pareus: But
these seem to be two distinct things, to be manifest in them, and God has
manifested to them. 4. Therefore hereby the Apostle signifies thus much: that
beside that natural instinct and light of the mind, God did concur withal:
as Augustine says, not only natural reason did hereunto profit, sed Deus
continuo adiuvit, ne sola natura sufficere videretur: but God did also
continually help, that nature alone should not seem to be sufficient: ex
glos. ord. so they had divinu^ concursum mediante lumine naturali, they had
concurring the divine help together with this natural light, Perer.
Catharinus thinks that God did per Angelos illuminare, illuminate their minds
by the operation of the Angels: But the Apostle says, that God, not Angels,
did manifest it unto them. This then is added, least any man should solis
rationis viribus, to the strength only of reason ascribe whatsoever knowledge
of God, Gualter. for though men have this natural instinct, yet by the
corruption of their nature, and by the subtlety of Satan, it might be so
obscured, that it should help them very little: and therefore it was
necessary, that the divine assistance, should concur together, with this
natural direction.

Quest. 50. Of the ways and means whereby the Lord does manifest himself
unto men.
These ways and means of the manifesting of God, are 1. reduced to these
three kinds: they are either such as are in this life, either natural by the
creatures, and the instinct of nature, or supernatural by faith, and these are
imperfect: And there is an other manifestation of God, in the next life, which
is called visio beatifica, the blessed sight of God: when we shall see him as
he is, Tolet. 2. Now the means, whereby God is manifested in this life, are
diverse. 1. per naturalem rationem, by natural reason. 2. per creaturarum
considerationem, by the consideration of the creatures. 3. per Scripturarum
inspectionem, by the inspection of the Scriptures. 4. per gratiae infusionem,
by the infusion of grace. 5. per angelicam reuelationem, by Angelical
revelation. 6. per humanam eruditionem. by humane instruction. 7. per
miraculorum operationem, by humane operation, Gorrham. 3. But the natural
means of manifestation, which the Apostle speaks of here, are thus
distinguished: they are either within us, or without us: within us, there are
1. the natural principles, which are imprinted in the mind, both touching
divine things, as that there is a God, that he is omnipotent, eternal, good
and gracious: and concerning moral duties. 2. The natural reason of man's
mind, whereby he discourses, and concludes unto himself, that there is a God
by his effects and works in the world. 3. There is also diuinus concursus, a
divine concurring of God, in helping our natural weakness, and in giving
efficacy unto these natural faculties and powers: the natural means without
us, are the knowledge, sight, observation, and experience of Gods creatures,
whereby the invisible things of God are made known unto us: which the Apostle
shows in the next verse.

51. Quest. What invisible things of God the Apostle speaks of, and how they
are made known unto us.
v. 20. The invisible things of him, etc. 1. Origens conceit here has no
probability, who by these invisible things, understands the Angels: for 1.
the Apostle says, the invisible things of him, that is of God, as he said
before, v. 19. that, which may be known of God. 2. and he does distinguish
here manifestly between the invisible things of God, and the works of God:
seeing then the Angels are comprehended in the works of God, they are not
these invisible things. Tolet. 3. Theodoret by these invisible things,
understands the creation of the world, the divine providence, his justice,
and government of the world. 4. Lyranus by these invisible things, interprets
the essential attributes of God: and so he makes it a distinct thing from the
eternal power and Godhead, which afterward the Apostle mentions: whereas the
Apostle interprets himself, the invisible things of God, that is, his
eternal power and Godhead. 5. Gorrham the invisible things of God
interprets, inuisibilis Deus, the invisible God: but there is great
difference between God, and the things of God. 6. Therefore the Apostle does
best show his own meaning: the invisible things of God, that is, his eternal
power, and deity: wherein notwithstanding all his other attributes, his
wisdom, justice, goodness, are understood: Pareus: for as Calvin notes, his
deity nisi cum singulis Dei virtutibus nequit consistere, can not stand but
with the singular virtues of God. But Tolet obiecteth, that the word quoque,
also, is here a note, non declarationis, sed adiectionis, not of declaration,
but of addition. Contra. Though the vulgar Latin so translate quoque, also;
yet in the original the word is (...), which is as much as nempe, or
videlicet, that is to say, as Vatablus, and the Syrian interpreter read: so
likewise Beza.

2. (...), from the world created. These words are diversely expounded: for
whereas (...) signifies both the very act of creating of the world, and the
creature it self that was made, as Erasmus notes, hereupon these diverse
interpretations are given. 1. Some read, by the creation of the world, Beza,
Genevens. and Aretius thus distinguishes, that (...), is tota mundi fabrica,
the whole frame of the world taken together: but (...), the works afterward
mentioned, are the special works, as the stars, the elements, and such
like. But if by the creation, the works themselves created should be
understood, then the Apostle should seem superfluously afterward, to make
mention, of the works are understood by the works: Perer. Tolet. and beside,
(...) is put in the genitive, and (...) in the dative, and therefore they can
not be joined appositiuely together by way of declaration. Pareus. 2. The
Latin translatour reads, a creatura, of the creature, which Anselme and the
ordinary gloss following, understand of man: in which sense it is taken,
Mark. 16.15. preach the Gospel to every creature. And man is so called the
creature by a certain excellency, because he has some agreement with every
creature: he is in a place, as other bodies, he has sense, as beasts, and
understanding as Angels: But as Tolet well notes, the other word, which is
joined with creature, of the world, excludes this particular sense and
application unto man. 3. Therefore (...) is here better taken for the world
created: and is referred unto the time, a mundo condito, since the world was
created, Pareus: a fundamentis mundi, from the foundation of the world, as the
Syrian interpreter: for so the preposition (...), from, is taken, as Matthew.
13.35. (...), from the foundation of the world, Tolet: so that (...) here
signifies, not the act of the creation: for it is taken for the world created
afterward in this epistle, Romans 8.20. nor yet for the creatures simply: but for
the state of the world, when it was created: from the world created, a
constitutione mundi, from the constitution of the world, as Chrysostom is
translated.

3. Being understood by his works. Non corporea, vel imaginaria visione, sed
intellectuali, not by a corporeal or imaginary vision, are they seen, but by
an intellectual: gloss. interlin. as the cause is understood by the effect:
Lyran. like as by an image representing one that is absent, we are brought to
the knowledge and remembrance of him, so God is seen in his works. Perer.

4. To wit, his eternal power and Godhead. 1. Some by the invisible things of
God, understand the person of God the father, by the virtue or power, the
person of the Son, by the deity the holy Ghost: which interpretation
Theophylact mentions here only: Gorrham seems to follow it: But this
reason makes against it, that the mystery of the Trinity is to high a matter
to be searched out by the light of nature: that knowledge comes only by
revelation. Perer. 2. These three things then are here understood, the
eternity, power, and divine majesty of God, the knowledge whereof man is lead
unto in part by his natural instinct. Perer. 3. And under the deity or
Godhead, are understood the rest of his attributes, his wisdom, goodness,
justice, which are seen in the administration of the world, whereby his
Godhead, which is in it self incomprehensible, is known, as by the effects:
Pareus.

52. Quest. Of the knowledge which the Philosophers had of God, and by what
means they attained unto it.
1. Theodoret rehearses five ways whereby the Philosophers were brought to
the knowledge of the Creator. 1. by the contemplation of the heavens and the
stars, and their orderly motion. 2. by the consideration of the elements, the
fire, the air, the water, the earth. 3. by the admirable frame and
workmanship of man's body. 4. by the operation of man's hands, and by the
manifold arts invented by man. 5. by the dominion, which man has over the
creatures. Theodor. in sermon. de provid. But some Philosophers had their
special and peculiar reasons beside, which induced them to think there was a
God.

2. Socrates especially considered the providence of God, in providing so
bountifully for man: as he brings Euthydemus by this particular induction to
acknowledge, that God has special care of man: as he has given him the light
and day to guide him, the night for him to rest in, the fire to warm him, the
fruits of the earth to nourish him: And whereas Euthydemus objected, that these
things were common unto men with bruit beasts, Socrates shows, that even the
beasts themselves also are for man's use: and beside God has given more
excellent gifts unto man, then to any other creature, as understanding,
memory, speech: wherein Gods special care appears more to man, then toward
any other creature. This was Socrates inducement. ex Grynaeo.

3. The Platonists did find out God, by comparing the Godhead with other
things: first they were persuaded, that God was not a body, secondly they held
God to be immutable, and so they sought not God in the soul of man, or among
the mutable spirits: and therefore they held God to be, an infinite, and
immutable essence beyond them all: to this purpose August. lib. 8. de civ. Dei.
c. 6. And further they rose up thus by degrees to find out the Godhead: first,
they held spiritual things, to be better then corporal: then the things that
had life, they preferred before those that had no life: and of the things that
had life, them that had sense and motion: and of these they held to be most
perfect the things that were endued with reason: and of the things having
reason, such as were intellectual spirits, such as are the Angels: and among
those, he to be most perfect, that was totus actus, only in act, void of all
passive quality, which is God: for the other spirits do consist partly in
act, partly in a possibility, as they may not be: But it is impossible that
God should not be: and thus by these steps did they ascend to the
contemplation of the divine nature. Faius.

4. Aristotle was persuaded that there was a God, and that all things consisted
by the divine power, because it was haereditaria fama omnium mortalium, an
hereditarie opinion of all mortal men: lib. 12. Metaphys. c. 6, 7. lib. 7.
Ethicor. c. 13. thereupon he calls God (...), the habitation of God: Pareus:
Perer. disputat. 14.

5. Galen by the contemplation of the creatures, and of the excellent
workmanship of the world, did find out the wisdom, power, and goodness of God:
for thus he writes, lib. 3. de vsu partium, as Beza annot. and Gryneus out of
him translateth, Sacrum istum sermonum, vti verum hymnum, conditori nostro
compona^, etc. This sacred speech, as a right hymn, I will compose to our
Creator: and this I hold to be the true worship of him, not to offer unto him,
many sacrifices of bulls, or burn ointment and incense: but if I both know him
my self, and declare him unto others, how great his wisdom, power, and
goodness is: for in that he would have all these things made, and envied us not
any of those good things, this is a clear demonstration of his goodness: in
that he would find out a way, how to adorn all those things, it was his great
wisdom: and in that he would bring to pass and effect, whatsoever he had
decreed, therein he showed his power. And by these means the Philosophers
attained by their natural light to some knowledge of God.

53. Quest. How other Scriptures, that deny all knowledge of God unto the
wicked, agree with this place of Saint Paul.
1. Object. The Apostle says here, that the things which might be known of
God, were manifest unto them: how then is it said in the Psalm. 53.1. The fool
has said in his heart, there is no God: and, Isa. 1.3. The ox knows his
owner, etc. but Israel has not known me: and it is said of all in general,
Ioh. 1.18. No man has seen God: and yet more evidently the Apostle thus
writes, 1. Cor. 1.21. Seeing the world by wisdom knew not God in the wisdom
of God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe.

Answ. 1. Caietane gives this solution, that the Apostle says not, none of
the world knew not God, sed mundus (communiter) non cognovit, the world
generally knew him not: though the wiser sort among them, as the Philosophers
knew him: yet they in respect of the rest of the world, were as none: But the
Apostle does exclude even the wise from the true knowledge of God, as he says
in the same place, 1. Cor. 1.20. Where is the wise, etc. has not God made the
wisdom of this world foolishnes?

2. Pareus thus answers, Impijs negatur cognitio Dei efficax and salutaris,
quae ex verbo discitur, the effectual and saving knowledge of God is denied
unto the wicked, which is learned out of the word: but an unfruitful and idle
knowledge they may have: Tit. 1.16. They profess that they know God, but by
works they deny him. But the Apostle speaks not here of the knowledge of
God by his word: the world by wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God: but
of the natural knowledge, which the heathen might have had of God: for as
Theodoret well notes, the Apostle shows three kinds of wisdom, two are
natural, the wisdom of man by the light of reason, the other the wisdom of
God shining in the creatures: these two the Apostle speaks of here: the third
kind is the wisdom of God in his Son Christ, which afterward the Apostle
also expresses, v. 24. We preach Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of
God.

3. P. Martyr makes this answer, that there were some among the heathen, which
by nature were persuaded there was a God, but afterward, they did not yield
unto him, that which was proper unto God: as the Epicures denied unto God the
government of the world, but made him as an idle beholder of the actions of
men, being no agent himself: And some likewise grew to that impudency, that
they sought by subtle reasons to prove, that there was no God. But though
this be true, which P. Martyr affirms, yet it is too particular to include
the whole meaning of the Apostle: for he says generally of the heathen, that
the world knew not God, not only certain sects of Philosophers among them,
but all the Gentiles generally.

4. Pareus has an other answer, that this natural light could not bring them
to the knowledge of God, because it was obscured and darkened by sin, and so
imperfect thorough the natural corruption of man. But this does not fully
satisfy neither: for though by man's fall this natural knowledge is decayed,
yet there was sufficient remaining, if the Gentiles had not abused it: at the
least, as the Apostle says, that they might have groped after God, in some
sort to have known him.

5. This solution then remains, that there is a twofold natural knowledge,
one is only speculatiue, consisting in a bare and naked contemplation of God,
bringing forth no fruit: the other is practical, when men according to that
light which they have of God, do fear him, and worship him: the first kind of
knowledge of God the heathen only had, as the Apostle shows, Romans 1.21. When
they knew God, they did not glorify him as God, neither were thankful, but
became vain in their imaginations: for the heathen, notwithstanding this
natural direction which they had, generally did fall unto idolatry, and so
dishonored that God, whom they knew by his creatures, Mart. Perer.

54. Quest. Of the meaning of these words, That they should be inexcusable, v.
20.
1. Some thus translate the Greek words, (...), ad hac vt sint, to this end,
that they may be unexcusable: Beza: Pareus: to the intent, that they be
inexcusable, Genevens. And Beza thinks that God for this cause would have the
light to shine in darkness, vt homines nihil possent praetexere, that man should
use no pretext or excuse. But it is hard, to say that God for this end gave
the light of nature unto men, to take away all defense and excuse from them:
whereas Gods intent was, that man should thereby come unto the knowledge of the
Creator.

2. Origin, Chrysostom, do understand this consecutivo, by way of consequent:
that this followed as a consequent upon their abusing of that natural
knowledge, which was given them: And Theophylact makes it like unto that
saying in the Psalm. 51.4. Against thee have I sinned, etc. that thou may be
just when thou speak: it was not the end, but a consequent: so also
Erasmus: and Faius, est consequens cognitionis illius, it was a consequent of
that knowledge: But the Apostle seems to signify more then so, Tolet.

3. Aretius, because he can not think that to this end were these helps given
them, to make them inexcusable, takes this to be a new argument, against
justification by works: that whereby the Gentiles were made inexcusable, can
not justify them: but by their works they were made inexcusable: Ergo. But
the Apostle speaks here of the light of nature, which the Gentiles used, not
of their works, which follow in the next verse.

4. Wherefore, the meaning of the Apostle is this, that this was not the proper
end and use of this natural knowledge, to make them inexcusable: but it is
vsus accidentarius, an accidental use; which happens thorough men's
ingratitude, that abusing this natural knowledge, which yet remains in man
after his fall, they thereby are deprived of all excuse or pretext of
ignorance, Pareus: so also Gualter, quod gentium vitio factum est, Deo per
accidens tribuitur. that which came to pass by the fault of the heathen, is
attributed unto God accidentally: this sense is well expressed in the vulgar
Latin, it a vt sint, etc. so that they are inexcusable: as our common English
translation also reads.

55. Quest. Whether there is any natural knowledge of God in man.
1. Pererius here reports the opinion of some Schoolmen, whom he calls
Nominals, Deum non posse naturali ratione, etc. that God can not
demonstratiuely be proved by natural reason: disput. 16. And Pareus makes
mention, dub. 16. of one Osterodius, who directly affirms, that man has no
knowledge of God by nature, or by the contemplation of the creatures, but only
by outward fame and hearsay: his reasons are these:

1. Because many in India and Brasile, are found utterly ignorant of God,
because they have not heard, that there is a God.

2. If there were any such natural knowledge, all should have it, but even
among the Philosophers some were found, which denied that there was any God.

3. The Apostle speaks of the works of the new creation, namely of his
miraculous works, v. 20. whereby God is known.

Contra. 1. The very Indians are not without knowledge of God, though they
abuse it: for some of them worship the Devil for their god. 2. Those
Philosophers of malice, not of ignorance, denied that there was a God. 3. The
Apostle speaks evidently of such works, as were manifest and made known to
all men: so were not Christ's miraculous works, they came not to the knowledge
of all the world.

2. Now, that there is some knowledge of God even by nature, is evident by the
Apostle in this place. 1. he says, that God has manifested unto them, that
which naturally may be known of him: and that the invisible things of God are
seen and understood by his works, v. 20. Pareus. 2. For how else should all men
be inexcusable, if they had not by nature some knowledge of God: whereas many
have not otherwise heard of God? Perer. 3. Cicero an heathen man confesses,
lib. 2. de natura Deorum, quid potest esse tam apertum, etc. quam esse aliquod
numen praestant^ssimae mentis, qua haec regantur, what is so manifest, when we
look up to the heavens, etc. as that there is some divine nature most
excellent, whereby all those things are governed? 4. This was the end,
wherefore God erected the world, that thereby man might learn to know his
Creator. 5. And if man naturally had not knowledge of God, then naturally he
were not bound to love God above ll: for how naturally can be love and honor
him, whom he acknowledges not? Perer.

56. Quest. Whether the natural knowledge, which the Heathen had of God, was
sufficient unto salvation.
1. It was never doubted of among Christians, whether a man by his natural
strength, without Gods supernatural grace, might be justified before God, and
so attain unto everlasting life:for this were to ascribe all unto man's free
will, and to deny the grace of God: But this has bin called into question,
whether that this natural knowledge of God, without any supernatural
instruction or revelation, had not been sufficient (concerning knowledge) unto
salvation.

Chrysostom affirms, hom. 37. in Matthew. that of those which died before the
coming of Christ, fides Christi, qui nondum venerat, non petebatur, the faith
of Christ, which was not yet come, was not required, etc. likewise Justin.
Apolog. 2. qui cum ratione olim vixerunt, Christianos esse appellandos, etc.
they which lived in time past according to the rule of reason, are to be called
Christians, although they knew not Christ: such as were among the Grecians,
Socrates, Heraclitus, with others. Clemens Alexandrin. lib. 6. stromat. says,
that they which were before Christ, were made just either by the law of Moses,
or by Philosophy, but they wanted only faith in Christ: and therefore they
expected the coming of Christ and his Apostles in hell, eorumque ibi
praedicatione Christi fidem percepisse, and there by their preaching they
attained unto faith, and so were saved. And further these reasons may be
alleged for this opinion, that this natural knowledge was sufficient:

1. God requires not things impossible: but it had been impossible for the
Gentiles, beside their natural knowledge, to attain unto faith, which comes
by hearing the word, which they had not.

2. To know that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, had
bin sufficient, Heb. 11.6, but this they might have attained unto by nature.

3. The Gentiles by their natural knowledge of God, might have been able to
lead their life aright, and to direct their actions both toward God, and man:
and therefore it might have been sufficient.

Contra. 1. Though it be impossible to attain unto faith without the ordinary
means, yet it is not to be doubted, but that, if the Gentiles had thankfully
acknowledged their Creator, and not abused their natural knowledge, God would
have given them further instruction:as he did afterward in sending the Apostles
to preach the Gospel to all the world.

2. To believe that God is, and a rewarder of them that seek him, is the work
of faith: and not of natural knowledge, as the Apostle there shows.

3. Some moral civil duties the light of nature might have directed them
unto, but to order their ways aright toward God and men, their natural
direction had not sufficed without the grace of God: for then some might have
been found among them, who had attained unto this sufficiency, by their
natural light only.

2. Now on the contrary side: that beside our natural knowledge, faith in
Christ is necessary, and that without it there is no salvation, thus it
appears by the Scriptures. 1. Christ says, Ioh. 14.6. I am the way, the
truth, and the life: and Ioh. 10.9. I am the door: so that none can enter into
life, but by this way and door: he is the lamb of God, that takes away the
sins of the world, Ioh. 1.29. he is the Mediator between God and man, 1.
Tim. 2.5. And S. Peter says, Act. 4.12. that among men there is given none
other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved: all these places do
evidently testify, that without the knowledge of Christ there is no salvation.
2. Further the necessity of faith also appears. 1. because by faith we are
justified:as the Apostle alleges here out of the Prophet, the just shall
live by faith, and without justification there is no salvation: 2. invocation
and calling upon the name of God, is necessary: but they cannot call upon him,
upon whom they have not believed, Romans 10.14. 3. without faith it is impossible
to please God, Heb. 11.6. and where God is not pleased, there can be no
salvation. 4. the knowledge of life to come, and of those things which God has
prepared for them which love him, is necessary unto salvation: But those
things are apprehended by faith, Which is the evidence of things, which are not
seen, Heb. 11.1.

3. Therefore, the former assertions of Chrysostom, Justinius, Clemens, are
unsound:unless they be understood to speak of perfect, distinct, and complete
faith, which was reserved for the times of the Gospel, that such an exact faith
was not required of the fathers: otherwise the Scripture generally imposes
necessity of belief in Christ, in some degree and measure, upon all:
Angustines judgment herein is much to be preferred, who thus writes, quod
scriptum est, non esse aliud nomen sub coelo, etc. that which is written, there
is no other name under heaven whereby we must be saved, etc. since that time
prevailed for the salvation of mankind, when in Adam all mankind was corrupted,
etc. epist. 157. ad Optat.

57. Quest. Whether any of the Philosophers were saved by that natural
knowledge, which they had of God.
1. Catharinus a Popish writer, thinks that where S. Paul says here of the
Gentiles, when they knew God, they did not glorify him as God, that he
speaks not of all the Philosophers: a better opinion may be conceived of
Socrates and Plato: it is an hard censure, to send all the Philosophers unto
hell: Erasmus opinion also is well known, who inclines to think that Cicero
was saved, praefat. in Tusculan. quaestion.

2. For the deciding of this question: 1. It can not safely be affirmed, that
all the Philosophers and other of the better sort among the heathen were all
damned: for God might have mercy on some of them, and bring them unto
repentance, and impart unto them some more clear light and knowledge of
salvation, then nature could afford: it is therefore hard to set down, what
end every one had: God might show mercy in the very instant of the passage of
the soul: And we find that there were some among the nations, that were
strangers from the people of God, that had the knowledge of his ways: as Job
with his friends, who lived among the Gentiles, had the knowledge of the true
God: the like might be found els-where.

2. Concerning, Socrates and Plato, and other the like in particular,
whatsoever their end was, which is secret and hid unto us, yet by their
sayings and doings it can not be gathered, that they had the true knowledge of
God, or attained unto salvation. First, Socrates, though he privately among his
friends seemed to mislike of the heathen gods, and acknowledged one only God,
yet publicly he worshipped their gods and sacrificed unto them, as both
Xenophon and Plato excuse him, and free him from that imputation, that he
contemned the gods of the Grecians: likewise Plato, though he sometime seem to
magnify the one God the Creator of all things, yet he allows sacrifices done
unto the heathen gods, and commends Socrates for rendering his vows unto
them, and that he commanded a cock to be sacrificed unto Aesculapius: to this
purpose Eusebius. lib. 13. de praepar. Evang. c. 8. and 11. the like Tertullian
reports of Socrates in Apologes. who in contempt of the heathen gods used to
swear by a goat, or a dog, yet in the end caused a cock to be sacrificed to
Aesculapius: Chrysostom affirms the same of Socrates, that he sacrificed to
Aesculapius, and of Plato, that he allowed the fables of the Poets of the gods.
hom. 3. in 1. c. ad Romans

Seneca, who in his book de superstit. which is now perished, but cited by
August. lib. 6. de civit. Dei. cap. 10. though he much enueighed against the
heathen idols, showing how they worshipped their gods in the form of beasts,
and fishes, and other shapes, thus writing, numina vocant, quae si spiritu
accepto subito occurrerent, monstra haberentur, they call them gods, which if
they had spirit and life, and should suddenly meet us, would be thought to be
monsters: yet in the end he resolves, that all this rabble of the gods is to
be worshipped, yet so, that we think, cultum magis ad morem, quam ad rem
pertinere, that this worship rather is for fashion, then in truth: thus, as
Augustine infers, this grave Philosopher, colebat quod reprehendebat,
agebat, quod arguebat, adored that which he reprehended, and acted that which
he misliked. Much better is the example of that ancient and reverend old man
Eleazar, who being persuaded by his friends to dissemble as though he did eat
swines flesh, and so to save his life: answered, non dignum est aetati nostrae
fingere, it is not beseeming our age to dissemble, 2. Macchab. c. 6.

Hermes Trismegistus, that wise Philosopher among the Egyptians, who did teach
many things truly of God, in so much that some called him the Egyptian Moses,
yet he spoke very absurdly and impiously touching the idols of the heathen, as
Augustine sets it down, lib. 8. de civit. dei. c. 23. that simulachra sunt
velut corpora Deorum, etc. that the images were as the bodies of the gods: and
he foretells, and that with grief, that the time should come, when the
worship of idols should fail among the Egyptians: wherein he seems to note
those times, when as by the preaching of Christ's Gospel, idolatry should be
banished: wherein he shows himself an enemy and adversary to Christ. If
this were the behavior of the most famous Philosophers, who contrary to their
own judgment worshipped idols, what is to be thought of the rest? and what
argument can we have of their salvation, who both lived, and died for ought we
know, in so gross idolatry? Therefore howsoever God might have mercy upon
some of them upon their repentance, yet it is most certain, that they being
without the faith of Christ, could not be partakers of life everlasting. Faius.

Quest. 58. Seeing that the natural knowledge, which the heathen had was not
sufficient unto salvation, how are they thereby made inexcusable?
1. Pareus dub. 16. answers that they to whom sufficient knowledge and
strength is denied to attain unto salvation, may have some excuse of their
ignorance and weakness, if these 4. conditions be observed. 1. that this
their ignorance and imbecillitie comes not by their own default. 2. if that
light of nature which they had, they had followed, and not wilfully depraved.
3. if they had accknowledged their own wants, and had desired to have the same
supplied by the grace of God. 4. if God had been any ways bound to have given
them further graces to help their ignorance and imbecillitie: But none of
these things could be pretended by the heathen: for their ignorance and
weakness came upon them by their own apostasy, and falling away from God:
and that light which they had they depraved: neither did they acknowledge their
infirmity, but became vain and foolish in the opinion of their own strength:
neither is God debtor or bound unto any, but bestows his graces freely.

2. Pererius disput. 16. insisteth only upon the first part of this answer,
showing that there is a double kind of ignorance, vna est causa culpae, one
kind of ignorance is that which is the cause of fault or sin, and this
excuses: there is an other, cuius causa culpa est, the cause whereof is our
fault, and this excuses not: and such was the ignorance of the heathen, which
was caused by their own wilful neglecting and abusing of the light of nature
given unto them.

3. Peter Martyr has yet a further answer: he distinguishes between the
ignorance of the heathen, and their imbecillitie or weakness: this the
heathen would not have pretended, because they ascribed all unto freewill, and
therefore they would not have complained of want of strength: the Apostle then
touches that, which was most likely to have been objected by the^, namely,
their ignorance: and shows how even in that behalf they were also
inexcusable, etc. But seeing as is showed before, eue^ their natural knowledge
was insufficient to salvation, the same doubt remains still: therefore those
two other exceptions concerning their imbecillitie, which P. Martyr mentions,
as that it happened by their own default, and that they did not practice that
little knowledge which they had, but abused it, may also be admitted, touching
their ignorance, as before Pareus answered sufficiently.

4. Hereunto further may be added, that distinction of ignorance, which Gryneus
borrows from Augustine, not eueris one, which is ignorant is excused, sed is
solum, qui non habuit vnde disceret, but he only, that had not whence to
learn. And therefore S. Paul excuses himself by his ignorance, that he
persecuted Christ, I did it ignorantly thorough unbelief, 1. Tim. 1.13. But
such was not the ignorance of God, which the Gentiles had, having natural
means offered unto them, which they depraved and abused.

Quest. 59. v. 21. How the Gentiles are said to have known God, and yet
glorified him not as God.
1. Some think that in Scripture, that ignorance, which is caused by a man's
own fault when he may have knowledge, if he will himself, it is called by the
name of science and knowledge in Scripture, as Ioh. 7.28. Christ says to the
Jews, ye both know me and whence I am: because they might have known if they
would: Justin. resp. 140. ad 44. Gentium: so also Photius and Sedulius. But
this is not the Apostles meaning here: for he says not, when they might have
known God, but when they knew God, they therefore had some knowledge of him.

2. Some think that they had the true knowledge of God, but they against this
knowledge maliciously, and against their own conscience, worshipped other
gods: so Ambrose, Anselm. But 1. it cannot be showed, that any of the
Philosophers, no not they which come nearest unto the truth, had the true
knowledge of God, for even Socrates, Plato, Seneca, allowed the worship of the
heathen gods, and practiced it, as is before showed, qu. 57. and if any of them
thought, that the images were no gods, yet those which they worshipped, were
either devils or Angels, as Athanas. shows, orat. cont. idol. 2. the Apostle
here says that they became vain in their imaginations, which shows, that
they were without the true knowledge of God: Anselm answers, that they had
once the true knowledge of God and afterward lost it: But the Apostle says
otherwise, that they did withhold the truth in unrighteousness, v. 18. they
lost not that knowledge of the truth which they had, but suppressed it and kept
it under, with their vain imaginations.

3. Origin seems to think, that they were utterly void of all true
knowledge of God, dum formas and imagines requirunt in Des, in semetipsis
imaginem Dei perdiderunt, while they imagined forms and images to be in God,
they lost in themselves the image of God: for there were some Philosophers
which held God to be a spirit without any form or image.

4. Some, whereas it is said, Ioh. 1. the world knew him not, and yet here the
Apostle says, when they knew God, etc. give this solution, that the world
knew, the only God, but not the Son, Gorrham. But the Apostle speaks here
only of such knowledge of God, as naturally may be attained unto: but the
knowledge of the Trinity exceeds the strength of nature.

5. Wherefore, the Apostle is thus to be understood, that they knew the true
God in part, but not perfectly: they held some truths concerning the divine
nature, but they mingled many untruths and falsities therewith: they
acknowledged a God, but they either denied his providence, and power, or they
communicated the duine honor unto others which were not gods: and thus they
knew him, and yet knew him not: In this sense Christ said to his Apostles,
Ioh. 14.4. Whether I go, ye know, and the way ye know, and yet Thomas says
immediately, Lord, we know not whether thou go, how then can we know the
way? So they knew Christ, because they saw him, and he was among them: but
yet they knew him not perfectly, his power they as yet did not fully
understand: So the Gentiles knew God in some sort, but such an one as he was,
they did not know.

Augustine to this purpose gives instance in one of their chief Philosophers,
Hermes Trismigestus, how he confesses many things of the true God the maker of
the world: tamen obscuritate cordis ad ista delabitur, etc, yet by the
darkness of his heart he falls to say, that he would have men subject unto
those gods, which are made by men: Beda ex Augustine. so they kept the truth as
the same Augustine. says, in doctrina multis falsitatibus permixta, in doctrine
mingled with many falsehoods.

And though some among the heathen did hold certain true principles of God,
yet there were others more gross and foolish, and were utterly ignorant of the
divine nature: taking the fire, wind, stars, and such like to be governors
of the world: as it is in the book of wisdom, c. 13.1, 2. see before of this
matter, quest. 52.

Quest. 60. v. 21. How the Gentiles did not glorify God, neither were
thankful, but became vain.
1. Did not glorify him as God: this word to glorify, is taken two ways:
either to conceive an honorable opinion of God, and to magnify him, and set
forth his praise: as Ioh. 11.4. this sickness is not unto death, but for the
glory of God, that the Son of God, may be glorified thereby: or it
signifies the worship due unto God, as Isay. 43.23. Neither have thou honored
(or glorified) me with thy sacrifices: Theodoret, so likewise Chrysostom and
Origin, seem to take it in the first sense: that the Gentiles did not conceive
so reverent an opinion of God, in faining him to be like unto the images of
creatures: so also P. Martyr. Gregor. hom. 11. in Ezech. thus understands it:
they did not glorify God, non impenderunt ei cultum debitum, they did not give
unto him his due worship: Ambrose, Anselm, Sedulius, do expound the former of
the latter: they glorified not God, in not giving him thanks, but the Apostle
set these two down, as two distinct things: not to glorify God, and not to
give him thanks: Therefore, by this word, to glorify, is better comprehended,
both the inward reverent opinion of God, of his justice, mercy, eternity,
power, goodness, as also the outward worship due unto him, Calvin. Pareus. So
the Gentiles did offend in both these: they neither honored God as they ought,
worshipping him and reposing their trust and confidence in him: neither did
they return him thanks for the benefits received, but referred all unto
fortune, some to the stars, some to their own providence.

2. They became vain in their imaginations. 1. Erasmus gives this sense, they
were deceived in their expectation, because they took themselves to be wise,
yet proved very fools: but this the Apostle expresses afterward in
particular. 2. some take it in Aristotle's sense: that is called vain, which is
not brought to the due effect: as the end of this their knowledge was, that God
should be honored: which end they attained not unto, Martyr. but indeed they
neither had the true knowledge of God, nor yet propounded unto themselves any
such end.

3. Some refer it to the errors of the Philosophers, because they did
resemble the Godhead by vain images: Theodoret, Chrysostom. Tolet: but this
seems to be to particular: they had many vanities beside: and this the
Apostle alleges afterward, as a proof of their foolishness, v. 23.

4. Augustine, whom Anselm follows, understands it of their pride: the
knowledge which they had, suis cogitationibus tribuebant, they attributed to
their own thoughts, and reason: but their vanity was more general, it
comprehended other things beside.

5. Therefore hereby are understood all the vain opinions and inventions which
the heathen, trusting to their own wit and invention, coy^ed concerning the
divine nature: as 1. some denied there was any God, as the Epicures. 2. some
doubted thereof, as Protagoras, Diagoras. 3. some affirmed that there was a
divine power, but they made many gods: and them either incorporeall, as the
spirits, so the Platonists. 4. or some also made material and corporal gods,
as the Greeks and Romans made men departed gods: the Egyptians other
creatures, as oxen, geese, crocodiles, yea herbs, as onyons, leckes. 5. Some
acknowledged one God, as Plato, Aristotle: but either denied his providence in
all things done under the moon, as the Peripatetikes: or tied him unto second,
and inferior causes, as the Stoikes: this is the vanity, which the Apostle
speaks of: And as this was their vanity in their judgment and opinion, so
were they deceived in their hope and expectation: they thought by such means
to appease their gods, to procure favor, to obtain good things: but the
contrary fell out.

3. Their foolish heart was full of darkness. 1. by the heart is understood
the mind, their very understanding was darkened, Faius. the natural reason in
them was obscured, Gorrham. 2. this was a just punishment upon them, because
they abused that knowledge, which was given unto them: their own pride and
ouerweening of themselves besotted them, that whereas they thought themselves
wise, they became fools, iusto Dei iudicio propter super^iam, their foolish
heart was obscured thorough their pride, Lyran. 3. that whereas they boasted of
the name and title of wisemen: as the Grecians much gloried in their seven wise
men: as the Romans had their wise men also, Numa, Cato, Cicero, yet they were
all fools: for as fools delight in toys, and let pass things of greater
substance and importance: so they worshipped images instead of the true God,
which the Apostle in the next verse gives as a reason of their foolishness:
yea Socrates, who was counted one of their wisest Philosophers, desired his
friends, being now ready to die, to offer for him a cock unto Aesculapius,
which he had vowed, Pareus.

4. Some interpret thus, that while they held themselves wise in temporal
things, stultifacti sunt in spiritualibus, they became fools in spiritual
things: Lyran. But their understanding was darkened even in moral duties: as
Cato gave his wife unto Hortensius, desiring her, and took her again, when he
was dead. Lycurgus exposed virgins naked in their plays and public
spectacles, he commended theft, if it were secret: and many such absurd things
even in civil duties were committed by their wisest men, Gryneus.

5. Augustine, whom Hugo Cardinal. follows, does somewhat curiously
distinguish these three. 1. they became vain in their imaginations, this he
applies to th^^^, which do measure the divine nature according to their
corporal sense, imagining him to have parts and members like unto man, which
was the error of the Anthropomorphites. 2. their foolish heart was full of
darkness, this he understands of them, which ascribe unto God the qualities
and affections of the soul of man, as anger, grief, forgetfulness,
remembrance. 3. when they thought themselves wise, they became fools, this he
does interpret of those which do imagine such things of God, which neither can
be found in him, nor in any other creature, neither in the body, nor in the
soul of man.

6. But this description of the error and blindness of the Gentiles is better
referred generally to their foolish and carnal devises, and pretexes whereby
they obscured the truth both in divine and humane duties: as they alleged for
their images, that they did not worship the image or idol, but the thing
represented thereby, and that as a man cannot have access unto the Prince, but
by his courriers: so there must be mediators to bring us unto God: Thus they
became foolish in their imaginations, for God is not like unto man, that he
need to be informed by others: Thus they became fools, leaving the true
substance of Gods worship, and following after shadows and shows: as the
Apostle says; Col. 2.23 which things have indeed a show of wisdom, etc. but
substance they had none, Martyr.

Quest. 61. How the Gentiles changed the glory of God into the image of men
and beasts, v. 23.
1. They changed the glory of the incorruptible God. 1. The glory of God is
either absolute in himself, which can no ways be changed: or it is considered
with relation to us, as the worship and honor which is yielded by the
Creatures unto the Creator: this is changed by men, when they give the honor
due unto God, unto creatures, Pareus. So that indeed they could not deprive
God of his glory, sed audaciae accusantur, but they are accused of great
presumption, that as much as in them lay they attempted to rob God of his
honor, Martyr. 2. God is said to be incorruptible, because he only of
himself is free from all corruption and change: the Angels are incorruptible,
yet not originally, but by the will of God, Pareus, infaelix mutatio, this was
an unhappy change of the true glory of God, into a similitude, of the very
God, into an image, and of the incorruptible, into that which is corruptible,
Gorrham. 3. this they did two ways: first in ascribing divine honor to such
things, as by nature were not gods, as the Egyptians did worship beasts and
other creatures for their gods: then in seeming to honor the true God by the
images of men and beasts, Pareus. 4. Some take the words in this sense, as
though they should think that the godhead was like unto these things, as S.
Paul touches that error, Act. 17.29. We ought not to think that the Godhead
is like to gold or silver, etc. But the meaning rather is, that they give the
divine honor due unto God, unto the images of men and beasts: for the Apostle
seems here to allude to that place, Psalm. 106.16. they turned their glory
into the similitude of a bullock, etc. yet the Israelites did not think God
to be like unto a calfe or bullock, Tolet. now whereas in the Psalm, it is
said, their glory, but here the glory of God, the reason is, because gloria
eorum Deus, God was their glory: for there can be no greater honor unto a
nation, then the true worship of God, Mart. 5. The Apostle here does diverse
ways exaggerate this gross idolatry of the heathen. 1. maxim ridiculum est,
etc. it was ridiculous that they took upon them to change the glory of God:
2. then quod in tam absurda mutarunt, that they changed it into such absurd
things, Chrysostom. 3. he says not, they changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into a corruptible man: but into the similitude of the image,
etc. not natural, but such as was fashioned and framed by the hands of man,
Gorrham, Tolet. 6. And whereas some of the Philosophers were not so gross to
think, that the very images of wood, gold, or silver, were the gods, but that
the Gods were represented in them: yet both the one and the other did worship
them for gods, as Athanas. shows, orat. cont. idolat. and Augustine says
well, quis orat intuens simulachrum, qui non sic afficiatur, vt ab eo se
exandirs putet, etc. who prays looking toward an image, is not so affected,
as though he thought it heard him, and hops to have performed by it, that
which he desires: whereupon men addicted to such superstitions, do turn
their back upon the Sun, and power out their prayers before the image of the
Sun, August. tractat. in Psalm. 123. ex Beda.

62. Quest. Of the diverse kinds of idolatry among the heathen in worshipping
the images of men and beasts, v. 23.
1. Varro a famous antiquarie among the Romans, who wrote the 41. books of
antiquities, whereof 25. are of humane matters, 16. of them of divine, he
makes three kinds of Theology or heathenish divinity: one fabulous and
poetical, wherein the Poets do feign many indecent things of the gods, as
that they committed theft, adultery: that some of them had their beginning out
of the thigh, some out of the head of Iuppiter: there was also a natural
Theology, which the Philosophers handled: as whether the gods were eternal,
what their beginning was, whether of the fire, as Heraclitus, or they consisted
of numbers, as Pythagoras, or ex atomis, of small motes, as the Epicures: the
third was civil Theology, which belonged to the Priests, as what gods ought
to be worshipped, and with what ceremonies and sacrifices: this was for cities,
the second for the world, the first for the theater or stage: to this purpose
Varro. But Thomas shows how in this place, the Apostle condemns all these
kinds: the Civil, which consisted in the adoration of images, in these words,
they turned the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of the
image, etc. the fabulous and poetical, in these words, v. 25. which turned the
truth of God into a lie: and the natural, observed by the Philosophers, he
condemns in saying, v. 25. they served the Creature, forsaking the Creator.
Thom. in hunc locum.

2. Plutarke 6. c. lib. 1. de plurit. Philosoph. divides the heathen idolatry
into 7. kinds, 1. they observed the heavens, and stars, and when they saw
that by their motion and influence the things below were much guided, they
gave unto them the name of gods. 2. they made some profitable and wholesome
gods, as Iuppiter, Iono, Mercury. 3. some unprofitable as Mars, Saturn, the
Furies, whom they appeased with sacrifices. 4. they gave the fourth place unto
the passions and affections of the mind, as to love, venerie, desire. 5. then
they made goddesses of the virtues, as of Justice, Fortitude, and such like. 6.
Then follow the poetical fictions, as Hesiodus generation of the gods. 7.
They ascribed divine honor unto those, that had bestowed any benefits, or
found out any profitable invention for men, as Hercules, Castor, Pollux,
Bacchus.

3. And of all other people the Romans exceeded in the variety of idolatry:
Tertullian in apologet. cites Varro, that he brought in 300. Iuppiters, and of
other kinds they had an infinite number of gods: whereof Augustine gives this
reason, Roma quanto mayor facta est, sicut nauis nautas, tanto plures
adhibendos esse Deos putavit, etc. Rome the greater it waxed, as a great ship
requires more mariners, so they thought to use many gods, as though a few
gods sufficed not for their greatness, lib. 3. de ciuit. c. 12. Leo adds
further, cum pene omnibus dominaretur gentibus omnium pene serutebat errorbus,
when as they bare rule over all nations, they became slaves to all their
errors, sermon. 1. de Natal. Pet. and Paul. and they in policy did worship the
gods of all other nations, ad dilatationem imperij, for the enlarging of their
dominion: thinking thereby the rather to insinuate themselves, Lyranus.

Quest. 63. Of the gross idolatry of the heathen in worshipping the images of
men, and of beasts, v. 23.
1. Of the image of a corruptible man, etc. 1. In the book of wisdom two
reasons are yielded of the adoration of images, nimius amor amicorum, and
nimius timor tyrannorum, too great love of friends, and too great fear of
tyrants: of the one they made images to remember them, of the other to flatter
them, Gorrham. 2. The Assyrians were the first that worshipped the image of a
man, namely of Belus the father of, Ninus, whom the Babylonians called Bell,
the Sidonians Baal, the Jews Beelzebub, the Philistims Zebet, Haymo., 3. The
Romans after the coming of Aeneas into Italy, worshipped also the images of
men, as Iuppiter, Romulus, ex gloss. ordinar. 4. And they worshipped not only
men of desert, but lewd persons: as the Romans made Larentia, a common
strumpet one of their goddesses: Simon Magus they inaugured with the title of a
god, Tertullian. in Apologet.

2. And of birds, and fourefoosed beasts, and of creeping things. 1. Herein
appeared the great folly of the heathen, who beside the adoration of images of
men, gave divine honeur unto creatures: the Romans worshipped a goose, the
Egyptians the hawke, and the Crocodile, and other beasts beside, Haymo. and the
Philistims Dagon in the form of a fish: and Ambrose says the Pagans had
Coracina sacra, their sacred ravens solemnities. 2. But the Egyptians exceeded
all other nations in these abominable fooleries as Diodorus Sicalus expresses
at large, lib. 2. c. 4. which narration of his may be sorted out to these
particulars. 1. First, their gross superstition appeared in the adoration of
diverse kinds of beasts and fowls, as at Memphis they worshipped the god Apis
in the likeness of a pide coy^e, in Midatu a goat: at the lake Mirides the
crocodile, and a lion in the city Leonce. Besides they adored dogs, and cats,
wolves, vultures, water ratts, which were enemies to the crocodiles and gnawed
a sunder their bowels: 2. Those their beasts and birds which they held sacred,
they kept very carefully in places near unto their Temples, and appointed
keeps for them, providing them divine meat, soft beds, and beside they used
to wash and bath them with sweet water and spices. 3. if any chance to kill any
of them, he was put to death for it: they spare none, for at such time as
Ptolome was received into amity and society with the Romans, there chanced
one of the Romans to kill one of them, who notwithstanding the mediation of
the king himself and the nobles, could not escape the hands of the people. 4.
if any of them die in an house, there is great mourning and lamentation made,
and they bestow great cost upon the burials: in Ptolomeus Lagus time, who
succeeded Alexander, there died at Memphis an old ox, in the burying whereof
the keeper bestowed 50. talents, which he borrowed of Ptolome, and Diodorus in
the same place reports of some^ that had employed an 100. talents that way.

3. This kind of Egyptian Idolatry the Romans also learned, after the
ouercomming of Alexandria, gloss. ordinar. Tertullian obiecteth to the Romans,
iumenta omnia coeli a vobis, vosque omnium pane pecudum and bestiarum esse
cultores, that they worshipped all kind of cattle and beasts: Valerius Maximus
has a memorable history, lib. 1. c. 8. how they brought a serpent in honor of
Aesculapius from Epidaurus, which came of it own accord into one of their
ships, and there lay folded together one part within an other, and so was
brought to Rome: which narration if it be true, it was either the devil in the
likeness of a serpent: or the devil used the serpent, as his instrument: The
reason hereof, why that Satan uses Serpents to work by and to deceive men,
Augustine renders to be this: haec permittuntur, ad primi facti memoriam
commendandam, etc. those things are permitted unto Satan to deceive and delude
men, by serpents; as in causing them to move at the enchantment of men: to
call to mind the first fact of Satan in seducing our first Parents by a
Serpent, lib. 11. de Genes. ad liter. c. 28. Pherecydes Syrus writes that the
spirits were cast down from heaven by Jupiter, the Prince whereof was called
Ophioneus, that is, serpentinus, serpentine, ex Lodov. Viv. in lib. August. de
ciuit. dei.

4. Thus were the heathen blinded, that as Ambrose in this place says, eorum
quae praua sunt, and inimica homini, similitudini, etc. that they gave the
honor of God, even unto evil things such as were enemies unto man. They might
pretend, that in worshipping Serpents, and such other deadly things enemies to
man, they adored the divine wrath and revenge of God, who uses those creatures
as his instruments, to punish men by, Mart. But this is a foolish pretense: the
like may the men of Calecut allege for worshipping of the devil, ne noceat,
that he should not hurt them: they should rather have turned themselves unto
God, as the only (...), turner aside of all such evils.

5. This gross idolatry of the heathen in worshipping the images of creeping
things, and beasts with such like, did not contain it self among the heathen
only: But the Israelites also learned to follow the Gentiles: as Ezechiel was
commanded to dig an hole thorough the wall, whereby he came into a secret
place, where he found the similitude of creeping things, and abominable beasts
painted upon the wall, and the Elders of Israel standing before them with their
censers, Ezech. 8.10.11.

6. But whereas the heathen commonly pretended this excuse, that they did not
hold such things, as they worshipped to be gods: but they in them worshipped
God: as Symmachus objected in his oration, wherein he craved of the Emperors
Valentinian and Theodosius, the restitution of the Roman gods: that the
heathen had respect but unto one only God, sed ad illum per diversa itinera
pergunt, but they have diverse ways to bring them unto that God: this frivolous
excuse is here taken away by the Apostle, who says, that the heathen changed
the glory of the corruptible God, into the similitude of those things. And
Augustine further hereunto makes this answer, quod illic facit ara, si non
illud habent pio numine, what do their altars there before their images, if
they take them not to be their gods. And whereas Symmachus pretends many
ways to lead unto one and the same God, the Scripture teaches us, that as
there is but one God, so there is but one way, which he has prescribed us
whereby to come unto him: as our blessed Savior says, Ioh. 14. I am the way,
the truth, and the life: we can not come unto God who is the fountain of life,
but by Christ, who is the way. This and other objections made by Symmachus, are
answered as large by Ambrose, epist. 30.

7. Of this kind of idolatry, was that heathenish devise of the Astronomers,
in imagining the image of beasts and souls among the stars: which was
Satan's subtlety, to bring man, vt se submitteret ijs rebus, etc. to submit
himself to those things, which he was made Lord and governor of P. Martyr.

Quest. 64. How God is said to have delivered them to their own hearts lusts,
v. 24.
1. Some do expound this only by way of permission, tradidit, nihil aliud
est, quam permisit, he delivered or gave them up, that is suffered them: so
Chrysostom, Origin, Oecumenius with others: Chrysostom uses two similitudes:
like as if a captain should withdraw himself from his soldiers, and so in
the time of battle they fall into their enemies hand: the captain might be
said to deliver them unto their enemies: likewise a king has a son that is
given to riot, whom he cannot reclayme, he leaves him to himself, that by
experience he may see his own folly: Theodoret also to the same purpose uses
this similitude, that God leaves men to themselves, tanquam cymbam absque
rectore, as aship left without a pilote: Theophylact likeneth God herein to a
Physician, who having to deal with an unruly patient, that will not obey his
precepts takes no more care of him: likewise Ambrose thus expounds, tradere
est permittere, non incitare, to deliver up is to permit, not to i^^ite, or
stir up. Damascen. lib. 4. de fide orthodox. c. 20. shows, that it is the
use of Scripture to call the permission of God, his action, that he is said to
do that, which he only permits and suffers: yea Pererius here adds
further, that the permission of God sometime nomine praecepti appellatur, is
called by the name of precept: as, whereas Christ says according to Matthew,
c. 19.8. Moses suffered you for the hardness of your heart, to put away your
wives; according to S. Mark, c. 10.3. he says, What did Moses command you?

Setus in his commentary makes two kinds of permission: est vna generalis,
there is one general, when any man is suffered to sin, but this permission
is not called a delivering up: altera est singularis quaedam and valde
formidabilis, there is an other a singular and most fearful kind of
permission, when God for the punishment of former sins, suffers one to be
blinded, and hardened in his sin: which kind of permission the Apostle
speaks of here. Of this opinion generally are the Romanists, that this
delivering up is understood of permission; as Lyranus with the ordinary gloss.
Varablus, Tolet. the Rhemists.

Contra. 1. To make God only a sufferer or permitter of things to be done,
does admit a double inconvenience: first they make God an idle beholder of men's
actions, like as Homer brings in Iuppiter feasting and spotting himself in
Aethiopia, while the Grecians did take Troy: and again, they make God
accessarie and consenting unto evil: for like as the father, or master of the
house, if he should suffer his servants to live riotously, and give themselves
to all licentiousness, though he do not encourage them to it, yet in not
hindering them, he seems to give consent: the like inconvenience also would
follow, if God should be a permitter or sufferer only of such things to be
done. Pareus.

2. But it will be here objected, that if God suffer not sin to be done in
the world, it could not be: how then is not he accessarie to that, which he
does not hinder? Answ. God is here otherwise to be considered, then as man: we
can not suffer any evil to be done before us, which is in our power to hinder,
but we must be guilty of it: But the Lord is always most just: evil should
not be done in the world, if it did not stand with Gods will and pleasure; who
notwithstanding is therein just, and good, as Augustine says, probando
patientiam dat locum. poenitentiae, nolens aliquem perire, etc. the Lord
therein shows his patience in giving way unto repentance, because he would
not have any perish, etc. and so he concludes, Deus non facit voluntates
malas, sed vtitur ijs, vt voluerit, cum aliquid inique velle non possit, though
God make not men's wills evil, yet he uses them, as it pleases him, and yet
he wills not any thing unjustly. August. contr. Julian. lib. 5. c. 3.

3. Chrysostomes similitudes are not fit: for the captain which leaves his
army, is a betraier of them, and the very cause of their delivering up: but so
is not God the author of evil: and the father can not turn his son from his
licentious life: but God is able to turn the heart. Martyr.

4. Seeing the Scripture ascribes unto God manifest action, as shall appear
afterward: as he is said to have hardened Pharaohs heart, and to bid Shemei
curse David, and such like, it is a forcing of Scripture to apply that unto a
bare permission, which shows an active and working power. Pareus.

2. An other way, how God is said to deliver them up, is by the subtraction,
and withdrawing of his grace: as he which takes away the proppe or pillar,
that bears up a great stone or weight, may be said to be the cause of the
fall thereof: Thomas. Thus Gregory expounds: God is said to harden the
heart, quando cor reprobum per gratiam non emollit, when he does not mollify
with his grace a reprobate heart: So also Augustine, Deus non indurat cor
impertiendo malitiam, sed non largiendo gratiam, etc. God does not harden the
heart, by imparting unto it malice, but in not giving unto it grace: So also
Thomas upon this place: God directly does not deliver over men to uncleanness by
inclining the affections, sed indirecte tradit in peccatum, in quantum
subtrahit gratiam, but he does indirectly deliver them to sin, by withdrawing
his grace. This interpretation may safely be admitted, but yet it seems not
fully to express the meaning of the Apostles phrase: for delivering up,
signifies more then a subtraction only, or depriving one of grace.

3. Some do expound the Apostle thus, that God is said to harden the heart,
and to deliver up unto co^c^piscence, and such like, by ministering occasion,
which is perverted by the wicked unto evil: for as unto those that love God,
all things are turned to the best, so unto those that hate God, all things make
for their ruin and destruction: thus the miracles and wonders wrought in
Egypt, and the messages which Moses brought from God unto Pharaoh, were a
means to harden Pharaohs heart, not so intended by God, but so perverted by
Pharaohs malice. Thus God is said to do those things, because by occasion of
such things as the Lord does, other things fall out: In this sense it is said,
that he which loves iniquity, hates his own soul, not that he intends
directly the death of his soul, but because he does such things, as procure
the death of his soul: So the Lord bestowed many benefits, and temporal
blessings upon the heathen, which they abused to covetousness, and wantonness, in
following of their own lusts. This interpretation follows Pet. Martyr, and
Pererius. But this seems to be no fit exposition: God delivered them up, that
is, they abusing the blessings of God unto wantonness, delivered themselves up:
for the Apostle here shows, that this delivering of them up, was inflicted as
a punishment upon the Gentiles for their idolatry: and therefore God must be
considered here as a just Judge, who had an hand in this their punishment,
otherwise, then by ministering occasion only.

4. Some do thus interpret, tradidit illos Deus. id est, delictum in Dominum,
God delivered them up, that is, their sin committed against God delivered
them: as we say, perdidit illum pecunia, his money was his destruction, whereas
it was not the money, but the abuse of the money which hurt him: so caeten.
Graec. which Stapleton follows. But Faius here well answers, that, here
money is considered (...), by way of passion, it is a thing used, as an
instrument, it has no action: but an active power is here given unto God.

5. The blasphemous Manichees were here driven to this strait, because they
would free God from being any way accessarie to evil, that they made two
gods, one good the father of Christ, and the author of the new Testament, the
other evil, the author of the old: and that God it was, which is said to have
hardened Pharaohs heart, and to bid Shemei curse David: and of this god, they
understood S. Paul to speak, 2. Cor. 4.4. In whom the god of this world has
blinded the minds: But the Manichees do here manifestly contradict the
Apostle, who says, Ephesians. 4.6. There is one God, and father of all, etc. who is
above all: there are not then more Gods then one. And in that other place, by
the god of this world, the Apostle means Satan, who is the prince of the
darkness of this world, who is so called, because he is so held to be of the
infidels. Some think that God may as well be said to blind the minds of
infidels, as here to deliver them up to their own concupiscence: as P. Mart.
following Augustine: But the Scripture uses not so to speak of God: the God
of this world, is all one, as to say, the prince of the world, which name
Christ gives unto Satan, Ioh. 14.30.

6. Wherefore, there is more to be considered in these actions, of hardening
the heart, and delivering up unto a reprobate sense, then bare permission
only, and subtraction of grace: these we refuse not: so that permission be
here understood, as joined with Gods will: for otherwise to think that God
permits any thing, which he can not hinder, were great blasphemy, Faius:
yet God has a further stroke in these actions, then by permission only, and
withholding of his grace. 1. Augustine doubts not to affirm, that not only
the good wills and minds of men, which God makes good of evil, are in Gods
hand, but also the evil minds and wills of men, are so in Gods power, vt eos
quo voluerit, quando voluerit, factat inclinari, that the same God causes to
be inclined, which way he will, and when he will: and he gives instance in
diverse places of Scripture; as how God is said to have hardened Pharaohs
heart, that he bid Shemei curse David, non iubendo dixit, sed eius voluntatem
proprio suo vitio malam in hoc peccatam iusto suo indicio inclinavit, not that
he in deed badde him, but by his just judgment he inclined his will, being
evil of it self, into this sin: so it is said, 2. Chron. 25.20. But
Amaziah would not hear for it was of God, that he might deliver them into his
hand, etc, likewise Ezekiel. 14.9. if the Prophet be deceived, when he has spoken
a thing, the Lord has deceived that Prophet: upon these and other such places,
Augustine thus infers: that it is manifest, operari Deum in cordibus
hominum, ad inclinandus sorum voluntates, quacunque voluerit, etc. that God
works in the hearts of men to incline their wills, which way he will, either
unto good for his mercy sake, or unto evil, according to their desert:
indicio suo aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto, semper nutem iusto, by his
judgment sometime open, sometime hid, but always just: thus August. lib. 5.
contr. Julian. c. 3. All these places alleged show, that God in such actions,
is to be considered as an agent, and yet is free from the imputation of any
evil.

2. Which that it may more fully appear, these considerations following are
here necessary. 1. we must distinguish, between the motion of the mind, and
(...), and the disorder or euilnes of the motion, Pareus: and there are two
things in sin, actio, and defectus, the action it self, and the defect or
fault: the action is of God, but not the other, Mart. so Hugo Cardinal. Deus
non incitat ad malas notiones, in quantum sunt mala, etc. God does not stir
up unto evil actions, as they are evil, but as they are actions. 2. Beside,
sins are considered three ways: first as they are transgressions of the law
of God: then as they are causes of other sins: in neither of these respects
does sin any way stand with the will and pleasure of God: thirdly, as they
are poena praecedentium scelerum, punishments of sins before-going: and so
they are of God: so then, as there is (...), a disordered motion in sin, God
no way is accessarie unto them: but the (...), the infliction of them as a
punishment, proceeds from the just judgment of God, Pareus. 3. As God is to
be considered, as a just Judge in punishing sin by sin, so likewise as a
wise foreseer, and provident worker and contriuer of all things, to effect his
good pleasure: so then we affirm, Deum iusto suo iudicio ordinare, etc. God
does so ordain in his just judgment, that men be delivered up to their own
concupiscence: as the Judge delivers male factours over to the tormentor, or
hangman, Calvin. carnifex agit vi, and authoritate iudicis, etc. the tormentor
works by the authority of the Judge: yet carnisicis opus, cum imperio
iudicis non confundo, I confound not the work of the hangman with the
commandment of the Judge, says Beza: So it is true, as Faius here says, Deus
arcano suo iudicio effecit, etc. God so wrought by his secret judgment, that
they which were already estranged from him, magis averterentur, should yet be
estranged more.

But it will be thus objected against this resolution. 1. Iulianus the Pelagian
thus cavilled, If this concupiscence, unto the which the Gentiles were
delivered up, were a punishment of sin, then it is good and commendable. Ans.
It follows not, for by the same reason the devil should deserve
commendation, because he is the executer of Gods revenge, and punishment. 2. He
obiecteth, that they were left by the patience of God, not per po^^tiam
compulsi, not compelled by his power. Ans. 1. God shows herein both his
patience and his power, as the Apostle shows, Romans 9.22. What if God would,
to show his wrath, and make his power known, suffer with long patience, the
vessels of his wrath prepared to destruction, etc. 2. yet although God herein
show his power and secret judgment, in punishing them with their own
concupiscence, yet he forces not their wills, but being evil of themselves,
he gives them over further to all impiety. 3. Object. The Apostle says, Ephesians.
4.19. Which being past feeling, have given themselves unto wantonness, etc.
they then give themselves over, God gives them not up. Ans. It follows not:
for both God does deliver them up, as a just Judge, and Satan as a minister of
Gods vengeance: and they themselves, as willingly precipitating themselves into
all uncleanness: So God delivered up his Son unto death, and the Jews also:
in one and the same action, God is just, and man guilty: quia in vna re quam
fecerunt, causa non est vna ob quam fecerunt, because in one end the same
thing which they did, there was not one cause, for the which they did it.
August. See more of this question, Hexapl. in Exodus c. 11. qu. 15. to qu. 28.
where it is discussed at large.

65. Quest. How the Gentiles are said to defile their bodies in themselves, v.
24.
1. Chrysostom thus interprets, propria corpora inter seipsus debonestar^
solitos, that they were accustomed to defile their bodies between themselves:
so also Erasmus, Vatablus, and Beza: Theophylact reads, a seipsis, of
themselves: but in the original it is (...), in themselves: as the vulgar
Latin translateth: so also Calv. Pareus. 2. Some retaining this reading, by in
themselves, understand that kind of pollution and uncleanness, which men commit
with themselves, and not with any other person, Ansel. Garr: or there are three
kinds of sins of uncleanness against nature: either the same party with
himself works uncleanness: or with an other person, of the same sex, but of
the same kind, as man with man, or with an other kind, as man with beast: the
first of these is signified here, Lyranus. 3. Some think that the Apostle
speaks of such uncleanness, which was committed by themselves one with an
other, Osiand. but that is spoken afterward. 4. Tolet takes this to be
understood, not of sins against nature, but of adultery, fornication, and
such like: that first they fell into peccata simplicia, into simple sins,
then as they exceeded in idolatry, so they fell into more gross sins. 5.
But this is better understood generally of all kind of pollution, and
uncleanness, natural, or unnatural, which was committed in themselves, that
is, against their own bodies: for other sins are committed without the
body, but the sin of uncleanness defiles the body, and such do sin
against their own bodies: as the Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 6.28. And so
Augustine distinguishes between flagitium, and facinus: the first is that
which one commits against himself in defiling his own body, and soul:
the other is in hurting of an other, Pareus. 6. And this was the just
recompense of retalion, that as they had dishonored God, so they should
dishonor themselves: and like as they had turned God into the similitude of
beasts, and beasts into gods; so they themselves should be given over to
beastly affections. Faius.

66. Quest. How they worshipped the creature, rather then the Creator.
1. So reads the vulgar Latin, and the Syrian translator: but upon this
reading it would follow, that they worshipped the Creator, but not so much as
the creature: and the same inconvenience follows to read, above the Creator,
Chrysostom. Vatabl. but the word in the original is (...), which signifies,
beside the Creator: as Cyprian well gives the sense, relicto Creatore, the
Creator being forsaken, lib. 3. contr. Iudaeos, c. 10. and Hilarie, praeter^^
Creatore, the Crea^or being omitted: so also Beza. 2. Tolet here notes, that
they committed two things in their idolatrous worship, vnum ad intellectum,
alterum ad voluntatem spectat, one concerns the understanding, in the error
of their mind: they changed the truth of God, the true worship of God into a
lie, that is, a lying image: the other was in their will and affection, in
worshipping the creature. But Gryneus adds a third degree, which was in their
action: for he distinguishes these two, they worshipped, and served, the first
he applies unto the inward veneration and worship, the other to their outward
service. 3. By the creature, is not only here understood such things as were,
and had an existence in the nature of things, as the Sun, the Moon, the
stars, but they did also worship (...), such things as had no being: which
were of three sorts, either such as never were in the world, but were imagined
gods and goddesses, as Venus, Pallas, Herculius, Febris, and such like: or such
as were sometime in the world, but were now dead, and not in the world, as
Hercules, Romulus; so Faius: and they worshipped some things of d^uers shapes,
which never were, nor could be in the world: as Iuppiter of Lybia had a rams
head, and Anubis of Egypt a dogs head: the Faunes and Satyrs had goats
feet, the Na^ades and Trit^^^, had a mixed shape of men, and fishes: Aretius:
by the creature then is understood, whatsoever beside the Creator, which they
worshipped.

4. Whereas the Apostle adds, which is blessed for ever: Chrysostom well
notes, null^ ille ex hac impietate da^^no afficitur, etc. that God,
notwithstanding this contumely offered him by idolaters sustanied no loss
thereby, he still remained blessed for ever: and that it is said for ever, a
difference is showed between the honor of God, which remains invio^able for
ever, and the honor of idols, which remains but for a time, Gorrh.

67. Quest. Of the unnatural sins of the heathen.
26. For this cause God gave them up, etc. 1. Aretius takes this to be but an
(...) further explanation of that which the Apostle had spoken of before: but
it is rather an (...) an exaggeration rather, and amplifications for it is more
to be given over, (...) unto passions, then (...), unto the lusts of the heart:
for they differ in three things, 1. the passion here signifies a (...) defeat
of the mind, which could not be removed, whereas the lust of the heart was
not yet perfected, Faius. 2. by the lust is signified their unclean desires,
but here the Apostle also speaks of their unclean acts, Pareus: 3. and
before the Apostle touched such uncleanness, as defiled the body: but now they
are given over unto such vile affections as also defile the mind, deprauing it
of the use of reason, Tolet.

2. How the women did change the natural use, may seem strange: Theophylact
thinks it was obscaenum aliquid, quod nec dici fas est, some obscene thing,
that is not to be uttered. Lyranus, so also Tolet, and before them Ambrose and
Anselmo, understand it de commistione foeminarum inter se, of the commixtion of
women among themselves, as the men were defiled between themselves. But rather
here the natural use is to be referred unto the organe and instrument of
generation: when the women did prostitute themselves, the ^en exercising
praeposterum and sterilem venerem, preposterous and sterilous venerie, Osiand.
Sodomiticos concubitus, or they companied with men, as Sodomites, Pareus: and
as Augustine says, when the males abused ex part corporis, quae non ad
generandum instituta est, that part of the body in the female, which was not
appointed for generation: so the Syrian translator, re quae non est ex natura
vsae sunt, they used the thing both which was not of nature, etc.

3. So likewise the men with men wrought filthiness: actiuely, in forcing upon
other unnatural acts of uncleanness: and passiuely, in suffering others to do
it: this was the sin of Sodom, for the which they were destroyed. Socrates
is noted among the Philosophers for masculine venerie, which Plato condemns.
And the Apostle may seem to have special relation here unto the abominable
uncleanness of the Romans, and specially (...), who was a monstrous beast for
such sins against nature, Pareus. Chrysostom (...) elegantly shows, how
whereas by Gods ordinance, in lawful copulation by marriage, two became one
flesh, both sexes were ioned together in one: by this Sodomiticall vn^^^nnes,
the same flesh is divided into two, the men with men working uncleanness with
women, and so serve in stead of two sexes.

68. Quest. How one sin is punished by an other, upon these words, And
received in themselves such recompense of their error, etc. v. 27.
1. There are some sins, which are as punishments of former sins, which are
non tormenta peccantium, sed incrementa vitiorum, not so much the torment of
sinners, as the increasing of sin, as Augustine says. And here we may make a
fourfold distinction of sins: 1. some are not only sins, but the causes
also of sins following: lib. 25. Moral. cap. 17.
as Gregory gives instance, of one given unto riot and excess in eating and
drinking, which causes him through the lustines of his flesh to commit
adultery: here his Epicures life is both a sin, and the cause of an other
sin, namely adultery. 2. Some sins are both the cause of an other sin
following, and the punishment of a former: as if the adulterer proceed further
to commit murder: here adultery is the punishment of his gluttony, and the
cause of murder. 3. And there is a sin, which is the punishment of a former
sin, though it bring forth no new sin: as murder here is the punishment of
adultery. 4. Some sins are neither the causes, nor punishment of other
sins, but simply sins in themselves: as namely when any one repents of
his sin, and proceeds no further.

2. But here it will be objected, that every sin is voluntary, but the
punishment of sin is involuntarie: how then can sin be a punishment: and
every punishment of sin is just, and so of God, but sin is unjust, and not
of God, therefore not a punishment? To this objection diverse answers are made:

1. The master of the sentences, lib. 2. distinct. 36. gives this solution,
that sin is said to be a punishment, not as it is a fault committed by the
will: but in respect of the effect which it works in the soul, which is the
corrupting of the mind, and making it guilty of damnation. But in this sense,
every sin should be a punishment of sin: because the mind is thus
corrupted, and made guilty even by the first sins, which one commits.

2. Therefore Thomas Aquinas adds further, that sin in respect of the
nature thereof, because it is voluntary, is not a punishment, but in respect
of the cause, which is the subtraction or remoouing of the grace of God,
whereby he falls into further sin. And further he explaneth the matter
thus: that sin is a punishment 3. ways, either in respect of somewhat going
before, as the absence, or subtracting of the grace of God, or somewhat which
accompanies sin, either in the mind, as the corrupting and polluting of it:
or without, as crosses and troubles, which are sent for sin: or else in
respect of somewhat ensuing and following, as the torment of conscience. But
all these, the subtracting of grace, outward trouble, and remorse of
conscience, may concur in the first sins, which are not the punishment of
any precedent sins: therefore a further reason hereof is to be found out.

3. Wherefore, God in punishing one sin by an other, is to be considered as a
just Judge, that not only by subtracting his grace, as Pererius: not by giving
Satan power over sinners, to draw them further into sin, as Hyperius: but by
the secret working of his justice, in ordering and directing all things
according to his will, he so disposes and effects, that the wicked are given
over to greater impiety and iniquity, to commit sin with greedines: so then
this (...), recompense, has neither reference unto the sinners themselves; who
regard herein nothing but their own inordinate pleasure, not yet unto Satan's
work, who intends nothing but the contumely of God, and the destruction of
the ungodly: but it is referred unto God, who in punishing sin by sin,
only respects the due course of his justice, in thus recompencing their
former error. God then is no way accessarie to their sins, but concurreth as
a just Judge in punishing their former sins with greater following: Pareus.
Faius here notes well a difference between the word (...), which the Apostle
here uses, which signifies a just and full recompense, answering and
correspondent unto the merit of their sin: which word is only used of evil
works: but (...), a reward, is given unto good works, as be conferred of grace,
not answering unto any merit before going.

3. As thus it has been showed how sin is the punishment of sin, so also
one sin may be the cause of an other: and that either directly, or
indirectly: directly, when as a man by one sin is inclined to commit an
other: and that three ways, 1. in respect of the end, as when one through
covetousness commits murder, to enjoy an others wealth: 2. or by suggesting
the matter of an other sin, as gluttony brings forth adultery: 3. or in
respect of the efficient and moving cause, as when one by practice and
continuance in sin is grown into an habit of sinning, which still stirs
him up to heap sin to sin: Indirectly one sin causes an other, by
remoouing that which should keep one from sin, as namely when the sin
first committed, excludes the grace of God, whereby one should be preserved
from sin. Thom. prim. secund. qu. 80. art. 2.

69. Quest. How the Gentiles are said, not to regard to know God, v. 28.
1. Origin thinks, that the Apostle sets down here three kinds of
impieties against God: first, of them which worshipped idols, to v. 23. which
was the general sin of the Gentiles: secondly, of those which worshipped the
creature rather then the creator, v. 25. such were the Philosophers and
Astronomers, which were skillful in the observation of natural things:
thirdly, he thinks heretics here to be noted, that regard not to know God.
But the Apostle seems still to continue in the same argument, setting forth
the sins of the Gentiles: that as before he showed, how they polluted and
defiled themselves: so now he describes other sins as fruits of their
idolatry, namely such as are committed against others.

2. These words, they regarded not to know God: 1. some thus interpret, that
they thought God to have no knowledge, or no great care of such things, as they
committed, gloss. ordin. Gorrham. and so before them Ambrose: but the words
must be much forced and strained to make this sense, as though the Apostle
should say, they regarded not, that God knew. 2. Some think the Apostles
meaning is, that they had not Gods fear before their eyes, that knowing him,
they much regarded not, what was pleasing or displeasing unto him. Haymo. But
the Gentiles had not the true knowledge of God, for they neglected the means,
which should have brought them to know him. 3. Some give this sense,
neglexerunt, etc. they neglected, Tolet. non curarunt, they had no care to know
God, Vatab. they did not seek to know God according to that natural light and
direction, which they had. 4. But there is more signified here, then a
negligence: rather spreverunt, they despised to know and acknowledge God:
Faius: they scorned and derided the true knowledge of God, and preferred their
own vain inventions: And so Chrysostom notes, that the Apostle says not,
as they knew not God, but regarded not to know God: so that it was corrupts
iudicij, of a corrupt judgment, not a sin of ignorance, that they refused
the knowledge of God. The Apostle then shows, voluntariam caecitatem, their
wilful blindness, Pareus: it seemed not good unto them, as Beza: or they judged
it not good, as the Syrian translator, to know God: it was a voluntary
election in them to prefer their superstitions before the knowledge of God.
And Erasmus, whom P. Martyr therein approoueth, notes here a difference
between (...), knowledge, and (...), acknowledgement: the latter word is here
used: though they had some knowledge of God, yet they did not acknowledge him
to be God, as in glorifying him, and giving thanks unto him, as the Apostle
said before, v. 21.

Quest. 70. What it is to be delivered up to a reprobate mind.
1. Some understand this word (...), reprobate, passiuely, that is, quod
omnibus displicet, which displeases and is reproved of all: Eras. mentem
improbandam, a mind to be reproved or disalowed, Sa. but this expresses not
the whole meaning: their reprobate mind, was not so called so much in respect
of others, as of themselves.

2. Some take it passiuely in respect of God: that they were as reprobates,
that is, rejected and reprobate of God: But all the Gentiles, which followed
these sins were not reprobates, Beza. many of them afterward were washed from
their sins, and sanctified in the name of Christ, 1. Cor. 6.11.

3. Therefore this word ( reprobate) is rather here taken actiuely: for a mind
void of all judgment, Beza. which takes good for evil, and evil for good,
Esa. 5.10. Bucer. which prauitie of mind comes not by one or two evil acts,
but by a continual custom to evil, per acquisitum habitum, when it is grown
into an habit: like as the rast that is corrupted takes sweet things for
bitter, Lyran. So the Gentiles were not delivered over to this reprobate mind,
all at once, but by diverse degrees: first they were given up to their hearts
lusts, v. 24. then to vile affections, v. 26. last of all to a reprobate
sense, to such an evil habit, that they could do nothing but evil, Faius.

4. This prauitie of the mind is here described, 1. by the subject, in the
very mind, not in the sense, as the Latin translator: the word is (...),
which signifies the very judgment and understanding, both theoreticall, and
practical, they err both in their judgment and conscience: as the Apostle
says, Tit. 1.15. their minds and consciences are defiled. 2. the material
part wherein this reprobate disposition of the mind consists, is more
distinctly showed, Ephe. 4.18. where the Apostle imputes to the Gentiles,
vanity of mind, their judgment and understanding was corrupt, then their
cogitations were darkness, their reason and thoughts were obscured, and their
hearts were hardened: that is, their wills and affections. 3. the causes are
expressed: the meritorius cause, is their rejecting of God: they regarded not
to know God: they rejected God, and he rejects them: where there is a fit
allusion in the words: for it is said of them, (...), they approved not to
know God, so they are delivered up (...), into a reprobate mind, Pareus. The
efficient cause, not of their reprobate mind, but of giving them up to a
reprobate mind, is God, who as a just judge does deliver them to this
punishment, Gryneus. 4. Then follow the effects of their reprobate mind, to
do things not convenient, that which was forbidden both by divine and humane
laws, Haymo.

5. But here it is to be considered, that God is not said to be author or
worker of their reprobate mind: but of the delivering of them up to a
reprobate mind, Faius. not that their mind began now to be wicked and
evil, which was not so before: but God finding their mind evil and lewd,
does deliver them over, that is to themselves, first, in withholding his grace,
then unto Satan, to work his will in them, Gryneus: and not only to, but God
by his just judgment does secretly so work and dispose, even in the hearts of
the wicked, that all things do tend still to their further hardening, Aretius.

6. This reprobate mind or corrupt and depraved judgment is of two sorts,
either in general, when things that are evil, and unlawful, are judged to be
good and commendable: and in particular, when as the affection is misled in
some particular act to do that, which generally the judgment condemns, as
to steal, to commit adultery: the Gentiles failed in both these, for some of
them judged many things to be lawful, which were evil, as to commit
fornication, to steal: But most of them failed in particular, committing those
things, which in their general judgment they allowed not, Tolet.

Quest. 71. General observations out of the Catalogue of the sins of the
heathen, reckoned up by the Apostle, ver. 29.30.
1. As before the Apostle touched those sins of unrighteousness, which the
Gentiles committed against themselves, in their mutual defiling, so now he
rehearses such sins as were perpetrated against others, Rareus. 2. And in
that he says, full of all unrighteousness, this happened unto them, propter
aversionem a Deo, because they had now forsaken and turned aside from God:
therefore they fell into all evil, Lyran. for as the fear of God is the
fountain of all righteousness, so incredulity, and want of the faith and
fear of God, is the beginning of all iniquity. 3. Origin seems to make this
the cause, why they were given over to a reprobate mind, because they were
full of all unrighteousness, and the Latin interpreter, refers it to the
word, delivered up: that they being full of all unrighteousness were
delivered up: but then nothing should have remained afterward, to show their
reprobate mind in, if they had been full of all iniquity before: this then is
rather a proof of their reprobate mind, by such fruits and effects, as
followed, Tolet. Eras. Beza. 4. Thus the Apostle sets down their faults in
particular, vt apertius accuset, that he might accuse them more plainly,
gloss. ordinar. 5. But this further is to be observed, that the Apostle in this
catologue of their sins, sub alijs personis omnem sermonem producit, does
frame his speech as under other persons, not directly accusing the Romans, but
showing what they were, under the general view of the sins of the heathen.
6. Now the Apostle says, they were full of all unrighteousness, showing a
difference between the Gentiles, that were given over unto all iniquity, and
such as believed, who may sometime fail in these sins, but are not full
fraught with them, Mart. 7. And though all among the Gentiles were not alike
guilty of these sins, yet an imputation is laid upon all the Gentiles for
these reasons. 1. because the number was small of those which carried
themselves more civilly, and therefore they were not to be counted in so great
a multitude. 2. though some bridled their corrupt nature, yet they were
naturally given to these sins, as well as others: as Socrates being noted by
a certain Physiognomer, that took upon him to conjecture by his countenance
of his disposition, that he was given to incontinencie, answered, that by
nature he was so, but that he had corrected the euilnesse of his nature by
Philosophy, Gualter. 3. the Apostle does not only rippe up the sins of the
Gentiles in fact, but such as were committed in the mind, as malice, envy,
that they which were not detected of outward and gross sins, yet might find
themselves guilty of the other, Hyperius. 4. And though all these sins are
not found in every one, yet alicuius ex illis conscij omnes, all men are
guilty of some one of them, Calvin.

Quest. 72. Of the order observed by the Apostle in this particular enumeration
of the sins of the Gentiles.
1. Hugo Cardinal. thus scanneth the number: that whereas here are rehearsed
21. sins in all of the heathen, he would thus distinguish them, that there
are seven capital sins, and each of them is three ways committed, cord,
ore, opere, in the heart, mouth, and work: and so the number of 7. being
multiplied by three, we shall have the just summo of one and twenty in all:
But having propounded this division, he there leaves it, not being able to
assign every one of these particular sins to one of these kinds.

2. Gorrham does thus more distinctly distribute these several kinds: first
the Apostle sets these sins down in general, full of all
unrighteousness: then in particular, first the sins of transgression, then
of omission, from these words disobedient to parents, to the end.

The sins of transgression, are 1. in fact. 2. in word, whisperers. 3. then
both in word and deed, doers of wrong, etc. v. 30.

The sins of transgression in fact are seen, 1. in inferring some temporal
damage, either in the affection, as malice, or evilnesse: or in the effect,
either concerning carnal pleasure, as fornication, or worldly profit,
covetousness, or some other notable wrong, which is called wickedness. 2. or
in personal damage, which is done to ones person, which begins in the
heart, that is envy, and is finished in murder. 3. then follows spiritual
damage or hurt, which consists in deceit, which is threefold, in open debate,
in secret craft, and in the sinister opinion of the mind, in taking all in the
worst part.

2. In word men transgress either against men, in private whispering, or open
backebiting: or against God, in hating him, or speaking evil of him.

3. Then follow the transgressions, partly in word, partly in deed. 1. in
detracting and dishonouring of others, doers of wrong, or contumelious. 2. in
preferring themselves before others, proud. 3. in despising of others,
boasters. 4. in corrupting of others, inventors of evil things.

Next are the sins of omission. 1. in respect of superiors both in rebellion
to parents; they are disobedient: then they are unwise, in refusing their
parents instruction: and so became incomposite, disorderly without any
government. 2. or in respect of all: where there are three sins: first they
are without natural affection: secondly, sine faedere societatis, without
fidelity, or society: they can never be appeased: thirdly, sine miserecordia
comp^ssionis, without compassion, they are merciles.

3. But I rather think with Calvin, that it is too curious, to observe such
order in the enumeration of the Gentiles sins, which the Apostle intended
not, but only to accumulate together, the manifold corruptions, that reigned
among the heathen: setting down every sin, not in any certain method, but
as it came unto his mind: yet if these particular sins be sorted out to
their several kinds, we shall find, that these transgressions are against all
the precepts of the second table, Pareus.

Quest. 73. Of the particular sins of the Gentiles here (...) rehearsed by
the Apostle.
1. First is set down the general to all the particulars following (...),
unrighteousness, which is (...), the transgression of the Law, 1. Ioh. 3.4.
some interpret it, full omni peccati, of all sin, Gorrham. but that is too
general, it signifies rather all such injustice, quod coniungitur cum iuiuria
proximi, which is joined with the wrong of our neighbor, Calvin: some thus
distinguish between iniquity and sin, the first is referred to the euilnes
of the mind, the other to the outward execution in the body.

2. The first special sin is (...), fornication: the vulgar Latin places
next, (...), malitia, malitiousnesse, and so Beza following his ancient Greek
copy: and he thinks it to be another general word comprehending all the
particulars following: But the most Greek copies, and the Syrian translation,
make it the fourth particular sin, next to covetousness, to Vatab. Mart.
Gryneus, Geneuens. Gualter, with others: the Greek word (...), is derived of
(...), perneo, to sell, because such do make sale of their bodies and
prostitute them for gain, Gryneus: the Latin word fornicatio, fornication, is
derived a fornicibus, of the vaulted houses where such strumpets used to
prostitute themselves, Haymo. By fornication is understood, omnis vsus praeter
legitimum connubium, any carnal use beside lawful marriage, gloss. interlin.
all uncleanness and impuritie of the body, Calvin. And for two reasons, is
this one kind named rather then adultery: 1. quia ex leuiori granius
evincitur, etc. because by the less sin the greater is convinced, Ambrose:
if fornication be a sin, adultery is much more, Martyr. 2. And because
fornication was held to be no offense among the Gentiles, therefore the Apostle
especially names it: for even Solon, which was counted one of the wisest men
among the Grecians, did use to buy harlots for the young men: and among the
Carthaginians it was a common use, for the virgins before their marriage, to
prostitute themselves publicly in the Temple of Venus, that they might bring a
dowry with them by that filthy lucre, home to their husbands, Gualter.

3. (...), wickedness, studium improbo agendi, a study or desire to do
mischief, Pareus: the Syrian translatour reads amaritudinem, bitterness: some
versutiam, craft or subtlety, Vatab. which is interpreted to be a settled
purpose or endeavor to do hurt, Gennad, ex Oecumenio. Beza his conjecture is,
that this word (...), came into the text, because of the near affinity that
it has with (...), for his ancient copy has it not: But I prefer herein
Piscators conjecture, that thinks the Apostle of purpose put these words
together, that had some allusion the one to the other: as (...).

4. (...), covetousness, which is the desire of having much, though it be with
wrong unto others: and so is the word derived of (...), having much, Mart. some
refer it not only to the desire of wealth, but of carnal pleasure, Haymo.
but this was touched before under the word fornication: the Romans know by
woeful experience what a mischief covetousness brought with it, for this was
the cause of the wars between Caesar and Pompey, and between Augustus,
Lepidus, and Antonie: Gualter. it comprehends, omnes, furti and imposturae
species, all the kinds of theft and other impostures, Bucer. which are
transgressions against the 8. precept.

5. (...) nequitia, malitiousnesse, it sometime is taken generally, as it is
opposed unto virtue: but here it rather signifies, inclinationem ad deteriora,
a general inclination unto (...) Tolet. some take it for the sin of
spiritual sloth, when one is weary of well doing, Mart. But I prefer the
former sense, that thereby is signified a general inclination to evil: and
especially ad luxum and libidinem, to excess, riot, and wantonness, Erasm. as
they which are given to drunkenness, are used to blasphemy, railing, fithie
communication, and such like, Gualter.

6. Full of (...), envy: the Apostle changes here his form of speech, both
because of the elegance of the Greek tongue, and for that these sins
following are special transgressions against our neighbor: envy has a
double passion: for an envious man would not have an other to be that which he
is, seeing another in better case then himself, it grieueth him that he is not
so to: this difference there is between envy and zeal, that is taken always
in the worst part, so is not the other, for there may be both a good, and bad
zeal, Haymo: and commonly men do envy those whom they cannot otherwise hurt,
for if they could, they would soon take them out of the way, Bucer.

7. (...), murder is the next, which is set next after envy, as the mother
thereof: for Caine first hated and envied Abel before he killed him, Mart. the
Latin interpretet reads in the plural, murders, because there are two
kinds of murder, one in will and purpose, the other in act: but in the
original the word is put in the singular, yet thereby al kinds of murder are
understood: which is committed diverse ways. 1. in heart, every one, that
hates his brother is a manslayer, 1. Ioh. 3. 2. in giving counsel or using
persuasion, so the Jews are said to have killed Christ, James. 5.6. 3. by
writing, as David killed Vriah. 4. by striking with the hand, as Ioab killed
Abner. 5. by taking away necessary things, such as the life should be
maintained with: as he which withholdeth the poor man's covering wherein he
should sleep: Exodus 22.27. 6. by not showing mercy in releeuing, as the rich
glutton refused to give the crummes to poor Lazarus. 7. in not rescuing and
delivering such as are unjustly oppressed: as the wise man says, deliver them
that are drawn to death, Proverb. 24.11. Gorrham. yet all kind of killing is
not here understood, unless it proceed of a corrupt affection, either of
revenge, or a desire of gain: that putting to death which proceeds of the
execution of justice, is no sin, Bucer.

8. (...), contention, which is set next after murder, because it follows
upon murder, Mart. contention, Basil describes thus, which for vain glory
sake, facit vt alij similiter faciant, procures others to do the like, re.
bre. 66. Haymo thus, vbi non ratione aliquid, etc. when any thing is not
defended and maintained with reason, but with a pertinacie of mind: gloss.
ordinar. thus, est impugantio veritatis, it is an impugning of the truth by
clamorous contention: against the which the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 11.12. if
any man lust to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Church of God.

9. (...), deceit: some take it for that special kind of deceit, which men use
in undermining another life, that whom they cannot overcome by strength, they
supplant by treachery, as Ioab did Abner, Mart. Basil defines it exquisita
diligentia ad insidiandum, a most exquisite diligence to lie in wait: But here
it is taken generally for all kind of dissimulation and deceit: Calv. cum aliud
simulatur, aliud agitur, when one thing is dissembled, another thing done,
gloss. interlin. Haymo makes this difference, between dolus, insidiae, frans,
deceit, which is in the mind, lying in wait, which is in act, and craft, which
is in the deceiving of mutual faith.

10. (...), churlishness, morositie: Basil defines it to be latens in moribus
vitium, a sin lurking in men's manners: Theophylact takes it to be a kind of
dissimulation: some take it for unthankfulness, gloss. Hugo. but it rather
signifies morositie, churlish behavior: which Aristotle takes to be a vice
in construing all in the worse part, so Beza, Gry^, Gualt. Plutarke did tax
Herodotus for this, writing a book of the morositie of Herodotus: these five
last rehearsed are offenses against the sixth precept, for they practice against
the life and health of our neighbor, either secretly, as by envy, fraud, or
openly, in murder, contention, or both ways, as in malignitie, or morositie,
Fareus.

11. The next is (...), a whisperer, such an one as secretly practices by
carrying of tales to dissolve friendship, and sow enmity, and thinks by such
means to insinuate himself: such the wiseman speaks of, c. 6.20. without
wood the fire is quenched, and without a talebarer strife cease: whisperers
are enter amicos discordias seminantes, such as sow dissension among friends,
gloss. interlin.

12. (...), a backebiter: he differs from a whisperer, 1. in that he speaks
evil openly of an other, the whisperer does it privily, Theophyl. 2. nullius
fa^ae parcunt, they spare no man's fame, but the other specially intends, to
set strife between friends, Calv. 3. they differ in the end, the detractor or
backebiter intends to separate friendship, the oher to hinder ones fame.

13. (...), is a hater of God, which some take both actiuely and passiuely, as
Theophylact: for such, as both do hate God, and are haters of God: some take
it passiuely, for such as are hated of God, as the Latin interpreter, and in
this sense they think there is a relation to the former sins, of whispering
and backebiting, that even for such sins they may incur damnation, and be
hated of God: But Oecumenius says well, that it is not the Apostles purpose,
to show who were hated of God, but to set down the sins of the Gentiles:
whereof this was one, that there were among them enemies to all religion,
plain atheists, that had no list, to think, hear, or speak of God, Mart.

14. (...), one that is contumelious or injurious: Lyranus takes it for one
that is contumelious in words: so also Occumenius interprets them to be
convitiatores, raylers: but it is rather an injury offered both in word and
deed: and that in a petulant and insolent manner: sedet in front, cord, and
manu, this sin of contumely it has the seat both in the heart,
countenance, and in the hand, Pareus: it is that sin, quae homines
paruifacit, which makes no account of any: such were they which both reboked
the Apostles and scourged them, Act. 4. Haymo: and such were the people of the
old world, full of cruelty, Genesis 6.11. Eucer.

15. (...), he is the proud man, that prefers himself before another in
honor, riches, and such like, as Chrysostom says, that superbia in animo est
idem, quod in corpore tumor, pride in the mind, is the same, that a swelling
is in the body, Gryneus.

16. (...), a boaster, a vain glorious man, that boasts of that which he
has not: Theophylact thinks that the first is pride against God, the other
against men: But the true difference is, that the proud man boasts of such
things as he has, the boaster, of that which he has not, Oecume, such was
that vain glorious Thraso in Terence, Pareus: this difference there is
between (...). and (...), the first oftentat quod non est, boasts of that
which he has not, the other dissimulat quod est, dissembleth, and hides that
which is, and indeed he has, Erasm.

17. (...), an inventor of evil things: such as were not content with the old
known sins, but still invented new: which shows, that they sinned not of
ignorance but of malice, Chrysostom. Thophylact. these were of two sorts, for
either nothing could be so well said, or done, but they would find some fault
with it, or else they would find out some new devises themselves, tending
either to mischief, or filthy pleasure, or such like. As Tiberius the Emperor
did promise great rewards to such as could find out new Venereans and carnal
pleasures, Gual. such also were Phaleris, and Sardanapalus, that made great
promises to such as invented strange torments, or new pleasures, Bacer. in this
number may be reckoned such as found out new impostures, in usury, traffic,
and in law suites, Marlorat. And Basil thus in general describes them, qui
praeter vsitata mala, alia excogitant, etc. which beside the usual evils, do
devise others, reg. brev. resp. 78.

18. Disobedient (...), to parents: for they which obey not God their heavenly
father, it is no marvel if they are disobedient to their earthly Parents,
Haymo. Aristolte shows that children receive three benefits by their parents,
causam essendi generando, causam vivendi educando, and causam discendi
informando, they are the cause of their being by generation, the cause of
their living by education, the cause of their learning by instruction, Gryneus:
this is understood not only of natural, but of spiritual parents also, and
of others in authortie, gloss. interlin. men are bound unto their natural
parents, because they have from them their esse and nutrimentum, their being
and nourishment, unto their spiritual, because they have of them their regimen
and documenta, government and instruction, Lyran. and here by the less sin
of disobedience, are understood all other wrongs offered to parents, as in
striking, and killing of them: which sins were common among the heathen, as
may appear by so many laws of the Gentiles made against parricide: Gualter.
And even in these days this sin of disobedience to parents, is too common:
for children grow stubborn, and will not be ruled by their parents, yea and
they will presume to marry without their parents consent, Osiander.

19. Without understanding, (...): Lyran. Gorrham do refer this unto the
next sin before going: that herein they are unwise, because they do not give
ear unto their parents: but it is more general: they are such as are not
guided by reason, but are void of all judgment in their actions, being
carried away with their preposterous and precipitate affections: such were
Pharaoh, Saul, with others, that ran headlong into their own destruction:
such were Catiline among the Romans, and of late one Thomas Monerarius, that
took arms with a purpose to destroy all Princes, and that vile person of
Munster, that made himself king of the Temple of God, Marlorat. And generally
by the unwise, we understand such as are void of all judgment, both in divine
and humane things, Par.

20. Covenant breakers, (...), some read incompositos, Lat. Lyran. Gorrh.
Tolet. understanding such as are uncivil, and rude in their manners and
behavior: Haymo calls them lascivious and inordinate persons: But
Theophylact, so Erasmus also and Beza take them better for such as would not
stand unto their covenants and leagues: such an one was Lysander among the
Lacedaemonians, whose saying was, that children should be deceived with check
stones, and men with oaths, Gualter. The Olynthians were noted for breaking
their truce and league with Philip king of Macedonia, Libanius argument. 1.
Olynthias. The Carthaginians were common breakers and violaters of their says:
unto these may be adjoined all such as deny such things, as are committed to
their trust, or do wast and consume them, or any other, which deceive that
trust, which is reposed in them, Bucor.

21. Without natural affection, (...), some take it generally for such as are
without all love or humanity, Lat. Tolet. Lyran. as therefore the tribe of Dan
did smite Lachis, because they had no society with any other people, Gorham.
But specially is here signified the natural affection, as between parents and
their children, husband and wife, kindred, country: the heathen were void cuen
of such natural affection, Mart. Beza: as their stories are full of such
examples of unnatural inhumanitie, as Cambyses, Remus, Romulus, and such like,
Gualter, such was Cain, Ismael, Esau, to their brethren: The Stoics among the
heathen deprived a wise man of all affection, and so do the wicked
Catabaptists among Christians, Bucer.

22. Such as can never be reconciled: (...), some read absque faedere, without
fidelity, Lat. such as break all truces and leagues: but they were noted
before trucebreakers: Lyranus takes them to be such as would hold no
friendship with any, but such men were also spoken of before, loc. 10. they are
therefore such as were implurable: that being once offended, would never be
reconciled again, Mart. Pareus, with others: such was Saul that would by no
means be appeased toward David, Marlorat.

23. Merciless, (...), such as had no bowels of compassion, neither pitied the
miseries and calamities of others: as among the heathen, their cruel wars,
and bloodshed, when they spared neither man, woman, nor children, and their
bloody spectacles and swordplayes, when they delighted to see the blood of man
shed before their face, were evident proofs hereof, Gualter: Chrysostom thus
distinguishes these last four: they are coneuant breakers that keep no
fidelity with the same kind, as man with man: they are without natural
affection, which are unkind to their kindred: and such are (...), which break
civil leagues: and the last includes mercy to be showed even unto enemies.

Quest. 74. Of the true reading of the last verse, v. 31. and the meaning
thereof.
1. The vulgar Latin, which Lyranus follows and Tolet, the Rhemists with
other Romanists, read thus, when they knew the justice of God, understood
not, that they which do such things, are worthy of death, etc. and this
reading seems also Cyprian to follow, epistol. 68. But in the original
these words, non intellexerunt, they understood not, are wanting, and are
inserted beside the text: and they do also quite inuert the sense of the text,
for they make it a less thing to consent unto evil doers, and approve them,
then to commit evil: not only they which do them, but also they which
consent unto them, as the vulgar Latin text stands: whereas the Apostle
evidently makes two degrees of sinners: they which commit evil, and those
worse, which are patrons and favorers of evil. And so Chrysostom well
expounds: showing how the Apostle, takes away two pretexts and excuses of
the Gentiles: one was their ignorance, which they could not pretend, because
they knew by nature what the justice of God required: the other was their
infirmity, but that they could not allege, seeing they did commit such
things in fact: but approved also and commended the evil doers.

2. By the justice of God, (...), is here understood not the moral law which
the Gentiles had not, but the iudiciarie justice of God in punishing of sin:
for so (...) is defined, iniusti facti corectio, a correcting of that which is
unjustly or unlawfully done: Michael Ephesus in ethic. Aristot. lib. 5. c. 7.
The Gentiles knew this justice of God in punishing of sin, both by the light
of nature, by the testimony of their own conscience, and by the examples of
Gods justice showed in the world: Pareus: Even Draco, which appointed death for
all offenses, was taught by the law of nature, that all sin deserved death.
Mart. So Abimelech and Pharaoh knew by the light of nature, that marriage was
not to be violated, and therefore they caused Sarah to be restored to Abraham.
Gualter.

3. By death here is understood any kind of punishment, tending to the ruin
and destruction of the offender, Pareus: yea also the Gentiles had some
knowledge of everlasting punishment: for they had an opinion of hell, as Virgil
shows, lib. 6. Aenead. as they promised the pleasant Elysian fields after
death unto well doers: Plato. lib. 10. de repub. Cicero. in some. Scipton.

75. Quest. What a dangerous thing it is to be a favorer and procurer of sin
in others.
1. The vulgar Latin, reading thus, not only they which do such things (are
worthy of death) but they which consent unto them that do, and Lyranus,
Toletus, with others, do think, that here to consent with sinners, is put as
the less: that no not the consenters only were free, but were worthy of
death: But it is rather expressed as an higher degree of sin: as Theophylact
says, quodque deterius est, and that which is worse, they gave assent unto
those which do evil: so also Erasmus, Osiander, Pererius, with others.

2. The word (...), signifies not an assent only, but an approbation, and
patronage, as Beza and Pareus read, patrocinantur, they give patronage: but
Piscator rather uses the word applaudunt, because to applaud and approve, is
more then patronize: for one may be a patron of that upon some occasion, which
he does not altogether approve.

3. The heathen generally were guilty hereof, in defending and maintaining
publicly even those things, which by the light of nature, they knew to be
evil: as idolatry, fornication, and such like: when Alexander had killed
Clitus his friend, and was stricken in conscience for the same, he had miserable
comforters applied unto him, Anaxarchus, Aristander, Callisthenes, which were
all but patrons of his sin, and made him worse: the first as an Epicure told
him, that all was lawful which Princes did: the second being a Stoike,
referred all to fate and destiny: the third used moral and civil
persuasions: but none of them showed him the greatness of his sin. Gryneus.

4. Of these favorers there are two kinds: some do affoard their help, and
assistance to evil doers: some, hold their peace, when they should reprove.
And there is a double kind of reproof or correction: fraterna correctio,
brotherly correction, unto the which all are bound, but not always, sed pro
debito tempore and loco, but in due time and place: there is correctio
punitionis, correction by way of punishment, unto the which all superiors are
bound, and at all times, as they shall see it to make best for the amendment of
sinners. Lyr. But both these kind of corrections were much neglected among the
heathen.

5. Now, of these there were three sorts, some might commit sin in
themselves, and yet not consent unto it in others, and these were worthy of
death: some might give consent, in not punishing sin in others, though they
did it not themselves, and these also were worthy of death: and some did both
practice it in their own person, and favor it in others; and these were
worthy of double death. Haymo.

76. Quest. How one may be accessarie to an others sin.
This may be done diverse ways: 1. they which command others to do evil, as
Saul bid Doeg fall upon the innocent Priests, 1. Sam. 22. are guilty of others
sins. 2. They which are ready to obey such wicked commandments, as Ioab
upon David's letter caused Vriah to be killed: and the same Ioab also was David's
instrument to number the people, though be misliked it himself. 3. They which
give counsel, or any kind of help or assistance to the evil: for which cause
Iehosaphat was reproved of the Prophet Iehu, because he aided the idolatrous
king of Israel in battle: and here they also are included, which do promote
unworthy and unmeet persons to office: and therefore S. Paul charge
Timothy to lay hands suddenly on none, neither to be partaker of other sins,
1. Tim. 5.4. They which commend the wicked in their evil doing, and so
extenuate their sin: as Psalm. 10.5. the wicked man is said to bless the
covetous. 5. They which by any sign in word or deed seem to give consent
unto the sins of others, as Saul kept their garments which stoned Steven, and
to gave consent unto his death. 6. They which are partakers with others in
their sin, and part stakes with them: as Psalm. 50.18. When thou see a
these thou runnest with him, and art paraker with the adulterer. 7. They which
do not rebuke and correct others, when it is in their power: which was the
sin of Hell, who used too much connivence and forbearance toward his sons,
1. Sam. 2.8. They which give intertainement unto the wicked, as unto thieves,
robbers, strumpets, and such like. 9. Such as conceal and keep secret others
sins, whereby their heart is hardened, and so they continue in their sin,
Hyper.

Quest. 77. Whether all the Gentiles were guilty of these sins which are
here rehearsed by the Apostle.
Many among the Gentiles in respect of the rest, were men of civil life, and
gave example of diverse moral virtues: such among the Grecians were Aristides,
Phacion, Socrates, among the Romans, the Scipioes, Catoes, with others: But
yet none of them are exempted out of the Apostles reprehension: 1. because none
of them were free from the most of these sins, though they were not guilty
of all. 2. they wanted true faith, and therefore their virtues were but
speciosa peccata, goodly sins. 3. And in respect of their natural corrup^
disposition, even the best of them were inclined unto all these sins, saving
that the Lord bridled in some of them the corruption and badnesse of their
nature, that there might be some order and government among the heathen:
otherwise their common wealths would soon have come to confusion. 4. And those
which gave any good example among the heathen, were so few, that they are not
to be named among the rest, Peter Martyr.

4. Places of doctrine.
v. 1. Paul a servant of Jesus Christ. 1. Doct. Of diverse kinds of service.
Christ's service is perfect freedom: there are three kinds of service: 1. the
service of God, which is either general belonging to all Christians, which is
the service of their profession, whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 6.19. or
special, which is in that vocation, to the which any are called: whereof see
Matthew. 25.14. Luke 12.43. 2. Civil service, which may very well stand with the
service of God: see 1. Cor. 7.11. 3. there is the service of sin, Romans 8.16.
and service to please men, Gal. 1.10. and this service is contrary to the
service of God. Pareus.

Called to be an Apostle. 2. Doct of diverse kinde^ of callings.
There are two kinds of calling: one is unto salvation, the other is to some
office in this life. The first is either external, which is general to all by
the light of nature, and knowledge of the creatures: especial, by the
preaching of the word: or internal by the inward working of Gods spirit, which
is peculiar to the elect. The calling to some function in this life, is either
private, as of men, to their several vocations: or public, which is either
Civil, of Magistrates in the time of peace, leaders and Captains in the time
of war: or Ecclesiastical, which is either immediate from God, as of the
Prophets and Apostles: or mediate by men, which is either ordinary, such as is
the ordination of Bishops and Ministers now: or extraordinary by lot, as was
the election of Matthias, Act. 1.

To be an Apostle. 3. Doct. Of the difference between Apostles and other
Pastors.
There is a threefold difference between Apostles and other Pastors. 1. They
were immediately called of Christ: the other mediately are appointed by men, 2.
in respect of their doctrine and writings, both the authority thereof, they
are free from error, and are part of the Canonical Scripture: but so are not
the doctrine and writings of the other, they must be subject to the writings of
the Apostles: as also their doctrine was confirmed and ratified by miracles.
Mart. 3. in their authority and office, the Apostles were not tied unto any
place, but were sent to preach to the whole world: but Pastors now have their
particular and special Churches. Pareus.

Set apart. 4. Doct. The Father, Son, and holy Ghost one God.
God the father set apart Paul to be an Apostle, Gal. 1.1. and Jesus Christ,
Act. 9. and the holy Ghost, Act. 13.2. these three then are one God: for it
belongs only unto God to send Prophets, and Apostles, and Pastors to his
Church: therefore all such are condemned, whom the Lord has not sent. Ierem.
14.15.

Gospel of God: 5. Doct. Christ God.
which is afterward verse. 16. and chap. 15.19. and in other places called the
Gospel of Christ: which is an evident testimony of Christ's eternal Godhead.
Pareus.

v. 2. Which he had promised before, etc. 6. Doct. Of the Gospel, and the
nature thereof.
Concerning the Gospel of Christ, 1. Euangelium, the Evangel, signifies a
joyful message of the grace of Christ: 2. though the Gospel be diverse in
circumstance; for there is Gospel promised by the Prophets, and the Gospel
performed by Christ's coming, yet it is one and the same in substance: 3. the
efficient and author thereof is God, it is called the Gospel of God: the
material cause is Jesus Christ, God and man: the formal, the declaration and
manifestation of him to be the Son of God, v. 4. the end, is to salvation, v.
16. the effects, obedience to the faith, v. 5.

v. 3. concerning his Son: 7. Doct. Christ God and man.
here the person of Christ is described to be both God and man: Man as he was
borne of the seed of David: and he was also declared to be the Son of God.
Piscator.

According to the flesh. 8. Doct. Of the union of Christ (...)
In that the Son of God is said to be made of the seed of David after the
flesh, it shows against the Nestorian heretics, that there are not two
Sons but one Son, the same both God and man: and that according to the
flesh he was made, there the property of his natures is still reserved;
against the Eutychians, and Suenkefeldians, which destroyed the unity of
Christ's humane nature.

By reason of this union of the divine and humane nature of Christ, 9. Doct. Of
the (...) of the properties of Christ's divine and humane nature.
that which was done in one of his natures, is ascribed to his whole person:
and here we are to consider of a threefold communion of the properties of
Christ's divine and humane natures one unto the other. 1. some things are really
common to both his whole person, and natures: as such things which belong to
the office of the Redeemer, as to sanctify, quicken, glorify, to reign, to
be adored: which things were performed in both his natures. 2. some things are
communicated really to his whole person, which yet properly belong only to one
of his natures: as Christ the Son of God in whole person is said to be made
of the seed of David, but yet in respect only of his humanity; according to
the flesh: these two communions there is no question made of. 3. a third
communion there is devised by the Vbiquitaries, whereby they really communicate
the properties of one nature to an other: as the flesh of Christ by reason of
the union of the Godhead, they call omnipotent, knowing all things, every where
present. Pareus.

v. 8. I thank my God, etc. 1. Here two kinds of prayer are expressed,
invocation, 10. Doct. Of prayer, how it ought to be made.
which is a requesting of some grace or benefit from God, and giving thanks for
some benefit received. 2. the requisite things in prayer are here showed, 1.
that our prayers must be made to God, not to any creature, I thank my God. 2.
we must pray with confidence, my God. 3. by Christ our Mediator. 4. not for
our selves only, but our brethren. Pareus.

v. 9. God is my witness. Hence the lawfulnes of a lawful oath among
Christians, 11. Doct. It is lawful to take an oath.
is warranted by the Apostles example against the Anabaptists. Piscator.

v. 10. That by some means, etc. 12. Doct. Means must be joined with prayer.
The Apostle then though he prayed for a prosperous journey, yet neglected not
the means: against the Messalian heretics, who ascribed all unto prayer, and
in the mean time would do nothing themselves.

Here also the doctrine of Gods providence is to be considered, 13. Doct. Gods
providence works by contrary means.
who many times works even by contrary means: for S. Paul his bonds and
imprisonment, which might have seemed like to hinder his journey to Rome, yet
were means to bring him thither by his appeal. Olevian.

v. 17. As it is written. The Apostles alleged Scripture, 14. Doct. How the
Apostles alleged Scriptures.
not to confirm their doctrine, for they were (...), of themselves worthy to
be credited, but to show the consent of the Prophets for the confirmation of
others: But the Pastors of the Church do now allege Scripture for warrant of
their doctrine. Pareus.

v. 19. That which may be known of God. The knowledge of God is general, 15.
Doct. Of the diverse kind^ of the knowledge of God.
either internal by the light of nature: or external by the view of the
creatures: or special, which is peculiar to the Church, which is either
external, common to the whole visible Church, as by the preaching of his word:
or internal, by the inward operation of the spirit, which is proper only to
the Elect.

v. 23. They turned the glory of the incorruptible God to the similitude, etc.
16. Doct. Of the diverse kinds of Idolatry.
An idol is whatsoever being not God, is worshipped for God, either inwardly
or outwardly: Idolatry is of two sorts: direct, or indirect: the first, when
the creature is worshipped, the Creator being omitted: and it is of two sorts,
internal, when men set up such an idol in their hearts: or external, when
divine worship is given outwardly to a false god, as the heathen worshipped the
Sun, Moon, and stars: or to the image of a false god: indirect idolatry,
when the true God is worshipped, but not after a due manner, such as he has
prescribed: Pareus.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. Against the Manichees, which refuse Moses and the Prophets.
v. 2. Which he had promised before by the Prophets. Out of this place August.
lib. 5. cont. haeres. as he is cited by Beda, conuinceth the Manichees: I
(says the Maniche) neither receive Moses not the Prophets, and quid ais de
Apostolo Paulo, etc. what say thou then to the Apostle Paul, who in the
beginning of his epistle to the Romans, thus writes, Paul a servant, etc. put
a part for the Gospel of God, which he had promised before by his Prophets,
etc. then he infers thus, audis, quia evangelium per Apostolos non
exhiberetur, ^i ante per Prophet as promitteretur, you hear that the Gospel
should not have been exhited by the Apostles, unless it had been promised
before by the Prophets.

2. Controv. Against election by the foresight of works.
v. 1. Set apart for the Gospel of Christ. Origin, and Sedulius following him,
think that Paul was separated in the counsel of God, and ordained to be the
Apostle of the Gentiles, because God did foresee his merits, and labor, which
he should take in the Gospel: the same is the opinion of the Rhemists, who
affirm, that Christ does not appoint any by his absolute election, without
respect unto their works: annotat. Hebr. 5. sect. 9. But Tolet. a champion of
their own, confuteth this position, by that place of S. Paul, Gal. 1.15. But
when it pleased God, (which had separated me from my mothers womb, and called
me by his grace,) to reveal his Son unto me: he ascribes this his
separation to the good pleasure and grace of God, not to any merit foreseen in
himself. P. Martyr adds further, that if election were grounded upon such
foresight of works, it had not been so hard a matter to find out the reason,
why the Lord electeth some, and not others: and the Apostle needed not thus to
have stopped the mouths of those, which complain of Gods righteousness, O man
who art thou, which pleadest against God, etc. And the Apostle in the same
place evidently says, It is not in him that wills, or in him that runs,
but in God that shows mercy. This doctrine of the free grace of God in
electing his servants, has a double use: 1. to make them confident and bold,
that seeing they are elected of God, nothing can hinder or ouerturne their
election, whatsouer befalls them in this life: 2. as also to humble them,
that they should not ascribe their election to any works of their own, but to
the mere grace of God.

3. Controv. Against the Nestorians and Vbiquitaries.
v. 3. Made of the seed of David according to the flesh. The Son of God, not
the Son of man, is said to be made of the seed of David, and yet with this
limitation, according to his flesh, that is, his humane nature: where first the
heresy of the Nestorians is confuted, who denied that Marie was (...), the
mother of God: seeing the Apostle does evidently affirm, that the Son of God
was made of the seed of David: so that because of the union of the two
natures, the humane and divine in one person, that is ascribed to the whole
person, which is proper but unto one of his natures: as the Son of God is
said to be borne and become man, and to have died for us: and so the Son of
man is said to have descended from heaven, the Son of man which is in heaven,
Ioh. 3.13. which was only true of his divine nature, yet is spoken of his
whole person, which there receives denomination of his humane nature. 2.
Beside, as the Nestorians admit no communication at all of the properties,
which belong to each nature, but do so divide and distinguish the natures, as
if they made two persons; so the Vbiquitaries make a confused commixtion and
community, really attributing to one nature, that which is proper to the
other, as though to ascribe any thing to the whole person, were secundum
vtramque neturam tribuere, according unto both natures to attribute it: because
Christ's deity is every where, and it is true of Christ's whole person, that
homo Christus, the man Christ is every where: yet it follows not that his
humanity should be every where: so then we conclude against the Nestorians,
that Christus totus non dimiatus, that Christ whole not half, was made of the
seed of David; and against the other, that yet non secundum totum sus, not
according unto his whole nature, but his humanity only.

4. Controv. Against the heresy of one Georgius Eniedinus, a Samosatenian
heretic in Transylvania.
v. 3. According to the flesh: whereas we understand this place of the Apostle
of the two generations of Christ, his humane, in that he is said to be made of
the seed of David after the flesh, his divine, in that he was declared to be
the Son of God touching the spirit of sanctification: this forenamed heretic
affirms, that Christ is said to be made of the seed of David in respect of
his carnal generation, which is vulgar and common to all, and that he is by
his spiritual nativity the Son of God, as other faithful are. Eniedin. expl.
loc. p. 226.

1. Concerning the first part of his wicked assertion, that this clause
according to the flesh, does here signify the vulgar and common kind of
nativity, he would prove it by the like places: as, Romans 9.3. he calls the
Jews his kinsmen according to the flesh: and 1. Cor. 10.18. Israel after the
flesh, etc.

Contra. 1. It is not true, that this clause, according to the flesh, (no not
in these places given in instance) does show the common and vulgar generation:
but there is implied a difference and distinction between, kindred according to
the flesh, and in the spirit: and of Israel after the flesh, and Israel after
the spirit: for otherwise in respect of their common nativity all Israel was
after the flesh: whereas some were the children of Abraham after the flesh,
some were the children of promise, Romans 9.8. 2. The miraculous and singular
birth of Christ is not insinuated only by these words, according to the flesh.
but in that he is said to be made, not borne, for the word is (...), not
(...), it shows the extraordinary making of his flesh, as the Apostle says
in the same phrase, Galat. 4.4. that he was made of a woman. And this is of
purpose observed by diverse of the fathers, to set forth the miraculous
conception of Christ: as by Tertullian. lib. in praxeam. Iren. lib. 3. c. 32.
advers. haeres. Vigilius in Eutychet. l. 5. August. l. 2. de Trin. c. 5.
whereby is convinced the heresy of Hebian revived by this Transilvanian, that
Christ's flesh was conceived by humane seed.

2. He thus obiecteth concerning the other generation of Christ. 1. that every
faithful man likewise has two natiuities, one according to the flesh, an
other according to the spirit:as Ioh. 1.13. which are not borne of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God: Isaac is said to
be borne according to the spirit, Romans 9.8. yet hereupon it follows not, that
they had two natures, divine and humane.

Contra. There is great difference between the two generations of the
faithful, and of Christ: 1. for when they are said to be borne of the flesh
and of the spirit, not two natures are thereby signified, but two beginnings of
their diverse births: but Christ is man according to his own flesh, and
declared to be the Son of God, according to his own sanctifying spirit: he
is not said to be borne of the spirit, but to be declared to be the Son of
God according to the spirit: which shows not a diverse generation only, but a
diverse nature. 3. other faithful are the Sons of God by adoption and grace,
Romans 8.15. Ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father: But Christ is the true natural Son of God: Ioh. 1.18. The only
begotten Son, which is in the bosom of his father: Heb. 1.3. The brightness
of his glory, and the ingraued form of his person.

2. Object. Christ is no otherwise the Son of God, then because the Father
sanctified him, and sent him into the world: Ioh. 10.36. Say ye of him, whom
the Father has sanctified into the world, thou blasphemest, because I said I
am the Son of God? And thus others also are the Sons of God, because they
are sanctified by his spirit.

Contra. Christ makes not his sanctification a cause of his Sonneship, but he
reasons from the effects, which are set forth by an argument from the less
to the greater: that if the Scripture calls civil Magistrates the Sons of
God, in respect of their office; much more may Christ call himself the Son
of God, whom the Father had sanctified to be the Redeemer of the world, and to
be the chief governor thereof.

3. Object. By the spirit of sanctification, the divine nature of Christ can
not be signified: for Christ is thereby sanctified, but that which sanctifies,
is diverse from that which is sanctified and the Apostle gives this to be the
cause of Christ's being the Son of God, namely his resurrection: But his
divine nature rather should be the cause, if it were here signified.

Contra. 1. It is true that which sanctifies is diverse from that which is
sanctified ^ and Christ's humane nature, which is sanctified, is diverse from his
divine, which sanctifies. 2. neither is the resurrection given as a cause of
his being the Son of God, but of his manifesting to be the Son: there is
one cause of the being of a thing, an other of the manifestation. ex Paraeo.

5. Controv. Against the Marcionites, that Christ had a true body.
v. 3. Made of the seed of David. Then the Marcionites heresy is hereby
convinced, which imagine Christ to have an invisible body, that could not be
seen or touched, though it were present: from whose heresy they much differ
not, which include the body of Christ in the sacrament, under the forms of
bread and wine, neither giving unto it place, nor disposition of parts, nor
making it visible or palpable: their heresy also is noted, that affirm Christ
to have brought his body down from heaven with him: or to have passed through
his mothers womb, as water through a conduit: for he was made of the seed of
David. Gryneus.

6. Controv. Against the Apollinarists, that Christ had no humane soul.
v. 3. Made of the seed of David. If Christ had a true humane body, made with
parts, organes, and instruments, of life and sense, as other men have, then it
follows also that he was endued with an humane soul: which though it be not
here comprehended under the name of flesh, yet it follows by necessary
consequence, that having an humane body, he likewise received of God a
reasonable soul: as he himself says, Matthew. 26.38. My soul is heavy unto
death: his divine spirit was not subject to grief or heaviness. This
overthrows the heresy of the Apollinarists, which denied Christ to have an
humane soul, but affirmed, that his flesh was animated by his divine nature.

7. Controv. That the Roman faith is not the same now, which was commended by
the Apostle.
v. 8. Your faith is published through the whole world. Pererius among other
commendations of the Roman faith, alleges this, That the Roman Church has
kept inviolablely the faith once received by the Apostles, and therefore the
fathers, Ireneus, Tertullian, Opsatus, by this argument used to confute
heretics, because they dissented from the faith of the Church of Rome. The
Rhemists also allege diverse testimonies of the fathers in the commendation of
the Roman faith, as of Cyprian, who says, whose faith was praised, to whom
misbeleefe can have no access, epist. 55. nu. 6. likewise Hierome, the Roman
faith commended by the Apostles mouth, will receive no such deceits, nor can be
changed possibly, though as Angel taught otherwise, being sensed by S. Paul's
authority, adv. Ruffin. l. 3. c. 4.

Contra. 1. The meaning of these fathers is not, to give such privilege unto
the Roman Church, as that it should never fail in faith: for Cyprian, though
in error himself, charge Stephanus Bishop of Rome with error: and Hierome
shows that Liberius Bishop of Rome fell into heresy: catalog. and he
himself reprooueth the custom of the Church of Rome; and prefers the
custom of the Catholic Church in all the world^ Evagrio. 2. But they give
this commendation of the Roman faith, which was commended by the Apostle,
which while the Church of Rome held, as it did until those times, it could not
possibly err. Now being fallen from that faith, more then any Christian
Church in the world, it has lost this commendation which S. Paul gave of the
faith of the Romans: therefore as P. Martyr well says, dolendae magis sunt
vices Romana Ecclesia, etc. this change of the Church of Rome is much to be
lamented, which being sometime so highly commended by the Apostle, is now
become the seat of Antichrist: as at Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria,
Constantinople, which were sometime famous Churches, the Mahometarie profession
is now received: and the Christians that are there, are addicted to infinite
superstitions.

8. Controv. That the Pope is not universal Bishop.
v. 5. By whom we have received grace and Apostleship, etc. among all the
Gentiles: hence the Romanists may pretend the Popes universal Pastorship over
all the world, because he succeeds the Apostles.

Contra. 1. Other Bishops also as well as the Pope succeeded the Apostles,
therefore they also may challenge as well as he, to be universal Bishops. 2.
But neither they nor he do succeed the Apostles in their special calling to
be Apostles, but in their general ministry in office, in being Pastors and
Bishops. 3. The Pope chalengeth to be Peter's successor, not Paul's: but Peter
was the Apostle of the circumcision, not of the uncircumcised Gentiles. 4.
Gregory the 1. Bishop of Rome condemns the title of universal Bishop, and
thus wrote concerning John Patriarch of Constantinople, who affected that
title, lib. 6. epist. 30. Ego fideliter dico, quia quisquis se vniuersalem
sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desidevat, in electione sua Antichristu^
praecurrit, etc. I speak confidently, that whosoever calls himself universal
Priest, or desires to be so called, in his pride forerunneth Antichrist:
likewise in the Africane Council it was thus decreed: the Bishop of the first
Sea shall not be called the Prince of Praists, or the chief Priest, but only
Bishop of the first Sea: Vniuersalis autem nec etiam Romanus pontifex
appelletur, etc. But no not the Bishop of Rome shall be called Universal.
distinct. 100. primae sedis.

Controv. 9. Against the Popish distinction, between (...), to worship, and
(...), to serve, ver. 9. Whom I serve in my spirit.
1. The Romanists make this difference: they take the first to signify
religious worship due only unto God, the other to betoken service which is
given unto Saints and men, Bell. lib. 1. de Sanctor. beatitud. c. 12. Erasmus
much dissenteth not, saving that he understands (...), to be worship, which
is given Diuis aut Deo, to Saints or God.

Contra. That these words are indiffently taken for the same, is evident both
by the Scripture, and profane writings. 1. as the Apostle here says, (...),
whom I worship, so in other places he uses the word, (...), to serve, Act.
10.19. Romans 7.6. and 12.11. Ephesians. 6.7. Philip. 2.22. Pareus. And as (...), to
serve, is given unto God, so (...), which they would have only to signify to
worship, is used of men: as in Leviticus 23.7. where it is said, thou shall do
no servile work, the words are, as the Septuag. translate, (...): likewise
Deuter. 28.48. where it is said thou shall serve thine enemies, the word is
(...): 2. likewise these words are in foreign writers taken in the same sense,
as Pet. Martyr shows out of Suidas, that at the first, (...), was the same
with (...), but that the first word afterward was taken to be of the same sense
with (...), to worship: So also Xenophon lib. 3. Cyropaid. brings in the
husband thus speaking unto Cyrus concerning his wife, that he had rather give
his life, then she should serve, the word is (...): Beza also shows the same
out of Pindarus in Olymp. od. 1. (...), a reward for service: So that the
vanity of this distinction sufficiently appears: the word (...), is derived
of the particle (...), which is added for more vehemency, and the word (...),
which signifies to tremble: because it is the use of servants to be much
afraid and tremble at the presence of their Masters: Erasmus. This divise then
will not serve their turn, to coin two kinds of religious service by this
curious distinction, one peculiar unto God, the other unto Saints.

Controv. 10. That God only is spiritually to be served and worshipped.
v. 9. Whom I serve in the spirit: God only is so to be served, as our
Blessed Savior says, Matthew. 4.10. thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve: Origin says, lib. 1. in epist. ad Roman. Nos
nullam creaturam, sed patrem, filium, and spiritum sanctum adoramus and
colimus, we worship no creature but the father, Son, and holy Ghost, etc.
Therefore if no creature is to be worshipped, much less an image, which is the
work of man's hands: if not the living are to be adored, much less the dead.
But here this objection will be moved, if no creature is to be worshipped how
then do we adore Christ? Chrysostom answeareth, Nemo veneraturus regem dicit
illi exuas purpuram, etc. no man coming to do reverence to the king, says
put off thy robes: So Christ being clothed with our flesh, is worshipped in
and with our humanity, which is united unto his Godhead in one person: yet the
original and first cause of this adoration given unto Christ's humanity,
proceeds from his divine nature: adoration then being due unto the person of
Christ, is yielded unto him both God and man, Martyr.

Controv. 11. Of the vain use of popish pilgrimages.
v. 13. That I might have some fruit: Paul desires to see Rome, to the intent,
that he might receive some fruit by them, and they by him: this was the end of
this his journey and peregrination: Much unlike herein were the pilgrimages
which in times past, and now in many countries are made to Rome, Jerusalem, and
other places: which are only of a superstitious meaning, to offer before some
idol, and to perform their vows: But the end of the travail and coming
together of Christians should be for their mutual edifying, Mar.

Controv. 12. None to be barred from the knowledge of Gods word.
v. 14. I am detter both to the Grecians and Barbarians: seeing there was no
nation so barbarous, to whom the Apostle was not willing to impart the
knowledge of the Gospel, the Romanists are evidently convinced of error, that
will not admit their lay people generally to the reading of the Scripture: If
the gospel of salvation must be communicated to all, then the Scriptures also,
which contain the knowledge of salvation, should be common to all, Hyperius:
the book ^^ the law was appointed to be read in the hearing of the people
that they might learn and fear God, Deuter. 31.12. see more Synops. Centur.
1. error. 3.

Controv. 13. Against diverse heretical assertions of Socinus touching the
justice of God.
v. 17. For by it the justice of God is revealed: because in this place the
justice of God is taken for his benignity and mercy showed by Christ in the
Gospel, Socinus, that blasphemous heretic, takes occasion thus to broach his
errors. 1. he says, that justice being vndestood of God, is never in
Scripture set opposite to Gods mercy: but the contrary is evident, Psalm 5.6.
thou shall destroy them that speak lies: here the Prophet speaks of Gods
revenging justice: and in the next verse he compares it with Gods mercy, But
I will come into thine house in the multitude of thy mercies. 2. he affirms,
that, that which is opposed to Gods mercy, is not called the justice of God,
but wrath, indignation, severity: which is evidently refelled, v. 31. they
knowing the justice of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of
death: here the vengeance of God upon sinners, is called (...), justice. And
yet more evidently, Psalm. 145.17. the Lord is just in all his ways, and
merciful in all his works, here the justice and mercy of God are compared
together. 3. further he says, that this justice of God, as it is set against
his mercy, is of two sorts: there is one, whereby he punishes the wicked and
obstinate sinners, an other, whereby he chasteneth even those, that are not
altogether impenitent. But herein is his error, he makes them two kinds of
justice, which are but diverse degrees of one and the same justice: for when
God shows severity in punishing the wicked, therein he exercises his strict
and rigorous justice: and when he chastises sometime his own children, for
their amendment, he uses the same justice, but in an other degree, tempering
his justice, with mercy and favor, Pareus.

Controv. 14 Against inherent justice.
v. 17. The justice of God is revealed: the Rhemistes apply this place against
imputative justice, alleging out of Augustine how it must be understood of
that justice, not which God has in himself, sed qua induit hominem, but
wherewith he endueth man when he justifies him.

Contra. 1. They do not well translate the word induit, which signifies here
not to endue, but to cloth with: and so man being justified by faith is
clothed with Christ's righteousness: he is not justified by any inherent
righteousness in himself, but by an imputed righteousness, Romans 4.6. 2. And
the Apostle does expound himself, Romans 3.22. showing that the justice of God
is by the faith of Jesus: and Philip. 3.9. the Apostle renounceth his own
righteousness, that he might have the righteousness of God through faith.

Controv. 15. That the Sacraments do not confer grace.
Kemnitius out of this place, v. 16. the Gospel is the power of God to
salvation, infers, that the Sacraments do no otherwise justify then the
word preached, that is, excitando fidem, by exciting and stirring up our faith:
as in this sense, the Gospel is said to be Gods power to salvation.

Bellarmine answeareth, 1. that the Gospel is not here taken for the preaching
of the Gospel, but for the history of the Gospel, as of Christ's incarnation,
and passion: 2. if it be taken in the other sense, it follows not because the
preaching of the word justifies only, by stirring up faith, that therefore
the Sacraments justify the same way, Bellar. lib. 2. de effect. sacram. c. 11.
ration. 4.

Contra. 1. The Apostle speaks not only of the historical narration of the
Gospel, but of preaching and publishing the same, as it appears both by the
words before going, v. 15. I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that are at
Rome: and by the words following, it is the power of God to salvation to every
on that believes: but they cannot believe unless they hear, neither can they
hear without preaching. 2. the argument thus follows from the greater to the
less, if that which is more principal in the work of our salvation, do
justify no otherwise then instrumentally, in stirring up faith, namely the
preaching of the word, then that which is less principal, cannot justify
more: but the word and preaching of the Gospel, is the more principal: for
they beget faith, which the Sacraments only confirm and seal: therefore the
Sacraments do not justify men, us by conferferring of grace by the work
wrought.

Controv. 16. That faith only justifies.
v. 17. The just by faith shall live: out of this place, where the very
justice, life, and actiuitie of the soul is ascribed to faith, we do conclude
that a man is justified only by faith: for all is ascribed unto faith: Now the
Romanists, seeing this place of the Apostle to be so pregnant for justification
by faith only, seek diverse shifts, to obscure the truth of this testimony.

1. Costerus Euchirid. 170. says, that these words, the just shall live by
faith, have no other meaning but this, iustum secundum fidei norman vitam
dirigere, that the just does direct his life according to the rule of faith.

Contra. 1. He does not place the words aright, for thus are the words to be
joined together, the just by faith shall live, so that by faith, has rather
connection, with the first word, the just, then with the last, shall live. 2.
the Apostle by life, here understands everlasting salvation, not our
conversion here: as is said before, v. 16. that the Gospel is the power of God
to salvation to every one that believes: faith then brings to everlasting
salvation.

2. The Rhemists have this shift, that faith together with works must be here
understood to justify: the Apostle says not, the just shall live by faith
only: to this purpose also Bellarmine, lib. 1. de iustificat. c. 20.

Contra. 1. If the whole life of the soul depended not upon faith, but partly
upon faith, partly upon works: then it might as well be said, the just shall
live by works: which were an absurd speech, and not far from blasphemy. 2.
the Apostle c. 3.28. excludes works, concluding that a man is justified by
faith without the works of the law: then to live by faith, is to live only
by faith, as we are justified only by faith without works. 3. Now although
the just live by faith, and not by works, yet faith lives by works: it must
be a lively and effectual faith working by love, by the which the just man
lives: and not a dead faith.

3. Pererius here slyeth to their old distinction of justification: the first
which is by faith, the second is perfited by works: so faith is said to
justify a man, because it is exordium, fundamentum, radix iustificationis, the
beginning, foundation, and root of justification, Perer. d^sput 8. in 1. ad
Roman. sect. 46.

Contra. 1. That which he calls the second justification, is properly,
satisfaction, which is the fruit of justification: as the Apostle says, Romans
6.22. being now freed from sin, and made servants unto God, you have your
fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life: where the whole state of the
faithful man is divided into these three parts, his justification and freedom
from sin, which is by faith, the fruit of his justification which is
holiness, and the end or reward, which is everlasting life. 2. to live by
faith, shows that not the beginning but the perfection of our life is by
faith, and by nothing but faith, as the Apostle says, the justice of God is
revealed from faith to faith: faith is the beginning and end of this justice:
there is no time, wherein salvation is given unto any but by faith, as Thomas
expounds: see before quest. 42.

4. Bellarmine has an other devise, he makes this the meaning; the just shall
live by faith, that is, ex fide patienter expectare, quae Deus promisit, by
faith he does patiently expect those things which God has promised: So he
would have it understood, rather of patient waiting and expecting, then of
justifying. lib. 2. de effect. sacram. c. 9.

Contra. This patient expecting of Gods promises is indeed a fruit of
justifying faith, for it is the ground of things hoped for: and he that is
justified by faith, has this grace also of patient expectation: but to live by
faith comprehends more. 2. and that by this phrase, to live by faith, the
Apostle understands to be justified by faith, is evident Gal. 2.20. Thus I
live, not I now, but Christ lives in me, and in that I now live in the flesh,
I live by the faith if the Son of God, etc. 3. And whereas Bellarmine further
obiecteth, that the Prophets meaning, from whom the Apostle takes this saying,
is none other, but to note their patience, that waited for the Lords promises:
it has been showed before, qu. 44. that the Apostle keeps the Prophets
sense, and does most fitly apply this sentence to justification by faith.

5. But the Romanists against justification by faith only, thus object. 1. It
seems a very absurd thing, to make men believe, that they shall be justified
by faith only, without either satisfaction for their sins, or the works of
righteousness: by this means, nothing could be easier, then by faith to be
saved. 2. And this doctrine will make men presumptuous, that they will care for
no good works: and so there should be no more use either of precepts to exhort
them unto the works of piety, nor of threatenings to terrify them from sin.

Contra. 1. Though that faith need no satisfaction for sin in our selves,
nor good works as helping unto justification: yet it apprehends the
satisfaction made by Christ's suffering for our sins: and works are also
necessary as testimonies of our faith, though not as helps of our
justification: neither is such a faith, lively and effectual so easy a thing,
seeing man has no power of himself to attain unto it, unless God do give
it: and to believe in Christ, as a Christian ought, is found to be the hardest
thing in the whole world. 2. Neither is this a doctrine of presumption, nor yet
does it make void, precepts and comminations: for faith though it require not
works as causes and helps to salvation, yet it cannot be without them as
fruits and effects: so that the law of faith establishes the law of works:
as the Apostle shows, c. 3.31. do we then make the law of none effect
through faith? God forbid, yea we establish the law. Pareus.

Controv. 17. How the Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one
that believes, v. 16.
This, and such like places, which ascribe justification and salvation to
faith, as Ioh. 3.16. that whosoever believes in him, should not perish: Act.
13.39. by him every one, that believes is justified: Bellarmine would thus
elude. 1. he says, that these Scriptures must be understood negatiuely, that
without faith none are justified: not that only by faith they are justified.
2. then by all are understood, all nations, that there is no difference between
Jew, and Gentile, but that one common way to salvation is propounded to them
all. 3. And it being applied to every particular man, the meaning is, that
not faith of it self alone, but with other things, as hope, charity,
justifies, Bellar. lib. 1. de justify. c. 22.

Contra. 1. Yes these sayings hold affirmatively, that faith is sufficient unto
salvation: for our Savior says, John 5. he that believes, etc. has
everlasting life, and is passed from death to life: that which gives a man a
present assurance, and real possession of everlasting life, is alone
availeable to salvation. 2. True it is, that none of what nation soever are
excluded, but every one that believes wheresoever, is justified: this
confirms the doctrine of justification by faith, that there is no other way
to salvation either for Jew or Gentile. 3. And if the Gospel be the power of
God to salvation to every one that believes: then it follows that every
one that believes is saved, where else were the power of God to salvation, if
it were not effectual to save? if then this power be in faith to salvation, if
it could not save without the supply of other helps, this power should be
turned into weakness: that which is powerful to salvation, is sufficient to
salvation: Gods power works perfectly it has no want, nor requires any
help: but in faith is the power of God to salvation, Ergo, etc.

Controv. 18. Of the difference between the Law and the Gospel.
v. 18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness:
Bellarmine hence infers, that comminations and terrors, are as proper and
peculiar to the Gospel, as to the law, lib. 4. de iustificat. c. 2.

Contra. True it is, that the Gospel also has many comminations against
sinners: and as by the Gospel the righteousness of God is revealed from faith
to faith, v. 17. so the wrath of God is also revealed thereby against all
unrighteousness: but this is not the proper effect of the Gospel, but
accidentally: for the Gospel by the unthankfulness of them which believe it
not, being ordained for their salvation, is turned unto their condemnation:
And whereas the Law in general condemns all infidelity and unbelief, the
Gospel peculiarly condemns unbelief in Christ, Pareus. See further hereof,
Synops. Centur. 4. er. 60.

Controv. 19. Whether by natural means the Gentiles might have attained to
the knowledge of the only true God, without the special assistance of Gods
grace.
1. Bellarmine affirms the contrary, Deum esse, and vnum esse, cognosci
posse lumine rationis absque speciali gratiae auxilio, that it may be known
that God is, and that he is but one by the light of nature, without the
special help of grace: and he insisteth upon this place of the Apostle, v.
20. thereout urging these two arguments. 1. because the Apostle says, the
invisible things of the world are seen not by revelation, but by creation. 2.
and seeing the Gentiles are hereby made inexcusable, because they
notwithstanding this natural knowledge of God, committed idolatry, it
shows, that they knew God by the creatures, or else they might have excused
themselves by pretense of their ignorance, Bell. lib. 4. de great. c. 2.

Contra. 1. Though we consent not to their opinion, who hold, that nothing at
all can be known of God, without his special assistance: as Petrus ab Aliaco
affirms in 1. sent. qu. 3. which opinion see before confuted, qu. 54. for
many things touching the Godhead, as his goodness, wisdom, power, are seen
in the creation. 2. yet it cannot be proved, that the Gentiles did, or could
attain unto such a manifest knowledge of the only true God, only by the
light of nature, without Gods further assistance: And this is an evident
argument hereof, because never any of the Gentiles, de facto, in fact did
attain unto such knowledge of God by the light of nature. 3. And concerning
the reasons urged: S. Paul shows, that the invisible things of God were to be
seen in the Creatures: not that the Gentiles did therein see them, but they
might have seen them, if they had not bin wilfully blind: and they were made
inexcusable, because they could not plead simple ignorance, but their own
wilfulness was the cause of their ignorance, which took from them all excuse:
see hereof before, qu. 52.54.57. So that Augustines resolution is good: that
the creatures do indeed cry with a loud voice, ipse fecit nos, God made us,
sed surdis canere, etc. but they thus speak unto deaf men, unless God show
further mercy: see further Synops. Centur. 4. err. 38.

Controv. 20. Against some Philosophers, that the world is not eternal.
v. 20. The invisible things of God, to wit, his eternal power and Godhead are
seen, etc. If Gods eternity is seen by the works which he made, then that
which is made is not eternal. 1. that which is made must have one by whom it
was made: he then that made the world, was before the world: then as by the
things made, the maker is found to be eternal; so the things made, which had a
beginning, are concluded not to be eternal. 2. beside, where things are
contrary one unto another, there is no eternity, now in the world there are
things contrary, as actions, passions, generation, corruption: seeing then the
world consists of corruptible parts, the whole must be also subject to
corruption: Then is the opinion of Aristotle vain and false, that held the
world to be eternal, and of Pliny, which calls the world God, and of
Hermeas the Stoike, that imagined a coeternitie of matter with God, whereof he
made the world: ex Faio.

Controv. 21. Against the adoration, and setting up of images in Churches and
places of prayer, ver. 23. they turned the glory of the incorruptible God to
the s^imilitude of an image.
Though the use generally of all images be not condemned among Christians, as
the Turks hold it unlawful to make the similitude of any thing: for there may
be a civil and historical use of pictures and images: yet it is dangerous to
set them up in the public places of Gods service, either to fall down and
worship before them, as the Romanists do, or to retain them for a supposed
ornament, as the Lutherans: The reasons against all such public use of
imagerie, are these.

1. It is the direct commandment of God, that he would have no image made to
represent him by, Deuteronomy. 4.15. Take heed, that ye corrupt not your selves, or
make you a graven image or representation of any figure, whether it be male or
female, the likeness of any beast, or the likeness of any feathered foul,
etc. the same prohibition is expressed in the second commandment of the Moral
Law, which is perpetual, and binds for ever, Pare.

2. Herein pseudo-Christians do conform themselves to the Gentiles, by whom
imagerie was brought in, and herein they do oppose themselves to the decision
of the Turks and Jews: for as the Gentiles did use the pictures and images of
beasts, which they joined to their idols, so is it among the Romanists: as they
make John Baptist with a lamb in his lap, Vendeline with oxen, Antonie with
hogs, Eustachius with buckes and dogs, Gallus with a bear, Gertrude with
mise, Martine and George upon horseback: These were the very superstitious
fashions of the heathen, Gualter.

3. Nay the very Gentiles at the first did a long time forbear the
superstitious use of images: Plutarke writes in the life of Numa Pompilius,
that he would suffer no images to be in Churches, because he thought it not fit
to make God like unto man, or any other thing, who is an invisible spirit: and
so the Romans continued without images for the space 170. years: Varro also
thus writes hereof: that they which first brought in images, metum ciuitatibus
ademerunt, and errorem addiderunt, did take away the fear and awe of the gods
from cities, and brought in error: And if the first use had remained, castius
dij obseruarentur, the gods should more chastely and sincerely have been
worshipped still: to this purpose Augustine reports the words of Varro, lib.
4. de ciuit. dei. c. 31.

4. The daily offense and hinderance that comes by images set up in the
Churches shows the inconueniencie of them: for they draw away men's minds
from true devotion, and their eyes are first set to gaze upon such objects:
therefore the Lacedaemonians forbad, that any images should be set up in their
Counsel house, least that by the sight thereof, their minds might be drawn
away from the business of the commonwealth, which they came together to consult
about: Augustine also gives this reason, concion. 2. in Psalm. 103. because by
the very place some honor is given to images, when they are set up in
Churches, Martyr.

5. The first that are found to have made account of images among Christians
for any religious use, was Marcellina the companion of the heretic
Carpocrates, who privately had the images of Christ, Paul, Homer, Pythagoras,
which she used to burn incense unto: Augustine. lib. de haeres. ad Quodvult
Deum: But among the ancient Christians the public use of images in places of
prayer was condemned: Epiphanius coming to a Church in the diocese of the
Bishop of Jerusalem, there seeing a picture in a cloth, caused it to be cut in
pieces: and he writ an epistle unto the Bishop of Jerusalem, that he should not
suffer any such thing to be done in his Churches: which epistle Hierome
translated into Latin^, therein showing his consent with him: In the Elibetan
Council, can. 36. it was decreed that no pictures should be made upon the
walls of the Churches: Leo Isauricus had a Council at Constantinople, wherein
images were condemned, yet after this they were restoared by Irene the
Empress, and Tharasuos patriarch of Constantinople in the 2. Nicene synod:
And about the same time Carolus the great held a Council in Germany, where
the decrees of the said Nicene synod were abrogated: ex Martyr.

Now on the contrary it will be thus objected for the use of images: 1. The
Lord in diverse visions did show himself in certain representations, as Dan.
7. like an ancient man, and Matthew. 3. the holy Ghost appeared in the likeness
of a dove.

Answ. 1. That which God did grant unto certain persons, upon some certain
and special occasions must not be drawn into a general rule: neither is it
lawful to leave a general precept, unless some special prohibition can be
showed, Pareus. 2. So the Lord in Scripture is likened unto a lion: they may as
well infer thereupon, that they may so picture him, Gualter. 3. And there is
great difference, between the writing of Scripture, and a picture: for the
Scripture speaking of such visions and representations, expounds it self,
and shows the meaning thereof: but a picture is dumb and idle: Martyr. 4.
and though such visions may be historically represented, yet it follows not,
that they should be set up for any religious use, Faius.

2. Object. Many miracles have bin done before images, as Eusebius makes
mention of a brazen image of Christ at Cesarea, and there was an other image of
a woman by, touching the hemme of his garment: under the which grew an herb,
that after it came up so high as the skirts of the image, had a sovereign
power against all diseases.

Answer. 1. This image (the history being admitted) was not set up in any
religious place, but openly in the city, as a monument of that miraculous
work. 2. God might in the beginning of Christianity show such miracles, as
Peter's shadow healed the sick, for the confirmation of the Christian faith:
which miracles are now ceased. 3. this miracle being admitted, yet even such
images, when they are abused to idolatry, may notwithstanding be broken down:
as the brazen serpent had a special virtue, to heal the biting of serpents in
them that looked upon it, yet notwithstanding H^z. Isiah brake it down, when
it began to be abused to superstition.

2. Object. God has punished such as offered any contumelic or disgrace to
such images, as being the signs of God: as Socrates writes, lib. 7.
tripartit. histor. how Julian removed the said image of Christ at Cesarea, and
caused his own to be set up instead thereof, but it was cast down by
lightening: and when the heathen had drawn the other image in disgrace round
about the streets, the Christians took it up, and preserved it, etc.

Ans. 1. Images set up for such idolatrous and superstitious uses, are no
signs of God: and therefore the honor given unto such is a contumelic and
dishonor unto God: for the will of him that gives honor is not the rule of
honor, but of him that is honored. 2. yet even the disgrace and despite
offered to such false signs of God, redoundeth sometime unto God, when they
are done with an intention to dishonor God, Pareus: as Julian did disgrace
that image upon his hatred to Christ, and therefore the Lord did therein show
his power: see further against the adoration of images, Hexap. in Exodus c. 20.
Command. 2. Controv. 4.

22. Controv. Of the corrupt reading of the vulgar Latin translation, v. 32.
The Latin translation thus stands, Who, when they knew the justice of God,
did not understand, that they which do such things, are wortie of death, not
only they which do them, but they also which consent unto the doers, etc.
whereas according to the original, the words are thus truly translated, The
which knowing the justice of God, how that they which commit such things are
worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them, etc. B. or
favor those that do them. So that the Latin translation fails, 1. both in
the words: for these words, did not understand, and they which do them, are
not in the original: 2. as also in the sense: for according unto the Greek
reading, the Apostle makes it a more heinous thing to favor and patronize
evil doers, then to be a doer of evil: but after the other reading, the
latter is the greater: 3. beside after the vulgar Latin, the words include a
contradiction: for when they knew the justice of God, how could they choose, but
understand it: 4. Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theophylact, do read and interpret
this place according unto the Greek text.

Bellarmine here answers: 1. that some Greek copies had had these word,
(...) they understood not: as appears in Origens commentary, and Titlemannus
affirms, that he had seen an ancient Greek copy with those words. 2. it is
a greater sin to do evil, as to commit murder, then only to consent. 3.
they might have a theoricall knowledge, and yet fail in practice, and so not
understand in effect. 4. Cyprian, Ambrose, Sedulius, Hayme, Anselme, do read
here according to the vulgar Latin, so we may set one ancient writer against
an other: to this purpose Bellarm. lib. 3. de verb. Dei. c. 14.

Contra. 1. Though some Greek copies might have those words, yet the most, and
the most ancient have them not: as is evident by the Greek commentaries: and
the Syrian translator follows the Greek text, as it is now extant. 2. The
Apostle speaks not of a bare consent unto evil, but of favoring,
patronizing, and taking pleasure in them, which is more then to do evil: for
this one may do of infirmity, the other proceeds of a settled malice. 3. the
understanding is in the judgment of the mind, not in the practice: and
therefore to know a thing, and yet not to know or understand it, includes a
contradiction. 4. the Greek authors and commentaries are more to be respected
in this case, for the finding out of the best reading in the Greek, then the
Latin writers.

23. Controv. Against the Popish distinction of venial and mortal sins.
v. 32. Worthy of death. Hence the Rhemists infer, that some sins are
mortal, that is, worthy of damnation, some venial, that is, pardonable of
their own nature, and not worthy of damnation.

Contra. 1. This distinction is contrary to the Scripture, which says, the
wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. no sin is excepted: and whosoever
continues not in all things written in the law, is under the curse, Gal. 3.10.
And if any sin were venial in it own nature, it would follow, that Christ
died not for all sins: for those sins, which are pardonable in themselves,
need not Christ's pardon. 2. Indeed there are degrees of sin, and some are
worthy of greater condemnation then others, and are more easily pardoned, yet
in Gods justice every sin deserves death: which are through Gods mercy made
venial both the less and greater sins: so that one and the same sin may
be mortal to the impenitent, and yet venial to the penitent believer.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. v. 1. Called to be an Apostle: none then must take upon them any
Ecclesiastical function, but they which are thereunto called and appointed of
God. Heb. 5.4.

2. Observe. v. 5. For obedience to the faith: the Lord straightly charge,
that obedience should be given to the faith of his Son: whence are these
sayings, Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son. Matthew. 17.5. Hear him: they then
profess not the Gospel of Christ truly, who make only a show thereof in
words, but deny obedience in deed.

3. Observe. v. 7. Grace to you and peace: this inward peace of conscience, is
that peace which can not be taken from us: all other things in the world are
temporal, but the grace and favor of God, and this inward peace, ne morie
ipsa abscinduntur, are not cut off by death it self: Chrysostom. for this peace
we ought all to labor, which Christ has left unto us after an other manner,
then the world leaves peace, Ioh. 14.27.

4. Observe. v. 8. I give thanks, etc. for you all. This is true charity, to
pray one for an other, and to give thanks unto God for the graces bestowed
upon others, as if they were conferred upon our selves: And as here the Apostle
prays for the Church, so the Church prays for the Apostle S. Peter, Act.
12.5. the Pastor and people are hereby taught one to pray for an other.

5. Observe. v. 12. That I might have consolation together with you. Herein the
Apostles modesty appears, who takes not himself to be so perfect, but that
he might receive some comfort even by the faith of the Romans: Let no man
therefore despise the gifts and graces of others: for every one may profit by
an other: even as one member helps an other.

7. Observe. v. 13. I have been let hitherto. Seeing the purposes of holy
men, as here this of S. Paul was hindered, it teachet us, that we should commend
and commit all our purposes, and counsels to Gods providence, and fatherly
direction.

8. Observe. v. 17. The just shall live by faith. Hence Chrysostom infers,
that men should take heed of curiosity, to know a reason of Gods works: but
they only must believe: As Abraham was not curious, when God bad him sacrifice
his son, but he obeyed without any further reasoning, or disputation: But the
Israelites, when they understood, that the Cananites were as giants, because
they saw no reason, or likelihood to overcome them, doubted, and so fell in the
wilderness: so he concludes, vides. quantum sit incredulitatis barathrum, you
see what a dangerous downfall incredulity is, and what a safe defense faith
is.

9. Observe. v. 24. Wherefore God gave them up to the lusts, etc. The Lord
sometime gave the idolatrous Samaritans over to lions, 2. King. 17. but he
gives over these idolatrous Gentiles to their own hearts lusts, and vile
affections: which did more tyranize over them, then lions and tygres: for when
the body is given up to wild beasts, and deprived of life, nothing happens
against the condition of our mortal nature: but when the mind is ruled by
lust, and so the affection prevails against reason: this is monstrous, and
unnatural. Perer. disputat. 20.

10. Observe. Which is to be blessed for ever. We are taught by the example of
the Apostle, when as we speak of the majesty of God, to break forth into his
praise, as the Apostle does here, and c. 9.5. 1. Tim. 1.17.

11. Observe. Chrysostom further observes, that as God still remains
blessed, though his glory were defaced by the idolaters, as much as in them
lay: so likewise the members of Christ, when they are reviled and railed upon,
are not thereby hurt: nonne vides adamanters cum percutitur, percutit iteru^,
like as the adamant, when it is smitten, it smites again, and leaves a dint
in the hammer that strikes it.

The second Chapter.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
THerefore thou art inexcusable, O man, ( O son of man. T.) whosoever thou
art, that iudgest: ( thy neighbor. T. but this is not in the original) for
wherein thou iudgest an other, L.T. ( in that, that thou iudgest an other, G.
or in that wherein thou iudgest an other: but in the original it is, (...),
for wherein: the antecedent is omitted) thou condemnest thy self: for thou
that iudgest, do the same things: (not thou do the same things which thou
iudgest. L. in the original it is (...), thou judging, that is, which iudgest:
the relative is referred to the person, not to the thing.)

2 But we know ( are sure, B.) that the judgment of God is according to truth,
against those V.B.T.Be. G. ( upon those, L. the preposition is (...), in,
against) which commit such things.

3 And think thou this, O thou man, that iudgest them, which do such
things, ( condemnest them, which etc. Be. but (...) here used, signifies
properly to judge, (...), to condemn) that thou shall escape the judgment of
God?

4 Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, L.V. A.B. (or benignity,
gentleness, T. Be. rather then bountifulnes, G. the word is (...)) and patience,
and long sufferance, (or long animitie) not knowing that the goodness (or
benignity of God) leads thee (or brings thee, R. (...)) to repentance?
(not to penance, R. (...) signifies rather repentance and change of the mind,
then outward penance)

5 But thou, after thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent, do treasure
up unto thy self ( heapest up. L.B.G. gatherest to thy self, V. but the word
properly signifies to stoare or treasure up) wrath, in the day of wrath,
V.A.L. (that is, against the day of wrath, Be. T.G. B. but in the original it
is in the day) and of the revelation T.A.L. ( declaration, G. B. the word is
(...), revelation) of the just judgment of God:

6 Who will render to every man ( reward every man, B.G. but it is put in the
original in the dative) according to his works:

7 That is, to them, which by continuance in good works (or in well doing,
B.G.V. but the word in the original, is good works: not according to patience
in good works, L.R. for (...) signifies as well perseverance, and
continuance, as patience: nor, which by perseverance seek the glory of good
works, Be. good works is better referred to continuance) seek glory honor,
and immortality, eternal life:

8 But unto them, that are contentious ( verbat. of contention, L:R.) and
disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness, (not give credit to unrighteousness,
L. R. for both the words (...), disobeying, and (...), obeying, are of the same
deriuation) shall be indignation, and wrath: V.A.B.G.Be. ( wrath and
indignation, L. T. but the first (...), excandescentis, commotion or
indignation, is less, then (...), wrath, rage)

9 Tribulation and anguish shall be against the soul Be.V.A. (upon the soul,
B.G.L. to every soul, T. the first rather, see before v. 2.) of every man that
does evil, of the Jew first, and of the Grecian. (not to the Jews first, and
to the Gentiles. T.)

10 But glory, honor, and peace to every one ( every man, B.) that does good,
( to every one that does good, glory, honor, etc. G. but here the words are
transposed) to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian. (not, to the Gentiles,
T.)

11 For there is no respect of persons V.B.G. (acception of persons, Be.L. R.)
with God. ((...), acception of persons)

12 For as many as have sinned without the law (not, whosoever has sinned, L.
B. for (...), whosoever, is put in the plural) shall perish also without the
law, and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law:

13 For not the hearers of the law, are just with God, ( before God. G.T. in
the sight of God, B. the word is (...), apud, with) but the doers of the law
shall be justified.

14 For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by nature ( not
naturally, L. R. the word is (...), by nature) the things of the Law, (
contained in the law, G. B. which are of the law, but in the original it is,
the things of the law) they having not the law, are a law unto themselves,

15 Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, ( the effect of
the law. G. but the word is (...) work) their conscience also bearing witness,
(not, bearing them witness, L.T.B. for, them, is not in the original) and their
thoughts (not of their thoughts. L. for in the original it is put absolutely in
the genitive) accusing one an other mutually, or excusing:

16 In the day ( at the day. G.B. but in the original it is, in the day) when
God shall judge the secrets of men according to my Gospel, by Jesus Christ. (
by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel. B.G. but the words are here transposed)

17 Behold, thou art surnamed a Jew, V.B.G.Be. (not, but if thou art surnamed,
L.R.T. the word is (...), behold, not (...), as though it were two words) and
restest in the law, and gloriest in God, ( make thy beast of God. B. but the
preposition is (...), in)

18 And know his will, and triest the things that differ, A. B. ( approouest
the most profitable things. L.T. approouest the more excellent things, G.B. but
the phrase is used in the first sense, Philip. 1.10. (...) properly signifies
things differing) being instructed by the Law:

19 And art persuaded, or confident, V.Be.A.G. ( beleeuest, B. presumest, L.
the word is (...) which S. Paul uses of himself, Romans 8.38.) that thou art a
guide of the blind, a light of them, which are in darkness:

20 An instructor of them which lack discretion, B. G. T. ( of the foolish, L.
the word is (...), without wit or discretion) a teacher of the unlearned, V. B.
G. ( of infants, verbal, (...), L.B.T. he means, such as were infants in
knowledge) having the form of knowledge, and of truth in the Law.

21 Thou therefore, which teach an other, teach thou not thy self? thou
that preachest, a man should not steal, do thou steal?

22 Thou, which say, a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? thou that abhortest idols, committest thou sacrilege? A.B.G.Be.
read these two verses with an interrogation: V.T.L. read without: and so the
next verse also.

23 Thou, that gloriest in the Law, thorough transgression of the law, B.V. (
prevarication, L. breaking of the law. B.G (...) transgression) dishonourest
thou God?

24 For the Name of God thorough you, is blasphemed among the Gentiles, as it
is written.

25 For circumcision verily profits, Be.V.G. ( avails, B. (...) profits)
if thou do the law: but if thou be a transgressor of the law, thy circumcision
is made uncircumcision:

26 Therefore if the uncircumcision ( prepuce. R. the word is praeputium in
Latin, but it can not be made an English word) keep the rites of the law, Be.
( ordinances. B. G. justices, L. A. the word is (...), rites) shall not his
uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?

27 And shall not uncircumcision by nature, keeping the law (not by nature
keeping the law. T. these words, by nature, are evidently joined with the first
clause in the original) judge thee, that by the letter and circumcision art a
transgressor of the law?

28 For not he, that is in open show, ( outward, B. G. (...), in manifest, in
open show) is a Jew, not that which is in open show, in the flesh, is
circumcision:

29 But he that is in secret, is a Jew ( he is a Jew which is one within. B. G.
but the word is (...), in the secret or hid part:) and the circumcision is of
the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter: whose praise, (that is of the Jew,
as the relative (...), of the masculine gender shows) is not of men, but of
God.

2. The parts, Method, and Argument.
THis Chapter has two parts: 1. the Apostle conuinceth all to be sinners, and
so to deserve condemnation, much less to be justified by their works: 2. he
takes away certain pretexts and excuses which might be alleged.

1. As in the former chapter he convinced the Gentiles of sin, and so to be
subject to Gods just wrath, because both they committed evil things
themselves, and favored those which did them: so now he urges an other
argument from their own conscience: The reason stands thus: whosoever
condemns himself, is inexcusable: this is proved in the second verse,
because the judgment of God is according to truth, to judge every man
according to his own conscience: but all men do condemn themselves, because
they judge others for the same things which they do themselves, v. 1.
therefore they are inexcusable, v. 1.

2. The pretenses are 1. either general, of all men, v. 3. to 11. or special,
first of the Gentiles, v. 11. to 17. or of the Jews, v. 17. to the end.

1. The general pretext or pretense, 1. is propounded, v. 3, 4. that God
being merciful and long-suffering, will not straightly punish and condemn
every one that is evil. 2. the Apostles answer follows, 1. from the end and
cause of Gods long-suffering, which is to call men to repentance, v. 4. in the
latter part. 2. from the effect of impenitencie, which is the heaping up of
wrath: which is confirmed by the efficient cause, the justice of God, v. 6.
then by an anrithesis and opposition both of the rewards and punishments, v. 7,
8, 9, 10. which also is amplified and confirmed by the reason thereof, that God
is no accepter of persons, v. 11.

2. The first special pretext is of the Gentiles, which may be collected thus:
It is unjust for those which have no law to be punished: the Gentiles have no
law, Ergo.

The Apostle answers to the mayor, or first part, by a distinction, that they
which have no law at all, neither natural, nor written, are not to be
punished, but if they have either or both, if they sin against the law of
nature, or the written law, they shall be judged accordingly, v. 12. the latter
part of sinning against the written law, is further illustrated by preventing
an objection: for the Jew might allege, that he had the law, and gave ear
unto it, therefore he should not be judged thereby: the Apostle answers, that
not the hearers of the law, but the doers should be justified, v. 13.

The second part of the argument, that the Gentiles had no law, the Apostle
denies, proouing, that although they had not the written law, yet they had
the law of nature: which he shows by two arguments, taken from two effects,
the one, because some of them by the light of nature, did some things agreeable
to the written law, v. 14. and again, they had the testimony of their own
conscience, either accusing or excusing them, v. 15. which is set forth by the
circumstance of the time, when this testimony of their conscience shall most
of all show it self, namely at the day of judgment, v. 16.

Then follow the particular pretexts and excuses of the Jews. The first is,
that the Jews had the knowledge of the law, and therefore that they should not
be damned together with the rest: this defense of the Jews is first propounded
in their person, in diverse particular points, wherein the Jews boasted, as in
the knowledge of the law, in the teaching, and instructing of others, v. 17. to
20. then the Apostle adioyneth his answer, denying the argument, because
although they had the Law, yet they observed it not: which he proves by
experience of their evil life, v. 21, 22, 23. and by a testimony of
Scripture, v. 24.

The other pretext and defense of the Jews was this; circumcision is not
unprofitable, the Jews had circumcision, therefore it was available unto
them; to this the Apostle makes this answer, to the proposition by this
distinction: that circumcision profited if it kept the law, which is amplified
by the contrary, that if it kept not the law, it was no better then
uncircumcision; nay uncircumcision keeping the law, should be preferred before
circumcision, not keeping the law, v. 25, 26, 27. to the assumption he also
answers by a double distinction, of a Jew outward, and inward, and of
circumcision in the flesh, and the spirit: that a Jew outward should gain
nothing before God by his circumcision only in the flesh, and not in the
heart, v. 28, 29.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. To whom the Apostle here speaks, Wherefore thou art inexcusable,
O man, etc. to the Gentiles, or Jews.
1. Some think that the Apostle uses here a transition, and as he had
hitherto discovered the sins of the Gentiles, so now he turns him unto the
Jews, to lay open their hypocrisy: Lyran. And Tolet thinks, that the
Apostle reasons from the less to the greater: that if the Gentiles which had
not the written law of God, were not excusable, much less the Jews: But the
particle (...), wherefore, shows, that this is inferred out of that which
went before, and so is a continuance of the same argument.

2. Some here comprehend not the Gentiles only, but the Jews also, that both
the Jews in condemning the idolatry of the Gentiles, and the Gentiles
censuring the Jews for their evil life, and yet did the same things
themselves, should be both without excuse: Haymo, gloss. ordin. Anselm. Perer.
But it can not be showed, how the Jews condemning the Gentiles of idolatry,
were guilty of the same themselves.

3. The third opinion is, that the Apostle still treats of the Gentiles: and
hereof there are two reasons; both because those words have a necessary
connection, and reference to and with the former chapter; and afterward, v. 17.
the Apostle begins by name to deal with the Jews. But they which agree
that this is spoken of the Gentiles, yet do differ therein. 1. Origin will
have this verse to be the conclusion of the former chapter: wherein he
commits two faults, first in joining together things of diverse natures: for
the Apostle there touched those, which both favored evil in others, and did
practice it in themselves: but now he taxes an other sort of men, that seemed
to mislike sin in others, and yet did it themselves: and again, Origin in
dividing the first verse from the second: for we know, that the judgment of
God is according to the truth, which is a reason of the former, does separate
and distinguish those things, which should be conjoined.

2. Some refer this to such as were Judges among the Gentiles, who though
they made laws to judge and punish by, yet did commit the same things
themselves: Theodoret. But the Apostles words being general, Thou art
inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art, are not to be so restrained.

3. Chrysostom thinks the Romans are here specially taxed, who were the
Lords of other nations, and so took upon them to judge others: But the Apostle
hitherto in general has reasoned against all the Gentiles.

4. Some think that the Apostle speaks of the judgment of the Philosophers,
such as were Socrates, Cato, who erred in the same things, whereof they
reproved others: Hyper. But the Apostle in general speaks to every man
whatsoever.

5. Yea some do make the Apostles speech yet more particular: that he should
specially mean Seneca, with whom he was familiar: But as yet S. Paul had not
been at Rome, and therefore if Seneca were known unto the Apostle, this their
knowledge began after the writing of this epistle.

6. Wherefore I rather think with Pareus, that the Apostle notes all such in
general among the Gentiles, who found fault with others, being guilty of the
same faults themselves: yet so, as the Jews be not excluded, though
principally the Gentiles be taxed: see the analysis before: he speaks of a
general judgment whereby one judges an other: that is, subscribeth to Gods
judgment, that they which do such things are worthy of death: so
Chrysostom: Vniuersi mortales, licet non omnes thronos iudiciales, etc. for
all mortal men, though they have not judicial thrones, etc. yet they judge
either in word, or in the secret of their conscience. Ambrose thinks, that
the Apostle here preuenteth an objection, that whereas he had before noted
such, as committed sin themselves, and favored it in others, they might
think to be free, which condemned it in others, though they did it themselves:
therefore the Apostle shows, that even such could no way escape the judgment
of God.

2. Quest. Whether one offend in judging an other, wherein he is guilty
himself.
It may be thus objected, that if a man make himself inexcusable, in judging
an other for the same crime, which he knows by himself, then it is not safe
for such an one to judge an other: as our Savior reprooueth those which
brought the woman taken in adultery, because they themselves also were not
without sin, Ioh. 8. Ans. 1. The judge, which condemns an other, is in the
same fault, either occulte and in foro conscientiae, secretly and in the court
of their conscience, and then they sin not in judging of an other: or they
are publicly detected of the same sin: and then they sin, not in that they
give just sentence upon other, but in respect of the scandal and offense given
to others: Thomas: non peccat, quia reprehendit, sed quia inordinate
reprehendit, he sins not because he reprehendeth him, but because he does it
inordinately: Gorrh. 2. so that the power of the office must be distinguished
from the vice of the person: such a judge neither offends against the laws,
which command malefactors to be punished: nor against the offender, which has
deserved that punishment: but he sins in giving offense to others: Pareus.
3. our blessed Savior misliketh not the action, that they accused the
adulteress: for he himself admonishes her to sin no more: but the manner,
that they did it in hatred, delighting in the punishment of an other, and in
hypocrisy, not looking into themselves. Martyr. 4. Herein David offended, who
pronounced sentence of death against the man, of whom Nathan put the case in
his parable, not yet perceiving that he himself was the man, against whom he
pronounced sentence: Erasm. such many were there among the heathen: Diogenes
accused Grammarians, which diligently sought out Ulysses faults, and were
ignorant of their own; and Musicians, which tuned their instruments, being
themselves of untuneable manners; Astronomers, for that they gazed upon the
stars, and saw not the things before their own feere; Orators, because they
were careful to speak just things, but not to do them: the common people
praised them, which contemned money, and yet they themselves were addicted to
the desire of money. ex Gryn.

5. Now whereas our Savior says, Judge not, that ye be not judged, Matthew. 7.
he speaks not there against civil judgment, or brotherly admonition: but
against hasty and precipitate judgment, and uncharitable curiosity, when men
pried and searched into the faults of others, not with a desire to amend them,
but to the end, tha^ their faults might be rather excused with the multitude of
otehr delinquents. Martyr.

Quest. 3. Of these words, v. 2. We know that the judgment of God is
according to truth.
1. We know: some will have this principally referred to the Jews: we know
by the Scriptures, Tolet. we the Apostles and spiritual men, Gorrh. we know
both by the light of nature, and by the testimony of the word, Pareus. But the
Apostle having here to deal against all men in general, does urge this
natural principle, that God sees more sharply then men, and therefore is a
most just judge, Beza. so that he says in effect, we know, that is, it is
certain: Osiander.

2. The judgment of God: Chrysostom refers this to the final judgment at
the last day, that howsoever some may escape unpunished in this world, yet the
judgment of the next world shall be according to truth: so also Osiander: but
even in this world the Lord also often shows his upright and just judgment:
Ambrose makes this the connection of the sentence: that if man judge the sins
which he sees in another, God shall much more: But these words are rather a
confirmation of the former sentence: that he which judged an other, and yet
committed the same things, could not so escape, for though he were blind in his
own judgment, God would find him out: his hypocrisy could not be hid.

3. According to truth: where the judgment of God is opposed to the judgment
of man, in these two things: first man's judgment is partial, he often judges
according to the person, not the quality of the offense, Calvin: and again
there are many secret things which God will bring to light, but man cannot
judge them, Lyran. Socrates who publicly disputed of virtue, yet privately was
an idolater: Cato 2 Censor of others, yet was an vsuter, and did prostitute his
wife: these men though they seemed without reproof unto others, yet the Lord
that judges according to truth, would find out their sins, Beza.

4. Origin here moves this question, if God judge according to the truth, so
that the evil receive evil things, and the good good things at the hands of
God: how then comes it to pass, that a man who has lived wickedly and
repents him, finds remission of sins and favor with God: and an other
which has lived well, and afterward falls into evil, is punished: the
answer is, that God judges here according to truth, for in the one, ingressa
piet as impietatem depellet, godliness enters and expels ungodliness: and
in the other ungodliness expels godliness, and so every one is judged in
truth, according to that present state wherein he is, whatsoever he had been
before.

Quest. 4. Whether a judge be bound herein to be like unto God, to judge
according to the truth which he knows.
Some here resolve, that a Judge is bound to follow the evidence which is
brought in before him, though he know the truth to be otherwise in his own
conscience: indicandum est secundum veritatem manifestam, id est, probatam,
they must judge according to the manifest truth, which is proved, and not
according to the secret truth, Gorrham. Hugo Cardinal. and so their resolution
is, that a judge is not bound to absolve a man publicly condemned, though he
know him to be innocent.

Contra. 1. Indeed a judge cannot follow that truth which is hid and secret
and no way made known unto him: and in this case if an innocent man be
condemned, the Judge is free, because he follows the evidence, having no
other direction to the contrary: But if the Judge know in his conscience that
he is innocent, he is by no means to consent to his condemnation, whatsoever
evidence is brought in to the contrary: for he is to judge according to the
truth, as God judges: now there can be but one truth: neither can the action
of that Judge be warranted, which is against his knowledge: for whatsoever is
not of faith is sin, Romans 14. But see this question handled at large, Hexapl.
in Exodus c. 23. qu. 13.14. whether I must desire the Reader to have recourse:
because it were superfluous to handle the same things in diverse places.

Quest. 6. Of the reasons why the Lord uses patience and forbearance toward
sinners.
1. The Apostle uses three words, (...), goodness, bountifulness, which is
seen in the general benefits, which God vouchsafes to the wicked, as in
granting them the Sunshine and rain, and such other temporal blessings:
(...), patience and forbearance, which is in bearing with the wicked, and not
punishing them in their sins: (...), longanimitie, and long sufferance: when
God still deferreth his punishments, though men heap sin to sin: the first
and chiefest cause of this long sufferance in God, is the expectation of men's
repentance, that they should thereby come to amendment of life, as S. Peter
says, 2. epist. c. 3.9. God is patient toward us, and would have no man to
perish, but would have all men come to repentance. 2. As Gods mercy and
goodness herein appears, so also the malice of men, in abusing the Lords
patience, and their more just condemnation in the end is made manifest, as the
old world was most justly destroyed, after they had been warned an 120. years
by the preaching of Noah. 3. God takes occasion by the malice, impenitencie,
and hardness of heart in the wicked, to show his powerful and wonderful
works, as Pharaohs hardness of heart gave occasion to the Lord, to show his
wondrous works in Egypt. 4. While the impenitent abusing Gods long animitie,
are more hardened in their sins, others in the mean time make good use of the
divine patience, and are converted unto repentance: as in Egypt, though Pharaoh
became worse, yet many of the Egyptians were humbled by these plagues, and were
turned unto God, and joined unto his people. 5. God uses patience toward some,
for the ensample, encouragement, and confirmation of others, that they should
not despair of the goodness of God: as S. Paul says, that Jesus Christ might
first show on me all long suffering, unto the example of them, that in time to
come, shall believe in him to eternal life, 1. Timoth. 1.16.

Quest. 7. Whether the leading of men to repentance by Gods long sufferance,
argues that they are not reprobate.
It will be here objected, that seeing the long sufferance of God calls all
unto repentance, and whom he would have repent, he would have saved: it seems
then, that none are rejected or reprobate, whom the Lord so inviteth and
calls unto repentance.

Answer. 1. Such as are effectually called unto repentance by Gods patience and
long suffering, are indeed elected: for the elect only are effectually called
to repentance, but such as abuse Gods patience, and are impenitent still, may
notwithstanding be in the state of reprobation: for though the same means be
offered unto them to bring them to repentance, yet they have not the grace: the
decree then concerning the rejecting of such impenitent persons, and the offer
of such means, as might lead them unto repentance, may very well stand
together: because it is of their own hardness of heart that the means offered
are not effectual. 2. And thus also another objection may be answered, that
if it be Gods will, that such should come to repentance, whether the malice of
man therein can resist the will of God: for, if it were Gods absolute will and
good pleasure, that such should come unto repentance, no man could resist it:
God is able to change and turn the most impenitent and hard heart, if it
pleased him: But here we must distinguish between effectual calling, which
always takes place and none can hinder it, and calling not effectual, yet
sufficient if men did not put in a bar by their own hardness of heart: Gods
absolute will then is not resisted, when men come not to repentance: for his
will is to leave such to themselves by his just judgment: and not to give them
of his effectual grace, Faius. Now hereof no other reason can be given, why
God does not give his effectual grace to all, but his good pleasure, as our
Blessed Savior says, Matthew. 11.26. It is so father, because thy good pleasure
is such.

Quest. 7. How the bountifulnes of God in leading men to repentance, and the
revelation of his wrath, spoken of chapter 1.18. may stand together.
The revelation of Gods wrath and justice against all unrighteousness, and his
goodness and mercy in expecting the conversion and repentance of sinners, are
not contrary the one to the other: for if men have grace to come to amendment
of life by Gods long sufferance, then his mercy takes place in forgiving them
their sin, and acquiting them of their punishment which is satisfied for in
Christ: But if they become impenitent, and abuse Gods patience, then his
justice shows it self in their condign and deserved punishment: So Gods
bounty and mercy appears in forbearing to punish, if they will repent, and
his wrath is revealed, upon their impenitencie, and abusing of Gods long
sufferance, Pareus.

Quest. 8. How God is said to harden the heart, seeing the wicked do harden
their own hearts.
v. 5. After thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent: this hardness of
heart, is naturally in man's heart, and is increased by his own perverseness, and
obstinacy: yet God sometime also is said to harden the heart, as the Scripture
says, he hardened the heart of Pharaoh: This is done three ways, 1. because
men take occasion by Gods patience and forbearance, to continue in their
sins: and so the Lord may be said to harden the heart, because the wicked
abuse that occasion, which is sent of God: thus Origin, lib. 3. periarchor.
Basil in his oration, wherein he proves that God is not the author of evil:
but in this respect, man rather should be said to harden his own heart, in
abusing the occasion, then God in giving it. 2. Augustine takes this
induration of the heart to be said of God, when he withdraws his grace: as
discedente sole aqua obduratur, by the departure of the sun, the water is
congealed and hardened, sermon. 88. de tempor. 3. But beside the subtracting and
withholding of Gods grace, he concurreth as a just judge, by his secret power
so working, that both the inward suggestions of Satan, and the external
objects do all make together for the further hardening of their heart: see
before, c. 1. qu. 63.

Quest. 9. Whether hardness of heart and final impenitencie, be a special kind
of sin.
1. Pererius seems to collect so much by these two reasons. 1. because here
the Apostle joins hardness and impenitencie of heart together: that as
hardness of heart, is a special sin, so should the other be also. 2. here
is a special and most grievous punishment inflicted, the heaping and
treasuring up wrath: But neither of these reasons conclude, for both the
hardness of heart is rather the general effect of sin, and a perpetual
companion of an habit and custom in sin, then a special sin: and the
punishment here described is against not one but all their sins, wherein they
continue without repentance.

2. Vega lib 13. c. 20. super decret. Trident. de iustificat. shows that in
these two cases, impenitencie does assume a new kind of peculiar malice, that
is either in receiving of the Sacraments, for then especially men are commanded
to prepare their hearts by repentance: so that herein the commandment of God
is transgressed: and at the hour of death, for then a man not repenting is
accessarie to his own death, and so transgresses that commandment, thou
shall not kill: But neither of these reasons are sufficient. 1. when one
comes to the sacrament without due preparation, and so receives it
irreverently and profanely: there is a new sin indeed committed which is
profaneness and contempt of sacred things: but this is the fruit and effect of
his impenitencie: a new sin is added to his impenitencie, rather then
impenitencie it self is changed into a special sin. 2. And so likewise,
when one thorough impenitencie is careless of his salvation being at the
point of death: this carelesnes is also a fruit of impenitencie.

3. Thomas thus decideth this question: that if impenitencie be taken simply
for perseverance and continuance in sin, it is not a special sin, but a
circumstance rather of sin: but if there be beside, praepositum non
poenitendi, a purpose not to repent, now impenitencie is become a special
sin, Thomas 2.2. qu. 14. articl. 2. But this seems to be no perfect
distinction: for wheresoever impenitencie is, there is a purpose and resolution
not to repent, as long as the heart remains impenitent: Thus much then may be
added for the discussing of this question: that impenitencie is two ways to be
considered: either in respect of the object, which is sin, that one has
committed: and so it is a circumstance that accompanies sin: or as it is
joined with profanenes, contempt of God, and vacuitie of his fear, and so it
may have toward God, the nature of a special sin.

Quest. 10. Whether it stand with Gods justice to punish twice for the same
sins.
Seeing that the Gentiles were punished before, being delivered up to their
vile affections, c. 1.26. how then are they reserved here to a greater
punishment against the day of wrath? for the Prophet Nahum says, c. 1.9. non
consurget duplex tribulatio, double affliction or tribulation shall not rise up.

Answ. 1. This is not the meaning of the Prophet, that God cannot punish twice
for the same sin, but there he speaks of the destruction of the Assyrians,
that it should be at once, God should not need the second time to come upon
them: which was fulfilled in the euersion and overthrow of Nineueh, it was at
once destroyed for ever.

2. This rule well holds in the course of justice, that one be not punished
twice for the same sin. 1. if by that one punishment full satisfaction be
made for sin: but the wicked by their temporal punishment, cannot fully
satisfy Gods justice for their sin. 2. punishment begun in this life, and
eternal punishment afterward, are rather diverse degrees of the whole
punishment due unto sin, then diverse punishments: as here in the course of
humane justice, a malefactor may be both put to the rack, to the wheel,
hanged, and quartered: and all these shall make but one condign punishment for
his offense, Par. 3. and when one punishment works unto amendment, then a
second is needless: as the righteous only are chastened in this life, but the
wicked because they profit not by temporal punishment unto repentance, have
their punishment begun in this life, and finished in the next: as the old world
and Sodomites were both temporally and eternally punished.

Quest. 11. Whether every one shall be rewarded according to his works, ver.
6.
Against this saying of the Apostle, v. 6. Who will reward every man according
to his works, it will be objected, that they which repent them in their last
hour, and so are saved, have no time to show good works, and likewise
infants: therefore it appears not how they should be judged according to
their works.

Answ. 1. They which have grace to repent them in their last hour, are not
void of good works: as the theife upon the cross showed these good fruits of
his faith, he confessed Christ, acknowledged his sin, reproved the
unbelieving theife, and prayed earnestly for everlasting salvation. And if he
had lived longer, he had no doubt a full purpose of heart to have expressed his
faith by his godly works: the like may be said of those which are at the point
of death, called to repentance. 2. Concerning infants there is an other reason:
for either they be saved according to the grace of Gods free election: or some
are damned being left in their own nature, the children of wrath: Now the
Apostle speaks not of infants here, but of such as are of years to commit
evil, or do good, Pareus.

Quest. 12. How it stands with Gods goodness to punish evil with evil.
It may be thus objected: that sin is committed three ways, either in
rewarding evil for good, or evil for evil, or in not recompensing good for
good: But God cannot sin, therefore it should seem to be against the nature
of the divine goodness to punish sin with eternal damnation: and it is
against Christ's rule, who commands that we should do good against evil.

Answer. 1. Two ways may evil be rendered for evil, ve! libidine vindictae,
vel amore iusticiae, either with desire of revenge, and so it is sin: or for
love of justice, and so it is not sin: for then it should not be lawful for
Magistrates to inflict punishment upon malefactors. 2. in this life also God
sometime does send evil for good, upon his own children, as when he
afflicts them: but it is for their greater good, as to increase their faith
and augment their reward, Hugo: but in the next world, he never renders evil
for good: but either evil for evil, as to the wicked, because he is just: or
good for evil, as to infants, because he is good and gracious: or good for
good, as to his faithful servants, because he is both just, and good and
gracious, Gorrhan.

Quest. 13. Of the true reading of the 7. verse.
1. Some do thus read, To them which by continuance in well doing, seek
eternal life, he shall render, glory, honor, immortality: thus Oecumenius,
Ambrose, Gregory, lib. 28. moral, c. 6. Haymo. Pererius. But in this reading
there is a manifest inverting of the order of the words: which stand thus in
the original: to them which by patience in well doing seek glory, honor,
immortality, eternal life: that is, God will give eternal life unto such:
whereas then the sense may be found out, without any such inversion, the best
way is to keep the due order of the words. 2. some do thus read: to them
which by patience (the glory of good works, honor, immortality) seek
eternal life: Beza, Gryneus, Aretius: that is, God will give the glory,
honor, immortality, due unto their good works, unto them which continue to
the end, in seeking eternal life; this reading agrees with the former in
transposing of the words: saving that they join, good works to the words
following, glory, honor, etc. which is better annexed to the former word,
patience and perseverance: as appears, v. 10. To every one that does good,
shall be glory, honor, etc. where these words glory, honor, are severed
from the former: as it must be so here also. 3. Therefore the best reading of
these words is this: To them which by perseverance in well doing, seek glory,
honor, immortality, eternal life: that is, God shall render eternal life
unto such: the word render must be supplied out of the former verse, who will
render unto every man, etc. and the word is beter joined, with eternal life,
then with the former words, glory, honor, immortality: because the words
need not be transposed, or put out of their place in this reading, as in both
the former: Thus Origin, Chrysostom, Theophylact, do interpret this place:
and the Syrian interpreter, Calvin, Pareus, Faius, with others.

Quest. 14. What the Apostle means, by patience of good works, v. 7.
1. Some refer this patience unto God, whereof the Apostle spoke before ver.
4. Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness and patience, etc. and they
give this sense: that they which abuse not the patience of God, but thereby are
stirred up unto good works, shall have eternal life: thus Ambrose. But this
exposition cannot stand: for the Apostle uses here a diverse word (...),
patience, perseverance, from the former, v. 4. which is (...) long-suffering,
forbearing: and there the Lord spoke of the sinners and impenitent, which
abused Gods longanimitie, but here of the faithful that continue in well
doing. 2. some understand the patience of men, whereby they endure affliction,
which might otherwise turn them aside from well doing, Ansel. and Caietan much
to the same purpose understands here patience of good works, not obiectiue,
by way of object, for the object of patience is evil, and not good: but
causaliter, causually, because good works give occasion of persecution, which
many times follows good works. 3. but the word here used (...), does as well
signify perseverance and continuance, as patience: the meaning then is, that
they which persevere and continue in good works: So S. Luke says, c. 21.19.
By your patience possess your souls: which Matthewe rehearses thus, c.
24.13. He that endures to the end shall be saved: likewise the Apostle to the
same purpose, Heb. 10.36. Ye had need of patience, that after ye have done the
will of God, ye may receive the promise: the Apostle there uses the same word
(...). And in this sense Hierome takes patience here in his commentary upon
this place, so also Pareus, Beza, with others.

Quest. 15. What glory, honor, and immortality, the Apostle speaks of, v.
7,
1. Some do understand them, pro vitae piae and sanctae studio, for the study
and desire of a godly and holy life, Faius: and hereby Tolet would have
signified, honorum operum qualitat, the quality of good works, for true
honor comes of virtue: but it is evident by the word following,
immortality, that the Apostle here has relation, unto the eternal glory of
the next life, Pareus.

2. Glory, by glory is understood, that glorious state of the Saints both in
their bodies and souls: when, as the Scripture says the just shall shine as
the Sun in the kingdom of the father, Matthew. 13. and honor is that
dignity, which the Lord shall give unto the Saints, placing them at his right
hand, honoring them in the sight of the world which before condemned them,
Faius. These two Adam was funished with in his creation: as it is said, Psalm.
8.5. Thou have crowned him with glory and honor, he was created glorious in
the gifts of his body and mind, and honorable, because he had the dominion
of all other creatures, and so was preferred before them: but this glory and
honor, which Ada^ lost by his fall, as Origin to this purpose alleges that
place, Psalm. 49.12. Man did not continue in honor, shall more abundantly be
restored in the resurrection.

3. He adds incorruption, to show that this glory and honor, were not such
as the Gentiles sought, who made terrene and earthly glory the scope of their
actions: but eternal and everlasting in heaven, which should never fade:
Origin seems here to understand the spiritual incorruption of the soul in
this life, contrary to which is the corruption of the mind from the
simplicity of faith in Christ: per hanc observantia incorruptionem, etc. by
this incorruption in the observance of faith, we attain unto the incorruption
of our bodies in the resurrection: Gryneus understands the incorruptible
state both of the body and soul in the next life: As the bodies shall be
freed from corruption, so mentes non lab^rabunt vanitate, their minds shall be
free from vanity: But Chrysostom better (...) it to the incorruptible state
of the body: aditum facit ad resurrectionem corporum, etc. the Apostle makes
a way to the resurrection of the body: and he joins glory and honor with
incorruption, omnes resurgemus incorrupti, sed non omnes ad gloriam, etc. for
we shall rise incorruptible, but not all unto glory.

4. Unto these the Apostle adds a fourth, v. 10. namely peace, which is the
very complement and perfection of our happiness: this peace is honorum omnium
secura and tran^qui^ possessio, a secure and peaceable possession of all good
things: and as Prosper says, as Beda here cites him: pax Christi sinem non
habet, the peace of Christ has no end: the Saints shall be at peace with God,
they shall enjoy the tranquillity and peace of conscience to themselves: and
peace they shall have without, from all enemies whatsoever, which shall be
subdued unto them.

5. But it will be objected, that glory and honor are peculiar and essential
unto God, which he will not give to any other, Isay. 42.8. And thine is the
glory, Matthew. 6.13. Answer. That essential and infinite honor and glory
which is in God, is not communicated unto any other: but yet there are certain
influences and bright beams of that glory, which in Christ are imparted to
his members, as S. Peter says, that by these precious promises (which are made
unto us in Christ) we are made partakers of the divine nature, 2. Pet. 1.4.

Quest. 16. How it stands with Gods justice to punish eternally sin
temporally committed.
Object. As God gives eternal life unto his faithful servants, so he
punishes the wicked and impenitent with everlasting damnation: but sin is a
temporal transgression: and for one to be punished eternally for a momentanie
delight, may seem to exceed the rule of justice.

Answ. Three ways does it appear to be most just, that God should punish
eternally sin but temporally committed: both in respect of the mind and
intention of the sinner, of the matter wherein he sins, and of the person
against whom he is an offender.

1. First though the act of sin be but temporal, yet the mind of the sinner
is infinite: if he could ever live, he would ever sin: and therefore as
Gregory says, quia men's in hac vita nunquam voluit carere peccato, iustum est
vt nunquam careat supplicio, etc. because the mind in this life would never be
without sin, it is just, that it should never be without punishment.

2. If the matter and subject of sin be considered, it is of, and in the
soul: like as then the wounding of the body, brings the death of the body,
after the which there is no returning into this life again: so sin being
the death of the soul, it follows, that it should be perpetual and for
ever, Hugo: like as then Magistrates do punish some offenses, as murder,
theft, with death, which does utterly exclude them from the society of the
living, and cut them off for ever: so is it just with God to punish the sins
committed against him with everlasting pain, Perer.

3. Sin because it is a transgression of the law of God, is so much the more
heinous: as he that smites the Prince does more grievously offend, then he
which strikes a private person: so that sin is of an infinite nature,
because of the infinite dignity of the divine majesty, against whom it is
committed: and therefore it deserves an infinite punishment: which because it
cannot be infinite, secundum intensionem, in the intention and greatness of
it, it remains that it should be infinite, secundum aurationem, in respect of
the continuance, and enduring thereof. Perer.

4. Further, the equity of Gods judgment in punishing the temporal act of
sin eternally, Hugo does thus very well illustrate by these comparisons: Like
as when marriage is contracted, per verba de praesenti, by words uttered in the
present tense: though the contract be sone done, yet the marriage remains all
the life long: so when the soul and sin are contracted together, it is no
marvel if this contract holding during the life of the soul, deserve
everlasting punishment: And like as where the fuel and matter of the fire
continues, the flame burns still; so sin leaving a blot in the soul
being the matter of hell fire, is eternally punished, because there is still
matter for that everlasting fire to work upon. Thus then it is evident, how
the Lord even in punishing sin eternally, does reward men according to their
works: for though the action of sin be temporal, voluntas tamen pe^candi,
qua per poenitentiam non mutatur, est perpetua, yet the will to sin, which is
not changed by repentance, is perpetual. Gorrhan.

17. Quest. How eternal life is to be sought.
v. 7. To them, which in well doing seek glory, honor, etc. In seeking of
God who is eternal life, three things must be considered, locus, tempus,
modus, the place, the time, the manner.

1. The place must be mundus, quietus, securus, clean, quiet, secure: then
first God is not to be sought upon the bed of idleness, or carnal delight: and
therefore it is said, Cantic. 3. 1. In my bed I sought him, but found him not:
that is no clean place to seek God in: But yet the bed undefiled is
honorable. Heb. 13.4. and the faithful do seek God even in their beds; as
David says, Psalm. 6.6. That he watered his couch with his tears. Neither is
God to be sought in the courts and streets, and tumultuous assemblies: as
Cantic. 3.2. I sought him in the streets, but found him not: and Hos. 5.6.
They shall go with their bullocks and s^eepe to seek the Lord, but shall not
find him: such are no quiet places: but God must be prayed unto in secret, and
sought in the quiet haven of the conscience. Neither is God to be sought in
pompa, where there is ostentation of pomp and vanity, as Christ's parents
found him not among their kinted, but in the Temple disputing with the Doctors:
God is to be sought, not in pompous shows, but in the assemblies of the Saints.

2. Concerning the time, God must be sought, dum dies est, dum prope est, dum
nobis predest, while it is day, while he is near, and at hand, and when it may
avail us. 1. First God is not to be sought in the night, Cantic. 3.1. I sought
him in my bed by night, etc. but found him not: so the Apostle says, The night
is past, the day is come, let us cast away the works of darkness: God then is to
be sought, not in the time of ignorance and darkness, but in the time of light
and knowledge. 2. The Lord must be sought when he may be found, and is at hand:
Isa. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found, call upon him while he is
near: while the Lord offers grace unto us, and stands knocking at the
door of our hearts, we must open unto him. 3. And in this life must we seek
God, while mercy is showed: while the bridegroom cries in the streets,
Matthew. 25.6. but when the doors are shut, and this life is ended, it is then
too late to seek for mercy.

3. Touching the manner: God must be sought in the heart, in desiring him: Isa.
26.8. The desire of my soul is to thy name: our eyes must be toward him: Psalm.
121.1. I will lift up mine eyes to the mountains from whence my help comes:
our talk must be of him: Psalm. 119.13. With my lips have I declared all the
judgments of thy mouth: our hands must be lift up unto him in our prayer: We
must lift up pure hand^ 1. Tim. 2.8. our feet must be ready to go to serve
him: Psalm. 18.33. He makes my feet like hindes feet: Gorrhan.

18. Quest. Whom the Apostle means by contentious, and such as disobey the
truth.
v. 8. But unto them that are contentious. 1. Some do understand those, that
did wilfully maintain and defend their errors: whence was beginning of sects
and schisms, Origin, Anselme. 2. Chrysostom, Theodoret, apply it unto those,
which sinned of malice, and of an obstinate and set purpose. 2. But Ambrose
specially refers it unto those, who despised the judgment of God, and
abused his long suffering and patience, thinking that they should not be called
to account for their sins: and this seems to be most agreeable to the
Apostles meaning: for he spoke before of such, v. 4. as despised the
bountifulnes of God, which did lead and call them to repentance: by the
contentious then are understood such as were refractorie, and rebellious
against God.

And disobey the truth. 1. Some understand the truth of the Gospel, Anselme,
Aretius. 2. some generally the truth of doctrine by preaching, Lyran. Osiand.
But the Apostle speaks principally of the Gentiles, which had neither heard
of the Gospel, and wanted the light of true doctrine. 3. Ambrose does restrain
it to those, that believe not the judgment to come by Christ, but that is too
peculiar. 4. some do understand only the light of nature, Beza, Gryneus,
Pareus: of which truth the Apostle spoke before, c. 1.18. which withheld the
truth in unrighteousness. 5. But seeing the Apostle comprehends the Jews as
well as the Gentiles, the truth is more generally to be taken, for any
direction unto that which was right, whether by the law of nature, which the
Gentiles had, or the written law, which the Jews had: so Chrysostom takes it
in this general sense, qui lucem fugit, tenebras eligens, which does flee the
truth, choosing darkness etc.

19. Quest. Of the punishment due unto the wicked, Indignation, wrath,
tribulation, anguish, etc. v. 8.
1. Some do join all these together, as depending upon one sentence: so
Ambrose, Theodoret, Origin: but they are distinguished into two periods, one
ends at wrath, the other begins at tribulation: the first shows the
quality of the works which are punished, the other the persons that shall be
judged, indifferently both Jews and Gentiles: Tolet. or the first contains
the thesis, or general preposition: the other an hypothesis, with particular
application to the Jews and Gentiles.

2. (...), indignation, some take for the more vehement motion of anger, and
(...), anger, for the less, Origin, Martyr. but the first rather signifies
the lighter commotion and stirring of the mind, the other the inflammation of
the mind, with a purpose of revenge, Tolet. Pareus: and this anger and
indignation are not to be referred unto the men themselves, as Origin, but unto
God, who is not subject unto any such perturbations: but here figuratively,
anger the cause is taken for the effects, the judgment of God upon the wicked,
the effects of his anger. Pareus.

3. (...), tribulation, and anguish. 1. some apply unto the inward vexation
and anguish of the mind, which the wicked feel in this life: these are before
judgment, and the other two, indignation, wrath, after: gloss. ordinar. Aret.
and hereupon Origin makes a difference between the tribulation of the wicked,
quam subsequitur angustia, which anguish and vexation of the mind follows,
and the affliction of the righteous, wherein they are not straightened, but
enlarged in their inward man. 2. But this tribulation and anguish is better
referred to the infernal punishment, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, Pareus: which some thus well distinguish referring tribulation, to the
external punishment of hell fire, and anguish to the worm of conscience, that
never di^th, O^^and, Gorrhan. But yet so there eternal punishment is here
described: as that the horror of conscience even in this life, the forerunner
of that everlasting horror in hell, may very well be included also.

4. Upon the soul of every man: which is not only an Hebraisme, that is, upon
every man, Tolet. for according to the Hebrew phrase it had been sufficient,
to say, upon every soul: therefore hereby is also signified the horrible
punishment of their souls specially, yet together with their bodies, Pareus:
for a part totum intelligit, he understands the whole by a part. Haymo.

20. Quest. Why the Jew is set before the Grecian.
v. 9. Of the Jew first, and of the Grecian. 1. Tolet thinks that the word
(...), first, here signifies, ordinem and praeminentiam statuum, the order and
pre-eminence or prerogative of states between the Jews and Gentiles: for the
Jews were preferred before the Gentiles, because they were the people of God:
But although this reason may be yielded in the next verse, where mention is
made of glory and honor, upon every one that does good, the Jew first, and
then the Gentile: yet it can be no prerogative for the Jew to be first in
punishment. 2. Therefore I prefer their judgment, which think that the Jew
in the order of punishment is placed first, because they knew Gods will, and
had better helps, and therefore they were worthy of greater punishment, if
they did not their masters will: so Ambrose, Iudaeus credens propter Abraham
honorificentior, diffidens peius tractandus the believing Jew was more honored
for Abraham's sake, but the unbelieving Jew was worthy of greater blame: so
also Athanas. ad Antioch. qu. 144. so primum significat grauitatem poena, this
word first, does in this place signify the greatness of punishment: in the
other, prarogativam pramij, the prerogative of reward, Faius.

21. Quest. What Jews and Gentiles the Apostle here means.
1. Origin will have neither the unbelieving Jew here to be matched with the
believing Gentile: for then the Jew should not have the pre-eminence: nor yet
the believing Jew with the unbelieving Gentile: for then they were not fit to
be joined together: but he understands, as well the unbelieving Jews as
Gentiles: and has these strong positions: 1. that even they which believed not
among the Gentiles, yet doing well might be rewarded, though they had not faith
in Christ: for as they were condemned for their evil works, so if they did
well, they should be counted worthy of reward: and whereas that place will be
objected, He that believes not, is condemned already, Ioh. 3.18. he gives
this interpretation, secundum hoc quod non credidit, iudicatus est, etc. he is
judged in this, that he believed not, though for other things which he does he
shall not be judged: as it is said, he that believes shall not be judged or
condemned, that is, he shall not be judged, secundum hoc, quod credit, in that
that he believes, yet in other things he shall be judged: 2. Such an one not
believing in Christ, yet doing well, though he have not eternal life, yet
gloria operum poterit non perire, by the glory of his works he may be kept
from perishing: to this purpose Origin lib. 2. in c. 2. ad Roman.

2. Contra. 1. The first position of Origin that any thing done without faith
can be acceptable to God, is contrary to the Scripture, Heb. 11.6. Without
faith it is impossible to please God, neither does that argument follow from
the contrary: for one evil work is sufficient to condemn a man, but one
good work is not sufficient to obtain reward: for he that does one good work
may have many evil works beside, for the which he deserves to be punished:
that other gloss of his, of the judging of believers, and the not judging of
unbelievers is confuted by the words of our Savior, Ioh. 5.24. he that
believes, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation: he is
not freed then from judgment only in part, because he believes, but simply
he shall never enter into condemnation: for he which has a lively faith, which
is effectual working by love, has not only a naked faith, but is full of
good works: and where he is wanting, his imperfect obedience is supplied by
the perfect obedience of Christ apprehended by faith. 2. Neither does the
Scripture allow any third place beside heaven and hell after this life: that
any not having eternal life, should be preserved from perishing: for they
which are not counted among the sheep at the right hand of Christ; for whom
the kingdom is prepared: they belong unto the goats at the left hand, and
shall go into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his Angels. 3. This
straight and inconvenience Origin is driven unto, because he takes these Jews
and Grecians to be unbelievers: whereas the Apostle understands such among
the Gentiles, as believed in God, and lived thereafter: such were they which
lived with Melchisedek, Job, the Ninevites, Cornelius, as Chrysostom upon this
place shows, whom Faius follows.

22. Quest. Of the diverse acceptions of the word person, v. 11.
This word (...), is either given unto God, or to creatures, and the same
either without life, or to such as have life, as to man.

1. It is attributed to God three ways. 1. the face of God signifies his
judgment against sinners, 1. Pet. 3.12. the face of God is against those which
do evil. 2. it is taken for the spiritual presence of Christ, 2. Cor. 2.10.
I forgave it for your sakes in the sight or face (...), of Christ. 3. it is
taken for the divine hypostasis in the Trinity: as Christ is said to be the
engraued form of the person of his father, Heb. 1.3.

2. Things without life are said to have a certain face, as Luke 12.56. the
face of heaven.

3. Properly this word face is given unto man: and it 1. either signifies his
countenance, as Jesus is said to have fallen upon his face, Matthew. 26.39. 2. or
the bodily presence: as the Apostle says he was kept from the Thessalonians,
concerning his face, but not in heart, 1. Thessal. 2.17.3. or it is taken for
some respect of the gifts of body, mind, or some external condition, as of
honor, riches, or such like: in this sense it is said of Christ, Mark. 12.14.
thou carest not for the person of any: and S. Jude says of certain false
teachers, that they have men's persons in admiration for advantage sake, Iud. v.
16, and in this sense it is taken here, Gryneus. 4. The person then of man
betokens some quality or condition in him, for the which he is respected:
either natural, as the gifts of the mind, sharpnes of wit, memory,
understanding, or of the body, as strength, come lines, beutie: or such as are
attained unto by labor and industry, as learning, knowledge of arts, wisdom:
or external in worldly respects, as if he be rich, honorable, of authority,
or such like. 5. Further, some respect of persons is necessarily joined with
the cause, as a fault in an aged man, or minister, or one that has knowledge,
is greater, then a slip of a young man, or one that is ignorant: some respect
of persons is divided from the cause, as whether he be rich or poor,
honorable or base: and in this sense persons are not to be respected: Martyr.

23. Qu. How God is said not to accept the persons of men.
The Apostle having made mention of the equal condition of the Jews and
Gentiles, both in punishment and reward, adds this as a reason, because God
is no accepter of persons, in respect of their nation and kindred: So S. Peter
says, God is no accepter of persons, (...) in every nation, he that fears
God, etc. is accepted with him, Act. 10.34, 35, here the respecting of persons
is understood of the nation or country: likewise S. Paul says, Gal. 3.28.
that in Christ, There is neither Jew nor Grecian, bond, nor free, male nor
female: that is, in Christ there is no respect of persons: Deuteronomy. 16.19. Thou
shall not accept any person, neither take any reward: to prefer any for gifts
or rewards, beside the merit of his cause, is to have respect of persons: God
then accepts no man's person, he prefers not any for his riches, country,
honor, strength, or any other such quality, but judges every man, as his
cause is, and a^ his works are: But thus it will be objected on the contrary:

1. Object. Moses entreats the Lord to spare his people for Abraham, Isaak,
and ^^kobs sake, Exodus 32. herein then the Lord had respect of persons.

Ans. Some give this answer, that in temporal things, such as was the
forbearing to punish the people, God may have respect to persons, but not in
eternal, Mart. But it may be better answered, that God had not respect to the
persons of these Patriarks, but to his gracious promise, which he had made unto
them, as there Moses says, Remember Abraham, etc. to whom thou swarest by thy
self, etc.

2. Object. S. Paul would have us do good to all, but specially to the
household (...) faith, Gal. 6.10. here the person is respected.

Ans. The person is not respected here, but the cause: for the faithful are
preferred, in respect of their faith, which is the cause, why they have the
pre-eminence.

3. Object. But God does elect some unto salvation, some are rejected, whereas
all by nature are the children of wrath, and in the same common condition: to
give then unequal things, as life or death, to those which are in the same
equal condition, seems to be done with respect of persons.

Ans. 1. Some give this solution, that there is no acception of persons in
donis gratuitis, in gifts of gratuitie, and freely bestowed: as election,
vocation, are of the free gift of God, he calls and electeth whom he will:
but a person may be accepted, in the distribution of that which does of right
appertain unto one: and so the Lord accepts no man person, but rewards
every one according to his work. Peter. disput. 6. numer. 42.

2. Beza thus answers, that in the decree of election, there can be no
acception of persons: when God electeth some before they have any being, and
so are yet no person at all.

3. But this answer is more full and sufficient: there are three things to be
considered in the accepting of persons. 1. when some external condition is
respected beside the merit of the cause. 2. and this is done contrary to the
law of equity. 3. and not without iniur^ done unto an other, when of partial
affection, that is taken from one which is his right, and adjudged to an other:
But none of these are seen in Gods election: 1. he respects not any
condition or quality in them, which are elected: but he makes choice of them,
of his own good pleasure. 2. he is not tied to any law, and so transgresses
no law. 3. he does not wrong unto any, in exempting some from destruction,
which in the rigor of his justice is due unto all: like as Augustine puts
the case of two debtors: if the Creditour do forgive his debt unto one, and
exact it of an other, he does no wrong: it is free for him to do what he will
with his own, Matt. 20.15. Pareus, Faius: so as Augustine well determines,
ibi acceptio personarum recte dicitur, vbi ille, qui iudicat, relinquens causae
meritum, etc. there acception of persons is rightly said to be, when he that
judges leaving the merit of the cause, does find somewhat in the person, for
the which he gives sentence with one against an other, etc. lib. 2. ad 2.
epist. Pelagian. c. 7. But to does not God, for he finds no difference in the
persons, but all being in the same cause of damnation, he of his own free
will forgiueth his debt unto some, and requires it of others.

4. Object. But it is an accepting of persons, as well, cum aequalibus in
aequalia tribnuntur, etc. when unequal things are given to those which are
equal in cause: as when all are guilty, and yet one is saved, an other
condemned, as when the persons are unequal, as the innocent condenmed, and the
guilty freed: God seems in the first kind to have respect unto persons,
freeing some from condemnation, which belongs in the rioour of Gods justice
to all.

Answ. 1. It is not simply an accepting of persons, to give unequally where the
cause is equal: but when this is done with respect unto some quality in the
person, as because he is rich, or honorable, or such like, and the other is
not: But God does not so, he electeth some before other, not for any respect to
their persons, but of his mere grace and favor. 2. between the decree of
Gods election, and the execution thereof, there comes the faith and piety of
the elect, which makes a manifest difference between them and the reprobate,
which freeth God from all partiality, who judges men according to the
quality of their works. See more afterward, 3. addition to the places of
doctrine.

24. Quest. Of the meaning of these words, v. 12. As many as have sinned
without the law, shall perish without the law.
1. Ambrose exposition here seems somewhat strange, who understands this
not of the law of nature, but of the law of Moses, to the which the Gentiles
were bound to give assent: and therefore duplici nomine sunt rei, they are
guilty two ways, because they did not give assent unto the law given by
Moses, nor received Christ, etc. Pererius refelleth this interpretation,
because the law of Moses did only bind the Hebrews, neither were any of the
Prophets commanded to publish the law of Moses to the Gentiles, as afterward
the Apostles were commanded to preach it to the Gentiles. But Tolet somewhat
qualifieth and excuses Ambrose, making this his meaning, that he speaks
only of the Gentiles, who lived after the publishing and preaching of the
Gospel, who then were bound to believe and to receive the writings of Moses,
and the Prophets, which prophesied of Christ: yet in this sense, he thinks,
that Ambrose expresses not the Apostles full meaning, who speaks generally
of the Gentiles, both before, and at the coming of Christ.

2. Chrysostom, whom Anselme follows, does interpret, this to be judged
without a law, levius puniri, to be more easily punished: for the Gentile
having not the law as the Jew had, is thereby somewhat excused: But the
Apostles purpose is not to show any inequality of punishment between the Jew
and Gentile, but only howsoever they are unequal in knowledge, yet because
they are equal in sin, they shall both indifferently be punished.

3. Some contrariwise, do make the case of the Gentiles more grievous: they
shall perish without the law, meaning the written law, but the Jews shall be
judged only, that is, not punished eternally, but for a time, who afterward
shall be saved: this opinion is imputed to Origin, hom. 3. in Levit. and he
insinuates as much in his commentary upon this place. Augustine reselleth
this opinion, concion. 25. in Psalm. 118. And it is evidently confuted by the
saying of our Savior, Matthew. 11. that it shall be more easy for the Sodomites
in the day of judgment, then for the unbelieving Jews: Perer, and they that
have done evil (whether Jew or Gentile) shall go into everlasting fire,
Matthew. 25.46. Here then judgment is taken for condemnation, as it is usual in
the Scripture: as Ioh. 5.29. They that have done evil shall come forth to the
resurrection (...), of judgment, that is, condemnation. Tolet.

4. Pererius here makes mention of the like opinion of certain of their
Catholics, who by judging, here understand certain transitory pains in
purgatory, which such shall endure, but they shall not finally perish, because
they hold the foundation, namely, faith in Christ: But Pererius confuseth them,
because the Apostle speaks of such Jews, as believed not in Christ, and
therefore did not hold the foundation.

5. Gregory has this observation upon those words: he makes two degrees of
those which shall be saved in the day of judgment, and two likewise of them
which shall be condemned: first, alij iudicantur and regnant, some shall be
examined first for their life, and afterward enter into Gods kingdom, such as
repented them of their former sins, and did good works: such Christ shall
say unto, for I was hungry, and ye gave me meat, etc. alij electorum non
iudicantur and reginant, others of the elect, should not be judged at all, but
presently reign with Christ: such are they that are perfect, as namely the
Apostles, who are promised to fit upon twelve fears, and judge the twelve
tribes of Israel. So likewise for them, that shall be condemned, some sine
iudicij examine condemnabuntur, shall be judged without any examination or
judgment, such are the infidels, which shall rise again, non ad iudicium, sed
ad tormentum, not unto judgment, but unto torment: as it is said in Psalm. 1.
The wicked shall not stand up in judgment: and here the Apostle says of such,
they shall perish without the law. But they which professed the faith, and yet
lived not thereafter, redarguentur vt pereant, shall first be judged and
reproved, and then perish: like as in a commonwealth, the Prince aliter punit
civem delinquentem, aliter hostem rebellantem, punishes a citizen offending
one way, examining his offense according to the law, and an enemy rebelling an
other way, he uses martial law against such, giving sentence presently to
condemn them. But this observation of Gregory seems somewhat curious: the
Apostle intends not here any such thing, to show any difference in the
process of judgment between the Jews and Gentiles, but that they both
being in the same cause of transgression, shall be partakers of the same
punishment: And that there shall be but one manner of proceeding in judgment,
both in rewarding the righteous, and in condemning the wicked, it is evident by
that description of Christ's coming to judgment, Matthew. 25.31.

6. Augustine here propounds this doubt, that whereas the Apostle says, Romans
4.15. Where there is no law, there is no transgression: how then can the
Gentiles be found to be transgressors without the law? for answer hereunto, he
makes three kind of laws: one is the written law, which is given unto the
Jews, not to the Gentiles: and of this law speaks the Apostle here, that
they sinned without the law, and so shall perish without the law, that is, the
written law of Moses: there is beside the law of nature, whereof the Apostle
speaks afterward, v. 14. They having not the law, are a law unto themselves:
against this law the Gentiles sinned, and by this law they shall be judged: the
third law is that which was given unto Adam in Paradise, by which not only he,
but all his posterity are found to be transgressors: and in respect of this
law, even infants are found trespassers, because of original sin: to this
purpose Augustine in the place before cited.

25. Quest. Of the occasion of these words, v. 13. The hearers of the law are
not righteous before God, but the doers shall be justified.
1. Some take this to be a new argument to convince the Jews, that they could
not be justified by the law, because the keeping and fulfilling of the law is
required to make one just, which no man can do: and so consequently being not
justified by the law, they must seek to be justified by faith. Calv. Pareus.
But as yet the Apostle is not entered into that matter, to prove justification
by faith, and not by the law: he hitherto labors to convince both Jews and
Gentiles, that they are under sin.

2. Some take this to be the order: that the Apostle proves both Jews and
Gentiles to be equal, both quo ad naturam, in nature, for God has no respect
of persons, v. 11. they are all alike by nature: and quoad poenam, in their
punishment they are equal, the one shall perish without the law, the other
shall be judged by the law, v. 12. then quoad culpam, they are equal in the
fault, because neither of them are doers of the law. Gorrhaen.

3. Some think, that here the Apostle meets with an objection of the Jews,
who seeing the Apostle to equalize them with the Gentiles, might have objected,
that they had the law, and so had not the Gentiles: the Apostle then answers,
that this did not help them, because they were hearers only of the law, and
not doers. Martyr. Gryneus.

4. Tolet thinks, that this sentence is brought in as a probation of the 10.
verse, the glory shall be to every one that does good: otherwise that part
should be passed over without proof: and so he thinks this clause not
specially to be meant of the Jews, but of the Gentiles also, because it is
said, the doers shall be justified, which was common both to the Jews and
Gentiles, not the hearers and doers, which was proper to the Jews, who had the
law written, which was read unto them, and they heard it: Faius also thinks
this to be a proof of the tenth verse.

Contra. 1. But if S. Paul should prove here, that glory shall be to every
one that does good, and he immediately infers, that the Gentiles do by
nature the things of the law, it would follow that by nature they might do
good, and so by their natural works obtain glory, which is not to be
admitted. 2. that part concerning glory to them which did good, had not so
much need of proof, as the other, because there were very few found among
the Gentiles, that did such good works, as should be recompensed with glory
and honor: and the Apostles principal intendment, is to conclude both Jews
and Gentiles to be under sin. 3. and further that the Apostle speaks of the
written law here, it is evident, because that only was heard: neither needed
he again to repeat, hearers of the law, and doers, it being mentioned
before.

5. Wherefore, this rather is the coherence of this verse: that whereas S. Paul
in the former verse, had showed first the Gentiles without the law, and the
Jews under the law, to be sinners: he proves the latter part first: that
the Jews should be judged by the law, because as long as they were hearers,
and not doers, it could not help them, they should not thereby be approved
and justified: and in the next verses following, he shows how the Gentiles
should perish without the law, because although they had not the written law,
yet they had the law of nature imprinted in them, which guided them to do
some things agreeable to the law, and so made them inexcusable. And thus this
whole disputation of the Apostle hangs well together, Bucer. Aretius.

Quest. 26. Of the meaning of these words, Not the hearers of the Law, etc.
but the doers shall be justified, ver. 13.
1. There are two kind of hearers: some only hear with the ear, but
understand not: Matthew. 13.13. they hearing hear not, neither do understand:
and there is an hearing joined with understanding, v. 15. least they should
hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts: of the first kind of
hearing speaks the Apostle here.

2. Doers of the law: the law is fulfilled two ways: one is in supposition,
that if a man could by his own strength keep the law, he should thereby be
justified: there is another fulfilling, which is by the perfect obedience of
Christ, imputed to us by faith: whereof the Apostle speaks, Philip. 3.9. Not
having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
thorough the faith of Christ: of these the Apostle speaks here, that in part
do themselves live according to the law, and show their faith by their
fruits, supplying that which is wanting in them by the obedience of Christ by
faith.

3. There are two kinds of justification: one is verily and indeed before God,
which is by faith in Christ, Romans 3.26. the other is in the opinion of men,
Luke 16.15. Ye are they which justify your selves before men: of the former
the Apostle speaks here, Gryneus. see further for the exposition of this
place, controv. 7. following.

Quest. 27. How the Gentiles which had not the law, did by nature the things
contained in the law.
This place is diversely expounded. 1. Some do here understand the Gentiles
converted to the faith of Christ, which do naturally the work of the law,
that is, to believe in Christ, not that faith is natural, but because, duce
natura credunt, they believe, nature so guiding them: and while they believe,
opus legis oftendunt, they show the work of the Law: to this purpose
Ambrose, whose meaning seems to be this, that the Gentiles which received the
Gospel, were moved by the light of nature, seeing the great miracles which
Christ did, to acknowledge him to be the Messiah. But 1. this is an improper
speech to say, that to believe is to do the things of the law: neither is
faith a work of the law: for then he that is justified by faith, might be
said to be justified by the law, which the Apostle every where opposes and
sets one against the other: and faith is called the work of God, not of the
law: as Ioh. 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye believe, etc. 2. Neither
by the light of nature can any come to believe, but he has need of special
illumination: John 6.44. No man can come unto me, except my father draw him.

2. Augustine likewise, lib. de spirit. and liter. c. 26. understands this
place of the Gentiles converted to the faith of Christ: and so also lib. 4.
con. Iuli. c. 3. And thus he seems to prove it: because afterward, v. 26. he
says, If circumcision keep the ordinances of the law, shall not his
uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? here the Apostle speaks of a
Gentile converted: for otherwise how could he keep the law? and it is like,
that in all these places the Apostle speaks of the same kind of Gentiles: and
they are said naturally to do the things of the law, quia vt crederint, ipsa
in eis per Christi gratiam sanata est natura, because that they might believe,
their nature was healed by grace: to this purpose Augustine. But this
exposition may be thus objected against. 1. though it be admitted that
afterward the Apostle speaks of a Gentile converted to the faith, it
follows not that he should so mean here: for in this place the Apostle
makes mention of such Gentiles as had no other direction but the law of
nature, and their conscience, and so are said to sin without the law: but in
the other place, he compares with the Jews such uncircumcised Gentiles which
kept the ordinances of the law, and had the true circumcision of the heart,
which they could not attain unto by the light of nature: And so Origin though
before he understand the unbelieving Gentiles, qu. 21. yet there he thinks
the Apostle to mean the Gentiles converted: see qu. 43. following. Some
think, that the Apostle is there to be understood to speak by way of
supposition, if circumcision keep the ordinances of the law, not that it did,
but if it did, Calvin: but it is there better referred to the converted
Gentile, O siand, see afterward question 43. 2. If to do by nature the things
of the law, were to do it by nature illuminated by grace and faith, then were
there no difference here between Jew and Gentile: for the Jew also did so
keep the law. 3. and whereas it is said, they having not the law, he shows,
that they have no other help, but the law of nature: whereas the converted
Gentiles did such things by the instinct of grace and faith, rather then by the
light of nature. 4. And whereas Augustine thus obiecteth, that if it be the
law of nature which is written in their hearts, the Gospel should have no
privilege more then the law: which the Lord is said to write in their hearts,
Ierem. 31.33. It may be answered: that the one is written in the heart,
ratione luminis naturalis, by the means of the natural light: the other is
written, ratione luminis fidei, by the light of faith: and by the first
natural only and moral duties are imprinted in the heart, by the other,
beside these, all other mystical points of religion, which nature cannot bring
one unto without faith: this is the privilege then of the Gospel, more then
the law of nature has, Tolet. And Jeremy speaks there of a supernatural
inscription and writing in the heart by grace, the Apostle here of the
natural, Pareus dub. 14.

3. Some do take the Gentiles here to be understood not converted to the
Gospel, but such as lived before the times of the Gospel: but beside the light
of nature, had auxilium diuinae gratiae, the help of Gods grace, whereby they
kept the moral precepts of the law: Thus Thomas interprets, and Vega lib.
6. super decret. council. Tridentin. c. 21. so also Tolet: that they did the
works of the law, non quidem sine fide and gratia, but not without faith and
grace, annot. 25. But this opinion is confuted by Medina lib. 4. de certa fide
c. 7. and Pererius disput. 8. numer. 61. and it may be further refelled thus:
1. If that were S. Paul's meaning, that the Gentiles by their natural light,
helped by faith did keep the law, they should not in this behalf differ from
the Jews, who did keep the law by the same means also, the light of nature
assisted by grace. 2. the Apostle says, they having not the law, are a law
to themselves: but they which are aided by grace, are not a law to themselves,
they are guided and directed by grace.

4. Some here understand such among the Gentiles, as had the true knowledge of
God, such were Melchisedeck, Job, the Ninevites, Cornelius. Chrysostom. Faius.
But these were not many among the Gentiles: the Apostle seems to speak more
generally, of a great number among the Gentiles.

5. Some think that the Gentiles by the light of nature though they believed
not in God, might do works of the law worthy of reward, to this purpose
Origin, whose opinion is before confuted, qu. 21. Lyranus seems also to
incline hereunto, obseruatio legis naturalis cum fide and cultu vnius Dei, (ad
quod inducit ratio naturalis) aliquo modo sufficit, etc. the natural
observation of the law, with the faith and worship of one God, to the which
natural reason iuduceth, was some way sufficient to the Gentiles unto
salvation, etc. But nothing can be acceptable to God without faith: not that
general faith and knowledge of one God, but the knowledge of God in Christ:
for he is the way and door, and without him is no entrace into life.

6. Wherefore the Apostle here describes the Gentiles in general even before
the times of the Gospel, and such as had no other direction then by the law of
nature: which they had, as the Apostle shows by these two arguments: both by
the external works of the law, and by the inward testimony of their
conscience. But the Apostle faith not they fulfilled the law, they only did
certain things, prescribed in the law, Martyr: And he speaks rather, de
notitia naturali, quam de implenda legis facultate, of the natural knowledge
which they had, not of any power or faculty to fulfill the law, Calvin. Beza.
And he means not all the Gentiles in general, but the wiser sort among them
as Solon, Socrates, Aristides, the Sciptoes, Catoes, with other, who outwardly
did some external works which the law commanded, though they wanted the
inward obedience, Pareus.

Quest. 27. How any thing can be said to be written in the heart by nature,
seeing the mind is commonly held to be as a bare and naked table.
v. 15. Which show the effect of the law written in their heart: It is the
opinion of the best Philosophers, as of Plato in Philebo, that the soul of man
by nature is like unto a book wherein nothing is written, or like unto a bare
naked table, Aristot. lib. 3. de anima. c. 4. how then does the Apostle here
say, that the law is written in their heart?

Answ. 1. Plato was of opinion, that all things were at the first written in
the soul, but when it comes into the body, is blotted out again and
forgotten: and upon this ground that opinion is mentioned by the Platonists,
that scire est reminisci, to know is nothing else but to remember. But this
assertion presupposes that the soul of man had a being without the body:
and that there is a certain promptuarie or seminare of souls, from whence the
souls are derived into the bodies: But this opinion is contrary to the
Scripture: which affirms that God forms the spirit of man within him, Zach.
12.1. the soul of man is created within him, in his body, infundendo creatur,
and creando infunditur, it is created by infusion into the body, and iufused
by creation. 2. therefore a better answer is that whereas Aristole says,
(...), that nothing is written in the understanding: it must be understood
actually: yet potentia, in possibility every thing is written there: because
the understanding is apt, and has a capacity to receive and apprehend every
thing. 3. neither is that axiom of Philosophy generally to be understood, but
to be restrained to such principles, as are not engendered in the mind without
instruction, experience, and observation, as is the knowledge of arts,
otherwise there are some principles, which are by nature imprinted in the
soul, as first the natural conclusions, which the soul apprehends of it
self without any other demonstration: as that God is to be worshipped, parents
are to be honored, that good and honest things are to be desired: secondly
there are certain (...), general notions, which are at the first apprehended
only by the sense: as that the fire burns, that the whole is greater then
the part, and such like, ex Perer.

Quest. 28. Of the Law of nature, what it is.
It shall not be amiss by occasion of these words of the Apostle, who speaks
here of the law of nature written in the heart, a little to digress, and
briefly touch certain questions of this matter: and first we will see, what
this law of nature is, and of what precepts it consists.

1. It is evident by the Apostle here, that there is a law of nature: which he
proves by ^o effects, the one external in the performance of some things
agreeable to the law, the other internal in the testimony of the conscience:
But in this inward testimony, there are two things to be considered: there is
first that which is called (...), which is the comprehension of certain
practical principles, and a natural discerning between good and evil, just
and unjust: then there is (...), the conscience, which either accuses one for
doing evil, or excuses him in choosing of that which is good: the synteresis
does frame the proposition, the syneidesis or cosncience, the assumption, as
thus: the natural law reaches that parents must be honored, and that they
which disobey parents are worthy of punishment: thus the proposition is framed
out of the principles of nature: then the conscience of the guilty person
supplyeth the assumption: But we Cham, Esau, Absalom, have disobeyed our
parents, therefore we deserve punishment: and the like practical syllogismes
may be made in other commandments, Gryneus.

1. Melancthon thus defines the law of nature: it is a knowledge of certain
principles belonging to the practice of life, and of the conclusions thence
necessarily inferred, agreeable with the eternal rule of truth, which God has
planted in the mind of man, to be a testimony unto man, that there is a God,
which rules and judges the actions of men, etc. In this description there are
the former causes expressed of the law of nature. 1. the material cause, or
the object thereof, wherein it is occupied, and whereof it consists: namely,
of certain practical principles with the conclusions gathered thereupon: for
the special scope of this natural direction, is for the the practice of life,
and not for speculation: and in this natural knowledge, are not only
contained the first principles, as parents are to be honored, but the
conclusions thence diducted, as out of this principle in general, every one is
taught by the light of nature in particular to conclude, that therefore he must
honor his parents: 2. the formal cause is the agreement with the rule of
truth, and the equity of Gods written law: for the law of nature is a
summarie abridgement of the moral law. 3. then the efficient cause, and
author is God, who has written and imprinted this law in the heart of man, as
Ambrose thus defines this natural law, quam Deus omnium creator singulorum
hominum pectoribus iufudit, which God the Creator of all has infused into
every man's breast, epist. 71.4. then the end is that it should be a testimony
of the divine providence and judgment, whereby he rules all things, and in
the end will judge the actions of men. This description of the law of nature
agrees with the Apostles definition here, it is the effect of the law written
in our hearts, the effect or work shows the matter, of the law, the form
written, the efficient, for it is Gods writing: the end is expressed
afterward, their conscience accuses or excuses them,

Quest. 29. What precepts the law of nature contains and prescribes.
This may be showed, both generally in the diverse kinds of those things
whereof these precepts consist, and in particular, by a several induction and
instance in the precepts of the moral law.

1. Man is bound to carry himself upright, both toward God that is above him,
toward other men like himself, and toward such things as are inferior unto
him, and under his rule and command: as within him his body, sense,
affections, without him, honor, riches, pleasure, and such like. In all these,
man receives some direction from the law of nature: for the first he is
taught to love God and fear him above all, as being the maker of all things:
for the second, there are two natural precepts: one affirmative, whatsoever
you would that men should do unto you, do unto them: Matthew. 7.12. the other
negative, quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris, that which you would not
have done to you, offer not to another: for the third, even Cicero by the light
of nature could say, animus imperat corpori vt Rex ciuibus, ratio libidimi, vt
seruis dominus, the mind rules the body as the king his citizens, reason the
lust, as the master governs the servants, lib. 3. de repub. which words are
cited by Augustine lib. 4. cont. Julian. c. 12. even by natural reason man
has some direction to guide himself in the desiring and coveting of the
temporal things of this life.

2. Another general demonstration there is of these natural precepts: for man
has some natural inclinations common to all other things, some incident only
to things that have life, and some peculiar to humane nature: of the first
kind, is the desire which every thing has for it own preservation: and hence
it is that a man naturally declineth all things which are hurtful to his life,
and is inclined by nature to preserve his body and life: as Tullie says,
generi animantium omni est a natura tributum, etc. it is given by nature unto
every living thing, to defend it own body and life: of the second sort, is
the procreation and education of children, which is by nature given unto
unreasonable creatures: of the third kind are those things which specially
belong unto the nature of man, as a desire to know the truth, and to
acknowledge God, and live sociably with other men: so Tullie also says, eadem
natura virationis hominem conciliat homini, and adorationis and vitae
societatem, etc. the same nature by the force of reason does join man to man,
both in the society of speech, and life, lib. 1. de officijs.

3. But more evidently shall it appear what nature prescribes, by particular
induction in the several commandments of the moral law.

1. Concerning the worship of the only God: the heathen by nature had some
knowledge thereof, as Cyrellus lib. 1 cont. Julian. cites Pythagoras: Deus
vnus est, etc. God is one, not without the government of the world, as some
think, sed in ipso est tot ^s en toto orb, but he is in it, wholly in the
whole, he considers all generations, the beginning of all things, the father
of all, etc. the same father shows how Orpheus recanted his error of the
multitude of Gods, and in the end ackowledged one only God.

2. And as touching the adoration of images: Strabo writes, that the Persians
had neither altars, nor images: and when they warred against the Greecians they
ouerthrewe and burned their temples with their images: the like Cornelius
Tacit. writes of the Germans: quod coelesti maiestati parum convenire
putauerunt, etc. that they thought it not agreeable to the celestial majesty,
to include the gods within walls, or to resemble them to any humane shape; Numa
Pompilius thought it unlawful, to ascribe any form either of man or beast
unto God that was invisible.

3. Touching the abusing and profaning of the name of God: Tullus Hostilius was
killed with lightening, and his house burned, because he attempted by certain
irreligious excorcismes to call up Jupiter Elicius: Theophrastus, as Plutarke
writes, noted Pericles, that being sick showed unto his friend, certain
enchanted toys hanging about his neck.

4. And the Gentiles also observed their Sabboths and days of rest: wherein it
was of their blind and corrupt nature, that they added many superstitious
observations of their own: yet nature taught them, that some time was to be
set apart for the worship of their gods.

5. The Gentiles also commended the honoring of parents, and condemned
disobedience unto them: therefore Solon being asked why he appointed no
punishment for such as killed their parents, answered, because he thought that
none would be so wicked to attempt any such thing.

6. Such was the hatred of the detestable sin of murder among the Romans,
that for the space of 620. years from the first building of Rome none was
found to have been killed within the city walls by any private man's hand, as
Dion, Holicarnass. observes.

7. Adultery was odious by the light of nature among the Gentiles: as
appears by the judgment of Pharaoh, and Abimelech concerning Sara Abraham's
wife, Genesis 22. and 20.

8. Theft by Draco his law was punished with death: Solon thought that too
grievous a punishment, and enjoined double restitution for theft: the Indians
and Scythians because they had not houses to keep their goods in, counted
theft among the most grievous offenses: the like opinion they had of fraud and
impostures: Cato being asked, quod faenerari, what it was to be an usurer,
answered, quid hominem occidere? what is it to kill a man?

9. The Indians most severely punished those, which were taken in a lie: and
generally among the heathen, they so detested falsehood, and were jealous and
suspicious of false testimonies: that, as Cicero says, it was generally
received, vt vel amplissimi homines, ne in miximis rebus, etc. that no not the
most excellent men, even in the smallest matters should give testimony in
their own cause: and for the same reason, they would not suffer any to be a
witness against his enemy: for it was supposed he would make a lie to
endanger him whom he hated.

10. The Gentiles also were not ignorant, that it was unlawful to cover the
things of another: as when Xerxes dealt with Leonides to have revoulted, and
promised to make him Monarch of Greece: he received this answer from him, If
you had known, says Leonides, what things are honest in man's life,
abstinuisses a concupiscendis alienis, you would have abstained from coveting
other men's things. And thus by this particular induction, it is evident, how
the effect of the moral law, is naturally written in the heart of man, and
that the law of nature, if it be not blinded, commands the same things which
the written law of God, ex Gualtero.

Quest. 30. What the law of nature was before and after man's fall, and wherein
they differ.
In the law of nature, there are two principal things, first the
understanding and judgment, in apprehending and conceiving these natural
principles touching our duty toward God and our neighbor: the other is in the
will and affection, in giving assent and approbation unto those things so by
the understanding conceived: In both these there was greater perfection in the
natural light which Adam was created with, and that which is now remaining in
his posterity.

1. Concerning the understanding: whereas the object thereof is either touching
mystical and divine things apppertaining unto God, or moral and civil
duties. 1. In both these the mind of man is naturally obscured, that it does
not so clearly see, what is good or evil in moral duties, much less in
spiritual, as Adam did in the creation^ for there are some mysteries
concerning the Godhead, as of the Trinity, of the creation of the world, and
of the end thereof, of the power and omnipotency of God, and such like, which
Adam in his creation had a perfect knowledge of: but now such things by the
light of nature cannot be attained unto: they are revealed by grace: as our
blessed Savior faith, this is life eternal, that they know thee to be the
only very God. 2. as some things we know not at all, by nature, which were
infused to Adam: so these principles that remain, are but darkely and
obscurely now revealed in nature, which were manifest to Adam, both in
spiritual things, and moral duties: that as the Apostle says, by this light
of nature, they could but grope after God, Act. 17.27. 3. An other defect in
the understanding is, that men by great difficulty and labor now attain unto
these things, which Adam had infused without labor, whereof the Preacher
speaks, when he says, He that increases knowledge, increases sorrow,
Eccles. 1.18. 4. Curiosity is an other fault in the understanding, when men
are carried away from seeking after things profitable, and are tickeled with a
desire, to search out hid and mystical things, to high above their reach: as
our parent Eve, when she began to listen to the serpents suggestion, was
tempted to desire some accession and increase of knowledge more then they had:
therefore the Apostle would have every one understand according to sobriety,
Romans 12.4. 5. Now our understanding is ouercast with a vanity of mind, which
breaks out into idle, vain, and unprofitable thoughts, which was not in
Adam: who before his fall, should have been occupied in nothing else, but in
the meditation of God, and good things: according to which pattern, David
desires that the meditations of his heart, might be acceptable unto God, Psalm.
19.14. 6. Adam had the knowledge of good by experience, of evil by
contemplation: But after his fall he had an experimental knowledge of evil,
which now remains in his posterity: And these differences there are between
Adams natural understanding, and ours.

2. In the will of man by nature, there are these defects and infirmities which
Adam had not. 1. In spiritual and moral good things, the will has no
inclination at all, saving in some civil things: but to will that which is
good it has no free will or power at all without grace: as the Apostle says,
2. Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing. 2. in
general the will consents to that which is good, but it fails in
particular: as by nature man knows that it is evil to steal, murder,
committ adultery, and yet when it comes to a particular act he approoueth
and follows the contrary: as S. Paul says, Romans 7.19. I do not the good
thing, which I would, but the evil which I would not, that do I: But Adam
both in general and particular did know what was good, and might if he would
himself, have given consent thereunto. 3. Man's will is so froward by nature
and perverse, that when as naturally every one desires to be happy, yet he
willingly commits those things against his intendment, which make him
vnhappier: as a thief steals to keep himself from famine, and so from
misery: and thus, ut miser sic, malus fit, and ideo miserior ect, quia malus
est, least he should be miserable, he becomes evil, being so much the more
miserable, because he is evil. And by this means, it falls out, that he
becomes that which he intended not. 4. Further whereas the law of nature is,
that a man should not offer that to another which he would not have done to
himself: yet now this natural light is obscured with selfeloue, that a man
will not have wrong done to himself, yet he will wrong an other. 5. The law
of nature is, that the reason should govern, and the affections should be
subject to reason: thus was it in Adan, so is it now: for the lust and
concupiscence often prevails, and swayeth against reason. 6. the law is
constant and unchangeable: and the will of man following the light of nature
altreth nor, but now the will of man is mutable and changeable. 7. And whereas
by the light of nature only that which is good should be desired: now the will
is carried to follow things apparently evil, as most notorious vices, of
adultery, drunkenness, pride, and such like: which by custom men delight in,
as Augustine says, peccata, qumvis magna and horrenda, cum in consuetudinem
venerint, aut parua, aut nulla esse creduntur, sins, though great and
horrible, when they are grown into custom, are thought either to be no
sins, or very small, Enehurid. c. 80. And in these particulars it is evident
how far the natural light now remaining, is declined from that perfection,
which it had in the first creation of man.

31. Quest. Whether the light of nature, though much obscured, can altogether
be blotted out of the mind of man.
Though the light of nature may be, and is much dimmed and ouercast by the
corruption of man's preposterous affections, yet that is most true, which
Augustine resolves upon, legem scriptam in cordibus hominum, ne ipsa quidem
delet iniquitas, the law written in the hearts of men, no not iniquity and
sin it self can blot out: lib. 2. confess. c. 4. this conclusion may be
further thus strengthened, and confirmed.

1. There are certain general principles and rules of nature, which do
revive and remain in most wicked men: as every one desires to be happy:
neither is there any so careless of himself, but would attain unto this
end, though he may be deceived in the means: again, every one by nature
knows, that evil is to be avoided, and therefore he would not have any wrong
offered unto him by an other, because he takes it to be evil: and he likewise
knows, that good is to be desired, and therefore that which he would have an
other to do unto him, he desires so to be done, because he thinks it to be
good. These general rules and principles of nature, none are ignorant of: but
when they come to draw out particular conclusions, out of these general rules,
there they fail, either being blinded in their judgment, or corrupted by
evil manners and custom: whereupon it comes that men take those things in
their practice to be good and commendable, which are evil: as among the
Germans, as Caesar writes, lib. 6. de bell. Gall. robbery was counted no
fault: neither was the unnatural love of boys, among the Grecians and
Romans, held to be unlawful, and infamous. 2. An other proof hereof, that
the light of nature is not utterly extinguished, is by the force and working of
the conscience, which is ready to accuse the offender, and to prick and sting
his soul: as Cain by this light of his conscience was driven to confess, that
his sin was greater then could be forgiven. 3. An other argument hereof,
which the Apostle also touches here, is the practice of natural men, who did
perform diverse commendable things by the light of nature, agreeable to
equity: as appears by diverse politic laws, and positive constitutions of
the Gentiles: by the which these two assertions and conclusions of Plato are
found to be true: legem esse inventionem veritatis, that the law is the
invention of truth: that is, the law of nature: and, lege^ est imitatione^
veritatis, the law is the imitation of truth: that is, positive laws grounded
upon the law of nature.

32. Qu. Whether ignorance of the law of nature in man does make any way
excusable.
1. First, though the light of nature be now much darkened and obscured, yet
thereby a man, notwithstanding this natural darkness and ignorance, is left
without excuse: as the Apostle says, c. 1.20. to the intent, that they should
be without excuse: and the equity thereof thus further appears: the Prophet
David says, Psalm. 79.6. Power out thy wrath upon the heathen, that have not
known thee: and S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. in flaming fire rendering vengeance
unto them that do not know God: But Gods judgment is most just, he would not
punish men without their fault: seeing then, that even they which know not God,
shall be judged, it remains, that their ignorance is not without their own
fault: that is an excellent saying of Augustine, inexcusabilis est omnis
peccator, vel reatu originis, etc. every sinner is inexcusable, either by
original guilt, or by voluntary additament, whether we know, or be ignorant:
for ignorance in them that would not understand is sin without doubt, in them
that could not, it is the punishment of sin: and so in both, non est just a
excusatio, sed just a damnatio, there is no just excuse, but damnation is just,
etc. epistol. 105. So both ways is the ignorant man left without excuse: for
that perfect light of nature, which was given at the first to man, was lost by
his sin, so that this ignorance is the just punishment of sin: and that
light of nature which remains, was by the Gentiles abused, that they would
not understand that, which nature revealed.

2. Yet although the ignorance of the law altogether excuse not, as it serves
not the malefactors turn, to say he knew not the law of the Prince, against
the which he has offended; yet it does somewhat extenuate the offense: for the
faults committed by the ignorant, are less then those, which such fall into
that have knowledge, according to that saying of our blessed Savior, Luke
12.47. The servant that knew his masters well, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many (stripes:) but he
that knew it not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten
with few (stripes:) for unto him that is ignorant are wanting two things,
knowledge, and a good will: but he that sins wittingly has but one want,
only good will and inclination: and the one has both voluntatem facti and
peccati, the will of the deed, and the sin: but he that falls of
ignorance, has only a will to the deed, not to the sin, though the deed be
sin: see further of this matter 4. chap. 1. quest. 57.

33. Quest. That the light of nature is not sufficient of it self to direct a
man to bring forth any virtuous act without the grace of Christ.
It was the common opinion of the Philosophers, that there were the seeds of
all virtue graft in the mind of man by nature: which seeds growing to ripenes
were able to bring forth right virtuous actions. But the contrary is evident,
that this natural seed is imperfect, and of it self utterly unable to bring
forth any such fruit.

1. The Apostle says, that he which sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh
reap corruption but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap
life everlasting: it is then the seed o^ the spirit, that sanctifies to life
everlasting: he that is lead only by the light of nature, so^eth to the flesh,
and the fruit thereof is corruptible: S. John also says, he that is borne of
G^^ sins not, for his seed remains in him, 1. Ioh. 3.9. he then that is
only borne of nat^^e has not this seed remaining in him, and therefore can
not choose but sin.

2. If the moral law, without the grace of Christ, were of no efficacy to
bring a man to righteousness, but rather served to reveal sin, as the Apostle
says, Romans 4.13. The law causes wrath: and, Romans 7.11. Sin took occasion
by the commandment, and dece^^^ me, and thereby slew me: much less is the law
of nature available, to direct one unto yet ^^ous acts: but rather, it is an
occasion to the wicked, that abuse it, of further stumbling: (...) as a light
suddenly flashing upon ones eyes walking in darkness, does dazzle them the mo^^
and causes him to stumble.

3. This further appears how insufficient this natural light is, because in
many thorough custom and continuance in sin, their very conscience is
corrupt, that they are n^^ touched with any remorse for evil: but as the
Prophet says, Ier. 3.3. Thou had a who^^ forehead, thou would not be
ashamed: so they grew to be impudent, and shameless in their evil doing: and as
their conscience was feared as with an hot iron, so their judgment ^^blinded,
taking good for evil, and evil for good, Isa. 5.20.

4. If it be objected, that the Gentiles did many commendable things: there are
found among them many worthy examples of justice, temperance, fortitude, yet
these were s^^^ from true virtues: for both these semblable virtues were
obscured with many other vi^^ which reigned in them, and they aimed at doing
such things at a wrong end: they referr^^ all this their endeavor either to
their own profit, or else to get praise thereby: so that th^^ did overcome
other inferior lusts and desires, with the predominant humor of couetous^ and
ambition: like as in a body full of diseases and infirmities, there may be
one, which not exceed the rest, and draw the other unto it: which body
notwithstanding is far from per^^^ health, though the smaller infirmities are
not felt, where a greater disease has taken possessi^^.

5. Now if our nature be insufficient to produce any good moral work, much
lesses it able to direct a man unto godly living: for the truth only makes
one free, Ioh. 8.32. unto such godly works, we had need to have the grace of
God to direct us: Psalm. 4.6. man say, who will show us any good, but Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.

34. Qu. Of the testimony of the conscience, and the accusing or excusing of
the thoughts.
v. 16. Their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts, etc. 1. Faius
thinks the three effects of the conscience are here expressed, the first to
testify, that is, to propose the things done unto the mind, then to accuse,
and thereby to defend or excuse. But rather the^ first is the general, to
testify and bear witness, which is expressed afterward in these two
particulars, that according as the things committed are good or evil, so the
conscience^ bears witness by accusing, or defending: Gorrhan. Pareus. 2.
Their thoughts are said ^^ accuse one an other, 1. non cogitationibus inter se
digladiantibus, not as though the thought^ did at the same time strive together
about the same fact, that some thoughts accused, a^^ other excused. 2. not yet
is it meant of diverse men, as that the thoughts accused the unbelievers, and
excused the believers, gloss. interlin. Gorrh. or the accusing thoughts
conceived puniendos, such as were to be punished, the excusing servandos, such
as were to be saved Graeca caten. 3. but in one and the same man, as his facts
were evil, his conscience accused and as they were well done, his conscience
excused him: Par. Tol. 4. Some think that whe^^ in every judgment there must
be three, actor, retis, index, ^he actuarie, the guilty person, and the judge:
that in diverse respects the conscience is all these: the conscience accusing is
the actor, the conscience accused, is the guilty party, and the judge also is
the conscience, Faius: But the party accused, is rather the man himself,
whom his conscience accuses or excuses, and the conscience is the witness:
the judge supreme is God sitting in the conscience: and the subalternate judge
is the light of nature imprinted in the heart: which Lyranus calls natural
indicatorium hominis, the natural judgment place of man: All these are here
expressed by the Apostle, he says, the effect of the law is written in their
heart: the judgment seat is the heart, the judge, the natural law their
written, then the party accused or defended are themselves: and the witness
and giver of evidence is the conscience. 5. Photius ex Oecumen. here notes,
that the conscience is not said to justify or condemn, but only to accuse or
excuse: sententiam iudex ipse fert, the sentence the judge himself gives,
etc. which is now for the present the evidence of natural light in the soul:
but the superior judge is God himself in the day of judgment. 6. Here Origin
disputes very curiously, what this conscience should be: and he resolves that
the spirit of the conscience, is an other thing beside the soul, being joined
unto it as an inseparable companion in the body: but if the soul of man be
not ruled by it, it shall be separated from the soul afterward, and the spirit
shall return to God, and the soul shall go to torment: to this purpose he
expounds these words of the unfaithful servant, Matthew. 24.51. He will
separate him, and give him his portion with hypocrites: as though the soul and
the spirit should be separated a sunder. Contr. True it is, that there are two
faculties in the soul; there is in the mind the notion and apprehension of
the natural principles, which are graft in us by nature, and then the
conscience in the heart, Pareus: but that these should be diverse in substance,
and that one may be separated from the other, is a strange conceit: for the
very spirits and souls of the wicked shall be tormented in hell, not their
souls only: as S. Peter speaks of the spirits in prison which were
disobedient in the days of Noah, 1. Pet. 3.19. and by separating in that place
our Savior means, the cutting such off, and separating of them from the
living.

35. Qu. Why the Apostle makes mention of the day of judgment, v. 16.
1. Some join this verse with the 13. Not the hearers of the law, but the
doers shall be justified, in the day etc. and all the rest coming between they
enclose in a parenthesis: so Beza, Pareus, and the Greek catena: Beza gives
this reason, because if it should be referred to the next words before, their
thoughts accusing one an other, or excusing, which is spoken only of the
Gentiles, this general judgment should be supposed to be only for the
Gentiles: But the same inconvenience will follow, if it be joined to the 13. v.
which is specially meant of the Jews, that the day of judgment would be
thought only to concern them: it is therefore no good consequent, because the
Gentiles are mentioned before, that this judgment should be only for them:
for how follows it? the conscience of the Gentiles shall in that day accuse
or excuse them, therefore no man's conscience else.

2. Wherefore this verse is better annexed to the next words before, then to
the other words so far off: to the which they can not well be joined without
great divulsion of the sentence, and suspending of the sense: the meaning then
is this, not that the conscience accuses not, or excuses none, till that
general day of judgment: but 1. it is felt now, sed tum maxim omnium
sentietur, but then it shall be felt most of all, Osiand. so also Lyran. 2. And
now many men being carried away with the delights of this life present,
cogitationes accusatrices non audiunt, do not hear or regard their thoughts
accusing them: but in that day they shall be brought to light, every man's
conscience shall touch him. Mart. 3. Hactenus occultus est testis, hitherto the
conscience is but a secret witness, only known to him that has it; but then
omnibus apparebunt, they shall be made manifest and apparent to all. Tolet. 4.
and by this the Apostle shows, ne morte cas extingui, that such accusing or
excusing thoughts are not extinguished, no not by death: And Origin here well
notes, that the thoughts shall accuse or excuse them in the day of judgment:
not which they shall have then, but which they have now: for cogitationum
malaru^ quaedam notae, certain marks of evil thoughts do remain in the
soul, which shall be manifested then: Origin. ficut style en cera nota
imprimitur, as a seal leaves a print in the wax. Haymo.

36. Qu. Why it is called the day, and of the application of other words, v. 16.
1. At the day. Gorrhan is here somewhat curious: it is called the day, propter
occultarum manifestationem, for the manifesting of things secret: and the
night, propter improvisionem, for the suddennes of his coming: as Matthew. 25.6.
At midnight there was a cry made: it is called the even, Matthew. 20.8. propter
terminum temporis, for the ending of time: and the morning, propter initium
aeternitatis, for the beginning of eternity: Zeph. 3.5. In the morning does he
bring his judgment: But here day is understood generally for time, as it is
taken in other places of Scripture. Faius.

2. Shall judge. In this world the Lord shows sometime special judgments,
as he did upon the old world, upon Sodom and Gomorrha: but this shall be a day
of general judgment, Faius: and he shall judge the secrets of men, non
daemonum, not of devils, they have their judgment already. Gorrhan.

3. According to my Gospel. S. Paul calls it his Gospel, in respect of his
ministry: it was the Gospel of Christ, tanqua^ authoris, as the author, and
Apostoli, vt praediratoris, the Apostles, as the preacher, Lyr. my gospel, quod
annuntio, which I preach, Haym. so Ioh. 17.20, our Savior calls his word,
their word, that is the Apostles, because they were preachers of it.

4. According. 1. which some understand of the manner of judgment: that Christ
shall give sentence according to the doctrine of the Gospel: as he that
believes in the Son of God has eternal life, he that believes not is
damned: Pareus: Gryneus refers it to that doctrine of the Apostle, Gal.
5.20. They that do such things, etc. as idolatry, witchcraft, and the like,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God: so he shall judge believers, both
according to the Gospel of faith, and the wicked according to their works.
Pareus, dub. 15. 2. some give this sense, according to my Gospel: because the
day of judgment calls men to repentance, and so belongs to the Gospel,
Mart. 3. but it is better applied to the certentie of the day of judgment,
that it shall certainly come, as Paul had preached, and that the world shall be
judged by Jesus Christ: for this is portio Evangelij, a portion of the Gospel,
to believe that the world shall be judged by Jesus Christ: Calvin. see more
afterward of other things belonging to the day of judgment among the places of
doctrine.

37. Quest. Whence the Jews were so called, v. 17. Behold, thou art called a
Jew.
1. Justinius imagines, that the Jews were so called upon this occasion; he
thus writes, that there was one Israel a certain king, that had two sons,
to whom he distributed ten kingdoms, who after that division were all called
Jews, by the name of one Judas, who died presently after that division was
made. lib. 36.

2. Cornelius Tacitus writes, that the Jews came out of Creta, where was the
hill Ida, or Idaeus, as Vi^g. l. 3. mons Idaeus ibi, there is the mountain
Idaeus: whence he thinks they were called Idaei, and by some corruption of
speech, Iudaei. Tacit. lib. 5. histor. But the falsitie of both these fabulous
reports, evidently appears out of the Scriptures: for they were thus named of
Judas one of the twelve Patriarks.

3. Some Christian writers were of opinion, that they were so called of Judas
Macchabeus: Thomas makes mention of this opinion, but names not the author,
Catharinius ascribes it to Josephus: but indeed Ambrose, if he be the author
of the commentary upon this epistle, so affirms: their conceit is evidently
controlled by the Scriptures: for mention is made of the Jews in the story of
Esther in diverse places, and Nehemiah 4. which were long before the times of
Judas Macchabeus.

4. But the original of the name indeed was this: first this people, now
called Jews, were called Hebrews of Heber, in whose time the languages were
confounded, and the Hebrew speech was continued in his family: after this they
were called Israelites, of Israel their father, whose name was before called
Iaakob, Genesis 32. And after Salomons time, the tribes were divided into two
kingdoms, ten were under Jeroboam, and two with (...) half under Rehoboam:
the ten tribes went into captivity, and never returned again: after that
division, all they which were under the kingdom of Rehoboam, and his
successors were called Jews: these also went into captivity into Babylon, but
after 70. years they returned: after which return, not only they which were
of the tribe of Judah, but all other of that nation, which returned with them,
were called Jews, because it was the more noble tribe: and that part of
Palestina, which they inhabited, did belong unto Iudahs lot: Josephus thinks,
that this name was given unto them, and to that region, quando a Babylonia sunt
reversi, when they returned from Babylon, lib. 11. antiquit. c. 5. But indeed
they were so called before, but not so generally, as afterward. Thus they had
three names: they were called Hebrews, that is, transeuntes, passers, propter
susceptionem praeceptorum terrenorum, for the receiving of terrene precepts:
Israelites, that is, seeing God, propter cont^^plationem coelestium, for the
contemplation of heavenly things: and Iudaei, that is, confessing propter
confessionem divinae laudis, for the confession of the divine praise. Gorrhan.

5. It was the opinion of some that the Jews were the same people, who were
called Solymi, whom Homer mentions in his verses, of whom the city
Jerusalem should be so called: Tacit. lib. 5. historiar. and Josephus cites
the ancient Poet Cherillus, who says that these Jews called Solymi, did serve
Xerxes in his wars against Greece. lib. 1. contr. Apion. Contra. But these
are mere conjectures: for these Solymi, as Strabo writes, lib. 1. inhabited
about the mountain Taurus, who were in times past called Mylies: Herodotus
lib. 1. thinks they were a people of Asia, called the Lysians: Pliny lib. 5.
c. 27. does number them among other people in Asia, that were long ago
extinguished, whose country was ^ext unto Isauria, Pamphilia, Lycania.
Pererius.

6. Now whereas the name of a Jew was then a noble name, as now is the name
Christian, let it be observed, that S. Paul says not, thou art a Jew, but
rather, thou art called a Jew: they were so in name, rather then true Jews in
deed. Chrysostom.

38. Quest. Of the privileges of the Jews here recited by the Apostle.
The Apostle reckons up seven several privileges of the Jews. 1. their
name and profession, to be called Jews. 2. they tested in the Law, placing all
perfection therein, and admitting of no other doctrine: wherein they were
deceived: for so long as they were bearers only of the law, and not doers,
they were under the curse. 3. they gloried in God, not truly, as they do,
which do ascribe the glory and praise of their salvation to God in Christ:
but their boasting was vainglorious, such as was that of the Pharisie, Luke
18. I thank thee God, etc. 4. They knew the will of God, revealed in the law:
but they were so much the more inexcusable, because they knew their masters
will, and did it not. 5. Thou allowest, or triest the things that are
excellent: they had a discerning judgment by the knowledge of the law, to know
good from evil, just things from unjust. 6. Then that which was the cause of
this their discerning, they were instructed in the law, and trained up in the
precepts thereof. 7. Then follow their titles, which they took upon them: to
be masters, and teachers of others: a guide to the blind, a light of them which
were in darkness: both of the Gentiles, which were blind in respect of other
nations, and the more simple and ignorant Jews. But these privileges did
nothing profit them, because they followed not that, which they taught others.
Pareus.

39. Quest. How the Jews are said to commit sacrilege, v. 22.
1. They were not guilty of sacrilege in giving the divine worship unto
idols, as Gorrh. for the Jews after their return out of captivity, excepting
some in the time of the Macchabees, who for fear were compelled to worship
idols, were free from idolatry: and if it had been so, S. Paul would have
directly charged them with idolatry, as he did before with adultery. 2.
Neither, is hereby understood contemptus divinae maiestatis, the contempt of
the divine majesty: Calv. Piscat. for that is afterward touched by the
Apostle, v. 23. Thorough breaking of the law dishonourest thou God? 3. Nor with
Origin, is the meaning, Christum verum templum Dei violas, thou do violate
Christ the true temple of God: for in joining sacrilege with idolatry, he
means some external sin: and the violence offered to the name of Christ is
comprehended under blasphemy, which is objected, v. 24.4. Gryneus
understands it, of arrogating to their own merits, that which was peculiar
to the grace of God; Pareus of the polluting of Gods service with their
inventions: but some external sacrilege is signified, as is faide. 5. Some
refer it to that particular sin of robbing and spoiling the house of God,
as the sons of Eli appropriated to themselves the things offered to God:
Martyr. but S. Paul seems specially to touch the sins of that age present:
thou art called a Jew. 6. Some take this sacrilege to be meant of buying and
selling the Priests office, Osiand. and in taking to their own use, things
ordained for the temple, Lyran. Syriack interpret. Haymo: But the Jews which
were at Rome, were not guilty of those abuses committed against the Temple at
Jerusalem. 7. Therefore this sacrilege was rather the covetousness of the Jews,
who attrectabant idolathyta, did handle things offered to idols, and so
committed sacrilege, in using those things to their private commodity, which
were consecrate to idolatry, which by the law of God should have been
destroyed: Chrysostom. Theophyl. as the manner of the Jews is at this day, to
buie chalices and other implements, which are stolen out of the idolatrous
Churches of the Romanists: this is called sacrilege, because such things as
were dedicate to idolatry, no man was to convert to his own use: Gualt. and
Calvin misliketh not this sense.

40. Quest. How the name of God was blasphemed by the Jews and whether this
testimony be rightly alleged by the Apostle.
v. 24. The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as it is
written. There are two kinds of blasphemy, one is in word, where the name of
God is taken in vain whereof we have an example, Levit. 24. when the
blasphemer was stoned to death: Gr^^ and here there is great difference
between these two, blasphemare, and blasphemiam die^^ to blaspheme, and to say
a blasphemy: he blasphemeth, which of set purpose profaneth and abuses the
name of God: but one may through infirmity and perturbation of mind sp^^^^
that which is blasphemy, and yet not blaspheme: as Job, that complained, that
God had perverted or overthrown him, Job 18.6. the other kind of blasphemy
is, when that is given unto God, which appertains not unto him, as that he is
cruel, unjust: or that is denied unto him, which is due unto him, as if any
deny his providence, mercy, wisdom. Faius.

2. Here the Jews are said to blaspheme God diverse ways. 1. they did both
themselves contumelia Deum afficere, offer contumely unto the name of God, in
blaspheming Christ, and ad id alios inducunt, and they teach others to do so
likewise, Theoph. Gorrh. 2. they blasphemed God in the contempt of his law, for
he that willingly transgresses the law, contemns it, and the author of it:
Basil. reg. brev. resp. 4. 3. and they did not only blaspheme God themselves,
male vivendo, in evil living, but occasionem praebendo, in giving occasion to
the Gentiles to speak evil of God, and of his religion, because he had chosen
such a wicked and disobedient people: Lyran. and of this latter kind of
dishonouring and blaspheming God, speaks the Apostle here.

3. Now for the allegation it self. 1. some think that the Apostle borrows
this testimony from the Prophet Isa, 52.5. They that rule over them, make them
to houle, says the Lord, and my name all the day continually is blasphemed: so
Origin, Theophyl. Tolet: but the two things will be here alleged: 1. that the
Apostle neither follows the Prophets words: for here are neither thorough
you, nor among the Gentiles. 2. nor yet keeps his sense, for he speaks of
the blasphemy of the Chaldeans, who insulted against God, as though he were
not able to deliver his people. Ans. 1. First of all those words are in the
translation of the Septuagint, which the Apostle follows, as being best
known unto the Grecians and Romans: and because there is eadem sententia, the
same sentence and sense. Lyran. 2. And in that the Chaldeans blasphemed God, as
though he either would not or could not deliver his people, the occasion was
ministered by themselves, who for their sins were carried into captivity,
upon which occasion their enemies blasphemed. 2. Some refer us to that place,
Ezekiel. 36.23. And I will sanctify my great name, which was polluted among the
heathen, among whom ye have polluted it: Hierome, Ostand. Calvin. where it is
evident, that the Jews by their evil life caused the name of God to be
polluted among the heathen. 3. But the Apostle rather has reference to both
those places, not so much alleging a testimony, as showing the agreement of
that prophecy to those times then present: that the Jews by their evil life
caused the name of God to be blasphemed and evil spoken of among the Gentiles.
Mart. Pareus.

41. Quest. In what sense the Apostle says, Circumcision is profitable, v. 25.
Seeing the Apostle in other places utterly rejects circumcision, as Gal.
5.2. If ye be circumcised, Christ shall not profit you any thing: and, v. 5.
for in Jesus Christ neither does circumcision atta^le any thing, etc. hence two
doubts arise. 1. how the Apostle says here, Circumcision is profitable, if
thou do the law. 2. seeing none could keep the law, how could circumcision
profit them.

Ans. 1. In those places the Apostle speaks of circumcision then abrogated in
the times of the Gospel: but here he has respect unto the times of the law,
while circumcision was an ordinary sacrament of the old Testament.

2. Circumcision was profitable, because ex part Dei, on Gods behalf, it was
a seal of all his gracious promises, if on their part, they did perform the
condition, which was to walk in obedience: this condition was added, to meet
with their hypocrisy, which stood upon the outward ceremony, thinking it
sufficient for them to be circumcised in the flesh: whereas circumcision
without obedience, was no better then uncircumcision: and to stir up the
faithful to express their faith by their obedience, and to look unto Christ,
in whom their disobedience was pardoned, and their imperfect obedience by his
righteousness supplied. Pareus.

3. Thus Augustine dissolueth this doubt, showing that there were two kind of
precepts given the Jews: the moral, and ceremonial: the moral were
perpetual, not only concerning those times, but they do bind also now under
the new Testament: the ceremonies were only for those times: si observabantur
and intelligebantur, non modo nihil oberant, sid proderant, tanquam and illi
tempori and illi genti congruentia, if they were observed, and understood, they
did not only not hurt, but they were profitable, as agreeable to those times,
and to that people: to this purpose August. exposit. inchoat. ad Galat. this
solution follow Hugo Cardinal. distingue tempora, and salvatur Scriptura,
distinguish the times, and the Scripture is reconciled: here the Apostle
speaks of the times before the manifestation of the Gospel: so also Gorrhan.
hic loquitur pro tempore adventus Christi, here he speaks of the time before
the coming of Christ, there of the time after.

4. Some give this solution further, that in those times, profuit circumcisio,
sed non ad salutem, circumcision profited, but not unto salvation without the
spiritual observation of the law: gloss. ordinar. as Hierome in his
commentary upon this place, (if he were the author) shows that circumcision
was profitable to these ends: 1. vt agnosceretur populus Dei inter gentes, that
the people of God hereby might be discerned among the Gentiles: and therefore
the people were not circumcised in the desert, because they only were there:
(though other reasons may be given thereof, Mart.) deinde vt corpora tum
agnoscarentur in bello, that the circumcised bodies of the Jews might be
discerned in war: further it signified their chastity: and thereby Christ
was signified, to come of the seed of Abraham, who should make an end of
carnal circumcition. These and other such profitable uses of circumcision may
be alleged. But the Apostle means only, the profitable use thereof, as
furthering their salvation, as it was a seal of the righteousness of faith, and
brought with it the circumcision of the heart in the obedience of the law: si
Christo credas, and spiritualiter observes, if thou believe in Christ, and
spiritually keep the law: gloss. interlin.

5. Origin has two other expositions: the first is, that the Apostle speaks
not here of carnal circumcision, but of the spiritual circumcision of the
heart: which the Apostle speaks on afterward: and this circumcision
consists in ceasing from sin, which is not sufficient, unless also we do
the works of righteousness in keeping of the law: and his reason is, because the
Apostle says, If thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision: non est possibile carnalem circumcisionem in praeputium verti,
it is not possible for carnal circumcision to be turned to uncircumcision:
therefore such vncircumcisio^ the Apostle speaks not of. Contra. 1. the
Apostle in this place speaks evidently of two circumcisions, the one carnal,
which of it self is not profitable without the keeping of the law, and the
other spiritual, which is the circumcision of the heart: of the former he
speaks here, because he says to the Jew, thy circumcision, which was the
circumcision of the flesh wherein they gloried: and the circumcision of the
heart, consisted not only in ceasing from sin, but in keeping also the law:
it is in the spirit, and is acceptable to God, v. 29. but a cessation from
sin only without obedience, is not accepted of God. 2. the meaning of the
other words is, that such remission facta est abominalis Deo, etc. is become
abominable unto God, as if it were uncircumcision, Lyran. non plus valet, quam
praeputium, it avails no more then uncircumcision, Gorrhan: yea and Origin
himself so expounds afterward, his circumcision, shall be turned into
uncircumcision, that is, nihil profuturam, it shall not profit him at all.

6. Origin has an other exposition: he thinks that the Apostle may also
speak of such circumcision, as remained a while among the faithful after the
coming of Christ: that although the Apostle allowed not the Gentiles to be
circumcised, to whom he says, Galat. 5. That if they were circumcised, Christ
should not profit them: yet he bears with the Jews, to whom he speaks
here, to be circumcised, least they might have been hindered from coming unto
Christ: so their circumcision he makes like, to Peter's discerning of meats,
which were some clean, some unclean by the Law, and to Paul's purifying
himself.

Contra. There is great difference between these speeches, circumcision is
profitable, and circumcision hinders or hurts not: After the Gospel was
preached, and some ceremonies of the Law yet in fact remained, being in right
abolished, the toleration of such things for a time, was no impediment to the
believing Jews, but yet it furthered them not: no more then Timothy his
circumcision did profit him, or Paul's purifying, which both were done not for
any benefit to themselves: but least they might have given offense, and so
hindered others: But the Apostle speaks here of the profit which circumcision
brought: which was only during the continuance of such legal sacraments,
which were profitable unto them then, as being seals unto them of the
righteousness of faith in Christ: so then circumcision with other legal tites
was profitable under the law: but after the ceremonies were abolished, they
became unprofitable in the mean time between both, as they profited not such
as believed of the circumcision, so they hindered not, if they did not repose
their trust and confidence in them: Therefore of all these expositions I
resolve of the first, that the Apostle here speaks of circumcision, as it was
an ordinary sacrament under the law, not yet abolished.

Quest. 42. How circumcision was availeable for infants.
Object. If circumcision did not profit, except they kept the law: this doubt
will be made that then it was not profitable at all unto infants, who could not
keep the law.

Answ. 1. Hugo answeareth, that circumcision did not profit infants ex virtute
sua, sed ex virtute and fide parentium, by it own virtue, but by the virtue
and faith of the parents: But although the believing parents may obtain graces
by their faith for others: yet formally none are justified before God, but by
their own faith, or some grace infused by the spirit of God: for as the
parents sins cannot condemn the child, so the parents faith cannot save the
infant.

2. Gorrhan thinks, that circumcision herein was avayleable, quia peccatum
originale delebat, because it blotted out original sin: But it is evident by
this place, that the circumcision of the flesh did not outwardly confer
grace: for then circumcision could never be turned to uncircumcision: that is
to be of no more force without keeping of the law, then if they had not been
circumcised at all.

3. Augustine, as Pet. Martyr alleges him, not citing the place, reports
the opinion of some, which affirmed, that a man being once baptized, though he
were an evil liver, yet in the end should be saved, but should suffer many
things in this life: the like opinion the Jews might have of their
circumcision: and so it might be profitable to infants, but more profitable to
those, that also kept the law: But the Apostle denies circumcision to be
profitable any thing at all without keeping the law, because it is turned into
uncircumcision: it is no more availeable, then if they were not circumcised at
all.

4. Wherefore the best solution is, that the Apostle speaks not here of
infants, sed de adultis, but of those which were of years and discretion: that
circumcision did not profit them, unless they kept the law: as baptism now is
not any help unto salvation to Christians, that lead an evil life: As for
infants they were then saved by the covenant of grace sealed in circumcision,
as now in baptism.

43. Quest. What uncircumcised the Apostle here speaks of, whether such of
the Gentiles as were converted to the faith, and what keeping of the law he
means.
1. Calvin thinks, that the Apostle saying, v. 26. if the uncircumcision
keep the ordinances of the law, speaks ex hypothesi, by way of supposition,
if any such could be found, that did keep the law, which no man could: so also
Pareus. de obedientia plena loquitur, ad quam obligabat circumcisio, he
speaks of the full and perfect obedience of the law, unto the which
circumcision did bind: and he speaks ex hypothesi, by supposition, if the
uncircumcision keep. But it is evident, that the Apostle speaks not by way
of supposition, as of a thing impossible to be done, but supposing, if it were
done: for then it would follow, that circumcision were not profitable at all,
because he says, circumcision is profitable, if thou keep the law: if the
Apostle should speak of the perfect keeping of the law, which is impossible,
then all profitable use is denied to circumcision: but he ^ealed not so much
detract from that holy institution of God: circumcision indeed did bind them
to keep the whole law: but it did profit them, if there were an endeavor in
them, and care to keep the law, though they perfectly keep it not.

2. But Lyranus here has a very unfound assertion, that the Apostle should
here speak of such uncircumcised Gentiles, which did the works of the Law,
ex rationis naturalis dictamine, and erant Deo accepti, by the direction only
of natural reason, and were acceptable to God: which cannot be, that any not
having faith by the light only of nature, should be accepted of God: for
without faith it is impossible to please him, Heb. 11.6.

3. The interlinearie gloss has an other exposition, by the ordinances of the
law, understanding, fidem Christi, the faith of Christ, whom the law did
foretell should come for our justification: but faith in Christ is no work or
ordinance of the law, for the Apostle concludes, that a man is justified by
faith without the works of the law, Romans 3.28. which were no good conclusion
if faith in Christ were a work of the law: yet I deny not, but the Apostle
speaks of such keeping of the law, as proceeded from faith.

4. Wherefore the Apostle here understands such Gentiles as were converted to
the faith, as Origin expounds, qui ex praeputio ad Christi fidem venerunt,
which came unto the faith of Christ from uncircumcision: for the idolaters
among the Gentiles, being not converted unto Christ, could not do the works
of the law: failing in the first commandment, which forbids idolatry:
such faithful therefore among the Gentiles are understood, which had the
knowledge of God, Faius. such as Job was: and to fulfill or keep the law here,
is taken pro legis seruandae studio, for the study and endeavor to keep the
law, Faius. so also Gryneus, he says in effect, si Ethnicus aliquis fidei
obedientiam praestaret, if any Ethnicke or Gentile should perform the
obedience of faith, he should condemn a Christian that only is baptized, and
performs not such obedience: But here it will be thus objected on the
contrary.

1. Object. The Apostle says, v. 27. If uncircumcision by nature keep the
law, shall it not judge thee? the Apostle then means those, which by the
light of nature only keep the law.

Answ. 1. Some do thus expound, ex natura per gratiam reparata, by nature
repaired by grace gloss, interlin, so also Gorrhan says, that this keeping of
the law is understood to be by faith: which is of nature, preparative, by way
of preparation, but of grace completive, by way of perfection: for the
illumination of the soul is of grace, the consent is of the will reformed by
grace. Contra. 1. It is an erroneous assertion, that faith is partly of nature,
partly of grace: it is wholly the work of the spirit, 1. Cor. 12.9. the will
indeed consents, yet not by it own natural power: God, as Augustine says,
ex nolentibus vol^tes facit, of nilling, makes us willing: and the will
concurreth, not actively, in any good work, or formally: but passiuely and
materially, as not working but being wrought upon. 2. If nature should here be
so taken, restoared by grace: there should be no difference in this behalf
between the Gentile and the Jew: for even the Jew also by grace illuminating
his nature was enabled to keep the Law, though imperfectly: but the Apostle
seems here to speak of somewhat peculiar to the uncircumcised Gentiles.

2. The Syriake interpreter in his annotations, thinks that by nature is here
only opposed, to the law, and the letter: not excluding all other helps,
beside nature, but only the help of the written law: but then, one that
works by grace may be said to work by nature: which are opposite the one to
the other, c. 11.6. if by grace, then not of works, that is naturally done
without the help of grace.

3. Wherefore the words are thus rather to be placed, and that which is by
nature uncircumcision, keeping the Law, as the words stand in the original:
not thus, uncircumcision, which by nature keeps the law: as the Syrian
translatour places them, so, by nature, must be joined to uncircumcision, not
to keeping the law: and it is a description of the Gentiles, which have
uncircumcision by nature, Pareus.

2. Object. The words of the Apostle are, (...), consummans, as the Latin
interpreter reads, perfecting the law; which phrase Origin thus
distinguishes, from the former word (...), to keep the law, which the
Apostle uses, v. 26. he that lives according to the letter of the law is
said to keep it, but he that keeps it according to the spiritual sense, is
said to perfect or accomplish it. Contra. But Beza here well observes, that
both these are here taken for one: that the perfect keeping of the law is not
here opposed to the imperfect keeping, but the keeping and observing of the
law, is set against the not having care to keep it, but to rest only in the
outward sign and ceremony.

Quest. 44. Of the explanation of certain terms here used by the Apostle: and
of the letter and the spirit.
1. v. 26. Where the Apostle says, if uncircumcision keep the law, by a
Metonimie he understands the uncircumcised: the sign is taken for the thing
signified: but afterward it is taken for the sign it self.

2. His uncircumcision shall be counted for circumcision: that is, it shall be
as no circumcision: Chrysostom reads, it shall be turned into circumcision:
it shall be all one as if he were circumcised.

3. By the ordinances of the law, (...), some understand the ceremonies and
rites of the law: But rather the moral duties of the law are thereby
signified, which the Gentiles performed, having not the written law: otherwise
the rites and ceremonies of the law they could not observe without the
knowledge of the written law.

4. Shall judge thee: To judge is taken three ways. 1. Personally, as it is
said, the Saints shall judge the world, 1. Cor. 6. shall personally stand
against them in judgment. 2. actually, as to judge may be taken to accuse, or
testify against: as it is said v. 15. their thoughts accusing them. 3. or by
example, as it is said the Ninevites and the Queen of the South, shall judge
the Israelites: so is it taken here: the Gentiles going beyond the Jews in
example of life, shall condemn them, that is, show them to be worthy of
judgment, for their evil life, Mart. Calvin, Pareus.

5. What is meant by the letter and spirit, there are diverse expositions. 1.
Sometime Augustine, by the letter understands the litterall sense of the
law, by the spirit, the spiritual sense, exposit. in epist. ad Roman. so also
Origin, he transgresses the law, qui spiritualem eius non tenet sensum, who
keeps not the spiritual sense: but even the spiritual sense of the law, if
it were apprehended only, and the heart not thereby circumcised and reformed,
was in the Apostles sense but literal. 2. some by the letter understand legem
scriptam, the law written, as separate from the grace of Christ: as the Syrian
interpreter reads, scripturam, the Scripture: which is so called because it
was written in tables of stone, gloss. interlin. 3. But it is better here more
specially applied to circumcision: so that the letter and circumcision, are
here taken pro literali circumcisione, for litterall circumcision, Calvin.
Pareus. that is, the external sign and ceremony of circumcision only
according to the letter of the law, which was made literalibus cultris, with
literal, that is, external knifes, Gorrhan. and by the spirit is not
understood the soul, as Tolet, following Chrysostom: but the efficacy of
grace wrought in the soul by the spirit of God: and so Augustine takes it else
where, thus describing the circumcision of the heart, quam facit non litera
legis docent and minans, sed spiritus Dei sanans and adiuvans: which not the
letter of the law teaching and threatening, but the spirit of God works
healing and helping, lib. de spirit. and liter. c. 8. so then there is no
difference, quoad rem, in respect of the thing which is propounded, between
the spirit and the letter, sed quoad animi affectum, but in respect of the
affection of the mind, and the inward operation of the spirit, Mart. for even
he that hears the Gospel, but believes it not, may be said to be a
Gospeller according to the letter, not after the spirit.

6. By transgressing the law is meant the voluntary breaking thereof, not the
failing therein, thorough ignorance or infirmity, Mart. as Origin notes Paul
himself did not always keep the law: non tamen fuit praevaricator legis,
yet he was not a prevaricator or transgressor of the law.

7. v. 28. He is not a Jew, which is a Jew outward: here must be understood
the word only, he was not a Jew indeed, that was only so outwardly. And in
this sense the Apostle says else where, he was not sent to baptize, that is,
only, Martyr.

Quest. 45. Of two kinds of Jews, and two kinds of circumcision, v. 28.
v. 28. He is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, etc. 1. The Apostle here
makes a double comparison: both of the persons, setting a circumcised Jew not
keeping the law, against an uncircumcised Gentile keeping of the law: and of
the things between inward circumcision of the heart, and outward in the flesh
only, Mart.

2. And here there is a fowrefold antithesis or exposition. 1. From the forms,
the one is within, the other without in outward appearance only. 2. from the
subject, one is in the heart, the other in the flesh. 3. from the efficient,
one is wrought by the spirit, the other is in the letter, it consists in
literal and ceremonial observations. 4. from the end, the one has praise of
God, the other is commended only of men, Gryneus.

3. Hence the Apostle proves by three arguments, that the spiritual
circumcision is better then the carnal: 1. That is best, which is in secret
and in truth, then that which is openly and in show only: 2. and that which
is wrought by the spirit, is more excellent then that which is in the letter.
3. and that has the pre-eminence, whose praise is of God.

4. This distinction of spiritual and moral circumcision, S. Paul has out of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 10.16. Circumcise the foreskinne of your heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. The
Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart: which the Apostle further describes
thus, Coloss. 2.11. In whom ye are also circumcised with circumcision made
without hands, by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, thorough the
circumcision of Christ. And as there are two kinds of circumcision, so there is
also a twofold uncircumcision, as Burgens. notes, addition 1. out of the
Prophet Jeremy, c. 9.26. All the nations are uncircumcised, and all the house
of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart: there is then an uncircumcision of
the heart, and an other of the flesh.

5. Yet this must not be so understood, as though there were two kinds of
circumcisions, rather then two parts of one and the same circumcision: which
are sometime joined together, both the inward and outward, as they were in
Abraham: sometime separate one from the other: and this separation is of two
sorts: it is either salutaris, healthful, or not: for when the inward
circumcision is without the outward, it is profitable, as in Noah: but when the
outward is, and not the inward, it is unprofitable, as in Judas Iscariot.

6. Origens observation seems here to be somewhat curious, thus
distinguishing the circumcision of the flesh: that because there is some part
of the flesh cut off and lost, some part remains still: the lost and cut off
part (says he) has a resemblance of that flesh, whereof it is said, all flesh
is grass: the other part which remains is a figure of that flesh, whereof
the Scripture speaks, all flesh shall see the salvation of God: But thus
Origin confounds the circumcision of the flesh and the spirit, making them
all one: Further, to show these two circumcisions of the heart and spirit, he
alleges how the Israelites were circumcised again by Iosuah, (who was a
type of Christ that circumciseth the heart,) who were circumcised before by
Moses in the desert: wherein Origin is greatly deceived: for it is evident by
the text, Iosuah, 5.5. that they which were circumcised by Iosuah, had not
been circumcised before.

4. Places of doctrine.
1. Doct. v. 1. In that thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy self: He
that is guilty of the same sins (...) condemn: another, but therein he also
judges himself.
he which does give sentence upon another for that wherein he is guilty,
therein is a judge against himself: so Judah did judge Thamar, for her
incontinencie being in greater fault himself: and David pronouncing sentence
of death against him, that had taken away his poor neighbors sheep, did by
his own mouth condemn himself: Piscator. see further addition 1. following.

2. Doct. v. 11. There is no respect of persons with God, etc. No respect of
persons with God in the elec^^on of his.
In that God freely without respect unto any works, electeth some unto
eternal life, it is done without respect of persons: for though God decree
unequal things unto those; that are in equal case: for all by nature are the
children of wrath: yet it follows not, that God has respect of persons: for
he does it not either against any law, for God is not tied unto any law: nor
yet upon any fini^ter cause, either for fear, for there is none greater than
God, to be feared of him: or savor, for there are no merits or deserts which
God respects in his election: And when God comes to give the reward, then
he distributeth unto every man according to their works: see further addit.
3. following.

3. Doct. v. 16. At the day when God shall judge: Of their sin: of the last
judgment
here the certainty of the day of judgment is expressed, with the manner
thereof. 1. who shall judge, God. 2. whom, men and what, not their open and
manifest works only, but their secret things. 3. by whom, in Jesus Christ,
in his humane shape. 4. According to what rule, namely, the Gospel, is be
says, Ioh. 12. that his word shall judge them, Gualter.

4. Doct. v. 21. Thou which teach another, etc. the carnal Jew, True
doctrine not to be condemned for evil life.
though he did not himself, as he taught, yet was not his teaching and
doctrine therefore to be refused: so our Savior says, Matthew. 23.3. Whatsoever
they bid you, observe and do, but after their works do ye not, Mart.

5. Doct. v. 25. Circumcision is profitable, etc. Of the baptism of infants.
Baptism succeeds in the place of circumcision: as the Apostle shows,
Coloss. 2.11. In whom ye are circumcised, etc. thorough the circumcision of
Christ, in that ye are bound in him thorough baptism, etc. then like as
infants were circumcised, so are they now to be baptized: but baptism is not
now tied unto the eight day, as it was then: for by the liberty of the Gospel
are we delivered from the observation of the circumstances of the time and
place.

6. Doct. v. 28. Of the baptism of the flesh and of the spirit.
Neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh: as these were not
two diverse circumcisions, but two acts of the one and same circumcision, the
internal and external: so there are two acts in one and the same baptism,
there is the baptism of the spirit, and the baptism of water: which both are
joined together in the lawful use: they have the baptism of the spirit to
whom the Sacrament is upon urgent necessity denied: but infidels, unbelievers,
and evil livers have only the baptism of water: for he that believes not
shall be condemned, Pareus.

7. So likewise in the Eucharist, there is an external act of eating, and an
internal: the unworthy receivers have only the latter, the faithful, when
they communicate have both: and in case the Sacrament be denied, they may
spiritually eat Christ without the Sacrament: our Savior says, Ioh. 6.54.
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life: And
though they do spiritually eat Christ, before they receive the Sacrament, for
otherwise they would not desire it, yet the Sacrament also must be celebrated
for their further comfort, and strengthening, and the testifying of their
faith, Gryneus.

Certain additions to the former doctrines.
Addit. 1. Concerning the judgment which a man gives against himself, which
is called (...), thus much may further be observed out of the 1. verse: 1. What
it is: namely the testimony of ones conscience, of his own guiltiness before
God. 2. Whence it is: partly by the providence of God, which strikes into a
man's conscience this sense of sin, partly by the force of the conscience it
self, conuincing one of sin. 3. Of whom it is: namely, of all men. 4. It is
necessary and profitable to diverse ends. 1. to humble us in respect of Gods
judgment: for if our conscience condemn us, God can much more, who is greater
then our conscience, 1. Ioh. 3.20. 2. It is for our comfort, working in us
boldness, if our hearts condemn us not, 1. Ioh. 3.21. 3. it will make us not
to be too severe in judging of others, our own heart condemning us.

Addit. 2. Out of the 5. v. concerning (...), the hardness of the heart: we
are to consider, 1. What it is: namely the contumacie and rebellion of the
heart against the law of God. 2. Whence it is: originally by the corruption of
man's nature: Satan concurreth as the efficient: the occasion are the external
objects: and God by his secret judgment yet most just has an ouerruling hand
herein. 3. the effect, is the treasuring up of the wrath of God. 4. it is
curable, not by man's free will, for it is not subject to the law of God,
neither can be, Romans 8.8. but by the grace of Gods spirit, as David prays,
Psalm. 51.12. Create in me a new heart.

Addit. 3. The accepting or respect of persons called (...) is when things
equal are given to them which are unequal, or contrariwise things unequal to
them which are equal, only for their person: and the person, is the state,
condition, or quality of a thing: now to know whether all accepting of the
person be unlawful: first the diverse kinds of persons and qualities must be
considered, whereof there are 3. sorts. 1. some personal conditions there are
which are annexed, to promises or comminations divine, and humane: as faith,
obedience in the elect, impenitencie, impiety, unbelief in the wicked, this
accepting of persons is not unjust: as Abraham was respected of God for his
faith, so also David, and Saul rejected for his hypocrisy. 2. Some personal
respects are so annexed to the cause, as thereby it is aggravated or
extenuated: as he that strikes a magistrate is worthy of greater punishment,
then he, that strikes an other: and this respect of persons is also just. ^^
some personal respects are beside the cause: as riches, poverty, in the case
of adultery, theft, and such like: and such accepting of the person is unjust:
Secondly, the accepting ^^ persons, is either in judgment, when it is in the
two first senses lawful: but not in the thu^^ or extra iudicium, out of
judgment: and it is of three sorts: 1. dilectionis, of love, which in common
duties is unlawful, as when a rich man is preferred before a poor man for his
riches: which is condemned by S. James, c. 2. v. 2.3. but in special and
proper duties it is lawful: as in preferring the love of our parents before
others. 2. electionis, of election ^^ choice, as when men of quality and gifts
are advanced to places of office, before them, which are not so qualified: this
respect of persons is lawful, as being agreeable both unto nature and to
positive laws. 3. donationis, in matters of gift and donation; as one for
gives his debt to one, not to another: this also is lawful, because here is
no wrong done: a man may dispose of his own, as it pleases him: see more
hereof before, quest. 23.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. Against the power of free will in good things.
v. 5. Thou after thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapest unto
thy self wrath, etc. Pererius out of this place infers, that it is in
potestate hominis been vel male agere, in the power of man to do well or
evil, for it should otherwise be unjust to punish a man for doing evil, and
for want of repentance, whereas he can do no other, disput. 2. in c. 2. numer.
23.

Answ. 1. That man has free will to do evil without any compulsion,
violence, or constraint, it is confessed of all: but this is a freedom a
coactione, from compulsion or enforcing, not a necessitate, from necessity: a
man cannot now choose but sin, because his nature is enthralled by the fall of
man, yet he sins willingly: no man compels him: But unto that which is
good, man has no will or inclination of himself, but by the grace of God: as
the Prophet says, Ierem. 4.22. They are wise to do evil, but to do well
they have no knowledge and our Blessed Savior says, Ioh. 15.5. Without me ye
can do nothing. 2. yet though man cannot repent of himself, nor yet do any
good thing, he is worthily punished: because man by his voluntary
transgression, when it was in his power not to have transgressed did abuse his
free will given in the creation, unto sin, and so enthralled him self and
his posterity: Once therefore man had free will if he could have kept it: but
now that is become necessary, to do evil, which was before free: man
therefore is justly punished notwithstanding this necessity of sinning,
because he lost this liberty and freedom by his own default. 3. And let it
here further be observed, how Pererius beside the falsitie of his assertion, is
become a falsarie, in charging us with untrue opinions, such as Protestants
hold not: as first, that we should say, hominem ad vtrumque impelli a Deo, etc.
that man whether to do good or evil is compelled and enforced of God: whereas
we abhor and detest that as a most wicked heresy, that God is the author of
any evil, or the moouer, stirrer, or prouoker thereunto: Again, he obiecteth
that we hold that man's free will, is, velut quoddam inanime, etc. is a certain
dead thing without life, that it does nothing of it self, but is a bare title
without any matter: whereas we affirm, that man is not as a stock, or stone,
but has a natural power, to will, to elect, to desire: but to will or do
that which is good, it has no power: man wills, desires, chooses, but to
do these things well it is of grace: in respect of the general inclination of
the will unto the object it is active, but in respect of the goodness of the
will, in being moved unto that which is good, it is merely passive: see
Synop. page 858.

Controv. 2. Of justification by the imputative justice of faith.
Whereas the Apostle says, v. 2. We know that the judgment of God is
according to truth: Bellarmine hence thus reasons against imputative justice:
Gods judgment is according to truth, but so is not imputed justice, it is not
verily and in deed, and according to truth, but the habitual, infused, and
inherent justice is according to truth, lib. 2. de iustificaton. c. 3.

Contra. 1. Bellarmine does mistake the Apostles meaning: for according to the
truth, is not secundum realem existentiam, according to the real existence of
a thing, but secundum equitatem, according to equity.

2. So then, the justice of Christ imputed by faith, is according to truth,
that is, the rule of justice, because thereby full satisfaction is made for
sin by faith in Christ: but that habitual and inherent justice, is not
according to the rule of justice, because it is imperfect, and thereby Gods
justice cannot be satisfied, Pareus.

3. Controv. Against the merit of works.
v. 6. Who will reward every man according to his works: out of this place the
Romanists contend for the merit of good works: the Rhemists upon this place
affirm, that life everlasting is given for, and according to their good
works: there reasons and arguments are these.

1. The Apostle uses the word (...) shall render, which signifies a just
retribution, and so it is taken, Matthew. 20.8. Bellar. l. 5. de iustificat. c. 2.

2. Tolet. annotat. 6. urges that place, Matthew. 25.34. Inherit ye the kingdom
prepared for you, etc. for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc.

3. Likewise it is thus objected: God shall reward the wicked according to the
merit of their evil works, Ergo the righteous shall be rewarded according to
the merit of their good works.

Ans. 1. Tolet. annot. 6. rehearses five several answers, which he supposes
to be used by the Protestants. 1. some, he says, by his works, understand
Christ's works, according to the which God should reward the righteous. 2. some
thus, he shall render unto every man according to their faith, which shows it
self by their works. 3. some, he says, thus interpret; he shall render
according to their works, that is, post opera sua, after their works, 4. some,
say they shall be rewarded according to their works, but with the temporal
blessings in this world, not with life eternal. 5. some grant, that the
righteous shall be rewarded according to their works, if any could be found,
that had such works, which are worthy of reward: the like answers Pererius
imagines to be made by the Protestants, numer. 39. but neither of them name
what Protestants they are, that thus answer: we insist upon none of these
solutions.

2. But we can otherwise satisfy all these reasons objected.

1. The word (...) to render, signifies not only a just retribution, but a
gift of favor, as in that place given in instance, Matthew. 20.8. the reward is
said to be rendered, not only to them which had labored first, which might
seem to have deserved it, but unto those that came at the last hour, to whom
it was given of favor: and therefore simply v. 14. it is expressed by the word
(...), to give.

2. In that place, Matthew. 25. it is showed, to whom, not for what the reward
shall be given: good works are required as a condition in those, which are to
be saved, not as a meritorious cause of their salvation: Pareus: for in the
same place our Savior shows the original and fountain of their salvation,
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundations of the world: their salvation then depends upon the free and
gracious election of God, not upon their works. Faius.

3. The argument follows not from the merit of evil works, to the merit of
good works: for there is great difference in the way of meriting between
them. 1. good works are the gifts of God, and proceed from him: but evil
works have their beginning from man. 2. good works are imperfect, and
therefore merit not: evil works are perfectly evil, and therefore are
worthy of punishment. 3. good works are commanded, and so it is our duty to
do them: and therefore thereby we do not merit: but evil worke^ are
forbidden, and there is no duty but rather the transgression of duty in doing
them: Gryneus.

4. And concerning this place, it proves no merit of works: the Apostle
says, (...), according to works, not (...) propter opera, for works: so that
this shows the measure rather then the merit of works: As this phrase is
taken, Matthew. 9.29. according to your faith be it unto you: and, Matthew. 22.3.
according to their works do not. And this phrase is thus expounded, Revel.
22.12. My reward is with me to render unto every one, (...), according as his
work is: Pareus: so then according to their works, notes the quality, not
the merit of their work: that is, good works shall be recompensed with
reward, and evil works with punishment. Faius. And mention is made here of
works, that God shall judge according as he finds men's works, to show that he
is no accepter of persons, neither regards the outward appearance, but that
which is in truth. Gualter.

And that it is not one and the same thing to reward for works, and according
to works, Gregory well shows, in Psalm. 149. v. 9. aliud est secundum opera
reddere, aliud p^^pter ipsa opera reddere: in eo enim quod secundum opera
dicitur, ipsa operum qualitas intell giver. etc. it is one thing to render
according unto works, an other, for works, for in that it is said according
unto works, the quality of the work is understood, that whose works appear
to be good, his recompense should be glorious, etc. Pererius thus answers to
this place of Gregory, that he speaks of the substance, quantity, and
quality of works in themselves, which being compared with the celestial
glory, are not worthy thereof, but as they are considered in Christ, by whose
virtue and merit they are made meritorious, so are they worthy of that
everlasting reward: to the same purpose also Tolet. annotat. 6.

Contra. But Gregory must be understood to speak of the works of the
faithful, which receive all their actiuitie, worthiness, and acceptance from
Christ: and the Apostle likewise speaks of the faithful, Romans 8.18. I
account that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the
glory, which shall be showed us: even then the works and sufferings of the
faithful are excluded from meriting. Faius.

3. Now further that no works of the Saints are meritorious, it may further be
showed by these reasons: 1. there must be a proportion between the merit and
the reward: but between our works, and the everlasting reward, there is no
proportion: the reward by many degrees exceeding the worthiness of the best
works. 2. there are no good works without faith: for without faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. wherefore whatsoever is promised to works,
per fidem consequimur, we do obtain by faith. 3. that which a man meriteth
must be of his own, not of his, of whom he meriteth: now our good works are
of God, they are not of our selves: and therefore by them we can not merit at
Gods hand. 4. that wherein men are endebted unto God, can not merit: for then
be should be endebted unto us, not we unto him: for the wages is not of favor,
but of debt, Romans 4.4. But all which we can do, is no more but our duty, we
owe our best service unto God: as our blessed Savior says, When ye have done
all those things which are commanded you, say we are unprofitable servants, we
have done that, which was our duty to do, Luke 17.10. But here some will
answer, that we are said to be unprofitable servants, only in respect of God,
because he is not profited, or furthered by our service: but yet good works are
profitable to our selves. Contra. True it is, that good works are profitable,
because thereby we testify our faith, we do good unto others, and make our
own salvation sure, but it follows not, because they are profitable, that
therefore they merit eternal life: Martyr. they are as Bernard says, via
regui, non causa regnandi, the way unto the kingdom, not the cause of the
kingdom.

4. Controv. Which are to be counted good works.
v. 7. Which by continuance in good works seek, etc. The Romanists do not
hold those only to be good works, which are commanded by God, but such also as
are enjoined by the Church, and the governors thereof. Council. Tridenti^. sess.
6. c. 10. And according to this rule they count the saying and hearing of
Mass, going in pilgrimage, inuocating of Saints, praying for the dead,
offering unto images, good works.

Contra. There are two evident rules to examine good works by: 1. because God
only is good, and the fountain and author of goodness, therefore nothing can
be good, but that which is according to his will, which is no where revealed
but in his word: then no work can be good, unless it be wrought according to
the prescript of Gods word. 2. there can come no good work from man, who is
prone to evil, and to nothing but evil by nature: unless then a man be
regenerate and borne a new, which is by faith in Christ, be can do no
acceptable work. Both these are evident out of Scripture, 1. that without
faith it is impossible to please God, Hebr. 11.6. and whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. 2. and that by faith we are regenerate and made
the sons of God, Ioh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them he gave power to
be the sons of God, even to them, that believe in his name: All such works
then, as have neither warrant out of Gods word, not yet proceed from faith,
such as all superstitious works are, so much commended and commanded in
Popery, are not to be counted good works. Gualter.

5. Controv. Whether any good works of the faithful be perfect.
1. The Romanists do hold that some works of the righteous are so perfect,
that they be not sin so much as venially in them: they have no blemish at
all. Council. Tridentin. can. 25. de iustificat.

Pererius urges that act of Abraham's obedience in sacrificing his son, which
was not only omnis peccati vacuum, etc. void of all sin, but it was
perfectly good, as appears by that excellent promise, which the Lord made
thereupon to Abraham: so it is said of David, that he was a man according to
Gods own heart. disput. 4. in c. 2. numer. 33.

Contra. 1. That act of Abraham's obedience was not rewarded for the perfection
of the work, but because it proceeded from faith: he believed God, and
therefore it was counted unto him for righteousness. 2. And it is hard to say,
whether Abraham did not cast some doubts in his mind, when he was first
commanded of God to sacrifice his only son: there might be some natural
reasoning within him, which notwithstanding he did overcome by faith. Ambrose
thinks, lib. 1. de Abrah. c. 8. that when Abraham said to his servants, T^rie
you here with the ass, for I and the child will go yonder and worship, and
come again to you: captiose loquebatur, etc. spoke cunningly, or captiously,
least his servants should perceive whereabout he went. 3. And, as for David, he
had many infirmities and imperfections, from some of which even his best works
might not be free: he was said to be according to Gods heart, both
comparatively in respect of Saul, and others; and because he fought God
unfeignedly, not in show and hypocritie as Saul did: otherwise that he was not
imply according to Gods heart, the great sins, wherein he fell, do declare.

2. But that there is some blemish, imperfection, and defect, even in the best
works of the Saints, (though we affirm not, as Pererius slandereth Luther,
that all the works of the regenerate are sin) it is thus made evident out of
the Scripture.

1. The Prophet Isai says, c. 64.6. All our righteousness is as stained clouts,
even their best actions were defiled and polluted: to this place diverse answers
are found. 1. Pererius out of Augustine, thus interprets; that iustnia nostra
divine comparata iustitiae, etc. out righteousness being compared to the divine
justice, is like unto a filthy and menstr^^^ cloth: this is then spoken
comparatively: to this purpose August. sermon. 43. Contra. And we herein concur
with Augustine, that although the work of the Saints seem (...) perfect and
excellent before men, yet in regard of that perfection which God requires of
us, they are found to come far short: so that if they be compared with the
justice of God, not which he has in himself but which he commands and
requires of us, our best works will appear to be imperfect, and full of
wants. 2. He urges Hieromes exposition, who applies this place to the
incredulous Jews after the coming of the Messiah, whose sained legal holiness
was as unclean thing in the sight of God, because they believed not in Christ
exhibited to the world. Contra. It is evident by the text it self, that be
Prophet speaks of that age then present, v. 10. Zion is a wilderness,
Jerusalem is a dese^. 3. Therefore Pererius insisteth upon this third
inpretation: that the Prophet speaks of the hypocrites among the Jews, and
of their legal righteousness, which was an vncleare thing, being not
sanctified by the spirit of God: and the Prophet speaks in the first person,
as including himself, as the manner of the Prophets is, for humility sake
condescending unto the infirmity of the people, and therein also showing his
charitable affection and compassion toward them. Contra. It is evident, 1. that
the Prophet speaks not only of their legal observations, but of all their
moral obedience whatsoever: for the words are general, All our righteousness,
is as a stained clout. 2. neither does he mean the hypocrites only, but he
comprehends all the people, excluding no not the better sort: as he says, v.
8. But now, O Lord, thou art our father: and v. 9. Low beseech thee behold, we
are all thy people: but the wicked and hypocrites are not alone Gods people,
neither is God said to be their father: for the godly and faithfuls sake among
them, they may be so counted, but not alone by themselves.

2. To this purpose may be urged that place, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall none that lives be
justified, etc. Hence it is evident, that no not the just in their best works
are justified in the sight of God: but the Lord can find sufficient matter
against them even in their most perfect works: as Job says, c. 9.30. If I wash
my self with snow water, etc. yet shall thou plunge me in the pit, etc.

Pererius here shows five reasons, why the just desire, that God would not
enter into judgment with them: 1. because of the uncertainty of their
election, and present justice. 2. many of them may fall into deadly and great
sins, which they are not sure, whether they be remitted. 3. yea and the best
men have their venial faults, which can not altogether be taken heed of in
this life. 4. and even in their best works, plures negligentiae immiscentur,
many negligences, and scapes are intermingled. 5. their good works are of God,
and not of themselves, and therefore they can not in the rigor of justice
expect a reward at Gods hand. Perer. disput. 4. numer. 37.

Contra. 1. Of these five causes, some are false, some are impertinent, and
some directly make against him.

1. That the righteous and faithful are not certain of their election, nor of
remission of sins, is false, and contrary to the Scriptures: for S. Paul was
both sure of his election, desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
Phil. 1.23. and of the remission of his sins, saying, I was received to
mercy, 1. Tim. 1.13. 2. That the righteous may at other times fall into other
sins, is not the point in question, but whether they may fail in their best
works: neither is it to the matter, whether the goodness of their work be from
God, or themselves: for no not from God have they receuied any perfection of
goodness in this life. 3. And in that he confesses many negligences to be
intermingled in the good works of the faithful, he grants as much as we
desire, that the faithful are defective even in their good works.

6. Controv. Whether men ought to do well for hope of recompense or reward.
v. 7. Which by continuance in well doing seek glory. It is not to be doubted
but that the faithful may encourage themselves in their well doing, by looking
unto the reward set before them, as it is said of Moses, Heb. 11.26. He had
respect to the recompense of reward: and S. Paul says, I follow hard toward
the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ, Phil. 3.14. and
the same Apostle thus stirs up servants to do their duties to their
masters, Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of inheritance,
Coloss. 3.29. But here two things are to be considered: first, that men do not
only or chiefly look toward the reward, but the principal end of their well
doing, which they must propound unto themselves, must be the glory of God:
secondly, they must have an eye unto the reward, not as wages deserved, but as
a gift of favor. Thus to expect a reward, as a due and deserved recompense, is
mercenarie: which seems to be the opinion of the Tridentine Synod, sess. 6.
c. 11. and can. 31. and of Bellarm. lib. 5. de iustificat. c. 8. and of the
Rhemists, annot. Heb. 11. 26. though Pererius would distinguish here between
amor mercedis, and amor mercenarius, the love of the reward, and a mercenarie
love: But if they propound unto themselves the reward, as merited and deserved
by their works, it is a mercenarie love, and so derogatorie to the glory of
God, who crowns our good works in mercy in himself, not of merit in them:
Chrysostom here says, oportebat omnia propter Christum facere, non propter
mercedim, we ought to do all things for Christ's sake, not for the reward.
sermon. 5. See more of this question, Synops. Centur. 4. err. 66.

7. Controv. Against justification by works, upon these words, v. 13. Not the
hearers of the law, but the doers shall be justified.
This place because it seems in show to be contrary to these places, Gal.
2.16. That a man is not justified by the works of the law: and, Gal. 3.11. No
man is justified by the law: diverse expositions are framed of these words,
which are much urged by the Romanists to prove their justification by works.

1. Ambrose thus interprets these words: the doers of the law shall be
justified, that is, they which believe in Christ, whom the law of Moses
promised, and in whom it commanded them to believe: for nemo. facit legem,
nisi qui credit legi, no man does the law, but he which believes the law: and
therefore our Savior says, Ioh. 5. If ye had believed Moses, you would have
believed me, for he wrote of me. But against this exposition it may be thus
excepted: 1. the Scripture so uses not to speak, to do the law, that is, to
believe in Christ: for by this means the law of faith and belief, and the law
of works should be confounded, whereas the one is opposite to the other. 2. the
Apostle is not yet entered into the disputation of says. 3. and he speaks
generally of keeping the whole law, not of that part only, which prophesied of
Christ.

2. Tolet here makes mention of an other exposition of some of their
Catholics, that the Apostle here means, a certain moral, or civil justice
in keeping of the law, which may be found in an unbeliever: But he rejects
this, by the Apostles words, righteous before God: which shows that he
speaks of true and perfect justice in the sight of God.

3. Now whereas justification, and to justify, may be taken three ways,
either when a man before unjust is made just: or when he is made more just: or
declared to be just: as it is said, Wisdom is justified of her children, that
is, declared to be just: Augustine takes it here in the first sense, and he
makes this to be the meaning: not that men are made just by keeping of the
law, but first being justified by God, then they are enabled and made fit to
keep the law: as he makes it to be like unto this speech, homines crea^tur,
men are created, not that they were first men, and then created: but they are
created to be men: so for the doers of the law to be justified, what is it else,
but they that are just by faith, are justified and made able to keep the law?
to this purpose Augustine, whom Anselms and Thomas follows. But this
exposition seems not to be agreeable unto the scope of the Apostle, who goes
not about to prove, that men must first be just, before they can keep the
law: but that they are approved before God, in doing according to the law: in
not professing, but practicing it.

4. In the second sense, the Rhemists in their annotation here, do take it for
the increase of justice, which they call the second justification: the first
justification is by faith without works, the second is by works: But Pererius
r^i^cteth this gloss, as being not consonant unto the scope of the Apostle
here: for he speaks not of the increase of justification, but simply of
justification: But beside this is a new devise of the first and second
justification: the Scripture acknowledges but one justification, Romans 8.30.
Whom he justifies, he glorifieth: after justification follows
glorification: that justification then, which glorification follows, is one
whole and sufficient justification, there comes none other between.

5. Some take justifying in the third sense, for declaring to be just: as the
word is sometime taken: as Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and
condemns the just, even they both are an abomination to the Lord: to justify
the wicked here, is to declare him to be just: so the doers of the law shall be
justified, that is, declared and pronounced just in the day of the Lord in the
presence of God, and all his holy Angels: thus Perer. numb. 52. Tollet. annot.
13. so also Bellarmine, in divino iudicio iusti iudicabuntur, they shall be
adjudged to be just in the divine judgment: lib. 2. de iustificat. c. 15.
Contra. 1. Let it be observed here, that the Romanists approve that
interpretation of this word, which is urged by Protestants, where S. James
says, c. 2. that Abraham was justified through works, that is, declared to be
just: 2. but yet this acception of the word has no place here: for this
declaration of one to be just, by works is before men: before God, there need
no such declaration, for he knows what is in man: but this justification is
before God, which the Apostle here speaks of: it is therefore justification
in deed, and not the declaration of it only.

6. Some think that the Apostle speaks of the legal justification, which is
by works, which if any could do, they should be justified thereby: but it is
impossible for any to keep the law: Calv. Pareus, Beza annotat. But it is
evident, that the Apostle speaks not here of a thing impossible to be done,
and of justification upon that supposall, if any could be doers of the law: but
he sets this down affirmatively and positiuely, that they which lived
according to the law, should be justified: as he said before, v. 6. that God
will reward every one according to his works. And as the hearers of the law
only are not justified, so the hearers and doers are justified: but some hear
the law in fact, verily, and in deed, therefore some also were verily and in
deed doers of the law.

7. The meaning then of this sentence is the same with that v. 6. God will
approve, justify, reward them that do the works of the law, whether Jew or
Gentile: yet it follows not, that a man is therefore justified by the works
of the law: But God approoueth and rewards the workers, not the hearers or
professors: so here the Apostle entreareth not of the cause of justification,
which is faith without the works of the law: but of the difference between
such as shall be justified, and such as are not, Faius: they only, which have
a lively faith, which works and keeps the law in part, and supplieth the
rest, which is wanting in themselves by the perfect obedience of Christ: they
shall be justified, not those which only profess the law, and keep it not:
the Apostle then here shows, who shall be justified, not for what.

8. But this place makes nothing at all for justification by works: 1. if a
man is justified by doing the works of the law, either he is just before he do
the works, or nor just: if he be just, then he is justified before he do those
works, then is he not justified by those works: if he be not just, then can
he do no good works whereby he is made just: for the works done before
faith, as Tolet himself confesses, non possunt iustum afficere, can not make
one just. Here the Romanists have no better answer, then to confess, fidem
sine operibu^ prima^ efficere iustificationem, that faith without works does
effect the first justification: which is increased by works, which they call
the second justification, Tolet. ibid. And thus they are driven to consent with
Protestants, that justification is by faith without works: as for that
distinction of the first and second justification, the vanity of it is showed
before. 2. If works did justify, then it would follow, that the justice
whereby we are made just, should be an actual justice, not habitual: because
that is actual which works, the contrary whereof is maintained by
Bellarmine, who proves by sundry reasons, that one is formally made just,
not by an actual, but an habitual justice, wherewith the mind is endued,
lib. 2. de iustific. c. 15.

Controv. 8. That it is not possible in this life to keep the law.
1. Pererius disput. 7. numer. 55. takes upon him to prove against Calviu,
legem divinam impleri posse, that the law of God may be kept in this life, he
means by a man in the state of grace.

1. Otherwise David had not said true, Psalm. 18.21. I kept the ways of the
Lord, and did not wickedly against my God.

2. S. Paul says, he that loves his brother, has fulfilled the Law, Romans 13.

3. What wisdom were there in God to command things impossible unto man: or
what justice to punish him for not keeping of that which was not in his power?

2. Contra. 1. David's keeping of the ways of God, must be understood either of
some particular act of his obedience, wherein he behaved himself uprightly: as
Psalm. 7.3. If I have done this thing, or if there be any wickedness in mine
hands: or else it must be understood, of his faithful endeavor, as far as he
was enabled by grace: for David's sins, which are mentioned in the Scripture
do evidently show, that he did not keep all the ways of God.

2. If a man could perfectly love his brother, as he ought, he might fulfill
the law: but so can no man do: and there is, as Hierome distinguishes, 2.
kinds of justice, or fulfilling the law: there is a perfect justice, which was
only in Christ, and an other justice, quae nostrae competit fragilitati, which
agrees unto our frailty, dialog. 1. cont. Pelagian. and thus may the law be
fulfilled.

3. The commandments are not simply impossible: for man in his creation had
power to keep them if he would: Gods wisdom is seen in giving his law unto
man, being unable in himself to keep it, that it might be a schoolmaster to
bring him unto Christ, Galat. 3.19. and his justice appears in punishing man
for transgressing that law, which sometime he was able as he was created of
God to keep: and now may perfectly perform it by faith, in the obedience of
Christ, who has delivered us from the curse of the law.

3. Now, that it is not possible for a man no not in the state of grace to
keep the law of God, it is thus showed out of the the Scripture.

1. S. Paul says, Romans 7.19. To will is present with me, but I find no means
to perform that which is good: a man regenerate now can do no more, then S.
Paul could, who confesses that he was unable to do that which was good and
agreeable to the law.

2. If a man by grace could keep the law, by grace he has power to redeem
himself from the curse of the law: for as he which keeps not every thing
contained in the law, is under the curse: so he that keeps all things which
the law commands, is free from the curse: but no man can redeem himself
from the curse of the law: for Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
law, Galat. 3.13.

3. Further, The law is not of faith, Galat. 3.12. but if the law might be
kept by grace and faith, then should it be of faith.

4. And if a man regenerate were able to keep the law, then it were possible
for a man in this life to be without sin: for where no transgression of the
law is, there should be no fa^e: for sin is the transgression of the law, 1.
Ioh. 3.4. see more hereof, Synops. Centur. 4. ^rr. 63. page 916.

Controv. 9. Whether by the light of nature only a man may do any thing
morally good.
Bellarmine has this position, that a man, if no tentation do urge him,
without faith, or any special assistance from God, may by his own strength
do something morally good, it a vt nullum peceatum in eo admittat, so that
therein he shall not commit any sin, lib. 5. iustificat. c. 5.

That the falsitie of this assertion may the better appear, 1. We must
distinguish of the light that is given unto man, which is threefold. 1. There
is the light of nature, which Christ gives unto every one, that comes into
the world, as he is their Creator Ioh. 1.9. this is given unto all by nature:
they are endued with a reasonable soul, and in the same by nature is imprinted
this light. 2. there is beside this natural light, an other special light and
direction concurring with that natural light, which though it be not so
general as the other, yet it is common to many unregenerate men, that have not
the knowledge of God, as the Lord says to Abimelech, Genesis 20.6. I kept thee
that thou should not sin against me: this common grace many of the heathen
had, whereby they were preserved from many notorious crimes, which other did
fall into. 3. There is beside these the grace of Christ, whereby we are
regenerate, and enabled to do that which is acceptable unto God through
Christ: of this grace we mean, that without it the light of nature is not
sufficient to bring forth any good work.

2. Secondly, we grant, that this light of nature, being illuminated by the
grace of Gods spirit, and lightened and perfected by faith, is able to bring
men to perform good works agreeable to the law: As is evident in the fathers
before the flood, and after the flood in Noah, Sem, Abraham, and other of the
faithful, when as the law and Scriptures were yet unwritten, that by the
grace of God, which lightened their natural understanding, they wrought
righteousness and pleased God.

3. But this must be received withal, that Gods grace and the light of nature
do not concur together as cooperators and fellow workers: but it is grace
only that works, the nature of man is wrought upon: the spirit of God is
only active, the power of nature is passive in all good works: and therefore
in this sense, we mislike that position of Pereius, legem naturalem Christi
gratia illustratam valere ad pie vinendum, that the law of nature lightened by
the grace of Christ avayleth to live well: for thus the law of nature it made
a joint worker with grace unto godliness of life: we say it is wrought upon by
grace, it works not, but only as a natural faculty and agent: the
spiritual goodness is all of grace.

4. But that no virtuous act or moral good work can be performed by the light
of nature only without grace, it is evident out of these, and such other
places of Scripture, Genesis 6.5. The imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart,
are only evil continually. Ioh. 3.6. That which is borne of the flesh is
flesh: Ioh. 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing: Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not
of faith is sin: All these places evidently show, that there is no
actiuitie, power, ability, or inclination to any thing by nature without
grace: see further, Synops. Centur. 4. err. 43. page 845.

Controv. 10. Of the imperfection of the vulgar Latin translation.
v. 15. Erasmus notes a great defect of the Latin translation in the reading
of this verse: for whereas in the Greek text, it is put absolutely in the
genetiue case, their thought accusing one another or excusing, which is
expressed by the genitive case (...), in the original, because they want the
ablative; the Latin translator puts it in the genitive; cogitationum, of
their thoughts accusing or excusing.

Gorrhan would thus help this matter; that it must be referred to the word
conscience, going before; their conference bearing witness, that is, not only
the conscience of their works, but even of their thoughts: but the word
((...), and) coming between them, shows that these words do not hang one
upon another; he says this is more Grecorum, after the manner of the Greeks,
which use the genitive for the ablative; but, seeing the Latins have their
ablative cases, wherein things absolutely spoken use to be put, the Latin
interpreter should have followed the use of the Latin tongue: therefore I say
and conclude with Erasmus here, they which think the Latin interpreter did
not err, vnum bunc locum, si possunt, expediant, let them free this place, if
they can.

Controv. 11. That the Sacraments do not confer grace.
v. 25. Circumcision avails if thou keep the law: the opinion of the
Romanists is, that circumcision did actually confer upon infants remission of
sins, and mundabat cos a peccato originali and did cleanse them from original
sin, Perer. disput. 17. c. 2. numer. 105. so also Gorrhan.

Contra. 1. But the contrary is evident here: for the Apostle says, If thou
be a breaker of the law thy circmcision is made uncircumcision, it was no more
avayleable, then if they had no circumcision at all: But if they had actually
received remission of sins in circumcision, it must needs be better then
vncircumicision, whatsoever desert followed afterward. 2. That which cleanses
the soul, has praise with God, v. 19. now the circumcision of the flesh, has
no praise with God, but the circumcision of the spirit, the circumcision then
of the flesh does not cleanse or purge the soul: to this purpose Hierome,
invisibilia non indigent visibilibus, visibibilia indigent invisibilibus, eo
quod visibilia sunt imago invisibilium, and invisibilia sunt veritas
visibilium, invisible things do not need visible, but the visible have need
of the invisible: because the visible are the image of the invisible, but the
invisible are the verity of the visible: the circumcision then of the flesh
needs the circumcision of the heart: but the circumcision of the heart,
needs not the circumcision of the flesh: for the truth has no need of the
image, but the image has need of the truth, etc. remission of sins then is
not tied to the sacrament, it may be conferred without it: but the sacrament
needs the inward operation of the spirit to make it effectual: as the
Apostle says, cleansing it by the lauer of the water in the word: the water is
the instrument of cleansing, but the efficient and working cause is the word;
the sacraments then confer not grace, but the spirit in and with the
Sacrament, and also without it works grace.

Controv. 12. That the Sacraments depend not upon the worthiness of the
Minister or receiver.
This may be observed against that paradox of the old Donatists, who measured
the sacraments by the worthiness of the Minister; upon which ground they refused
baptism ministered by heretics, or evil livers, and after such baptism they
baptized again: the Donatists held baptism ministered by schismatickes or
heretics to be no baptism, Augustine. lib. 2. de baptis. c. 6. and the
heretics called Apostolin, denied, that wicked men could minister the
Sacraments. Bernard. sermon. 66. in Cantic.

Contra. 1. This place of the Apostle, that circumcision profits, if one
keep the law, does not favor any such opinion; for the Apostle speaks not
of the dignity and worthiness of the sacraments, which depends upon the
institution, sed de fructu, but of the fruit thereof, Mart. Gualt. 2. neither
the unworthiness of the minister, makes the sacrament void, for Judas
baptized with the rest of the Apostles; nor yet of the receiver; for he that
eats and drinks unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord; if his unworthiness made it no Sacrament, he should not be guilty of so
great a sin; But the unworthiness both of the one and the other makes the
sacrament void, and without fruit unto themselves.

Controv. 13. Against the Marcionites, and other, which condemned the old
Testament, and the ceremonies thereof.
The Marcionites among the heathen rejected circumcision, and condemned the
author of the old Testament for the same; and the Stoiks among the heathen
denied the same, as being an invention not beseeming God, who thus objected as
Origin shows in this place. 1. It was not a thing answearable to the
clemency and goodness of God, to command infants so to be wounded and cruelly
handled in their infancy. 2. If the foreskinne of the flesh be a superfluous
part, why was it made, if it be not, why should it be cut off. 3. by this
means many were terrified from taking upon them that religion, which God
desired to be propagated, both for the shame and painfulnesse of circumcision;
and so it fell out, to be impedimentum religionis, non insigne, an impediment
rather, then an argument, and cognizance of religion.

These objections are thus sufficiently answered by Origin. 1. He shows
against the Gentiles, that circumcision was had in honor even amongst them,
and therefore they had no reason to scorn and deride that, as a thing
dishonest among the people of God, which was of great estimation among them;
for among the Egyptians, who were most addicted of all other people to
superstitious rites, and from whom all other nations borrowed their ceremonies,
there was none given to the study of Astrology, Geometry, but was
circumcised, so were all their Priests and Ministers of sacred things.

2. Against those which professed Christ, and yet refused the old Testament
with all the rites thereof: he shows the conueniencie of circumcision, that
seeing we were to be redeemed by the blood of Christ, before that price was
paid for our redeemption, it was necessary for them, which were instructed in
the law, vnumquemque pro se velut ad imitationem quandam futurae redemptionis
sanguinem suum dare, every one for himself to give his blood, in imitation of
the redemption to come: but now seeing the blood of Christ has been offered
for us, it is not now necessary that every one for himself should offer the
blood of circumcision.

3. Then he comes to answer the particular objections. 1. If you blame God,
for imposing so hard a thing upon infants, why also do ye not find fault,
that Christ was circumcised the 8. day, vulnera passionis excepit, was wounded
in his passion, and shed his blood. 2. And if this bloody Sacrament terrified
men from their religion, then exempla martyrum prohibebant homines accedere ad
fidem, by the same reason the example of martyrs much more should have hindered
men, from coming to the faith. 3. And though there had been no other mystery
in circumcision, it was fit, that the people of God should carry some badge
and cognizance to discern them from other people: and if the amputation or
cutting off some part of the body were requisite, what part was more fit then
that quae obscaena videbatur, which seemed to be obscene? 4. And whereas they
object, if it be not a necessary part, it should not have been created, if
necessary, it should not be cut off, they may be answered by the like: they
will not deny but that the procreation of children is necessary: then by this
reason, virgins, and all unmarried persons, and such as have made themselves
chaste for the kingdom of God, should be blamed, quia necessari^s naturae
officijs non ministrant, because they do not give their service to the
necessary offices of nature. 5. And so he concludes thus: As there were many
washings and baptismes in the law, before the baptism of Christ: many
purifyings, before the purifying by the spirit: many sacrifices, before that
alone sufficient sacrifice was offered upon the cross: so multorum sanguinis
effusio processit, the shedding of the blood of many went before, until the
redemption of all came by the blood of one: And here the Apostle stops their
mouths, saying, that circumcision was profitable: how then do they reject it,
as a thing vain and unprofitable? to this purpose Origin upon this place.

Controv. 14. Against the Anabaptists, which reject the Sacraments of the new
Testament.
Whereas the Apostle says, v. 28. Neither is that circumcision, which is
outward in the flesh: the Anabaptists take occasion by these, and such like
words, to condemn all the Sacraments of the new Testament, and the outward
ministry thereof, in like manner S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is
nothing, nor uncircumcision, but the keeping of the commandments.

But their objection may be answered out of this place, where the Apostle had
said a little before, v. 25. Circumcision is profitable, if thou do the law:
The Apostle then condemns not outward circumcision simply, but if it be
external only, and not joined with the inward circumcision, Mart.

Controv. 13. That the want of baptism condemns not.
v. 29. Seeing the Apostle says, that the outward circumcision is not that
which has praise of God, but the inward in the spirit, and the like may be
said of baptism which succeeds in the place of circumcision: then it
follows, that like as many circumcised in heart were saved, without the
circumcision of the flesh, so also many having the spiritual baptism of the
soul by faith in Christ's blood may be saved, the outward sacrament being not
by them contemned or neglected, but by some urgent necessity denied: as
Ambrose says, concerning Valentinian the younger, Emperor, who deceased
without baptism, Christus te baptizavit, quia humana officia defuerunt, Christ
baptized thee, where other humane offices were wanting, etc. and again,
detersa labe peccati ablutus ascendit, quem sua fides lauit, he is ascended to
heaven being washed from his sin, whom his own faith washed. Ambros. tom.
5. de obit. Valentin. The like may be affirmed of infants the seed of the
faithful, that they dying without baptism, Christ baptizeth them: they are
within the covenant of grace, and so stand according to Gods promise, I will be
thy God, and the God of thy seed, Genesis 17.7. Like as then the want of
circumcision was no bar unto infants under the law, no more is the want of
baptism to infants now.

Controv. 16. That the wicked and unbelievers eat not the body of Christ in
the Sacrament.
It is the received opinion of the Romanists, to justify their gross error of
Christ's carnal presence in the Sacrament, that even the wicked are partakers
of the body of Christ: But they may be convinced here: for as circumcision,
and so also baptism outward in the flesh, is not profitable: so neither is the
outward participation in the Eucharist; unless the receiver do also
spiritually eat and drink Christ: And further our Saviors own words confute
them, Ioh. 6.54. whosoever eats Christ's flesh, has eternal life: But the
wicked and unbelievers have not eternal life: therefore they cannot eat
Christ's body: So Cyprian says, qui verba tenus, etc. they which in word
only, being dry in heart, and withered in soul, are partakers of the gifts:
lambunt quidem petram, sed inde mel non sugunt, do indeed lick as it were
upon the rock (with their tongue) but they suck no honey out of it: sermon. de
coma Domini. see further of this controversy, Synops. Centur. 3. err. 28. p.
564.

6. Moral observations.
Observe. 1. Thou art inexcusable that iudgest an o her: this teaches us that
we should not be too curious and strict examiners of other men's faults but
look into our selves: Augustine has an excellent place concerning this
matter, lib. 2. de sermon. Domini. c. 30. to this effect; When necessity drives
us to reprehend an other, we must bethink our selves, whether it be such a
vice, which we never had, or now have not: if we never had it, cogitemus and
nos homines esse, etc. let us consider that we are men, and might have had it.
But if we had it and have it not now, tangat memoriam communis fragili^as, etc.
let us remember the common frailty of man, and so let compassion go before our
reprehension, etc. if we find that we are in the same fault, non ob^urgemus,
sed congemiscamus, let us not rebuke him, but mourn together with him, etc.
This counsel of Augustine agrees notably with that saying of S. Paul, Galath.
6.1. Brethren, if any man be fallen by occasion into a fault, etc. restoare
such an one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self least thou
also be tempted.

Obser. 2. v. 2. Know that the judgment of God is according to truth: this
makes against security, that men do not flatter themselves, as though they
should escape unpunished committing things worthy of punishment, seeing the
judgment of God is true, Pareus.

Observe. 3. v. 4. The bountifulness of God leads thee to repentance: let
licentious persons take heed, that they abuse not Gods long suffering and
patience: which is showed to them to bring them to repentance: for as Valerius
Maxim. lib. 1. c. 1. Deus tarditatem suppliciij grauitate recompensat, God will
recompense the slownesse of his punishment with the greatness of it, Piscator.

Observe. 4. v. 6. Who will reward every man according to his works: let us
study then to approve our faith by our works, that the Lord may judge us
worthy to be rewarded in Christ, when he comes to judgment.

Observe. 5. v. 15. Their thoughts accusing or excusing: it is evident then,
that no not in the most wicked, ex^u^^ posse conscientiam, that the conscience
can be shaken off, as appeared in Saul, Judas, Caligula, ^^lian, though the
conscience may lie asleep for a time, yet in the end it will be awake^: let us
therefore always study for the peace of conscience: as S. Paul did, who says
Act. 24.16. And herein I endeavor my self always, to have a clear
conscience, toward God, and toward men, Olevian.

Observe. 6. v. 16. In that Christ Jesus shall judge the secret actions of men,
it teaches us, that no man should be encouraged to sin, because of the
secrecy of the place, or silence of the night: for all things are manifest in
Gods eyes, Heb. 4.13. Piscator.

Observe. 7. And seeing Christ shall be our judge, who was judged for us, and
redeemed us by his blood: and shall judge according to his gospel, which
says, that whosoever believes in him shall be saved: the faithful may be of
good comfort, wish for that day, and love the appearing of Christ, which shall
be a day of refreshing unto them, Gualter.

Observe. 8. v. 24. As the Jews through their evil life caused the name of God
to be blasphemed among the Gentiles: so now carnal Christians give occasion to
Turks, Jews, Papists, and other adversaries to speak evil of their
profession: It is the part therefore of all that profess the gospel of Christ,
specially of those which are by office teachers, that they give no offense by
their evil example of life: but both in doctrine and conversation set forth
the word of God.

The third Chapter.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1. What is then the preferment ( or excellency) of the Jew? ( what
preferment has the Jew. L.V. but that it should be put in the dative, whereas
it is in the genetive in the original) or what is the profit of circumcision?

2 Much every manner of way: the first (or chief) is because Be.V. (not, first
surely because, L.B.G. for then the word (...), because, should seem to be
superfluous) unto them were credited Be. (rather then, committed. B.G.R, the
word is (...) credita, credited) the oracles of God. V.Be.G. (the words of God.
L.R.B.T. but (...) signifies more then words: the words of God became
faithful. T. but the Greek word is put passiuely, were credited, and
therefore it is not of an active signification.)

3 For what if some ( though some, B. G. some of them. L. B. but the word is
(...), if, and if them, is not in the original) did not believe? shall their
unbelief make the faith of God without effect? (not has their incredulity
made, etc. for the Greek word (...), is in the future tense)

4 God forbid: ( or, far be it of, (...), absit. B.V.T.) yea let God be true,
( not, but God is true, L.R. the word is in the imperative (...)) and every man
( the son of man, T.) a liar, as it is written, That thou might be
justified in thy words, and overcome, ( be pure, T. but the Greek word (...),
signifies to overcome) when thou iudgest. B. Par. ( not judged. B.L.V. when
they judge thee. T. but the word (...) being of the mean voice, may a well be
translated actively as passively, and the rather because he speaks afterward
of Gods judging the world. Beza.)

5 But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall we
say? is God unrighteous, which inflicteth wrath? ( executes wrath, L. takes
vengeance, B. which punishes, G. infers punishment. B. Par. immittit iram,
sends his wrath. T. inducit ira^^, brings in his wrath, that is,
punishment) I speak according to man. V.L. Or. ( as a man. G. as the son of
man. T. after the manner of man. B.Be.)

6 God forbid: ( far be it, or let it not be. Or.) else how shall God judge
the world? Or. ( this world. L.R.)

7 For if the verity of God has ( more, B.) abounded thorough my lie ( in my
lie, L. so is the original, but the preposition in, is taken for through) why
am I yet condemned as a sinner?

8 And not rather, as we are blasphemed, orig. ( as some speak evil of us.
Be.V. but the word in the orig. is in the passive, as we are slanderously
reputed. B. and some affirm that we say, let us do evil, that there may come
good? whose damnation is just. or. ( whose damnation is reserved for justice.
T.)

9 What then? are we more excellent? no, in no wise: for we have already ( or
before) proved, G. ( or pronounced. T. not before accused. Be. B. L, showed by
rendering the cause. V. the word properly so signifies, to give a reason, or
show the cause) all both Jews and Gentiles to be under sin.

10 As it is written, There is none righteous, no not one. ( there is not any
just. L.R. but the word (...), one, is here omitted)

11 There is none that understands: there is none that seeks ( after, B.)
God.

12 They have all gone out of the way: they are together become unprofitable:
there is none that does good, no not one. ( unto one. Or.)

13 Their throat is in an open sepulcher: with their tongues they have
deceived: B. Or. (used their tongues to deceit. Be.G.) the poison of aspes is
under their lips:

14 Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness:

15 Their feet are swift to shed blood:

16 Destruction (not hearts grief. B. the word is (...), contrition,
destruction) and calamity V.B.G. (misery, B. unhappiness. L. grief. T.) are
in their ways,

17 And the way of peace they have not known.

18 The fear of God is not before their eyes. Or. (not, there is no fear of
God before their eyes, for the Greek word (...), not, is an adverb.)

19 Now we know, that whatsoever the Law says, it says to them, which are
under the Law, ( in the law, Or.) that every mouth may be stopped, and all the
world may be culpable G. (obnoxious. V. Be. subject. L. R. endamaged. B.
subject to condemnation. B. the word is(...), which signifies to be under the
sentence, that is, guilty) unto God.

20 Therefore (not, because, L.B. because that, V. for it is a conclusion
inferred out of the former words) by the works of the Law shall no flesh be
justified in his sight: (or before him. L.) for by the Law comes the
knowledge of sin: ( by the law sin is known. T.)

21 But now is the righteousness of God made manifest without the Law, having
witness of the Law and the Prophets:

22 To wit, the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ toward all (
unto all. B.G. but the word is (...), in omnes, toward all) and upon all that
believe: ( the righteousness of God by faith, etc. L.V.T. but it is better to
join it by way of exposition to the former verse: for this righteousness by
faith is the same which in the former verse he called the righteousness of God)
for there is no difference ( these words some make part of the next verse the
23. Genev. but in the original they end the 22. verse.)

23 For all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God. G. Be. (or come
short, as of the mark, not, have need of the glory of God. L. B. or are
destitute, V. T. for that does not sufficiently express the meaning of the
word (...), which is (to come short.)

24 But are justified ( being justified. L. Or. but the participle must be
resolved into the verb) freely by his grace, thorough the redemption that is
in Christ Jesus:

25 Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood,
for the showing of his righteousness, by the forgiveness of the sins which were
past before.

26 Through the patience of God ( by the space which God gave us by his long
suffering. T. but this is interpreted, rather then translated) for the showing
of his righteousness in this present time ( at this time. G.B.L.T. but in the
original there is (...), nunc, now, that is, this present) that he might be
just, and a iustifier of him, which is of the faith of Jesus. Or. (of Jesus
Christ. L. of our Lord Jesus Christ. T.)

27 Where is then the boasting? rejoicing. G.) it is excluded: by what law? of
works? nay but by the law of faith.

28 Therefore we conclude G. ( or collect or gather. B.V. as by reason and
argument, so the word (...) signifies, not, we think. L. or hold. B.) that a
man is justified by faith without the works of the Law.

29 Is he God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles also? yes even of the
Gentiles also:

30 For it is one God, which shall justify ( justifies. L.T. but the word in
the original is in the future tense) the circumcision of faith ( through
faith. T.) but the preposition here is(...), of) and the uncircumcision through
faith.

31 Do we then make the Law of none effect through faith? (not destroy the law
through faith. L.B. for the same word was used before, v. 3. shall their
unbelief make the faith of God without effect, not, destroy it) God forbid:
yea we establish the Law.

2. The Argument, Method, and parts.
IN this Chapter the Apostle proceeds to prove, that the Jews
notwithstanding certain privileges which they had, yet because of their
unbelief were not better then the Gentiles, and so he concludes all under
sin, and unable to be justified by their works, whereupon it follows, that
they must be justified by faith. This chapter has three parts:

The 1. from v. 1. to v. 9. wherein he remooueth certain objections which
might be ^ooued by the Jews, which are three in number.

1. Objection is propounded v. 1. in making the case of the Jews and Gentiles
alike, he should seem to take away all privilege from the Jews: the answer
follows, in graun^ing their privilege, v. 2. and confirming the same by the
constancy of Gods promises, v. 3. which he proves by certain testimonies
out of the Psalms, v. 4.

2. Objection is propounded, v. 5. and it arises out of the testimony before
alleged; that if God be declared to be just, when he judges and punishes
men's sins, then he should not do well to punish that, whereby his justice is
set forth, v. 5. the answer follows, v. 6. taken from the office of God, he
can not be but most just, seeing he shall judge the world.

3. Object. v. 7. which arises likewise out of the former testimony cited out
of the Psalm: if by men's lies Gods truth is commended, then the liar is
unjustly punished: the answer follows, v. 9. the Apostle calls it a
blasphemy, and worthy of just damnation, if any shall justify themselves in
their evil doing, and of purpose do evil, to set forth the justice of God,
v. 8.

The second part is from v. 9. to 21. where he proves the Jews and Gentiles
both to be under sin, which is propounded, v. 9. proved by particular
induction of their sins grounded upon some testimonies of Scripture, v. 10.
to 19. then applied to the Jew, as well as to the Gentile, by three arguments,
v. 19.1. from the relation which the law has to those which are under the law:
2. then from two ends, that every mouth may be stopped, all occasion of
boasting may be taken away: 3. and that all the world may be found culpable.

The third part follows, wherein the Apostle proves that all must be
justified by faith in Christ: which he proves by a distribution, either by
the works of the law, or by faith: not by the law by the contrary effect, v.
20.

Then he confirms the other part, that we are justified by faith without the
law, which proposition is contained v. 1.22, 23. by showing the causes of
justification, and who are justified, even all that believe, and why, v. 23.

Then this proposition is confirmed, 1. by showing all the causes, the
efficient principal the grace of God, then Christ by his blood, the instrument
is faith, the formal cause remission of sins, the end the setting forth of
Gods justice, v. 24, 25, 26. 2. by the effects, it excluding all boasting, v.
27. 3. the conclusion follows, v. 28. 4. which is confirmed, 1. by remoouing
an absurdity, because God otherwise should seem to be God only of the Jews,
v. 29.30. 2. by preventing an objection, v. 31.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. Of the privileges of the Jews, and their pre-eminence before the
Gentiles.
v. 1. What is the preferment of the Jew? etc. Whereas the Apostle seemed in
the end of the former chapter to make the Jews and Gentiles equal, and had
extenuated the circumcision of the flesh; now it might be objected by the Jew
that by this means, they should have no pre-eminence or preferment more then
the Gentile had: the Apostle then meets with that secret objection, and
shows, wherein consisted the excellency of the Jew.

1. The Jews had many privileges, which the Gentiles had not: as 1. they were
called to be the peculiar people of God, and the Lord professed himself to be
their God. 2. i^ that nation continued the true knowledge of God, even unto the
coming of Christ, 3. of them came many holy Patriarks and Prophets, that were
in high favor, and acceptance with God. 4. among them and for their sakes the
Lord wrought many miracles and wonders. 5. they had many visions, prophesies,
and dreams. 6. God gave unto them the Sacraments and sacrifices, as
circumcision, the Paschal lamb. 7. the Messiah was promised to descend of that
nation. 8. But the Apostle omitteth these, and specially insisteth upon this,
that the law and oracles of God were committed unto them.

2. Chiefly, or first, because unto them were credited, etc. This word (...),
Erasmus takes for to signify the order of the Apostles speech, as before c.
1.8. but there the Apostle begins his epistle, which he does not here. 2.
Some refer it to the number of the privileges rehearsed by the Apostle,
whereof this was the first, and the rest follow in the epistle: But the Apostle
makes mention of no other privilege but this. 3. Origin, whom Sedulius
follows, has here reference to the Gentiles, that unto the Jews first were
committed the oracles, then to the Gentiles: but the promises here spoken of,
were only made unto the Jews. 4. Therefore this word first, here signifies
chief: that this was the chief privilege and immunitie which the Jews had.

3. And the Apostle gives instance of this, that they had the Scriptures, 1.
because it was most general, and multa concludit, and concluded many things
beside, Tolet. 2. herein consisted a chief difference between the Gentiles,
which had but the law of nature to direct them: and the Jews, which had also
the written law of God. Perer. 3. and the Apostle omitteth their temporal
privileges, insisting upon a spiritual, as being more precious and durable.
Gorrhan.

4. By oracles, (...), some seem to understand only the law, which was given
by Moses, as Chrysostom, Theodoret: but thereby are signified all the
prophetical writings, which the Jews had, both the law and the Prophets:
gloss. interlin. though special reference be made to the law: as S. Steven
says, that Moses received the lively oracles, Act. 7.38. Pare.

5. But it will be objected, that God also to others communicated his oracles,
as to Pharaoh, Nabuchadnezzer, which were not of Israel: it may be answered,
that 1. God did impart those things not to many of the Gentiles, but to a few,
2. and that of some particular things: 3. neither were such oracles and visions
committed to their trust, but only for a time revealed: 4. and that for his
peoples sake, rather then their own.

6. In that the Apostle says, (...), the oracles of God were committed to
their credit, or credited unto them: 1. the Syrian interpreter is deceived, who
makes it the nominative, that the oracles of God were credited or believed. 2.
and Origens observation is much like, that the oracles of God were committed
unto them, which did understand and believe them: but the letter of the law,
was given to all: for by the words following, v. 3. what though some did not
believe, it is evident, that the Apostle here speaks of a general
privilege, which was not made void, by some men's unbelief. 3. Erasmus says,
that those oracles were committed unto them, alijs magis profutura, quam ipsis,
to profit other rather then themselves: as though they were committed unto them
to keep for others use: But Beza notes better, that they had those things
committed unto them, non vt alienae rei depositum, not as an other man's thing
laid to pledge, but as their own proper treasure, if they could have used it
well. 4. And indeed, they were faithful keepers of the Scriptures, preserving
them from falsitie and corruption, and are to this day, though they understand
them not: and in the days of our Savior, when many other corruptions both of
life and doctrine were objected against them, yet they were not charged to be
falsifiers of Scripture. Faius. 5. Chrysostom has here a good note, nusquam
illorum virtutes, sed Dei beneficia in illos enumerat, the Apostle does not
reckon up their own virtues among their privileges, but he counts the
benefits of God toward them. 6. And this word, is credited, (which the Apostle
uses else where, as 1. Cor. 9.17. the dispensation is credited, or committed
unto me) makes for the credit of those, to whose fidelity these oracles were
committed: facit ad honorem personae, cui confidimus, it makes for the honor
of the person, which we trust: as Ambrose says, maximam fuisse laudem
Iudaeorum, etc. it was a great praise for the Jews, that they were counted
worthy to receive the law. 7. And this word of crediting, shows, that what
was committed unto them, exigendum cum vsuris, was to be exacted with usury:
Gorrhan. God would require an account of them of his law, which he had
credited, and committed unto them, as is showed in the parable of the talents.
Hugo. 8. This then was the privilege and pre-eminence of the Jews; that they
were first depositarij, tum oeconomi, first keepers of Gods oracles committed
unto them, and afterward stewards and dispensers of them: Calv. for the
Apostles preached the word of God unto the Gentiles, as it is prophesied, Isa.
2.3. The Law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of God from Jerusalem: and
so our blessed Savior says, Ioh. 4.22. that salvation is of the Jews.

9. But this further here is to be observed, that whereas v. 1. the Apostle
propounded two questions, one of the pre-eminence of the Jews, the other of
the profit of circumcision; he insisteth only upon the first, and omitteth the
other: both because he had answered before, concerning circumcision that it is
profitable, if one keep the law, c. 2.25. and he hasting to other things,
reserueth that matter to a fitter place, c. 4. Pareus.

2. Quest. How men's unbelief can not make the faith of God without effect.
1. By the word (...), here is rather understood their perfidiousnes,
rebellion, and falling away from God, then the not believing of his promises,
Beza: and by the faith of God, is meant his verily and constancy in keeping
his promises: as Psalm. 33.4. All his works are faithful Pareus: the Apostle
then understands, fidem datam, faith given by God, Bez. and the truth of his
promises, Bucer: now, as the former objection might be made by the Jews, that
if their case were no better then the Gentiles, then they should have no
pre-eminence at all: so this second objection might be moved by the Gentiles,
that although God for his part had made unto the Jews many gracious promises,
yet they by their de^^elt, had deprived themselves of the benefit thereof: to
this objection then the Apostle makes this answer, that their unbelief could
not make the faith and promise of God of no effect.

2. This some expound of the absolute promises of God: for some of his promises
are absolute, as those made to the fathers, of the giving of the law, and of
the coming of Christ: some were conditional, as that they should for ever
inherit the land of Canaan, if they walked in Gods commandments: the first is
called by the schoolmen, prophesia predestinationes, the prophecy of
predestination, the other the prophecy comminationis, of commination: and
diverse will have the first kind to be here understood, as Lyranus, Caietas
Perer. Faius. Pareus rejects this interpretation, because all the promises of
the Law and Gospel have annexed the condition of obedience or faith.

3. Some give this sense, by faith, understanding the belief of the faithful
reposed in Gods promises: that the infidelity of some could not evacuate the
faith of others: Origin. but by the words following, let God be true, show that
the faith of God, that is, made by him, not faith reposed in him, is here
signified.

4. Some thus expound, quantum ad De^^, that God for his part is ready to
keep his promises, if men perform the condition: but if they by their
infidelity deprive themselves of the promise, the failing is in themselves and
not in God, Pareus dub. 1. But this does not fully satisfy, for if the
promises of God should have been altogether evacuated, though not by any
inconstancy in God, but their infidelity, yet they should have been without
effect: which the Apostle denies.

5. Chrysostom thus infers: that their incredulity is so far from laying
any fault upon God, vt maiorem illius ostendit bonitatem, that it more
commends his goodness when he seemed to honor those which dishonored him:
So also Beza, the goodness of God is so much the more commendable, quanto
indigniores sunt, quorum miseretur, the more unworthy they are, that he has
mercy on: But to the incredulous the promises of God were of no effect: they
were deprived, Heb. 4.1.

6. Therefore it must be observed, that the Apostle says not all, but, some,
what though some did not believe, Gualter, they then which believed not non
praeiudicabant caeteris, ^^ not hinder or were prejudicial to those which
believed, gloss. ordinar. he signifies, sem^ mansisse quosdam, etc. that there
were always found among them in that nation, that believed in Gods promises,
and therefore the promises of God are not evacuate, Calvin, like as, though the
Sun seem not to rise unto those, which are blind, yet he does rise unto
those, that are of perfect sight, Gryneus. as then the Sun should rise,
though no man could see it: yet God has ordained, both that the Sun should
give light, and some should enjoy it: So God would show himself true and
steadfast in his promises, though all men should fall away from him: yet he has
ordained, that as he keeps truth in his promises, so there should be always
some in the Church, which should believe them.

Quest. 3. How God is said to be true.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, God is true, and so some of the fathers have
followed that reading, as Cyprian epist. 55. ad Cornel. and Ambrose lib. 3. de
fide, c. 3. and so the Syrian interpreter: but in the original Greek, it is
in the imparatiue, (...), let God be true which Origin thinks must be
understood, non praeceptive, by way of precept, but pronuntiative, as
pronouncing, that God is true: And here it is taken in the same sense, as when
we say in the Lord, prayer, let thy name be hallowed: then fiat, let him be, is
here all one, as manifestetur, let him be manifested to be true: sit nobis
verax, intelligatur, let him be true to us, that is, be so taken and understood
to be: Photius: so also Basil lib. 4. cont. Eunom.

2. Now this difference is between veracitie, and fidelity, the first is
circa verba, above words that no untruth be uttered, the other is circa pacta,
concerning covenants and premises, in keeping and performing them: faithfulness
and fidelity always includes verily but there may be verity in speaking,
without fidelity, when as truth is only uttered without any promise to
perform any thing: But here veracitie is taken for fidelity: as Psalm. 8.15.
the Lord is said to be great in kindness and truth. Tolet.

3. Now the Lord is said to be true, 1. not only effective, because he
effects his promises, which he made to Abraham, as concerning the land of
promise, and concerning Christ, Haymo: but essentialiter, he is essentially
true and constant in himself, he can not lie^ Man is said to be true, because
he will not sometime lie, though he may and can lie: B^^ God is so true, that
he can not lie: neither does this argue an impotencie of nature in God for as
in a man posse mentiri, to can, or be able to lie, argues an infirmity,
rather then power; so in God it shows his power, that he can not lie, because
it is contrary to his (...) Faius.

4. It will be objected, that God sent a lying spirit into the mouths of Ahabs
false prophets: how then is God true, that sends forth a lying spirit? Ans.
Satan was indeed the author of that lying, and offered himself to go: God
only permitted and suffered him, and efficaciam erroris dedit, and gave way,
and efficacy of error, and by his just judgment delivered Ahab over to be
deceived, and deluded by them: God was no way accessarie unto the act of lying.
Faius.

5. This saying of the Apostle, God is true, though it be not cited out of any
special text of Scripture; yet it may be collected out of diverse places, unto
the which it is agreeable: as, Numb. 23.18. God is not as man, that he should
lie. Psalm. 85.15. God is great in kindness and truth. Psalm. 36.6. Thy truth
reaches unto the clouds. Psalm. 89.33. I will not falsify my truth. Ier.
10.10. The Lord is the God of truth, he is the living God, and an everlasting
king: Out of all these places, or any of them may this sentence be alleged.
Pareus, Perer.

4. Quest. How every man is said to be a liar.
1. Four ways is a man given to lying. 1. by the circumstance of his nature,
because he is mutable, and ready to alter and change his purpose. 2. by the
prauitie and perverseness of his will, in not keeping that which he has
promised. 3. in the vanity of his mind, in delighting in lies, and giving
ear unto fables. 4. in his malice, in inventing and devising lies many times
to beguile and deceive. Gryneus, Martyr.

2. Hugo thus distinguishes these kinds of lying: there is triplex vanitas, a
threefold vanity, which a threefold lying follows: there is vanitas
essentiae, the vanity of man's nature and essence, which is to be mutable and
changeable: and this is common to man with all other creatures, and hence is
the first kind before spoken of: then there is vanitas miseriae, the vanity of
misery and wretchedness, which is incident to all living things: such is the
misery of man's nature, that neither he can do what he would, neither yet
often will do that which he can: hence is the perverseness of the will, in not
performing and keeping that which is promised, which is the second kind before
spoken of: the third is vanitas culpae, the vanity of sin: which is proper
only to the reasonable creature: hence are the two last kinds before spoken
of, either to give ear unto lies, or to devise them.

3. But there is great difference between mentiri, and mendacium dicere,
between lying, and telling of a lie: one is said to lie, when he does it anima
fallendi, with a mind to deceive: one may tell a lie, and yet not lie himself:
when he reports that which is false: as many such false and fabulous things,
are found in Herodotus and Pliny. Faius.

4. Augustine distinguishes a lie into three kinds: there is perniciosum,
officiosum, iocosuas, a pernicious lie, which is to deceive, and to do hurt;
an officious lie, which is made to preserve an others life; and a lie made in
merriment in sport: none of these lies can be justified, but the first is the
worst. But here is no place at large to handle these things: I refer the
Reader to the questions upon the 9. Commandment in Hexapla upon Exodus, chap.
20.

5. Quest. Whether every man can be said to be a liar.
Origin here moves this doubt, if every man be a liar, then Paul also was a
liar, and David, for they were men.

1. Hierome upon this place, would have this general particle, all, to be
restrained, and to be taken for the most part: as when S. Paul says, All seek
their own: and, Psalm. 14.5. All are gone out of the way. But it is evident v.
12. of this chapter, that the Apostle understands all, without any exception.

2. Some by omnis, every one, understand the Jew, or such as were incredulous:
gloss. ordinar. But Beza well makes a difference between (...), disobedient,
unfaithful, which be affirmed only of some, and (...), a liar, which he
ascribes to all without exception.

3. An other answer is, that in respect of God, all men are said to be liars,
because God only is immutable: But in this sense, not only men but Angels
should be said to be liars, for they also are mutable and changeable being
compared with the Creator.

4. There are then two answers, which will fully satisfy: 1. the Apostle
speaks of men, as they are in themselves by nature, so every one is apt and
prone unto lying, not as they are regenerate and renewed by grace, and speak
by the spirit of God, as David, and Paul did: Pareus: this solution follows
Augustine in his commentary upon the 116. Psalm, Every

4. It will be objected, that God sent a lying spirit into the mouths of Ahabs
false prophets: how then is God true, that sends forth a lying spirit? Answ.
Satan was indeed the author of that lying, and offered himself to go: God
only permitted and suffered him, and efficaciam erroris dedit, and gave way,
and efficacy of error, and by his just judgment delivered Ahab over to be
deceived, and deluded by them: God was no way accessarie unto the act of lying.
Faius.

5. This saying of the Apostle, God is true, though it be not cited out of any
special text of Scripture; yet it may be collected out of diners places, unto
the which it is agreeable: as, Numb. 23.18. God is not as man, that he should
lie. Psalm. 85.15. God is great in kindness and truth. Psalm. 36.6. Thy truth
reaches unto the clouds. Psalm. 89.33. I will not falsify my truth. Ier.
10.10. The Lord is the God of truth, he is the living God, and an everlasting
king: Out of all these places, or any of them may this sentence be alleged,
Pareus, Perer.

4. Quest. How every man is said to be a liar.
1. Four ways is a man given to lying. 1. by the circumstance of his nature,
because he is mutable, and ready to alter and change his purpose. 2. by the
prauitie and perverseness of his will, in not keeping that which he has
promised. 3. in the vanity of his mind, in delighting in lies, and giving
ear unto fables. 4. in his malice, in inventing and devising lies many times
to beguile and deceive. Gryneus, Martyr.

2. Hugo thus distinguishes these kinds of lying: there is triplex vanitas, a
threefold vanity, which a threefold lying follows: there is vanitas
essentiae, the vanity of man's nature and essence, which is to be mutable and
changeable: and this is common to man with all other creatures, and hence is
the first kind before spoken of: then there is vanitas miseriae, the vanity of
misery and wretchedness, which is incident to all living things: such is the
misery of man's nature, that neither he can do what he would, neither yet
often will do that which he can: hence is the perverseness of the will, in not
performing and keeping that which is promised, which is the second kind before
spoken of: the third is vanitas culpae, the vanity of sin: which is proper
only to the reasonable creature: hence are the two last kinds before spoken
of, either to give ear unto lies, or to devise them.

3. But there is great difference between mentiri, and mendacium dicere,
between lying, and telling of a lie: one is said to lie, when he does it anima
fallendi, with a mind to deceive: one may tell a lie, and yet not lie himself:
when he reports that which is false: as many such false and fabulous things,
are found in Herodotus and Plinic. Faius.

4. Augustine distinguishes a lie into three kinds: there is perniciosum,
officiosum, iocosum, a pernicious lie, which is to deceive, and to do hurt; an
officious lie, which is made to preserve an others life; and a lie made in
merriment in sport: none of these lies can be justified, but the first is the
worst. But here is no place at large to handle these things: I refer the
Reader to the questions upon the 9. Commandment in Hexapla upon Exodus, chap.
20.

5. Quest. Whether every man can be said to be a liar.
Origin here moves this doubt, if every man be a liar, then Paul also was a
liar, and David, for they were men.

1. Hierome upon this place, would have this general particle, all, to be
restrained, and to be taken for the most part: as when S. Paul says, All seek
their own: and, Psalm. 14.5. All are gone out of the way. But it is evident v.
12. of this chapter, that the Apostle understands all, without any exception.

2. Some by omnis, every one, understand the Jew, or such as were incredulous:
gloss. ordinar. But Beza well makes a difference between (...), disobedient,
unfaithful, which he affirmed only of some, and (...), a liar, which he
ascribes to all without exception.

3. An other answer is, that in respect of God, all men are said to be liars,
because God only is immutable: But in this sense, not only men but Angels
should be said to be liars, for they also are mutable and changeable being
compared with the Creator.

4. There are then two answers, which will fully satisfy: 1. the Apostle
speaks of men, as they are in themselves by nature, so every one is apt and
prone unto lying, not as they are regenerate and renewed by grace, and speak
by the spirit of God, as David, and Paul did: Pereus: this solution follows
Augustine in his commentary upon the 116. Psalm, Every

2. This some expound of the absolute promises of God: for some of his promises
are absolute, as those made to the fathers, of the giving of the law, and of
the c^^^^ing of Christ: some were conditional, as that they should for ever
inherit the land of Canaan, if they walked in Gods commandments: the first is
called by the schoolmen, prop^esia predestinationis, the prophecy of
predestination, the other the prophecy comminationis, of commination: and
diverse will have the first kind to be here understood, as Lyranus, Caietan,
Perer. Faius. Pareus rejects this interpretation, because all the promises of
the Law and Gospel have annexed the condition of obedience or faith.

3. Some give this sense, by faith, understanding the belief of the faithful
reposed in Gods promises: that the infidelity of some could not evacuate the
faith of others: Origin. but by the words following, let God be true, show that
the faith of God, that is, made by him, not faith reposed in him, is here
signified.

4. Some thus expound, quantum ad Deum, that God for his part is ready to
keep his promises, if men perform the condition: but if they by their
infidelity deprive themselves of the promise, the failing is in themselves and
not in God, Pareus dub. 1. But this does not fully satisfy, for if the
promises of God should have been altogether evacuated, though not by any
inconstancy in God, but their infidelity, yet they should have been without
effect: which the Apostle denies.

5. Chrysostom thus infers: that their incredulity is so far from laying
any fault upon God, vt maiorem illius ostendat bonitatem, that it more
commends his goodness, when he seemed to honor those which dishonored him:
So also Beza, the goodness of God is so much the more commendable, quanto
indigniores sunt, quorum miseretur, the more unworthy they are, that he has
mercy on: But to the incredulous the promises of God were of no effect: they
were deprived, Heb. 4.1.

6. Therefore it must be observed, that the Apostle says not all, but, some,
what though some did not believe, Gualter. they then which believed not non
praeindicabant caeteris, did not hinder or were prejudicial to those which
believed, gloss. ordinar. he signifies, sempa mansisse quosdam, etc. that
there were always found among them in that nation, that believed in Gods
promises, and therefore the promises of God are not evacuate, Calvin. like as,
though the Sun seem not to rise unto those, which are blind, yet he does
rise unto those, that are of perfect sight, Gryneus. as then the Sun should
rise, though no m^^ could see it: yet God has ordained, both that the Sun
should give light, and some should enjoy it: So God would show himself true
and steadfast in his promises, though all m^^ should fall away from him: yet he
has ordained, that as he keeps truth in his promises, so there should be
always some in the Church, which should believe them.

Quest. 3. How God is said to be true.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, God is true, and so some of the fathers have
followed that reading, as Cyprian epist. 55. ad Cornel. and Ambrose lib. 3. de
side, c. 3. and so the Syrian interpreter: but in the original Greek, it is
in the imparatiue, (...), let God be true: which Origin thinks must be
understood, non praeceptive, by way of precept, but pronuntiative, as
pronouncing, that God is true: And here it is taken in the same sense, as when
we say in the Lords prayer, let thy name be hallowed: then siat, let him be, is
here all one, as manifestetur, let him be manifested to be true: sit nobis
verax, intelligatur, let him be true to us, that is, be so taken and understood
to be: Photius: so also Basil lib. 4. cont. Eunem.

2. Now this difference is between veracitie, and fidelity, the first is
circa verba, abo^^ words, that no untruth be uttered, the other is circa pacta,
concerning covenants and premises, in keeping and performing them: faithfulness
and fidelity always includes verity: but there may be verity in speaking,
without fidelity, when as truth is only uttered without any promise to
perform any thing: But here veracitie is taken for fidelity: as Psalm. 86.15.
the Lord is said to be great in kindness and truth. Tolet.

3. Now the Lord is said to be true, 1. not only effective, because he
effects his promises, which he made to Abraham, as concerning the land of
promise, and concerni^^ Christ, Haymo: but essentialiter, he is essentially
true and constant in himself, he can not lie Man is said to be true, because
he will not sometime lie, though he may and can lie: But God is so true, that
he can not lie: neither does this argue an impotencie of nature in God for as
in a man posse mentiri, to can, or be able to lie, argues an infirmity,
rather then power; so in God it shows his power, that he can not lie, because
it is contrary to his na^^^^ Faius.

4. It will be objected, that God sent a lying spirit into the mouths of Ahabs
false prophets: how then is God true, that sends forth a lying spirit? Ans.
Satan was indeed the author of that lying, and offered himself to go: God
only permitted and suffered him, and efficaciam erroris dedit, and gave way,
and efficacy of error, and by his just judgment delivered Ahab over to be
deceived, and deluded by them: God was no way accessarie unto the act of lying.
Faius.

5. This saying of the Apostle, God is true, though it be not cited out of any
special text of Scripture; yet it may be collected out of diverse places, unto
the which it is agreeable: as, Numb. 23.18. God is not as man, that he should
lie. Psalm. 85.15. God is great in kindness and truth. Psalm. 36.6. Thy truth
reaches unto the clouds. Psalm. 89.33. I will not falsify my truth. Ier.
10.10. The Lord is the God of truth, he is the living God, and an everlasting
king: Out of all these places, or any of them may this sentence be alleged.
Pareus, Perer.

4. Quest. How every man is said to be a liar.
1. Four ways is a man given to lying. 1. by the circumstance of his nature,
because he is mutable, and ready to alter and change his purpose. 2. by the
prauitie and perverseness of his will, in not keeping that which he has
promised. 3. in the vanity of his mind, in delighting in lies, and giving
ear unto fables. 4. in his malice, in inventing and devising lies many times
to beguile and deceive. Gryneus, Martyr.

2. Hugo thus distinguishes these kinds of lying: there is triplex vanitas, a
threefold vanity, which a threefold lying follows: there is vanitas
essentiae, the vanity of man's nature and essence, which is to be mutable and
changeable: and this is common to man with all other creatures, and hence is
the first kind before spoken of: then there is vanitas miseriae, the vanity of
misery and wretchedness, which is incident to all living things: such is the
misery of man's nature, that neither he can do what he would, neither yet
often will do that which he can: hence is the perverseness of the will, in not
performing and keeping that which is promised, which is the second kind before
spoken of: the third is vanitas culpae, the vanity of sin: which is proper
only to the reasonable creature: hence are the two last kinds before spoken
of, either to give care unto lies, or to devise them.

3. But there is great difference between mentiri, and mendacium dicere,
between lying, and telling of a lie: one is said to lie, when he does it anima
fallendi, with a mind to deceive: one may tell a lie, and yet not lie himself:
when he reports that which is false: as many such false and fabulous things,
are found in Herodotus and Plinir. Faius.

4. Augustine distinguishes a lie into three kinds: there is perniciosum,
officiosum, iocosum, a pernicious lie, which is to deceive, and to do hurt; an
officious lie, which is made to preserve an others life; and a lie made in
merriment in sport: none of these lies can be justified, but the first is the
worst. But here is no place at large to handle these things: I refer the
Reader to the questions upon the 9. Commandment in Hexapla upon Exodus, chap.
20.

5. Quest. Whether every man can be said to be a liar.
Origin here moves this doubt, if every man be a liar, then Paul also was a
liar, and David, for they were men.

1. Hierome upon this place, would have this general particle, all, to be
restrained, and to be taken for the most part: as when S. Paul says, All seek
their own: and, Psalm. 14.5. All are gone out of the way. But it is evident v.
12. of this chapter, that the Apostle understands all, without any exception.

2. Some by omnis, every one, understand the Jew, or such as were incredulous:
gloss. ordinar. But Beza well makes a difference between (...), disobedient,
unfaithful, which be affirmed only of some, and (...), a liar, which he
ascribes to all without exception.

3. An other answer is, that in respect of God, all men are said to be liars,
because God only is immutable: But in this sense, not only men but Angels
should be said to be liars, for they also are mutable and changeable being
compared with the Creator.

4. There are then two answers, which will fully satisfy: 1. the Apostle
speaks of men, as they are in themselves by nature, so every one is apt and
prone unto lying, not as they are regenerate and renewed by grace, and speak
by the spirit of God, as David, and Paul did: Pareus: this solution follows
Augustine in his commentary upon the 116. Psalm, Every man is a liar, if man
be considered in himself, sed gratia Dei verax efficitur, but by the grace of
God he is made true: and again, he alleges that place in the Psalm, I said
ye are gods, etc. in tantum non erit homo mendax, in quantum homines erunt dij,
as men are gods, so they are not liars: So before him Origin urging those words
of our Savior, Ioh. 10.35. If he called them gods, to whom the word of God
was, etc. but the word of God came unto David, and unto Paul, non vtique
homines erant, sed dij: therefore they herein were not men, but gods. 2. This
must be understood, of a general pronenes and inclination by nature unto
lying, not of the very act it self of lying: It follows, because every man
is naturally a liar, that therefore morally he should be a liar in act: Pareus:
so then every man is said to be a liar, quia mentiri potest, quamvis non
mentiatur, because he may and can lie, though always he do not lie. Tolet.

6. Quest. How the Prophet David is to be understood, saying, Every man is a
liar, Psalm. 116.11.
1. Some do thus interpret, nihil est firmum vel stabile in rebus humanis,
nothing is firm or stable in humane matters, Theodoret: to the same purpose
also Euthymius, fallax est humanae vita faelicitas, the happiness of man's life
here is deceitful: But this being a most true position, how could the Prophet
say, I said in my have, as correcting his hasty and unadvised speech, in thus
saying.

2. Some prefer this sense: that David being much troubled and perplexed
with his manifold afflictions, and sometime tempted with diffidence, does
correct himself, and confesses, that God notwithstanding was true, though all
men were liars: Perer. but it is evident by the Prophets words, that this is
not a correcting, but a corrected speech, which he spoke in his have.

3. Origin delivers a third sense: that David having revealed unto him the
truth by faith, saying a little before, I believed, and therefore I spoke, does
thankfully acknowledge, that he had received the revelation of the truth from
God, whereas all other men, as Philosophers, and the wise among the heathen,
were liars: their writings were full of error, and falsehood: But that by all,
he understands not only the unbelieving Gentiles, but all men in general,
is evident, v. 12. following, as has been showed before.

4. Calvin, whom the Genevens. follow, thus expounds, nihil esse certi neque
ab homine, neque in homine, that there is no certentie, neither from man to be
looked, nor yet in man: but this being a most true and advised assertion, why
then should the Prophet there say he spoke it in have: for so the word there
signifies, as likewise Psalm. 31.22. I said in my have, I am cast out of thy
sight.

5. Vatablus thinks that David means those, which said, when Saul
persecuted him, that he should never enjoy the kingdom, and therefore he
trusting to Gods promises, says they were all liers: But why then should David
say, I said in my have: as confessing, that he thus spoke in his heat and have?

6. Wherefore the meaning of the Prophet David there is this, that being
oppressed with his manifold and great afflictions, he had some distrustful
thoughts, in so much, that he began to think, that even Samuel and Nathan,
which had made unto him such promises concerning the kingdom, were but men,
and had spoken as men unto him: And this sense may be confirmed by the like
place, Psalm. 31.22. cited before, I said in my have: Iun. Caietan, Iansenius.

But two objections will be made against this interpretation. 1. If David be
thus understood, this allegation should seem to be impertinent: for the
Apostle groundeth upon that saying of David, as a certain and undoubted axiom,
which David their uttered in have. Ans. 1. It is not necessary to grant, that
S. Paul cites this place out of that Psalm: the like saying is found, Psalm.
39.5. Every man is altogether vanity. 2. but it may safely be admitted, that
the Apostle has reference to this very place, Psalm. 116. and yet he keeps
the Prophets sense: for though David were deceived in the particular
application to Samuel, and other Prophets; yet the speech was true in general,
every man is a liar: here was David's error, that he took them to speak as
other men: this general ground of David's speech the Apostle follows here.

2. Object. The word there used bechaphzi, Vatablus translateth, in praecipiti
mea fug^, in my hasty flight: the vulgar latin, in excessu meo, when I was
beside my self for fear: it need not be translated, in my have. Ans. 1. The
word chapaz signifies indeed all these, to make have, to be astonished, to
move for fear, to precipitate: but the more usual and proper signification,
is to make have: as Exodus 12.10. Ye shall eat it in have: Psalm. 104.7. they
have away. 2. and whether it be translated in my have, or in my fear, the
sense is all one: that David spoke thus in his heat and passion. 3. and that it
is not meant of his external flight of body, but rather of the acceleration
and have of his affections, is evident by the like place, Psalm. 31.22. I said
in my have, I am cast out of thy sight.

Quest. 7. Of the occasion of these words, cited out of the 51. Psalm, that
thou might be justified, etc. against thee only have I sinned.
The words in the 51. Psalm immediately going before are these, v. 4. Against
thee only have I sin, and committed evil in thy sight: how David is said to
have sinned only against God, it is diuersely scanned.

1. Gregory thus expounds: tibi soli peccavi, against thee only have I
sinned, quia tu solus es sine peccato, because thou only art without sin:
man is not said to sin against man, quia eum aut par, aut grauior culpa
inquinat, because either he is defiled with the same or a greater sin: But
though every man be a sinner, this is no reason, but that one man may
trespass against another.

2. Origin thus expounds David by these words of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 2.15. the
spiritual man discerns all things, yet he is judged of none: therefore
against thee only have I sinned: because others cannot judge me, quia
spiritualis sum, because I am spiritual, etc. But David in this act was not
spiritual, but carnal.

3. Caietan thinks that David so speaks, because he was king, and had no
superior judge, to whom he was subject: and therefore he is said only to
sin against God: because he only was his superior Judge: But David stands
not here upon any personal prerogative, he sets forth the quality of his
offense.

4. An other exposition which P. Martyr mentions is, he says he sinned only
against God, because he sinned against his law: for although he had trespassed
against Vrias, and Bathshebe his wife, yet those were sins none otherwise,
then as they were prohibited by Gods law: But in this sense not only David,
but every one beside should be faid to sin against God.

5: Some give this sense: against thee only, that is, chiefly: he had so
profaned Gods covenant, abused his benefits, caused the name of God by this his
fall to be blasphemed, that he had offended God most of all, Mart. Gualter. But
they are two diverse things, to sin only against God, and chiefly to offend
him.

6. Wherefore, David here has relation to the secrecy of his sin, which was
carried so politikely, that the world perceived it not: yea Ioab, though he was
privy to Vrias death, yet knew not the cause, Vatab. Iun. and thus before them
D. Kimhi: this sense is warranted, 2. Sam. 12.12. where the Lord says, thou
did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel.

Quest. 8. Of the diverse acceptions of this word, justified.
1. Justice, is taken diverse ways. 1. it is used to signify a general
consent and concurrence of all virtues, which we call righteousness: in this
sense Job is called an upright and just man, Job. 1.8. 2. it properly
signifies that special virtue, which is seen in giving unto every one their
own, as Luke 18.3. do me justice against mine adversary. 3. it is taken for
the goodness of God, in performing unto us though unworthy, that which he
has promised: as S. Paul says, 2. Timoth. 4.8. which the Lord the just Judge
shall give me ^^ that day, etc.

2. So likewise to justify is used in a diverse sense. 1. it signifies to
declare or manifest one to be just: as it is said, Matthew. 11.19. Wisdom is
justified of her children. 2. to absolve as pronounce innocent, Romans 8.33. It
is God that justifies, who shall condemn? 3. we are said to be justified by
faith, that is, to be reputed and counted just by the righteousness of Christ
applied and imputed unto us by faith. 4. and it is also used of that inchoate
and imperfect righteousness, which is in the regenerate: as Revel. 22.12. He
that is just, iustificatur adhuc, let him be justified still, Beza. Gryneus:
here it is taken in the first sense, God is said to be justified, that is,
declared, acknowledged to be just.

Quest. 9. Of the meaning of these words, That thou migh^st be justified in thy
words, and overcome when thou iudgest.
1. Some do specially apply these words unto Christ: as Augustine, vidit
futurum indicem iudicandum, be saw that the Judge to come should be judged,
tract. in Psalm. 60. to the same purpose Gregory expounds, that Christ was
justified in his words, and overcame when he was judged of Pilate and the
Jews, there was no guile found in his month: Hugo adds, that he overcame
when he judged and triumphed over Satan, and all the infernal powers upon the
crosse^: But in this sense there should be small coherence in David's words: for
he confessing his sin, saying, against thee only have I sinned, adding
further, that thou may be justified, etc. has relation to his present
state, how God should be justified in forgiving his sin: and the Hebrewe word
is taken actiuely, when thou iudgest, not when thou art judged, so that it
cannot fitly be applied to Christ being judged.

2. Some give this sense, Against thee only have I sinned, vt dum ego and omnes
peccamus, etc. that while I and all other sin, thou only may appear to
be just, gloss. ordinar. so also Osiander, agnosco me nihil agere sine peccato,
I confess, that I do nothing without sin, to thee only belongs the
praise of all goodness: But David speaks not of other men's sins here, but
of his own, and not of all his, but this special sin, which he had
committed, neither does he meditate of the justice and goodness of God in
general only, but as he had experience of his goodness, in the particular
remission of his sin.

3. Some by words, here understand Gods promises, which he had made to David,
touching the continuance of the kingdom in his seed, and the coming of the
Messiah: which promises some might think God would revoke because of David's
sin, and therefore God, though men so judged of him, that he would alter his
promises, yet he would show himself just in keeping his word with David:
Thomas, Lyranus, Tolet, Perer. But David makes not mention here of any such
particular promises: but such, as other sinners also upon their repentance,
might have comfort in, as he says, v. 13. I will teach thy way unto the
wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto thee.

4. Calvin and Pareus thus interpret; that David confessing his sin,
acknowledges God therein to be just, whatsoever he should lay upon him for his
sin, that howsoever men might murmr against God, and so judge him unjust,
yet his judgments were most upright: and so God should be pure when he was
judged of men, or to read it actiuely, when he judged sinners for their sin:
But in this sense, it should not seem to be much pertinent to S. Paul's
purpose; who would prove by this place, that the Lord is true and just of his
promises, though men do fail in their obedience.

5. Theodoret and Euthymius think, and so likewise Iunius, that David has
special relation to that conference, that Nathan had with David, 2. Sam. 12.
and the punishment there denounced: confessing it was justly inflicted upon
him: and so God was justified in his words and speeches, which Nathan had in
his name with David.

6. Yet further, as I deny not, but that David has special reference unto
that judicial proceeding, which the Lord had with David, when he sent his
Prophet Nathan: it is more agreeable to the Apostles purpose, to understand
this of Gods promise made to David by Nathan, that his sin was forgiven him,
then of the judgment there inflicted: that God notwithstanding David's sin,
yet would keep his promise toward the elect for the remision of their sins:
and so Vatablus will have it depend upon the 2. verse, wash me from ^ine
iniqu^^^^, that thou may be justified, etc. or Lyranus immediately after
these words, against thee only have I sinned, understands to be supplied,
remitte mihi, forgive me: Thus Beza also refers it to Gods gracious promise
of remission of sins: And so it is best agreeable to the Apostles purpose,
who shows by this testimony, that the vnbeleeefe or some makes not the
faith of Gods promises of no effect: and as before the Apostle set the truth of
God, against man's lying: so here in this sentence, man's frailty appears on
the one side, in David's sin, and Gods truth and constancy in forgiving the
same, Tolet.

7. Now whereas the Apostle follows the Septuagint, and overcome when thou ^^
judged: but out of the Hebrewe it is thus interpreted, and may be pure when
thou iudgest, first the Apostle retains the received translation which was
much accounted of, specially seeing it kept the sense of the original: for he
which is pure and blameless, ouercomme^^ in right judgment, Faius. and God
being pure and free from the accusations of the wicked, therein overcomes
their murmurings, against his judgments, Pareus: secondly, the other word
(...), in judging, may as well be in the mean voice as the passive: and so may
be taken actiuely, when thou iudgest, as some read passiuely, when thou are
judged, Beza, Pareus.

Quest. 10. Whether a man may do evil, and commit sin to that end, to set
forth Gods justice.
This doubt is moved by occasion of the Prophets words: because after he had
said, I have done evil in thy sight, it follows, that thou may be
justified: to the which these answears may be made, 1. David w^n he sinned did
not propound this as the end to himself thereby to set forth God, justice,
but this event followed: this word that, does not then show the cause, but the
order rather and event of the thing, Perer. where is not relation to David,
that he did it to this end, but unto God, who turned this evil unto good. 2.
or these words, that thou may be justified, are not to be referred, to the
words immediately going before, but to the 3. verse, I know mine iniquities:
David therefore shows not, quo sine prius fecerit mal^, with what intent he
did evil before, sed quo fine nunc faciat bonis, but with what end he now did
well in confessing his sin, namely, that God might receive glory thereby. 3.
Vatablus also refers these words unto the 2. verse, where he says, wash me
thoroughly from my sins, and then these words in sense are to be annexed,
that thou may be justified, etc. this was not then sinis peccati, sed
precationis, not the end of David's sin, but of his prayer: that God in
forgiving his sin might appear to be just and true of his promises in
forgiving the sins of the elect.

Quest. 11. Of the meaning of the 5, 6, 7, 8. verses.
1. Now follows the third objection, issuing out of the former: for if Gods
justice and truth in keeping his promises do appear in remmitting the sins
of the faithful, that notwithstanding their sins, yet he is faithful in
performing his promises: then it would follow, that our unrighteousness
commends the justice of God: and hereupon ensue three other inconveniences.
1. That God should be unrighteous in punishing that which makes for his
glory. 2. nay he should not be said, to be so much as a sinner, by whom the
the glory of God is promoted, v. 7. Why am I yet comdemned as a sinner. 3. and
it would follow, that if by our sins the justice of God were set forth, we
should still commit sin and do evil, that good might come thereof, the
setting forth of Gods glory, Gorrhan.

2. Whereas the Apostle says according to the Greek text, I speak (...),
according to man, Origin seems to approve and follow another reading: as
though it should be (...), against man: for the Greek preposition (...), with
an accusative case signifies according, but with a genitive, against: and so
he would join it to the former words, is God unrighteous, which infers, or
inflicteth punishment against man. But there is an other word (...), I speak,
which should be quite cut off in this sense: beside this phrase, I speak
according to man, is usual with the Apostle: which he uses upon diverse
occasions. 1. to decline envy, when he is forced to speak of himself, and
his own doings, he thus speaks according to the wisdom of men, 1. Cor.
15.31. 2. Cor. 11.16. 2. sometime he uses this form of speech, when he takes
somewhat from the common use of men, for a more lively demonstration of that,
which he has in hand, Romans 6.19. 1. Cor. 9.8. 3. sometime according to man, is
as much as according to the flesh, and after the guise of carnal men: and so
the Apostle here speaks in the person of a carnal man, Beza, annot.

3. But whereas, v. 7. the Apostle says, why am I yet condemned as a sinner,
the most interpreters agree to make it a part of the same objection: that God
should seem unjust in punishing sinners by whom his glory is set forth: Tolet
makes it rather an answer to the objection: that S. Paul proves by two
arguments, that God is not unrighteous, one by his office, that he is judge of
the world, the other by the execution of his justice, that if God were not
just, I should not be punished as a sinner: but the former words going
immediately before, if the verity of God, has more abounded thorough my lie
unto his glory, shows that it is part of the objection, which also is
continued still in the verse following; And, etc. why do we not evil, etc.

4. By verity here v. 7. is not understood, the verity of doctrine; and by a
lie, erroneous and false doctrine: as Origin here shows by diverse particular
instances, of the false positions of the Philosophers, how the verity and
truth of God, has thereby more manifestly appeared: But by virtue rather the
justice of God and constancy in keeping his promises is understood, and by a
lie, the perfidiousnesse of men, whereof the Apostle spoke before, v. 3.

5. Now to this objection the Apostle makes 4. answers. 1. he rejects this
impious calumniation, as blasphemous, and absurd, thinking it worthy of no
better answer, saying, God forbid. 2. he adds a reason taken from Gods
office: he is the judge of the world both present and to come, who does both
govern the world in equity, and shall as the supreme judge give unto every
man according to his works: he therefore cannot be unjust. 3. to the last part
of the objection he says, first, that they do blaspheme the Apostle, v. 8. in
raising such a slander of him, as though he should teach any such doctrine,
that men should do evil, that good may come thereof. 4. then he says, their
damnation is just: which words some do understand actiuely, that the Apostle
condemned such positions; referring whose to the objections: but it is better
understood passiuely of their persons, that for this their blasphemy, they
deserve to be condemned of God, Pareus.

6. Thus the Apostle answeareth pithily, to these cauills and objections,
repelling them, that howsoever men may imagine, yet God is most just in
punishing of sinners, though thereby his glory is set forth. So that thus much
is insinuated in the Apostles answer: that it follows not, that God should
therefore forbear the punishment of the wicked, because by their iniquity,
his justice and goodness is more set forth, because it is not of their sin,
that any good comes thereof, but of Gods goodness: they per se, by
themselves are no causes of the setting forth of Gods glory, but per accidens,
by an accident: God thereby takes occasion to manifest his justice in their
condign punishment, as he did in the destruction of Pharaoh: his wisdom as
he did use the malice and envy of Joseph's brethren, to effect his purpose in
bringing him to honor: his clemency, in doing good to his Church, as by Judas
treachery Christ was delivered up to death, for the redemption of the world:
But therefore none of their sins were excused, because they had no such
intent to set forth Gods glory, but God who brought light of darkness, was
able by their works of darkness, to manifest the light of his truth, Pareus.

Like as when the Judge condemns a malefactor, his uprightness appears in
his just condemnation: and the greater the disease is, the more commendable is
the skill of the Physician in healing it: yet no thanks is due either to the
malefactor, for the one, or to the diseased patient for the other, Mart. So
likewise, that man's sin sets forth the goodness of God; it is not of the
nature of sin, sed ex infinita bonitate, sapientia, and potentia Dei, but of
the infinite goodness, wisdom, and power of God, who can turn men's sins
to his further glory. Perer.

And further, here we are to distinguish between malum culpae, and malum
poena, the evil of the offense, and the evil of punishment: the first simply
and by it it self makes not to Gods glory: but the punishment of sin,
which is occasioned by sin, God ordains for the declaration of his justice,
Lyran.

Quest. 12. Whether none evil is to be done at all, that good may come thereof.
1. This is a most true conclusion in divinity, that no evil must be done or
sin committed, that some good may be caused thereby: for the contrary the
Apostle here condemns, and says their damnation is just, that thus object,
Why do we not evil, that good may come thereof: the reason hereof is this, no
sin is eligible, for whatsoever is eligible, and to be made choice of, is
good, but sin is no ways good, for then it should not be sin, yet sin
may be the occasion of the further setting forth of Gods glory: as the
offenses of thieves and murderers may be the matter for the justice of the
judge to work upon, and diseases are occasions for the skillful Physician to
show his skill: yet as therefore a man will not choose to be diseased, that
the Physician may grow famous in healing him, so neither are sins to be of
purpose committed, that Gods justice should be thereby set forth, Mart.

2. But here the former distinction takes place between malum culpae, and
malum poena, the evil of sin, and the evil of punishment: the first is no
ways to be chosen: a less sin is not to be committed to avoid a greater:
for if no evil is to be done for a good end, then the less evil or sin,
is not to be committed to avoid a greater: for the avoiding of evil is also a
good thing, Caietan. But of other things, which are not evil in their nature,
but are counted evil in respect of temporal loss, there one may make choice
of the less, Pareus: as David did rather choose to have the pestilence sent
upon the land, then famine, or captivity: and here that similitude of Gregory
may have place, vt qus murorum, ambitu clauditur vndique etc. as he that is
compassed and closed in with a wall, that he cannot escape, there takes his
flight, vbi breuior murus invenitur, where the wall is the lowest: so of such
temporal evils a man may make choice of that which brings the least
inconvenience.

3. And concerning the first sort of evils, there is also a kind of choice to
be made: when there is a necessity: as when one is driven to such a straight,
as that having taken a rash oath to do an unlawful thing, and the oath being
made, he must either break his oath, and so commit perjury, or keep his
oath, and so break charity: it is the less of the two evils, to break a
wicked oath, then to fulfill it, as Herod did in putting John Baptist to death:
for in violating the oath, creator^m offendimus, we do but offend the Creator,
but in performing a cruel and bloody oath we both transgress Gods
commandments, as also offer wrong unto our brother: thus was it decreed
Council. Toletan. 8. vbi periculi necessitas as compuleru, etc. where the
necessity of the danger compels: which necessity is, when a thing is once
committed, and cannot be undone again, as in taking a rash oath: which
necessity, or perplexity, as Caietan well notes, is not ex part rerum, on
the behalf of the things: for it is not necessary for a man, if it were in
his power either to swear falsely, or to break charity: but it is ex part
hominis, on the behalf of man, who cannot revoke and vncall that which he has
once done, Caietan.

4. But against this position the example of Lot will be objected, who to
preserve the young men from the beastly rage of the Sodomites, would have
prostituted his daughters unto them: if this fact were not good, why does S.
Peter call him just Lot, 2. Pet. 2. if it were, then one may do good that
evil may be occasioned thereby.

Concerning this act of Lot, there are diverse opinions: some do commend and
justify it, as Ambrose lib. 1. de Abraham. c. 6. Chrysostom hom. 43. so also
Thomas. Caietan. Some do blame Lot in so doing, and disallowe this fact: as
August. qu. 42. in Genes. Lyran. Gloss. interlin. Tostatus. Lyppom. in catena.
and this seems to be the better opinion: as Augustine determines, ^oli
facere magnum scelus tuum, dum magis horrescis alienum, do not make thine
offense great, while thou fear an others sin: yet two things do excuse
Lot, his zealous care to preserve the young men from violence, and his
perplexed, and troubled mind, not well considering what he did: And whereas S.
Peter calls him just Lot, that is not understood in respect of this
particular fact, but of his upright life, who was not touched with the unclean
conversation of the city, but grieved thereat.

5. Here further may be noted a certain oversight of Gregory, who disputing
this point, that of two evils the less is to be chosen, gives this instance
that the Apostle saying, to avoid fornication, let every one have his wife,
concessit minimo, vt mayor a declinaret, he permitted the less (evil,) to
avoid the greater: so he thinks it not to be without fault to marry, though
it be less: and he would prove it by these words of the Apostle, I speak
this by permission, not by commandment, non est sine vitio, quod ignoscitur,
and non praecipitur, that is not without fault which is pardoned, not
commanded, Gregor. lib. 32. Moral. c. 27.

Contra. 1. If it were an evil or sin to marry, then God should be the
author of sin, who was the institutor of marriage: if men do abuse the marriage
by their in temperancie, that is their fault, not any evil in the thing: 2.
The Apostle does not pardon them their marriage, but he permits them to
marry as a thing lawful for all, if they will use the remedy, but not
necessarily imposed by way of commandment: for they which have the gift of
continency are not bound to marry. 3. the Apostle then in allowing to marry
to avoid fornication, does not prefer the less evil before the greater,
but prescribes the remedy, which is good to prevent the greater inconvenience
of evil, which would follow, if the remedy were not used.

13. Quest. Whether God do not evil, that good may come thereof, in
reprobating the vessels of wrath, to show his power.
Object. 1. The Apostle says, Romans 9.22. What and if God would to show his
wrath, and make his power known, suffer with long patience the vessels of
wrath prepared to destruction? ^ere God should seem to do that which is
evil, as to prepare the vessels of wrath to destruction, for a good end,
namely, to declare his power.

2. Likewise to permit and suffer evil to be done in the world, to exercise
his iudg^ments, or declare his providence seems to be evil, as when he
suffered Joseph's breth^^^ to sell him into Egypt, that Jacobs family by this
means might be provided for: for he which suffers evil to be done, when he
may hinder it, seems to consent unto it, and so is accessarie thereunto: as a
Magistrate sins in suffering adultery, murder, and other sins to go
unpunished.

Ans. Concerning the first objection, it is not evil, that some are vessels of
wrath prepared to destruction: 1. because it is Gods will, which is always
just and holy: yea Gods will is a perfect rule of justice. 2. and that which
tends to Gods glory, can not be evil, as God gets himself glory in the
condemnation of the wicked. 3. that which is lawfully done, can not be evil:
but God in rejecting some, does that which he may do by lawful right, to
dispose of his own as it pleases him; as no man can reprove the potter in
making some vessels of honor, some of dishonor of the same piece of clay. 4.
but seeing in the end Gods rejecting and reprobating of some, namely such as
by their sins deserved eternal death, appears to be most just, it must
needs also be good, for that which is just, is good.

2. To the other objection of Gods permission, it may be likewise answered, 1.
to permit evil to be done, and to consent to evil, do not necessarily follow
one the other: he that permits, only has a will not to hinder, but he that
consents, approoueth that which is done. 2. and that God consents not to
that which he permits is evident, because he punishes sin, which he
suffers to be done. 3. God in permitting evil to be done, only consents to
that good which he draws out of evil, and for the which he suffers the same
to be done. 4. the case is not like between God permitting evil to be done,
and the Magistrate: for 1. God is free, and is not tied to any law, but the
Magistrate suffering evil therein does contrary to Gods law, or man's. 2. Man
oftentimes of some sinister affection suffers evil, either because he is
hindered by some greater power, and cannot punish it, or he is corrupted, and
so winketh at sin: but none of these are incident to God. 3. If the
Magistrate propound unto himself some good end, in using connivence i^ some
sins, yet he is not sure to effect it as God is. 4. Beside it belongs unto
the Creator, to give unto his creatures freely to work according to their
nature: for otherwise he should restrain the ordinary course of things: But
this no way concerns the Magistrate in his connivence. ex Pareo.

Quest. 14. In what sense the Apostle denies the jews to be more excellent
then the Gentiles, v. 9
v. 9. What then, are we more excellent? there is a double sense of these
words, some think that this is spoken in the person of the faithful which
were uncircumcised, as though they were more excellent then the Jews, which
abused the blessings which the Lord had bestowed upon them: but if the Apostle
had spoken here of the uncircumcised, he would not have named himself, as one
of them, are we more excellent? therefore the other sense is better, that the
Apostle speaks here in the person of the Jews, least they might have gloried
too much, in their pre-eminence and prerogatives which the Apostle had yielded
unto them before the Gentiles, v. 1.

2. Now the Apostle in denying unto the Jews that excellency, which he before
had yielded unto them, v. 1. is not contrary to himself: for the reconciling
whereof, 1. Some think, that S. Paul before spoke of the excellency of the
Jews beyond the Gentiles, before the coming of Christ, but here of their
state in the Gospel, when they had no such pre-eminence, as the Apostle says,
Coloss. 3. that in Christ there is neither Jews transgressing against the
law, were no better then the Gentiles, as Ezech. 5.10. she has changed my
judgments into wickedness, more then the nations, etc. 2. Some give this
solution, that then pre-eminence was in respect of the promises, on Gods
behalf, which he made unto the Jews, but in respect of their own nature,
they were sinners as well as others, Thomas, Pererius. they had no
pre-eminence, by their own merits: to this purpose, Gualter, Hyperius,
Aretius, with others: But Tolet refuses this upon this reason, because in this
sense neither should a Christian man have any pre-eminence before a Gentile,
seeing the one meriteth more at Gods hand, then the other: these things wherein
they excel, non (...) proprijs acciperunt, they have not received by their
own merits, annotat. 6. 3. The pre-eminence then before granted, and now
denied, is neither in respect of the diverse times, nor of their persons, but of
the cause in hand, that although the Jews had some civil and Ecclesiastical
prerogatives, they had the law and circumcision, which the Gentiles had not,
yet concerning their manner of justification before God, it was all one, the
Jew was no more justified by works then the Gentile, but both of them were
justified only by faith. Par. Tol.

15. Quest. Of the meaning of certain phrases, which the Apostle uses, v. 9.
We have already proved, and, under sin.
1. The Greek word is (...): 1. some translate, criminati sumus, we have
accused: Greek schol. Beza, Pareus: but it had been sufficient to have said,
we have showed both Jews and Gentiles to be under sin, this was a sufficient
accusation it self, without any such express addition, that he had accused
them: Tolet. 2. Pererius makes this the sense, I have alleged this as a
cause, that all are under sin, namely as the cause and occasion, why the
Jews in the matter of justification are not preferred before the Gentiles:
Per. Haymo: but that the Apostles speech should be imperfect, saying thus much
in effect, we have showed this as the cause, that all are under sin, not
showing whereof it should be a cause. 3. Tolet deuiseth an other sense,
expounding it by the passive, we have been all accused that both Jews and
Gentiles are under sin: but the Greek construction will not suffer this
sense, for Jews and Gentiles, is put in the accusative, and so can not answer
unto the word, accused. 4. Some thus interpret, causis redditis ostendimus, we
have showed by rendering the cause, why all should be under sin: that the
Apostle had not only showed this, but tendered also the cause: Chrysostom. Ambr.
Sedul. Erasm. Vatabl. but Beza thinks that the word is not found in that
sense. 5. Wherefore the best interpretation is this, evici^^^ probavimus, we
have proved before, Oecumen. Genevens. we have sufficiently showed by reason,
that all are under sin: so also the Syrian interpreter reads,
pronuntiavi^^s, we have pronounced: and gloss. interl. rationibus ostendimus,
we have showed by reason.

2. Under sin, which signifies three things, 1. that although the act of
sin do pass, yet there remains still a blot in the soul and conscience,
and a guiltines of sin, as Iosu. 22.17. we are not cleansed from the wickedness
of Peor unto this day. Perer. 2. to be under sin, is tenerireatu, to be held
guilty of sin, Pareus: to be subject unto the curse and malediction due unto
sin, Piscat. and so guilty to everlasting damnation. 3. and beside it
signifies the servitude under sin, that they do walk and live in sin,
and can not be delivered from the tyranny thereof, Tolet. as to be under the
law, is to be in subjection, thraldom, and under the curse of it. Pareus.

16. Quest. Whence the Apostle alleges these testimonies; v. 10. to 18.
1. All these allegations according to the vulgar Latin edition, are taken out
of the 13. Psalm, where all those sentences stand together in this order,
wherein they are cited here: And one Lindanus a Popish writer, would prove
hereby the Hebrew text to have been corrupted by the Jews, because only v.
10, 11, 12. are there found Psalm. 14. according to the Hebrew original, and he
affirms that he had seen an Hebrew copy thought to have been Augustins the
Monk that was sent into England, where these eight verses do stand in the
Hebrew text, as they are here alleged by S. Paul. But Pererius misliketh this
assertion: 1. he urges Hieromes opinion who was more ancient then that
Augustine, who finds not all these sentences in the Hebrew. 2. it is not like
that the Jews could all conspire to corrupt the Greek text, who otherwise are
found to have been always most careful to preserve the Scriptures
uncorrupted: neither had they any reason to raze out any of those sentences,
seeing therein is contained no manifest prophecy of Christ. 3. and concerning
that Hebrew copy, Ioannes Isaac sometime professor of the Hebrew tongue at
Co^^^, writing against Lindanus, thinks it was patched together by some
unskillful Hebrici^^, who might turn the Latin into Hebrew.

2. Pererius thinks that the Hebrew text is not corrupted in that place, yet
he would have the vulgar Latin translation to be retained, because of the
antiquity thereof, which ^^serteth all those verses in the 14. Psalm: But if
he acknowledge the Hebrew to be perfect, and the Latin translation to put in
more, then is in the Hebrew, why should not the Latin text be corrected
according to the Hebrew?

3. Therefore the truth is, as Hierome thinks, proem. l. 16. comment. in
Esaiam, that this whole text is not taken out of the 14. Psalm, sed partim ex
Isaia, partim ex Psalmis esse contextum, but is framed together partly out of
the Prophet Isai, partly out of the Psalms: the 10, 11, 12, verses here are
alleged out of the 14. and 53. Psalm: the first part of the 14. v. is out of
the 5. Psalm. v. 10. the second out of the 140. Psalm. v. 3. the 14. v. out of
the 10. Psalm. v. 7. the 15, 16, 17. v. out of Isa. 59.7, 8. the 18. v. out of
Psalm. 36.1. Pareus: the same is also affirmed by Origin, that these testimonies
are cited partly out of the Psalms, partly out of the Prophet Isai: but the
16. v. Destruction and calamity are in their ways, he says, non recordor vbi
scriptum sis, etc. I remember not where it is written, but I think it may be
found in some one of the Prophets, etc. this may seem strange, that Origin so
diligent a searcher of the Scriptures, should not find where these words are,
seeing they follow in the very same place of the Prophet Isai, as Hierome also
observes.

4. But that is well observed by Origin, that whereas S. Paul does not follow
the very same words which are in the Psalm, puto dari in hoc Apostolicam
authoritatem, I think (says he) that this is done by Apostolic authority,
to teach us, when we use the testimony of Scripture, sensum magis ex eo, quam
verba rapiamus, that we rather take the sense, then the words, etc.

17. Qu. Of the matter and order observed by the Apostle in citing these
testimonies.
In these testimonies the Apostle first shows the sins of men, then their
punishment: their sins either of omission, in leaving some duties undone, to
v. 13. then of commission, in committing such things as were evil, to v. 16.
the sins of omission, are either concerning faith, or manners: concerning
faith three ways, nec credunt per fidem, they neither believe by faith, there
is none just, nec intelligunt per scripturam, neither do they understand by
the Scripture, nor seek God per investigationem, by searching after him, v.
10, 11. Concerning manners, 1. they decline out of the way, in turning away
from God. 2. they are become unprofitable, that is, to their brethren. 3.
neither do they good, that is, to themselves, v. 12.

The sins committed are of two sorts, ad inducendum alios in errorem, to
bring others into error; ad incutiendum terrorem, and to smite into them
terror: the first is done three ways, 1. openly in corrupting with evil
words, their mouth is an open sepulcher. 2. secretly in deceiving, they have
used their tongues to deceit. 3. in cloaking their malice with fained words,
the poison of aspes is under their lips.

They do strike terror into them, 1. mala imprecando, in wishing evil, their
mouth is full of cursing. 2. necem intentando, by threatening death and
destruction, there is bitterness in their mouth. 3. in shedding of blood.

Then follows their punishment, which is of two sorts, 1. poena and non
culpa, a punishment, and no fault, either eternal, destruction, or temporal,
calamity, with the meritorious cause, in their ways. 2. there is a
punishment, which is both a punishment, and a sin: which is first their
wilful ignorance and blindness, v. 17. they have not known the way of peace:
then their obstinacy, the fear of God is not before their eyes. Gorrhan.

But this distribution may seem to be too curious: we therefore will content
our selves with this plain enumeration of sins, which are here set down by
the Apostle. 1. be accuses all men of injustice, and unrighteousness, there is
none righteous, v. 10. 2. of ignorance and blindness, there is none that
understands, v. 11. 3. of apostasy and falling away from God to abominable
idolatry, v. 12. 4. of deceit and craft. 5. of cursing and bitterness, v. 13.
6. of cruelty, their feet are swift to shed blood. 7. they are turbulent and
enemies to peace, v. 17. 8. they are profane, casting off all fear of God, v.
18. Pareus.

18. Quest. How none are said to be just, seeing Noah and other holy men are
reported to have been just in their time.
1. Origin thinks, that whereas the Scripture says, in thy sight shall no
man living be justified, it is spoken by way of comparison, that none compared
to God, are just: and so Lyranus thinks, it is understood de iustitia
perfecta, of perfect righteousness: there may be iustitia politica, a politic
and civil justice, in living according to the rule of nature, and iust^^^^
legalis, a legal justice, in keeping Moses ordinances, but no perfect justice.
Contra. If this were the meaning, then they which are justified by faith in
Christ should be here also included: for they being compared to Gods perfect
and exact justice, can not be said to be just but the Apostle speaks not of
faith, he shows only, what men are by nature. 2. And by the same reason, do
we also reject an other interpretation of Origin, that no man liui^^ here is
justified before God, that is, in this life none can be pronounced to be just:
But although in the next world our justice shall be perfected, yet it is begun
here; otherwise w^ should never come there.

3. Chrysostom understands this to be spoken only of the Jews, which are
noted of three things: 1. that they all had transgressed. 2. they only
committed evil, and wrought no good. 3. they did it with all vehemencic and
endeavor: so also Anselme thinks, that Paul speaks of the Jews. 4. Some
understand contrariwise only the Gentiles, and uncircumcised, Greek schol.
and Theodoret thinks, that Psalm. 14. there is special reference to the
railing of Rabsacah, which is declared Isa. 36. But the words of the Prophet
are general: and he intends by this Scripture to prove, that all both Jew
and Gentile were under sin. 5. Ambrose and Augustine think that these words
are uttered only of the evil and wicked sort, not of the righteous, so also
gloss ordinar. But the Apostle generally concludes of all, that they are
under sin, and that they had need of the grace of God.

6. Pererius mentions an other exposition that some would have it understood
of venial, that is, the smaller offenses, which no man lives without, but
every one is subject unto: But the Apostle reckons up afterward many
grievous sins, as their throat is an open sepulcher, their feet are swift to
shed blood, etc. these were not small offenses, but most grievous and gross
sins. 7. Pererius thinks that this is spoken by an hyperbole, none are
said to be just, that is the most, so that a few only are excepted.

8. But the Apostle understands universally all men, that there is none just:
as afterward he concludes, v. 19. that all the world be culpable before God:
and whereas some men are called and counted righteous, that is ex gratia, by
grace: but yet by nature all both Jews and Gentiles are sinners: that they can
not by their own works be justified, but only by grace and faith in Christ.
Faius. Tolet. annot. 10.

9. Origin here makes a question, how it could be said, that there was none
neither among the Jews, nor Gentiles, that did any good: seeing there were
many among them, which did cloth the naked, feed the hungry, and did other
good things: he hereunto makes this answer; that like as one that lays a
foundation, and builds upon it a wall or two, yet can not be said to have
built an house, till he have finished it; so although those might do some good
things, yet they attained not unto perfect goodness, which was only to be found
in Christ. But this is not the Apostles meaning only to exclude men from the
perfection of justice: for even the faithful and believers were short of that
perfection, which is required: he therefore shows what men are by nature, all
under sin, and in the state of damnation, without grace and faith in Christ:
if any perform any good work, either it is of grace, and so not of
themselves, or if they did it by the light of nature, they did it not as they
ought, and so it was far from a good work in deed. Perer. number. 37. Tolet.
annot. 10.

19. Quest. Of the particular explication of the sins, wherewith the Apostle
here charge both Jews and Gentiles.
v. 10. There is none righteous: in the Psalm it is, there is none that does
good, but the sense is the same, for he that is righteous does that which is
good, and he that does not good, is not just or righteous, so he proves the
antecedent, by the consequent. No not one: though this be not in that place of
the Psalm, according to the Hebrew, it is added for a more full explanation,
to show, that none are excluded: some understand this of justification by faith
in Christ, there was none which believed in him: gloss. interlin. Gorrhan. but
the Apostle shows, what every one was by nature: otherwise there were always
some in the world, to whom the Lord gave faith and belief in him.

v. 11. There is none that understands: the Apostle here omitteth some words
of the Psalm: for there it is set down affirmatively, the Lord looked down
from heaven, whether any would understand: but S. Paul keeping the sense, Beza,
expresses it by a negation: Pareus. The Apostle condemns them all of
ignorance, which is the mother of prophannes: Tolet understands this
peculiarly of the Gentiles who were idolaters, and had not the right knowledge
of God: some do specially refer it to their ignorance concerning Christ, that
they did not know him to be God. gloss. interlin. Gorrhan. But it is more
general: they had no knowledge of God at all, no true and effectual
knowledge, which might bring them to the service and obedience of God. Mart.

There is none that seeks God. This Tolet specially understands of the
Jews, who though they knew God, yet they did not seek him, to live according
to his commandment: but it is more general, comprehending both Jews and
Gentiles: some have particular reference to Christ, that they did not seek to
know him, whom they might have found out to be God by his miraculous works:
gloss. interl. But the Apostle comprehends more times, then that only
wherein Christ lived: Lyranus has here a corrupt gloss: they did not seek
God, per opera meritoria, by the merit of their works: but so God shall never
be found: the prophannes then of men in general is here set forth, that had no
care to seek unto God, and to depend upon him, but they were addicted to
themselves, and their own lusts, conforming themselves unto this present
world, Romans 12.2. Gryneus.

v. 12. They have all gone out of the way. They fell away, being destitute of
grace from the way which leads unto life, unto the broad way, that brings
unto everlasting destruction: Gryneus: and they became unprofitable, being cut
off from God, as the branch from the vine, they could bring forth no fruit:
Tolet. the Hebrew word signifies to rot and corrupt, so they became as rotten
and corrupt branches, Pareus. There is none that does good, no not one: here
none are excluded: some thus give the sense, none saving one, namely Christ,
gloss. interlin. Gorrhan, and so Augustine before them: but the original will
not bear that sense: the words are, none unto one, that is, no not one.

v. 13. Their throat is an open sepulcher. 1. They are instar voraginis, like
unto a gulf to destroy men, and therefore are compared to a sepulcher. 2. and
an open sepulcher, quod tetros spargit odores, which sends forth stinking
smells: so they do utter filthy and vain words. 3. and they are likened to
an open sepulcher, quia vsus scelerum, verecundiam sustulit, their custom in
sin has taken away all shamefastnes and modesty, they are impudent in their
sin. Origin. 4. and as an open grave can never be satiate, but it receives
one body after an other; so they do still seek to devour men, and as it
were eat them up, with their filthy and slanderous tongues. They have used
their tongues to deceit: where they can not openly devour, they attempt to do
it by craft and deceit. gloss. interlin.

The poison of aspes is under their lips. The biting and venomous tongue is
thus resembled: 1. because this serpent does morsu inficere, infect and poison
by biting. Gryneus. 2. it is insanabile, a poison incurable: gloss. interlin.
Pellic. 3. and they are incorrigible and intractable, like as the serpent
stops the ears, and will not hear the voice of the charmer.

v. 14. Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. 1. Their mouth is said to
be full, because ex pleno oris vasculo, out of their mouth, as a full vessel
do continually flow forth bitter and cruel words. Origin. 2. as they have
gall and bitterness in their heart, Act. 8.23. so they do utter it with their
mouth, Gryneus. 3. thus the Apostle shows how they abuse all the instruments
of speaking, their throat, their tongues, their lips, their mouth, Tolet. 4.
And as before they were given to flattery and deceit, so they sometime brake
forth into open blasphemy both against God and man. Calvin. 5. Haymo specially
refereth it to the bitter and blasphemous words, which the Jews uttered
against Christ: charging him to have a devil, and crying out against him to be
crucified.

v. 15. Their feet are swift to shed blood. 1. The Apostle hitherto alleged
those testimonies out of the Psalms, now he cites the Prophet Isa; because in
the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be established: Faius. 2.
by the feet are understood their affections, as Origin expounds, consilium
quo agimus iter vitae, the counsel, whereby we take in hand the travel of
this life: and hereby their readiness is signified, upon every occasion to shed
blood. Tolet. 3. as Doeg by his false tongue caused many innocent Priests to be
slain, Gryneus. 4. and, by this phrase, of shedding, is showed how they do
vilipend the blood of the Saints, pouring it out as water. Gorrhan.

v. 16. Destruction and calamity are in their ways. 1. Whereas the word is
(...) contrition, Origin understands it of their sin and disobedience,
whereby they do ^^^rere iugum domini, cast off and beat in pieces the Lords
yoke: so also the Greek schol^^^: as by the way, he understands life, so by
contrition, sin; whereby the life is worn, as the way is beaten with
trampling. 2. some understand it passiuely of the destruction and ^^l^mitie,
which was brought upon them by the Romans: gloss. interlin. Haymo, Gorrha^. 3.
but it is better taken actiuely, for the destruction and calamity, which they
bring upon others: they are the authors and deuisers of nothing but mischief:
Gryn. Calv. Pare. as the Roman histories do write of Hannibal, who in his
dream following one, that was sent of Jupiter to be his guide into Italy,
seemed to see behind him an huge serpent, devouring and destroying all as he
went: whereby was signified the horrible vastitie, which he should bring upon
Italy.

v. 17. The way of peace they have not known. 1. Origin understands Christ
to be (...) way of peace, whom they acknowledged not: so also Haymo, Gorrhan.
gloss. 3. but thereby is signified their turbulent nature, who delighted in
war, and filled the world with tumults and troubles: Gryneus, Pareus: and
although some among the heathen did seek to preserve the peace and
tranquillity of the commonwealth, yet it did not help them any thing toward
their everlasting peace. Osiand.

v. 18. The fear of God is not before their eyes. 1. As the fear of God is
the beginning of true wisdom, and piety, so the want of that fear gives way
unto all impiety: and therefore, sine retinaculo currunt ad malum, they run
into all kind of mischief without any stay. Lyran. These do not say, there is
no God, yet they do not fear God: August. ex Beda: and so are given over to
all impiety.

20. Quest. v. 19. Whatsoever the Law says: what is here understood by the
law, and how diversely this word is taken.
Hierome, epist. 151. notes this word Law, to have six several
significations in the Scripture: 1. it is taken precisely for the Law given by
Moses, which contained both moral precepts, judicial, and ceremonial: as
Ioh. 1.17. The Law was given by Moses. 2. the law signifies not the precepts
only, but the history of the old Testament: as S. Paul calls Abraham's
history concerning his two sons, the law, Gal. 4.22. 3. the book of the
Psalms is called the law, Ioh. 15.25. It is written in the law, they hated me
without a cause. 4. the prophecy of Isai is called the law: 1. Cor. 14.21. In
their law it is written, by men of other tongues, etc. will I speak unto this
people: which testimony is taken out of Isa, c. 28.21. 5. the spiritual sense
and meaning of the old Testament is called the law: as the Apostle says, The
Law is spiritual, Romans 7. 6. the law is taken for that natural light which is
imprinted in the mind by nature: as S. Paul says, c. 2.14. The Gentiles which
have not the law, are a law unto themselves. Here then by the Law, the Apostle
generally understands the old Testament, as the book of the Psalms, and the
Prophets.

21. Quest. It says to them, which are under the law: who are here understood
to be under the law.
1. Origin takes here the law, for the natural law, under the which not only
the Jews, but the Gentiles also are under: and this he would prove by two
reasons, 1. because it follows afterward, that every mouth may be stopped:
but the mouths of the Gentiles could not be stopped by the written law, which
was not given unto them. 2. the Apostle also says afterward, that by the law
comes the knowledge of sin: which is not the written, but the natural law:
for both Cain, and the brethren of Joseph did confess and acknowledge their
sin, before yet there was any law written. Contra. 1. The Apostle infers
not, that every mouth is stopped by the written testimonies, but that general
word is used, least the Jews should think themselves excluded: so then not
that writing, but the thing written, that all men are sinners, serves to
stop all men's mouths, and especially the Jews: it conuinceth both Jews and
Gentiles; the Jews both for the manner, because the written law, was given
unto them, and for the matter also, they were sinners: the Gentiles it
conuinceth, for the matter, they were guilty of all these sins. 2. Though
law be there taken generally both for the natural and written law, by the
which came the knowledge of sin (and yet both Cain and Joseph's brethren had
beside the natural law, instructions received from their fathers:) yet in this
place it is evident, that the Apostle means the written and speaking law,
whatsoever the law says.

2. Origin beside has here an other strange conceit, he thinks that not
only men, but Angels and spirits are here said to be under the law, because
they also have a law and rule given them to be ordered by: but seeing the
Angels are not saved by faith in Christ, which the Apostle treats of here,
and he says directly, that by the works of the law no flesh shall be justified
in his sight, the angels can not be said to be under the law, for they are not
in the flesh.

3. Theodoret here has this distinction: that the law says thus to them which
are under the law, sea non de ijs, but not only, of them: for the Prophets
have many comminations concerning the Egyptians, Babylonians, and other
nations: Pererius also has this observation, that when as any prophecy is
directed against other nations, they are touched by name: but those things,
which are set down in general and absolutely without any such particular
direction, do properly appertain unto those who are under the law, etc. And
although the Scripture make mention of other nations, yet the special intent
thereof is to profit the Church of God: Faius.

4. Now the occasion of these words of the Apostle is this: the Jews hearing
these general sentences, setting forth the iniquity of the world, might
think, that the Gentiles were specially meant, and so shift them off from
themselves: Therefore the Apostle shows, that these things were specially
directed to the Jews: and that by these three arguments. 1. from the relation,
which the law has to them, to whom it is given; it seems specially to
concern them: therefore, because the Scriptures wherein these things were
found written, were given unto the Jews, to them they were specially directed.
2. from the end, that every mouth should be stopped: if the Gentiles should be
understood, and not the Jews also, then they might have somewhat to glory in,
and to exalt themselves against God: therefore, that all occasion of boasting
should be taken away, even the Jews are convinced by these testimonies to be
sinners. 3. an other end is, that not only all occasion of boasting should be
taken away, but that the whole world should be found (...), guilty and
culpable before God: Chrysostom by this word understands him, qui sibi ipsi
a^ defensionem non sufficit, who is not sufficient or able to defend himself:
but it signifies more, one that is guilty and subject to condemnation. Pareus.

5. Tolet thinks not this to be the occasion, to meet with such a secret
objection of the Jews, for they could not be ignorant (says he) but that
whatsoever was written in the Scriptures, was spoken to them: but rather to
show the reason, why they could not be justified by the law, because the law,
which was given unto them, condemned them: annot. 11. Contra. The Jews did
know that the Scriptures did speak unto them, but not of them, they might
flatter themselves, as though such things were uttered against the Gentiles:
and therefore as Augustine says, in Iudaeis confringenda erat: superbia, etc.
the Jews pride was to be taken down: exposit. epist. ad Galat. and both these
may very well stand together, that an objection of the Jews is met withal,
and a reason also showed, that the law which condemned them, could not justify
them.

6. But the Psalm, whence the Apostle alleges his first words, touches
those which said, there is no god, Psalm. 14.1. but so did not the Jews:
Hierome answers, they did confess God with their mouth, sed factis negabant,
but denied him in their works.

23. Quest. How no flesh is justified by the works of the law, v. 20.
1. By the works of the law: in that he decrees justification to the very
works, not to the persons or workers only, it is evident, that the places
before alleged, as v. 10. there is none righteous, no not one, are to be
understood generally of all, and not of the most, although some should be
excluded, that did some good works either among the Jews or Gentiles: for
even the works of the law, which they did, were not able to justify them:
Melancthon.

2. By the works, are not here understood, those quae praecipiuntur, which are
commanded and required by the law: for if a man could perform those works, he
should find life thereby: but such, quae praestantur, which are performed of
men, Beza: either before grace, which can not justify, because they can not be
good, or acceptable to God without faith: or in the state of grace, which can
not justify neither, because they are imperfect, Pareus.

3. By the law, here he understands, both the natural, whereby the Gentiles
were convinced, and the written law, given to the Hebrews: for the Apostle
disputes generally against both the Gentiles and Hebrews, proouing them both
to be transgressors of the law, and so not able to be justified thereby:
Pareus: and by the works of the law, are understood not only the ceremonials,
and judicials, as the ordinary gloss. but the moral works, which the Gentiles
did by the light of nature: for otherwise the Jews only should be excluded,
whereas the disputation of the Apostle is general both against Jews and
Gentiles: Pareus^ Tolet.

4. The word flesh is diversely taken in Scripture: it signifies the humane
nature of man, as Ioh. 1.6. the word was made flesh: or the corruptible and
mortal state of man, as when the Apostle says, flesh and blood can not
inherit the kingdom of God: or the sinful state and condition of man, in
which sense it is said, they that are in the flesh can not please God: in
which sense Origin would have it taken here: that they which are carnal, not
spiritual, a^^ denied justification by works: but in this sense the meaning of
the Apostle should be much perverted, who generally affirms, that there is no
justification for any by the works of the law, but by faith: but yet the
Apostle uses this word flesh, to put man in mind of his fresh condition and
state, being not apt of it self to bring forth any thing that is good: Beza.

5. To justify is taken three ways: first to make one actually and verily
just: so if any man could perfectly keep the law, he should thereby get an
habitual and inherent justice: secondly, it signifies to be counted and
declared just, as wisdom is said to be justified of her children: and
thirdly, it signifies, to forgive, discharge, and acquit sins: and so is it
taken here: that no man is justified by the works of the law: that is,
thereby finds forgiveness of his sins, and so is taken for just before
God: but this justification is by faith in Christ, by whom we are acquitted of
our sins, and clothed with his righteousness: Martyr.

6. The Apostle adds, in his sight: to show a difference between
justification and righteousness before men, which may be attained unto by
works, and the perfect righteousness, which God requires: sometime this
phrase, in Gods sight, is used to show a difference between that
righteousness which is but in show, and hypocrisy, and that which it in
truth: as in this sense, Zachary and Elizabeth, are said to have been just
before God, Luke 1.6. sometime it distinguishes between the righteousness,
even of good men, and the righteousness before God: as the Apostle grants
that Abraham had wherein to glory before men in respect of his works, but not
before God, Romans 4.1. and so the Apostle takes it here: It is Christ only
that makes us holy and unblameable, in the sight of God, Coloss. 1.22. Beza.
And further these reasons may be yielded hereof, why none can be justified by
works in Gods sight, though before men they may. 1. in respect of the Majesty
of God, and most perfect purity of his nature, before whom the very Angels
do cover their faces, and feet, Isay, 6. and the heavens are not clean in
his eyes, how much more is man abominable, Job. 15.15. 2. God looks not unto
the outward show, but to the inward disposition of the heart, which is perfect
in none. 3. the law of God is spiritual, and requires exact obedience of
Gods commandments: so that he which offends in one is guilty of all, Iam.
2.10. this perfection none can attain unto: Pareus.

Quest. 24. How the Apostle here denies justification by works, seeing he
said before, c. 2. v. 13. that the doers of the Law are justified.
1. The ordinar. gloss. gives this solution, secundum ceremonialia intellige,
understand this according to the ceremonials: he thinks that the Apostle
speaks here of the ceremonial works of the law, whereby none are
justified: but in the other place of the moral works, which do instifie: But
the Apostle here even excludes moral works, for of the moral law the words
following are specially understood, by the law comes the knowledge of sin.

2. Caietan thinks that the Apostle speaks here of justification before
God, there of the justice of works before men: but the very words of the text
do overthrow this interpretation: for even in that place the Apostle speaks
of those which are righteous before God, which are not the hearers, but the
doers of the law.

3. Ambrose to this purpose, lex temporalem habet iustitiam, fides aeternam,
the law may give a temporal kind of justice, but faith an everlasting: be
thinks that men are said here not to be justified by works, that is, without
faith: but yet a temporal kind of justice they might have by the law without
faith: But the Apostle in both places, as has been said, speaks of true
justice and righteousness before God.

4. The modern Papists tell us here of two iustifications, the first which is
by faith only without works, the second, which is by works which proceed of
faith and grace: of the first speaks the Apostle here, as they think, and of
the other in the former place, Romans 2.13. Perer. disput. 8. to the same purpose
Tolet, that the Apostle speaks here of works going before faith, which do
not justify, there of works which follow faith: the other do justify in
increasing justification which was begun before by faith, annot. 13.

Contra. 1. This is but a Popish fiction of the first and second justification:
the Apostle is saying, Romans 8.30. whom he justified, he glorified, makes but
one justification, after the which follows glorification. 2. even the Apostle
excludes here the works of the regenerate, which may appear by these
reasons. 1. because there need no question to be made of the works of carnal
men, which are evil, because they are without faith: there can be no show at
all, that such works should justify. 2. the works of Abraham were the works
of grace, which the Apostle excludes from justification, c. 4.2. 3. This is
the reason, why works cannot justify, that all occcasion of rejoicing may be
taken away from men, and every mouth may be stopped: but now, if men might be
justified by their works after they are called, and have faith, they might
glory in such works, by the which (they say) they do merit, and which (in
their opinion) proceed in part from man's own free will.

5. Some think that the Apostle, Romans 2.13. speaks ex hypothesi, by way of
supposition, that the doers of the law shall be justified, that is, if any
could keep and perform the law, they should thereby be justified: But here
he simply denies justification to works, because no man is able to keep the
law, Pareus. This is a good distinction, and in other places it may well be
received, where the Scriptures seem to attribute much unto the law, as he that
does these things shall live thereby: But here it is not so fit, for in that
place, Romans 2.13. the Apostle encreateth not of the causes of justification,
but only shows who they are, which shall be justified, not hearers and
professors, but doers and followers.

6. Peter Martyr says, that when justification seems to be ascribed unto
works, it must be understood in respect of faith and grace, wherewith they are
joined: as a man is said to be a reasonable creature, yet in respect of his
soul only, though he consist both of soul and body: yet it is faith
properly that justifies, and not works, which follow faith: But the Apostle
does not at all in that place, or any other, ascribe justification before God
unto works.

7. Wherefore the best solution is this, that here S. Paul disputes indeed of
the proper and true causes of justification, which he simply denies unto
works, and gives unto faith: but there he shows who, and upon what
condition men are justified, and who are not justified, namely, such as having
a lively faith do bring sorth the fruits thereof, and do their endeavor to
keep the law are justified: as the Apostle in the same sense had said before,
c. 2.6. that God will reward every man according to his works. And in the
like sense Christ shall say unto the righteous in the day of judgment, Matthew.
25.34. Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you,
for when I was hungered, ye gave me meat: he shows not the cause of their
salvation, but the condition, state, quality of those which should be saved:
to this purpose, Faius. see further before c. 1. quest. 26. and controv. 7.

Quest. 25. How by the law came the knowledge of sin.
1. The Apostle here confirms that which he said before, that none are
justified by the works of the law, by the contrary use of the law, because
thereby comes the knowledge of sin: therefore justice and righteousness is
not attained thereby.

2. The law, Origin understands of the law of nature: Augustine only of
the moral law, lib. de spirit. and liter. c. 8. but indeed the law is
understood here in general: both the natural, for even before the law
written, by the law of nature, Abimelech knew that adultery was sin, Genes.
20. but the moral more, by the which came a more full knowledge of sin:
likewise by the ceremonial and judicial law sin was manifested, but after
a diverse manner, ex accidente, accidentally, because the one was appointed in
expiationem, for the expiation, the other in poenam, for the punishment of
sin, Tolet. annot. 14.

3. Now diverse ways does the written law, whereof the Apostle specially
speaks, reveal sin. 1. Ambrose shows that before the law written there
was some knowledge of sin, as he gives instance in Joseph, who detested the
sin of adultery, to the which his mistress enticed him: but it is so said,
quia lex ostendit peccata non impune futura, because the law shows, that
sins shall not go unpunished: so also Theodulus. 2. and by the written law,
peccata clarius fuerunt cognita, sins were more evidently known: and some
were known to be sins, that were not so taken before, leviora quaque non
cognoscebantur esse peccata, the smaller sins were not known, as
concupiscence, Hierome: as the Apostle says, he had not known lust, unless
the law had said, thou shall not lust, quaedam etiam grauiora, etc. and some
things by the law were known to be greater, then before, gloss. ordinar. 3.
Oecumenius thus expounds, because sin was increased by the knowledge of the
law, for he that sins wittingly is so much the more a grievous offender. 4.
And before the law written sin was known as being against reason, but by
the law it is discerned, as being against the will of God: and so the nature
and quality of sin, is more fully and perfectly known by the law, Perer.
5. and even the knowledge of sin before the law written, did issue out of
the grounds and principles of the moral law which were imprinted by nature in
the mind, Faius.

4. But whereas the law shows as well, what things are honest, and virtuous,
as it discovers sin: the Apostle only touches that use of the law, which
is to reveal sin: both because it was more pertinent to his purpose, which
was to show, that there is no justification by the law, because thereby we
have the knowledge of sin: and for that men are more prone unto the things
forbidden in the law, then to the duties commanded: so that the law does not
so much teach our duty to God and our neighbor, as that we do not perform
that which is our duty, Beza.

5. Now further, whereas the Apostle says, by the law comes the knowledge
of sin, we must supply the word only: not that the law does nothing else
but reveal sin, for it judges and condemns sin likewise: but here the
opposition is between the knowledge of sin, and the remission thereof: the
law only gives the one, the agnition or knowledge of sin, not the
remission, Perer. by the law is cognitio peccati non consumptio, the knowledge
of sin, not the consumption of sin, gloss.

6. But it will be objected, that in Leuiticus there are oblations prescribed
for sin, and the Priest was to pray for such as had sinned, and it should be
forgiven them: Gorrhan answeareth, that it was only a legal remission, quoad
poenam, non quoad culpam, only concerning the punishment of the law, not of
the fault: But Lyranus answeareth better, that such sacrifice for sin, was
protestatio Christi passuri, a protestation or profession of Christ which was
to suffer: so that such remission of sins though it were under the law, yet
was not by virtue and force of the law, but by faith in Christ: for the sins
of the offerers were forgiven at the prayers of the Priests, which could not be
heard, if they were not of faith.

7. It will here be further objected, that the politic and civil laws of
Princes intend more then the showing of sin, they also do help to reform
sin, and reclaim men from it: therefore Gods law should do more then
manifest sin. Answ. 1. Humane laws do only require an external civil
justice, but the law of God discovers the corruption of the heart, so that
herein there is great difference between them, Melancth. 2. Humane laws may
by proposing of rewards and punishments help to persuade and induce men, but
they cannot instill or infuse obedience into the heart. 3. God also intends
more then the revealing of sin by his law: for if any could keep it, they
should live thereby: which while none is able to do, yet the law beside the
discovering of sin ferueth as a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ: so that
it is thorough man's own infirmity, that the law gives not life: and it
shows Gods power and wisdom that turns the law unto our good, namely, to
bring us unto Christ, which by our infirmity is become unto us the minister of
death.

8. So then there are two other special uses and benefits of the law, beside
the revealing of sin, the one that concerning faith, it is a Schoolmaster to
bring us to Christ, and touching manners and life, it shows us the way
wherein we should walk, Mars.

9. There is a double knowledge of sin by the law: there is one which is
weak and unprofitable, which neither thoroughly terrifieth the conscience, nor
reformeth the life: such was the knowledge, which the heathen had of sin as
the poets in their satyricall verses did set forth the sins of their times,
but themselves followed them: there is an other effectual knowledge of the
law, whereby the soul is humbled: and this is of two sorts: when such as is
joined only with terror of conscience, without any hope, such was the
knowledge of sin, which Cain and Judas had, that betrayed Christ: or it has
beside some lively hope and comfort, such was David's agnition and confession of
his sin: But this comfort is no work of the law, it is wrought in us by the
spirit of grace, Martyr.

Quest. 26. Of the meaning of these words, The righteousness of God is made
manifests without the law.
1. Ambrose by the justice of God understands that justice, wherewith God is
just ^estans promissa sua, in keeping his promises: Origin takes this justice
to be Christ: rather it signifies the justice or righteousness which is by
faith to Christ, so called, both because of the efficient cause thereof, namely
God, who works it in us: and in regard of the effect, because it only is
able to stand before God, Calvin.

2. Without the Law. 1. Origin here understands the law of nature, and
gives thi^ exposition: ad iustitiam Dei cognoscendam nihil opitulabatur lex
naturae, the law of nature did help nothing at all to the knowledge of the
justice of God: but it was manifested by the written law of Moses: but the
Apostle excludes not here the written law: for them it were no consequent
speech unto the former, where the Apostle denied justification unto all works
of the law in general: the same law then must be here understood, which he
treated before, that is, generally both the natural and written law. 2.
Augustine joins this word without the law, not unto manifested, but unto
righteousness, so the righteousness without the law, he expounds, sine
adminiculo legis, without the help of the law, lib. de spirit. and liter. c.
9. but this sense first Beza confuteth by the order and placing of the words,
which stand thus, without the law is righteousness made manifest, not
righteousness without the law: as S. James says, faith without works is dead,
not without works faith is dead: for in this transposing of the words, the
sense is much altered: Tolet adds this reason, that righteousness without
the law, that is, the works of the law, was known even unto the faithful
under the law, therefore the words without the law, must be joined rather
unto manifested, then to righteousness. 3. But yet Tolet is here deceived, for
he thus interprets, absque lege, without the law, that is cossante lege, the
law ceasing and being abrogate, the Evangelical faith was manifested: for
although the works of the moral law are commanded in the Gospel, yet they
bind not by reason of the legal bond or obligation, but by virtue and force of
new institution thereof by Christ: But our Savior faith directly, that he
came not to destroy the law and the Prophets, Matthew. 5.17. but if the moral
law were first abrogated, though it were again revived by Christ, it must
first be dissolved. 4. Ambrose well refers without the law, to manifested:
but he seems to restrain it to the law of ceremonies: sine lege apparuit,
sed sine lege sabbati, and circumcisionis, it appeared without the law, but
without the law of the Sabbath and circumcision, and new Moon, etc. But in
all this disputation the Apostle chiefly entreats of the moral law, by the
which specially came the knowledge of sin. 5. some refer this to the
manifestation of the Gospel by the preaching of the Apostles, when the Gentiles
were called, which had no knowledge of the law, Mart. and many also among the
Jews, which though they had not the law, yet cared not for it, as they say,
Ioh. 7.48. Does any of the rulers or Pharisees believe, in him, but this
people, which knows not the law, Gorrhan, ^^ they understand without the
law, that is, without the knowledge of the law: But the Apostle speaks of
that justice, which was manifested both to the Gentiles and the Jews, which
had yet the knowledge of the law.

6. Gryneus, whereas the Apostle says, first, that righteousness is revealed
without the law, and yet immediately after he says, having witness of the
law and the Prophets, would reconcile them thus: understanding law in the
first place of the letter of the law, which does not set forth the justice of
God by faith, and in the other place the spiritual sense of the law.

7. But the meaning rather of the Apostle is this: that it is not the office of
the law to teach faith: and that beside the law, there is an other doctrine,
in the Church concerning faith: which doctrine of salvation and justice by
faith, neither the natural nor moral law can teach: and though in the time
of the law, this doctrine of faith was taught the faithful, yet the knowledge
thereof came not by the law: And for the full reconciling here of the: Apostle
to himself, three things are to be considered. 1. that in the first place the
law is understood strictly, for the doctrine of the moral law, whether
written or natural, which does not properly teach faith in Christ: afterward
the law is taken for the book^ of Moses; wherein many Evangelical promises
are contained beside the legal precep^^ Beza annot. ^2. The law does properly
urge works, it does not professedly teach faith, and yet it excludes it not,
Pareus: but accidentally it brings us to Christ, as forcing us when we see
our disease to seek for a remedy. 3. this doctrine of faith was manifested
without the law, that is, more clearly taught and preached at the coming of
Christ, yet it was known unto Moses and the Prophets, though more obscurely:
for in that it is said, to be manifested, nor made or created, it shows that
it was before, though not so manifest, Perer. disput. ^0. Faius. So then those
words but now, do both note the diversity of time, and they are aduersatiue
particulars, showing, that our justice is not revealed in the law, but
otherwise and else where.

Quest. 27. How the righteousness of faith had witness of the law and the
Prophets.
Four ways are the law and Prophets found to bear witness and testimony
unto the Gospel of faith. 1. by the evident prophesies of Christ: as our
blessed Savior says, Ioh. 5.46. Moses wrote of me: and S. Paul said before,
c. 2. Which he had promised before by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures: and
S. Peter says, Act. 10.43. To him also give all the Prophets witness: such
evident testimonies out of the law and Prophets are these, which are cited by
the Apostles, as that Romans 10.6. The righteousness of faith speaks on this
wise, say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into heaven? that is, to bring
Christ from above, etc. so the Apostle cites an evident testimony out of the
31. of Jeremy, Hebr. 8.8. how the Lord would make a new testament with the
house of Judah: and many such testimonies in the new Testament are taken out of
the old.

2. A second kind of testimony, were the types and figures which went before
in the old Testament: as the Paschal lamb, the Manna, the rock, the cloud,
did shadow forth Christ: likewise some acts of the Patriarchs and Prophets did
prefigure out Christ, as Abraham's sacrificing of Isaac: Salomons building of
the Temple: Jonas being in the belly of the whale, with such like.

3. The sacrifices and oblations, and the blood of rams and goats did
signify the unspotted lamb of God, that should be slain for the sins of
the world, Mart.

4. The law also by the effect thereof did bear witness unto Christ: as
Augustine says, lex hoc ipso, quod iubendo and minando neminem iustificabat,
satis indicabat, etc. the law in this selfsame thing, that it justified none
in bidding and threatening, did sufficiently show, that man is justified by the
gift of God, etc.

Quest. 28. Of these words, v. 22. The righteousness of Go by the faith of
Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all.
1. Here the Apostle touches first the efficient and principal cause of this
righteousness, which is God, then the material cause Christ with his obedience
both active and passive, in performing the law, and bearing the punishment
thereof for us: then the isntrumental cause, which is faith: and the subject,
wherein this faith is seen, and unto whom it belongs, even unto all and upon
all.

2. The faith of Christ is not here taken actiuely, for the faith which Christ
had, but passiuely for the faith, whereby Christ is had and possessed: And by
faith here is not understood a general assent only, or naked knowledge, but a
firm persuasion of the heart, joined with a sure and certain knowledge of
things hoped for: as the Apostle joins both together, Hebr. 11.1. defining
faith, to be the ground of things hoped for, there is the assurance and
confidence: and the evidence of things which are not seen, there is the
knowledge.

3. This faith does not justify, effective, as working an habitual justice in
us, nor materialiter, materially, as though faith in it self were that,
whereby we are justified: but it justifies obiective, as it apprehends
Christ: and organice, iustrumentally, as it applies the righteousness of
Christ, to them which believe, Pareus.

4. Further concerning faith, it differs much from opinion, suspicion,
science, or knowledge: opinion, though it incline unto the truth, yet it is
uncertain and doubtful, so is not faith: suspicion gives but a weak assent,
but faith is a firm and sure persuasion: as opinion is an uncertainty of the
judgment, so is suspicion in the will and assent, neither are in faith:
knowledge brings a firm assent, but it is by demonstration of reason: now
faith believes beyond reason: And of faith there are two kinds: one is a vain
and temporary faith, which is fruitless and without charity, as in the
parable of the sower, some seed fell in stony and thornie ground; such faith
justifies not; there is a lively and effectual faith, which is only in the
Saints; and this is the true justifying faith; which yet admits diverse
degrees, in some it brings forth thirty, in some sixty, in some an hundred
fold: there are two impediments of faith, the one is curiosity, to seek fully
to comprehend the things which we believe, the other is doubtfulnesse to be
uncertain of them: Both these Basil touches writing of faith, ne contendas
videre ca, qua precul reposita sunt, neque eae quae sperentur, ambigua statuas,
strive not to gaze upon those things, which are set far off, neither hold
uncertain the things hoped for, Mart.

5. Here it shall not be amiss to note the diversity of phrases which the
Apostle uses, when he speaks of faith: it is called the righteousness of
God, c. 1.17. and of or from God, Philip. 3.10. righteousness by faith, c.
3.22. and of faith, c. 5.1. righteousness without works, c. 3.28. the
righteousness of faith, c. 4.11.13. righteousness in the blood of Christ, c.
5.9. righteousness by the obedience of Christ, c. 5.19. righteousness not our
own: Philip. 3.9. righteousness imputed of God, c. 4. v. 6.10.

6. And whereas it is added, toward all, and upon all. 1. Some do thus
distinguish, that the first ( all) notes the Jews, the second the Gentiles,
Oecumen. some by the first understand the Apostles, by the second those which
were afterward called: Anselme, super omnes, upon or above all, interprets,
supra captum omnium, above the teach or capacity of all: But this is rather
doubled to show, neminem excludi, that none of the faithful are excluded,
Pareus: and in that he says above or upon all, Gods ouerflowing justice is
signified, which ouerfloweth as waters, Faius. 2. But this universal particle
( all) must be restrained only unto those which believe: for as Ambrose says,
habet populus Dei plenitudinem suam, etc. the people of God have a certain
fullness, and specialis quaedam censetur vniuersitas, etc. and there is a
special kind of universality, when the whole world (of the elect) seems to
be delivered out of the whole world, etc. de vocat. gent. lib. 1. c. 3.

Quest. 29. What it is to be deprived of the glory of God, v. 23.
1. Origin understands these words, effective, by way of the effect: quomodo
auderes peccator gloriam Deodare, how should the sinner presume to give glory
unto God: the praise of God is not seemly in a sinners mouth. 2. Oecumenius
takes the word (...), literally, thus interpreting, they are left behind, post
tergum est gloria and beneficentia Dei, the glory and beneficence of God, is
behind thy back: that is, Gods grace does prevent thee: because a man is
justified freely without his own works. 3. Some by the glory of God understand
justification, whereby Gods glory appears, Lyran. per quam gloriosus
apparet, by the which the Lord appears glorious: so also gloss. ordinar.
Hugo, Gorrhan. 4. Faius by this glory understands that image of God in
righteousness and holiness, after the which man was created: which man has
blotted out by his fall: so also Martyr applies it to the corruption of man's
nature. 5. Theodoret takes this glory for the presence of the grace of God:
in which sense the arc of the covenant was called the glory of God, because
there he showed himself visibly present: as when the Philistians had takes the
Arc, it is said, the glory is departed from Israel, 1. Sam. 4.22. 6.
Melancthon by glory would have understood, that grace, acceptance, and
approbation, which men have with God, being justified by faith: so also
Osiander, Tolet, Caietan, understand glori^^ hominis apud Deum, the glory of
man, that is his acceptance with God: and there is here a secret opposition
between glory with men, which we may attain unto by works, as the Apostle
shows, c. 4.2. and glory with God: to this purpose also Calvin and Piscatur.

7. Wherefore with Chrysostom we here understand rather the glory of eternal
life: he that offends God, non ad eos pertinet, quibus ascribenda est gloria,
does not appertain unto those, to whom eternal glory shall be ascribed: and
so Beza also well gives the sense of the word (...), which is used of those
which came short in the race, and cannot attain unto the mark or price, that
is set before them: so also Gryneus, they cannot attain ad metam vitae illius
gloriosae, to the mark of that glorious life, which is set before us in
heaven: of this glory the Apostle spoke before, c. 2.10. to every one that
does good, shall be glory, and honor: the meaning then is, that all men by
their sin, are strangers, and as banished men from God, and his kingdom,
which is not recouerable by man's works, neither is there any way to come unto
God, and everlasting salvation, but only by faith in Christ: So that all
religions whatsoever are condemned beside the Christian faith, as not being
able to bring us unto God, Pareus.

Quest. 30. Of justification freely by grace, v. 24.
1. Here the Apostle expresses all the causes of our justification. 1. the
efficient, which is the grace of God, that is, not the doctrine of the Gospel
freely revealed, as the Pelagians vnsterstand it, nor the graces of the spirit
infused, as the Romanists: but by the grace of God we understand, the free
mercy and goodness of God toward mankind. 2. the formal cause and manner, is
in that we are freely justified without any merit of our own: the word (...),
freely, is sometime taken in an other sense, as Galat. 2.22. if righteousness
were by the law, then Christ died (...), without cause: but here it signifies
firely. 3. the meritorious and working cause is Christ Jesus, who has redeemed
us, and the isntrumental cause, is faith. 4. the end in respect of us, is our
salvation and justification: in respect of God, the manifestation of his
righteousness to his glory.

2. Thorough the redemption. 1. This word is taken improperly for any
deliverance out of danger, as God is said to have redeemed his people out of
the thraldom and captivity of Egypt: but properly it signifies such
deliverance, as when any thing being in an others occupying, is freed and
exempted, by paying the price: and such redemption is either corporal, as when
men are delivered from external and corporal bondage; or spiritual: such is
our redemption by Christ: whose death, the price of our redemption, was in
respect of the deed corporal, being historically done, but in regard of the
effect and fruit it was spiritual, in redeeming us from the spiritual bondage
of sin, the devil, and hell. 2. This redemption is taken two ways, either
properly for the very work of our redemption purchased by the death of Christ:
or for the effect thereof, the consummation of that work of our redemption in
everlasting life: as it is taken, Romans 8.22. Pareus.

3. But it will be objected, that we are not freely justified, seeing that
Christ has paid the ransom for us: how then is that said to be freely done,
where a price is paid? Answ. It is free ex part hominu^, on man's behalf,
because no price for their redemption is exacted of them: but ex part Christi,
on Christ's part it was not free, because he paid a most sufficient, and exact
price for our redemption: So the Prophet says, Come buie without money, Isa.
55.1. they are said to buie salvation, because it is bought for them by
Christ, and yet without money; because Christ paid the debt for them: Tolet.
So in the work of our redemption are seen both the justice, and free mercy
of God: the first, in that Gods wrath was so testified by the death of Christ:
the other toward us, in that God has given his sin freely to die for us.

31. Quest. How God is said to have proposed or set forth Christ to be our
reconciliation.
1. Whom God has set forth or proposed: Ambrose reads, disposed, and some
understand it of the public exhibiting and proposing of Christ in the
preaching of the Gospel, Tolet. but this word rather shows the everlasting
purpose and decree of God from the beginning of the world, to give his son
for our redemption: so is the word (...) taken Romans 8.28. even to them, that
are called of his purpose. Faius. And hence may two objections be answered: 1.
how it might stand with the justice of God, that his most innocent Son should
die for others. Answ. This was Gods purpose from the beginning of the world: it
was the decree of the whole Trinity, that the Son of God should be the
Redeemer of the world: yea and Christ also offered himself, 1. Tim. 2.8.
Faius. 2. Some object, how the death of Christ, and whence it should have
virtue to reconcile us unto God: what proportion is there between the infinite
sea of men's sins, and the short death of Christ, that was not extended beyond
three days. Answ. The virtue of Christ's death depends of the purpose of God:
he so appointed, decreed, and purposed, that by this means the world should be
redeemed: the Lord in his infinite power, could have appointed other means:
but he thought none fitter for the recovering of our decayed estate: Pareus.

2. Christ is called (...), the reconciliation: which some think may be taken
in the masculine gender, that he is our reconciliator: Tolet. annot. 21. where
there is a manifest allusion unto the propitiation of the Arc, which was
called cappareth, the propitiatory: Christ was then signified by that golden
propitiatory, which covered the Arc, from whence the Lord delivered his
oracles. Origin is here somewhat curious in his typical applications: by the
gold understanding the purity of Christ, by the length and breadth, his
divinity and humanity: but I omit them as too curious observations: Beza
thinks, that the Apostle in saying whom God (...), has proposed, alludeth
unto the propitiatory, which was then kept within the veil, but now is
publicly proposed, and exhibited, that veil being removed: but the Apostle,
in this word proposed, has reference rather to the purpose and counsel of
God, as is before showed.

3. Through faith in his blood: 1. by blood is understood by a synecdoche, the
whole sacrifice of Christ, which was the consummation of his obedience: And he
says in his blood, that is, by his blood, as the instrument of our redemption:
for there are two instruments of our redemption; one on Christ's part, his death
and shedding of his blood; the other on ours, which is our faith, Mart. these
words, in his blood, some do refer unto the word reconciliation, Theodoret,
Anselme, Tolet: some unto the next words before, ( through faith) as the Syrian
interpreter: But it may very well be joined with both, that our reconciliation
was purchased by Christ's blood, and Christ's blood can not profit us, unless we
believe it to have been shed for us. Pareus.

32. Quest. How we are said to be justified freely, seeing faith is required,
which is an act in the believer.
1. This objection may further be urged thus: that is freely bestowed, which is
conferred without any help or work in the receiver: seeing then a man must
bring faith, which is a work of the will, how is he said to be justified
freely?

Ans. 1. Tolet first has this answer, that we are said to be justified freely
through faith; because faith is the free gift of God: and it is given us freely
to merit our salvation by faith: But he himself misliketh this answer: for to
be justified freely, and by the merit of faith in any other gift, it can not
stand together: for where merit and work is, the wages is not counted by
favor, and so freely, but by debt, Romans 4.4.

2. The better answer then is, that we are justified freely, although the
condition of faith be required, because faith does not justify, vt actus
quidem noster est, as it is an act of ours: but all the virtue thereof
proceeds from the object: as the Israelites being healed by looking upon the
brazen serpent, obtained not their health, by the very act of opening their
eyes, but by the object, which they beheld, which was the serpent: And like as
when a rich man gives his alms unto the poor, though he stretch out his hand
to receive it, yet is it said notwithstanding to be a free gift. Tolet. annot.
20. 3. But add here further, that as when a blind man puts forth his hand,
but he that gives is feign to direct it, to receive the alms: or if a man
have a weak and withered hand, which he is not able to stretch out, unless
the other that gives do lift it up: in this case every way the gift is free:
So our will is not of it self apt to believe, or will any thing aright,
unless the Lord direct it: faith then being both the work of God in
straining our will, and faith receiving all the virtue from the object which it
apprehends, namely Christ: it remains, that faith notwithstanding, we are
justified freely. Faius.

33. Quest. v. 25. To declare his justice or righteousness, what justice the
Apostle understands here.
1. Chrysostom understands the declaration of Gods justice by the effects
thereof: like as God declares his riches, not that he is rich in himself, but
in making others rich: and his power, not in that he ever lives himself, but
in raising others to life: so his justice is declared, not in being just in
himself, but in making others just. But this justifying of sinners is a work
of Gods mercy, not of his justice.

2. Theodoret herein will have Gods justice to be manifested, because he did
sustain the sins of the world with patience, forbearing to punish them: but
this likewise was an effect of his goodness and mercy, not of his justice.

3. Ambrose understands this justice of God in keeping, and performing his
promise: but the justice of God is not here to be taken in a diverse sense, then
before v. 22. the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ.

4. Some do take the justice of God here, for his goodness, mercy, and
clemency: as the Prophet David uses to pray, Judge me according to thy
righteousness, that is, thy goodness, Pareus: but this seems not to be so
proper here.

5. Some understand the justice of God, in not leaving sin unpunished, Lyran.
it was the justice of God, that the price of our redemption should not be paid
otherwise, then by the blood of Christ: but this is not the justice of faith,
which the Apostle spoke of before.

6. Therefore this justice, which the Lord manifested and declared, is none
other but the righteousness of faith, before touched: and as the words here
following do show, by the forgiveness of sins: God revealed and manifested
this to be the true justice, whereby men are justified before him, even the
righteousness of faith: so August. lib. de spir. and lit. cap. 13. Anselme,
Tolet, Osiander.

34. Quest. What is meant by sins that are past, v. 25.
1. Some think that this is understood of the fathers in the law, which were
kept in Limbus, who though thorough remission of their sins, they were freed
from punishment, yet they were not received unto glory: gloss. ordin. Gorrhan.
But Tolet confuteth this interpretation, (though he allow the opinion) as not
agreeable to the Apostles mind: for the words are not to be so limited and
restrained: but generally the Apostle understands such sins as he spoke of
before, v. 23. All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God. And if
the sins were not yet remitted until Christ's coming unto the Patriarks,
they could not be freed, no not from the punishment. 2. The Novatians
understand those former sins, which were passed, of sins going before
vocation and justification, denying all remedy unto sins committed
afterward: But this were to make the death of Christ of small force, if there
were no place for forgiveness, even after one is justified: David fell into
those two grievous sins of murder and adultery after he was called, and yet
was restored again. 3. Catharinus with other Romanists, understand likewise
sins going before justification and baptism: the rest that follow after,
they say must be purged by other means, as by repentance and satisfaction: But
the Apostle speaks generally of all sins, If any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just, 1. Ioh. 2.2. Christ is our
advocate as well for sins before baptism, as after: but see more for the
confutation of their error among the Controversies. 4. The Apostle then
compares not the persons, but the sins and the times, and shows, that even
the sins committed under the law, and from the beginning of the world, were
redeemed by no other way, then by faith in Christ: God by his patience did
forbear to punish those sins, as not imputing them, because of the Redeemer
which was to come. Agreeable hereunto is that place, Heb. 9.15. For this cause
is he the Mediator of the new Testament, that thorough death, which was for
the transgression in the former Testament, they which were called might receive
the promise of everlasting inheritance: By conference of these places together,
it is evident, that by sins that are past are meant not the sins going
before baptism, or justification, but the sins committed under the old
Testament, to show that there was no remission of sins from the beginning of
the world, but by faith in Christ. And this further appears, because the
Apostle faith, v. 26. to show at this time his righteousness, etc. he sets
the present time of the Gospel, and the revelation of grace against the former
times.

35. Quest. Why the Apostle only makes mention of sins past.
Now the Apostle so extends the effect and fruit of our redemption by Christ,
unto the sins passed, as that the sins present, and to come also, shall be
by virtue thereof remitted: but he makes mention only of the sins past and
before committed for these reasons.

1. Hereby the Apostle shows the imbecillitie of the law of Moses, and the
ceremonies thereof, that they were expiationes non verae, sed vmbratiles, not
true expiations, but only in shadow, Pareus: as the Apostle says, Heb. 9.9.
that those gifts and sacrifices could not make holy concerning the conscience:
and so Thomas yields this reason upon this place, God remitted the sins
before passed, quae lex remittere non potuit, which the law could not remit.

2. Adamus Safhout adds, that the Apostle makes mention only of former
sins, to signify, non deinceps vivendum esse peccatis, sed iustitiae, that
we should not live afterward unto sin, but unto righteousness: for it were a
sign of great unthankfulness, having received so great a benefit in the
forgiveness of sins past, if we should estsoone fall into the same again.

3. Pererius gives two other reasons, first, that because it seemed an hard
and impossible thing, that sins before done should be remitted by the
Redemption of Christ following many years after: for the cause must be
secundum existentiam, have a being before the effect: therefore the Apostle to
take away this scruple and difficulty, makes express mention of precedent
sins, to the which the virtue of Christ's death was applied by faith.

4. But Pererius other reason is false and frivolous: that those former sins
are mentioned to show, that there was no full remission of them: for though
they were remitted quan^^^ ad culpam and poenam aeternam, in respect of the
fault and everlasting punishment: Perer. disput. 15. numer. 73.
yet the fathers until Christ's coming were kept in Limbo, and had no entrance
into heaven, ^at seeing by the blood of Jesus their sins were remitted, they
also by the virtue of the same blood had power to enter into heaven: as the
Apostle says, Hebr. 10.19. By the blood of Jesus we may be bold to enter into
the holy place. And again, v. 14. he says, With one offering has he
consecrated for ever, them that are sanctified: if then the believing fathers
of the old Testament were sanctified by Christ's blood, they were consecrated
for ever, that is perfectly: but more follows afterward of this matter among
the Controversies.

5. The true reason therefore, why the Apostle gives instance in sins, which
were past, is to show, that from the beginning of the world, there was no
remission of sins, from Adam unto Moses, and from Moses unto Christ, but
only by faith in his blood: And therefore John Baptist points at Christ, and
says, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world: Some
do allege that place, Apoc. 13.4. whose names are not written in the book
of life of the Lamb, which was slain, from the beginning of the world: Pareus,
Faius: but this place seems not to be so fitly alleged to that purpose: for
these words, from the beginning of the world, are rather to be joined with the
former words, whose names are not written in the book of life, etc. from the
beginning of the world: so Aretus distinguishes, whom Beza and Pererius
follow: And so are the words joined, c. 17.8.

6. And further, as hereby is expressed, that all the sins of such as
believed were remitted in Christ which were done before, so much more the
sins of the age then present, and which should be committed afterward, are
forgiven by no other way: as the Apostle says, Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, and the same also is for ever. Pareus.

36. Quest. How God is said to be just, and a iustifier of him which is of the
faith, etc. v. 26.
1. Some understand this justice of God generally of his holiness, vprightnes,
integrity, which appeared in the work of our redemption throughout, Pareus:
wherein most of all shined forth the power of God, his wisdom, and benignity
unto man: his power in justifying the wicked, which was no less work, then in
first creating him: his wisdom in justifying him by the death of Christ: so
fit and convenient a mean for the reparation of man: his benignity appeared,
in being so mindful of man, as to appoint a way for his redemption: Hugo.

2. Ambrose does understand God to be just, that is, faithful in keeping his
promises: so also Beza.

3. Some thus interpret: just, that is, benignus and bonus, good and gracious:
Osiand. but Gods justice is one thing, his clemency an other.

4. Tolet understands God to be just, in that he would not be satisfied for
the sin of man, non accepto pretio sanguinis, unless he had first received
the price of Christ's blood: so also Pareus.

5. Oecumenius applies it to Gods justice, which should be showed in the just
punishment of those, which should refuse grace offered: but the Apostle
speaks of the time present, not to come.

6. The meaning then is this: that he might be just, that is, appear and be
acknowledged only to be just, and all men liars, that is, sinners and unjust,
as he said before: and as he is just in himself, so this justice is
communicated unto us by faith in Christ: to this purpose Calvin, Bucer,
Pelican. so also the interlin. gloss, that he might be just, aliter non posse
ipso^vare, otherwise he could not help to justify others, if he were not most
just in himself: God then is only just in himself, and as he is the
fountain of all justice, so he does justify others, by that way, which he
has appointed, namely by faith in Christ.

37. Qu. How rejoicing is excluded not by the law of works, but by the law of
faith.
1. There are two kinds of rejoicing, one is in our redemption purchased by
Christ: whereof the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 1.31. He that rejoices, let him
rejoice in the Lord there is an other rejoicing in man: as the Apostle says in
the same place, v. 29. that no flesh should rejoice in his presence: of the
latter kind of rejoicing, which is in men's works, speaks the Apostle here.

2. But the ordin. gloss understands this de laudabili gloriatione, of the
commendable rejoicing, and by excluded, he understands, manifested or
expressed, as goldsmiths do exclude and set out the stones set in silver: but
this is a very unfit interpretation: the rejoicing which the Apostle will have
here excluded, is the rejoicing before men, as he shows afterward, c. 4.2.

3. By the law of works, he understands not only the ceremonials, and
judicials of the law, which are abolished under the Gospel, as Lyranus: but the
moral also: for the Apostle shows, c. 4.2. that Abraham might rejoice in
works before men, but not with God: where he means works of the moral law:
for the ceremonies were not yet instituted.

4. Neither by the law of works, does the Apostle understand such works as are
done without faith, and by the law of faith, the law of works with faith: but
he excludes all works whatsoever: for seeing that such works (they say)
proceed partly of freewill, then this rejoicing should not be taken away, for
where the freewill of man works, there is merit, and where there is merit,
there is rejoicing. Pareus.

5. By the law of works, and the law of faith, is understood the rule and
doctrine of works, and the rule and doctrine of faith: for in the Hebrew
phrase, the law is taken for the strength of a thing, for doctrine or
direction, as afterward c. 7. he says, the law of the spirit, the law of the
members, the law of the mind. Mart. Faius.

6. And Moses law is called the law of works, not because it only contained
the precept of works, but gave no power or grace to do them: as Tolet. annot.
27. for neither does the Gospel give power by fulfilling of the law to attain
unto salvation: but it is called the law of works, because it required works
and keeping of the law unto salvation: for the Gospel also commands works,
but not with condition thereby to be saved: it is called the law of faith,
because it requires only the condition of faith unto salvation, it says,
believe, and thou shall be saved. Faius. And whereas it will be objected, that
diverse had faith under the law, the answer is, that they had it not by the law,
but by the spirit of grace given unto them. Faius.

7. And whereas the Apostle had said before, v. 20. by the law comes the
knowledge of sin: it seems that even rejoicing is excluded by the law of
works also, which the Apostle denies, seeing the law does not help to
justify, but condemns: But we must consider, that here the Apostle speaks
of the law of works, not in respect of our weakness, that are not able to keep
it, but in regard of the institution thereof, which promises life and
salvation to those, that keep and observe it: Calvin. the next verse being
the 28. see handled at large, with the questions thereout arising, among the
controv. contr. 14. to contr. 22.

38. Quest. Of the difference between these two phrases, of faith, through
faith, v. 30.
Whereas the Apostle says, it is one God, which shall justify the
circumcision of faith, (...), and the uncircumcision, (...), through faith:
this difference of phrase is diversely scanned. 1. Origin thinks the Jews
here called the circumcision to be said to be justified of faith, because
initio ex fide sumpto, etc. they beginning of faith, are perfected by the
fulfilling of works: and the uncircumcised Gentiles are said to be justified
through faith, quia a bonis operibus exorsi, because beginning with good works
they are perfected by faith: But Origin is herein both contrary to the
Apostle, who concluded, that a man is justified by faith (only) without the
works of the law, and to himself, who had said a little before, fidem solam
sufficere ad salutem, that faith only suffices to salvation.

2. Gorrhan shows a more reasonable difference, that the Jews are said to be
justified of faith, the Gentiles through faith; because unto the Jews, faith
is both terminus a quo, and adquem, the term, where they begun their
justification, and where they end: but in the Gentiles it is only terminus ad
quem, the term, unto the which they tend, and where they end: and Calvin
seems to say as much in effect, that the Jews nascuntur gratia haeredes, are
borne as it were the heirs of grace; but to the Gentiles it is adventitium
foedus, a covenant happening unto them otherwise: But in this sense ( of faith)
should be joined to circumcision, not to justified, and if the Jews were of
faith, then they needed not to be justified again through faith.

3. Faius has the like conceit, that by the circumcised of faith, the Apostle
means the believing Jews, which are said to be of the faith, and so he would
have this particle again repeated, that the uncircumcision (of faith) are both
justified through faith: but then the sentence should be very imperfect: and of
faith must be joined to justify, as appears, v. 28.

4. Tolet thinks, that although sometime these prepositions, (...), and
(...), of, and through signify the same thing, yet here the Apostle giving the
one to the Jews, and the other to the Gentiles, seems to make some
difference between them, least he should seem to confound the Jews and
Gentiles together: Tol. annot. 28. But the Apostle in this matter of
justification makes both Jews and Gentiles equal, how soever he otherwise
denies not unto the Jews their prerogatives.

5. Wherefore, in this place it seems rather that the Apostle means the
same thing, to justify of faith, and through faith, and by faith, v. 28. as
the Apostle says, c. 11.36. of him, and through him are all things; not
insinuating by this diversity of phrase, any different thing in God: and
further, as the circumcised Jews are here said to be (...), of the faith, so
are the Gentiles, Gal. 4.7. Thus much therefore the Apostle signifies, that as
there is no difference between these two, to be justified of faith, and
through faith, so neither in this behalf is there any difference between the
justification of the Jew and Gentiles. Calvin.

6. Peter Martyr notes here how the Grecians standing upon the curious and
nice distinction of these two prepositions, (...), if, and per, through,
dissented from the Latin Church about the proceeding of the holy Ghost: they
would have the spirit to proceed ex patre per filium, of the Father by and
through the Son: but the other to take away this difference, affirmed, that
he proceeded, ex patre and ex filio, both of the Father, and of the Son.

39. Quest. How the law is established by the doctrine of faith.
1. Origin and Theodoret think that the law is established by faith, because
the law did write of Christ, and commanded to believe in him: as Deuteronomy. 18. A
Prophet shall the Lord God raise from among your brethren like unto me, etc.
But the Evangelical promises contained in the old Testament, belong rather
unto the Gospel, then the Law.

2. Ambrose understands it of the performing and fulfilling of the
ceremonies: mystica and ceremoniala spiritualiter implentur, the mystical
ceremonies of the law, are spiritually fulfilled: gloss. ordinar. to the same
purpose Hierome: the law is established, when it appears, that one Testament
succeeded an other, one circumcision an other, and spiritual things succeed
carnal, etc. But it is evident that the Apostle specially means the moral
law, by the which comes the knowledge of sin, v. 20.

3. Chrysostom gives this sense, quia fides voluntatem legis statuit, because
faith establishes the will and intent of the law: for the intendment of the
law, was to justify men by the works thereof: now that which the law could not
do, faith effects. But in this point of justification, faith rather is
contrary to the law, for the one requires the condition of works, the other
only of believing.

4. Beza and Pareus in these two points will have the law established, first
because Christ satisfied the punishment of the law in dying for our sins,
according to the sentence of the law, thou shall die the death: and in that
Christ by his perfect obedience has fulfiller the law: But it seems that the
Apostle speaks in general of the establishing of the law in all the members
of Christ, and not in Christ their head only.

5. Therefore in these two things rather is the law established; because by it
comes the knowledge of sin, and the law is a schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ, it shows us our disease, and sends us to the Physician: Faius,
Sasbout: but because this is not the proper effect of the law, otherwise then
by reason of our infirmity; the Apostle is to be understood to speak of the
practice and obedience of the law, which Christ requires of the faithful, who
though they do not look thereby to be justified, yet by the spirit of
sanctification are enabled to walk according to the same: as the law commands
that we should love the Lord with all our heart, and our neighbor as our
self: these precepts every Christian is bound to keep. And in this sense our
Savior specially says, Matthew. 5. I came not in dissolve the Law, but to
fulfill it: so Origin, omnis qui credens Christo been agit, etc. vi^en^^ legem
confirmat, etc. every one which believes in Christ, and does well, does
confirm the law by his life: to the same purpose Augustine; fides impetrat
gratiam, qua lex implet^^, etc. faith obtains grace, whereby the law is
fulfilled, etc. the Gospel gives grace, whereby men are directed to live and
walk according to the law.

Add hereunto, that without faith it is impossible to keep the law, or any
part thereof as the law commands us to love God with all our heart, but no
man can love God, vnles^ he first know him and believe in him. Again, the law
commands the worship of God, whereof invocation is a part: but none can call
upon him, upon whom they have not believed, Romans 10. Mart.

6. Other expositions there be of this place: Caietane says, that faith does
establish the law, because by faith we believe, that God is the author of the
law, without which faith i^ would be of no greater authority with men, then
the laws of Lycurgus and Solon.

7. Catharinus a Popish writer, herein would have the law helped by the
Gospel, because those things, which were handled obscurely in the law, are
manifested openly in the Gospel: the law was kept then thorough a servile
fear, but now under the Gospel for the love of justice: But leaving those and
other like expositions, I insist upon the fifth before alleged, as most
agreeable unto S. Paul.

8. Now then whereas the Apostle in some places speaks of the abrogating of
the law: as Heb. 7.12. If the Priesthood be changed, there must of necessity
be a change of the law: and v. 18. the commandment, that was before is
disanulled, because of the weakness thereof and unprofitableness, etc. he is
not herein contrary to himself, for either the Apostle speaks of the
ceremonial law, as in the first place, but it is the moral law which is
established by faith: or be means that the unprofitable end of the moral
law, which was to justify men, is abrogated: but here he speaks of an other
end, and use of the law, which is to be a direction unto good life; in which
sense the law is established.

9. Thus the Apostle has answered this objection, least he might have seemed
to abrogate the law, because he denies unto it power to justify, unto this
objection he makes a double answer, first in denying that he does not take
away the effect of the law: for where one end of a thing is denied, all are
not taken away: secondly he answeareth by the contrary, he is so far from
abrogating or disanulling the law, that contrariwise he does establish and
confirm it, as is showed before.

4. Places of doctrine.
Doct. 1. Of the pre-eminence or prerogative of the Church.
v. 1. What is the preferment of the Jew, etc. here occasion is offered to
consider of the pre-eminence and excellency of the Church, which consists in
the consideration of the dignity, state, and blessings, wherein it excels
other humane conditions and states: This excellency and pre-eminence of the
Church, is either of nature or grace: but by nature all men are the children of
wrath, one as well as an other, Ephesians. 2.3. therefore all the prerogative of
the Church is of grace.

This prerogative is either common to the old Church of the Jews, and the new
of the Christians, or proper and peculiar: the common is either internal, in
their vocation, justification, sanctification by the spirit, or external, in
their public profession of religion, and adoption to be the people of God,
with their external directions, by the word and sacraments unto salvation.

The peculiar and proper prerogative of the old Church is considered, 1. in
their state, that they were a people severed from the rest of the world, and
joined unto God by a solemn covenant. 2. in the blessings, wherewith they were
endued, which were partly spiritual, as the Scriptures of the Prophets were
committed unto them, they had the legal sacraments of circumcision, and the
Paschal lamb, the Priesthood of Leui: partly temporal, as the inheritance of
Canaan, which was tied unto Abraham's posterity.

The prerogative peculiar unto the Church of the new Testament, consists 1.
in their state, in being an holy people, taken out from the rest of the world,
and consecrated to the worship of God. 2. in their blessings, partly
perpetual, as the doctrine of the new Testament, the sacraments, baptism,
and the supper of the Lord: partly temporal, as the gift of tongues, and
miracles, which the Church had for a time, for the necessary propagation of
the faith, but are now ceased, ex Pareo.

Doct. 2. Of the utility and profit of the divine oracles.
v. 2. Unto them were committed the oracles of God: The Scriptures called here
the divine oracles are profitable to diverse ends. 1. illuminant intellectum,
they do lighten the understanding: Psalm. 19.8. It gives light unto the eyes.
2. inflammant affectum, they inflame the affection: as Luke. 24.32. the two
disciples said between themselves, did not our hearts burn within us, while
he talked with us by the way. 3. mundant culpam, they do cleanse the fault: as
Ioh. 15.3. now are ye clean thorough the word, which I have spoken unto you.
4. conseruant contra tristitiam, they do comfort against heaviness. 5.
roborant ad p^tientiam, they do strengthen unto patience: both these the
Apostle shows saying, Romans 15.4. that we through patience and consolation of
the Scriptures might have hope. 6. fran^^^t cordis duritiam, they break the
hardness of heart, Ierem. 23.29. is not my word like an hammer, that breaks
the stone? 7. protegunt contra tentationes, they defend and protect against the
tentations of the devil, Prou. 30.5. Every word of God is pure, it is a
shield; etc. Ephesians. 6.17. the sword of the spirit is the word of God, Gorrhan.

Doct. 3. Of the combination between God and his Church.
v. 3. Shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? Here are to
be considered tria ingorum paria, three pair of yokes and bands as it were,
between God and us. 1. the covenant and intercourse is between God only and
his elect, as Act. 13.48. th^^ believed as many as were ordained to eternal
life: God has a special care of their salvation, that are ordained unto life.
2. there is a mutual relation between the faith of God, and the elect: the
elect are by faith persuaded of the faith of God, and the truth of his
promises. 3. on Gods behalf there is offered his word, on our part it is
required, that we should keep that worthy thing, which is committed unto us,
2. Tim. 1.14. Gryneus.

Doct. 4. That the Sacraments depend not of the worthiness of the Minister.
As the Apostle here says, shall their unbelief make the faith of God without
effect? howsoever the minister be disposed, the Sacraments want not their force
and efficacy: because they depend upon the truth of God, which the
incredulity or misbeleefe of man cannot make void, Martyr.

Doct. 5. There are always some unbelievers and incredulous persons in the
Church.
Shall their unbelief, etc. Then it follows, that as there were some
unbelievers even among the Jews, so there are still such carnal men and
hypocrites in the Church: and yet it cease not to be a Church: we should not
therefore be afraid, when we see carnal men, and evil livers to remain within
the Church: but consider, that such there must be, as the Apostle says, that
they which are approved may be known, 1. Cor. 11.19. Pareus.

Doct. 6. Who shall judge the world, and how?
v. 6. Else how shall God judge the world? 1. Here we learn that God is the
judge of the world, and he shall judge the world by Jesus Christ, Act. 17.31.
2. and this judgment of God consists both in his knowledge, that nothing is
hid from him, Eccles. 12.14. God will bring every work unto judgment, and
every secret thing: and in his power, whereby he now present both directs,
orders, and disposes every thing, and afterward shall give unto every one
according to his works. 3. God judges two ways, 1. by his word revealed,
which teaches the true faith and worship of God, and discerns the true faith
and doctrine from false: so our Savior says, Ioh. 12.48. the word which I
have spoken shall judge him: This word then ought to be judge of all
controversies: the Church cannot judge because it is a party, as when the
question is, which is the true, which the false Church, here the Church is a
party, therefore the word, and not the Church must be judge: as the law is
the judge of civil controversies: the Church notwithstanding is said to judge
but improperly, when it searches out, and pronounces the sentence of the
word. 2. God judges by his deed and work, both present, in disposing every
thing to that end, which he thinks best, and in proposing examples of his
judgments even in this life, and therefore David says, Psalm. 9.5. thou
sit in the throne, that iudgest right: and by, his judgment to come, in
the final execution of his sentence upon all both good and bad, wherein he
shall reward every one according to his works, ex Pareo.

Doct. 7. Our doctrine must be grounded upon the Scriptures.
v. 10. As it is written: hereupon Origin gives this good note, non nostras
cum docemus, sea spiritus sancti proferamus sententias, let us not bring forth
our own but the sentences of the spirit when we teach, etc. the Preacher of
the truth must confirm his doctrine by the word of truth: for faith must not
be grounded upon any man's word: yea the Berrheans searched and examined the
sermons of the Apostles by the Scriptures, Act. 17.11. Therefore neither are
such preachers to be commended, which are very rare in citing of Scriptures in
their sermons, but they are much more worthy of blame which are more frequent
in the citing of profane testimonies of Philosophers and Poets, and such like,
then of the Prophets and Apostles.

Doct. 8. Of the corruption of man's nature.
v. 10. There is none righteous, no not one. 1. It is evident, that man's nature
is wholly corrupt, as both the Scripture testifies and daily experience
shows. 2. this corruption of nature is a general deprauation and prauitie of
nature, being inclined unto all evil, and by this prauitie and euilnes, it is
made guilty of death. 3. this corruption of mankind is not of God, who created
man good, but of man himself, through the instigation of the devil. 4. it is
general and universal, none are exempted from it, there is none righteous, v.
10. all have sinned, v. 13. 5. the knowledge thereof comes by the law, v.
20. 6. It must be known, confessed, and acknowledged of all, that every mouth
may be stopped, v. 19. and God only may have the glory. 7. the remedy
against this natural prauitie and corruption is by the Redemption thorough
Christ, v. 24. Pareus.

Doct. 9. Of the difference of true and false religion.
v. 19. That every mouth may be stopped: This is a true mark and touchstone
whereby to discern true religion from false: for that religion, which only
gives honor unto God, and denies all power unto man, to help toward
salvation, and so stops man's mouth, and takes from him all ostentation and
vain glory, that is the true religion: whereas on the contrary, that which
gives unto man matter of ostentation and rejoicing, is to be suspected of
falsehood, and hypocrisy: such is the doctrine of Popery, which ascribes much
unto man's free will and merits.

Doct. 10. Of true justification by faith, the manner, property, use, and end
thereof.
v. 21. Now is the righteousness of God made manifest without the law, etc.
from this place to the end of the chapter S. Paul sets forth the doctrine
of justification. 1. how there is a right and true justification, which is by
faith in Christ, and a false justification, by the works of the law. 2. from
the true justification are excluded not only the works of the ceremonial
law, and of freewill, but all works whatsouer, for the law of faith is set
against the law of works in general, v. 27. 3. the first cause efficient of
this justification is the grace of God, the next is redemption purchased by
Christ, v. 24. 4. the matter or object of justification are all believers, v.
22. 5. the form is the imputation and application of Christ's righteousness,
obtained by his obedience and blood. 6. the manner is, through faith in his
blood, v. 25. 7. the end is the declaration of the righteousness of God by
the forgiveness of sins, v. 25. 8. the effect thereof is our reconciliation
with God, v. 25. 9. it is revealed in the Gospel, v. 21. 10. and this
justification was not unknown unto the faithful under the law, having
testimony of the law and the Prophets, ver. 21.

Doct. 11. How God has set forth Christ, and to what end.
v. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation. 1. God has set forth
Christ to be our propitiator and reconciler, 1. Ioh. 2.2. He is the
reconciliation for our sins. 2. to be our Redeemer, v. 24. Through the
redemption that is in Christ. 3. to be our Mediator, 1. Tim. 2.6. Our Mediator
between God and man, etc. 4. to be our doctor and teacher, Matthew. 23.8. One is
your Doctor, to wit, Christ. 5. to be our advocate and intercessor, 1. Ioh.
2.1. We have an advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus the Just. 6. to be our
defender and deliverer, Isay. 19.20. He shall send them a Savior, and a great
man that shall deliver them. 7. to be our Lawgiuer, Iam. 4.12. There is one
Lawgiuer, which is able to save and destroy. 8. to be a faithful and true
witness, Apocal. 3.14. These things says Amen, the faithful and true
witness. 9. to be our judge, Act. 10.42. It is he that is ordained of God,
judge of the quick and dead. 10. to be our Savior, Philip. 3.20. From whence
we look for our Savior even the Lord Jesus: so Christ is all things unto his
servants, reis propitiatore ^aptiuis redemptor, etc. a reconciliation to the
guilty, a redeemer to the captives: a Mediator unto them at variance with God,
a teacher to the ignorant, a lawgiuer to the dissolute, an intercessor to them
accused, a defender to the assaulted, a witness to the defamed, a judge to the
oppressed, and to the elect a Savior, Gorrhan.

Doct. 12. The same faith both under the law and Gospel, v. 25.
Thomas well observes upon this place, that seeing the sins which were
passed and committed under the law were forgiven by no other way then in
Christ, that the righteousness of faith was at all times necessary: as S.
Peter says, Act. 4.12. Among men there is given no other name under heaven,
whereby we must be saved: and S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 14.13. That we have the
same spirit of faith.

13. Doct. Of our redemption by Christ, and the manner thereof.
v. 24. Thorough the redemption, that is in Christ, etc. 1. This our redemption
consists in our deliverance from the power of Satan, sin, and death, and
in reconciling of us unto God. 2. there is a double redemption, the first in
the forgiveness of our sins now present, the second when we shall be redeemed
from corruption and mortality in the resurrection. 3. This our redemption, is
not metaphorically so called: but it is a very true redemption: there being
all things concurring in redemption: the captives, which are men, the redeemer
Christ, the price his blood, and from whom we are redeemed, from Satan, hell,
and damnation: see contr. 22. following. 4. They which detain the captives are
first God as a just Judge, whom they had offended: then Satan as Gods
minister, sin is as the bands, death as the tormentor, hell as the prison,
Pareus loc. 5.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. That the Sacraments of the old Testament did not justify ex opere
operato, by the work wrought, and so consequently neither the new.
There are diverse opinions among the Romanists concerning this point in
question. 1. Some of them think, that the Sacraments of the old Testament did
not justify at all, though they were received in faith: because they were not
given to that end to justify, sed vt oneri essent, but to be a burden: so
Magister sentent. 4. distinct. 1. 2. Some are of the contrary opinion, that
circumcision did justify ex opere operato, by the work wrought, though there
were no faith in the receiver, as Alexander, Bonaventure, Scotus, Gabriel, as
Bellarmine cites them. 3. But the common opinion on that side is, that the
sacraments of the old Testament did only justify and confer grace, ex opere
operantis, by the work or disposition of the receiver; and this they hold to
be the difference between the old sacraments and the new, nostra conferunt
gratiam, illa sola significabant, ours do confer grace, theirs only
signified grace, Bellar. and that those Sacraments did not confer grace
Bellarmine would prove it out of this place, v. 1. What is the profit of
circumcision, etc. to the which question the Apostle makes answer, Much
every way, for chiefly, because unto them were committed the oracles of God:
herein was the pre-eminence of the Jew before the Gentiles, not that he was
justified by his circumcision, but because the Lord gave his oracles to the
circumcised, Bellar. lib. 2. de sacram. c. 14. Now upon this conclusion of
Bellarmine thus it may be further inferred: the sacraments of the old Testament
did not justify by the work wrought, or confer grace: this Bellarmine
grants: but there was the same substance and efficacy of the old and new
sacraments: for the Apostle says, that circumcision was the seal of the
righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. and so is baptism, Col. 2.12. And Christ
was the substance both of their sacraments and ours, for the rock was Christ,
1. Cor. 10.4. the conclusion then follows, that seeing their sacraments did
not confer grace, no more do the sacraments of the Gospel: the difference
then between the old sacraments and the new, is not the substance which is
Christ, and the proper effect thereof, which is to be seals of faith: but in
respect of the more clear signification, and so in the more lively
illustration and confirmation of our faith: for the more full discussing of
this matter I refer the reader to the treatise of controversies, Synops.
Centur. 2. err. 97.

Controv. 2. Of the Apochryphal Scriptures.
v. 2. Unto them were committed the oracles of God: Faius well observes
hereupon, tha^ seeing all the old Scriptures, which were Canonical were
committed unto the Hebrews then those books which were called Apochryphal,
that is, of hidden and obscure authority are not to be accounted any part of
the divine and Canonical Scripture: such are the books o^ the Macchabees, of
Tobi, Judith, with the rest, that go under the name of Apochypha^ for they
were not commended to the Church of the Hebrews, because they are not written
in the Hebrewe tongue: neither did the Jews place them in the canon of the
Scriptures as Josephus sets it down, lib. 1. contra Appion: see further
Synops. Centur. ^^ error 1.

Controv. 3. That the wicked and unbelievers do not eat the body of Christ
in the Eucharist.
v. 3. The Apostle says, Shall their unbelief make the faith of God without
effect: hence then it will be inferred by the Romanists, that the promise of
Christ's presence in the Sacrament is not evacuated, notwithstanding the
unbelief of the communicants.

Answ. True it is that the unbelief of some does not make Gods promises void,
and of none effect, in respect of God himself, who for his part is ready to
perform his promise or covenant, where the condition is performed, and on the
behalf of the elect to whom Gods promises are effectual, they receiving them
by faith: but it follows not that the promises of God should be effectual
unto unbelievers: for Gods promises are made unto those which believe: unto
unbelievers therefore they do not appertain, Pareus.

But it will be further objected, that the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 11.27. that
he which eats and drinks unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood
of Christ: but they could not be guilty, unless they were partakers.

Answ. It does not follow, one may be guilty of a thing, which he is not
partaker of: as many may be guilty of violating the princely majesty, which
had no interest therein, neither were partakers thereof: so then the wicked and
unbelievers are guilty, non manducati, sed non d^^dicati corporis, etc. not of
the eating, but of not discerning the Lords body: Gryneus.

Controv. 4. That the Roman Church has not the promise of the perpetual
presence of Gods spirit.
The Romanists allege this place for themselves: that the unbelief of some
make not the promises of God of no effect: and therefore seeing the Lord has
promised to be present with, and to give his spirit to his Church, they cannot
fail thereof, notwithstanding their sins, and corruptions.

Answ. Christ promised the presence of his spirit to his disciples: they must
then first prove themselves to be the disciples of Christ, in following his
doctrine, and keeping his word, in adding nothing thereto, nor decreeing any
thing against it, before they can have any interest in this promise: God
indeed has promised to be present with his Church: but a company of mitred
Bishops following humane traditions, and leaving the word of God, do not make
the true Church of Christ, Martyr.

Controv. 5. The Virgin Marie not exempted from sin.
v. 10. There is none that is righteous, no not one: Chrysostom handling these
words in his commentary upon the 13. Psalm, gives instance, how that when
Christ was crucified, this saying was then most of all verified, that there was
not one that did good: discipuli omnes fugerunt, etc. all the disciples fled,
John went away, Peter denied: Mariae animam gladius dubitationis and
incredulitatis pervasit, and a sword of doubtfulnesse and unbelief did pierce
the soul of Marie, etc. the like is affirmed by Chrysostom hom. 49. in Genes.
and by Origin hom. 17. in Luc. and by Augustine lib. question. veter. and nov.
Testam. qu. 73. But Pererius refusing the judgment of these fathers,
confidently affirms that the Virgin Marie, fuisse expertem omnis peccati
etiam minimi and levissimi per omnem vitam, was free from the least and
lightest sin all her life: and of Chrysostom he is bold to say, veritatis
and pietatis terminos excessisse, that he exceeded the bounds of verity and
piety, Perer. (...). 6. numer. 33.

Contra. But Pererius in thus affirming will make not Chrysostom only, and
other ancient writers liers, but Christ himself, and his blessed mother: for
if Mary were without the least sin, why did our Blessed Savior reprove her
for taking so much upon her, saying, John 2.4. Woman, what have I to do with
thee? would he check her without any fault? and again Marie her self says
in her song, Luke 2.47. My spirit rejoices in God my Savior: what needed she
a Savior, if she were free from sin? see further hereof Synops. Centur. 2,
^^^. 79.

Controv. 6. The reading of Scripture is not to be denied unto any.
v. 10. As it is written, etc. in that the Apostle alleges testimonies of
Scripture to prove all men to be sinners, thereupon appears the necessity
of the reading of Scripture (...) of the general use for all both laymen and
others: for by the Scriptures comes the knowledge of sin, which concerns
all: Chrysostom in his homily of Lazarus and the rich man exhorts all men
to read the Scriptures, even such as did trade in the world, and kept
families, further showing, that they could not attain unto salvation, unless
both day and night, they were conversant in the Scriptures: yea he affirms
that such of the common sort had more need to read the Scriptures, then men
of more holy life, quod perpetus versantur in maiori discrimine, because they
are conversant in greater danger: Here then that corrupt usage of the Roman
Church is to be taxed, who deny the general use of the Scriptures unto the
people, neither do permit them to read them, shutting the Scriptures up in an
unknown language, Martyr.

Controv. 7. Against the adversaries of the Law, the Marcionites and other
heretics.
v. 20. By the law comes the knowledge of sin: hereupon those wicked
heretics took occasion to speak against the law: malaradix lex, etc. the
law then is an evil root and an evil tree, by the which comes the knowledge
of sin: to this Origin upon this place answeareth well, non dexit ex lege
agnitio peccati, sed per legem, vt scias non ex ipsa ^tum, sed per ipsam
cognitum, he says not of the law is the knowlede of sin, but by the law,
to know, that sin did not spring of it, but is only known by it: As
physic by the which we come to have the knowledge of our diseases, is not
therefore evil: thus Origin.

Controv. 8. Against the Counsels of perfection.
v. 19. That every mouth may be stopped, etc. here the opinion of the
Romanists is evidently convinced, that beside the precepts which are commanded,
there are Evangelical counsels, which are more, then one is bound to do:
notwithstanding he that does them is worthy of a greater reward: such are
these counsels of perfection, as they call them, ^^ vow single life, to give
all to the poor, and to take upon them voluntary poverty, and such like: and
Origin has the like conceit, who in his commentary upon this third chapter
gives this corrupt gloss, upon these words of our Savior, Luke 17.10. When
ye have done all these things, which are commanded you, say we are unprofitable
servants: as long as a man (says he) does that which he is bound to do, he is
an unprofitable servant, si a^^m addas aliquid praeceptis, iam non eris
invtilis servus, but if you add any thing to the precepts, then are you no
longer an unprofitable servant.

Contra. 1. Concerning Origens gloss, we have as great liberty to refuse it
as Pererius had before to reject Chrysostomes opinion concerning the Virgin
Marie, and to accuse him of falsehood and impiety: especially seeing that his
gloss corrupts the text: for if we cannot do those things, which are
commanded, much less beside the commandment, can any do more then is
required. 2. the Apostle here in saying, That every mouth may be ^^ped,
overthrows this arrogant and presumptuous opinion of such counsels of
perfection: for then a man should have wherein to rejoice, if he could do more
then is commanded, and his mouth would not be stopped.

Controv. 9. Against the Pelagians, which established freewill.
Augustine c. 9. lib. de spirit. and liter. handling these words, confuseth
that presumptuous error of the Pelagians: who affirm, that the law only
shows what should be done, and the will of man does it: so homo iustificatur
non per legis imperium, sed per liberum arbitrium, man is justified not by the
precept of the law, but by free will: this error Augustine confuseth by the
Apostles words here, who says, The righteousness of God is made manifest, he
says not the righteousness of man, or of our own will, but the
righteousness o^ God, non qusa Dous iustus est, sed qua induit hominem, cum
iustificat impium, not the^ whereby God is just in himself, but whereby he
does cloth man, when he justifies the sinner.

Controv. 10. That the verity of Christ's death is indifferently extended both
to sins before baptism and after.
It is the opinion of the Romanists, that sins before baptism and after are
not remitted after one and the same manner: for the sins before baptism are
freely forgiven by the merit of Christ's blood: both quoad culpam and poenam
omnem, in respect of the fault, and of all punishment due thereunto: but for
sins after baptism other remedies are requisite, they are remitted freely
for the offense it self, and the eternal punishment, but the temporal
punishment remaining must be purged by satisfactorie and penal works, Perer.
disput. 14. numer. 63. they reason thus.

1. Catharius urges to this purpose this place of the Apostle, v. 25. To
declare his righteousness by the remission of sins past: which he
understands to be the sins before baptism.

2. Pererius urges the example of David, upon whom though his sin were
remitted, yet this was inflicted as a punishment, that the child which was
borne in adultery should die.

3. This course is held also among men, who though they sometime are content to
remit the offense, yet will impose upon the offender some kind of punishment, as
Absalom, though he were reconciled to his father, and called home out of exile,
yet David would not suffer him a good while to come into his presence, Perer.
disput. 24. numer. 65.

4. For these works of penance and satisfaction, the Council of Colen in their
antididugina, do produce these and the like places: as 2. Cor. 2.12. this
godly sorrow, etc. what great care has it wrought in you, yea what
punishment: they imposed a certain punishment upon themselves for their sin:
Apocal. 2.5. repent and do thy first works: these were the works of
satisfaction: ex Martyr.

Contra. 1. It has been before showed, v. 34. that the Apostle by sins
which are passed, understands not sins committed by any in particular,
before baptism, but generally all the sins of the faithful, which were done
under the old Testament before the coming of Christ: to that place I refer
the Reader.

2. That chasticement, which befell David, after his sin was remitted, was
inflicted not as a punishment of his sin, but both as a correction, to make
David more circumspect afterward, and for the example of others, for that he
had caused the enemies of God to blaspheme: and so it is as Chrysostom well
says, Deus imponit nobis poenam, non de peccatis (...) supplicium, sed ad
futura nos corrigens, God imposes punishment upon us, not taking revenge of
our sins, but correcting of us for afterward, homil. de poeniten.

3. If a man forgive a trespass, and yet retain a grudge in his mind still,
to watch the other a shroud turn, therein he shows his infirmity, and God
is no ways like unto man: David kept Absalom from the Court, that the young
man might know himself and be thoroughly humbled: he knew him also to be of
an aspiring and turbulent spirit, and therefore did confine him: but this was
not imposed, as any satisfaction for his former sin.

4. The punishment, which the Apostle speaks of, was that castigation, which
they inflicted upon the incestuous young man, in executing the Apostles
sentence, most severely against him: it was not a punishment laid upon the
offender to satisfy the justice of God for his sin, but to give contentment
and satisfaction to the Church, whom he had offended: And in this sense also a
sinner may take punishment of himself, and so prevent Gods judgment: as the
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 11.31. if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged: not that by any satisfaction Gods wrath is appeased, and his judgment
staid: but God looks unto our repentance, testified by this judging of our
selves, and so in mercy stays his hand.

So also the Church of Ephesus, is bid to repent and do their first works,
not as a satisfaction for their sin, but as signs of true repentance, which
is in vain without amendment of life.

5. But that we are purged from all sin both before and after baptism,
without any works of satisfaction in our selves, the Scripture evidently
testifies, Ioh. 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all
sin: and, Apoc. 1.5. And washed us from our sins in his blood: all our
sins are equally and indifferently purged by the blood of Christ: there is no
difference, whether they be committed before or after baptism, saving that the
^^nnes committed after our calling, as they are more grievous, so they require
a more earnest repentance: See of this controversy further Synops. Centur. 3.
err. 11.

11. Controv. That the believing fathers before Christ, were not kept in Limbo.
Pererius because the Apostle makes mention only of sins before passed and
done, thinks this to be the reason thereof, because the fathers that died
before Christ, though they obtained remission of sins by faith in Christ, yet
detinebantur in Limbo, they were detained in Limbus (which they imagine to be a
dungeon of darkness, and a member of hell) until they were delivered thence by
Christ's descending thither. Perer. disput. 15. number. 73.

Contra. This Popish dream and fancy of this Limbus patrum, may be easily
overthrown, by the Scriptures. 1. he that believes, has everlasting life,
Ioh. 5.24. the Patriarks believed, they therefore had everlasting life: they
were not then excluded heaven. 2. they had the same spirit of faith with us, 2.
Cor. 4.13. but by faith the Saints now departing, are received into the
kingdom of God, therefore they also by faith entered into heaven. 3. the
faithful then departing went to Abraham's bosom, as is evident in the parable,
Luke 16. but Abraham's bosom is in heaven, it is a place of bliss and
happiness: as our Savior says, Matt. 8.11. they shall sit down with Abraham,
Izaak, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven Ergo. See more hereof, Synops.
Centur. 2. err. 9.

12. Controv. Against the Marcionite heretics.
v. 24. Thorough the redemption, that is in Christ: hence the old Marcionite
heretics objected thus, that man was not the workmanship or creature of God:
nemo enim emit, quod suum est, for no man uses to buie, that which is his own
already. But Origin takes away this cavil, hom. 6. in Exodus omnes eramus
Dei, etc. we were all sometimes belonging unto God, but we sold away our selves
for our sins: then Christ came, and by the price of his blood redeemed us
again, and restored us to our former liberty: so the Prophet Isai says,
50.1. For your iniquities are ye sold. Now, whereas in Scripture redemption is
taken sometime for a frank deliverance, where no price is paid: yet here the
word (...) is taken properly for such redemption, where the price is paid,
which was Christ's blood: as 1. Cor. 6.20. You are bought for a price, etc.

13. Controv. Against the Novatian heretics.
Whereas the Apostle says, v. 25. to declare his righteousness by the
forgiveness of sins, that are past: the Novatians hereupon denied remission of
sins to those which fell away after they were called: who being pressed and
urged by arguments out of the Scripture in the contrary, confessed and
granted, that God indeed by his absolute power might give remission of sins
unto such as fell away, but the Church had no authority to grant
reconciliation unto such.

But 1. they remembered not the answer of our blessed Savior made to Peter, how
often one should forgive his brother, not only seven times, but seventy times
seven times. 2. David sinned grievously after he was called, yet was restored
to the Church, so was the incestuous young man after due repentance for his
incest. 3. for how else should the blood of Christ cleanse us from all sin, 1.
Ioh. 1.7. if that there were not remission of sins and reconciliation even
for offenses committed after our calling?

14. Controv. Against inherent justice.
v. 28. We conclude, that a man is justified by faith, etc. This word (...), to
be justified, or made just, the Romanists contend to signify, ex impio iustum
effici, of a wicked man to be made just and righteous: Staplet. in Ant^dot. and
so their opinion is, that there is in justification an habitual righteousness
infused into the soul, whereby a man is justified.

1. This they would prove by the grammatical sense of the word: because words
compounded with facio, to do, as magnifico, purifico, certifico, to magnify,
purify, certify, signify to make one great, pure, certain, and so to
justify should be taken to make one just.

2. The Apostle expresses it by an other phrase, Romans 5.19. (...), to be made
or constituted righteous before God.

3. It is not agreeable to the nature and purity of God, to absolve, and hold
for innocent those, who are wicked and ungodly.

Contra. 1. This word to justify, though sometime it signify, to teach one
justice and righteousness, as Dan. 12.3. they which justify others, etc. that
is, teach them or turn them to righteousness: and sometime to persevere or
continue in justice, as Apoc. 22.11. he that is just, iustificetur adhuc, let
him be more just: yet usually in Scripture, it is taken to absolve, to
pronounce and hold just: and that in a double sense, as either to acknowledge
and declare him to be just, that is just: as wisdom is said to be justified of
her children, Matthew. 11.19. so is it taken before in this chapter v. 4. that
thou might be justified in thy words, etc. or (...) to count him just, who
is unjust in himself, that is, absolve, free, and discharge him: as c. 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that justifies
(that is, acquiteth, discharges) who shall condemn? so is it used in the same
sense, Act. 13.39. From all things, from the which ye could not be justified by
the law of Moses, by him every one, that believes is justified.

Neither does that grammatical construction always hold: for Marie says, My
soul does magnify the Lord, that is, declares or sets forth Gods
greatness: here it can not signify, to make great.

Lombards observation then is not found, that to justify in Scripture
signifies four things: 1. to be absolved and freed from sin by the death of
Christ. 2. being freed from sin to be made just by charity. 3. to be
cleansed from sin by faith in the death of Christ. 4. by faith and imitation
of Christ's death to bring forth the works of righteousness: Lobmard. lib. 3.
distinct. 19. for of these four significations, the 1. and 3. are all one,
which may be acknowledged, but the 2. and 4. are not found in Scripture.

2. We are also made and constituted righteous before God, not by any inherent
righteousness in our selves, but by the righteousness of faith: as the Apostle
says, that I may be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is
of the law, but that which is thorough the faith of Christ.

3. Yet it is most agreeable to the purity of the divine nature, to accept us
as just in Christ, who is most absolutely righteous before God: and so to
impute his righteousness unto us by faith: so sanctifying also our hearts by his
holy spirit, that we should delight in the works of righteousness.

4. If we should be justified by any inherent and inhabiting justice, and not
by righteousness imputed by faith, these inconveniences would follow. 1. that
justification and sanctification should be confounded: for that sanctity which
is wrought in the faithful, is a fruit of justification by faith. 2. this
holiness and charity, which is in the faithful, is a work of the law, which
requires, that we should love God and our neighbor: but faith and the work
of the law, can not stand together. 3. this habit of piety and charity, is
imperfect in us, for no man loves God, and his neighbor as he ought: now that
which is imperfect, can not justify: See further of inherent justice, Synops.
Centur. 4. err. 56.

15. Controv. Against the Popish distinction of the first and second
justification.
The Romanists generally do hold that there are two kind of iustifications,
the first which is an infused habit of justice formed by charity, to the
which we are prepared by faith, and other dispositions of the mind, and this
they say is without works: the other is the increase of this justification by
the works of charity, the grace of God concurring with man's freewill, and this
they say is by works and truly meritorious: sic Stapl. in Antidot. Perer.
disput. in 2. c. ad Romans disput. 16, 17.

Contra. 1. The Scripture acknowledges but one kind of justification in all,
which is both begun, continued, and ended by faith: as c. 1.17. The
righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith: and, c. 3.30. For it is
one God, who shall justify circumcision of faith, and uncircumcision through
faith: here the whole work of justification is ascribed to faith: and Romans
8.20. whom he justified, he glorified: there is nothing that comes between
this one justification, and glorification.

2. They confound justification, and sanctification: for that, which they call
the second justification, is nothing else but sanctification, which is the
bringing forth of the fruits of holiness after that we are justified by faith:
these two the Apostle manifestly distinguishes, Romans 6.22. Being freed from
sin, etc. you have your fruit in holiness: holiness then and sanctity is the
fruit of our justification, whereby we are freed from sin: Again, Apoc.
23.11. He that is righteous, let him be righteous still: be that is holy, let
him be holy still: here these two, to be just, and holy, are manifestly
distinguished.

16. Controv. Against the works of preparation going before justification.
Pererius concerning the works and motives of preparation tending to
justification, has these positions. 1. There are six of these preparatiue
motions: faith, the fear of God, hope to obtain pardon, the love of God, the
purpose of a new life, repentance and sorrow for sins past: thus he
alleges out of the Council of Trent, sess. 6. can. 6. so also Stapleton. in
Antidot.

2. These works of preparation proceed partly from man's free will, partly from
the assistance of the spirit concurring: and hereof it is, that sometime the
work of our conversion is ascribed unto man: as Joel 2. Turn unto me with
your whole heart: Iam. 4. Draw near unto God, and he will draw near unto you:
sometime it is given unto God, as Ier. 31. Convert us, and we shall be
converted.

3. These works of preparation though they do not merit the grace of
justification, ^^ condigno, of condignitie, yet de congruo, by way of
congruitie they may: that is, God sees it to be mere and convenient, that
such works of preparation should be rewarded with the grace of justification
following. Perer. disput. 7.

Contra. 1. Concerning faith, it is no where said in Scripture to prepare, or
dispose unto justification, but in deed to justify, by the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ: and as for the other preparations, they follow
justification, they do not prepare a way unto it ^ for good works follow
justification as the fruit and effect thereof, Romans 6.22. Being freed from
sin, you have your fruit in holiness: And again, there is no good work or
motion but it is commanded in the law: seeing then that we are justified by
faith without such works, they can not go before justification, as
preparatiues thereunto.

2. The Scripture ascribes every good work, motion, and thought of the mind
unto God: for of our selves we are not able to think a good thought, 2. Cor.
3.5. and our Savior says, Ioh. 15.5. Without me you can do nothing: wherein
the Scripture exhorts men to be converted, and to draw near unto God: that
shows not this power to be in themselves: but by these exhortations the
spirit of God works in them, and stirs them up, that by grace they should
seek to do that, which they find no strength in themselves to perform.

3. But that distinction of merit of congruitie and condignitie is vain and
frivolous: for in the matter of justification there is no merit at all: the
whole work is ascribed only to grace, Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye saved
thorough faith, not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, etc.
least any should boast: if all boasting be taken away, then there is no merit
for of merits men may boast. Augustine has an excellent testimony to this
purpose, Vocantis est gratia, percipientis vero gratiam postea sunt opera bona,
etc. Grace is of the caller, and then good works belong unto those, which have
received grace, quae non pariant gratiam, sed quae a gratia pariantur, etc.
which works do not beget grace, but are begotten of grace: for the fire does
not burn thereby to wax hoate, but it is first hot, and then it burns; and
the wheel therefore runs not well, that it may be round, but it is first
round, and then it runs well: so, nemo propterea been operatur, vt accipiat
gratiam, etc. no man therefore works well, to receive grace, but because he
has received grace, by the sa^^e he works well: lib. 1. ad Simplician. qu.
2. no works then going before the grace of justification, have any worthiness in
them at all to procure grace.

17. Controv. What justifying faith is.
Pererius that he may every where show some trick of his Popish profession,
misliketh three things in that description of faith, which is usually received
by Protestants: for whereas we thus define faith, that it is a confident
assurance of the heart, whereby we are persuaded of the remission and
forgiveness of our sins in Christ: he takes exception to these three points:

1. He denies that faith is any such confidence and assurance, which he
grants must be joined with faith: but that faith is not such assurance and
confidence, he would thus prove, Ephesians. 3.12. the Apostle says, by whom we
have boldness and entrance with confidence by faith in him: here it appears,
that confidence is a distinct thing from faith. Again, 1. Tim. 3.13. They that
have ministered well, get themselves a good degree, and great liberty as the
faith: here the Apostle shows, that confidence is a diverse thing from faith,
and that it springs from charity and a good conscience.

Contra. 1. Pererius first argument is, faith works confidence, therefore it
is not the same with confidence. Answ. 1. This argument may rather be retorted:
faith works confidence, therefore it is much more a kind of confidence: for
as the cause is, so is the effect. 2. faith is not the same with that
confidence, which it works: but they are thus distinguished, faith has a
general assurance and confidence in all Gods promises: and out of this
fountain do proceed those special acts of confidence, as to pray
confidently, to be confident in tribulation; which are as little rivers running
forth out of the same head and fountain.

2. His second argument is this: confidence is wrought by charity and a good
conscience; therefore not by faith. Ans. The argument follows not, for there
may be diverse causes of the one and the same thing: faith works confidence,
and yet the same is more increased and confirmed, by a good conscience: because
the Sun gives heat, does it follow that the fire does not heat also? like as
the warmth of the Sun may be augmented by the heat of the fire, so may the
assurance of faith, by charity and a good conscience be increased. See further
Synops. Centur. 4. err. 48.

2. Pererius second exception is, that the object of faith is not the assurance
of remission of sins: The Eunuch, when he was baptized, believed only that
Jesus Christ was the Son of God, Act. 8. And Paul required none other faith
of the keeper of the prison, but that he should believe in the Lord Jesus, and
so he should be saved, Act. 16. Abraham's faith was counted unto him for
righteousness, which was no other faith, then to believe, that in his seed,
that is, in Christ all the nations of the world should be blessed: of none of
these was required such faith to believe their sins were forgiven them: to
this purpose Pererius, disput. 19. err. 94.

Ans. 1. The Eunuchs faith was not only an historical knowledge, that Christ
was the Son of God, which the Devils also knew and confessed, but he
believed to have remission of his sins in his name, and therefore he was
baptized: for baptism in the name of Christ was for remission of sins, Act.
2.38. the same may be said of the keeper of the prison, who was baptized with
his household. 2. Neither was Abraham's faith only a general apprehension, that
Christ should come of his seed; but he made particular application of that
promise even to himself, trusting to be saved by the Messiah: and therefore
our Savior says of him, Ioh. 8.56. Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my
day, he saw it, and was glad.

3. Pererius third exception is, that a man can not in this life by faith be
certain of remission of sins: some of his arguments are these.

1. Job faith, c. 9.15. Though I were just, yet could I not answer: and v. 20.
Though I would justify my self, mine own mouth would condemn me, etc. And
S. Paul says, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified.

2. The Apostle bids ^s to work out our salvation with fear and trembling,
Philip. 2.12. S. Paul also was not so sure of his justification, but that he
still remained in doubt and fear, 1. Cor. 9.27. I beat down my body, and
bring it in subjection, least after I had preached to others, I my self should
be a reprobate.

3. This certentie of remission of sins, should be either humane, or divine:
the humane is of three sorts, either by the outward sense or by the inward act
of understanding, or by evident demonstration: but none of these it is: the
divine is also of two sorts, either by the general apprehension of the
articles of faith, but this works no such certentie, for then every Christian
that knows and believes the articles of faith should have it; or by special
and particular revelation, which every one can not have. Perer. disput. 19.
numer. 97.

Contra. 1. Job and Paul in those places speak only of such justification
which might be grounded upon their own worthiness, by such justification
indeed they could have no assurance, but they renounced it; I am not thereby
justified (says the Apostle,) that is, by his own conscience, which yet
accused him not.

2. The Apostle both teaches others to take heed of carnal security, and
presumption, and showed the practice of it in himself: one may be sure of
remission of sins, and yet walk in fear and reverence: this certentie then
of remission of sins only excludes carnal security, not reverent and
faithful fear: neither did S. Paul fear to become a reprobrate, but least if
he should do contrary to his doctrine, it should be a reproof unto him: for
he himself was most sure of his salvation, as he professes confidently, that
nothing could separate him from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8.38.

3. This certentie indeed, we willingly grant, is not humane, but divine;
neither is it so divine, as that it needs always an extraordinary and
special revelation: and yet it is more than an universal and general
apprehension of the articles of the faith: for between these two there is a
third, a particular application by faith of the general promises of God,
whereby a faithful man grows into this assurance.

4. And whereas he further obiecteth, that seeing every mortal sin hinders
justification, if a man can not assure himself to be free from sin, neither
can he be assured of the remission of his sins: we answer, that if a man did
think by his own purity to obtain remission of his sins, he can not
possibly be assured of forgiveness, so long as he has sin: but seeing we hope
to be justified by faith in Christ, by his righteousness, and not our own,
notwithstanding that the faithful are compassed about with infirmities, yet
this hinders not the certentie of justification by faith. So then a faithful
man must be considered two ways: in his spiritual part, which is quickened and
lightened by faith, and in his carnal infirmity which yet remains in the
regenerate, which causes sometimes doubtfulnes in the servants of God: but the
spiritual man prevails, and faith overcomes our carnal infirmities, that
although they be and remain in us, yet they do not reign.

5. This then (notwithstanding all these former objections) remains as an
undoubted principle of our faith: that a faithful man may be assured by faith
of his justification, and of the free remission and forgiveness of his sins in
Christ: which appears to be, 1. by the nature and property of faith, which
is to be without wavering, Iam. 1.6. Let him ask in faith and waver not. 2. by
the effects of faith, which works boldness, confidence, and assurance, and
peace with God, Romans 5.1. but we could have no peace of conscience, if we were
not assured of forgiveness. 3. by the experience which the faithful had, as S.
Paul by faith was most assured and persuaded of the love of God toward him in
Christ, Romans 8.38. whereof proceeded that his prayer, to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ, Phil. 1. see further hereof Synops. Centur. 4. err. 56.

18. Controv. What manner of faith it is, that justifies.
Pererius says, that justification may be taken two ways, either for the
preparation, and tending unto justice, or the very production of justice it
self: as the word generation in natural Philosophy, is sometime taken for
the very production of the form, and the perfection of generation, or for the
first alteration and change of the matter, which is but in the way and tending
unto generation: the Apostle speaks of the first kind of justifying in this
place: faith is said to justify, that is faith not yet formed with charity,
prepares and makes a way unto justification, which is per charitatis
infusionem, by the infusion of charity: disput. 18. numer. 86. so his opinion
is, that faith which is said to justify, is severed from charity: it is fides
informis and expers charitatis, an imperfect and unformed faith, void of
charity.

Contra. This assertion is flat contrary and opposite to the Scripture: for
the Apostle shows that it is faith working by love, which saves, Gal. 5.6.
and S. James says, that faith without works can not save, c. 2.14. but such a
faith is dead, and it is no other, but the faith which devils have: for the
devils believe and tremble, v. 19. Let the Romanists content themselves with
such a bare and naked justifying faith: but we are sure, that such a faith,
which is separate from love, can not help us.

Controv. 19. Of the manner, how faith justifies.
Here the Romanists have these positions. 1. they say faith justifies, because
it disposes, prepares, and makes a way to justification, so Bellarm.
Staplet. etc.

Contra. 1. The Scripture says, the Just shall live by faith, if faith
brings and works the life of the soul, as the Apostle also says, I live
by faith in the Son of God, Galat. 2.20. then is it not a disposition only:
for a disposition unto life is not life: but faith is the life of the soul. 2.
whereas Pererius obiecteth these places, Galat. 5.5. By the spirit thorough
faith, we wait or expect the hope of righteousness: whereupon he would
infer, that faith works the hope rather of righteousness, then
righteousness it self, and so prepares rather, and disposes to
justification, then justifies: to this we answer, 1. that by the hope of
righteousness, may be understood the reward of righteousness hoped: for hope
is taken for the thing hoped for, Beza. 2. or by the hope of righteousness is
signified perseverance and continuance in this hope, Calvin. 3. or rather these
words must not be taken in sensu diuiso, sed composito, not in a divided, but
an whole sense: that we must not join only ( to expect and wait) with faith,
but rather, thus to put them together, We wait for the hope of righteousness
by faith, Genevens.

2. Again the Romanists affirm, that faith is said to justify, because it is
the root only, foundation, and beginning of justification: and whereas the
Apostle notwithstanding says, Ephesians. 3.17. being rooted and grounded in love,
he says the Apostle speaks not of the foundation of justification simply,
but as it is complet, and perfect, and meritorious of everlasting life, and so
charity is the foundation, because it forms and perfecteth all other
virtues, and it is that whereby we are formallie and actually justified,
Pererius disput. 18. numer. 88.

Contra. 1. Faith is not the beginning only of justification, but the very
perfection thereof: for being justified by faith, we are at peace with God,
but an imperfect and begun only justification could not work peace in us.
2. The Apostle speaks in that place, of the love of God toward us in Christ:
which he calls the love of Christ, v. 19. not of the charity and love which
is wrought in man: and that love indeed is the very foundation of our hope.
3. but it is untrue that charity forms all other virtues, or that thereby we
are formally and actually justified: for it is faith that gives life unto
other virtues, which without faith cannot be acceptable unto God, whom it is
impossible to please without faith, Heb. 11.6. and not charity but faith, is
the form of justification, for the life of the soul is ascribed unto faith,
Galat. 2.20.

3. They say further, that faith does not justify passiuely, as it is an
instrument to apprehend Christ's righteousness, but by the dignity,
worthiness, and meritorious work thereof, Bellar. lib. 1. de iustificat. c.
17.

Contra. 1. The contrary is evident out of Scripture, that faith justifies
not as it is an act or work: for how then should faith justify without
works, if it self did justify as a work or act: If here it be answered,
that the Apostle excludes only the works of the law such as faith is not: the
Apostle else where excludes all works in general, as Ephesians. 2.8. by grace are
ye saved thorough faith, etc. not of works, etc. 2. faith then justifies
relate, by way of relation to Christ, as Romans 5.19. By the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous: and organice, as it is an hand to lay hold of,
and apprehend the righteousness of Christ: as the Apostle again says, Romans
5.17. Much more shall they which receive the abundance of grace and the gift of
righteousness, reign in life thorough one, etc. justification then is a gift
received and apprehended by faith. In this sense then it is said, faith
justifies, as an organe, instrument, and hand apprehending, receiving, and
applying the righteousness of Christ, like as the plough is said to make a man
rich, being the iustrument of his labor, whereby the earth is tilled and made
fruitful. 3. And here I will oppose the grave testimony of Tolet against
Bellarmine, one Cardinal against an other: thus he writes: fidem non habere
ex se efficaciam vllam, vt actus noster est, reconciliandi, sed totam eius
vir^^^^ procedere ex obiecto nempe Christo, that faith has no efficacy, as it
is our act to reconcile us unto God, but the whole virtue thereof proceeds
from the object, namely, Christ: As when the Israelits looked upon the brazen
serpent and were healed: their sight, as it was an act of the eyes had no
virtue to heal, but the whole efficacy was from the serpent which they
beheld, Tolet. annot. 20.

Controv. 20. Whether faith alone justifies.
Bellarmine, consenting with the rest of the Romanists does mightily strive,
lib. 1. de iustif^^, c. 12. that faith alone does not justify, and he much
insisteth upon this argument: faith cannot be alone without love, hope, and
other virtues and graces, therefore it cannot justify alone.

Contra. 1. But it follows not, for faith being separate from love and hope,
is no faith, it is dead, and therefore faith being destroyed it can bring
forth no act: like as it fol^^weth not, the care only hears, or the eye
sees, therefore the one can hear the other (...), if it were alone, that is,
pulled, and severed from the body.

2. That faith only justifies, though faith being alone justifies not, it
is thus made e^^dent. 1. because it is the office of faith only to apprehend
and receive the promises, it is ^^ hand of the soul, so is not charity, hope,
or any of the rest. 2. faith justifies without ^^e works of the law: but all
other virtues, as hope, charity, are commanded in the law, ^^^refore without
them is our justification wrought. 3. though the Apostle use not here ^^t
particle only, yet else where he uses a term equivalent, (...), nisi, but: a
man is not ^^^^^fied, etc. but by faith: And many of the fathers have by way of
interpretation expresse^^ but to the word, only: as Origin upon this place,
the Apostle faith that the justification, (...) fidei, of faith alone,
suffices: so Ambrose upon the 4. chap. of this epistle says, Abraham sola
fide iustificatus, Abraham was justified by faith only: Hilarie in c. 8.
Matthew. fides sola iustificat, faith only justifies: Hierome Romans 4. impium
per solam fidem iustificat Deus, God justifies the wicked returning by faith
only: to this purpose also see Chrysostom, Cyprian, Augustine, Nazianzen,
Basil, Ruffinus, cited by D. Fulke, who all affirm that faith only
justifies: so that appears to be a malicious cauil of the Rhemists, that
only is foisted in by us: see annot. in 3. Romans sect. 8. If sometime the
fathers seem to dispute against only faith, they are to be understood to
speak of solitary says separate from good works: as Augustine thus puts
the case: whereas the Apostle says that a man is justified without works, he
must not be understood, vt accepta fide, si vixerit, dicamus eum iustumesse, si
male vixerit, that after he has received says, if he live, we should call him
just, if he live evil, etc. lib. 83. quest. quest. 76.

Controv. 21. How S. Paul and S. James are reconciled together.
Whereas S. Paul here says, v. 28. We conclude that a man is justified by
faith without the works of the law, but S. James affirms, c. 2.24. You see
then, how that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only, etc. they
may seem at the first sight to be contrary: they are then thus reconciled.

1. Not as Erasmus and Caietanus, who doubt of the authority of the epistle of
S. James: for though it were a while doubted of, yet was it at length received
by a general consent of the Church, to be of Apostolik authority: as it is
acknowledged to be by Origin hom. i^ Ios. Cyprian in symbol. Epiphan. haeres.
76. Augustine lib. 2. de doctrine. Christ. c. 8. Da^^as. lib. 4. c. 8. and
others.

2. Not yet is the solution of the Romanists false and frivolous, that S. Paul
speaks of works going before justification, which are without faith and
grace, and S. James of the works of grace which follow the first
justification: for S. Paul even excludes the works of Abraham, which were
works of grace, Romans 4.2.

3. The best solution then is this: that the Apostles neither speak of the
same kind of faith, not yet of the same manner of iustifiying.

1. S. Paul speaks of the true lively faith, which justifies before God: but
S. James derogateth not from the true faith, but from the faith which was in
show only, which he calls a dead faith, and consequently no faith, and such
a faith as devils may have: S. Paul then saying that a lively faith justifies
before God, and S. James, that a dead faith justifies not, no not before men,
much less before God, are not contrary the one to the other.

2. Neither do the Apostles take the word justifying in the same sense: S.
Paul speaks of justification before God: but S. James of the declaration and
showing forth of our justification by our works before men: as is evident
thus: the Apostle says evidently, v. 18. show thou me thy faith out of thy
works, etc. Again he says, that Abraham was justified by works, when he
offered his son Izaak; which must be understood, that his justification was
thereby testified, manifested, and declared: for by faith before God he had
been justified before, as the Apostle alleges in the same place, v. 23.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: which
testimony is given of Abraham's faith, before he offered up his son: So then
S. Paul saying, works do not justify before God, and S. James, that works
do justify before men, that is, declare and testify their justification, do
not contradict the one the other.

22. Controv. Against Socinus that Christ properly redeemed us by paying the
ransom for us, and not metaphorically.
1. Argum. Impious Socinus (as Pareus rehearses his wicked opinion, and
confuseth it) denies that Christ died for us, or paid any ransom at all for
our redemption: but he is said to redeem, that is, to deliver us, without
paying any price at all: as Exodus 15.13. and in other places, the Lord is said
to have redeemed, that is, delivered his people from the Egyptian servitude.

Ans. 1. It follows not, because to redeem is sometime taken in that sense,
that it should be so every where: 2. there is great difference between
corporal, and spiritual deliverance: the first was, and might be done only
by the power of God, without paying any price at all: the other could not be
compassed without paying of a price; both because of Gods justice, that they
which sin, should die, Romans 1.32. and the truth of his word, because he had
said to man, that if he sinned, he should die the death.

2. Argum. Psalm. 31.5. David speaking of Christ, says, Thou have redeemed me,
O Lord God of truth: here Christ is said to have been redeemed: but he was
not redeemed with the paying of any price: Ergo neither did he redeem us in
that manner.

Ans. 1. If this Psalm be understood of Christ, we confess, that to redeem
is taken improperly in that sense: but then it follows not, because it is
used improperly in one place, therefore it should be so in all. 2. But if the
Psalm be understood of David, who was the type of Christ, the word is taken
properly: for even David was no otherwise freed from his sin, then by the
price of Christ's death.

3. Argum. The deliverance of the Israelites by Moses from the bondage of
Egypt, was a type and figure of our spiritual deliverance by Christ: but that
was done only by the power of God without any price paid, therefore so was
the other.

Answ. 1. The argument follows not, for the figure and the thing figured,
agree not in all things, there is more in the substance, then in the type. 2.
There is great difference between Moses and Christ's deliverance: Moses was a
mere man, and a servant of the house, Christ was God and man, and the Lord of
all: Moses delivered only from corporal bondage and servitude, Christ from
spiritual bondage under sin, from the wrath and curse of God: Moses redeemed
the Israelites without his own death, or shedding of his blood, but Christ our
redeemer gave his life, and shed his blood for us: Moses gave them the
inheritance of the earthly Canaan, Christ has purchased for us an everlasting
inheritance.

4. Argum. Redemption is properly said to be from him, of whom the captives are
holden: but we are said to be redeemed either from our iniquities, Tit. 2.14.
or from our vain conversation, 1. Pet. 1.18. or from the curse of the law,
Galat. 3.13. of the which we were not held captive: but no where are we said to
be redeemed from God, or from his justice, etc.

Answ. 1. Touching the proposition or first part of the argument. 1. it is
false that redemption is only from him that keeps us in bondage: for
although principally captives are freed from him whose captives they are: yet
they are delivered also from their very bands, imprisonment, and other such
like instruments of their captivity: such are our sins, as the bands and
fetters that kept us in thraldom under the devil. 2. there is a difference
between corporal and spiritual bondage: for there the price is paid to the
enemy, as to the great Turk, to get the captives out of his hand: but here
the price is paid to God, not to deliver us from him, but to reconcile us unto
him, like as when a subject rebelling against his Prince, is imprisoned and
condemned to die, till some mediation and satisfaction be made for him, then
his sin is pardoned, and he is reconciled to his prince.

4. Concerning the second part of the reason. 1. it is false that we were not
detained captives by our sins: for they are as the snare of the devil, 2.
Tim. 2.26. 2. And although by our redemption we are not delivered or taken from
God, but reconciled unto him; yet are we delivered from his wrath, Romans 5.9.
and so from his punishing justice.

5. Argum. We are improperly said to be redeemed from that, to the which the
price was not paid: but to the curse of the law, and wrath, that is, the
punishment of sin, the price was not paid: for the bearing of the curse and
the sustaining of the wrath of God for us, was the price it self: therefore we
are improperly said to be redeemed from the curse and wrath.

Answ. 1. The proposition is false: for the captive may be said to be redeemed
from that, to the which the price is not paid: as from the gives, fetters,
prison, sword, death: though principally the redemption, is from the hands of
him, which holds any in captivity: so we may be redeemed from the curse of
the law, though the price were not paid unto it. 2. the curse of the law and
wrath may be taken two ways, passiuely for the effect of the curse and wrath,
which is the punishment of sin, and in this sense the price is not paid to
the curse: or actiuely for the wrath of God, and his irefull judgment
pronouncing the sentence of the curse: and in this sense the price may be said
to be paid unto the curse, that is, the justice and wrath. of God inflicting
the curse.

6. Argum. The operation or curse of the law is everlasting death, but Christ
did not undergo everlasting death for us, therefore he was not made a curse
for us, but only for our cause he fell into some kind of curse for us.

Answ. 1. The proposition is generally true, for the curse or operation does
not only signify the punishment due unto the breach of the law, but the
sentence also pronounced against the transgressors of the law: as it is said,
Deuteronomy. 21.23. cursed is every one, that hangs upon a tree: but every one
that so hanged was not everlastingly condemned, as the theife, that was
converted upon the cross. 2. yet it is most true, that Christ in some sense
suffered eternal death for us: for in everlasting death two things are to be
considered, the greatness and infinitnes of the infernal agonies and dolors,
with the abiection and forsaking of God: the other is the perpetual
continuance of such everlasting horror and abiection: the second Christ must
needs be freed from, both because of his omnipotency, it was impossible for
him to be for ever kept under the thraldom of death, and his innocence, that
having satisfied for sin, being himself without sin, he could not be held
in death, and in respect of his office which was to be our deliverer: yet the
very infernal pains and sorrow Christ did suffer for us: because our
Redeemer was to suffer that which was due unto us: and why else was our Savior
so much perplexed before his passion, which in respect of the outward torment
of the body, was exceeded by many Martyrs in their sufferings, if he feared not
some greater thing, then the death of the body? 3. And although sometime in
Scripture the preposition for, signifies only the end or cause, as Christ is
said to have died for our sins, 1. Ioh. 3.16. yet it signifies also for, and
in ones stead to do any thing: as Romans 5.7. for a good man one dare die, that
is, in his stead, that he should not die; and so Christ died for us, that is,
in our place and stead, that we should not die eternally, ex Pareo.

7. Argum. As we are said to be sold under sin, so we are bought and redeemed
by Christ: but we were sold under sin without any price paid: therefore so
also are we redeemed, without the paying of any price.

Answ. The proposition is not true: for it is a metaphorical speech, that we
are sold under sin, thereby is signified the alienation and abiection from
God by our sins: but we are said to be redeemed properly: wherein it was
necessary, that a price should be paid for us, both to satisfy the just
wrath and indignation of God against sin, as also because of Gods immutable
sentence, thou shall die the death: which sentence must take place, let the
Lord should be found a lier, and his word not to be true: Christ therefore in
redeeming us by his death, paid that price and ransom for us, which we
otherwise should have paid.

8. Argum. Where there is a true and proper redemption, the price is paid to
him, which holds the captives in bondage: but in this redemption purchased by
Christ, the price was not so paid: for then the devil should have had it,
whose captives we were therefore it is not properly a redemption.

Answ. 1. It is not true that we are principally and originally the devils
captives: first, we are the Lords captives, as of an angry and offended Judge
by our sins: but secondarily, we were captiued unto Satan, because the Judge
delivers over sinners unto him as the tormentor: that power therefore which
Satan has over sinners, is a secondarie power received from God: this is
manifested in the parable, Matthew. 18.34. where the king delivers over the
wicked servant unto the tormentor.

2. The price then of our redemption was paid unto God, who had delivered us
over as captives for our sins; and so the Apostle says, that Christ offered
himself by his eternal spirit unto God, Heb. 9.14. not that God thirsted for
the blood of his son, but after (...) salvation, quia salus erat in sanguine,
because there was health in his blood, as Bernard says: for thereby Gods
justice was satisfied, and the verity of his sentence established, thou shall
die the death.

3. But whereas it is further objected, that the price could not be paid unto
God, 1. because God procured his own son to pay the price of our redemption:
but be that detaineth captives, does not procure their deliverance. 2. in
paying the price of redemption there is some vantage, accruing and growing to
him, to whom the price is paid: but in our redemption there was no gain or
advantage unto God: we further answer thus, 1. that in such a redemption,
wherein the Judge desires the life and safety of the prisoner, the Judge
himself may procure him to be redeemed, and that out of his own treasure. 2.
neither in such a kind of redemption does the judge seek for any advantage to
himself, but only the preservation of the laws and common justice: as
Zaleucus the governor of the Loerensians, having made a law, that he which was
taken in adultery should loose both his eyes, did cause one of his sons eyes
to be put out for the offense, and one of his own eyes: by this he gained
nothing, but the commendation of justice: and so in our redemption the justice
of God is set forth, otherwise there can be no lucre or advantage growing
properly unto God.

4. Wherefore notwithstanding all these cauills and sophistications, Christ
properly and truly redeemed us by his blood: which first appears both by
evident testimonies of Scripture, as Mark. 10.45. The Son of man came to give
his life a ransom for many: Coloss. 1.14. In whom we have redemption thorough
his blood: 1. Tim. 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all men: Apocal. 5.9.
Thou have redeemed us unto God by thy blood: secondly, all the parts requisite
in redemption do here concur together. 1. there must be captives, that are
we. 2. one to redeem, which is Christ. 3. a ransom must be paid, that is
Christ's blood. 4. and one to whom it must be paid, that is, God: see further
hereof in Pareus, (...) 10.

Controv. 23. That Christ truly reconciled us by his blood against an other
blasphemous assertion of Socinus.
v. 25. To be a reconciliation thorough faith in his blood: against this
Socinus obiecteth, that Christ was no otherwise a reconciliation, then the
cover of the Arc in the old testament was called the propitiatory, not that
thereby God was reconciled, but that God showed himself therein reconciled and
appeased toward his people: So also the sacrifices of the law, are said to be
(...), a reconciliation, yet there was no satisfaction made unto God by them:
to this purpose, that impious Socinus part. 2. c. 2. page 81.82. as he is cited
by Pareus, dub. 11.

Contra. 1. It is false, that the Arc and sacrifices of the old Testament did
reconcile as Christ has reconciled us: for there is great difference between
dumb and senseless ceremonies, the blood of beasts, and the most holy and
lively blood of Christ. 2. the Arc and the sacrifices, though in themselves,
and their own virtue, they did not reconcile unto God, yet typically and
sacramentally, they did reconcile, as being types and figures of the true
reconciliation by Christ. 3. And that Christ was verily and properly our
reconciler unto God, appears in that the Apostle adds in his blood, which
he offered up to God his father, which to what end was it so offered up, but to
be a reconciliation? thus much of the controversall questions out of this
chapter.

6. Moral observations.
v. 3. Shall their unbelief make the faith of God of none effect, 1. Obser.
Some men's unbelief hurts not the faith of others.
etc. Origin hereupon has this note, infidelitas eorum qui vel non accedunt ad
fidem, etc. their unbelief which either come not to the faith, or fall away
from it when they laugh us to scorn in our fasting, alms deeds, and other
works of faith, fidem quae in nobis est, non evacuant, do not euacuate or
make void the faith in us: our faith and piety is not hindered by other man's
incredulity, and profaneness.

And in that the Apostle does here prevent the cauills and objections of the
Jews, 2. Obser. He that teaches the truth must meet with the objections of
the adversaries.
it teaches that the minister of Gods word should so set forth the doctrine of
the truth, whether in Church or Schools, as that he may meet with all
contrary objections made against the truth: both to satisfy the minds of
them that are desirous to learn, to deliver them from all scruple and
doubting, and to stop the mouth of gainesayers, Pareus in v. 1.

v. 4. Yea let God be true. Seeing God is always found true of his promise, 3.
Observe. We must trust God of his word.
but men are liars and deceitful, we are taught that in all our trialls and
tentations we should certainly ground upon the promises of God; and not be
carried away or swayed by the promises or threats of men, to let go our
confidence in Gods promises: as David in all his afflictions, when he was
chased up and down, and persecuted of Saul, stayed himself upon the truth of
Gods promises.

v. 4. That thou might be justified: 4. Observe. Not to accuse God but our
selves.
When as God does correct us his children for our sins, or otherwise
exercises his judgments in the world, we should not seem to accuse God or
murmr against him, but confess God in all his works and judgments to be
just, and our selves to be sinners, as Dan. 9.8. to us appertains open shame,
5. Obser. Ministers must not give over though in some their labor be in vain.
etc. yet compassion and forgiveness is in the Lord.

v. 3. What though some did not believe: As the Oracles of God committed to the
Jews, yet were not in vain, though some believed not: so the Minister of Gods
word must not be discouraged, and give over his calling, because he sees in
some his labor to take small effect, Martyr: for even our Blessed Savior, in
that his most heavenly sermon of the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his
blood, was forsaken and left of many of his hearers, yet many of his disciples
went away, in so much that he said unto the twelve, Will ye also go away? Ioh.
6.67.

v. 9. Are we more excellent: 6. Obser. How the Minister sometime in his
discretion must make himself as one of the number.
The Apostle, that his reprehension might appear more easy and tolerable,
joins himself in the company and makes himself one of the number: and
indeed he was a part and member of Israel: So the Prophets do often join
thereselues with the rest of the people, as partaking with their sins, as
Dan. 9.5. We have sinned, and committed iniquity: for like as the praise and
commendation of the good and virtuous, extends it self unto all the
congregation, wherein there are notwithstanding some carnal men, and
hypocrites; so the sins of the congregation do even touch and some way
defile the godly: because that they living among the wicked might offend in
their connivence, in not reproouing the sins of others, as they ought, or in
not giving themselves such good example of life, as they should, or some other
kind of way might be touched.

v. 21. By the Law comes the knowledge of sin: 7. Observe. The law first
to be preached.
Then is the law first to be preached to make men to know themselves, and to
acknowledge their sins: this was the course that John Baptist took to preach
repentance to the people, and to bring them to confess their sins, and so to
prepare a way for the Gospel of Christ: for like as a wound cannot well be
cured, unless first it be searched to the bottom: so the heart must first be
humbled before it can be truly capable of the comforts of the Gospel.

v. 31. Do we then make the Law of God of none effect, 8. Observe. That the
doctrine of justification by faith only is not enemy to good works.
etc. As the adversaries in S. Paul's time blamed his doctrine concerning
justification by faith only, as an enemy to the Law and good works, whereas
the Apostle always joins sanctification with justification, works with
faith, though he exclude works in the act it self of our justification: So
the adversaries of the grace of God in these days the Papists and Romanists,
do slander the doctrine of the Gospel, which urges justification by faith
only, as though it should beat down and hinder the exercise of good works:
But we say with the Apostle, that by this doctrine of only, faith we do not
destroy the law, but indeed establish it, in as much as we hold faith without
works to be a dead, and fruitless faith: we do not separate work from faith,
though we exclude them from justification: faith which justifies cannot be
without works, yet it justifies without works: it alone justifies, yet it
must not be alone.

The fourth Chapter.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1. What shall we say then, that Abraham our father has found concerning
the flesh.

2 For if Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to glory, Be. (to
rejoice, ^^ to boast) he has glory. L.T. the word is (...), he has matter of
rejoicing:) but with God.

3 For what says the Scripture? but Abraham believed God, Be.V.T. ( Abraham
believed God. L.B.G. but here the Greek particle (...), is omitted) and it was
counted ( or rep^ted. L.) to him for righteousness.

4 Now to him that works, the wages ( reward. B.R. but a reward may be of
favor, so is not wages) is not counted by favor, (or, of grace, Be.) but of
debt: ( duty, Be. but (...) signifies debt)

5 But to him that works not, but believes in him, that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness: ( according to the purpose of
God. L. this is not in the original, nor yet translated in the Syriake.)

6 Even as David declares G. (or pronounces. Be. or expresses. V. rather
then te^^meth. R. the word is (...), says, calls) the blessedness of the
man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works.

7. Blessed are they whose iniquires are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.

8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord ( not our Lord, L. R.) imputes not
sin. G. ( has not imputed, L.R. will not impute. T. B. the word is in the
future tense, but according to the phrase of the Hebrew, it is taken for the
present.)

9 Came this blessedness G. Be. (or belongs it. V. or befalls, B. better
then abides, remains. L. R. there is no word expressed in the original, it
must be supplied and understood) upon the circumcision only, or upon the
uncircumcision also? ( the prepuce. R. but that is no English word) For we say,
that faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousness.

10 How was it then imputed? when he was in circumcision, ( when he was
circumcised, G. the word is (...), in circumcision) or in uncircumcision? not
in the circumcision, but in uncircumcision.

11 And (or after, G.) he received the sign of circumcision, as the seal of
the righteousness of faith (which he had) in uncircumcision, that he should be
father of all them which believe in uncircumcision, ( that is, being not yet
circumcised, not by uncircumcision, V. L. R. the preposition (...), is better
here translated in: for by uncircumcision they did not believe, that were to
give more virtue to uncircumcision, then to circumcision) that righteousness
might be imputed to them also,

12 And the father of circumcision, not unto them only which are of the
circumcision, but unto them also which walk in the steps of the faith, which
was even in uncircumcision, of our father Abraham.

13 For not by the law was the promise given to Abraham or his seed, that he
should be the heir of the world, but thorough the righteousness of faith.

14 For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is in vain, B. (or made
void, G.) and the promise is made of none effect.

15 For the law procures (or causes, G. works, L.) wrath: for where no law
is, there is no transgression.

16 Therefore ( the inheritance) is of faith, that it might be by grace, that
the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that only, which is of the
law, but also to that, which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of
us all,

17 (As it is written, a father of many nations have I appointed thee) even
before God ( not according to the example of God. V.) whom he believed, (not
whom thou did believe. T. L. or whom ye believed, B. the word is (...), he
believed) who quickneth the dead, and calls those things which be not, as
though they were. (not as those things which are, L. for the speaks of the
same things still, which God causes to be, whereas they were yet nothing.)

18 Who contrary to hope, B.Be.L. ( above hope. G. beside hope. V. without
hope: the preposition(...) is here taken in the first sense: for Abraham's hope
was in deed beyond all expectation) believed under hope, that he should be the
father of many nations: according to that which was spoken to him: So shall thy
seed be. ( as the stars of heaven, and the sand of the Sea, L.R. but these
words are not in the original)

19 And he not weak in faith, considered not his own body, ( he was not
weak in faith, when he considered his body, T. but in the original it is put
negatiuely, he considered not) which was now dead, being almost an hundred
years old, neither the deadnes of Saras tomb.

20 Neither did he stagger (or stirke. L.V.T. doubt. G. dispute. B. the word is
(...) it is better taken here in the first sense) at the promise of God
thorough unbelief, but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory unto God.

21 Being fully assured G. ( or persuaded. V. Be. certified, B. rather then
fully knowing, L.R. the word is (...), which signifies not only knowledge in
the understanding, but assurance also in the heart) that he which had promised,
was also able to do it.

22 And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.

23 Now it is not written only for him, that it was imputed unto him: ( for
rightesounes, L.G.T. but these words are not in the original)

24 But also for us, to whom it shall be imputed, believing in him, which
raised our Lord Jesus from the dead.

25 Who was delivered up for our sins, and was raised again for our
justification.

2. The Argument, Method, and parts.
THis Chapter has three parts. 1. the first is a proof of the former
proposition that we are justified by faith without the works of the law, by
the example of Abraham, the testimony of David, with some other arguments,
unto the 17. verse. 2. A commendation and description of the excellency of
Abraham's faith, to ^^.

2. The third is, the use and explication of Abraham's imputative justice.

In the first part the Apostle urges 4. principal arguments to prove, that
we are justified by faith without works.

1. Argum. If any were justified by works, most like Abraham: But he was not
justified by works, but by faith: Ergo: the assumption is diuersely proved,
1. from the effects, then Abraham should have had wherein to glory with God,
but he had not, v. 2. from a testimony of Scripture propounded, v. 3. faith
was counted to Abraham for righteousness then dilated and employed by the
contrary: that which is counted is of favor and debt^ 4. but Abraham's faith
was counted his righteousness by favor, v. 5. therefore not by debts.

2. Argum. From the testimony of David: there is the same way of
justification, which is of blessedness and happiness: but we are counted
happy, by the not imputing and forgiving of sin, v. 7, 8. therefore so also
are we justified, and consequently, not by any of our own works.

3. Argum. The father of those which believe, and the children must be
justified after the same manner: but Abraham the father of those which believe,
was justified by faith, and not by the works of the law: Ergo: the
proposition is insinuated, v. 11. from the end, why Abraham received
circumcision as the seal of the righteousness of faith, that he should be the
father, etc. the father then and children must be justified by one and the same
way the assumption is thus proved: the first part thereof, that he was the
father of all the faithful is proved by a distributio^: he was the father
both of the uncircumcised, which is showed by the time, v. 10. he was justified
by faith being yet uncircumcised: and of the circumcised, because he received
circumcision, v. 12. the other part that he was justified by faith, is proved
by the effects, because he received the promise, not through the law, but
faith, v. 13. (...) otherwise the promise had bin of no effect, if it had bin
by the law: which were absurd, v. 14.

4. Argum. From the contrary effects of the law and of faith: the promise
ought to be firm and sure unto Abraham, and his seed, v. 16. but the law
cannot work any (...) assurance, but it rather causes wrath, because it
discovers transgression, v. 15.

2. Then follows a description of Abraham's faith. 1. by the foundation
thereof, Go^ omnipotency showed by the effects, v. 17. 2. the object of his
faith, to believe to be the father of many nations, even as the stars, or
sand in multitude, v. 18. 3. the strength is his faith in ouercomming all
impediments, v. 19. 4. the quality, it was without doubting, v. 20. which
wrought in him assurance, v. 23. 5. by the effects, it was imputed to him for
righteousness, v. 23.

3. The application of this example follows. 1. from the end of the
Scripture, which was not written only for Abraham, but for us. 2. from the
description of faith. 1. the foundation, God. 2. the object Christ Jesus
crucified and raised up. 3. the end, remission of sins, and our
justification, v. 25.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. Upon what occasion Saint Paul brings in the example of Abraham.
1. Chrysostom takes this to be the occasion, that now the Apostle intending
to set forth how glorious and excellent justification by faith is, would show
it by the example of Abraham, whose righteousness was most glorious: But the
Apostle insisteth yet in the proof of his former conclusion, that a man is
justified by faith, not by works: it had been yet unseasonable for the Apostle
to set forth the praise and commendation of justification by faith, and to
stand upon the glory and excellency of it, the truth whereof, the Jews
addicted to the works of the law, were not yet thoroughly persuaded of.

2. Anselme thinks, that whereas a double question was moved in the
beginning of the former chap. v. 1. concerning the preferment of the Jew, and
touching circumcision: as the Apostle answered to the former question in the
third chapter, so he comes to the other here, to treat of circumcision: But
both the Apostle had already said much concerning circumcision, c. 2. so that
he needed not again to fall into any special treatise thereof: and beside, if
he should have singled out the example of Abraham to that purpose, the doctrine
of justification without all kind of works, as well ceremonial, as moral,
should not have been sufficiently proved.

3. Some think, that whereas the Apostle had said, c. 3.21. that the
righteousness of faith had testimony of the law and the Prophets, that now
the Apostle proves the same by the example of Abraham: But that assertion of
the Apostle went not immediately before, many other things which concern the
principal argument of justification by faith came between, with the which
this chapter rather must have coherence.

4. And therefore it is the opinion of others, as of Origin, Oecumen. to whom
consent Tolet, Pererius, that the Apostle directly by this example of Abraham
goes about to prove the general argument, that we are justified by faith
without works, because Abraham was so justified.

5. But as we deny not, but that the example of Abraham is very pertinent to
that purpose to prove justification by faith without works; yet beside this
general scope of the example of Abraham here produced, there is this
particular reason of the connection and coherence: that after the Apostle had
concluded generally without exception, that every man must be justified without
works, the Jews might straitway have objected the example of Abraham, whose
memory was honorable among them: that at the least he and David should seem
to be excepted out of this general rule: their works were renowned and
glorious, and somewhat must be yielded unto them. The Apostle therefore here
preuenteth this objection, and confesses that Abraham was very glorious by his
works among men, yet before God he did not glory by his works, but it was his
faith, whereby he was approved just in Gods sight. Thus Pareus, Pelican,
Gryneus.

Quest. 2. Of the meaning of the first verse.
v. 1. What shall we say then, that Abraham our father. 1. The Apostle uses an
interogation, both for the more full declaration of the thing in question, and
for more vehemency sake, ad struendam dictis fiduciam, to win the more credit
to his sayings, as c. 3.1. and 6.1.

2. The Apostle speaks in the first person, what shall we say, and Abraham
our father, that he might the better insinuate himself, Pareus.

3. He uses the name of Abraham, not Abram, because now it was the usual
name, whereby he was called, though as yet his name was not changed when he was
counted just by faith, for the which purpose S. Paul brings in his example,
Mart.

4. Concerning that addition, after the flesh. 1. Some do join unto Abraham
our father, after the flesh, to distinguish the carnal children of Abraham
from the spiritual: for he was the father of the Gentiles not according to the
flesh; but the spirit, Chrysostom. Theophy. Oecumen. Tolet: But then the Apostle
would have said, rather your father, if he had spoken only of the carnal
generation, Beza. neither does the Apostle seem to derogate unto the Jews, as
having only a carnal prerogative: he would not therefore use any such
limitation, as excluding them from being his spiritual children.

2. Some do join it with the word has found after the flesh, as indeed the
order of the words shows: but then by flesh, they understand circumcision, as
Ambrose, and the interlin. gloss: but the Apostle disputes generally against
all works of the law, not the ceremonialls only.

3. Lyranus thinks, that according to the flesh, is added, to show the
difference between the original of the flesh, which was from Abraham, and of
the soul from God: but this distinction is nothing pertinent to the thing in
question.

4. Therefore, by according to the flesh, the Apostle rather understands the
works of the law, so Theodoret and the ordin. gloss: and the reason hereof is
this, because the Apostle does not simply deny unto Abraham all kind of
righteousness, but that which is by works, Beza: so Phil. 3.3.9. the
righteousness in the flesh, and of the law, are taken for the same with the
Apostle. Gryn. But in this sense great advantage may seem to be given unto the
Popish sophisters, who think that only Abraham's works done before he had
faith, while he was yet in the flesh, are excluded from justification, and not
those which came after: upon the which reason Pareus seems to incline to the
other exposition, to join, according to the flesh, with Abraham our father:
But we need not for this reason to refuse the other exposition: for even the
works which proceed from faith, if any merit or worthiness be reposed in them,
may be said to be after the flesh: for the Apostle opposes (...), by favor,
and (...), by debt, v. 4. that then which is by debt and merit of the work is
according to the flesh, and is opposite to favor and grace.

Quest. 3. Of the meaning of the 2. verse.
v. 2. If Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to rejoice. 1.
Origin, Ambrose, Chrysostom do thus frame the argument: if Abraham were
justified by works, he had no glory with God, but he had true glory with
God, therefore he was not justified by works: so also Faius collecteth the
argument, assuming affirmatively: but the assumption is put negatiuely with the
Apostle, but not with God: so that thus rather the argument holds: if Abraham
were justified by works, he has wherein to glory with God, he has somewhat
to glory in as being justified by his works: but he had not wherein to
glory with God, Ergo: thus Beza, Pareus.

2. Gorrhan makes all this verse the proposition: If Abraham were justified by
works, he has wherein to glory, but not with God, but such glory, but not
with God, Abraham had not: for if it be understood of true glory in deed, such
glory none can have but from God, if false glory among men, Abraham would no
such glory: But in this collection, the Apostle should deny, that Abraham's
works had no praise or glory at all among men, whereas the Apostle seems to
grant so much, that his works might be praise worthy among men, but before
God, they could not justify him.

3. Chrysostom has here a distinction of glorying, one is by works, which a
man cannot have with God, an other is by faith, which is before God: and Pet.
Martyr approoueth this distinction, and thinks, that by the glory of God, c.
3.23. are deprived of the glory of God, the Apostle means our justification
by faith, wherein the glory of God shows it self: but an other word is used
there, (...), which signifies glory, here the word is (...), glorying or
rejoicing: and indeed before God we cannot glory either of works or faith:
for he is said to glory with God, that can bring any thing to God of his own:
now seeing faith also is a gift of God, we cannot glory in it: as the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 4.7. why gloriest or boastest thou, as though thou had not
received it? But whereas the Apostle says, he that glories, let him glory in
the Lord: he speaks not of any glorying of any gift which any man has, but
of the mere grace of God: and the meaning is, let him give all glory unto
God, confessing that he has nothing of himself.

4. Now whereas the Apostle says, he has wherein to glory: Oecumenius
understands this of glorying in himself: but so would not Abraham glory at
all among men: therefore by glorying here is understood nothing else, but the
praise and commendation of men: his works might cum honor abilem reddere, make
him honorable with men, but not with God, Lyran. Tolet here distinguishes
between the word, (...), here used, which signifies praise and glory, and
(...), before expressed, c. 20.23. which signifies glorying, boasting, annot.
3. but this distinction to be perpetual he shows not.

Quest. 4. How the Apostle alleges that testimony concerning the imputation
of Abraham's faith for righteousness, v. 4.
1. The Apostle reads in the passive, it was imputed, whereas Genesis 15.16.
whence this testimony is cited, it is put in the active, vaia^h shebeha, and
he imputed it: 1. the reason hereof Tolet. annot. 5. thinks to be, that the
Septuagint and the Hebrews did read without pricks, and then the word might
be taken either actiuely or passiuely: but this is no found opinion, to think
that the Hebrew pricks came in so late, for so there should be great
uncertainty of the Scripture: and further, set the pricks aside, yet the word
is not expressed with the same letters, when it is actiuely and passiuely put:
for Genesis 15.6. the word is as before it is set down: but Psalm. 106.31. where
it is put passiuely, the word is techasheb, it was imputed: the letters are
diverse: and further in this place, Genesis 15.6. there is an affix of the feminine
gender, which shows a difference in the very letters of the word beside the
pricks. 2. some think that the Apostle writing by the same spirit which Moses
did, by his Apostolic authority did so cite this Scripture, Faius. but this
would have given great offense unto the Jews and converted Gentiles, if the
Apostles should have cited the Scriptures otherwise, then they were found in
the old Testament. 3. Therefore it was more safely affirmed, that the Apostle
follows the Septuagint, which was the received translation among the
Gentiles, Mar. specially seeing they keep the sense of the place, and the
rather because this reading in the passive is warranted by an other Scripture,
Psalm. 106.31. where it is read in the passive, and it was imputed unto him.

2. An other difference in this reading is, that the Apostle beside that he
changes the voice, turning the active into the passive, does not interpret the
Hebrew affix, he imputed ((...)) that is, Abraham's faith God imputed, for so
the word cenunah, faith, being understood after the manner of the Hebrews in
the verbal word heemin, he believed, answers unto the affix ha, of the
feminine gender: but this the Apostle afterward evidently supplieth, v. 9. that
faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousness.

3. A third difference there is, that in the Hebrew text there is no
preposition set before the word tzedekah, justice, as here the Apostle
translateth (...), for righteousness: but there Moses says, he imputed it unto
him for righteousness: but this doubt is easily removed: for Psalm. 106.31. the
phrase is put with a preposition, litzedakah, it was imputed to him for
righteousness: so that beside the identitie of the phrase, there is no
difference, to say it was imputed unto him for righteousness, or as
righteousness: this reading of the Apostle is warranted by that other place in
the Psalm.

4. S. Paul with the Septuagint read, he believed, (...), God, but in the
Hebrew it is, I^iehovah, in God: Augustines distinction therefore does not
always hold, that it is one thing, Deo credere, to believe God, an other in
Deum credere, to believe in God: Mart. for these two, both in the Hebrew and
Greek phrase, are taken for the same: though in the Latin tongue there is a
difference.

5. Quest. Of the meaning of the words, Who counted this for righteousness unto
Abraham.
1. Some of the Hebrews perverting that place, Genesis 15.6. do understand it of
Abraham, that he imputed this faith unto himself for righteousness: but beside
that it is a very improper, and unfit thing, that a man should impute unto
himself his own righteousness, the Apostle takes away this doubt, v. 9. weere
he says, was imputed to Abraham: he could not be both the imputer, and the
person also, to whom the thing is imputed.

2. And as unreasonable is their gloss, who understand an other third person
not expressed, that the world imputed it to Abraham, that is, held him for that
cause to be a righteous man: ex Beza. annot. for how should the world be here
understood, whereof there was no mention before: the words then do easily
demonstrate, who it was, that imputed it, namely, he in whom Abraham believed:
he believed God, and he, that is God, counted it unto him for righteousness.

3. Tertullian. lib. de patient. does read it in the passive, and refers it
unto Abraham, iustitiae deputatus est, he was deputed for righteous: whereas
the Apostle does not speak of the imputation of his person, but of his faith,
as he says, v. 9. faith was imputed to Abraham.

6. Quest. What it was that Abraham believed.
The Apostle may seem unfitly to allege that place of Abraham's faith, which
was only concerning the promise of multiplying his seed, which kind of
belief is of an other nature, then justification by faith: to this objection
diverse answers are made.

1. Pererius here has one answer, that S. Paul speaks not of the first
justification of Abraham, when of a sinner he became righteous, but of his
second justification, which was an increasing of the first: and this is done
per quemlibet actum meritorium, by any meritorious act: so that to believe any
promise of God by such a faith informed by charity, is meritorious of a
further degree of justice.

But beside other errors, which are here couched together, as of the first and
second justice, that charity is the form of faith, that we are justified by
the merit of faith, all which are before confuted in the controversies of the
former chapter: I do here oppose against Pererius, one of his own order,
namely Tolet. annot. 5. who directly proves, that S. Paul speaks of
Abraham's first justification, which he proves by that place, Iam. 2.25. that
when Abraham's faith was imputed to him for righteousness, he was called the
friend of God, now says he, secunda iustitia, non amicum, sed gratiorem amicum
fecit, the second justice does not make one Gods friend, (for he was Gods
friend before, when he was first justified) but it makes him a better and more
acceptable friend.

2. Peter Martyr has here two answers: 1. he that spoke here unto Abraham, was
Christ, and therefore in believing God, he believed Christ, and so this says
was imputed unto him for righteousness. 2. all the promises of God were grounded
upon the mercy and goodness of God, and the mercy of God is grounded on
Christ: the Patriarchs then, though it were but a temporal promise, which was
made, yet in believing of it, did repose their trust upon Gods mercy in
Christ: but both these answers are insufficient, for they show not directly
that Abraham was justified by faith, but only by a certain consequence.

3. Therefore the best answer is, that Abraham in this multiplying of his seed
did understand Christ: for his faith had respect not only unto this promise of
the multiplying of his seed, as the stars of heaven, Genesis 15.5. but to the
other promises before going, as that in his seed all the families of the earth
should be blessed, Genesis 12. And that in these promises the Messiah is
understood, thus it may appear: 1. because so S. Paul expounds seed, of
Christ, Gal. 3. and the Hebrews also do understand this seed wherein all the
families of the earth shall be blessed, of Christ. 2. this multiplying of
Abraham's seed, as the sand of the sea, or stars of heaven, was not fulfilled
in the carnal seed of Abraham, which contained it self within the compass
of Canaan, but it was accomplished in the spiritual seed of Abraham, in the
conversion of the Gentiles to the faith of Christ. 3. neither could that
blessing of all the families of the earth be understood of any carnal
blessing, but of the spiritual benediction of the Gentiles converted to the
faith of Christ: as it is said, Isa. 53.11. My righteous servant by his
knowledge shall justify many. 4. yea in that they are promised to be as the
stars of heaven, that is, shall have celestial glory, this promise the
seed of Abraham could not attain unto but by Christ the king of glory, Psalm.
24.8. 5. our blessed Savior says, that Abraham was glad to see his day, he
saw it and rejoiced: which shows, that he had an evident knowledge and
express faith of Christ. Pareus, Perer.

4. But Stapleton in Antidot. denies that this faith of Abraham was a special
faith of the remission of sins, but only the Catholic faith, which is to
assent unto every word of God. Contra. 1. If Abraham did assent unto the word
of God, then also to this word concerning the remission of sins in Christ,
unless they will deny, that Abraham had any word at all for the remission of
his sins: whereupon then arised that his singular joy in Christ, for wherein
can a man joy, then in the remission of his sins, and consequently that his
name is written in heaven? Luke 10.20. 2. If they hold the hope, and assurance
of remission of sins to be no part of the Catholic faith, as indeed the
Papists do not make it, let them keep such Catholic faith to themselves: we
will none of it: what comfort can one have in that faith, which can not assure
him of Gods favor and of the remission of his sins?

7. Quest. Why Abraham's faith was imputed unto him at this time, and not before.
Although Moses then first makes mention of Abraham's justification by faith,
Genesis 15.6. yet it has relation to all other acts of his faith going before,
for it was an act of faith, that Abraham obeyed God to go out of his country,
and to dwell in a strange land, Heb. 11.8. and other promises, as Genesis 12.3.
and 13.16. also Abraham believed, wherein he showed his faith: yet Moses
reserueth this commendation of Abraham's faith to this place, for these reasons:

1. Moses would not straight upon the first promise made, Genesis 12. speak of
Abraham's justification by faith, before he had brought forth diverse excellent
and glorious works, that his justification might appear to be of his faith,
not by works, so Faius, and Tolet. annot. 5.

2. Neither would Moses defer this testimony of Abraham's faith unto that act
of his in offering his Son to be sacrificed: but he sets it down here, as
soon as he had received an express promise concerning his seed, which was
Christ: that it might appear to be faith in Christ, and none other whereby he
was justified: before this Abraham had received some general promises
concerning Christ, as that in Abraham all the families of the earth should be
blessed, Genesis 12.3. and that his seed should be as the dust of the earth: but
the seed out of his own bowels was not promised until now. Tolet. Faius.

3. Further, then was his faith commended, because it had at that time been
thoroughly tried, when he thought that Eliezer his servant should be his heir.

4. And though Abraham had faith before, yet was it still more perfected: and
Abraham was now more certainly persuaded of his justification, and therefore he
is said now first to be justified, though indeed by the same faith, he had
been justified before. Pareus, dub. 2.

Quest. 8. What imputation is, and what to be imputed.
1. This word is distinguished according to that, which is imputed, as sometime
that which is evil is said to be imputed, sometime that which is good,

1. An evil thing is imputed two ways, either rightfully, as when a sin is
worthily imputed to him, that committed it, as Quintilian puts this case,
lib. 5. c. 10. vtrum caedes ei imputanda sit, etc. whether the murder be to be
imputed to him, that began the strife: or it is imputed wrongfully, as
adultery was imputed to Susanna her charge without cause. 2. a good thing is
imputed three ways. 1. iure, by right, as the reward is imputed to the work
by debt, as the Apostle uses the word here, v. 4. but then this word imputed
is taken for to give, and it is improperly called an imputing. 2. iniuria, by
wrong, as when innocence is imputed to a malefactor, which is forbidden, Prou.
17.15. to justify the wicked. 3. gratia, by grace and favor, a thing is
imputed, but not against right, propter alienum meritum, for an others merit,
and so are we said to be justified by faith in Christ, Pareus: like as when a
Creditor of grace and favor accepts a debt to be paid, and accounts it
discharged, when yet the party indebted is not able to pay it: in this sense
is the word taken, Numb. 18.27. Your offering shall be reckoned unto you, as the
corn of the barn, it shall be so counted, or be in stead of it, though it be
not it, Faius.

2. This word to be imputed, likewise is taken either Physice, in a Physical
sense, as when a plant is said to be imputed, that is, set in or graft into the
stock, or relate, by way of relation, when a thing is imputed by way of
acceptance and favor, as when the victory archieved by the soldiers, is for
honors sake ascribed unto the captain though absent, or when the captain to
whom the spoil belongs gives it unto the soldiers, that did not fight for
it: and thus is the righteousness of Christ, which we wrought not our selves,
imputed unto us by faith.

3. And thus for faith to be imputed for righteousness, or to be justified by
faith, of faith, or thorough faith, are with S. Paul taken for one and the same
thing.

Quest. 9. How Abraham's faith was imputed to him for righteousness.
1. Origin thinks that Abraham's faith, was imputed to him now for
righteousness, because it was perfect, whereas before until now it was only
in part: and hereof it is, that whereas it is said of the Israelites, Exodus
14.31. they believed the Lord, and his servant Moses, yet they are not said to
be justified by this faith, it was for that their faith was not perfect, as was
Arahams: But 1. no man's faith can be perfect here, for as we know in part, 1.
Cor. 13.12. so is our faith in part. 2. that belief, which there Moses
speaks of, was of an other kind, it was not a justifying faith, which is
joined with confidence, for they reposed not their trust in Moses: but it was
only a believing and giving credit unto God, and his minister Moses.

2. Neither was Abraham justified merito fidei, by the merit and worthiness of
his faith: as by the work and act thereof, as the Romanists teach: and Origin
gave occasion of this error, who thinks, as it is here said of faith, it was
imputed for righteousness, idem de alijs vertutibus dici potest, that the same
thing may be said of other virtues, as humility, wisdom, may be reputed unto
justice, etc. But this is a manifest error: for faith or any other virtue, as
it is a work cannot justify, because it is but an act of one virtue, and so
not obedience and conformity to the whole law: and beside we are said to be
justified by faith without works, then neither faith nor any virtue justifies
as a work.

3. Neither yet is faith taken here by a synecdoche, when one part is taken for
all, as including works, as P. Martyr reports their error, for faith cannot
include that which it excludes: if faith justify without works, then under
works, cannot faith be comprehended.

4. Here also we refuse that corrupt note of the ordinary gloss: that to him
which believes, si non habet tempus operandi, if he have not time to work,
faith only suffices to righteousness: but to him that has time to work,
the reward shall be given, not according to his belief only, sed secundum
debitum operationis, but according to the debt of his work: But two ways is
this gloss erroneous, 1. because it flatly contradicts the Apostle, who
affirms where faith is counted for righteousness, there is no reward due by
any debt, v. 4.5. 2. it is impossible, that he which has a justifying faith,
should be without some works: as even the theife upon the cross showed his
faith by his works, in confessing his sin and honoring Christ.

5. Tolet also here is very nice and curious, he will not have the word (...),
here to be interpreted by the word imputo, to impute, but by the word reputo,
to repute: the difference between the which two is this, reputatur id, quod
tale non est, ac si tale esset, etc. that is reputed, which is not such, as
though it were such: to impute is to make one the cause of some commodity and
discommoditie, ac si ille talis rei author esset, as if he were the author of
it, etc. 1. so then faith is said not to be imputed but reputed for justice,
because the act of faith is imputed for justice: for when it does not bring
justice of it own nature, vt est actus hominis, as it is an act of man, yet it
is so accepted of God. 2. and therefore he misliketh the word imputed, because
we thereupon gather, that there is no justice given unto man, whereby he is
made just, but the justice of Christ reputed: but he affirms, that there is a
justice verily given unto man, by faith, which God accepts for justice: as
the fight of the brazen serpent did verily heal, not by the virtue of the
fight, sed ex diuino beneplacito, because it so pleased God. 3. for if the word
imputed, not reputed had been here used, the Apostle would have said, he
imputed unto him, etc. not it was imputed: to this purpose, Tolet. annot. 7.

Contra. 1. We say that justice is both imputed, and reputed unto us by faith,
for first Christ's righteousness is imputed and made ours by faith, and then it
is reputed and accepted, as if we had our selves performed it: neither can
there be any reputed justice, but it must first be by imputation. For God in
his justice cannot hold or repute him for just, that is not just, unless for
an others rigteousnesse he be reputed and counted just. 2. That figure of
beholding the brazen serpent does make more for imputation of justice, then
reputation only: for they which looked upon the serpent, were not reputed as
healed, but verily were healed from the biting of the serpent, by the
imputation and application of the virtue apprehended by the sight of the
serpent: so we are truly healed from our sins by the imputation of Christ's
righteousness. 3. that which S. Paul utters in the passive, it was imputed,
Moses expressed in the active, he imputed, so that the sense is all one, and
seeing Tolet following the vulgar Latin reads, v. 8. Blessed is the man, to
whom the Lord imputes not sin, why should not the same sense of the word be
retained here?

6. Wherefore then all these cauills being thus removed, we infer, that
Abraham was justified by faith, not materialiter, materially, as it was an act:
but relate, and obiectur, as it has relation unto the object the justice of
Christ, and organice, instrumentally, as it applies and apprehends the
righteousness of Christ.

Quest. 10. Whether Abraham were justified by any thing beside his faith.
1. It will be objected, that Genes. 22.18. after the Lord had tried Abraham's
obedience and faithfulness in offering his son, the Angel said unto him in
the name of the Lord, because thou have done this thing, I will surely bless
thee, etc. here the Lord seems to bless Abraham for his obedience, not
because of his faith: to this we answer, that it is not said that Abraham was
justified by this fact: he was justified long before by his faith: but that the
Lord rewarded Abraham's obedience, with ample and large promises: and so the
Lord crowns in mercy the works and obedience in his servant.

2. Object. As it is said here that this faith and belief was imputed unto
Abraham for righteousness: so Psalm. 106.31. Phineas act in killing the
adulterer and the adulteress, is said to have been imputed to him for
righteousness.

Answ. There is an universal and particular justice, that is personae, of the
person, the other is facts, of some particular fact: so in this place in the
Psalm, the Prophet speaks not of that universal justice whereby one is
counted just before God, but of the particular justification and approbation of
Phineas his fact: which otherwise might have seemed to be unlawful, because he
did take the sword being a private man, but because he did it in the zeal of
Gods glory, the Lord approved it: Phinehas by that act being but one, could
not be justified before God; for the law says, cursed is he that continues
not in all things, which are written in the law: one act then of obedience
could not justify Phinehas before God: but that particular act was accepted
and approved: so Deuteronomy. 14.13. the restoring of the pledge before the Sun go
down, is said to be ones righteousness: that is, the Lord would accept it as
a work of righteousness, pleasing, and acceptable unto him: But in this place
the Apostle speaks of universal justice, whereby a man is justified and
counted just before God: to this purpose Pareus dub. 3. Martyr. Faius.

Quest. 11. How S. Paul and S. James are reconciled about the manner of
Abraham's justifying.
S. Paul says here, v. 3. that Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto
him for righteousness: but S. James says, c. 2.23. Was not Abraham our father
justified by works, when he offered his son Isaac?

1. Tolet would thus reconcile them, that S. Paul should speak of works going
before Abraham's justification, and without them he was justified; but S. James
of works, that followed after whereby Abraham was justified: But this solution
will not serve his turn: for Abraham before this time, when he is said to have
been justified by his faith, had done many excellent works, after he had
believed Gods promises, in obeying his calling, and leaving his country, which
things he did by faith: and yet he was justified without any such works: S.
Paul then excludes even such works as followed his justification.

2. Wherefore the true reconciling of them is this. 1. that S. Paul and S.
James speak not of the same kind of justification: the one reasons of the
manner and causes of our justifying before God, the other of the signs thereof
before men. 2. they speak of a diverse subject, S. Paul of Abraham,
iustificando, to be justified, S. James iustificati, of the same being
justified. 3. S. Paul of the justifying of the person, S. James of the
justifying of a particular fact, Gryneus: see in the former chapter, controv.
21.

Quest. 12. Of the explication of the 4. and 5. verses.
v. 4. To him that works. 1. Here are three expositions set one against the
other, of him that works, and works not, but believes: of the debt, and
favor, or grace, of the wages and imputation, Mart. and by him that works is
understood him, that works with an intent thereby to merit or to be justified:
for he that believes also works: but he is said not to work. secundu^ quid,
after a sort, because he does it not to that end to merit by it.

2. This the Apostle speaks by way of concession, using a civil axiom taken
from humane affairs: not that indeed before God any wages by debt is due unto
any that works, Beza. the Apostle then speaks thus by way of supposition,
ex hypothesi, Faius.

3. This Origin not well understanding, but supposing that the Apostle indeed
speaks of such as are rewarded for their work before God: and not seeing,
quod vllum opus ex debit^ remunerationem Dei poscat, that any work by due debt
can require reward at Gods hand, he turns the Apostles meaning an other way,
and by debts understands sins: as they are called in the Lords prayer, and
so he also thinks he speaks of the wages of sin, as S. Paul says, Romans
6. That the wages or stipend of sin is death: But the Apostle here speaks
evidently, of the wages due unto good works, not to evil: the wages is not
counted by favor: but in rendering the wages of sin, there is no favor but
justice.

4. The Schoolmen likewise are grossly deceived, who thinking the Apostle
does set down this as a positive rule before God, have here devised two
interpretations. 1. they understand this working, and not working, of the works
following justification: and so he that works is rewarded uot of favor
only, because of his faith, but for the debt also of his works, gloss.
interlin. but he that works not, that is, has no time to work is rewarded
only of grace: But this gloss is convinced of many errors. 1. in joining
faith and works together, whereas the Apostle before, c. 3.28. ascribed
justification to faith without works. 2. to say that our works are rewarded
by debt, is to make God endebted unto man for the work, which is not far
from blasphemy. 3. he that has true justifying faith can never be without
some works or fruits thereof, be his time never so short, as appears in the
theife upon the cross.

5. Gorrhan beside this exposition has an other, to understand the Apostle to
speak of works going before justification: and then he gives this sense:
that to him which does some good works before faith, if he should be rewarded,
the reward should be of debt, which is false, for then it should not be of
grace: but to him that works not any such work before faith, righteousness
is imputed by faith, etc. Here also are diverse errors. 1. ^o imagine, that
there can be any good works at all before faith. 2. he imagines the Apostles
speech to be conditionalll, if any reward be given, whereas the Apostle sets
it down ^^sitiuely, the wages is counted not, if it be. 3. the Apostle speaks
in all that discourse of all works whether going before justification, or
following after: for all works of the law are excluded, c. 3.28. now all good
works are such as the law requires, therefore even such good works are shut
out from justifying, as well such as follow justification, as go before. 4.
all these errors arise out of the misunderstanding of this place, where the
Apostle speaks by way of supposition, from the civil use of rewards among
men: that if there were any such meritorious working before God, the wages
should in like manner be due by debt.

Quest. 13. Of the diverse kinds of rewards.
1. Wages or reward is either due by debt, per proportionem operae cum re, by
the proportion of the work with the reward, after a Geometrical kind of
proportion: as when a labourer is couenanted with to have so much for his
work, as in a due estimation it is valued at: there is a wages which is of
favor by promise and not by debt, and then it signifies the same thing that
fructus, a kind of fruit or commodity that follows ones labor, as Psalm.
127. the fruit of the womb is called a reward, and so life eternal is called
a reward, because the Lord has promised to give it as a fruit following the
labor of his Saints, Fai.

2. And further life eternal is called a reward by a certain similitude,
because that as in civil works the reward comes after the work is done: so
life eternal follows after men's fruitful labor in this life, Mart. and
again it is called a reward, in respect of the thing done, not for the manner
of the doing: because that as the wages is given to the worker of debt, so is
salvation rendered to him, which believes of grace, Pareus.

3. But properly eternal life is not a wages or reward, for these reasons. 1.
because the things are not equal, which are given and received, the eternal
reward, far exceeds the worth of our temporary and imperfect obedience. 2.
he that meriteth the wages, most do it ex proprio, of his own: but we have
nothing which we have not received: it is not our own. 3. he that meriteth
must be no way bound unto him that pays the wages, for his service: but all
that we do or can do, it is our duty to do.

Quest. 14. How it stands with Gods justice to justify the wicked, v. 5.
v. 5. But believes in him, that justifies the ungodly: this may seem to be
contrary to that Exodus 34.7. where the Lord says, he will not hold the wicked
innocent: and Prou. 17. it is called an abomination to justify the wicked.

1. Bucer hereunto answeareth, that S. Paul here speaks of the first
justification, which if it should not be of the wicked, none at all should be
justified, for we are all the children of wrath, and the Lord finds us all
wicked before we are justified: But Moses speaks of him, which continues in
his sin and disobedience afterward.

2. Gryneus thus answers, that although it be not lawful for a man to
justify the wicked, yet God may do it, that is omni lege superior, above all
law: and the reason of this difference is, because God only has right and
power to forgive sins, because they are committed chiefly against him, Faius.

3. Pareus adds further, that then it is unjust to justify the wicked when
as it is done without cause, and against the rule of justice, there being no
satisfaction made by the offender himself, or some other for him: but with God
it is so, for he justifies the wicked having received a sufficient
satisfaction by the death of Christ, who has paid the price of our redemption.

4. To this also may be adjoined, that this must be understood in sen su
diuiso, in a divided sense, that God justifies the wicked: not him that
remains wicked, but was so before he was justified: Faius. Anselmus
understands him to be wicked, that believes not: he then which believes, is
no longer to be counted wicked: so then whom God justifies be also
sanctifies, and of an unrighteous man he is made righteous: which
righteousness is imperfect here in this life, and therefore it cannot
justify, Par. dub. 4.

Quest. 15. How our sins are said to be forgiven and covered, v. 7.
1. First it is here to be observed, that whereas S. Paul brings in this
testimony out of the Psalms, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven,
and whose sins are covered, to prove the former proposition that God
imputes righteousness without works: that these two to remit and cover
sins, and to impute righteousness, are taken for one and the same thing: for
it is the obedience and righteousness of Christ, whereby both our sins are
remitted, and justice imputed unto us: As Luke 18.13. the Publican says, O God
be merciful unto me a sinner, and it is said of him, v. 14. that he went home
justified, etc. so then for God to show mercy in forgiving sin, and for man
to be justified, do both concur together, and the one does necessarily
follow the other.

2. Further the privatiue graces of the spirit, as in the remitting of sin,
the hiding of iniquity, and the not imputing of sin, are not severed from
the positive graces, as in the imputing of righteousness, Gryneus.

3. Now sometime sin in Scripture is said to be remitted, sometime to be hid,
and covered, and further to be not imputed, likewise to be washed away: which
are all the same in effect, but yet in a diverse, respect: for there are four
things to be considered in sin. 1. the first is the inordinate act of sin,
which being once done cannot be undone: this is said to be covered, not as
though it were not, but because it is not imputed, the Lord sees it not to
punish it. 2. there is in sin, the offense committed against God, which the
Lord is said to forgive and remit, like as one man remitteth and forgiueth the
injury and wrong done against him. 3. there is the blot and stain of sin,
whereby the soul is defiled and polluted, and that is said to be washed away.
4. there is the guilt of eternal death, in respect whereof sin is said not
to be imputed, Faius.

4. Now the reason, why these are all one, to impute righteousness, to remit
sin, is this: because these are immediately contrary one to the other, to be
a sinner, and to be just: he that is a sinner is not just, and so consequently
he that is just, is reputed no sinner, Par. dub. 5.

Quest. 16. In what sense circumcision is said to be a sign, and wherefore it
was instituted.
1. It was signum memorativum, a sign of remembrance or commemoration of the
covenant, which was made between God, and Abraham, and of the promises, which
he received: namely these three, 1. of the multiplying of his seed. 2. of
inheriting the land of Canaan. 3. of the Messiah which should be borne of his
seed.

2. It was signum representativum, a representing sign of the excellent faith
of Abraham as it is afterward called, a seal of the righteousness of faith.
3. it was signum distinctivum, a sign of the distinguishing the Hebrews from
all other people. 4. it was signum demonstrativum, a sign demonstrating or
showing the natural disease of man, even original sin, and the cure thereof
by Christ. 5. it was signum praesigurativum, a sign prefiguring baptism, and
the spiritual circumcision of the heart, Perer.

Quest. 17. In what sense circumcision is called a seal of the righteousness
of faith, v. 11.
1. Origin thinks, that it is so called, because in circumcision was sealed,
and lay hid and secret the righteousness of faith, which should afterward be
revealed and unfolded in Christ, and that it was a sign in respect of the
believing Gentiles, and a seal unto the unbelieving Jews, shutting them up in
unbelief, until they should be called in the end of the world: But 1. in
this sense it was not a seal to shut up and keep secret, seeing that Abraham
was commended for his belief, and the justice of faith was not unknown, or as
a^ hid and secret thing to the fathers. 2. Neither does S. Paul here speak of
unbelievers, but of those which believe, whose father Abraham was.

2. Chrysostom and Theodoret expound circumcision to be a seal, that is,
testimonium fidei acceptae, a testimony of faith received: but a seal serves
more then for a witness or testimony, there are witnesses used beside.

3. Thomas thinks it was called a seal, that is, expressum signum, an
express sign, having a similitude of the thing signified: as because hs was
promised to be a father of many nations, he received this sign in the
generatiue part: But though a seal have the mark or print of the stamp, yet
is it not called a seal for that, but in respect of the thing sealed and
^^^ified.

4. Neither does it only signify signum distinctivum, a distinguishing sign
of the people of the Hebrews from others: for it had been enough to say it
was a sign.

5. But because a seal is more then a bare sign, it is for confirmation as
kings letters pa^^^ts are sealed for better assurance: circumcision therefore
served as a seal, vt obsignaret (...) fidei, to seal the righteousness of
faith: by the which seal the promises of God cordibus imprimuntur, are
imprinted in the hearts, Calvin.

Quest. 18. Whether the mystery of faith in the M^ssiah to come were generally
known under the law.
The occasion of this question here is, because the Apostle says, that
circumcision was the seal of the righteousness of faith: seeing then, that
all the people were circumcised, it may seem, that generally all of them had
this knowledge of the Messiah to come.

1. Augustine as P. Martyr cites him, seems to be of opinion, lib. 3. de
doctrine. Christian. that only the Patriarchs and Prophets, and more excellent
men, being illuminate by the spirit did apprehend this mystery of faith, in
the Messiah to come, and that the common people did only know in general,
that God was worshipped by those signs and ceremonies, which were prescribed
in the law, but the end and scope of them they did not know: But by three
aguments it may appear, that the knowledge of the Messiah was more general.
1. the Prophets did every where show the insufficiency of the external
ceremonies and sacrifices, that they were not those things; which God required
at their hands: so that the people could not be ignorant, by the continual
doctrine of the Prophets that some further thing was signified thereby. 2. yea
the Prophet Isay has most direct prophesies of the Messiah, that by his
stripes we are healed, and that God had laid upon him, the iniquities of us
all, c. 53. 3. at the coming of Christ it is evident that there was a general
expectation of Christ: as Philip said to Nathanael, Ioh. 1.45. We have found
(...) of whom Moses did write in the law, and the Prophets: and the woman of
Samaria said, Job. 4.25. I know well that Messiah shall come.

2. But though the knowledge of the Messiah, were more generally revealed, then
to the Patriarchs and Prophets only: yet is it not to be thought, that the
people did know in particular the meaning of every ceremony, but only
generally, that they aimed at the Messiah: neither yet had all the people this
knowledge: there were some carnal men among them, which only did adhere unto
the external signs, ex Mart.

Quest. 19. Certain questions of circumcision: and first of the external
sign, why it was placed in the generative part.
1. Hereof these three reasons may be yielded. 1. by that part of being the
instrument of generation was signified the propagation of original sin: that
like as the circumcised parents did yet beget children with their uncircumcised
part: so the regenerate parents had children, which had need to be regenerate.
2. it was a sign of Gods covenant both to them and their posterity, as the
Lord promised to be their God, and the God of their seed. 3. Christ was thereby
signified, that he should come of the seed of Abraham.

2. And though this seemed in it self a mean and base sign, yet because it
was instituted by God, it is not to be basely esteemed of, as profane Celsus
and Julian scoffed, because our first parents were forbidden to eat an apple:
so the Jews and Gentiles derided the cross of Christ, as a weak means unto
salvation: like as Naaman despised the Prophets counsel to be washed 7. times
in Jordan: but these considered not, how that in all these things not so much
the external precept is to be respected, as the institution of God.

3. Now why circumcision was limited unto the eight day. Chrysostom renders
these two reasons, because the infant in his tender age, facilius doloris
circumcisionem sufferre possit, can more easily bear the grief of
circumcision: and beside hereby he says was signified nihil animae conducere,
that circumcision was not available any thing at all for the soul: P. Martyr
makes this the reason thereof: 7. days he would have to signify this present
world, and the 8. day the resurrection, when all corruption of the flesh shall
be laid aside, which was signified by circumcision: But of these three reasons
the first is most probable: other reasons there are which are more fully
handled and discussed, Hexapl. in Genesis c. 17. whether I refer the studious
Reader.

Quest. 20. Certain doubts removed, and objections answered, concerning
circumcision.
1. It is doubted how circumcision was a peculiar mark of distinction for the
Hebrews seeing that other nations used circumcision, as the Arabians,
Phenicians, Egyptians, and at this day the Turks: to this it may be answered
that some nations among the Gentiles retained circumcision by an apish
imitation of the Hebrews, but they did abuse it superstitiously, and did not
keep the rite of institution, as the Lord had appointed it: 1. they did abuse
it to superstition: for they imagined that by the blood of the infant the evil
spirits were chased away, as Ambrose observes, lib. 2. de Abraham: And the
superstitious Jews have the like conceit at this day, when the child is
circumcised they hold under a vessel of earth, into the which they cast the
foreskinne that is cut off, thinking thereby that the devil having his food
(because dust was appointed to be the serpents meat) will depart from the
child. 2. The Egyptians used to circumcise the females among them as well as
the males. 3. the Hebrews circumcised at 8. days old, but the Egyptians at
14. years, as do the Turks also.

2. It is further objected, that circumcision was an imperfect sign, because
it was appointed only for the males, the females were not circumcised.

Answ. Yet the privilege and benefit of circumcision, was extended also unto
the females, which were counted with the men, the unmarried with their fathers,
the married with their husbands.

3. But further thus some object: if the foreskinne be not according to nature,
why is it suffered to grow? Answ. As though for the furthering of the
spiritual man, it be not lawful to tame the flesh: as is seen in fasting,
abstinence, and other bodily exercises, which serve for the strengthening of
the inward man: and so it is fit that in circumcision that part of the body
should be used and employed for the service of the spiritual man, Peter Mart.

4. Object. By this hard ceremony and rite of circumcision, many were
terrified from taking upon them the profession of the Hebrews: beside it was
dangerous for children, and by this cutting off the foreskinne they were in
peril of their lives.

Answ. 1. Circumcision was nothing so terrible, as the sufferings of the holy
Martyrs: the shedding of their blood for the testimony of Jesus, was no
hinderance or discouragement unto men to become Christians: but many were
provoked rather by their patience to embrace the Christian faith. 2. It was fit
that as infants were subject to sin, so they should receive the sacrament,
which was a remedy against it: as Ambrose well says, vt omnis aetas est
obnoxia peccato, ita idonea est sacramento, as every age is subject to sin,
so is it mere for the Sacrament: And by this hard entrance into their
profession, they were admonished patiently to endure much for faith, and not
easily to give it over: God also by his providence so brought it to pass, that
very few infants died of their circumcision.

Quest. 21. How Abraham is said to be the father of them which believe, ver.
11.12.
1. The Apostle here affirms two things of Abraham, that he was counted
righteous by faith, being yet uncircumcised, and that he received afterward
circumcision as a seal of the righteousness of faith: and so accordingly he
is said to be the father of all that believe, both the uncircumcised, because
he was uncircumcised, when he first believed, and of the circumcised, because
he also received circumcision as a seal of his righteousness, which was by
faith.

2. Now he is said to be the father of them which believe, not effectiue, as
effecting in them faith and belief: for so God only is the father of
believers, working in them faith, and every good gift by his spirit: but he is
their father only analogice, by a certain analogy, that as fathers do
transmit over their inheritance unto their posterity, so Abraham should leave
one example of believing for them to follow, Pareus.

3. And though many of the fathers also were believers before Abraham, yet none
of them are said to be father of the faithful, as Abraham was, because to none
of them was made the like promise concerning their posterity as to Abraham,
Tolet.

4. Now in that Abraham is said to be the father of them which believe,
thereupon the Apostle infers, that they which are the children of faithful
Abraham must also be justified by the same faith: for the fathers do leave
unto their children their privileges and inheritance: like as then Abraham
left unto his caranll seed his temporal inheritance, namely the possession of
the land of Canaan, so unto his spiritual children he bequeathed the
spiritual inheritance of justification by faith.

Quest. 22. How Abraham is said to be the father of circumcision, ver. 12.
1. Lyranus understands the spiritual circumcision of the heart, but by the
words following, not unto them only which are of the circumcision, but unto
them also that walk in the steps, etc. it is evident that he speaks here of
the outward circumcision which is not sufficient, unless it be accompanied
with the inward circumcision of the heart, which is by faith.

2. Anselmus thinks that the Apostle reports here that which he said
before, that Abraham is the father of them which believe, though they be
uncircumcised: but he touches here rather the other part, that Abraham is the
father of the circumcision also: which he further explaineth, that he means
not such as only have the carnal circumcision, but such as walk in the
steps of Abraham.

3. By walking in the steps, the Apostle understands not here the fruits
and effects of faith, but rather faith it self, in which respect Abraham is
said to be the father of the faithful, Beza annot. And herein they must
follow the steps of Abraham. 1. he was not counted just, not by any merits
or works of his, but by faith. 2. this faith was joined with a constant and
full assurance: herein they must be like unto Abraham.

4. Origin here observes, that though at this time he were called Abram, not
Abraham, when he was pronounced just by faith, Genesis 15. yet the Apostle
retains that name, which was afterward imposed by the Lord, quod enim
divinitus sumitur, obseruari in posterum convenit, for that which is once
appointed of God, it is fit afterward to be observed.

Quest. 23. How and where Abraham was promised to be heir of the world, v. 13.
1. Gryneus by the world understands (by a Synecdoche of the whole taken for
a part) the land of Canaan, which was promised to Abraham and his seed: but
the Apostle speaks here not of a temporal, but of a spiritual promise.

2. Faius, Osiander, with others, do apply it unto Canaan also, but
mystically, as it was a type and figure of the kingdom of heaven.

3. Lyranus will have this fulfilled in Christ, to whom was given all power in
heaven and earth: so also Peter Martyr, and Calvin, who alleges that place,
Heb. 1.2. Whom he has made heir of all things.

4. Pareus by the world understands the world of the faithful, and believers
dispersed over the world: and so in effect it is the same, which he said before
that Abraham should be the father of all which believe, whether of the
circumcision or uncircumcision: So also Origin here refers us unto that
promise, Genesis 15. that in Abraham all the kinreds of the earth should be
blessed: likewise Beza.

5. As this last seems to be the fittest interpretation, so I think it best
to join both these last together: that Abraham was made heir of the world,
that is, the father of all believers in the world: yet so, as this was chiefly
performed in Christ: as it is said Psalm ^^ I will give the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession: And so S.
Paul also Galath. 3. understands the seed of Abraham, unto whom the promise
was made of Christ: to this purpose the ordinary gloss, that Abraham was
here is mundi secundum propositum exemplum, heir of the world in respect of his
example of believing: but Christ secundum potestatem, in regard of his power.

Quest. 24. Wherein Abraham was made heir of the world, and wherein this
inheritance consisted.
1. This inheriting of the world is not meant of any temporal dominion, which
sno^^ fall unto the posterity of Abraham, as the Jews dreamed, for the object
of faith is spiritual, not temporal: as it is defined by the Apostle to be
the evidence of things that are not seen, Heb. 11.1.

2. It must therefore be referred unto Christ. 1. Abraham in Christ's right is
promise^^ the inheritance of the world, which should be chiefly accomplished
in the celestial inheritance. 2. and now in the earth this spiritual
inheriting of the world is understood of the Church of Christ, which is
dispersed thorough the world. 3. and beside the faithful only have true tight
and interest unto the temporal things of this life: which the wicked (...)
bold as usurpers: as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 3.21. all things are yours, and
ye Christ's and Christ Gods, Pareus.

Quest. 25. How faith is said to be made void, if they which are of the law,
be heirs.
1. Haymo by the promise here understands the blessing which was promised to
Abraham, should in his seed come upon all nations: so that if they which were
of the law and circumcision should only be heirs unto Abraham: that promise
should not be accomplished, that all nations should in his feed be blessed.

2. Origin thus expounds, evacuabitur id, that should be evacuated and made
void, that Abraham was justified by faith: his meaning is, that the word of
God should not be found true: so also Osiander takes here faith, for the
constancy of Gods promises: it would follow that God did not stand to his
promise: seeing the promise was made to the faith of Abraham: but faith is not
taken in that sense in this chapter: but thereby is meant belief in God, and
the relying upon his promises.

3. Bucer and Calvin give this sense, that seeing faith is joined with an
assured confidence and trust: if the promise were made to the keeping of the
law, which being a thing impossible, would make doubtfulnesse and distrust in
the mind, this were contrary unto the nature of faith: and so in this respect
faith should be made void.

4. Tolet here refers us to that place, Galat. 3.17. where the Apostle
reasons from the time: that the law, which came 400. years after the
promise, could not make void the promise which was made before, but if the
inheritance came by the law, then should the promise which was made first, be
of no effect, which were very absurd and inconvenient.

5. But the Apostle rather reasons here from the contrary and diverse nature
of the law, and promise: for the law requires works, and so the reward is
of due debt, the promise is of faith, and so the reward is of grace and favor:
these then do one destroy an other: for that which is of favor cannot be of
desert, and due debt: if the inheritance then come by the law of works, the
law of faith is made void, and so Gods promise should be frustrate, which is
impossible, Pareus in ver. 14.

Quest. 26. How the law is said to cause wrath.
1. This is not brought in as an argument and proof of the former speech, that
the promise is of no effect, if the inheritance were by the law: but it is a
new argument to prove that inheritance is not by the law, by the contrary
effect, because the promise procures a blessing, but the law wrath and so
malediction, therefore the inheritance is not by the law.

2. Origin by the law understands the law of the members, which makes us
captive unto sin, and indeed causes wrath: and where this law is not, there
is no transgression: Haymo thinks it may be of the law of nature: but it is
evident that the Apostle speaks of the written law of Moses: as he calls
the Jews, Abraham's seed of the law, v. 16. that is, which had received the
law.

3. By wrath, some would understand the wrath and indignation in the
transgressor, his contumacie and rage against God, who has by law restrained
him of his licentious liberty: Origin and Haymo refer it to the penalty of
the law, as an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: but it rather signifies
the wrath and indignation of God in judging and punishing of sin, not only
temporally but eternally, Calvin.

4. Now the law works wrath, not of it self, for it is holy, just, and
good, but in respect of the weakness and corruption of man, which takes
occasion by the law as contrary unto it, to be the worse: as we see that in
nature, one contrary by the resistance of an other, becomes so much the more
violent: as expereince shows in the breaking out of lightening and thunder,
and in the terrible noise of gunshot, where two contraries meet together, the
fiery hot nature of the brimstone, and the cold quality of the saltpeter
both tempered together in the gunpowder, Mart.

5. But although the law occasionaliter, by way of occasion procures wrath:
yet it has an other end, and effect unto the godly: for unto them it is a
schoolmaster to bring them unto Christ: so that Christ is the end of the
law, not only because he has abolished the ceremonies of the law, and so is
the end and fulfilling thereof: but because the law directs us unto Christ,
who has fulfilled the law for us, which it was impossible for us to keep.

6. Now the holy Apostle does of purpose thus speak of the law, as saying,
that by it comes the knowledge of sin, that it causes wrath, that it is
the ministry of death; that by this means he might abate that great opinion
and estimation of the law, which the Jews conceived of it, hoping thereby to
be justified: but otherwise, as the law is considered in it self, he gives it
the due commendation, as afterward is showed in the 7. chapter: like as now the
Preachers of the Gospel do give unto good works their due praise and
commendation, but yet they detract from them, as not being able to justify
us. Mart.

26. Quest. Of the meaning of these words, v. 15. Where no law is, there is no
transgression.
1. Origin here observes, that the Apostle says not, where is law, there is
transgression: for then all those holy men, which lived under the law, should
be held to be under transgression: but he says in the negative, where there is
no law, there is no transgression. But this collection is not good, for the
contrary must be inferred out of the Apostles words: where there is no law,
there is no transgression, therefore, where there is a law, there is
transgression, or else there should be no coherence in the Apostles words:
whereas this is added, as a proof of the former clause, that the law causes
wrath.

2. Now touching the coherence: Gorrhan makes here two arguments why the
inheritance can not be by the law, because by it, there is neither remissio
poenae, remission of the punishment, the law causing wrath, nor yet remissio
culpae, remission of the fault, because by the law comes transgression.
Gryneus makes this the coherence, because idem est index, etc. there is the
same foreshowne both of the transgression and punishment, namely the law: But
thus better does the sentence hang together: the Apostle proves that the law
causes wrath, by the cause thereof, for that it causes transgression: so then
transgression is set in the mids between the law, and wrath: for the law
brings forth transgression, and transgression wrath. Pareus.

3. But this should seem to be no good argument: no law, no transgression,
therefore where there is law, there is transgression: as it follows not, no
creature, no man, Ergo, a creature, a man. Ans. The Apostle here reasons not
a genere-ad speciem, from the genus to the species, as in the instance
proposed: but from the contrary, by the like connection of the causes and
effects: as this follows well in the like; where the Sun is not risen,
there is ^^ day light, therefore the Sun being risen, it is day. Pareus.

4. Now concerning the meaning of these words, Haymo thinks it may be
understood either of the law of nature: and so infants not yet having
understanding of this law, cannot be transgressors against it: or of the
Evangelicall law, which the Pagans not having, are not held to be so great
offenders, as they which have reciued it: or of the moral law of Moses, where
that law is not non est tanta praevaricatio, neque sic imputatur, there is not
so great transgression, neither is it so much imputed. This latter sense is to
be preferred: for thoroughout this chapter the Apostle understands the law
of Moses.

5. And further for the true understanding of these words, it must be observed,
1. that the Apostle says not, where is no law, there is no iniquity: for the
old world and the Sodomites committed iniquity, before the law was written:
but he says there is no transgression, which is referred to the law written,
gloss. ordin. 2. this is simply true of things indifferent, as were the
ceremonies, before they were commanded by law, for then it was no sin to
omit them: but of things evil in their own nature it must be understood after
a sort, that there was not so great transgression before the law was given, as
after, Lyran. 3. and hereof these two reasons may be given, both quia homines
nituntur in vetitum, men are most bent unto that which is forbidden, and so by
the prohibition of the law, the stubbornenesse of man's heart was increased: as
also because by the law came the knowledge of sin: and so the servant that
knows his masters will and does it not, is worthy of more stripes, Lyran. 4.
So then the Apostle denies not, but that sin which is committed against the
conscience, even where there is no law, is sin, non est reus tantae
transgressionis, etc. he is not guilty of so great transgression, as he which
knows the law and breaks it, Calvin.

Quest. 27. Who are meant by Abraham's seed, which is of the Law, v. 16.
1. The Apostle in this verse urges two arguments, to prove that the
inheritance is not of the law, but of faith: because it is of grace, for to be
justified by faith, and by grace, with the Apostle, are all one: and because
the promise is firm: but if it were by the law, it should be uncertain and
not firm, because of man's weakness, who is not able to perform the law:
Calvin. Chrysostom further says, that the Apostle here speaks of two chief
good things, or benefits: the one is quod quia data sunt, firma sunt, the
things which are given are firm: the other, quod vniverso semini data sunt,
they are given to the whole seed of Abraham.

2. By the seed which is of the law, 1. Origin understands them that unto
the natural law, do join also faith: so that he would have one and the same
seed here understood, which is of the law, and of faith also: but it is
evident, that the Apostle saying, Not to that only which is of the law, but to
that which is of faith, etc. does make a manifest distribution and distinction,
of those which are the seed according to the law, and of those which are not,
but of faith. 2. Some understand this clause of that seed, which de operibus
legis praesu^mit, does presume of the works of the law: gloss interlin.
ordinar. but unto such as depend upon the works of the law, the promise
appertains not at all. 3. Therefore, by those of the law, he means the
believing Jews, to whom the law was given: and the same before he called v.
12. them which were of the circumcision, Pareus: and he means not those which
were only of the law, but of faith also, that is, were believers though of the
circumcision: for here is a distinction of the seed of Abraham (now none are
his seed, which have not says) whereof some are believers of the
circumcision, and so of the law: some are believers only, and are not of the
circumcision. Beza. annot.

3. But here the words stand thus in the original, (...), to that of faith,
Abraham: Erasmus would refer the article (...), that, not unto seed, but
unto Abraham: and so he makes two Abraham's, one which was justified by faith
being uncircumcised, the other justified by faith when he was circumcised:
like as the Scripture makes two Adams one heavenly, an other earthly: But the
Scripture no where sets before us two Abraham's: and the Apostles meaning is
evident, that he speaks distributiuely, of the seed of Abraham, one of the
law, and the other only of faith. Beza.

Quest. 28. Of the meaning of these words, v. 17. I have made thee a father of
many nations, before God.
1. Oecumenius joins this with the former words, as it is written, as though
the meaning should be this, it is written before God: and therefore it is
worthy to be received: but it was evidently, that this testimony was taken
out of Scripture, and so the testimony of God himself.

2. Origin interprets thus, before God, that is, by God, he was appointed to
be a father of many nations: but this were superfluous: for the words
themselves, I have made thee a father, do evidently show without any other
addition, that it was God that had made him, and called him to be a father, etc.

3. Chrysostom, Theophylact, Theodoret, do take the preposition (...), (which
signifies as well against, or answerable, or before) here in the first sense,
that Abraham was made the father of many nations, instar vel ad exemplum Dei,
like, or after the example of God: and that in two respects; both because as
God was an universal father, not of one nation, but of all, so was Abraham:
and as God was a spiritual father, not by carnal generation, so was Abraham
also: thus also Martyr and Pareus: But learned Beza observes, that this wood
(...), against, is no where in the new Testament taken in that sense for (...),
like.

4. Lyranus with the gloss understands it of Abraham's righteousness and
vprightnes, that he walked uprightly before God, as the Lord said unto him,
Genesis 17.1. Walk before me, and be thou upright: But the Apostle thoroughout
this discourse insisteth upon Abraham's righteousness by faith, not by works.

5. Haymo refers it to Abraham's faith, and so makes this difference of
those which believe; that some believe God, but not before God, because their
faith is only in outward show, and profession, and not in heart: but they
believe before God, that believe and trust in him, with all their heart: but
the words are not, he believed before God, but before God, whom he believed: so
that this is not meant personally of Abraham's faith, but of his calling to be
the father of many nations.

6. Anselme likewise has relation to the faith of Abraham, as it is set
against the carnal generation: that by faith, not in the flesh he obtained to
be the father of many nations.

7. But it rather shows the manner how, then the cause, why he was made the
father of many nations: namely before God, by a spiritual generation, not by a
carnal in the (...) of men, Calvin, Beza. that although it appeared not so
unto men, that he was the father of many nations: yet before God he was
appointed to be the father of many nations (...) faith, Osiander.

Quest. 29. Of the meaning of these words, v. 17. Who quickneth the dead, and
calls those things which be not, etc.
1. Origin understands this of the quickening of those which are dead in their
sins, and thinks it to be specially meant of the Jews, which were raised
by Christ from their sins: but in the end of the chapter, ver. 24. the
Apostle speaks of the corporal raising of Jesus from the dead.

2. Oecumenius and Ambrose have special reference unto Abraham whose body is
afterward said to be dead: yet it was quickened, that is made lively, and apt
for generation: But this the Apostle speaks of afterward, so that it should
seem a needelesse repetition if it had been touched before: and it is an
improper speech, to call the reviuing of an old decayed body, the quickening
of the dead.

3. Some expound this place by that, Heb. 11.19. of Abraham's faith, when he
offered up Isaac, He considered, that God was able to raise him up even from the
dead: and this they will have understood of that act of Abraham's faith, Tolet.
annot. 18. Faius: But this act of Abraham's faith, to believe that he should be
the father of many nations, went long before the other act of his faith in
offering up of his son.

4. But the best interpretation is, that Abraham believed in Gods omnipotency,
and all-sufficiencie, which is described by two effects, the one in causing
that to be, which never was, as in the creation: the other, in making that to
have a being again, which had ceased to be, as in the resurrection, Pareus.
And so Chrysostom also understands it of the resurrection of the dead: but
as Abraham believed thus generally concerning the power of God, yet there was a
particular application to his own state at that present: that God could raise
him a posterity, even out of his dead body: for so the Apostle says, Heb.
11.29. that be received Izaac from the dead; after a sort, Beza. Bucer.

Quest. 30. How God is said to call those things which be not, as though they
were.
1. Concerning the diverse uses and acceptations of this word, to call, it is
taken in Scripture specially four ways. 1. it signifies the first motion,
whereby God calls any unto the knowledge of salvation, as Romans 8.30. whom he
predestined, he also called. 2. it betokens the profession of
Christianity, as the Apostle exhorts, Ephesians. 4. that they should walk
worthy of their calling. 3. it signifies to bid, command a thing to be, which
was not, as Psalm. 105. God is said to have called for a famine upon the whole
land. 4. it is used for the distinct and exact knowledge of God, as Psalm. 147.
he numbreth the stars, and calls them all by their names: so the Lord says
to Moses, I have called thee by name: But here it is taken the third way: the
Lord calls things that are not, as though they were, that is, causes them to
be, Perer.

2. Concerning the meaning of these words. 1. Origin, Haymo, Anselmus do
understand this to be spoken of the Gentiles, which in respect of their
infidelity were no people before, as c. 9.25. the Apostle in this sense
alleges out of the Prophet Hosea, I will cal^ them my people, which are not
my people: to the same purpose, Lyranus with the interlinearie gloss, I will
call the things which are not, that is the Gentiles, which are of no
reputation, and make them as the things that are, that is as the Jews: But as
yet the Jews were not a constituted people, Abraham had at this time no seed
at all, and therefore they were no more a people, then the Gentiles.

2. Ambrose likewise understands here the Gentiles, but in an other respect:
they were not of the seed of Abraham, and yet they should be counted his
children, as though they were of his seed: But the Apostle speaks here of
all Abraham's seed, that he believed he should be the father of many nations,
not only of the Gentiles but the Jews also.

3. So likewise Beza in his annot. and Bucer in his commentary do distinguish
these two clauses: that the first, which quickens the dead, should be
understood of the circumcised Jews, which came out of Abraham's loins, being
in a manner dead: the other which calls things that are not, etc. of the
Gentiles, that of no people, were made a people: like as John Baptist said,
that God out of the very stones was able to raise up children to Abraham: But
we refuse this also upon the former reason, because the Apostle speaks here
of the whole posterity of Abraham, whether Jews or Gentiles, he as yet having
(...) feed at all, and therefore it could not be distinguished.

4. The ordinary gloss has reference here to Gods election, elegit qui non
sunt, he elected those, which as yet were not: they were not yet to whom the
promise was made, sed quibus promissum est, and ips^ promissi sunt: but they
are also promised to whom the promise is made: But the Apostle speaks not
here of Gods election, which was before all time, but of a promise made unto
Abraham in time, which he believed, that he should be the father of many
nations.

5. It remains then, that the Apostle here has reference unto the creation
of the world, when all things were made of nothing: which is described by the
name of calling, vt maiorem eius rei facilitatem in Deo declaret, to show the
greater facility and easines of this work in God: with whom it is as easy to
make a thing to be, as for us to name or call it: thus Chrysostom, Faius. But
this faith of Abraham concerning Gods creating power, has here a special
acco^modation: that as God was able to make the things that are of nothing, so
Abraham doubted not, but that God was able to give unto him a feed, as the
stars of heaven in multitude, he yet having no feed at all: this I take to
be the true meaning.

Quest. 31. Whether it be peculiar to God only to quicken, and raise the dead.
1. It will be here objected, that this seems not to be peculiar unto God to
quicken the dead, seeing not only Prophets and Apostles have raised the dead,
but the Pythonisse also called up Samuel: and in foreign histories, Aesculapius
is reported to have by medicine reviued two, Capaneus and Lycurgus, and
Polyitus raised Glaucus Minoes son, and Draco raised an other Draco,
Apollodor. biblioth. lib. 3. p. 134.

Answ. 1. This power of quickening the dead is peculiar unto God, for as he was
the first author, and Creator of life, so he only is able to restore life: the
Scripture says, Ioh. 5.26. as the father has life in himself, so he has
given to the Son to have life in himself: this power then to give and
communicate life unto others, is only in him, that is the fountain of life,
that has life in himself.

2. The Apostles and Prophets indeed verily raised up the dead, yet not in
their own power, but by the virtue and power of Christ: as Peter says, Act.
3.12. Why look ye on us, ^^ though by our own power or godliness, we had
made this man go.

3. Concerning those foreign reports, they are either to be held mere fables or
else illusions of Satan: as that was of the appearing of Samuel, which was not
the Prophet in his own person, but the devil in his likeness, Pareus. dub. 7.

Quest. 32. How Abraham is said against hope to have believed under hope.
1. Faius will not have the preprosition (...), to be intepreted contra,
against, but praeter, beside: for faith, though it be (says he) above nature,
yet it is not against nature: but for an old man to beget a child of an old
woman after childbearing, it was against the ordinary course of nature.

2. Some read above hope, Geneuens. the sense is good, for Abraham's hope was
from beyond the expectation of nature: but the word (...), will not properly
bear that interpretation.

3. The Syrian interpreter reads absque spe, without hope, but not so
properly, for Abraham though he saw no likelihood in nature of feed, yet was
not without hope.

4. They which read, contra spem, against hope. 1. Some have reference unto his
former hope, which he had of children, when as yet he was young, and his wife
young also: this hope of having a child, both of them being old was contrary
to that hope, gloss. ordinar. 2. Origin distinguishes the times: that whereas
Abraham had no hope of any issue, thus complaining unto God, Genes. 15.2.
behold I got childlesse, yet afterward upon Gods promise he conceived hope. 3.
but rather the diverse kinds or objects of this hope are to be distinguished,
then the times: for Abraham at one and the same time, against hope believed
under hope, as Chrysostom expounds, (...), beside or against hope: contra
spem naturae, in spem gratia, against all hope of nature, he believed under the
hope of grace, and of the power of God, Haymo, Lyran.

5. Hence then appears the greatness of Abraham's faith: 1. both by the
nature thereof, which was against reason, and the usual and ordinary course.
2. and by the difficulty of the thing promised, to be the father of many
nations. 3. by the unlikelihood of the object set before his eyes: that his
seed should be as the stars of heaven in multitude, Par. omnia difficultatem
sonant, all things were full of difficulty, both actus fidei, the act of his
faith, which was of things that appeared not: and modus, the manner, it was
against hope, and fructus, the fruit and end, which was to be the father of
many nations, Gorrh.

Quest. 33. How Abraham's body is said to be dead, verse 19.
Whereas Abraham 37. years after this begat diverse children of Keturah, whom
he married after Sarah, it is questioned, how Abraham's body at an 100. year
old is said to be dead, that is, unapt for generation.

1. Origin to dissolve this doubt, understands this deadness of Abraham's
body of his spiritual abstinence and mortification, such as the Apostle
speaks of, mortify your earthly members: But if in this sense Abraham's body
be said to be mortified now, then it would follow, that it was not so
mortified afterward, when he had children at a greater age, by an other wise.

2. Pererius has one solution, in his questions upon the 18. of Genesis, that
this deadness of Abraham's body, was only in respect of his own opinion: for
it is said, he considered not his own body, but this deadnes and unaptness
of his body was not in his own opinion, but verily and in deed, as appears
by the reason, which is yielded, because he was an hundred year old.

3. Augustine brings in two solutions, lib. 16. de ciuit. c. 28. the first is
that Abraham's body was not simply dead, and unfit for generation, but only in
respect of Sarah: he might be able to beget children of a younger woman, though
not of Sarah, so Lyraus Gorrhan, with others: But then this deadnes had not
been in Abraham's body, but in Sarahs: whereas the Apostle sets down both
the deadnes of Abraham's body, and of Sarahs womb, as two several impediments.

4. Augustine has an other solution, though he prefer the other: that
Abraham's body was indeed dead, and unapt for generation: but his body was
revived, and he received a generatiue faculty of God by faith, which continued
also after Sarahs death: thus answeareth also Thomas, upon this place, Tolet.
annot. 21. Calvin, Beza, Martyr.

But it will be thus objected against this interpretation. 1. Augustine thus
reasons, that it is not like Abraham's body was dead for procreation at an
100. years, seeing that although now, a man of these years cannot beget a
son: yet it was not unlike then: for many not years only, but ages after
Abraham's time, no less then a 1700. years, Plinius writes of Cato, and king
Massinissa, that begat children after 80. years, and I have known an old man
in this age at those years to have begotten children.

Answ. 1. If for a man at an 100. years to beget children, were not then
unusual, when the age of man extended near unto 200. years: the like might
be said also of Sarah, that it was not unusual for women to bear at 90.
Tolet. 2. It must be considered that Abraham was worn with labor and
travail, and so he might the sooner grow old, and his body weak, Calvin: as
we see in these days some men's bodies are as weak at 60. years as some men's
at 70. or 80. Tolet. 3. and further the disvse and discontinuance of Abraham's
body all his life time in that generatiue faculty, made it more unapt now in
his old age for procreation.

2. Object. Pererius thus obiecteth: that the Apostle makes this an act only
of Sarahs faith, not of Abraham's, that she received strength to receive seed,
Heb. 11.11. whereas if Abraham's generatiue faculty had been decayed, the
Apostle would also have noted it, to be an act of faith in him.

Answ. 1. In matters of fact it is no found reasoning from the Scriptures
negatiuely; it follows not, that if a thing be found not rehearsed in some
place of Scripture, that therefore it was not done. 2. that may be omitted in
one place of Scripture, which is supplied in an other; as both Genes. 17.17.
Abraham stands upon both these difficulties, that a child should be borne
unto him at an hundred years, and Sarah should bear at ninety; and the
Apostle sets down both these as impediments in this place, the deadness of
Abraham's body, and of Sarahs womb; the Scripture then noting both as
difficulties, and lettes, we are not curiously to take exception to the
contrary.

Now although elsewhere, Hexapl. in Genesis c. 17. quest. 7.8. I seemed to incline
unto Augustines first solution; yet now upon better ground, and plain evidence
of Scripture, I approve the latter rather, that Abraham had effoetum corpus, a
body unapt for generation indeed, Haymo, Beza: and herein I subscribe unto
Chrysostom, who rehearses four impediments and difficulties, which yet
Abraham's faith over came. 1. he believed, contra spem, against hope, because
non habebat alium quempiam, etc. he had not any other, whom he knew in that
manner to have received children: whereas they which followed afterward of
Abraham's posterity, had the example of Abraham set before them. 2. then
Abraham had himself, corpus emortuum, a dead body, this was a second
impediment. 3.4. then Sarahs womb was dead, which he calls the third and
fourth impediment: which Theophylact thus expounds, that Sarahs womb was two
ways mortified, semo, and sterilitate, with old age, and barrenness.

Quest. 34. What promise of God made to Abraham it was whereof he is said, not
to have doubted, v. 20.
1. Tolet annot. 22. thinks that the Apostle has reference in this place,
unto three promises renewed to Abraham, the last is mentioned first, v. 17.
when he offered up Izaak without doubting, believing God who quickneth the dead:
the first, v. 18. which was made concerning the number of his seed, Genesis 15.
and then the renewing of the promise, that he should have a son of Sarah,
Genesis 17. the Apostle infers v. 19. and of that promise the Apostle speaks
here: But if the Apostle in the first place should have mentioned the last
promise made at the offering of Izaak, it had been out of order, to mention the
last first: and it has been showed before, that there the Apostle touches
the first promise made to Abraham concerning his seed, quest. 29.

2. Some think that the Apostle here only aymeth at the second promise made
concerning Izaak: as the Latin translator reads, in repromissione, in the
repromission or promise renewed, and so Lyran. Gorrhan take it: but the Apostle
adds, v. 22. it was imputed to him for righteousness, which imputation was
at the first promise concerning Izaak, Genesis 15. when Abraham believed.

3. Neither yet is this to be restrained only to the first promise: for at
that time, no mention was made of Sarah, but Abraham is promised a son only
out of his own bowels, Genesis 15. but the Apostle says here, that he considered
not his own body, etc. nor the deadness of Sarahs womb.

4. Wherefore the Apostle in this place joins both these promises together,
the one as touching a son out of his own bowels, in whom his seed should be
multiplied as the stars of heaven, Genesis 15. and the other, that he should
have this son by Sarah, Genesis 17. and although it be not said there that
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: yet because
Abraham did not only believe that promise which was made, Genesis 15. but other
promises also, that came afterward, the Apostle applies the same testimony
unto other acts of his faith: for Abraham's faith, as Tolet well says annot.
24. non processit in omnes actus, nisi occasion data, did not show it self
in every act, but as occasion was given.

Quest. 35. Whether Abraham doubted of Gods promise.
It may seem at the first view of that story, Genesis 17. where Moses shows
how Abraham, when the Lord promised him a son of Sarah his wife, laughed to
himself, and thus said, shall a son be borne to one that is an hundred year
old, and shall Sarah bear being 90. year old: and he prays in the same
place, that Ismael might live in Gods sight: for the solution of this doubt
there are diverse opinions.

1. Chrysostom hom. 6. de poeniten. and Hierome lib. 3. cont. Pelagian. are of
opinion, that Abraham offended by incredulity, and Chrysostom adds further,
that for this his son of incredulitic Abraham's posterity was punished with
400. years servitude. But this is contrary to the Apostle here, who freeth
Abraham from all doubting and unbelief: And Chrysostom himself returns
this opinion, hom. 40. in Genesis there showing, that Abraham did not waver any
thing at all in faith.

2. Ioannes Arboreus as Pererius cites him, disput. 9. thinks that Abraham
at the first doubted of Gods promise, but afterward being strengthened and
confirmed by the Lords words, he believed and cast away all doubting: of the
same mind seems Basil to have been before, homil. de poeniten. Abraham
fidelis inventus est, and tamen iuvenire est, vbi hae^verit, Abraham (in the
end) was faithful, but we may find where he did somewhat stick and doubted:
But the Apostle clears Abraham from all doubting and unbelief both first and
last, Neither did he doubt of the promise of God, through unbelief.

3. Caietan in his commentary here thinks that Abraham doubted not at all of
the truth of God, promise, but he was uncertain only how the Lords speech
should be taken, whether properly or figuratively: But it is evident that
Abraham understood the Lord to speak properly without any figure or mystical
sense: for he says, shall a Son be borne to him that is an hundred year old?

4. Ambrose and Augustine do free Abraham from all manner of doubting: and
think that his laughter and his question which be moved, was not diffidentis.
sed de mirantis omnipotentiam Dei, of one which doubted, but rather admired the
omnipotency of God: to this purpose, Ambrose lib. 1. de Abraham. c. 9.
Augustine lib. 16. de ciuit. Dei, c. 26. But it appears that Abraham did cast
some doubts in his mind: when after God had promised him a Son by Sarah, yet
he desired that Ismael might live in his sight.

5. Wherefore we neither with the first impute unto Abraham any incredulity,
who though he laughed, as Sarah did afterward, yet he upon an other occasion:
it was in him a sign of spiritual joy, but in the other of womanly vanity
and lightness: and therefore she is rebuked of the Angel, but Abraham is not
reprehended: neither yet do we say, that Abraham was at the first incredulous,
but afterward upon better reason was swayed: not yet do we ascribe so perfect
a faith unto Abraham, as though he had no doubts at all. But that he had a
conflict at one and the same time in himself: he did wrestle with his own
reason, but stayed not there, he presently by faith overcame all difficulty:
and that interrogation which he made proceeded not of doubting, but of a desire
to be further instructed, how that thing should be, and so to be confirmed in
faith: like as the virgin Marie at the time of the annuntiation propounded the
like question, not of any incredulity or curiosity, but only of a desire to
be further confirmed in her faith: like as Gedeon and Hezekiah asked signs of
God for their confirmation, wherein they were heard and their desire granted:
whereas Ahaz was reproved for his peruersenes, because he refused a sign,
when it was offered of God: to this purpose Martyr, Calvin: for fides non
respuit media a Deo instituta, licet non est illis penitus addicta, faith
refuses not the means appointed of God, although it be not altogether
addicted unto them, Faius, so also Gorrhan, non fuit quaestio dubitatunis, sed
admirationis, it was not a question of doubting, but admiring: see more of this
question, Hexapl. in Genesis c. 17. quest. 11.

Quest. 36. How Abraham is said to have given glory unto God. ver. 20.
This phrase to give glory unto God is taken two ways in Scripture, and
uttered of two sorts of men, either of the righteous, or of the wicked: when it
is used of the righteous, it sometime signifies the acknowledging of his truth
and power, as Ioh. 3.33. he that received his testmonie has sealed, that God
is true: or it is taken for giving thanks, in acknowledging thankefully the
benefits received, as Luke 17.18. there is none returned to give God praise
save this stranger: when this phrase is uttered of the wicked, it either
signifies an acknowledging of Gods justice in punishing, as 1. Sam. 6.5. the
Philistims in sending a present to the God of Israel, are said to give glory
unto him: that is, to confess, that it was his hand and none other, that was
upon them: or else it signifies to stand in awe of God, and to know that he is
the reuealer of secrets, and so to confess the truth, and not to lie in his
presence: as Iosuah when he urged Achan to confess the truth, bid him give
glory unto God, Ios. 7. so they say in the same sense to the blind man, Ioh.
9.24. that he should give glory unto God: Now in what sense the Apostle says,
that Abraham gave glory unto God, it is diversely scanned.

1. Chrysostom and Oecumenius thus expound it, non curiose agere Deum
glorificare est, not to deal curiously is to glorify God: as curously to
enquire is to dishonor God. But this rather is a sequel and effect of giving
glory to God not to be curious, to give glory goes before, as the cause of
the other.

2. Gorrhan and gloss. interlin. takes it for praising God, de fidei suae
constantia, for the constancy of his faith. 3. Haymo de acceptis beneficijs,
for the benefits received. 4. Osiander, tribuens ei laudem veritatis, giving
him the praise of the truth, for he that believes not Gods promises, takes
him in effect not to say the truth, and so dishonors him. 5. Tolet, nihil
impossible Deo credidit, he believed that nothing was impossible unto God. 6.
Lyranus: he ascribed the promise not unto his merit or worthiness, but unto
the goodness of God. 7. But with Beza I join all these together, agnito and
collandato Deo, etc. he acknowledged and praised God that he is true and
gracious: so Bucerus, illum verum, omnipotentem credit, illum, invocat. colit,
etc. he believes him to be both true and omnipotent, and does call upon him,
worship, and adore him.

Thus Abraham's faith is set forth, quod credidit confidenter, that he believed
confidently, He did not doubt of the promise of God thorough vnbeleefe^
gratanter, he believed thankefully, because he gave God the glory: and
certainly, he was fully assured, Gorrhan.

Quest. 37. What was imputed to Abraham for righteousness.
v. 22. Therefore even it was imputed to Abraham for righteousness. 1. Tolet
will have this referred not simply unto Abraham's says, to prove that not his
works, but his faith were imputed unto him for righteousness, but unto the
quality of his faith which was perfect, because he was assured: he believed
confidently: But seeeing the Apostle adds that it was not written for Abraham
only but for us also, that faith should be imputed to us for righteousness,
it is evident, that the Apostle has not relation unto the particular quality
of Abraham's faith, but generally unto the condition and nature of faith,
whereby all that believe are justified: for otherwise none should be justified,
but they which have the like perfect faith, as Abraham had.

2. Origens collection here also is not found: that because the Greek
conjunction (...), and, is here used, infers, that the like may be said of
other his virtues, as piety, mercy, charity, quod reputata est ad iustitiam,
that it was reputed unto him for justice: But this gloss is contrary unto the
text, which says Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for
righteousness: this justice is imputed unto his faith, not to any other of his
virtues: for it is the office only of faith to believe, and not of the rest:
now the Apostle inserteth the conjunction, and, because the sentence is so
expressed by Moses, which depends on the other clause, Abraham believed God,
then it follows, and it was counted to him for righteousness.

Quest. 38. Of these words, Now it is not written for him only, etc. ver. 23.
1. Here then is confuted their error, who think that the Prophets did write
upon special and particular occasions only for that age, wherein they lived:
But the Apostle shows, that this Scripture was written for our use: as he
says again, c. 15.4. Whatsoever is written, is written for our learning,
Pareus.

2. But all things which are written of Abraham, are not written for our
imitation: as his arming of himself to recover Lot, that was taken captive,
his offering up of his son in sacrifice, and such like acts: for we must
distinguish between the universal or general calling of those holy men,
which was to be worshippers of God, and their particular, which was for some
special service: in their general calling the holy Patriarchs are by us to be
imitated, and in such actions, as thereunto belonged, as Abraham is set forth
to us an example for believing: but the particular acts, which they did by some
special and extraordinary direction of the spirit, are not by us to be
imitated, Martyr.

3. Yet there is somewhat to be observed even in the singular and
extraordinary acts of the fathers, worthy of our imitation: As in Abraham's
readiness to sacrifice his son, thus much we learn, that as he preferred
the commandment of God before the life of his son, so we should prefer the
will of God before all other things, Martyr. And so Origin here observes well,
est viri sapientis, etc. it is the part of a wise man to observe, quo^^^^ vnum
quodque opus, quod de Abrahame scribitur, etc. how every work which is
written of Abraham, may be fulfilled in him.

4. The same Origin also here has an other good observation, not only the
things written of Abraham, are written for us, sed quae de Isaac scripta sunt,
similiter accipienda, etc. (...) the things written of Isaac, are so to be
taken likewise, and so of Jacob, etc. for the Apostles rule is general, as is
alleged before: that whatsoever is written, is written for our ^^^^ing.

Quest. 39. How Abraham's faith is to be imitated by us.
v. 24. But also for us, to whom it shall be imputed, etc. 1. Here the Apostle
shows that our faith must be answerable unto Abraham's in these three things.
1. first in the benefit of imputation of righteousness: as justice came unto
Abraham by imputation, so also it is given unto us: the same kind of justice
before was always in the Church, from the beginning of the world to the end.
2. he shows to whom this benefit of imputation is imputed, namely, unto
believers such as Abraham was: unbelievers then are excluded. 3. what must be
believed: even the same thing which Abraham believed of God, that he was able
to quicken the dead: so we must believe in God, that raised up Jesus from the
dead: in which faith two things are contained, the manner we must believe in
God, which notes a firm and steadfast assurance, and the matter which shows
three things, the author, God that raised, Jesus that is raised, and the end,
in confessing him to be our Lord, that is, our Savior, Mediator, and Redeemer.

2. But it will be objected, that Abraham's faith is inimitable, because it was
great and miraculous, and a perfect faith. Answ. 1. It was a perfect faith in
comparison of ours, but not perfect in it self: for there is no mortal man's
faith so perfect, but it is mingled with some doubting. 2. we are not required
to imitate his faith in the quantity and greatness thereof, but in the
quality that we believe in God as he did: Faius: and yet Abraham's faith was a
great faith rather in respect of the fathers which lived under the old
Testament, then of the faithful under the new.

Quest. 40. Wherein Abraham's faith and ours differ, and wherein they agree.
1. They differ in promissionis specie, in the kind and quality of the
promise: for Abraham was promised, beside the spiritual blessing in the
Messiah, the possession of the land of Canaan, the multiplying of his seed,
the victory of his enemies, the inheritance of the world: to us is only
promised the inheritance of the kingdom of God. 2. in obiecto fidei, in the
particular object of faith: Abraham believed in him which does quicken the
dead: but we believe in him, that raised Jesus from the dead: which particular
point of faith was not so plainly revealed to Abraham. 3. Abraham's faith was
exemplarie for us to follow, and he is made in that respect the father of the
faithful: but the faithful and believers now are only the children of
faithful Abraham.

2. Now Abraham's faith and ours herein agree. 1. in the general object, which
is God, that quickens and raises the dead: 2. in the manner, condition, and
quality: for Abraham's faith was firm and certain, he was fully persuaded:
and such must our faith be. 3. the end and scope of his faith and ours is the
Messiah, the promised seed. 4. the effect is the same, the imputation of
righteousness, Pareus.

Quest. 41. How Christ is said to have been delivered up for our sins, v. 25.
Christ was diverse ways, and by diverse delivered up. 1. he was delivered up
by the determinate counsel of God, Romans 8.31. he spared not his own son,
but gave him up (...) us all unto death.

2. He was delivered up by himself, Galath. 2.20. Who has loved me and given
himself for me. Ephesians. 5.25. as Christ loved his Church and gave himself for
it.

3. By Judas: Matthew. 26.21. One of you shall betray me.

4. He was delivered up by the Jews: as Pilate says unto Jesus, Ioh. 18.35.
thine own nation, and the high Priests have delivered thee unto me.

5. He was also delivered up by Pilate to be crucified, Ioh. 19.16.

6. And lastly, he was delivered up by Satan, Ioh. 13.2. the devil had put it
into the heart of Judas to betray him, Gorrhan, Tolet.

So then Christ was delivered up a patre permittente, of his father permitting:
a scipso s^ lutem hominis procurante, of himself procuring man's salvation: a
Iudae prodente; of Iuda^ betraying him: a Iudao invidente, of the Jews envying
him: a Pilato iudicante, of Pilat^ judging him: a diabolo suggerente, of the
devil suggesting, Gorrh.

But the Apostle here speaks of the first kind of delivering up by God his
father, ^^ that the ineffable counsel of Gods wisdom, and mercy toward us
may appear. 2. that it might be known that Christ died not by chance, or of
any weakness or imbecilitie, ^^ by the counsel of God, wherein appears
Christ's great love in willingly offering himsel^^ for us, Pareus: 3. that the
same author may be known both of Christ's delivering to death and of his
raising again: God raised him up, v. 24. Tolet.

42. Quest. Why the Apostle thus distinguishes the benefits of our redemption,
ascribing remission of sins to Christ's death, and justification to his
resurrection. v. 25.
v. 25. Who was delivered up for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification: here the Apostle seems to ascribe our justification unto the
resurrection of Christ: where he must not be so understood, as though Christ's
death only merited for us remission of sins, and not justification also: for
elsewhere this our Apostle does place our justification in our redemption by the
death of Christ: Romans 3.24. We are justified freely by his grace, thorough the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus: and S. Peter likewise faith, 1. epist.
2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we
being delivered from sin, might live unto righteousness, etc. Diverse
interpretations then, are given of these words, to remove this doubt.

1. Some do give this reason of this distinction: that Christ is said to be
risen for our justification, that is, to be an example of newness of life: as
Augustine applies this sentence, super Psalm. 101. and ser. 2. pasch. sermon. 2.
Christus crucifixus est, vt ostenderet veteris homiris occasum, etc. and
resurrexit vt in vita sua ostenderet vitae nostrae novitatem, Christ was
crucified to show in us the dying of the old man, and he rose again to show in
his living again our newnes of life, etc. to the same purpose Origin, and
Anselme upon this place; and likewise Thomas 3. part. quest. 56. artic. 2 that
quantum ad efficientiam, in respect of the efficacy both the passion and
resurrection of Christ, are the causes of both, sed quantum ad exemplaritatem,
etc. but in respect of the exemplarie virtue and force, the passion of Christ
is the cause of remission of sins, and his resurrection the cause of newnes
of life: this interpretation is approved by gloss. ordinar. Gorrhan. Bellarm.
lib. 2. de effect. sacram. c. 9. resp. ad argum. 5. Pererius disput. 10. numer.
49. and by Stapl. Antidot. page 259.

But Tolet annot. 25. misliketh this sense upon this reason; because as the one
clause of this sentence is to be taken, so is the other: but the Apostle
saying, who was delivered (to death) for our sins, insinuates a satisfaction
made by his death for our sins, not an example showed of mortification:
therefore in the other part he must be understood likewise to speak of the
cause of our justification, not of an example only. And further there is
difference between justification, and newness of life: the Apostle says, c.
6.4. As Christ was raised from the dead, etc. so we should walk in newness of
life: here the Apostle speaks of the exemplarie imitation of Christ's
resurrection in newnes of life, which is our sanctification and regeneration,
but justification is a diverse thing from sanctification, which is as the frait,
and the other, the cause thereof.

2. Caietane thus expounds, we are said to be justified by Christ's
resurrection, because we are justified by faith, which is confirmed by Christ's
resurrection; and so products sumus ad iustificationem, per fidem
resurrectionis, we are brought unto justification, by the faith of the
resurrection. And they add further, that our faith is specially directed unto
Christ's resurrection: for the Jews and heathen did confess that Christ died,
but not, that he rose again: to this purpose Vatablus, Christ rose for our
justification, that we should believe him to be the Son of God, and so by
that faith be justified: to the same purpose Faius.

But Peter Martyr resureth this opinion, because our faith must as well aim at
the death of Christ, as at his resurrection: and although the Jews knew that
Christ died, yet they did not acknowledge, that he died for our sins, Tolet
adds this reason further, that like as the death of Christ was not an
argument only, and confirmation of our faith, but the very cause of the
remission of our sins: so his resurrection must be held to be not an
argument, and proof of our faith, but the very cause of our justification.

3. Tolet here brings in an other exposition, which he does father upon
Theodoret: Christ rose for our justification, vt communem omnibus
resurrectionem procuraret, to procure the common resurrection of us all: for
unless Christ had risen again, we should not have risen again.

But 1. no where in Scripture is our resurrection called by the name of
justification: 2. and our resurrection was as well merited by Christ's death, as
by his resurrection. 3. if Christ indeed had not risen at all, neither should
we have risen: but his body might have been kept incorruptible in his grave
unto the end of the world, and then he might have risen, and we with him, but
then should we have been justified: he rose therefore for our justification,
not for our resurrection.

4. Some will have these two benefits, of remission and justification, to be
indifferently referred as well to the death, as to the resurrection of Christ:
as Theophylact, mortuus est and exe: tatus a morte, etc. he died, and was
raised from death, to free and exempt us from our evil works, and to make us
just: to the same purpose Haymo, vt credentes eum passum, etc. that believing
him to have suffered for our salvation, and to have risen from the dead: per
hanc fidem mereamur iustificari, we may be counted worthy to be justified by
this faith: So Emmanuel Sa. vtrunque factum propter vtrunque, both of these
were wrought by both these. But if both these benefits were in like sort and
manner wrought by both those actions of Christ, there should appear no reason
of this distinction which the Apostle uses.

5. An other exposition is, Christ rose for our justification, that is, ad eam
demonstradam, for the manifestation and demonstration of it, Piscator: he had
purchased indeed both our redemption from our sins, and our justification by
his death and passion: but resurrectione gloriosa testatus est, he witnessed by
his resurrection, that he had overcome hell and death for us, Osiand. But the
Apostle shows the very real cause of our justification, not the
testification only thereof by Christ's resurrection, as his delivering to
death, was the very cause of the remission of our sins.

6. Some give this sense, he is said to have risen for our justification, quia
salutis predicatio, and redemptionis applicatio generalis, etc. because the
preaching of salvation, and the general application of redemption, was to
follow after the resurrection, Tolet. annot. 25. to the same purpose, Pet.
Martyr, our redemption was purchased by the death of Christ, but that the same
might be applied unto us, spiritu sancto opus fuit, it was needful the spirit
of God should be sent. These by justification understand the application,
publication, and preaching of justification. But this seems not be so fit
neither: for as in the one part of the sentence the Apostle touches the true
working and efficient cause of the remission of sins, Christ's delivering unto
death, and not the application or publication, so must the other part of our
justification be understood: And Christ might if it had pleased him have given
his Apostle a commission to preach his death and passion before his
resurrection: yet had we not been fully justified, until he had risen again.

7. But among the rest that exposition, which goes under the name of Ambrose
in the commentary upon this place, seems to be most unreasonable: that the
Apostle thus deuideth these benefits, to show, that as many as were baptized
before the passion of Christ, solam remissionem peccatorum accepisse, received
only remission of sins: but after Christ's resurrection, as well they which
were baptized before, as after, esse omnes vere justification, were all truly
justified: This one place does give just occasion of suspicion, that those
commentaries were not composed by Ambrose: for remission of sins cannot be
separated from justification: whosouer has the one, has likewise the other,
because they are pronounced blessed whose sins are remitted before, ver. 7.
but there can be no blessedness without justification.

8. Hugo is somewhat curious to show the reason, why remission of sins is
ascribed unto Christ's passion, and justification unto his resurrection: first,
he says, that Christ's passion, is both causa, meritum, figura, the cause,
merit, and figure or form of remission, but it is the cause, and merit only
of justification, and newenesse of life, not the form: it is the cause
moving, that we should live in sin, for which Christ has died, and Christ
by his death merited forgiveness of our sin: and he has given in his death
a form, that as he died in respect of his bodily life, so we should die unto
sin: now of newenesse of life Christ's death is both the cause moving, and
meriting of newenesse of life, but not a figure so it agrees in three points
with the remission of sins: and in two only with justification.

Likewise Christ's resurrection was both the cause moving unto newenesse of
life, are the form and figure, that as Christ rose again, so we should rise
unto newenesse of life but of remission of sins it was only the cause
moving, not the form: but of neither was it any meritorious cause, for Christ
having put off his mortal body in the resurrection, was not in statu merendi,
in the state of meriting: so the resurrection of Christ agrees with
justification in two points, in being the cause and figure or form, but with
remission of sins only in one, in being the cause, therefore justification
is rather ascribed to Christ's resurrection, then unto his passion: to this
purpose Hugo: But he fails in this his subtle and curious distinction. 1.
for seeing that the passion of Christ in two points, as be himself observes,
agrees with justification, namely, in being the cause and merit thereof, and
the resurrection in two likewise, in being the cause, and figure or form:
justification should rather in this regard be ascribed unto Christ's passion,
because it was merited by it, and not by the other: and the rather, because the
Apostle has nothing to do with the exemplarie form of the one or the other,
but to show the true causes: and so the passion of Christ shall agree in two
respects with justification, and the resurrection of Christ, but in one.

9. To draw then this question to an end, there are two answers which I
insist upon as the best, and so I will join them both together.

1. The Apostle does put justification unto the resurrection of Christ, because
although it were merited by his death, yet it had the complement and perfection
by the resurrection of Christ: for if Christ had not risen again, he had not
showed himself conqueror of death, and so the work of our redemption had
been imperfect: thus Calvin, Beza, Gualter: and to this purpose Rollecus
distinguishes well between meritum and efficacia, the merit of justification
in respect of Christ, and the efficacy thereof in respect of us: Christ did
meritoriously work our justification and salvation by his death, and passion:
but the efficacy thereof, and perfection of the work to usward depends
upon his resurrection: the like distinction the Apostle uses saying, Romans
10.10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man
confesses to salvation: not really distinguishing them in the causes, one from
the other, but showing that the complement and perfection of the work,
consists in both.

2. Hereunto add, that although these two benefits of our redemption,
remission of sins, and justification, are in themselves, and in the use of
them common and undivided, and are indifferently sometime ascribed to Christ's
death and passion, Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 1.7. and sometime to his resurrection,
Romans 10.9. yet in respect of their proper causes they are discerned, rather
then distinguished, as the remission of sins is properly referred to Christ's
passion, justification to his resurrection, Pareus: and the reason is yielded
by Thomas: effectus habet aliqualiter similitudinem causae, the effect has in
some sort the similitude of the cause, our mortification in the remission of
sin, answeareth to Christ's death, our justification and spiritual life, to
Christ's rising again to life, Mart. Thus the works of our creation,
redemption, sanctification, are indifferently ascribed to the whole Trinity,
as works of their deity, and yet are discerned in respect of their several
persons: And this shall suffice of this intricate and difficult question.

4. Places of doctrine.
Doct. 1. Justification by works shows pride and vainglory.
v. 2. If Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to rejoice, or
glory, etc. It is evident then, that for one to stand upon the justice of his
works, it comes of pride and vain boasting: it makes a man to extol and
advance himself against the grace of God: but God resists the proud, and
gives grace to the humble: the proud Pharisie was not justified, but the
humble Publican: then let proud Pharisees, and vainglorious Papists know,
that as long as they stand upon the merit of their works, they shall never be
truly justified: But yet whereas the Apostle adds, he has wherein to
rejoice, but not with God: we learn that all rejoicing in good works, and in
the keeping of a good conscience, is not denied, we may modestly profess and
protest before men, what the grace of God has wrought in us, but we must not
glory therein; as thereby justified before God, as the Apostle else where
says, 1. Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby
justified, Pareus.

Doct. 2. Of the nature and substance of the Sacraments.
v. 11. Circumcision is called, the seal of the righteousness of faith, this is
not proper and peculiar to circumcision, but it shows the use and end of all
sacraments, which is to seal and confirm unto us the promises of God in
Christ: So here are collected all the causes of the Sacraments: 1. the
efficient cause and author is God only, because he only is able to give
efficacy and virtue unto the sacraments, as God was the author of
circumcision, so of all other the Sacraments both of the old and new
Testament. 2. the material cause is the visible and external sign. 3. the
form is the rite and manner of institution. 4. the end to seal unto us the
promises of God for remission of our sins in Christ, Faius page 238.

Doct. 3. Of the baptism of infants.
From the circumcision of infants in the old Testament, is inferred the
baptism also of infants under the new: for there is the same reason of both
the Sacraments: and S. Paul doubts not to call baptism circumcision, Col.
2.11. And if, circumcision being granted to infants then, baptism should be
denied now, this were to make God more equal unto the Jews and their seed,
which were the carnal offspring of Abraham, then unto believing Christians,
which are the spiritual sons of Abraham.

If it be objected, that we know not whether infants have rem sacramenti, the
thing represented in the Sacrament, neither should we put to the sign: we
answer 1. that this were to reason against God, for the same question may be
moved concerning circumcision. 2. no more does the minister know the mind and
intention of all those which communicate, in the Lords Supper. 3. infants are
baptized though they have no understanding as yet of the Sacrament, to show,
that they belong unto the covenant of grace, whence their salvation depends,
and not of the outward sign: and both presently the Church receives edifying,
when they see infants baptized, and the children themselves are admonished and
stirred up, when they come to years of discretion, to learn the true
signification, and use of their baptism which they received in their infancy,
Peter Martyr.

Doct. 4. Of the unity of the Church, and the communion of Saints.
v. 11. That he should be the father of all them that believe: In that Abraham
is called the father of all that believe, whether of the circumcision, or
uncircumcision, hence it is evident, that there is but one Church, and one way
of justification, for all whether circumcised or uncircumcised, under the Law,
or the Gospel: and that there is a communion and common fellowship of all
believers, as being all brethren and children of faithful Abraham: So the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.4. There is one body, one spirit, etc. one Lord, one
faith, one baptism.

Doct. 5. Faith requisite in those which are made partakers of the Sacraments.
v. 11. The seal of the righteousness of faith which he had: Circumcision
profited not Abraham without faith: neither can any Sacrament, to them which
are of discretion and able to understand and discern, be of any force without
faith: and therefore S. Paul's rule is, 1. Cor. 11.28. That a man should examine
himself, when he comes to the Lords table, and to this examination it
belongs, to prove, whether they be in faith, 2. Cor. 13.5.

Doct. 6. The faithful are the true owners and hears of the world, the wicked
are usurpers.
v. 13. The promise to be heir of the world, was made to Abraham thorough
faith, to them then that believe, who are the right seed of faithful Abraham
do the promises belong, both of this life, and of the next, as the Apostle
says, 1. Tim. 4.8. That godliness have both the promise of this life, and of
that which is to come: the faithful then may use the blessings of this life
with a good conscience, as pledges of the life to come: but the wicked are
usurpers, and therefore defile themselves in abusing the things of this life,
Gryneus.

Doct. 7. The difference between the true God and the false.
v. 17. He believed God who quickens the dead. Hence are gathered three
arguments of the Godhead. 1. his omnipotency, both in giving a being unto
things which are not, be calls the things that are not as though they were,
and in restoring unto things the being which they had. 2. his eternity, he is
the first and the last, both at the first he created all things, and shall in
the last day raise them up to life again. 3. his omniscience, he can foretell
things to come, in calling them, that is, giving them a being, which yet are
nothing. These things cannot idols do, nor any strange gods: by these
arguments the Prophet Isa; confounds the Idols of the heathens, showing that
they are not like unto the true God. Isa. 44.6. I am the first and the last,
and without me there is no God: who is like me that shall call and declare it,
etc. and what is at hand, and what things are to come, etc.

Doct. 8. Of the nature, condition, and properties of faith.
v. 13. Who above hope believed under hope: faith then is a grace and gift of
God, whereby we give a firm and sure assent unto his promises in Christ, even
above and against natural reason: in faith then these things are considered.
1. the author thereof God, faith of Gods gift, Ephesians. 2.8. 2. the object or
matter of faith in general is the word of God, but the particular and proper
object, which is called obiectum adaequatum, is the promise of salvation in
Christ. 3. the quality and property which makes the form of faith, is to be
firm and sure without wavering, and to believe even beyond and against the
apprehension of natural reason, Pet. Martyr.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. That the Apostle excludes all kind of works from justification.
v. 2. If Abraham be justified by works: The Romanists are here of opinion,
that the Apostle only excludes such works as were done only by the strength
of nature without faith in the Mediator: so Staplet. Antid. page 46. who urges
this reason among other to confirm his opinion: the Apostle only excludes
such works, which expect not an eternal reward with God: but the works done
in faith do expect an eternal reward: therefore such works he excludes not.

Contra. 1. But the contrary is evident that the Apostle shuts out all
works whatsoever from the matter of justification: 1. he speaks of the
works of Abraham, now a faithful man not an unbeliever: 2. he mentions
works in general without any distinction, denying justification unto them,
and ascribing it unto faith. 3. every thing which is rewarded ex debito, of
due debt, is excluded from justification, but to every work is the wages due
of debt, as verse. 4. To him that works the wages is counted by debt,
therefore every work is excluded.

2. Concerning his reason: if he understand the reward which is due of debt,
and not given by favor, then even the works of faithful men cannot expect
such a reward: if he mean a reward given by favor, then as well the works
which are so rewarded, as those which shall not, are excluded.

3. And as the works of faith are excluded together with works done before
and without faith: so also not only does the Apostle speaking of works mean
the rewards only, but even the works of the moral law also: for the Apostle
names works in general: and he directly afterward speaks of the moral
law, v. 15. The law causes wrath, and where no law is, there is no
transgression: which though it be true of every law in general, yet this
generally is seen in the moral law.

Controv. 2. Whether blessedness consist only in the conversion of sinners.
v. 7.
The Romanists here object, that as the Apostle out of the Psalms ascribes
beatitude to the remission and forgiveness of sins, so elsewhere in Scripture
it is given unto innocence of life and to other virtues, as Psalm. 119. Blessed
are the undefiled in heart, and Matthew. 5. Blessed are the merciful, blessed
are the pure in heart, etc.

1. Peter Martyr answeareth here by a distinction of beatitude, which is either
inchoata, begun only, and that is in our justification, or perfecta, it is
perfect and absolute in the kingdom of God: so he will have the Apostle here
to speak of the blessedness which is begun in our justification: but in the
other places the blessedness in the next life is promised.

2. Calvin says that all these beatitudes which are pronounced do presuppose
the happiness, which is in being justified by faith, without the which, all
the other promises are in vain.

3. But the more full answer is, that the Apostle here shows the cause and
manner of our justification, which is by faith in Christ: but in the other
places it is only declared, to whom this justification belongs: and who they
are that shall be blessed, namely, the merciful and undefiled in heart: but
the Apostle shows, why they are blessed, because they believe in Christ,
Pareus. dub. 5.

Controv. 3. Whether sin is wholly purged and taken away in the justification
of the faithful.
The Romanists are of opinion that not only the guilt of sin is taken away
in justification, but sin it self is altogether purged: and so for sins to
be covered, idem plane valet atque esse sublata and nulla prorsus relicta, is
all one, as to be taken away, and not to remain at all, Perer. disput. 3.
numer. 11. Tolet. annot. 10. and they impute this opinion to the Protestants,
peccata non auferri, etc. that sins are not taken away in justification, but
remain the same they were, only they are not imputed after justification:
their reasons are these.

1. It was the opinion of the Pelagians confuted by Augustine, that in baptism
there is not given remission of all sins: nec auferre crimina, sed radere,
and that it does not take away sin, but only prone it as it were, and pare
it: the root remains still: August. lib. 1. contra 2. epist. Pelagian. c.
13. like unto this error they make the opinion of Protestants, Perer. ibid.

2. It were no justice in God, if sin remained still, not to impute it, not
to impute sin unto the sinner, seems not to stand with the rule of equity,
Tolet. ibid.

3. The Scripture so speaks of the remission of sins, as though they were
wholly removed, as Isaiah 44. I have taken away thine iniquity as a cloud, 1.
Cor. 6. but ye are washed, ye are sanctified, Job. 1. Behold the lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world: Isaiah 1. If your sins were as
red as scarlet, they should be made white as snow: Hes. 14.3. Take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously: Coloss. 2.14. Putting out the handwriting
of ordinances, that was against us: these and the like places are produced by
Tolet, and Pererius, in the foresaid places, to prove the full remoouing and
abolishing of all sin in our justification.

4. Otherwise Christ's merit should be of less force and efficacy then the
sin of Adam, if it should not wholly remove and take away sin brought in
by Adam, Tolet.

5. Pererius infers as much out of the Apostles words here: if our sins be
hid and covered, then are they not seen of God: si non videntur a Deo, nulla
vtique sunt, if they are not seen, then are they none at all: for if sin
still remained in the faithful, which God hates, then he should find
somewhat in them worthy of hatred, and so what he hates consequently he
punishes, Perer. numer. 11.

Contra. 1. Our adversaries do not truly propound the state of this question
between them and the Protestants: for we affirm not that the same sins
remain before justification and after: there is great difference between
peccatum inhabitants and regnans, sin dwelling in us, and reigning in us:
before justification it both dwells in the faithful and reigns, but after
it dwells but reigns not: again, before the righteous are justified by
faith, there is no sanctity in them, but upon their justification presently
follows sanctification, whereby they are become holy and full of good works,
though some relics of sin remain. There are three things then specially
here to be considered in sin, macula, culpa, poena, the blot of sin, the
fault or offense, and the punishment: now after we are justified by faith, the
fault is remitted, the punishment acquired, but some blot and blemish
remains: Now that in the justified and regenerate remains some seed and
relics of sin, it thus is manifest. 1. The Apostle confesses that there
was sin dwelling in him, Romans 7.20. 2. David when he thus spoke, Psalm. 32.
Blessed is he, whose wickedness is forgiven, had now many years been the
servant of God: and yet he confesses he had sins which had need of
forgiveness, Bucer. 3. the very word it self of not imputing of sin,
presupposes a being of sin: for that which is not at all, cannot be said not
to be imputed; for of that which is not, there can be neither action nor
passion, Faius: and that which is covered appears not, not because it is not,
but because it is covered.

2. Now for answer unto the arguments objected. 1. the error of the Pelagians
rather cleaves unto the Romanists, then the Protestants, who affirm that in
baptism there is sealed remission of all sins as well going before baptism
as following after, whereas the Papists extend the virtue of baptism unto the
sins only before going: neither do we say that the sprigges only of sin
are pruned, the root remaining still, but that the very root thereof is
killed, though some sprigges do sprout still, yet they shall never branch out
to bear the like bitter fruit as before: And as we are free herein from the
error of the Pelagians, so let them take heed, that the error of Origin be not
here worthily fastened upon them: who upon this place of the Apostle writes to
this effect; that when the soul of a sinner leaves and forsakes sin, then
his iniquities are said to be remitted: and when it begins to do well, then
it hides and covers sin, bonis recentibus, with new good things: But when
it is come to perfection, vt nullum in ea vestigium inveniri possit nequitiae,
that not a footesteppe of sin can be found in it, etc. then the Lord is said
not to impute sin, etc. Here Origin concurreth with the Romanists, or they
rather with him, that there remains no relic of sin in the faithful
after justification, and that they cover and hide their sins by their good
works: which does quite overthrow and pervert the Apostles sense: who
alleges these testimonies out of the Psalms to prove that righteousness
is imputed without works: which were no proof at all, if sins were covered
and hid by good works, Beza annot.

2. Not to impute sin unto a sinner continuing and remaining still in the
strength of his sin, were indeed no justice; but to a sinner that repents
of his sin, and amendeth, it is just with God not to impute sin for the
worthiness of Christ.

3. All these testimonies produced of the taking and washing away sin are
understood, of remitting the fault and offense, and acquitting the punishment:
it follows not, but that there remains some blot and blemish still.

4. Christ's merit is as effectual to take away sin, as Adam was to bring it
in: and in the end Christ shall utterly abolish the very relikes and
remainder of sin: which though Christ by his infinite power could effect all
at once, yet it pleases him to work it by degrees, to begin our
justification here, and to finish it in his kingdom.

5. How our sin is covered in Gods sight, and how the Lord is said not to see
it, Augustine shows well, si texit peccata Deus, noluit advertere, si noluit
advertere, noluit animadvertere, si noluit animadvertere, noluit punire, etc.
if God have hid our sin, he would not mark it, if he would not mark it,
neither would he chastise it, if not chastise it, then not punish it, neither
must ye so understand, that the Prophet said, our sins are hid, quasi ibi
sunt, etc. vivunt, as though they be there, and are alive, etc. to this purpose
Augustine, who by the hiding, and Gods not seeing of our sins, understands
his not seeing them unto punishment.

And although sin in it self be hated and detested of God, yet it follows
not that the faithful should be hated for sin, dwelling in them, because
they hate it, and judge it in themselves; sin then is to be considered two
ways, in it self, and as it cleaves and adheareth to the person; yet seeing
the person of the faithful, wherein it is found, is not addicted and wholly
inclined unto it, but likewise hates and abhors it; the Lord loves their
person accepted in Christ, though he hate that which is evil in them, as they
themselves also do.

Controv. 4. Against works of satisfaction.
v. 8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. The opinion of
the Romanists is here confuted, that after remission of the offense in sin,
and the guilt of eternal death, there remains yet some temporal punishment
to be satisfied for: and yet there is full remission of sin: for the
temporal punishment is extra substantiam peccati, etc. is not of, or belonging
to the substance of sin, but as an adiunct, and a thing annexed to it, Perer.
disput. 3. numer. 13.

Contra. 1. It follows necessarily, that where sin is punished it is
imputed, and laid unto the sinners charge: But unto them that are justified
nothing is laid unto their charge: as the Apostle says, Romans 8.33. Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that justifies:
therefore where sin is not imputed and remembered no more, there it is not
thought of to be punished; for how should it stand with equity for God to
punish the sin which is remitted.

2. No punishment is properly of the nature and substance of sin, but
necessary consequents and effects thereof: everlasting punishment it self, is
not belonging to the substance of sin: as Pererius confesses, that inest
peccato secundum substantiam, it belongs to sin in respect of the substance
thereof, for God has appointed and decreed eternal death, as the just
punishment of sin, but no substantial part of sin has God ordained, for
then be should ordain that which is evil: If then one part of the punishment
of sin be discharged, then the other also: or else there should not be a full
remission of sin.

Controv. 5. Of imputative justice against inherent righteousness.
v. 8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin: This is an
evident place, for imputative righteousness: that our justice before God
consists in the not imputing unto us the sins which we had done, and in
imputing unto us the righteousness of Christ, which we had not done or
performed in our selves: But against this imputation of Christ's righteousness,
for inherent justice thus it will be objected.

1. Object. The Apostle says, 1. Ioh. 3.2. We know, that when he appears we
shall be like him, but God is just by a justice inherent in himself, we shall
be like him, therefore we also are just by such an infused and inherent justice.

Answ. 1. We are like unto God who is just, because he reputeth us for just in
Christ: 2. and then we shall be like him in holiness and pureness, when all
corruption shall be taken away in his kingdom. 3. this likeness is understood
of the fruition of that great glory, which the faithful shall have, as it
follows in the same place, We shall see him, as he is.

2. Object. As our justification is, such is our happiness, if then
justification be by imputation only, then so shall our happiness be
imputative also, not verily and in deed.

Answ. 1. The proposition is not true, for it follows not that because
justification is by imputation, that our blessedness should be so also: the
blessedness promised is the reward, and must really be performed: imputative
justice is the condition required: like as a creditor may forgive his debtor,
though his debt be paid by another: here he enjoys his true and real
liberty, though he did not really in his own person pay the debt: so though
our justice be by imputation: yet Christ's justice and obedience, which is by
faith imputed, was really and actually performed, Faius.

Controv. 6. That the Sacraments do not confer grace by the external
participation only.
v. 11. The seal of the righteousness of faith: Hence it evidently appears
that the Sacraments are not effectual without faith, and that the very
receiving of them. ex opere operato, by the work wrought, does not confer
grace, as the Romanists hold: for Abraham was justified by faith being yet
uncircumcised: circumcision then did not confer upon him that grace, which he
had not, but did confirm and establish him in the grace and faith received:
the sacraments then, non instituta sunt iustificandis sed iustificatis, are not
instituted for those which are to be justified, but for them which are already
justified. Pareus.

Here then two errors are to be taken heed of, one that we ascribe not too
much to the outward sign in the sacrament: as to attribute unto it remission
of sins, collation of grace, and such other spiritual benefits: for this
were not far from Idolatry: If sometime the Scriptures and the ancient
writers do seem to speak of the Sacraments, we must understand that to be
spoken of the sign, which indeed belongs to the thing signified. An other
error is, if any do extenuate the Sacraments, making them but bare signs, as
the Anabaptists only take baptism and the Lords supper to be signs of our
Christian profession: for then they should be no more then badges and
cognisances, whereby families, and servants are one distinguished from another:
but the Sacraments do not only represent, but exhibit also the thing
signified, not by any virtue annexed to thy sign, but by the grace of the
spirit concurring in the Sacrament, and offering it self to the faith of the
receiver, Martyr.

Controv. 7. That there is the same substance and efficacy of the Sacraments
of the old and new Testament.
An other error of the Romanists is, that the Sacraments of the old Testament
did not exhibit the graces of the new Testament, as our Sacraments now do,
but were mere shadows obscurely representing them, so that their opinion is,
that there is not the same substance of the old and new sacraments, nor the
same spiritual graces exhibited.

But the contrary is evident. 1. out of this place: the Apostle calls
circumcision the seal of the righteousness of faith, and so are our
Sacraments: 2. the Apostle says, they did all eat the same spiritual meat,
and drink the same spiritual drink, as there the Apostle says, and so is he
ours. 3. this also appears in that the Apostle gives unto their Sacraments
the same names: he says they were all baptized in the cloud, and in the Sea,
1. Cor. 10.2. the Apostle doubts not to call it baptism, which it could not
be, if there were not the same spiritual substance of their baptism and ours:
And as the Apostle doubts not to give the names of the Sacraments of the new
Testament to the old, so also he calls the new Sacraments of the gospel by
the names of the old: as baptism he calls circumcision made without hands,
Coloss. 2.11.

But it will be thus on the contrary side objected. 1. Ob. The Sacraments of
the old Testament, were but shadows of that truth which is exhibited in the
new: therefore there was not the same substance in them: but they differ as
much as the body and the shadow.

Answer. It follows not, because they were but shadows of things to come,
that they had not in some part the things themselves: But like as, when a
picture is first drawn with lines and shadows, therein is shadowed forth the
same thing, though darkely and obscurely, that afterward is expressed in
colors: so the same truth and substance is more obscurely shadowed forth in
the Sacraments of the old Testament, which is more clearly manifested in the
new: the difference then is not in the substance, but in dispensationis modo,
in the manner of dispensation, Faius.

2. Object. The Apostle says, Heb. 8.13. In that he says the new, he has
abrogate the old, for that which is disanulled, and waxed old, is ready to
vanish. If the old Testament then be abrogated, how can there be the same
substance of the old and new Testament?

Answ. This abolishing and abrogating of the old Testament, must be understood
only of the changing of the ceremonies, which as shadows were to give place
to the body: as the Apostle says, which are a shadow of things to come, but
the body is in Christ: but the substance of the old Testament is not
abolished: as the Apostle says, c. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday and to day,
and the same also is for ever.

3. Object. But Augustine says, that the old Sacraments, promisisse
servatorem, did but promise the Savior, nostra exhibere, and ours do exhibit
him, in Psalm. 73.

Answ. Augustine says not, that their Sacraments showed one thing and ours
another: but that they did both demonstrate Christ, yet after a diverse manner:
for the old Sacraments did shadow Christ then to come, ours do exhibit Christ
already come, Mart. see more hereof Synops. Centur. 2. err. 97.

Controv. 8. That circumcision was not only a sign signifying or
distinguishing, but a seal confirming the promise of God.
Pererius takes upon him here to confute the Protestants opinion, that the
sacraments are seals to assure us of Gods promises made in Christ, and that
they serve for the strengthening and confirmation of our faith: his best reason
is this, qualis obsecro fides est, quae vacillat, etc. what manner of faith is
that I pray you, which wauereth and had need to be confirmed: if by faith we
are assured of Gods promises, what use is then of the Sacraments to assure us
of that, whereof we are by faith assured already? Perer. disput. 4. numer. 22.
to the same purpose Staplet. Antid. page 225.

Contra. 1. The truth of our opinion, that the Sacraments are seals to assure
us, and means to confirm our faith is evident both by the Apostles words, who
calls circumcision not only (...), a sign, but (...), a seal, which is
more then a sign: for a seal is added for confirmation: secondly, the same is
proved by the nature of signs, given in covenants, which is to assure the
parties of the truth and constancy of the covenant made: now circumcision was
a sign of the covenant between God and his people, and therefore a sign of
assurance and certainty.

2. And although it be the special office of faith to assure us of Gods
promises, which on Gods behalf are most sure, and need no ratification, yet
because our faith is here weak and imperfect, it has need of proppes to
confirm and strengthen it, Mart.

Controv. 9. Whether circumcision were auayleable for the remission of sins.
1. Diverse of the ancient and learned fathers are of opinion, that
circumcision had no spiritual use, but only served as a mark of distinction
to discern Abraham's posterity from other nations, and to be a sign unto
them, what faith Abraham was of, whom they should imitate: and of this opinion
these reasons are yielded.

1. Justinius Martyr dialog. cum Tryphon: and Epiphanius haeres. 30. do give
this reason, why circumcision was not given, ad iustificationem, for
justification, or sanctificationis gratia, for sanctification: because it was a
sign given only unto the men, and not to the women, quicquid ad iustitiam and
virtutem pertinet, etc. whatsoever belongs unto justice and virtue, was given
unto women, as well as men, Iustine.

2. Tertullian says, that circumcision was given as a sign for those times,
non in salutis praerogativum, not to be a prerogative of salvation, because
Abraham ante placuerat Deo, quam circumcideretur, had pleased God before he was
circumcised, lib. aduers. Iudaeos.

3. Chrysostom proves, quod circumcisio nihil ad animae virtutem conduceret,
that circumcision did nothing avayle for any virtue of the mind, by this
reason, because it was appointed to be ministered unto infants upon the eight
day: that it might thereby appear, that it did nihil animae conducere, nothing
profit the soul, hom. 39. in Genes.

4. Theodoret says, corporalis circumcisio solius obtinet locum signaculi,
corporal circumcision is only in stead of a seal: his reason is, that
circumcision is called carnal, and it was a corporal thing; and therefore had
no such spiritual use.

5. Unto these reasons may be added, that the Israelites were not circumcised
for the space of 40. years in the wilderness, which shows, that it was no
spiritual remedy, for then they should not have been suffered to want it so
long.

6. Beside Josephus and Philo, who have written most diligently of the
ceremonies of the Jews, and the signification thereof: neither of them make
mention of remission of sins signified thereby.

Contr. But these reasons are easily answered. 1. Though the women were not
circumcised, yet were they not therefore excluded from the covenant: Pererius
thinks that there might be some other means provided for the women: but if
there had been any such thing prescribed to women, such as circumcision was
for men, the Scripture would not have been silent therein: Peter Martyr
answeareth better, that although circumcision were only enjoined unto the men,
yet the use and fruit thereof also was extended to the women, because they were
numbered and counted with the men, the virgins belonged to their fathers, and
the married women to their husbands.

2. True it is, that Abraham pleased God, and was justified before he received
circumcision: this proves that Abraham indeed was not justified by
circumcision: not that thereby was not sealed the remission of sins.

3. And the circumcision ministered unto infants upon the 8. day does not take
away the spiritual use thereof, for then neither should baptism have any
spiritual use concerning the cleansing of the soul, because infants which
have yet no discretion, are baptized: The Sacrament of circumcision then, and
of baptism now, is given unto infants to consecrate them unto God, that
thereby they may be put in mind of their profession, when they come to years
of discretion.

4. And whereas S. Paul calls it circumcision in the flesh: he there speaks
of circumcision as separate from faith, as it is only unto carnal men:
whereas the right circumcision, being received according to the institution,
consists both of the carnal and external circumcision of the flesh, and of
the internal and spiritual circumcision of the heart.

5. The omitting of circumcision 40. years in the wilderness shows, that
justification and remission of sins was not tied to the sign: that it was no
sign of spiritual grace in the remission of sins, it proves not: for
them, which died in the wilderness uncircumcised, it may be affirmed, that they
were in like case with those which died before circumcision was instituted, or
with children, which died before the eight day of circumcision: the want of the
sign in these cases was not prejudicial unto them.

6. Josephus and Philo might conceal this secret, that circumcision was a
seal of remission of sins, least the Gentiles, into whose hands they knew
their writings should come, might thereby have taken occasion to have scorned
and derided the mysteries, which they understood not.

2. A second opinion is of the Romanists, who make this difference between
circumcision, and other Sacraments of the old Testament, and baptism in the
new: that in baptism grace is conferred; but in the other there was only
significatio gratiae, non effectio, a signifying only not an effecting of
grace: so Pererius out of Thomas, disputat. 6. numer. 32.

Contra. But beside that we showed before, controv. 7. that there was the same
spiritual effect of the Sacraments of the old and new Testament, they
differed only in respect^ of the more clear light and lively representation
in the new Sacraments, then in the old: there was more then a bare
signification only of spiritual grace in circumcision, for it is called a
seal not a sign only.

3. Yet some other of the Romanists, as diverse of their Schoolmen, as
Alexander, Gabriel, Bonaventure, Scotus, as they are cited by Bellarmine lib.
2. de effect. Sacramentor. c. 13. are of opinion, circumcisionem ex opere
operato contulisse iustificationem, that circumcision by the very work wrought
did confer justification: But this is evidently contrary to the Apostle in
this place, who directly notes, that Abraham was justified by faith, when as
yet he was uncircumcised: and upon this Justinius Martyr infers, that Abraham
had not received circumcision ad iustificationem, for his justification,
because he was justified before by faith, whereby he believed God, dialog. cum
Tryphon. And Ireneus urges the same argument, advers. haeres. lib. 4. c. 30.
that Abraham was not justified by circumcision, because sine circumcisione
placuit Deo. he pleased God without circumcision.

4. As these do ascribe too much unto circumcision, so Ambrose seems to
detract too much from it, inferring thus, that because Abraham received
circumcision as a sign of the righteousness of faith, non ergo habet
circumcisio aliquid dignitatis, sed signum est tantum, therefore circumcision
has no dignity at all, but is only a sign: to this purpose Ambrose in his
commentary here.

5. Wherefore the best opinion is, that circumcision, though it did not
confer remission of sins, yet it was more then a bare signifying sign: it
was a seal and pleadge, whereby the promises of God were ratified and
confirmed, and specially concerning remission of sins in Christ: And
therefore the Apostle says, it was not only a sign, but a seal, which
serves to confirm and ratify: see before of this controv. 8.

And herein we mislike not the opinion of Thomas and other schoolmen, that in
circumcision there was conferred grace, non virtute circumcisionis, sed fidei
passionis Christi, not by virtue of circumcision, but of faith in the passion
of Christ, whereof circumcision was a sign: Perer. disput. 6. numer. 2. saving
that they think that in the new Sacraments there is an actual collation of
grace by the very external participation of the Sacrament.

But that circumcision was as much an instrument of grace, not by the virtue of
the Sacrament but of faith, whereof it was a seal as baptism is, Augustine
directly testifies, writing to this purpose; that circumcision, which was then
a seal of the righteousness of faith, ad significationem purgationis valebat,
etc. sicut and baptismus, etc. was avayleable for the purgation of sin, as
baptism was availeable unto regeneration, after it was instituted, etc. to
this purpose Augustine de Nupt. and concupiscent. c. 11. Likewise Gregory,
quod apud nos valet gratia baptismatis, hoc agit apud veteres, etc. that which
the grace of baptism is avayleable unto amongst us, to the same end served in
the old Testament, either faith alone for children, or for the elder sort the
virtue of sacrifices, for those which came of Abraham's stock, the mystery of
circumcision, Gregor. lib. 4. Job.

Controv. 10. Of the presumptuous titles of the Pope calling himself the
father and head of the faithful.
Abraham is called the father of those which believe, because he gave them an
example both of the true justifying faith, and of holy obedience: If the Pope
would be the father of the Church and of believers, he must go before them in
purity of faith and manners: and yet if he did so, he should think it his
greatest honor to be counted the child of faithful Abraham: he must not
arrogate unto him the title, which the Scripture gives unto Abraham, to be the
father of the faithful: But seeing they which are Abraham's children, must
walk in the steps of Abraham's faith, which is to be justified without
works: the Pope holding justification by the merit of works, cannot be so
much as the child of faithful and believing Abraham.

Controv. 11. Against the Chiliastes or Millenaries that hold that Christ
should reign a 1000. years in the earth.
v. 13. The promise that Abraham should be the heir of the world: The
Chiliastes whose opinion was, that Christ after the resurrection should reign
in the earth in all external happiness and pleasure for a thousand years,
do apply this place to their own conceit, that this should be the inheritance
of the world promised to Abraham: As likewise they urge that place, Luke 22.30.
of eating and drinking with Christ in his kingdom, and that Apocal. 20.4. how
the Saints should reign with Christ a 1000. years in the earth: of this
opinion were Papius, Ireneus, Tertullian, Lactantius, with others: Lactantius
dreameth, that in those thousand years, the rocks shall drop honey, and the
rivers run with wine and milk.

Contra. But these are men's dreams and fancies. 1. the Apostle says that the
kingdom of God, is not meat and drink, Romans 14.17. therefore we must not
imagine that Christ shall reign with his Saints in any such carnal pleasure.
2. whereas the Scripture speaks of eating and drinking in the kingdom of
heaven, thereby Ambrose upon Luke well understands communicationem aeterna
falicitatis, the communicating and participating of everlasting felicity and
happiness: as the Scripture uses by such phrases taken from temporal and
earthly delights to express spiritual joys. 3. by the thousand years
mentioned Apocal. 20. Augustine understands all the time of the flourishing
of the Gospel here in earth: during which time Satan is bound, and his
kingdom destroyed by the preaching of the Gospel: so also Pet. Martyr
thinks that a certain time is there taken for an indefinite and uncertain:
But because all such prophetical predictions do note a certain limitation of
time and years, I subscribe rather unto their opinion, who think, that a
thousand years precisely are spoken of, wherein Satan should be bound: which
Iunius will have to end at the time of Hildebrande: but they rather end some
300. years after: for otherwise Satan should be held to be bound, in the 300.
years of persecution, under the Pagan Emperors, which is not to be admitted.

Controv. 12. Of the certainty of faith, v. 16. That the promise might be sure.
1. This is an evident place against that Popish uncertainty of remission of
sins: for they hold it a presumption for a man to be sure of Gods favor, and
of their justification by faith in Christ: but this is contrary to the
Scriptures, the Apostle says, Romans 8.16. The spirit bears witness with our
spirit, that we are the children of God: but nothing is more certain, then the
testimony of the spirit: Again, the same Apostle says, Being justified by
faith, we are at peace with God: but the conscience cannot be at peace, and
settled, if it were not sure of the remission of sins in Christ: S. Paul also
himself is persuaded that nothing could separate him from the love of God in
Christ, Romans 8.38. which persuasion was not peculiar to the Apostle by any
special revelation, but wrought in him by faith, as it is in others, as he
shows, 2. Timoth. 4.8.

2. This certainty of our assurance is builded upon these two grounds. 1. the
firmener and stablenesse of the word and promise of God, which cannot fail. 2.
the nature of faith which is to give an unfeigned and undoubted assent, unto the
promises of God, Mart. Origin gives this reason: those things are said to be
firmer, which are by grace, then those things which are by the law: quia illa
extra nos sunt, haec intra nos, etc. because those things are without us
written in tables of stone, these are within us, vero spiritu Dei inscripta,
being written by the very spirit of God.

3. But it will be thus objected against this assurance and certainty.

1. Object. Gods promises as likewise his menasings are conditional, as that
of Jonah, that Nineveh should be destroyed within forty days: and that
pronounced by Isay to king Hezekiah, that he should die.

2. No man is sure of perseverance, and continuance to the end.

3. Unless a man were sure to be without sin, which is impossible in this
life, he cannot be certain of his salvation.

4. There is not the perfectest man, but sometime he feels his mind to be
full of doubting.

Contra. 1. Some promises and threatenings of God are conditional, and they
hold not, the condition not being kept: such are these given in instance, but
some are without condition of our obedience, but are of Gods mere grace, which
require nothing but a lively faith to apprehend it.

2. The faithful do pray for perseverance in all their prayers: but prayer as
S. James shows, must be made without hesitation, or doubting: therefore the
faithful may be in time, and in the end are assured of their perseverance to
the end.

3. Not the assurance to be without sin, but that our sins are forgiven us
is required: for then neither S. Paul, who was not without sin, could have
been assured of Gods favor in Christ, as he was.

4. There may rise doubts in the minds of the faithful, from the weakness and
infirmity of the flesh, and yet they may notwithstanding have a persuasion:
for these do arise and spring of diverse causes, and beginnings: the infirmity
of the flesh may cause one sometime to doubt, and yet the spirit of grace, may
work assurance in the mind, which in the end prevails and overcomes all
doubts: Like as reason does tell a man that the Sun is bigger then the whole
earth, and yet his sense may cause him to doubt of it: Martyr. Origin in this
purpose upon these words, v. 19. and he not weak in faith, etc. infers,
that there may be then an infirmity, and weakness in faith, quod si est
infirmitas, est sine dubio and ibi sanitas, and if there be infirmity, there
is also health and sanitie.

Now this doubting, which rises in the mind, proceeds not from the nature
of faith, but from man's infirmity: like as there is nothing more certain in
any science, then the principles and axioms in the Mathematics, yet one may
doubt thereof, not of any defect in the art, but thorough his own
unskillfulness: so a faithful man may doubt, not because in faith, there is any
uncertainty, but it is raised by his own infirmity: which infirmity is of
two sorts, either when one is persuaded of that which he knows, but there
remain yet other things to be known, which he comprehends not, or when he
knows and believes the things which are set before him, but thorough his
weakness can not give full assent unto them: the first of these is a failing in
his understanding, the second in his heart and affection: But the spirit of God
subdueth at the last all these defects and doubting and works a full
persuasion in the heart: The argument then follows not, a faithful man may
sometime cast doubts in his mind, therefore by faith he can not be assured:
for neither does a faithful man doubt totaliten, wholly, dubitatio
proficiscitur ex infirmitate, his doubting proceeds of his infirmity,
certitudo ex fide, but his assurance is of faith: not yet finaliter, this his
doubting is not final, at length by faith he overcomes all such infirmities
Martyr.

13. Controv. Whether faith be an act of the understanding only.
Bellarmine upon these words, v. 19. not considering his own body, and v. 21.
plenissime scitus, fully knowing, infers, that faith is not a certain
fidence, confidence, or assurance, but only an act of the understanding: for
to consider, belongs to the understanding, and so does a full and firm
knowledge. Bellarm. lib. 1. de iustificat. c. 6.

Contra. 1. In that Abraham considered not his body, it shows that his faith
overcame all impediments, yea it even prevailed against his natural reason:
this makes rather against Bellarmine, for here an act of the understanding,
which is to have considered the weakness of his body, is denied, he
considered not: and yet if this proved any thing, it shows only that faith
joined with the consideration, and understanding of the mind, not that it
consists only of it.

2. Concerning the other word (...), it is better translated, being fully
assured and persuaded, then fully knowing: persuasion is not only a certain
knowledge and apprehension of the mind, but a full assent also of the will
grounded upon the firm and resolute judgment of the understanding: and in
this sense does the Apostle use the word (...), certentie, full persuasion, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. where he says, our Gospel was not unto you in word only, etc. but
in the holy Ghost, and much assurance: as he delivered unto them the most
evident and certain doctrine of the Gospel, so it wrought in them a steadfast
and settled assurance of their salvation.

3. And that this persuasion which Abraham had was joined with a confidence and
assurance, the words evidently show, v. 20. Neither did he doubt of the promise
through unbelief: which the Latin translator reads, non haesitavit, he
staggered or stuck not: And that faith has always assurance and confidence
joined with it, Saint James also testifies, chap. 1.6. Let him ask in faith,
and waver not: see more hereof Synops. Centur. 4. nr. ^. 45

14. Controv. That justifying faith is not a general apprehension or believing
of the Articles of faith, but an assurance of the remission and forgiveness of
sins in Christ.
Bellarmine further collecteth upon this place, v. 20. Being fully persuaded,
that he which had promised, was able to do it, etc. that this faith, whereby
Abraham was justified, was not any assurance of the remission of sins, but
fides dogmatica vel historica, a dogmaticall or historical faith, a belief of
the omnipotency of God: Bellar. lib. 1. de iustif. c. 11. to the same purpose
the Rhemists give here the like note, that Abraham's faith was a belief of an
article revealed unto him from God: and so infer that it shall be sufficient
for us to believe the articles of Christ's death and resurrection, without any
scuh confidence, which they call a found faith.

Contra. 1. That Abraham's faith was not only a general belief or assent that
Gods speech was true, and that he was able to effect, that which he promised,
but that he had also a particular confidence of his acceptance with God, and
remission of his sins in the Messiah promised, does evidently appear by
these two arguments. 1. The Apostle says, that Abraham was partaker by faith
of that blessedness, which the Prophet David speaks of, v. 7. Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, then it follows, ver. 9. Came the
blessedness upon the circumcision or upon the uncircumcision? 2. the like
faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousness, which is imputed to us, v. 23.
but our faith is to believe that Christ was put to death for our sins and
rose for our justification, v. 25. therefore Abraham's faith, was an assurance
of remission of his sins in Christ.

Controv. 15. That faith does not justify by the merit or act thereof, but
only instrumentally, as it applies and apprehends the righteousness of
Christ.
Bellarmine has an other sophistical collection upon these words, v. 22.
therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness: here says at, the Apostle
renders the reason, why faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousness,
because he in believing gave glory unto god: therefore he was justified merito
fidei, by the merit or worthiness of faith, which notwithstanding was his
grace and gift, Bellar. lib. 1. de iustif. c. 17.

Contra. 1. Abraham was not justified because he in believing gave glory unto
God: that indeed was an act and fruit of his faith: but it was his faith
only, for the which he was justified: as the Apostle says afterward v. 24. it
shall be likewise imputed to us for righteousness, which believe, etc. 2. the
Apostle says, to him that works not, but believes, etc. faith is counted
for righteousness: then it will follow, that where faith is counted or
imputed for righteousness, there is no work: faith then justifies not as a
work by the act of believing: for then faith should not justify without
works, which is the scope of all the Apostles discourse, that by faith
righteousness is imputed without works, v. 6. faith then does not justify
actiuely, as it is a work, but passiuely, as it apprehends the
righteousness of Christ. 3. If faith be the gift of God, as Bellarmine
confesses, then can it not merit, for he that meriteth must merit of his own:
where there is grace and favor as in the bestowing of gifts freely, there is
no merit, v. 4. 4. I will here oppose against Bellarmine the judgment of
Tolet, and so set one Jesuit against an other, and a Cardinal against his
fellow: he thus ingeniously writes upon these words, non existimes Paulum
merito fiderascribere iustitium, etc. think not that Paul ascribes
righteousness to the merit of faith, as though because he believed he was
worthy of the righteousness of God, but he signifies, Deum ex gratia
acceptare fidem nostram in iustitiam, that God of grace and favor accepts
our faith for righteousness.

Controv. 16. The people are not to be denied the reading of the Scriptures.
v. 23. Now it is not written for him only, but for us, etc. Hence it is
evident that the Romanists offer great wrong unto the people of God, in barring
them from the reading of the Scriptures: for they are to be admitted to the
reading of the Scriptures, for whom they are written: but they are written for
all that believe in Christ: the reading then of the Scripture serves to
confirm our faith, therefore they belong generally unto the faithful, Par.

But it will be objected, that the unlearned do not understand the Scriptures,
and therefore they are to depend upon the fathers of the Church for the
understanding of them, and not to venture upon them themselves.

Answ. 1. Nay the sense of the Scripture is most safely taken from the
Scripture, which is the best interpreter of it self. 2. the Fathers and
expossitors are to be heard, and consulted with, so far forth as they agree
with the Scriptures: but the sense of the Scripture (...) not depend upon their
fancies, which have no warrant by Scripture: as Hierome upon the^ 23. chap. of
Matthew, gives instance of a certain interpretation of one of the Father^ that
Zacharias the son of Barachias mentioned there v. 35. to have been slain
between the Temple and the Altar, was Zachary the father of John Baptist: And
Hierome searching out, which of the Fathers had made this interpretation, found
that it was Basil: and then he concludes this, seeing it has no warrant out
of the Scriptures, eadem facilitate contemnitur, qua probatur, is as easily
rejected, as it is affirmed: See further of the vulgar reading of Scripture,
and of the manner of interpreting the same. Synops. Centur. 1. err. 3. and err.
9.

Controv. 17. Against the heretics, which condemned the old Testament, and God
the author thereof.
v. 24. Which believed in him, that raised up Jesus etc. Origin very well
infers upon these words, that seeing the God, whom Abraham believed was
able to quicken the dead, was the same, that raised Jesus from the dead, non
erat alius Deus legis, alius Domini nostri Jesus Christ. etc. there was not then
one God of the law, and another of our Lord Jesus Christ: etc. But there was
the same God of the old and new Testament: which is observed by Origin against
the wicked Marcionites, and Manichies, who condemned the old Testament, and the
author thereof.

So also, whereas the same heretics urged these words of the Apostle. v. 15.
where no law is, there is no transgression: and thereupon inferring the
contrary, where there is a law, there is transgression, would thereby conclude
that the law is the cause of transgression, and so condemn the law: Origin
does thus return this their collection upon themselves: that as where the law
is, there is transgression of the law, so where faith is, there is
transgression against faith: but as faith is not the cause, vt quis
praeuaricetur a fide, that one transgress against faith: neither shall the law
be the cause of transgression against the law.

Controv. 18. Whether justification consist only in the remission of sins.
v. 25. Who was delivered to death, for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification: Pererius takes occasion here to inuergh against Protestants,
thus affirming of us: qui ^^^^em vim iustificationis ponunt in sola remissione
peccatorum, donationem vero iustitiae, etc. which do place all the force of
justification only in the remission of sins, but the donation of justice
whereby the mind is rectified, and newenesse of life wrought in us, they do
reject and abandon, Perer. disput. 10. err. 49. and to the same purpose Bellar.
lib. 2. de iustif. c. 6. and the Rhemists take upon them to confute the
Protestants, because they hold justification, to be only remission of sins,
and no grace inherent in us, annot. in 4. ad Romans Sect. 6.

Contra. 1. It is a false imputation, that we place justification only in the
remission of sins: for we hold also with S. Paul the imputation of Christ's
righteousness by faith: as S. Paul says Philip. 3.9. That I may be found in
him, not having mine own righteousness, which is by the law, but that which
is of the faith of Christ, etc. 2. But though we grant as well an imputation
of righteousness as a not imputation of sin concurring unto justification, yet
we deny, that any inherent justice or renouation of life, is any part of this
justification: neither does the Apostle mean any such justification here:
Christ rose for our justification, not thereby only to give us an example of
newenesse of life, as Bellarmine, and Pererius expound it, wherein Tolet his
own fellow Jesuit and Cardinal, is against him, as is before showed, qu.
42. but Christ's resurrection is the cause and ground of our justification,
which is imputed by faith: as Ambrose expounds, resurrexit, etc. vt nos
gratia iustificationis donaret, he rose again to endue us with the grace of
justification: vt iustitiam credentium confirmaret, to confirm the justice of
those which believe, says Hierome: ista resurrectio credita nos iustificat,
this resurrection being believed, does justify us, says Augustine. 3. an
inherent justice we confess, which is our sanctification, the fruit and effect
of our justification by faith, but because it is imperfect in us, and not able
to satisfy the justice of God, we deny, that we are thereby justified in his
sight.

Controv. 19. Against Socinus corrupt interpretation of these words, v. 25. Was
delivered up for our sins.
Socinus will not have this phrase to signify any satisfaction made by Christ
for our sins, but only to betoken the cause or occasion of Christ's death: as
the Lord is said to give Isra^l up for the sins of Jeroboam, who sinned and
caused Israel to sin, 1. king. 14.16. thus ^icked Socinus de Seruat. part. 2.
p. 108.

Contra. 1. Though sometime this phrase signify the cause, yet it is false
that it so only signifies: for the Scripture speaks evidently, that Christ
was our reconciliation, and that we have redemption in him, Romans 3.24, 25. our
sins then only were not the cause or occasion of his death, but he so died
for our sins, as that he by his blood satisfied for them. 2. It was the
Pelagian blasphemy, that Christ died for our sins, to be an example only
unto us to die unto sin: for thus the power and force of Christ's death is
extenuated, which indeed causes us to die unto sin, it does not teach us
only, and show us the way: this were to extol the power of man's corrupt will
against the grace of God. 3. The instance of Jeroboam is altogether
impertinent: Israel was delivered up for Ieroboams sins, which they imitated
and followed: if Christ were so delivered up for our sins, then they must
make him also to be a sinner with us, and to be polluted with our sins. ex
Perer dub. 8.

20. Controv. Piscators opinion examined, that our sins are remitted only by
Christ's death, not for the obedience and merit of his life.
These are Piscators words in his annotation upon the 25. v. Omnia nostra
pectata expiat^ sunt per solam mortem Christi, all our sins are expiated
only by the death of Christ: and therefore neither original sin is purged
by his holy conception, nor the sins of omission by his holy life, but by
Christ's death only: to this purpose many places of Scripture are cited, and
alleged by him: as, Matthew. 20.28. The Son of man came to give his life a
ransom for many: Matthew. 26.28. Which (namely, blood) is shed for many for the
remission of sins: Act. 20.28. Christ has purchased his Church by his blood.

Likewise he affirms, that by Christ's obedience in his death, and upon the
cross, part^^ esse nobis vitam ae^ernam, everlasting life is obtained for us:
as Hebr. 10.19. By the blood of Jesus we may be hold to enter into the holy
place: and other places are cited to the same effect.

Contra. 1. It is true, that Christ only by his death, and other his holy
sufferings, paid the ransom, and bare the punishment due unto our sin: but
seeing Christ's blood had been of no value, if he had not been most perfectly
righteous, his obedience and righteousness must as well concur unto the
remission of sins, as his death: and this is that which S. Peter says, 1.
Pet. 1.19. We are redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a L^^^e
undefiled, and without spot: and, c. 3.18. Christ has once suffered for
sins, the just for the unjust: the innocence then and integrity of Christ
must be joined with Christ's blood, to make it an acceptable sacrifice.

2. Whereas there are two parts of our justification, the remission and not
imputing of sins, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness: which two are
not separated, neither can the one stand without the other, neither can there
be any remission of sins, unless Christ's righteousness be imputed: as S. Paul
says, 1. Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin (...), that knew no sin,
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him: the merit of Christ's
obedience and righteousness must needs concur in the remission of sins: yea
Piscator in his annotation upon the 4. v. confesses that these words, blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven, idem valere, to be as much in effect,
as to say, blessed are they to whom justice is imputed.

3. But that seems to be a more strange assertion, to deny, that possessio
vitae eternat tanquam effectum adscribitur obedientiae Christi, the possession
of eternal life is ascribed, as an effect to Christ's obedience: which is
directly affirmed by the Apostle, Hebr. 7.26. Such an high Priest it became us
to have, which is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made
higher then the heavens: what has made Christ higher then the heavens, but his
holiness, perfection, integrity? and therefore he is able perfectly to save
them, that come unto God, v. 25.

4. And further, that we are justified by Christ's obedience, the Apostle
shows, Romans 5.13. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous: here the Apostle says
directly, that we are made righteous by the obedience of Christ. Piscator here
answers, that by Christ's obedience here is understood his obedience in
submitting himself willingly unto death, in which it was his fathers will he
should suffer for us. Contra. Our justification consists of two parts, of the
remission of our sins, and the making of us just before God: the one is
procured by Christ's death, the other is purchased by his obedience and
righteousness: and that the Apostle speaks not only of Christ's obedience unto
death, but generally of his whole course of righteousness, both in life and
death, is evident, because he calls it the gift of righteousness, v. 17. and
the reigning of grace by righteousness, thorough Jesus Christ, v. 21. And
further this is yet more evident, where the Apostle says, Romans 4.25. Christ
was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification: whence it is gathered, that justification is more then remission
of sins only: which as it was wrought by his death, so the other was
compassed by all other his holy actions: Piscator answers, that justification
is here affirmed of the resurrection, because it is an evident demonstration of
our justification which was obtained by the death of Christ. But I prefer
rather Augustines interpretation, lib. 10. cont. Faust. c. 10. Ista resurrectio
credita nos iustificat, etc. this resurrection of Christ being believed does
justify us, non quod reliqua opera and merita Christi excluduntur, etc. not
that the rest of his merits and works are excluded, sed omnia consummantur,
etc. but because all was perfected and finished in his death and resurrection:
here Augustine affirms two things, both that all Christ's merits and works
concur in our justification, as also that the believing of Christ's
resurrection is as verily a cause of our justification (not a demonstration
only) as his death was of the remission of our sins. See before this place
more fully expounded, quest. 42. and Piscators exposition refuted. artic. 5.

So then to finish this matter, if Christ's death only effected and wrought our
justification, then should the rest of his works and actions be superfluous:
whereas, whatsoever he did, in life or death, was wrought for us: as Thomas in
his commentary upon this place alleges out of Damascen: omnes passiones and
actiones illius humanitatis fuerunt nobis salutifera vtpote ex virtute
divinitatis prouenientes, all the passions and actions of his humanity did
tend unto our salvation, as proceeding from the virtue of his Divinity.

6. Moral observations.
v. 7. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven: Peter Martyr here notes
well, 1. Observe. That our sins hinder our beatitude.
that our sins only do hinder our blessedness: for iustificatio est inchoata
beatitudo, our justification is an happiness inchoate or begun: so then when our
sins shall be fully taken away, then our beatitude and blessed estate shall
no longer be deferred: as our happiness begun brings with it the remission
of sin, so when it is finished, all our sins with the remainder of them,
shall be clean purged.

v. 13. The promise, that he should be heir of the world. 2. The hope of our
celestial inheritance should qualify our outward wants in this world.
Although the faithful have the promises of this life, so far as the Lord
sees it to be expedient for them; yet their peculiar inheritance is the
kingdom of heaven: the children of God therefore must comfort themselves in
the hope and expectation of their proper inheritance, though in the mean time
they be stripped and dispossessed of the things of this life: As Abraham had
the land of Canaan promised him, and yet he himself had no inheritance in it,
no not the breadth of a foot, Act. 7.5. so we must be revived with the hope of
our celestial inheritance, though we possess little in this world: as Abraham
was promised to be heir of the world, not so much of that present, as of that
to come.

v. 18. Abraham above hope believed under hope. This teaches us, that we
should never despair, or cast off our hope, but comfort our selves in God,
though we see no means, 3. Never to cast off our hope, ^ to distrust in God.
as Abraham believed Gods promise, concerning the multiplying of his seed,
though he saw no reason thereof in nature: such a godly resolution was in Job,
cap. 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Then God shows
himself strongest, when we are weakest: and his glory most appears, when he
helps us being forsaken of all other worldly means.

v. 20. And gave glory unto God. As Abraham praised and glorified God for his
mercy and truth, so we ought to magnify God, 4. We must give glory and
praise to God for all his benefits.
and set forth his praise for all his mercies toward us: the Lord is not so
well pleased with any spiritual sacrifice and service, as when he return unto
the praise of every good blessing: as the Prophet David said, Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits, I will take the cup
of saving health, and call upon the name of the Lord: this is all the
recompense, that either God expects at our hands, or we are able to perform,
to give him thanks for all his benefits.

v. 23. Now it was not written for him only, etc. but for us, etc. Seeing then
that the Scriptures are written generally for all the faithful, 5. The
Scriptures are diligently to be searched of all.
we have all interest in them: and therefore every one of Gods children should
hereby receive encouragement, diligently and carefully to search the
Scriptures, as appertaining and belonging even unto him: as our Savior says,
Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life:
who would not search his ground very deep, if he thought he should find gold
there: so much more should we be diligent in searching the Scriptures which
show us the way to eternal life, which is far beyond all the treasures of
the world.

v. 25. 6. Our true consolation is, that our sins are pardoned in Christ.
Who was delivered to death for our sins: Seeing then that Christ died not in
vain, but brought that work to perfection, for the which he died, this now
makes much for the comfort of Gods children, that their sins are verily done
away in Christ, and blotted out in his death: this was S. Paul's comfort, that
Christ came into the world to same sinners, of whom he was the chief, 1. Tim.
1.15.

This also teaches us to die unto sin, 7. Christ dying for sin, does teach
us to die unto sin.
which was the cause that Christ was given up unto death, as Origin well
observes, quomodo non alienum nobis and inimicum omne ducitur peccatum, etc.
how shall not every sin seem strange, and as an enemy unto us, for the
which Christ was delivered up unto death?

The fifth chapter.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1. Then being justified by faith, we have peace (not let us have peace, S.
L.) toward God, thorough our Lord Jesus Christ:

2 By whom also we have had access thorough faith into this grace, wherein we
stand ( by the which we stand. Be.) and rejoice under the hope Be. G.V. (in the
hope, L.S.) of the glory of God. (of the sons of God. L. but this is added.)

3 Neither that only, but also we rejoice in tribulation, knowing that
tribulation (of afflection. V.S. oppression. Be.) brings forth patience, (
works, G. in us, S. but this is not in the original.)

4 And patie^^^e proof, B.S.L.V. (or experience, Be.G. (...). Gr.) and proof
(or experience) hope,

5 And hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us:

6 For Christ, when we were yet weak, at his time B.G. (that is, the appointed
time, S. according to the time, Gr.) died for the ungodly. (not, to what end,
when we were yet weak died Christ for the ungodly? L. it is not put
interrogatiuely, but passiuely in the original.)

7 Doubtless one will scarce die for a righteous man: but yet for a good man
(for one which is profitable to him, Be. he reads the sense, not the words)
it may be one dare die:

8 But God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while (not seeing, if
that while, S.) we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.

9 Being justified therefore by his blood, much more shall we be saved
thorough him from wrath.

10 For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God ( God was reconciled
to us, S.) by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be
saved ( live, S.) by his life.

11 And not only so, but we also rejoice in God, thorough our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we have obtained V. Be. (received, Gr.) reconciliation:
(atonement, B.G.)

12 Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
and so ( even so, B.) death went over all men, in whom (namely Adam, Be. not
in as much as S.V.B.) all men have sinned.

13 For unto the time of the law, was sin in the world, but sin is not
imputed, while there is no law.

14 But death reigned from Adam unto Moses, even over them, that sinned after
the like manner (after the similitude, Gr.) of the transgression of Adam, which
was the figure of him, that was to come:

15 But yet not as the offense, so is also the gift: for if by the offense of
that one, many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace,
which is of one man (by one man, B.G.) has abounded unto many.

16 And not, as that which entered by one which sinned: (not, as the sin of
one, S.L. for the word is (...), sinning, or that sinned: or, as by one that
sinned, death entered, V. for that follows in the next verse) so is the gift:
for the fault (sin, B. not, judgment, S.L.V. because of the words following,
to condemnation, (...), Gr.) came of one offense (which must be supplied out of
the next clause) unto condemnation: but the gift is of many offenses to
justification.

17 For if by one offense Be. (better then by the offense of one, B.G.S.V.L.)
for so much is expressed in the words following) death reigned thorough one:
much more shall they, which receive the abundance of grace (that abundance of
grace, G.) and of the gift of righteousness, reign in life thorough one, that
is, Jesus Christ:

18 Likewise then, as by one offense Be. (not the offense of one, cater, see
the former verse.) the fault came upon all men to condemnation, so by one
justification Be. (not the justification of one, B.G. cum caeter. for the word
(...) is put in the first place, otherwise it should be put after, as in the
next verse) the benefit redounded unto all men to the justification of life:

19 For as by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one many shall be made righteous.

20 Moreover, the Law entered thereupon, ( by the way, V. in the mean time, B.)
that the offense should increase: B. Be. (abound, V. G.) but where sin
increased, grace abounded much more:

21 That as sin had reigned unto death ( in death, V. S. L. so is the word in
the original is, in, but he means unto death, as appears by the other
opposite part, unto eternal death) so might grace also reign by righteousness
unto eternal life, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. The Argument, Method, and Parts.
In this chapter the Apostle pursues the former proposition, wherewith he
concluded the fourth chapter, that Christ died for our sins: and now he
shows the manifold benefits, which we have by the death of Christ, with an
ample proof and demonstration of the same.

So then this chapter is divided into two parts, the first containing a
rehersall of the benefits which we have by Christ's death, to v. 6. the second a
proof and demonstration thereof, to the end of the chapter.

1. In the first part there is 1. set forth the foundation of all other
benefits, which we obtain by Christ, namely justification by faith, v. 1. 2.
then the benefits and graces, either internal, which are these sour, peace of
conscience, bold access to Gods presence, perseverance, hope of glory, v. 2.
or external, which is constancy and rejoicing in tribulation: which is
amplyfied both by the effects, patience, experience, hope, which is described
by the effect, it makes us not ashamed, v. 5. and by the efficient cause
thereof, the love of God shed in our hearts by the holy Ghost, v. 5.

2. Then follows the probation hereof, which consists of two arguments, the
one taken from the state and condition of such, as were reconciled by Christ,
they were enemies, this argument is handled from v. 6. to 12. the other
argument stands upon a comparison, and collation between Adam and Christ,
the loss which we had by the one, and the benefit which we are made partakers
of by the other: from v. 12: to the end.

In the first argument there is 1. the proposition, that Christ died for the
ungodly; v. 6.^. the illustration thereof a dissimili, by an unlike comparison
between man and God: the first part is expressed, v. 7. that a man will not
die for an unrighteous man, and an enemy: which is showed by the contrary,
because hardly for a righteous man will one die, unless he be also a friend,
much less for an unrighteous man and an enemy: the other part of the
comparison follows, 1. showing that Christ died both for us being
unrighteous, v. 8. and enemies also, v. 10. 2. then he infers two
conclusions. 1. the certainty of our salvation being now justified and made
friends, v. 9.10. 2. the joy and consolation which springs and arises
hereof, v. 11.

The second argument consisting of a comparison between Adam and Christ, is
thus handled: there is the proposition concerning Adam, showing wherein he was
like, wherein unlike unto Christ, to v. 18. then the reddition or second part
concerning Christ, v. 18. to the end.

First Adam is like in three things. 1. in his person, he was but one and yet
the author of sin to all. 2. in the object, his sin was communicated to
all, though himself but one. 3. in the effect and issue, this sin brought
forth death: all this is propounded, v. 12. that sin entered by one man into
all the world: then it is proved by 3. arguments. 1. by the office of the
law, which is not to bring in sin, but to impute sin, v. 13. therefore
though sin were not so much imputed before the law, as after, yet was it in
the world before. 2. by the effects, death was in the world before the law,
and it reigned also upon infants, that had not sinned actually as Adam had
done, and therefore sin much more which brought forth death, v. 14. 3. Adam
was a figure of Christ, therefore as Christ's righteousness is extended even
unto those, before the law, so also was Adams sin, v. 14.

Then the Apostle shows wherein Adam is unlike unto Christ: namely, in these
three things. 1. in the efficacy and power, the grace of God in Christ is much
more able to save us, then Adams fall was to condemn us, v. 15. 2. in the
object, Adams one offense was sufficient to condemn, but by Christ we are
delivered from many offenses, v. 16. 3. in the end, Adams sin brought forth
death, but Christ's righteousness does not only deliver us from sin and
death, but brings us unto righteousness and life, yea and causes us to
reign in life: it restoareth us to a more glorious kingdom and inheritance,
then we lost in Adam, v. 17.

The reddition or second part of this comparison shows, wherein Christ of
whom Adam was a type and figure, is answearable unto Adam: namely, in these
three things propounded, v. 12. first in the singularity of his person, one
man's justification saves us, as one man's offense condemned us, v. 18. 2. in
the object, as Adams sin was communicated to many, so is Christ's obedience,
v. 19. And here the Apostle by the way preuenteth an objection: that if sin
came in by Adam, why entered the law? he answeareth, to the end, that sin
might the more appear and be increased, not simply, but that thereby the grace
of God might abound the more. 3. in the end as sin had reigned unto death,
so grace might reign unto eternal life.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. What peace the Apostle means, ver. 1.
v. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God. 1. Oecumenius, whom
Harm, and Anselme, Lyranus, Hugo follow, do read here in the imperative,
habeamus, let us have, not habemus, we have: and they understand peace with
men: that the Jews should no longer contend with the Gentiles about their
law, as though justification came thereby, seeing the Apostle had sufficiently
proved already, that we are justified by faith: But this exposition cannot
stand. 1. because the Apostle speaks of such peace, as we have with God, not
with man. 2. he speaks in the first person, we have, but S. Paul was none of
these which did contend about the Law.

2. Origin, Chrysostom, Theodoret, understand it of peace with God, but in
this sense: let us being justified by faith take heed, that we offend not God
by our sins, and so make him our enemy; mihi videtur (says Chrysostom) de
vita and conuersatione disserere, the Apostle seems unto me now to reason of
our life and conversation: so Origin, let us have peace, vt vltra non
adversetur caro spiritus, that our flesh no longer rebel against the spirit:
But the Apostle here exhorts not, sed gratulatur eorum faelicitati, he does
rather set forth with joy the happiness of those, which are justified: Erasmus:
and it is not an exhortation, but a continuation rather of the former doctrine
of justification, Tolet annot. 1. and here he shows the benefits of our
justification, whereof the first is peace of conscience, Pareus: and this is
further evident by the words following, By whom we have access, which words
being not uttered by way of exhortation, but of declaration, show that the
former words should so likewise be taken, Erasmus.

3. Ambrose reading, in the Indicative, habemus, we have, expounds this peace
of the tranquillity and peace of conscience, which we have with God, being
once justified by faith in Christ: thus the Apostle himself expounds this
peace, v. 10. When we were enemies we were reconciled to God, by the death of
his Son, for they are our sins which make a separation between God and us:
this sense follow Tolet annot. 1. and in his commentary, Pareus, Gryneus,
Faius, with others.

4. This then is resolved upon, that the Apostle speaks here not of
external, but internal peace: there is pax temporis, and pax pecteris, a
temporal, and a pectorall or inward peace: the other Christ gives, but
through the malice of Satan, and the corruption of man's heart it may be
interrupted, and therefore Christ says, Matthew. 10.34. That he came not to send
peace, but the sword: but the other which is the inward peace of conscience
Satan himself can not deprive us of: no man can take it from us.

But whereas there is a threefold combat within us, the fight between reason
and affection, between the flesh and the spirit, and a wrestling with the
terrors of Gods judgments: in the two first we cannot have peace here, but in
part: for still in the servants of God there remains a combat between
reason, and affection, the flesh and the spirit, as S. Paul shows, that it
was so with him, Romans 7.23. he saw another law in his members rebelling
against the law of his mind: and therefore we are not to hope to have such
peace, vt non vltra caro adversetur spiritui, that the flesh should no more
rebel against the spirit. as Origin thinks: but this inward peace is in
respect of the terrors which are caused in us by the fear of Gods judgment
against sin: from this terror we are delivered by Christ, Beza: yet so, as
sometimes there may arise some fear, doubts, and perplexity in the mind of
the faithful: as it is written of Hilarion, that being 70. year old, and now
near unto death, he was somewhat perplexed and troubled in mind: yet faith in
the end overcomes all these dangers, that we fall not upon the rocks, to
make shipwreck of our faith, and a good conscience.

5. And we must here distinguish between, pax conscientiae, and stupor
conscienciae, the peace of conscience, and a carnal stupiditie: for the one
never felt the terror of Gods judgments, and therefore can have no true peace,
the other has felt them, and is now by faith delivered from them, Calvin.

6. Now whereas it is added, We have peace with God, or toward God, these
things are here to be observed. 1. all the causes are here expressed of our
justification: the material which is remission of our sins included in
justification, the formal, by faith, the final, to have peace with God, the
efficient, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Gorrhan: 2. and in that he says,
toward God: Origin notes that this is added to show, that they have neither
peace in themselves, because of the continual combat between the flesh and
the spirit: not yet with Satan and the world, which continually tempt us: but
with God we have peace who is reconciled unto us in Christ: and he says toward
God, or with God, to signify that reconciliation is not only made with God,
but that it is pleasing, and acceptable unto him, that such a reconciliation is
made, Tolet. and further hereby is signified, that this is a perpetual peace,
because it is toward God, with whom there is no change nor mutabilitie, Faius.

Thorough Jesus Christ: 1. Chrysostom seems thus to understand the Apostle,
that Christ Jesus, is our preserver in this state to keep us in peace: which
is true, but it is not all, we rather understand with Origin, Theodoret,
Ambrose, that this our peace and reconciliation, was wrought and effected by
Christ, not continued only and preserved. 2. neither do we understand by this
phrase, that Christ in respect of his humanity was instrumentum coniunctum, a
joint instrument of this our peace, as Lyranus. But Christ is the true author
and efficient cause of this our peace, as (...) and (...), a joint cause, and
fellow worker with his father: for he says, Ioh. 16.33. that in him we have
peace; as the foundation thereof: and therefore he is said to be our peace,
Ephesians. 2.14. the worker and effector thereof, Faius. And here we may observe
the opposition between the effects and fruits of justification by the law,
and by faith: for they which look to be justified by the law, have not
wherein to rejoice with God, c. 4.1. but they which are justified, by faith,
have peace with God, and so matter of rejoicing, Tolet.

Quest. 2. Of the second benefit proceeding of our justification, which is to
stand and persevere in the state of grace.
1. By whom we have access thorough faith. 1. This is an amplification of the
former benefit of reconciliation: that we have not peace only with God by
faith, but are admitted also unto his presence, to his grace and savor: one
may be reconciled to his Prince, and yet not be brought into his presence,
Pareus: as Absalom was a long time kept from his fathers presence after he was
reconciled: but by faith we are both reconciled, and restored the fruition of
the favor and gracious presence of God. 2. But we must take beede here of
Origens note, that this gate whereby we have access unto God, is not only
says, but oftium hoc iustitia, oftium humilitas, righteousness is this gate,
humility is this gate: whereas the Apostle directly says, We have access
thorough faith. 3. Neither is this access taken only for a bare entrance and
beginning: as Gorrhan thus alludeth, accedere est incipientium, stare
proficientium, etc. to have access is of beginners, to stand, of proceeders,
to glory of such as are perfect: but here it signifies not an entrance as it
were to the threshold, but an admittance into the very chamber of the spouse,
Faius.

2. Unto this grace. 1. Not the grace of a good conversation, gloss. interlin.
for the Apostle speaks of the justifying grace, wherewith we are formally
made just, Lyran: 2. neither by grace are understood the second graces and
gifts of the spirit, whereof the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 15.10. I labored
more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God, etc. Origin:
for the Apostle speaks not of any such special and particular graces which
Paul had, but of the common justifying grace. 3. this grace then is that
whereof he speak before, c. 3.24. We are justified freely by his grace: and it
signifies both the original of our justification, which is the free mercy
and grace of God, and the state and condition whereunto we are called, Pareus.

3. Wherein we stand. 1. Some have reference unto our fall in Adam, gloss.
interlin. 2. some oppose it to the gesture of sitting or lying, as set against
the law, wherein we stood not, but were as pressed down with the burden of
ceremonies. 3. Tolet annot. 3. thinks thereby to be signified, progressum ad
vlteriora bona, a progress and proceeding to further good things: so Pererius
says, that standing betokens hominem erectum ad aspectum, a man settling
himself to look up to behold heavenly things.

4. But Chrysostom better observes the steadfastness of spiritual graces,
neque finem novit isthaec Dei gratia, this grace of God knows no end: And
beside it shows as the stedfastnes of Gods grace in it self, so the
certainty which we have thereof by faith: for faith is like unto Jacobs staff
wherewith he went over Jordan, Genesis 32.10. it is that whereby we stand, Romans
1.24. whereby we walk, 2. Cor. 5.7. thorough this veil of misery, Faius: we
then stand in the state of grace, being sure by the Lords assistance never to
fall away from thence, sic Calvin, Pareus, with others.

Quest. 3. Of the third benefit of justification, the hope of everlasting
glory.
v. 2. And rejoice under the hope of the glory of God. 1. Tolet annot. 3. will
have the word rejoice referred unto the former clause, wherein we stand and
rejoice, under the hope, etc. and his reason is; because there are two
prepositions used in the Greek, (...), in, and of or under, with the former is
the same word rejoice, joined in the next verse, we rejoice, in, in
tribulation: but this a needelesse contention, for howsoever the word be
joined, the matter of this rejoicing is the hope of eternal life.

2. The Latin translator adds, the glory of the sons of God, which some
understand of the Angels, Hugo Card. some of the Saints in heaven, Lyran. but
there are no such words in the original, though this glory belong unto the
sons of God, not only them which are already glorified in heaven, but those
which are the sons of God by grace, yet militant in earth: as it is called,
The glorious liberty of the sons of God, c. 8.21.

3. Origin is here somewhat curious: making three kinds of glory, one which was
seen, the glory of Moses countenance, which is passed away, another glory
which appeared in the incarnation of Christ, Job. 1.14. And we saw the glory
thereof, as of the only begotten son of God; the other is the glory of the
next life: whereof the Evangelist speaks, Matthew. 25.31. When the Son of man
comes in his glory: And whereas the Apostle speaks here only of the hope
of glory, that is, glory hoped for, and yet elsewhere be says, 2. Cor. 2.18.
We behold the glory of the Lord with open face, and are changed unto the same
image from glory to glory: as though he had possession already of this
glory: the Apostle must be understood to speak of two kinds of glory, one
now enjoyed in the state of grace, but the more full glory is hoped and
expected for in the kingdom of heaven.

4. Chrysostomes note here is good, that faith extends it self not only
unto things present, as the Apostle speaks of grace, wherein we stand, but
unto things also to come, namely, the glory which is hoped for: And beside he
notes the certainty of this glory, which is hoped for, because we glory in
this hope: now faith he gloriamur in ijs quae tam exhibita sunt, we glory in
the things which are already exhibited: if then the hope of things to come
were not as certain, as the things which are already past, we could not
glory in it.

5. Here the Apostle speaks not so much of that absolute glory, which God
has in himself, as of that, whereby he shall glorify us, Pareus.

Quest. 4. How we are said to rejoice in tribulation.
v. 3. Neither that only, etc. Origin refers this clause to all the
particulars before expressed, as justification by Christ, peace with God, and
having access unto him by Christ: but it is better restrained unto the former
clause, that we do not only rejoice because of the future hope of eternal
glory, but even in tribulation also, Erasmus: for it might have been
objected, that the condition and state of the children of God, is for the
present time most miserable: the Apostle then preuenteth this objection,
showing that the children of God are even in their afflictions most happy.

2. As before then he showed the internal effects of justification in the
spiritual graces of the mind: so here is declared what justification works
in us even in temporal and external things: which is seen in these three
points: 1. the faithful rejoice in tribulation. 2. why, because tribulation
brings forth patience. 3. and this is not in vain, for hope makes them not
ashamed, Gorrhan.

3. Chrysostom here shows a difference between the striving for a temporal
and everlasting crown: for there in the labor, that is sustained, there is no
pleasure till they come to the reward: but here non minus iucunditatis adferunt
ipsa certamina, etc. the very striving has no less pleasure, then the reward
which we strive for.

4. But here we must understand not every tribulation, but such as are endured
for Christ's cause: for the evil also do suffer tribulation, but they suffer
worthily as evil doers, and in such tribulations there is no joy, no comfort:
but in such as the faithful do suffer for righteousness sake, such as the
Apostle speaks of Act. 14.22. That we must thorough many afflictions enter
into the kingdom of God.

5. This is contrary to the judgment of the world, and of natural reason,
for they hold afflictions to be nothing else but misery and unhappiness, and
them miserable which do suffer them: But like as the eight sphere keeps it
course from the East to the West, but the planets do move from the West to
the East, holding a contrary course: so the godly and faithful do embrace
that way, which the wicked decline as evil and unhappy, Martyr.

6. And the faithful rejoice thus in tribulation, not as though they were
without feeling and were void of affection, as the Stoiks would have their
wise men; but afflictions being evil in themselves, are thorough the grace of
God turned to the good of his servants, Mart. Chrysostom here says, that
tribulations are res in seipsis bonae, etc. things good in themselves, because
they bring forth patience: but this is rather ex accidente, by an accident,
that things in themselves evil, are by Gods grace turned to be profitable unto
the servants of God.

7. Now in that the faithful do many times mourn and complain in their
afflictions, this is not contrary to the Apostle: for there is in every man
regenerate, the spiritual and natural man: the one shows it self in the
natural feeling of crosses and afflictions: but the other above nature by
grace rejoices in them, Calvin.

Quest. 5. How S. Paul and S. James are reconciled together: the one making
patience the cause of trial or probation, the other the effect.
S. Paul, v. 4. says, that patience brings forth trial or probation, which
is commonly translated experience: But S. James says, v. 1.3. that the trying
of your faith brings forth patience: so S. Paul makes this probation the
effect of patience, S. James the cause.

1. It cannot be said, that they speak of two diverse kinds of patience, for
the same word (...), patience, is used in both places.

2. Lyranus by probation understands, the purgation of sins: for as the
blot of sin is taken away (says he) by the contrition of the heart, so the
guilt of punishment by tribulation: But the Scripture acknowledges no such
purging of sins by affliction, the purging of sin is ascribed unto Christ,
Heb. 1.3. Who by himself (not by our afflictions, but by his own sufferings)
has purged our sin.

3. There are then two kind of probations: or rather this word probation is
taken two ways: for either it signifies the very action it self, whereby
one is tried or proved, and so it is taken actiuely in respect of God, who
proves and tries us: and so the trial and probation of our faith by
affliction brings forth patience as the fruit and effect thereof: and in this
sense James takes it: or it signifies the experience or trial which a man
has of himself by his affliction, and so is the effect of patience, and thus
S. Paul understands it: And therefore the Apostles use two diverse words:
James has (...), which is taken actiuely for the very probation it self: S.
Paul uses the word (...), which is taken passiuely, for that which is tried
and found out by experience: thus Calvin, Pareuis dub. 3. Tolet. annot. 4.
Perer. disput. 1. numer. 5.

4. Faius further answeareth that both are true in the same sense, that
patience brings forth trial or experience, and probation or trial again
makes patience: as health is the cause of deambulation and walking, and
walking is the cause again of health, the one is increased by the other.

Quest. 6. Of the coherence of these words with the former, because the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts, v. 5.
1. Oecumenius makes this as a reason why we rejoice in tribulation; because
the love of God is in us, and men do delight to suffer and endure for that
which they love: But love is here taken passiuely for the love, wherewith we
are beloved of God, not actiuely, for that whereby we love God, as shall be
showed in the next question: and the Apostle had yielded a sufficient reason
before of our rejoicing in tribulation, because tribulation works patience,
patience experience, etc.

2. Some do make it a reason of the words immediately going before, namely, of
the certainty of our hope, which makes us not ashamed, seeing we enjoy the
things hoped for, because we are assured by the spirit of God, that we are
beloved of God: his love is shed abroad, that is, manifested in our hearts by
the spirit, so Faius, Tolet.

3. But it rather contains a general reason of all the precedent benefits
and privileges, mentioned before, of our justification by faith, access and
entrance unto God, hope of glory, rejoicing in tribulation, because the spirit
bears witness unto our hearts, that we are accepted and beloved of God in
Christ, Calvin. Pareus.

Quest. 7. What kind of love the Apostle speaks of, saying, The love of God
is shed abroad, etc.
1. Some do take this actiuely, for the love wherewith we love God, so
Oecumenius, Anselme, and Stapleton antidot. page 275. does to the same purpose
allege Augustine, who understands here the love non qua ipse nos diligit,
Augustine. de spirit. and liter. c. 31.
sed qua facit nos dilectores sui, not wherewith God loves us, but whereby he
makes us lovers of of him, etc. and he would prove the same by the Apostles
phrase, absurdissime dicitur, etc. that is most absurdly said to be shed in our
hearts, quod extra nos est, etc. which is without us, only in God.

Contra. 1. Against Oecumenius we set Chrysostom an other Greek father, who
understands the Apostle to speak of the love of God toward us, dilectioni
Dei rem omnem acceptam fert, he ascribes the whole matter unto the love of
God. 2. Augustine shall answer Augustine, who elsewhere interprets this
place of the love of God toward us: as where he thus says, lib. 15. de Trinit.
cap. 16.
ipse spiritus sanctus dilectio est, non enim habet homo, vnde Deum dilig^^
nisi ex Deo; vnde Apostolus, the holy spirit himself is this love, for man
cannot tell how to love God, but from God: whereupon the Apostle says, the
love of God is shed abroad, etc. 3. And in this very place of Augustine, he
speaks of such love of God in us, whereby the Lord makes us love him, so
that he includes also the love of God, first toward us, whence issues our
love toward him. 4. And the love of God in God toward us, may without
absurdity at all, be said to be shed abroad in our hearts, as in true
friendship the love of a friend may be said to be shed on him, whom he
loves: so Gods love is shed forth in us by the fruits and effects which it
works in us, Pareus dub. 4.

2. Some think that both the love of God toward us, and our love toward God,
are comprehensive in the Apostles speech, as Origin upon this place allows
both: so also Gorrhan, and Pererius disputat. 2. numer. 9. who hereupon
infers, that there may be more literal senses, then one, of one place of
Scripture. Contra. One Scripture may have one general sense, which may
comprehend diverse particulars: or it may have one literal sense with diverse
applications, as typical or tropologicall, figurative or moral: but it can
not have more then one literal sense or exposition, specially one being
different from the other, not any scales included in it, or inferred, or
diducted out of it: for then the spirit in the Scripture should speak
doubtfully and ambiguously, like unto the oracles of Apollo, which were so
delivered, as that they might be taken in a diverse, yea a contrary sense. See
further of this point Synops. Centur. 1. err. 7. But that the love, wherewith
man loves God, is not here at all understood, it shall appear by diverse
reasons here following.

3. The best interpretation then is, that the Apostle speaks here of the love
of God, wherewith we are beloved of him in Christ. 1. Beza urges this reason,
because afterward v. 8. the Apostle speaks of that love: God sets forth
his love toward us, etc. and in both places mention is made of the same love of
God, the ground and foundation whereof is Christ, that was given to die for us.
2. Pareus insisteth upon this reason: the love of God here spoken of is
alleged as the cause of our rejoicing, and of the steadfastnes of our hope:
but our love of God, being weak and imperfect, can not be that cause. 3.
Peter Martyr, and Pareus do further press the scope of the place: the Apostle
assumeth this as an argument of our hope, because Christ was given to die for
us, which proceeded not from the love of us toward God, but from his love
toward us. 4. Faius urges the force of the Apostles phrase: this love is said
to be shed abundantly in our hearts, but our love toward God is not such an
abundant, and surpassing love: it is a slender, scant, and weak love: he
means then the superabundant love of God toward us, which as the Apostle
says, Phil. 4.7. passes all understanding. 5. I will adioyne also Tolets
reason, annot. 5. in c. 5. the charity and love, whereby we love God, is but
one grace and virtue: but the Apostle speaking of the shedding forth of this
love by the holy Ghost, means the effusion and pouring out of all the graces,
which are wrought in us by the spirit: he means then the love of God toward
us, from which fountain issue faith, all the graces and gifts of the spirit.
6. Add hereunto the consonant exposition of many of the Fathers, as of
Chrysostom cited before, of Hierome, who thus writes, quomodo Deus nos
diligat, ex hoc cognoscimus, etc. how God loves us, we know by this, that he
has not only by the death of his Son forgiven our sins, but has also
given us the holy Ghost, etc. Likewise Ambrose: pignus charitatis Dei bohemus
in nobis, etc. we have the pledge of the love of God by the holy spirit given
unto us, etc. Theophylact also interprets de charitate Dei, quam erga nos
ostendit, etc. of the love of God, which he shows toward us, etc. Likewise
expound Theodoret, Sedulius, with others.

8. Quest. Why the love of God is said to be shed abroad in our hearts.
1. Some do give this sense: effusa est sicut oleum, etc. this love is shed
abroad like oil, (...) cor occupando, in possessing and occupying the whole
heart, according to that saying. Matthew. 22. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart: Gorrh. but the love of (...) is not here taken actively,
for that love whereby we love God, as is showed in the former question. 2.
Tolet thus expounds it, abundantissime facti sunt amici Dei, they are not
sparingly, but abundantly made the sons of God: likewise the ordinary gloss
refers it to the greatness of Gods love, late nos diligit, he does love us
largely, that is, greatly. 3. Some refer it to the clear manifestation of
the love of God in our hearts: clare nobis manife^^ta, sicut cum lux
diffunditur, etc. the love of God is clearly manifested to us, as when the
^ight is spread and dispersed abroad. Gorrhan. 4. But hereby rather is
expressed the abundance of those graces, which are powered upon us by the
spirit: so Chrysostom, non mo^ce nos honoravit, etc. he has not sparingly
honored us, but he has shed forth upon us his love, as the fountain of all
good things: so also Oecumenius, quia vbere datus est, etc. because the spirit
is plentifully given us: and in the same sense the Prophet says, Joel 2. I
will power out my spirit upon all flesh. Faius.

9. Quest. Why it is added by the holy Ghost, which is given us.
1. The spirit of God is mentioned as the efficient cause of this work: the
love of God is said to be shed in our hearts by the holy Ghost, because the
spirit of God bears witness unto our souls, that we are the sons of God,
Romans 8.16. Osiand. Pareus, facit nos intelligere charitatem Dei, etc. the
spirit of God makes us to understand and feel the love of God toward us.

2. And this work is ascribed to the spirit, not excluding the Father and the
Son, to whom this love toward mankind is common: but the Apostle observes
the property of their persons, because as election is given unto God the
father, and Redemption to the Son, so love is the proper work of the spirit:
both to cause us to feel the love of God, and to make us to love God again.

3. And here we are not to understand only the gifts of the spirit, but the
spirit it self; which dwells in us, not in his essence, which is infinite,
but by his power, illuminating, directing, converting us: Faius: so Tolet well
says, that the spirit non solum dona sua nobis communicate, sed per ea in nobis
inhabitat, etc. does not only communicate his gifts unto us, but also by them
dwells in us.

4. In that the holy Ghost is said to be given us, thereby is signified, quod
non proprijs vi^tutibus, etc. that we have obtained the spirit not by our own
virtue, but by the free love of God: Oecumen. and the person of the holy Ghost
is noted, in that he is said to be given: and the giuers are the Father and the
Son. Hug. Card.

10. Quest. How Christ is said to have died according to the time. v. 6.
1. Some do refer these words to the former clause, and read thus, when we
were yet weak according to the time: that is, we were weak in the time of the
law, when grace yet appeared not: so Chrysostom. Theodor. and Erasmus thinks
this is added, as a mitigation of their infirmity: but it is against the
Apostles use to qualify the corruption and euilnes of man's nature: and he
speaks to the Gentiles, that had not the law, as well as to the Jews.

2. The most do apply it unto the latter clause, that Christ died in his
time: and here there are diverse opinions. 1. Some understand it of the short
time, which Christ's death continued, namely but three days, Ambrose, so also
Lyran. but that time being assigned see Christ's resurrection, is not fitly
expounded of his death. 2. Sedulius thus interprets, qu^^ in vltimo mundi
tempore mortuus est, because he died in the last time or age of the world. 3.
According to the time, that is, he died temporally in the flesh which is
mortal: for eternity knows no time. Haymo. 4. Hierom. epist. ad Algas.
refers it to the opportunity of time: Christ died in a fit time, when the
world stood most in need of his redemption. 5. But the best exposition is,
that Christ died in the fulness of time, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 4.4. the
time decreed and appointed of his father: thus expounds Theodor. and
Theophyl. tempore decenti and destinato, in a meet time, and appointed of God:
so also Beza, Par. Tol. with others.

11. Quest. Of the meaning of the 7. v. One will scarce die for a righteous
man, etc.
1. The Syrian interpreter reads in the first place, scarce will any die for
the wicked which reading Beza seems not to mislike, but that all the Greek
copies are otherwise: and Iunius thinks that here one word by the writers was
taken for an other, because of the near similitude in the Syrian tongue: and
thinks it should rather be read according to the Greek copy, for the
righteous, not for the wicked.

2. Some do take here these two, the righteous, and the good, to be one and
the same: and some confounding these two, do not understand these words of the
person of the just and good man, but of the cause, Hier. epist. ad Alg. and so
this should be the sense, that although scarce and sieldome, yet sometime one
may be found to die for a just and good cause: some likewise taking these two
for one, apply it unto the person of the righteous and good man, Chrysostom.
Lyran. Tolet. Par. Faius. But the Apostle first saying negatiuely, one will
scarce die, etc. and afterward using a kind of correction, that one may die for
a good man, does evidently distinguish these two clauses.

3. The most then do divide these two, and take the just and righteous, and
the good to be diversely taken by the Apostle.

1. Wicked Marcion, Hier. epist. 151.
as Hierome reports, by the just did understand the God of the old Testament,
for whom few offered themselves to death: by the good, the God of the new
Testament, that is Christ, for whom many are found ready to die. But this
opinion beside the blasphemy thereof in making two diverse Gods, and authors of
the Old and new Testament, contains apparent absurdity and falsehood: for
both many gave their lives in the old Testament in defense of the law of God,
as the three children, Dan. 3. and many in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, as
the history of the Macchabees testifies: and beside, many thousand Martyrs
are found to have died for Christ: whereas the Apostle speaks of very few,
that will die for a good man.

2. Arrius contrariwise by the just understands Christ, and by the good the
Father, of whom Christ testifies, that none is good but God. But if Christ be
this just one, for whom so many thousand Martyrs willingly gave their lives,
how says the Apostle, that scarce any will die for a just man?

3. Eucherius by the just interprets the Law and old Testament, by the good
Christ, and the new Testament: for few Martyrs are found in the old Testament,
and many in the new. But beside that it is against the scope and mind of the
Apostle, to understand this of dying for Christ, who by this comparison sets
forth the love of Christ, who died for evil men, even for his enemies, whereas
few are found ready to die for the righteous and good: the words of the
Apostle will not bear this sense, who in saying, for a good man it may be,
that one dare die, notes the paucitie and fewnes of them: whereas many
thousands have died for Christ in the New Testament.

4. Some by the just understand the virtuous, by the good the innocent, for
whom one may die in commiseration and pity toward him: Haymo, Thom. Aquin.
Gorrhan: or because innocence is favored of men, iustitia habet aliquid
severitatis, justice has some rigor and severity in it. Hug. Cardinal. But a
man can not be just, but he must also be innocent: these two then are not thus
distinguished.

5. Caietane understands by the just, an ordinary, virtuous, or righteous
man: by the good some excelling in the works of supererogation, for such one
perhaps dare die. But such works of supererogation we acknowledge not: all that
a man has is too little for himself, he has no superfluity to supererogate
to an other.

6. Osiander, and Emmanuel Sa, do understand in both those clauses, the
things, not the persons: and the first they expound of just punishment, which
none willingly suffer: in the second the good and honest cause, for which one
may be found ready to die. But the phrase to die for the just, will not bear
that sense: a man is not said to die for just punishment, but by it, or with
it: and yet in this sense some have been found, which willingly suffered their
just punishment, as the these converted upon the cross, who said unto his
fellow, Luke 23.41. We are righteously here.

7. The best interpretation then is, that by the just we understand such an
one, as is in himself a righteous and virtuous man: by the good such as have
deserved well of us, that are liberal and bountiful men, from whom we have
received good: so Beza interprets, one that is profitable to him: of whom he
has received good, Genevens. so also Catharinus a Popish writer: and some by
the good understand such as are dear unto them, as their children, parents,
friends, country: as some such were found among the Romans, that gave their
lives for their friends and country. P. Mart. And this exposition may be
confirmed by the opposite part: that Christ died for us being sinners, v. 8.
yea his enemies, v. 10. whereas men will not die for the righteous, and hardly
for their friends.

12. Quest. Of the difference between Christ's dying for us, and those which
died for their country.
We read in the foreign histories of the Gentiles, that some have given their
lives for their country: as Codrus for the Athenians, Menoecius for the
Thebanes, who killed himself and fell among his enemies for the deliverance of
his country: so Curtius threw himself into a gulf to preserve Rome from the
pestilence. But there was great difference between the death of these, and of
Christ. 1. They were not innocent as Christ was, and therefore as their life
was not so holy, so could not their death be so precious, nor their person to
honorable. 2. They did not willingly offer themselves unto any judge to be
condemned, as Christ did: but in other manner and sort adventured their lives.
3. They did it not of love, but of vain-glorie and desire of praise. 4. They by
the instigation of Satan were moved so to do, having no cogitation therein
to please God, but Christ gave himself to death (...) obedience to the will of
his heavenly father. 5. They at such time gave their lives, when as their case
was desperate, and so were impatient to abide the extreme ha^^d: and they died
being mortal men, that could not live long, as Solon, when he encouraged, the
citizens to take arms against Pisistratus the tyrant, being asked, what made
him bold so to do, answered, his old age he knew he could not live long: But
Christ died for us, having no necessity to die in himself. 6. Their death was
glorious and honorable unto them: but Christ offered himself to the
ignominious and shameful death of the cross. 7. They died for a temporal
deliverance: but we by Christ's death are eternally delivered. 8. And, that
which makes the greatest honor of all, they died for their country and
friends: but our blessed Savior for his enemies: ex Martyr. Pareus. 9. Origin
adds further, that although there may be found among the heathen that died
for their country, yet there is none of them, which died for all the world, as
Christ only did, which by his death totius mundi peccata absolvit, did absolve
all the world of their sins.

13. Quest. Of the greatness of the love of God toward man, in sending Christ to
die for us, v. 8.
This exceeding great love of God is set forth by three circumstances, what
they were for whom Christ died, sinners and enemies to God; what Christ was,
that suffered, even the Son of God; and what he endured and suffered, even to
die for them.

1. The condition of them for whom Christ died is set forth by three names:
they are said to be weak, as not able to help or deliver themselves, ungodly,
as they which had left the worship of the only true God, and had defiled
themselves with idolatry: sinners, which had every way transgressed the law of
God: Tolet. annot. 10. Origin here comprehends all kind of sins: for either
one of ignorance, and infirmity sins, and he is called weak: or he is an
obstinate and malicious offender, who is called the sinner: Sinners in
Scripture are said to be those, not which commit any sin, but those in whom
sin dwells and reigns: as Ioh. 9.31. and such were we by nature: Beza.
yea we were not only sinners, but enemies unto God: which sets his love
forth so much the more, that he sought our good, not only being evil, but
also adversaries unto him: So that while we were sinners, and so God hated us
in respect of our sins: yet at the same instant, amabat, secundum quod opus
eius, he loved us, as his own work. gloss. ordin.

2. Gods love further appears in sending his own Son into the world:
nothing is dearer to a man, then his own son: and therefore Gods love does
herein most show it self, in that he sent not either Angel or Arkangel, or any
other of his glorious creatures to die for us, but his own son. Martyr.

3. And this Son of God was not only made man for us, and lived in the
flesh, and suffered many things for our sake, but he died for us: it had been
a sufficient demonstration of his love, to have humbled himself, to take upon
him the nature of man, and to walk and converse among sinful men: But in
that he died, and that for his enemies, it shows an unspeakable love: there
is no greater love among men, then when one bestows his life for his friends,
Ioh. 15.13. But Christ's love here exceeded, that he gave his life for his
enemies: Gorrhan.

14. Quest. Whether man's redemption could not otherwise have been wrought then
by the death of Christ.
1. It was not necessary that Christ should die for our redemption, either by
the necessity of coaction, as though God had been by some urgent occasion
compelled thereunto: set God is not forced, he works most freely: nor yet by
necessity of nature: as it is impossible in the divine nature, that God should
lie, or be untrue: but no external work done by God proceeds from the
necessity of his nature: there was then no absolute necessity, that Christ
should die for us, nor yet any hypotheticall or conditional necessity, the
end being considered, namely, the salvation of man: for it had been possible
for God by other means, then by the death of his Son, to have wrought the
salvation of man.

2. Yet was it necessary that Christ should die for mankind, the wisdom and
counsel of God considered; because there was no other way whereby the greatness
of the love of God could be showed unto man, then by giving his own Son to
die for us: P. Mart. there might have been an other way, in respect of Gods
power, to whom all things are possible, sed nullus humanae miseriae
convenientoir, but none more convenient in regard of man's misery: for what can
more comfort us, and deliver us from despair, then that it pleased God, that a
man like our selves should die for us: gloss. ord. and though there must have
been an other way found out, Liberandi, to deliver man; tamen non redimendi,
yet not of redeeming man, Gorrhan: for man could not properly be said to be
redeemed, unless the ransom had been paid, and the punishment due unto man
satisfied, which was by the death of Christ.

15. Quest. Wherein the force of the Apostles reason consists, saying, Much
more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life, v. 9.
1. The ordinary gloss thus collecteth, because it is more to take away
sin, then iustos and cooperantes salvare, to save those that are just, and
fellow workers: as though this were the Apostles argument; it was an harder
matter to work our justification, which was done without us, then now to
purchase salvation, whereunto man himself works. But this is far from the
Apostles meaning, to make man a joint worker with Christ in the matter of
justification: for he ascribes all here unto the death and life of Christ.

2. Wherefore the force of this comparison, being from the greater to the
less, consists in these three points. 1. for whom Christ has done this. 2.
how he has wrought it. 3. and what.

1. The first is observed by Chrysostom: he justified us by faith in his
blood, when we were enemies, now amici facti sumus, we are made his friends,
and therefore he will much more save us.

2. The next is observed by Oecumenius, and Chrysostom also touches it: it is
not necessary, (...) post hac silius moriatur, that afterward the Son should
die any more: if then justification be already wrought for us, which required
Christ's death; much more now shall we obtain the perfecting of salvation, to
the which Christ's death again is not required. Pareus, and before him Gorrhan,
do place the comparison in the opposition between life and death: if he could
justify us by dying, multo magis vivens, etc. much more being alive can he
save us.

3 It is more to justify and reconcile sinners, then to save them being
justified. Christ has done the first, much less need we doubt of the second:
Pet. Mart. But Lyranus has here a corrupt gloss, giving this reason, why it
is a greater work to justify a sinner, then to glorify him being justified,
because one can not merit his justification: but he that is justified may per
gratiam mereri de condigno vitam beatam, etc. may by grace deserve of
condignitie a blessed life, etc. This is contrary to the Apostle, who says,
Romans 6.23. that the gift of God is eternal life, etc. it can not then be any
wise merited.

3. Now salvation is ascribed to the life of Christ, not as though the life of
Christ rising from the dead were the price of our redemption, but because
Christ by his resurrection and life did perfect our salvation: and he now ever
lives to be an intercessor for us unto his father, and to bring us unto
glory: wherefore to finish and make perfect our justification, the life of
Christ and his resurrection must be joined with his death and suffering: as the
Apostle concluded before in the very last words of the former chapter, Pareus.

16. Quest. Why the Apostle says, not only so, but we also rejoice in God,
etc. v. 11.
1. Some do make this connection: that we only shall not be saved by Christ in
the life to come, but now also rejoice in the hope thereof, Lyran. Gorrhan. and
before them Theo^^et: likewise Anselme we glory in this, quia consider amus
nos futuros cum illo in gloria, we consider we shall be with him in glory.

2. Oecumenius gives this sense, least any might think it a shame unto us,
that we could not be otherwise redeemed then by the death of Christ: the
Apostle adds that we ^^eede not be ashamed thereof, but rather glory
therein, because it was a sign of the great love of God, that he spared not
his own Son for us.

3. Some refer it to our glorying in tribulations, Sa: but it is more to
glory in God, ^^en to rejoice in tribulation.

4. But the Apostle sets down here the highest degree of the rejoicing of
Christians: they do not only rejoice under the hope of glory, nor in
tribulation, which two degrees the Apostle mentioned before, ver. 2. but they
rejoice in God: which is to rejoice, quod Deum propitium habeas, that thou have
God thy merciful father, Pareus. ^^^^care, Deum habere patrem, etc. to boast,
that we have God our father, protector, and ^^^ender, Tolet. gloriamur Deum
esse nostrum, we rejoice, that God is ours: Calvin. gloria^^^ de ipsius in nos
clementia, we glory of his clemency and love toward us, Osiander. And ^^s the
Apostle here amplifieth three effects of justification, before propounded, v.
1, 2. to ^^^e peace with God, to stand in the state of grace, and to rejoice:
so here he says we are reconciled by his blood, then we are saved by his life,
and so have a perpetuity and certentie in our state, and we dare also glory
in God. Pareus.

17. Quest. Whether any thing need to be supplied in the Apostles speech, v.
12. to make the sense perfect.
v. 12. As by one sin entered into the world, etc. 1. Some do think that the
redditiue of this similitude is wanting: for unto this, as by one, etc. should
answer the other part, so etc. Origin gives this reason thereof, that S. Paul
omitted the other part: so by one man's obedience came righteousness, propter
negligentiores, least the negligent and careless sort, should have presumed
too much: but this can be no reason, because the Apostle both before and after
had expressed as much, that we obtain life and righteousness by Christ.

2. Bullinger consents with Origin, that there is in this speech of the
Apostle an (...), some inconsequence: and that he omitted the other part,
through vehemency.

3. Erasmus thinks, that here is an anantapodoton, a comparison without a
reddition: which he would have understood by supplying the word (...), so, in
the particle (...) and death by sin, that is, so death came by sin, as by
one man sin entered: but all this belongs to the proposition or first part
of the comparison: As sin came in by one, and death by sin: the reddition
must be, that so righteousness came in by Christ, and life thereby: for
otherwise there should be small coherence in the words.

4. Tolet thinks that the reddition is included in those words in the end of
the 14.1. where Adam is said to be the figure of him that was to come:
insinuating thereby, that life and righteousness came in by the second Adam, as
sin and death entered by the first.

5. But their opinion seems to be the better, which supply the reddition of
this comparison concerning Christ in the words following: Origin refers us
to those words, v. 15. the gift is not so as the offense: but I rather with
Beza, and Pareus think, that the second part of the comparison is suspended by
a long parenthesis in the words coming between unto the 18. and 19. verses,
where the Apostle sets down both parts of the comparison.

18. Quest. Who was that one by whom sin entered into the world, v. 12.
1. Ambrose, and Hierome upon this place, by this one man would understand the
woman, because the beginning of sin came in by her: as Ecclesiastic. 25.26.
it is said, of the woman came the beginning of sin, and through her we all
die: and S. Paul says, 1. Timoth. 2.14. Adam was not deceived, but the woman
was deceived, and was in the transgression: But the woman here is not
understood, seeing the word is put in the masculine gender: and true it is that
from the woman came the beginning of sin, by the seducing of man: but the
Apostle here speaks of the propagation of sin, which was by the man, not by
the woman: Perer.

2. Some will have both the man and woman here understood, which both made as
it were but one: as when the Lord said, Let us make man according to our own
likeness, both the man and woman are understood: Pareus: so also the ordinary
gloss. quia mulier de vi^^, and vtriusque vna caro, because the woman is of the
man, and both made but one flesh.

3. But by this one we better understand Adam: though both our parents sinned,
and the man was seduced and deceived by the woman, yet the man only is named:
1. not because the man is the head of the woman, and so the sin of the woman,
is imputed to the man, because he might have corrected her, Hugo. 2. nor
because the man perfected the sin of the woman, which if he had not
consented, had not been finished: so the woman was principium incompletum, was
the incomplete or imperfect beginning of sin, the man was the complete and
perfect beginning, Gorrhan. 3. neither is this the reason, because the Apostle
consuetudinem tenens, etc. does follow the custom, which ascribes the
succession of posterity to the man, not to the woman, gloss. ordinar. 4. But
this indeed is the reason, the Apostle here shows not the order how sin
entered simply into the world: for the woman sinned first, and before the woman
the serpent: but how sin was propagated into mankind: now posteritas ex viro,
non ex m^liere nominatur, the posterity is named of the man, not of the woman:
as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 11.8. the man is not of the woman, but the woman
of the man: to this purpose Origin, so also Pet. Mart. ex quo tanquam principio
peccatum per propagationem traductum fuit, etc. by the man as the first
beginning sin was traduced by propagation: the Apostle then here speaks of
the beginning of the propagation of sin, not of the beginning of seduction,
which was by the woman, or of imitation, which was by the devil: who was a
liar from the beginning, and the father thereof, Job. 8.44. not by propagation,
but by seduction, and imitation, Mart.

Quest. 19. What sin the Apostle speaks of here, original or actual; by
one man sin entered.
1. Some understand here original sin, whereby the nature of man is
corrupted, and not actual: actuale non per vnum, sed per plures intrat,
because actual sin enters by many, and not by one, Gorrhan.

2. Some comprehend here sin generally, both actual and original: this word
sin, non solum complectitur vitium originia, sed omnia mala quae eo ex
sequuntur, does no: only comprehend the original corruption, but all other
evils, that come from thence, etc. Martyr. but of the propagation of original
sin, the Apostle speaks afterward in the end of the verse, in as much as
all men have sinned, etc.

3. Wherefore the Apostle here understands, the actual sin which Adam
committed: for the word is put in the singular number, and has the article
prefixed before it, (...) which shows some particular sin: and afterward
the Apostle calls it (...), transgression, and (...), disobedience: which
must be understood of Adams transgression: which was in him actual, but
original in respect of us, because it was the fountain of all sin: but it
was not original sin passive, passiuely: as now we call that original
sin, which is in the corrupt nature of man, issuing from Adams sin, Pareus:
this sin of Adam, in respect of him, was peccatum personale, a personal
sin, but as thereby the whole nature of man was corrupted, it was peccatum
naturae, the sin of nature, Faius.

4. Neither are we here to understand all the actual sins, which Adam
committed: but only his first transgression in eating of the forbidden fruit:
for like as the sins of parents now are not transmitted to their children, so
neither were all Adams sins propagated to posterity, but only the first,
between the which and his other sins there is this difference: that by the
first, bonum naturae, the goodness of nature was lost, by the other, bonum
gratiae personalis, the goodness and grace in Adam was taken away: And though
Adam repented of his sin, and so were delivered from the guilt thereof, yet
because that was a personal act, it extends not beyond his person: the
corruption of nature could not be healed by his repentance, Perer. disput. 6.
numer. 29.

Quest. 20. How sin is said to have entered into the world.
1. Origin by the world understands, terrenam and corporalem vitam, the
terrene and carnal life, to the which the Saints are crucified, but P. Mart.
rejects this interpretation upon this reason, that by this means the Saints
should not have original sin, if they be not comprehended under the name of
the world.

2. Some do take the world for the place continent and place of the world: but
this is rejected by Pererius numer. 32. upon this reason, because sin did not
in that sense first enter into the world by Adam: for before him sinned the
Angels that fell, and the woman, that was first deceived.

3. Neither by the world can we well understand paradise: for the woman had
first sinned in Paradise, before the man had consented.

4. Therefore by the world we better understand by a figure the inhabitants of
the world: the thing containing is taken for that which is contained, totum
genus humanum, all mankind is here signified, Gorrhan, Martyr, with others: as
afterward the Apostle expounds himself, by the world understanding all men:
And thus sin entered into the world: first Adam sinned being in and a part of
the world, and in him all mankind sinned, being then in his ioynes.

21. Quest. And death by sin: what kind of death the Apostle speaks of.
1. Ambrose here understands only the death of the body, when the soul is
separated from the body: There is an other death (says he) which is called
the second death in hell. quam non peccato Adae patimur, sed eius occasion
proprijs peccatis acquiritur: which we suffer not by reason of Adams sin, but
by occasion thereof, it is procured by our sins: so Ambrose is herein
deceived, for Adam was threatened to die the same day he should eat of the
forbidden fruit, Genesis 2.17. but he died not then the bodily death: Augustine,
who seems to be of the same mind with Ambrose, lib. 13. de ciuit. Dei, c. 23.
that the death of the body only was threatened, not the second death, quod
eam Deus occultam esse volait propter dispositionem novi Testamenti, etc. which
God would have kept secret because of the new Testament, wherein it should be
manifestly declared: Augustine (I say) thus answers this reason, that
although Adam and Eve did not that day die the corporal death, yet because
from that time forward mutata in deterius and vitiata natura, their nature
decayed and was corrupted, and the necessity of death was brought in, they
then began to die, etc. and Ambrose to the same purpose says, that there was
after that no day not hour, wherein they were not merit obnoxij, subject to
death: But the words of the text moriendo morieris, in dying thou shall die,
do seem to imply an actual death which then they should die, not a
potentiall only. Pererius is of the same opinion, numer. 38. that S. Paul here
speaks of the death of the body: because after our Parents had eaten of the
forbidden fruit; the Lord said to Adam, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return: But this is no good argument, they were subject to the death of the
body, Ergo, to no other death.

2. Some were of opinion, that the spiritual death is here only meant,
because they did not the same day die the death of the body, but lived 900.
years after: so Philo lib: de ^legor. leg. Mosaic. and Eucherius lib. 1. in
Genes. Gregor. epistol. 31. ad Eulog. the Pelagians, to whom consents impious
Socinus, were also of the same opinion, that the spiritual death only must be
here understood, but upon an other reason, because they thought, the death of
the body to be natural: But neither of th^^ reasons conclude: not the first,
for the same day they became mortal, though actually they died not: nor the
second, for Adam being created according to Gods image was made immortal, he
was not then mortal by nature.

3. Pererius has here an other conceit by himself, that the death of the
soul was also a companion of original sin, if it be taken only for the
separation of the soul from God, and the privation of eternal life, but not
as it signifies beside the everlasting torments of hell, numer. 39. But 1.
this assertion includes a contradiction, for if the death of the soul deprive
sinners of eternal life, it consequently casts them down to hell. 2. seeing
Christ the second Adam delivered us from that thraldom, whereunto we were
brought by the sin of the first Adam, and he has redeemed us from the
torments of hell, it follows that by Adams transgression we were made guilty
of hell.

4. Wherefore the founder opinion is, that sin brought into the world the
death both of body and soul: as Haymo well interprets, mors animae and
corporis in omnes homines pertransijt, the death both of the body and soul
went over all men, etc. Origin gives this reason, these two kinds of death are
here signified, quia corporalem mortem vmbram illia^ dixeris, etc. because you
may call the corporal death a shadow of the other, namely, the the death of
the soul: that wheresoever that invadeth, the other does necessarily follow,
etc. he thinks the death of the soul to be here specially meant, as in that
place of Ezechiel, The soul that sins, shall die, but so, as the corporal
death must necessarily follow: Theophylacts reason concludes as much, who
says by the sin of one, sin and death invaded the world, abcessisseque
hominis vnius, id est Christi virtute: and both are removed and taken away by
the virtue and strength of one, that is Christ, etc. Thus then the argument is
framed, what is recovered in Christ, was lost in Adam, but Christ restoareth us
both to the eternal life of the soul, and the life of the body in the
resurrection: therefore by Adams transgression we died both in body and soul,
Pareus. Pet. Martyr adds further, that as there is a double life, of the
soul, whereby we seek such things at are heavenly and spiritual, and of the
body, which seeks those things, that concern the preservation of the body:
so vtramque hanc vitam mors inflicta propter peccatum sustulit: so both these
lives death inflicted by sin has taken away: Faius gives this reason, in
Adam we are the children of wrath, now the wrath of God invadeth not the body
only, but the soul also.

By death then here we must understand, first the spiritual and eternal death
of the soul, which is to be cast out of Gods presence into hell, whereunto all
are subject without the mercy of God in Christ: secondly, the death of the
body, which is the separation of the soul from the body: thirdly, all the
forerunners, and consequents of both these deaths, as sickness, weakness,
corruption in the body, grief, horror, despair, and such like in the soul,
Pareus.

Quest. 22. Whether the death of the body be natural, or inflicted by reason
of sin.
1. Seneca has this saying, mors hominis non poena est, sed natura, death is
the nature of man, not a punishment: and of the same opinion seems Josephus
to be, who writes, lib. 1. antiquit. that Adam, if he had not sinned, futurum
fuisse longissima vita tardissimaque senectute, should have had a long life,
and a slow old age, etc. he thinks then, that he should have died, though it
had been long first. The Pelagians also were in the same error, that Adam was
by reason of his nature subject to death, not because of sin, as Agustine
reports their opinion, lib. 1. de peccat. merit. c. 9. and wicked Socinus
agrees with them, that death is naturally incident to men, as to briut beasts:
and that Adams posterity is subject to death, propter propagationem generis,
non imputationem peccati, because of the propagation of their kind, and nature,
not for the imputation of sin.

2. But this opinion is diversely confuted by the Scriptures. 1. Man was at the
first created according to Gods image: then as God is immortal, so man if he
had not sinned, should also have been immortal. 2. the Apostle says, Romans
6.23. the wages of sin is death, he speaks of death in general: every
kind of death both spiritual and corporal, is the reward of sin. 3. the
propagation of sin does indeed bring with it also propagation of death: as
the Apostle here says, sin entered by Adam, and death by sin: if sin then
had not entered, neither should death have entered.

3. But thus it is objected on the contrary, that death to mankind is
natural, and not brought in by sin.

1. Object. The body of man is compounded of dissonant and contrary
qualities, and therefore naturally is apt to be dissolved: and if there be a
natural aptness and power to die, there should also have followed a natural
act of dying.

Answ. 1. Pererius answeareth, that indeed, if man be considered, secundum
nudam natura conditionem, according to the bare and naked condition of his
nature, he was by nature mortal, as other creatures: but being considered as
he received a supernatural grace from God, death was not natural, but a
punishment of sin, Perer. numer. 34. But this answer is insufficient and
untrue: for there should not have been so much as any possibility of death in
the world, if sin had not entered: he then answeareth only concerning the act
of dying, which should be suspended by a supernatural gift, he takes not away
the possibility of dying: and this supernatural gift was no other then the
dignity and excellency of man's nature made by creation immortal, if he had
not sinned. 2. wherefore our more full answer is, that man's body, though
consisting of diverse elements, yet was made of such an harmonaicall
constitution and temper, as no dissolution should have followed, if he had not
sinned: such as shall be the state and condition of our bodies in the
resurrection.

2. Object. If death be the punishment of sin, God should be the author of
death, because he is the author of punishment.

Answ. 1. Pererius says, that God is not directly the cause of death, but
either consequenter, by way of consequent, because he made man of a dissoluble
matter, whereupon death ensues: or occasionaliter, by way of occasion, because
he took away from man that supernatural gift whereby he should have been
preserved from mortallitie: but God efficiciter, is not the efficient cause of
death, which is a mere privation. But this answer also is insufficient: for
neither should death have followed by reason of any such dissoluble matter, if
Adam had not sinned: neither needed there any such supernatural gift, beside
the privilege and dignity of man's creation. 2. wherefore we answer further,
that as God created light, darkness he created not, but disposed of it: so he
made not death, but as it is a punishment: God, as a disposer rather, and a
just judge, then an author, inflicteth it.

3. Object. Christ died, and yet had no sin, therefore death is a natural
thing, not imposed as a punishment for sin.

Answ. 1. Origin here answeareth, that as Christ knew no sin, yet per
assumptionem ^^ uis dicitur factus esse peccatum, etc. yet by the taking of our
flesh he is said to be made sin for us, so also he died for us, etc. the
death then which he undertook was not a punishment upon him, in respect of his
own sin, which he had not: but of ours, which was imputed unto him. 2.
Origin says further, mortem, quam nulli debuit, sponte, non necessitate
suscepit, the death which he ought to none, he did willingly undertake, not of
necessity, as Christ himself says, I have power to lay down my life, and
power to take it again. 3. add hereunto, that mors in eo imperium non habuit,
etc. death had no power or command over lum, Mart. for he rose again from
death triumphantly, which shows that he yielded not unto death of necessity,
for then he could not have shaken off so soon the bands of death again.

Quest. 23. Of the meaning of the Apostle in these words, in whom all have
sinned, and of the best reading thereof, ver. 12.
1. Erasmus will have the words (...), to be interpreted, eo quod, or
quandoquidem, in so much, or because, so also Calvin, Martyr, Osiander, and our
English translations, and Erasmus reason is, because the Scripture uses an
other phrase in that sense, as 1. Cor. 15.22. as in Adam all die, the words are
not (...), but (...): But this reason may be easily taken away: for sometime in
Scripture the preposition (...), is taken for (...), as Heb. 9.17. (...) the
testament is confirmed in the dead, Beza: and Heb. 9.10. (...), in meats: And
this interpretation of Erasmus, is the rather to be misliked, because he would
not have this understood of original sin, but of every ones proper and
particular sins, as Theodoret before him, and so we should want a special
place for the proof of original sin.

2. Wherefore the better reading is, in whom, that is, in Adam all have sinned,
so read Origin, Chrysostom, Phatius in Oecumenius, Theophylact, whom Beza,
Pareus follow: and there are three things, which may serve for the antecedent
to this relative, in whom, either sin, or death, or that one man, namely Adam
before spoken of, but not the first, because sin in the Greek tongue (...),
is of the feminine gender: and so cannot answer unto the Greek relative, which
is of the masculine gender: nor the second: for it were an improper speech to
say in the which (death) all have sinned: for as Augustine says, in peccato
moriuntur homines, August. lib. 4. cont. 2. epist. Pelag. c. 4.
non in morte peccant, men die in sin, they are not said to sin in death,
and so Augustine resolves, that in primo homine omnes peccasse intelliguntur,
all are understood to have sinned in the first man Adam, etc. and to this
purpose Augustine in the same place alleges Hilarious.

Quest. 24. Whether the Apostle mean original, or actual sins, saying, in
whom all have sinned.
1. Erasmus in his annotations upon this place, contending that it should be
rather read, for as much as all men have sinned, then, in whom all men have
sinned, thinks that this place is not understood of original, but of actual
sins: who although he profess, that he is an enemy to the heresy of the
Pelagians, which deny original sin: yet contendeth both by the authority
of the Fathers, as Hierome and Origin, and by the scope of the place, that the
Apostle must be understood to speak of actual sins: But all this may easily
be answered. 1. those commentaries which pass under the name of Hierome, are
verily thought not to be his, lib. 3. de remission. peccat. c. 123.
but Augustine coniectureth, that they might be written by Pelagius: that
supposed author excepteth Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, that they were free from this
death, namely the spiriturall death of the soul, whereas even they also
without the mercy of God, were subject by nature unto everlasting death. 2.
But Origin manifestly interprets the Apostle to speak of original sin:
for he says, as Leui was in Abraham's Ioynes when he paid tithes to
Melchizedeck, sic omnes homines erant iu lumbis Adae, etc. so all men that are
born were in the Ioynes of Adam, and when he was expelled out of Paradise, they
were expelled with him, etc. 3. touching the scope of the place that which
follows, v. 13. unto the time of the law was sin in the world,
comprehends also original sin (which Erasmus would have understood only
of actual, that this place might be taken so likewise) as shall be further
showed, when we come to that place.

2. But Theodoret goes yet further then Erasmus, for he does not only exclude
original sin here, applying the Apostles words only to actual sin: but
he thinks further, that Adams sin was not the cause of the entrance of
sin upon his posterity, but the occasion only: for they having sinned
became mortal: and being mortal, they begat mortal children, and so were
subject to perturbations, and consequently unto sin, and so he concludes,
vim peccati non esse naturalem, etc. that the force of sin is not natural:
for then they which sin should be free from punishment, (for that which is
natural cannot be helped) sed naturam ad peccatum procliuem esse factam: but
yet nature was made prone and apt to sin: to this purpose Theodoret: But the
Apostle evidently shows, that not only death is entered into the world, but
sin also: for how could infants in the justice of God be subject unto death,
if they were not also guilty of sin.

3. But the Pelagians go yet a step further, and deny that there is any
original sin at all, and that Adams sin is not transfused to his
posterity by any natural propagation, but only a corrupt imitation: which
heresy shall be confuted among the controversies.

Quest. 25. Of the coherence of these words, unto the time of the law was
sin in the world.
1. Some make this connection, that the Apostle directly proves his former
assertion, v. 12. that in Adam all sinned, and therefore are subject to death:
and this is proved by the contrary: because before there was any law given,
men were not punished for their actual sins, which were then in the world:
for there is no imputation of sin unto punishment, where is no law: seeing
then death was not inflicted for actual sins, it follows, that it was for
original sin, Tolet. But this is not the coherence, for he takes sin
only for actual sin, whereas the Apostle spoke before of original sin.

2. Some will have all this verse to contain an objection, and to be uttered
by S. Paul in the person of the adversary and obiecter: Where no law is,
there is no sin imputed, but before Moses there was no law given, therefore
no such sin was imputed: But all the words of this verse cannot contain the
objection, because the first clause, unto the time of the law was sin in the
world, are contrary to the objection: for it is affirmed that sin was in the
world, which the obiectio excepteth against: beside Beza well observes that
where the Apostle speaks in the person of an other, he inserteth some note or
signification thereof.

3. Calvin suspendeth all this sentence by a parenthesis, which Beza misliketh:
because it has a very good coherence with the former verse.

4. Some think that the Apostle here makes not an objection, but rather
preuenteth it, and makes answer unto a supposed objection: for it might have
been thus excepted aagainst the former words, in whom all have sinned, that
there was no law given until Moses, and where no law is, there is no
imputation of sin: to this objection the Apostle answeareth by way of
co^cession unto part, that though sin be not imputed without a law, yet sin
was in the world before the law, as it appears by the effects thereof,
namely death, which reigned over all, as it follows, v. 14. to this purpose,
Martyr, Piscator, Lyran.

5. But this rather is the right coherence and connection of these words with
the former: whereas the Apostle had inferred, that all in Adam were sinners,
and so subject to death: instance might be given of those which lived until
the time of the law, that unto them sin was not imputed, because they had no
law given them: Then the Apostle answeareth this objection, proouing that
death came into the world because of original sin: and first he takes it
for granted, that there was then sin in the world before the Law, v. 13. as
also death: then he reasons thus, if death were in the world, and not
inflicted for actual sins, then was it imputed for original: but it was not
inflicted for actual sins: which he proves by two reasons, first by that
which was objected, there was no law given for actual sins, and therefore
they were not imputed: secondly, by the instance of children which committed no
actual sins, and yet died: therefore death entered into the world because of
original sin. Pare.

Quest. 26. How sin is said to have been unto the time of the law.
1. Some do understand this sentence inclusiuely, including also the time of
the law: and expound unto the law, unto the end and term of the law: for
sin was both before and under the law, which could not take away sin
until Christ came: thus Augustine, lib. 1. de peccat. remission. c. 10. and
Thodoret, likewise Haymo, who understands by the law, finem legis, and
initium gratiae, the end of the law, and beginning of grace: and makes it
like unto this speech: the Hunnes reigned vsque ad Attylam regem, unto king
Attylas, that is, unto his death: But the words following are against this
exposition: sin is not imputed where is no law, for if the time under the
law be here comprehended, how could it be said, that then sin was not
imputed, whereas by the law it is most of all imputed.

2. Origin has this singular exposition by himself, he understands here not
the written but the natural law: and he supplieth the word mortuum, dead:
sin is dead unto the time of the law, that is, till children come to years
of discretion to understand the law of nature, and light of reason, sin is
not imputed unto them: As it is forbidden that a child should smite his
parents, but in a boy of 4. or 5. year old it is counted no sin so to do,
and to this purpose he also interprets the word, world: the Apostle says not
among men, but in the world: because in the world there are unreasonable
creatures, which are not capable of sin; and so he thinks that S. Paul
understands children, which are not yet capable of reason: to this effect
Origin: But first it is evident that the Apostle by the law, understands the
written law of Moses, as it follows, v. 14. and again it is too great
boldness to insert the word, dead: for thus we may make any sense of the
Scripture.

3. Wherefore the Apostles meaning is, that from Adam until the law was given
(for of the time after the law there could be no question) there was sin in
the world: for though they had not the written law, yet they had the law of
nature, in transgressing the which they sinned, Lyran. Beza, Mart.

Quest. 27. What sin the Apostle means: which was in the world unto the
time of the law.
1. Some do understand it only of actual sin: which was in the world in
that the law of nature was transgressed, though yet there were no written law
given, Tolet: but it is evident, in that the Apostle makes direct mention of
infants, v. 14. which sinned not as Adam did, that is, actually, that he
means original sin also.

2. Pererius only refers it to original sin, which though it were known
unto the Patriarchs, yet it was not by the law of nature acknowledged for
sin, so also Anselme: Tolet replyeth, that it cannot be so taken: for neither
under the law is original sin imputed unto punishment: But this reason is
not sufficient: for both before and after the law death reigned over all, as
brought in by original sin.

3. But it is more agreeable to the Apostles mind to understand sin here
generally, both original and actual, yet with special relation to original
sin: because the Apostles intendment is to show, that all are sinners in
Adam, and so subject unto death: and this appears to be the Apostles meaning,
v. 14. where he speaks of the reigning of death over all, as well those which
committed actual sin, as those which did not: Thus Haymo interprets: sin
was in the world, and originale, and actuale, both original and actual;
Augustine likewise and Theodoret in the exposition of this place comprehend
both: so also Beza, Pareus.

Quest. 28. How sin is said to be imputed where there is no law, ver. 13.
1. Chrysostom here reports the opinion of some, that make this a part of
the objection: but he refuses it: and Tolet adds this reason further:
because men do not use to object, but that has some show of probability:
now none could doubt whether there were sin in the world before the law, for
that was evident and apparent to all: these words then the Apostle utters in
his own person.

2. Oecumenius thinks that the Apostle speaks of the imputation of such
sins, as were against the ceremonial law of Moses, as touching
circumcision, sanctifying of the Sabbath, and such like: for other sins
before the law of Moses, were both known and imputed: as is evident in the
examples of Cain, Lamech, the Sodomites, which were punished for their sins:
But the Apostle directly speaks of such sins, as were in the world before
the law: now the breach of ceremonies commanded by the law, was counted no
transgression before the law.

3. Some by the imputation of sin understand the account made of sin, and
take imputation for reputation: as the Syrian interpreter, and Beza in his last
edition, non putatur esse peccatum, it is not thought to be sin: which is
referred unto the judgment: and opinion of men: before the law came, they had
no perfect knowledge of sin: obscurum tum erat naturae lumen, the light of
nature was so obscure, that men did not see their sins, Mart. so also
Os^ander, non reputabatur, it was not reputed sin; also Melancthon, vbi non
est lex, non agnoscitur, non accusatur, etc. where no law is, sin is not
acknowledged, accused: to the same purpose M. Calvin: though even before the
law their consciences accused them, and there were diverse examples of Gods
judgments, vt plurimum tamen ad sua scelera connivebant, yet for the most part
they did wink at their sins, etc. Thus before them Augustine understands
it of the knowledge of sin, because per legem cognitio peccati, by the law
comes the knowledge of sin, lib. 1. de peccat. merit. c. 10. and Oecumenius
also to the same purpose takes it comparatively, magnitudo peccati non erat
ita cognita, etc. the greatness of sin was not known so before the law, as
afterward by the law: and Haymo so expounds, peccatum non agnoscebatur tam
grave malum esse, sin was not known to be so great evil: to the same
purpose Lyranus, Hug. Card. But these expositions seem not to be agreeable to
the scope of the Apostle: for to what purpose should the Apostle use this
qualification: sin was in the world, though it were not imputed, and taken to
be sin before the law came: for the Apostle does not here intend to show the
effects or property of the law, but his purpose is to prove, that men before
the law came, were punished with death even because of their original sin.

4. Origin takes the imputation of sin for the reputation, but he follows
his former sense, understanding the law of nature: that in children, while yet
they have no use of reason, and so no knowledge of the law of nature, that
which they do is not counted sin: But the Apostle evidently shows in the
next verse, speaking of Moses, that he means here the written law of Moses:
Origin fortifieth his opinion, that the Apostle here means the law of nature;
because if it be understood of any other law, diabolus and angeli eius
videdutur absolvi, the Devil and his angels may seem to be absolved, because
they had no other law, then the law of nature. Contra. The Apostle speaks not
of the sin of Angels, but of men propagated from Adam, whom he proves all
to be sinners in Adam, because they die in Adam: but in the spirits there is
neither propagation, nor mortality.

5. Ambrose refers this imputation of sin unto the opinion, which men had
of God, whom they thought not to regard nor punish the sins of men: But the
contrary is evident in Pharaoh and Abimelech, who knew that they were
punished for keeping Sarah Abraham's wife.

6. Anselme and Pererius do understand this to be spoken only of original
sin: that it was not acknowledged to be sin, before Moses law came, by the
light of nature: though to the Patriarchs and holy men it were known: But the
contrary is proved by the Apostle, that original sin was imputed to men,
even before the law was given, because death reigned over all, even over
children: so far is he from saying, that original sin was not imputed: for
where death was inflicted for sin, there sin was imputed.

7. This word of imputing of sin is taken two ways, it signifies either to
have the fault imputed, or the punishment: but here the latter rather, to
impute sin, is adiudicare (...) reum, to adiudge the guilty person worthy
of punishment: in this sense is the word taken, 2. Tim. 4.16. All have forsaken
me, I pray God it be not imputed unto them: that is, that God do not punish
them for it: so to Philemon, 18. if he have hurt thee any thing at all, impute
it unto me, that is, let me satisfy for it, Faius, Tolet: in this sense the
Apostle says, Romans 4.8. Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes not his sin,
his sin shall not be laid to his charge in judgment. And so the Apostle
says here, where no law is, sin is not imputted, that is, there is no
punishment inflicted for sin, but by the prescript of a law: seeing then,
that the punishment of death was inflicted upon those which lived before the
law, it could not be for sins, which they actually committed, which had no
law to punish them: therefore it was original sin, which was punished by
death: and least it might be said, that though there were no written law,
whereby sin was imputed, yet there was a natural law, which men
transgressed, and therefore were punished: the Apostle shows in the next
raise, that even death reigned over them which had committed no actual sin,
as Adam had done, and therefore death was inflicted as a punishment not only
of actual, but original sin, Beza.

29. Quest. How death is said to have reigned, from Adam to Moses.
1. Origin distinguishes between the word pertransijt, entered or passed,
which the Apostle used before, v. 12. and regnavit, reigned: death entered over
all both the just and unjust, but it reigned only in those, qui se peccato
tota mento subiecerunt, which did give themselves wholly unto sin: But the
Apostle speaks generally of all, not only of some that death reigned upon:
by the generallitie of death, he proves the generallitie of some: and by this
word regno, he shows potentiam mortis, the power of death, tha^ none could
resist it, Martyr: instar tyranni saeuijt, it raged like a Tyrant, Pareus.

2. By death, some understand, mons anima, the death of the soul, that is,
sin, which reigned from Adam unto Moses: Haymo, Hug. but it is evident, that
the Apostle in this discourse distinguishes death from sin: and proves by
the effect, the universality of death, brought in by sin, the generality of
sin also. Origin seems to understand, mortem gehennae, the death of hell,
unto which all descended, and therefore Christ went to hell to deliver them:
this sense follows also the ordinary gloss, and Gorrhan. But in this sense
it appears not, why the Apostle should say, unto Moses: for they hold, that
all the just men even under the law also, went to hell. But in truth the death
of hell reigned not over the righteous either before the law, or after, from
the which they were delivered by Christ: therefore the death of the body is
here understood, which entered upon all even over infants, which sinned not as
Adam did.

3. Unto Moses. 1. Origin by Moses, understands the Law, and by the law the
whole time of the law, vsque ad adventum Christi, unto the coming of Christ,
who destroyed the kingdom of sin: so also Haymo: but in that the Apostle
sets Moses against Adam, it is evident, that he understands the time, when
the law was given: and what law he speaks of, is further showed v. 20. The
Law entered that offense should abound: the dominion then of sin and death
there ended not. 2. Some think this limitation is set, because men were more
afraid of death before Christ's coming then after, because they had not such
hope of the resurrection, Gorrhan. but it is an hard and forced exposition, to
interpret, unto Moses, unto the coming of Christ, as is showed before. 3. Some
think it is said, unto Moses, because then a remedy was given by the law in
restraining of sin: and then first in Judas capit destrui regnum mortis, the
kingdom of sin began to be destroyed, and now every where: gloss. ordinar.
but the law gave no remedy against sin, for sin then abounded much more,
v. 20. and the Apostle said before, c. 4.15. That where no law is, there is no
transgression: there is no such knowledge of sin. 4. Therefore unto Moses,
notes the time of the giving of the law: vsque ad legem per Mosen promulgatam,
unto the law published by Moses gloss. ordin. not that death reigned not after
Moses also: but this is added, to show that death was in the world even before
the law, Lyran. and so consequently sin: for of those greatest doubt might be
made, which lived before the law, whether death entered upon them as a
punishment of their sin.

30. Quest. Of the meaning of these words, which sin not after the similitude
of the transgression of Adam.
This verse has diverse readings. 1. some do refer the last words, after the
similitude of the transgression of Adam, unto the first part of the sentence,
death reigned. 2. some do join it with the next words before, which sinned:
and of either of these there are several opinions.

1. They which distinguish the sentence, and join the first and last words
together, some, as Chrysostom, give this sense: that as death reigned upon
Adam, so likewise it reigned over his posterity: but others do make this the
cause of death and mortality, because they are borne like unto Adam, that is,
destitute of original justice. Lyranus, Tolet. annot. 19. Tolet further would
confirm this interpretation by diverse reasons. 1. the preposition is (...)
which with a dative case shows the cause, whereas an other word (...), is
used to signify in, as Philip. 2.7. He was found in shape as a man: and, Romans
8.3. In the similitats of sinful flesh. 2. the word (...), similitude,
shows the similitude and likeness of nature. 3. and this is most agreeable to
the Apostles purpose, to show the cause why death reigned over all, because
they are borne sinners like unto Adam.

Contra. 1. The Greek word (...) is sometime taken for (...), in, as before in
the 12. verse. (...), in whom: and Tolet himself in that place shows, that
it is so used in other places of Scripture: annot. 15. 2. The word of
similitude is better referred to the quality of Adams sin, then to the
conformity in nature. 3. Neither needed the Apostle here show the cause why
death reigned over all: but he brings in this as a proof of that, which he
said verse. 12. that all sinned in Adam; because all are subject to death: even
they which commit not actual sins; as infants: it was therefore impertinent
to repeat that, which he intends to prove. 4. Now further, this distinction
of the verse is overthrown by these two reasons. 1. if the Apostle had said,
over those which (...) and should have put to no other addition, he had
contraried himself, having set it down verse. 12. that in Adam, all sinned,
and death therefore went over all: how the^ could he say, that death reigned
over those; that sinned not? 2. there is not in infants the similitude of Adams
transgression: for his sin was actual so is not theirs: if he had said
only, after the similitude of Adam, and not added transgression, there had
been more probability in it, thus to divide the sentence: but in that he
adds, after the similitude of the transgression, it is more fitly joined to
the former words, which sinned not.

2. Now of those which join the last clause with the former words, some read
them affirmatively, thus, death reigned, etc. over them, which sinned after the
similitude, etc. and Origin receiving this reading, expounds it of those,
which committed mortal and great sins, as Adam did: and so distinguishes
between the entering of death, which went over the righteous, and the reigning
of death only over those, which gave themselves wholly over unto sin.
Ambrose understands this clause of Idolaters, for they sin like unto Adam,
who was not free from idolatry, in forsaking the Creator. Some understand it
of children, that they are said to sin after the similitude of Adam, quia ex
peccatore nascuntur peccatores, because they are borne sinners of a sinners
Gorrhan. But all these go against the received reading, which has a negative,
over them which sinned not, as also the Syrian interpreter reads.

3. Of those which read with a negative, over them, which sinned not: Hier. l.
cont. Pelag. expounds it of the particular sin of Adam, in eating of the
forbidden fruit: that death reigned even over those, which had not committed
that sin: so also Theodor. and Chrysostom. though he otherwise divide the
sentence, as is showed before: But none beside Adam did commit that sin:
whereas the Apostle in saying, even over them also, which sinned not,
insinuates, that there were some, over whom death reigned, that sinned after
the similitude of Adams transgression, and some which did not.

4. Athan. ser. 4. cont. Arr. says, that they sinned like to Adam, which
committed mortal and great sins: they sinned not like to Adam, that sinned
not mortally; and yet died, as Jeremy, and John Baptist, that were sanctified
in their mothers womb: But in this sense the Apostle only should show, that
death reigned only over those, which had committed actual sins; and so he
should not prove that which he said before, that in Adam all sinned, not only
those which commit actual, but are guilty only of original sin.

5. Oecumenius does interpret this place, of those, which were before the Law,
which did not transgress in legem datam, against any law given unto them, as
Adam did, but only against the law of nature: and so he seems to understand
it only of those which committed actual sins: but then the Apostles reason
should not be general enough, if he concluded not all, as well Infants, as
others to be sinners in Adam.

6. Most of our new writers understand this, not to sin after the similitude
of the transgression of Adam, to be, sine lege peccare, to sin without a law,
as all they did which were from Adam to Moses, as well infants as men of
years: so Mart. Bulling. Melanct. Calv. But this had been then a needless
addition, seeing all without exception from Adam to Moses sinned in that manner
without a law: but the Apostle in saying, even over them also, shows, that
there were some beside those, which sinned after the transgression of Adam.

7. Wherefore I prefer Augustines exposition, who takes those to sin after
the similitude of Adams transgression, that committed actual sins, and those
not to sin after that similitude, which had no actual but only original
sins: so also Ansel. Lyran. Gorrh. gloss inter. Haymo, and of our new
writers, Beza, Part. Ofiana. Pisc. with other: so also Per.

31. Qu. How Adam is said to be the figure of him that was to come. v. 14.
1. Origin, by him which is to come, understands the next world, that as by
Adam we all in this life become mortal, so in the next world vita reguabit per
Christum, life shall reign thorough Christ.

2. Some understand this according to that place, 1. Cor. 10.11. all those
things happened unto them in t^pes: so whatsoever was before or under the law,
were figures of those things, which should be accomplished in the times of the
Messiah: Faius, and Origin also to the same purpose. But it is evident, that
the Apostle compares the person of Adam and Christ together, and touching
those things, which were wrought and accomplished in this life, not deferred
till the next.

3. Augustine sometime refers, that, which is to come, not unto Christ, but
unto Adams posterity, that such as he was after he had sinned, such was his
posterity, lib. 1. de peccat. mort. c. 11. so also Haymo brings this in for
one exposition, sicut Adam peccator extitit, as Adam was a sinner, so all his
posterity are borne sinners: but the word being put in the singular number,
and with one article, (...), of him, or one to come, shows, that it must be
understood of some special one, not of all Adams posterity.

4. The commentary under S. Hieromes name, but falsely, here bewraieth it self
to have been written by some Pelagian, whose heresy was, that Adams sin is
derived to his posterity by imitation, not by propagation: these are the
words, Adam having first transgressed the commandment of God, exemplum est
legem praevaricari volentibus, is an example to those, which will transgress
the law of God, as Christ is an example, to those which will imitate him, in
fulfilling his fathers will: But wherein Adam is a type of Christ, the Apostle
shows in the rest of this chap. following, where no mention is made of any
such exemplarie imitation.

5. Some refer this to such things as happened to Adams person, as Eve was
formed out of Adams side being asleep: so out of Christ's side hanging on the
cross issued water and blood, the Sacraments of regeneration, by the which the
Church is sanctified and saved: Gorrhan, Lyranus, Pererius: And as Adam was
made ex terra virgin, of the earth a virgin, so Christ was borne of Marie the
Virgin. Haymo. But Bellarmine presses this further, that as Adam was made out
of the earth being yet not accursed, Bellar. lib. 4. de amiss. great. c. 15.
so Christ of Marie, qua omnis maledictionis ac per hoc omnis peccati expers
fuit, which was free from all malediction, and so from all sin, etc. But
beside that none of the rest, which urge this similitude, do strain it thus
far: but only thus, that as Adam was made out of the earth, divina virtutes,
by the divine virtue, Lyran. sine humano opere, without man's help, Gorrhan: so
Christ was borne of a Virgin: this strained and forced collection should be
contrary to the Apostle: for if Marie were without sin, how is it true,
which the Apostle said before, in whom all ever have sinned.

6. Herein then Adam was a type of Christ, not in respect of such things, as
were personal to either of them; but of that, which by them redounded to many:
and this similitude and correspondencie, is ex contrarijs, by the contrary, as
Origin well observes: and that in these three respects: what they are in
themselves considered, what to their posterity, and wherein. 1. They were both
authors and beginners, Adam was the beginning of mankind, quoad esse naturae,
in respect of the natural generation: Christ is the beginning quoad esse
gratiae, in respect of the spiritual regeneration by grace, Lyran. 2. as Adams
sin did not hurt himself only, but his posterity, so the grace of Christ
is communicated to all his spiritual generation. 3. as death and sin came in
by Adam, so life and righteousness by Jesus Christ: as the Apostle follows
this comparison in the rest of this chapter, and ^^ large, 1. Cor. 2.15.

Here follow certain questions touching this comparison made by the Apostle
between Adam and Christ.

31. Quest. Of the names and terms, which the Apostle uses in this
comparison.
1. In the transgression and fall of Adam, the Apostle uses diverse words and
terms, which either express the cause of Adams fall, the ruin and fall it
self, and the fruits: for i^ these three are Adam and Christ compared
together. 1. the cause is set forth in general terms, as it is called (...),
sin, v. 12. or (...), transgression, v. 14. or more special, as it is called
(...) disobedience, v. 19. 2. the fall of man is called (...). Lapsus the fall
or ruin of man, v. 15. 3. the effect are either, the guiltines of sin,
called (...), v. 16, or the punishment, which is either (...), death, v. 12. or
(...), condemnation, everlasting death, v. 16.

2. In the justification purchased by Christ, are likewise expressed the
causes, the work it self, and the effects which follow. 1. the causes: the
efficient, (...), the grace of God, v. 15. called also (...), the abundance or
redounding of grace, v. 17. the formal cause, is (...), the obedience of
Christ, v. 19. 2. the work of our justification is called (...) the gift, v.
15. (...), the gift by grace, v. 15. and the gift of righteousness, v. 17. 3.
then the fruit and effect thereof, is (...), the justification of life, or unto
life, v. 18.

3. But yet if we will more exactly distinguish these words, this difference
may be made between them: these three words which the Apostle uses, (...), v.
15, 16. the first signifying grace, the other two being translated the gift,
do thus differ: the first shows the grace and favor, from the which the
benefit proceeds, the second is the co^^lation of the benefit, the third
betokens the benefit it self, which is conferred: as if a Prince should give
a great treasure to redeem one out of captivity: this favor of the Prince is
(...), the grace; the free giving of it is (...), the donation; the others
enjoying of it, and receiving of this liberty, is (...), the benefit or gift.
Beza.

4. So these other 3. words, (...), justifying, justification, justice, do
thus differ: the first signifies the merit of Christ's justice, whereby we are
justified: the second the action it self of justification, whereby Christ's
justice is communicated to us: the third the justice it self, which is imputed
and communicated unto us, Tolet. annotat. 24.

Quest. 33. Of the comparison between Adam and Christ in general.
1. Origin well observes, that this comparison, is per genus similis, per
speciem contraria, it is alike in the general resemblance, but contrary in
the particular: in two things there is a general agreement and resemblance: 1.
that there is one that gives beginning, and is the author unto the rest. 2. in
plures aliquid diffundtur, on both sides, as the beginning is from one, so
there is somewhat conveyed unto many.

2. The specificall difference, consists in the contrariety, and disparitie,
and the excellency: the disparitie is, that one was the author of sin unto
condemnation, the other of righteousness unto life: the excellency is, in
that the gift is not so as the offense, but much more powerful and abundant:
of both these, the disparitie and excellency, more follows to be added in
the two next questions: So then here are three things to be considered in this
comparison, as Photius observes, cited by Oecumenius, similitudo,
contrarietas, excellentia, the similitude or likeness, the contratietie and
disparitie, and the excellency.

3. Now whereas the Apostle from this verse unto the 19. v. seems to use
diverse iterations of the same thing, we shall find by a dilligent view and
examination of the Apostles sentences, that he does not repeat the same
things, as Pellicane thinks, eadem repetit propter infirmas conscientias,
etc. he repeateth the same things because of weak consciences, which often
think, that sin is more powerful then grace, etc. But Oecumenius says
better, nequaquam iterum atque iterum eadem repetit Apostolus, etc. the Apostle
does not again and again repeat the same things, as one would think, but
diligentissime copulat, he does most dilligently couple and join the
principal heads together.

Quest. 34. Of the disparitie and unlikeness between Adam and Christ in this
comparison.
The difference and disparitie between them is in these six several points.

1. In the persons compared: Adam is considered as a mere man, v. 12. but
Christ was both God and man, he is called Jesus Christ our Lord, v. 21.

2. They differ in that which is conferred: Adam propagateth to his posterity
sin, and death, v. 12. Christ communicates to his, righteousness and life,
v. 15.16.

3. The means are far different: Adams disobedience brought in sin:
Christ's obedience procures life, v. 18.19.

4. The persons upon whom these things are conferred, differ: for from Adam
death and sin are derived upon all in general, v. 12.18. but righteousness
is communicated only to those, which receive the abundance of grace by faith,
v. 17.

5. The manner how these things are conveyed, are diverse: Adams sin is
transmitted by natural propagation: but life and righteousness by Christ are
communicated by grace, v. 15. the gift is by grace.

6. The sequel and ends are contrary: the offense is unto condemnation, v.
16. but justification by Christ is unto life eternal. v. 18.

Quest. 35. Of the excellency and superiority which the benefit by grace in
Christ has beyond our fall and loss in Adam.
1. The first excellency is generally in the power and efficacy of the
worker: for it was necessary that he that should ouercom sin and death,
should be superior to both: for if he had been of equal power he could not
have dissolved Satan's work: the strong man could not be bound but by a
stronger then he, Mart. And more particularly this excellency appears in the
author and efficient cause: Adams sin was vnius and puri hominis, of one and
the same a mere man: but the gift was Christi hominis and Dei, of Christ God
and man: Lyran. that was of our, but this, non solum patris sed filij gratia,
was not only the grace of God the father, but of his son, Chrysostom.

2. An other point of excellency is generally in the work it self, and the
manner of it: 1. if sin being a privative, were so forcible unto
condemnation, much more the justice and grace of Christ, being a thing
positive, is available: fortior vita, quam mors, iustitia, quam peccatum, life
is stronger then death, and righteousness then sin. Origin. 2. fortius est
mortuum resuscitare, etc. it is a more powerful thing to raise one being
dead, then to kill one that is alive. Osiand. 3. Chrysostom adds further,
magis videtur rationi consonum, etc. it seems more agreeable to reason, that
one man should purchase salvation and redemption, then condemnation to and for
an other: if then that were done, which was more against reason, for one to
work an others condemnation, much more the other.

3. As our redemption and justification by Christ, is more excellent then our
condemnation by Adam, in respect of the more excellent and powerful cause, as
the Apostle shows, v. 15. as is before expressed: so it excels, in regard
of the more excellent fruits and effects: whereof one is declared, v. 16. that
whereas one offense of Adam entered unto the condemnation of many, in Christ not
only that sin is pardoned, but all other our actual sins: non solum illud
peccatum per gratiam est oblatum, sed and reliqua omnia, not only that fault
is taken away by grace, but all the rest also. Chrysostom.

4. An other effect is, that in Christ we receive abundance of grace, v. 17.
non tantum peccata sublata, sed iustitia prastita, our sins are not only
taken away, but righteousness also is given us: Chrysostom. which he further thus
sets forth by this similitude; like as if a Prince should deliver a man,
that is enthralled with his wife and children, and not only restoare him to
liberty, but set him in a princely throne: or as if a medecin should be
given, not only to heal the disease, but whereby the body should be made
much stronger: Lyrau. so Christ, non solum iustificat a peccatis, sed etiam
inducit ad gloriam, does not only justify us from our sins, but also
brings us to glory. Lyran.

5. Chrysostom adds one excellent privilege further, which we obtain in
Christ, that whereas death came by Adam, in Christ we obtain, that by death we
receive no hurt, sed plurimi luchri tulerimus, but much good: as 1. death
persuades us and the remembrance thereof, to live soberly and honestly. 2. hic
sunt Martyrum coronae, death was the occasion of the crown of martyrdom. 3.
and thereby we are made fit for immortality.

6. Origin herein places the excellency of this effect, that not only death
no longer reigns, sed and duo conferuntur bona, two good things are
conferred: life is given in stead of death, Christ our life reigns in us, and
we also shall reign in life with him.

This then is the abundance of grace that we receive in Christ. 1. in that we
are not only purged from our sins, but justified in Christ. 2. and
sanctified in him. 3. made fellow heirs with Christ, and restored to be the
sons of God. 4. and brought to everlasting glory.

36. Quest. Some other opinions refused, wherein this excellency should
consist.
1. Some think, that herein consists the excellency of grace, because the
sin of Adam was derived only unto men: the grace of Christ is revealed to
Angels. Perer. disput. 12. This is true, that even the Angels do stand by
Christ, but it is not the meaning of Saint Paul here: for he speaks
expressly of the abounding of this gift of justification unto men. v. 18.

2. Pererius further says, that by original sin, which we have from Adam,
we are only made subject poenae damni, to the penalty of loss, which is the
privation of the grace and glory of God: but in Christ we are delivered from
the penalty not only damni, of the loss, but sensus, of feeling and
suffering the torments of hell. But the Apostle is contrary, who says, that
by the offense of one sin came upon all to condemnation, v. 18. the
everlasting condemnation then of body and soul, is due unto men by nature in
respect of original sin, without the mercy of God in Christ: and elsewhere
the Apostle says, we are all the children of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2.2. to the
children of wrath belongs all kind of punishment, not only in the privation
of life and glory, but in the actual feeling and suffering of eternal
torments.

3. The ordinary gloss says, that death in Adam reigned only temporaliter,
temporally: but grace and life in Christ eternally: but death in Adam should
have reigned eternally, if Christ had not redeemed us: not only temporal, but
eternal death is the reward of (...) then seeing all sinned in Adam, all by
nature are subject even to eternal death.

4. Pet. Martyr observes out of Oecumenius an other point of excellency in
Christ above Adam: for Adams sin, cooperans habuit omne nostrum peccatum, had
every one of our sins to help and work together with it: but the grace of
Christ came upon all, sine nostra cooperatione, without our joint working: for
not only the faithful and believers, but infidels also and unbelievers shall
rise again from death.

But Pet. Martyr takes these exceptions to this observation. 1. Adams sin
without our actual sins, was sufficient to condemn his posterity. 2.
though the unbelievers shall rise again, it shall be to their further
condemnation, it shall be no benefit unto them. 3. though Gods grace do work
without us, yet there is somewhat required in the faithful, that they should
believe, though that also be the gift and work of God in us.

5. Wherefore the true excellency of the grace of Christ above the sin and
condemnation by Adam, consists in those points declared in the former
question: because in Christ we are restored to a more excellent state, then we
lost in Adam: 1. by Adam we are deprived of a temporal paradise, in Christ we
are restored to an heavenly. 2. in Adam we are excluded from the eating of the
material tree of life: but in Christ we feed of the bread of heaven, which
gives eternal life. 3. in Adam it was given us, posse non mori, non peccare,
a possibility not to sin, not to die: but in Christ we shall obtain, non
posse peccare, mori, that we cannot die, nor sin in the next life. 4. by
Adams sin we are compared to the beasts, that perish, Psalm. 49.12. but in
Christ we are made like unto the Angels: In these and other points, is our
state more perfect in Christ, then it should have been in Adam, if he had not
sinned.

Quest. 37. In what sense the grace of God is said to have abounded unto more,
v. 15.
The vulgar Latin gives occasion of this question, which in the first clause
reads multi, many be dead thorough the offense of one: but in the second he
says, grace in plures abundavit, has abounded unto more; and this reading
seems Origin to follow: Here then many do busy themselves to show, how
grace in Christ has abounded unto more, then sin in Adam.

1. Origin says that they are said to be more, because Adam himself, from
whom the death of sin was derived unto others, additur numero eorum, etc. is
added to the number of them, which have received grace in Christ: But this is
too curious, neither agreeable to the Apostles meaning; for seeing the
comparison is instituted between Adam and Christ, though Adam indeed were
saved by Christ, yet each of these Adam and Christ with their offspring must be
considered here, as in themselves: neither can the adding of one to this
number, make them more which have obtained grace in Christ, then them which are
lost in Adam.

2. Some by those many which are dead in Adam, understand only those which
sinned by imitating of Adam, that is commit actual sins, and so they read
the former verse affirmatively, Death reigned over those which sinned, after
the like manner of the transgression of Adam, and then the grace of Christ
abounds unto more, even unto infants, that sinned not in like manner, as Adam
did, that is, actually, thus Ambros. gloss. ordinar. Gorrhan: But in this sense
infants should be out of the number of those that are dead in Adam: whereas the
Apostle says, in whom all have sinned, yea infants and all sinned in Adam.

3. Pererius has this quaint observation, that there may be found of Adam
carnally propagated, and yet not infected with his sin, as the Blessed Virgin
Marie: yet none can be found spiritually regenerate, but by the grace of
Christ: But this conceit of his is against the Apostle, who says that in Adam
all sinned: and Origin thus collecteth videsne vt a peccato nullum Paulus
excuset? see you not how the Apostle excuses none from sin? If all have
sinned in Adam, then cannot the Virgin Marie be exempted from original sin.

4. Pererius has an other conceit, that the grace of Christ is said to have
abounded unto more; because that if God should create a new kind of men, not
of Adam, they should stand in need of the grace of Christ: and yet they not
coming of Adam, could not be infected with his sin, Perer. disput. 10. But
S. Paul speaks not of a possibility of supposall, how grace might abound
unto more, but of the actual and real abounding of grace unto many in Christ:
and if there were a new creation of men, they should be created in a perfect
estate as Adam was before his fall, and so should not keeping of that state,
have need of a redeemer in that behalf.

5. But this is a needelesse question, seeing that in the original in both
places the Apostle uses the word (...), multi, many, not in the comparatiue,
plures, more: therefore this question is impertinent, how the grace of Christ
is said to have abounded unto more: Neither does the Apostle give unto the
grace of Christ the pre-eminence in respect of the number, but of the more
powerful effect, as is showed before, quest. 35.

6. Haymo in both places understands the elect: they are the many which are
dead in Adam temporally, and they are the many, unto whom grace has much more
abounded, because in Adam only they are infected with original sin, in
Christ both original and actual are pardoned: But those whom the Apostle here
calls many, ver. 18. he expresses to be all: he means then all mankind in
general, which die in Adam.

Quest. 38. How all men are said to be justified in Christ, v. 18.
1. Huberus, therein joining the right hand of fellowship with the old
Pelagians, hence would prove the Universality of grace, that all in Christ
are absolutely justified, as in Adam all die: But then it would follow by the
force of the Apostles comparison, that all should verily be saved in Christ, as
they are by nature sinners in Adam: see the confutation of this error at large
among the controversies.

2. Some understand this of the sufficiency of justification by Christ, that
it is sufficient for all, if they had grace to receive it, Lyran. But the
Apostle speaks not of a possibility of justification, but of an actual
collation of this benefit, as Adams sin really and actually is transfused to
his posterity.

3. Tolet understands generally all men, whosoever, and by the justification
of life, he would have signified, the resurrection, which shall be of all men
in general, both good and bad, as all men are subject to death in Adam both
good and bad: But the Apostle before v. 17. called that reigning in life, which
here he names the justification of life, but the wicked that rise again shall
not reign in life, therefore they are not partakers of the justification of
life.

4. Haymo better understands here the universality of the elect, omnes
electos and praedestinatos ad vitam, all that are elect and predestinate unto
life: that as Adam infected all his posterity carnally descending of him, so
Christ justifies all, which believe in him: to the same purpose Augustine
understands, omnes viuificandos, all that are to be quickened and made alive,
because none are justified but in Christ, lib. 6. cont. Julian. c. 12. so the
interlinearie gloss understands omnes sui, all that are Christ's: all are
justified qui sunt Christi, which are Christ's, Pareus.

Quest. 39. Why the Apostle says, v. 19. By one man's disobedience many were
made sinners, and not all.
1. Origin by sins here understands those, which continue in a custom of
sin, a righteous man may sin, but he therefore cannot be called a sinner:
and so not all borne of Adam, but many are said to be sinners, to the same
purpose Tolet annot. 25. But the Apostle speaks here of Adams disobedience,
whereby many were sinners: which is derived by propagation, and learned by
imitation: therefore he speaks generally of all that sinned in Adam, and not
only of some special sinners.

2. Theodoret thinks the Apostle names many, because all did not continue in
Adams sin: but some permanserunt in decretis naturae, etc. did remain in the
decree of nature, and followed virtue, as Abel, Henoch, Noe, etc. But even
those also were borne in sin, as the Apostle said before, v. 12. that all
sinned in Adam, and they were sinners by nature, though regenerate by Christ.

3. Tolet thinks the Apostle has reference to the time before spoken of from
Adam, unto Moses, and therefore, he says, many, not all, as he on the other
side specially means the times of the Gospel, when likewise many, and not
all believed in Christ, annot. 22. so also Faius: But then this comparison
should be imperfect: for as Adams sin has infected all his posterity since
the beginning of the world to the end thereof: so Christ is the Savior of the
world both from Adam to Moses, and since.

4. Augustine takes the Apostle to mean all, but yet he says many, to show
the multitude of those that are saved in Christ: for there are aliqua omnia,
quae non sunt multa, some things all, that are not many, as the four Gospels
are all; but not many: and there be aliqua multa, some things many, that are
not all; as many believers in Christ, not all, for all have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3. etc. It is true, that the Apostle by many, understands all, as he
said in the former verse: and sometime the scripture, calls them many, which
are all: as in one place the Lord says to Abraham, I have made thee a father
of many nations, Genesis 17. in an other, in thy seed all the nations of the
earth shall be blessed: but yet the reason is not given, why the Apostle says
many, not all.

5. Some think, he so says, many, because Christ is excluded, that came of
Adam: Piscator. But Christ, though he descended of Adam, yet not by ordinary
generation, therefore in this general speech he needed not to be excepted: as
he was not included, when the Apostle says, in whom (that is, in Adam) all
have sinned.

6. The reason then is this, multos apponit vni, he opposes many to one: that
Adam being one, infected many beside himself with his sin: as Adams sin
rested not in his person, but entered upon many, so Christ's obedience and
righteousness stayed not in his person, but was likewise communicated to many:
Beza, Pareus.

Quest. 40. How, many are said to be sinners in Adam.
1. Chrysostom, by sinners understands, morti obnoxiot, those that are
subject to death by reason of Adams sin: and he adds this reason, ex illius
inobedientia alium fieri peccatorem, quam poterit habere consequentiam? by his
disobedience others to become sinners, it has no coherence or consequence.

Contra. 1. True it is, that sometime the word peccatores, sinners, is taken in
that sense, for men subject to death, and punishment: as Bathsheba says to
David, 1. King. 1.21. else, when my Lord the King shall sleep with his
fathers, I and my son Solomon shall be sinners, etc. that is, put to death as
offenders: But yet in this place, the word is not so taken, for as to be made
just in Christ, signifies not to have the reward of justice, but to be
justified indeed, so to be made sinners, shows not the punishment, but the
guiltines of sin deserving punishment; as then in the former verse, the
effects were compared together, condemnation in Adam, and justification unto
life in Christ: so here the causes are showed, sin on the one side causing
death, and righteousness on the other which brings to life. 2. though
Chrysostom fail in the interpretation of this place, yet he denies not, but
that in Adams all sinned, and in many places he testifies evidently of
original sin: as he calls to radicale peccatum, the rooted sin, hom. 40.
in 1. epist. ad Corinth. And therefore the Pelagians did him wrong to make him
an author of their opinion, who denied original sin: from which imputation
of the Pelagians Augustine clears Chrysostom, writing against their heresy:
and this point is cleared in this place: for if all are subject to death in
Adam, which Chrysostom here confesses, then all have sinned in Adam, for
death could not enter upon all without sin.

2. As Chrysostom understands here only, temporal death, whereunto all are
subject in Adam: so some by condemnation mentioned, v. 17. do likewise
insinuate the sentence only of mortality, Tolet. Origin understands the
expulsion of Adam out of Paradise: but by the contrary seeing the Apostle by
justification unto life, understands the reigning in life eternal: by death
and condemnation is signified, animae and corporis damnatio, the damnation of
body and soul: so expounds gloss. interlin. Gorrhan, with others.

3. Origin by sinners, understands consuetudinem and studium peccandi, the
custom, and study of sinning: as though the Apostle had meant only actual
sin: but that proceeds not from Adams disobedience properly, as original
sin does.

4. Neither yet does the Apostle only mean original sin which is by Adams
disobedience, in ipsius posteros propagatum, propagated unto his posterity:
Faius: for it is more to be a sinner, then to sin in Adam, which the Apostle
said before, v. 12.

5. Wherefore the Apostle by sinners, understands both such as sin
originally in Adam, peccatum contrabend^ by the contagion or contraction of
sin, and peccatum inte^and^, which sin actually by imitation, Gorrh. so
that we are not only naturally evil by sinful propagation: as the Apostle
said before, v. 12. in whom all have sinned, and so are by nature guilty of
death and condemnation, v. 18. but beside as an effect of our natural
corruption, there is a general pravitie of nature, and an habit of evil
engendered in us, whereby we can do no other then sin: so Adams disobedience,
has made us not only naturaliter pravos, naturally evil, sed habitualiter
peccatores, habitually sinners. Pareus.

Quest. 41. How the law is said to have entered thereupon, ver. 20.
1. The occasion of these words is not so much to show, that sin reigned in
the world even after the law, as it was in the world before the law, from
Adam to Moses, v. 14. but the Apostle having showed at large, how we are
delivered from sin and death brought in by Adam, only by Christ, he
preuenteth the objection of the Jews: for it might have been replied,
wherefore then served the law, if there were no remedy against sin thereby?
the Apostle then answeareth, that the law was so far from saving men from
their sins, that they were thereby the more increased thus: Chrysostom and
Pet. Martyr, with others.

2. But this is not to be understood of the law of nature, as Origin, who to
decline the imputation of the law, laid upon it by wicked Marcion, that it was
given to an evil end to increase sin, will have the Apostle to speak of
the law of nature: for the Apostle making mention of the law before, v. 13.
understands the written law, as he expounds v. 14. where he expressly
speaks of Moses: neither was the law of nature given to that end, to
increase sin, no more then the moral law was, but sin entered
occasionaliter, by occasion only of the law, as shall be showed in the next
question.

3. The law (...), entered thereupon. 1. the Latin interpreter reads,
subintravit, it entered in by the way: as though it had entered in secretly, so
also Erasmus, and Gorrhan gives the reason, because it was given but unto one
people, and secretly in the desert: but the law being so publicly delivered,
in such great power and signs, could not be said secretly to enter. 2. Origin
gives this sense, that the law of the members entered sub obtentu legis
naturalis, under the pretext and color of the law of nature, it entered, as it
were by stealth, but the Apostle speaks not here of the law of nature as is
showed before. 3. Chrysostom (whom Tolet follows) thus interprets, the
law is said to have entered by the way, vt ostenderet vsum illius temporarium,
to show that the use thereof was but for a time: but this is a perpetual use
of the law, to manifest and reveal sin: though indeed the use of the
ceremonial law were but to continue for a time.

4. Some think the law is said to have entered as under hand, post
effuscationem (...) naturalis, after the law of nature was obscured: so
Ambrose, Lyran. but though the law of nature had not been obscured, yet the
written law should have been given: by (...) which men should have been
prepared to receive the Gospel, Tolet. annot. 26. therefore it is said to have
entered thereto or thereupon: that is, beside that natural corruption and
deprivation of nature in Adam, the law also was given accessit ad morbum
illium, it came upon, or was added unto that natural disease, that sin
thereby being more increased might more commend the riches of Gods mercy in
Christ, Beza. Pareus.

Quest. 42. How the offense is said to have abounded by the entering of the
law, ver. 20.
The law is to be considered three ways: in respect of the nature thereof, in
respect of man, to whom it is given, and of God, the author and giver of the
law. 1. The law being considered in it self, it holy, spiritual, and good,
and so properly is not the cause of the increase of sin, but only in respect
of the event, as Chrysostom, Gennadius, and most of the Greek interpreters
expound it: the law then causes sin to increase, non causaliter, sed
consecutiue, not as the cause, but in regard of the event, or consequent: and
that not ex part legis, on the behalf of the law, but by the malice of man's
heart, Lyran: non ex ^^tura legis, not by the nature of the law, but by the
slougth and carelessness of them, which receive the law, Chrysostom. and sin
is thus occasionally increased sower ways. 1. because ruimur in vetitum, etc.
we always rush upon that which is forbidden: like as a river meeting with some
stone or let in the way, makes the greater noise: whereof these reasons may be
given: first, because things forbidden are not in our power, and therefore our
desire is more toward them, whereas we neglect things easy, and such as we can
do, when we list: secondly, the nature of humane affections is, the more they
are suppressed, and kept in, the more to be inflamed: as fide, when it is kept
in, breaks out more violently: this is usually seen in the passions of anger
and grief: Perer. numer. 78. Add hereunto the perverseness of man's will,
which is opposite to the will of God, and most of all is bent to follow those
things which the Lord forbids. 2. Sin is increased by the law, because he
sins more that knows the will of God, and does it not, then he, that is
ignorant of it. 3. by the law, which contains variety of precepts, the
number of sins is multiplied: innumera praecepta lex dedit, the law gave a
number of precepts, Chrysostom. 4. the law terrifieth the conscience, and so
accuses and condemns, and shows punishment due unto sin, and so
exaggerateth it, Mart.

2. If the law be considered in regard of the effect which it works in the
hearts of men, then this particle (...), that, may be taken causally, because
by the law properly sin is manifested, and revealed, as the Apostle shows,
Romans 3.20. that by the law comes the knowledge of sin, Perer.

3. If we turn our selves to God the author of the law, then in respect of
his counsel the law may be understood causally, to increase sin, in regard
of a further end, which God propounds to himself, namely that by the
abounding of sin, grace may yet more abound, Martyr. so the ordinary gloss,
has here this profitable note, Magnum Deiconsilium fuit, etc. it was the great
and deep counsel of God, that by the law sin should abound, that men in
severity and austeritie of the law, seeing their own infirmity, infirmi ad
^^dicum confugerent, etc. being weak should run unto the Physician, and
seek for the help of grace, etc.

Quest. 43. How grace is said to have abounded more.
1. Athanasius refers the word (...), vbi, where, to the nature of man: that
in the same nature grace abounded by the coming of Christ in the flesh, where
sin abounded before, tractas, de salutar. advent. but this seems to be too
curious.

2. Lyranus. has reference to the law: that whereas sin abounded under the
law, grace also abounded under the law, because Christ was made under the
law, as the Apostle shows, Galat. 4.4. But here grace is opposed, and set
against the law, therefore in both the opposite parts, there cannot be
reference to the same law.

3. The ordinary gloss, has two expositions: grace is said to abound because
it profits them, whom the devil could not overcome: grace works on them,
upon whom the kingdom of sin had no power: but, then the same thing should
be compared with it self, for in that the kingdom of sin and Satan
prevailed not against them, it was the work of grace.

4. Otherwise thus, quia peccatum ad tempus regnavit, because sin reigned but
for a time, but grace for ever: but unless grace had destroyed the kingdom of
sin, it should have reigned for ever.

5. Origin says grace abounded more, in that it does not only hominem
absoluere a peccatis prateritis, free a man from sins past, but also
strengthen him against sins to come.

6. Chrysostom thus: grace has superabounded, not only in taking away the
punishment, and remitting our sins, but in giving us life, and making us just.

7. Some give this sense, that grace has abounded, not only in taking away
original sin, but all other actual sins added beside, Piscator, Gorrhan.

8. But it is better to understand this superabounding of grace, of all those
privileges and excellencies, which the benefit by Christ has beyond our loss
and fall in Adam, as the Apostle showed before, Bez. Fai. So every way grace
exceeds, both in respect of the pote^tis of God, whose grace appears to be
the greater, by the greatness of our sin: which non (...) superat, sed
absorbet, it does not only overcome, but even swallowe up, Calvin. and in
respect of our selves, who the more we feel the burden and ouerflowing of our
sin, the more we have occasion to extol and magnify the grace of God,
Osiander.

So here are two ends of the law expressed, the ne^^^^ end, is the
manifestation and increase of sin: the remote end is the more abounding of
grace, but here is the difference: the first end is universal, for in all men
both believers and unbelievers, the law works the increase, insight, and
knowledge of sin; but the other end is particular and peculiar (...) to the
faithful, that by the abounding of sin, grace may more abound toward them:
which is not properly caused by the increase of sin, but thorough the mercy
of God, Pareus.

Quest. 44. Of the reign of sin unto death, and of grace unto life.
1. Before the Apostle had ascribed the kingdom unto death, v. 14. Death
reigned from Adam, etc. but here unto sin, because death indeed reigns by
sin, as the Apostle says, The sting of death is sin, 1. Cor. 15.56. death
could have no power over us, but thorough sin: Martyr.

2. But to speak more distinctly: where the Apostle gives the kingdom unto
death, he speaks of the times before the law, when as death did apparently
reign in the world, but sin was not so apparent till the law came: but
sin is said to have reigned after the law was given, because sin then more
abounded: So that three estates of the world are here described, the first,
from Adam to Moses, when sin was in the world, but death reigned: the third
is from the coming of Christ, who reigned by righteousness unto life,
destroying both the kingdom of sin and death, Tolet.

3. By death, Chrysostom seems to understand the death of the body, mors ex
haec presenti vita eijcit, death does cast us out of this life, etc. but
eternal death is here also comprehended, potestatem habuit deijciendi, etc. it
had power to cast us down to eternal death, Lyran. as may appear by the
other opposite part of eternal life, Piscator.

4. But whereas in the first clause, mention is made only of the reigning of
sin unto death, but in the other, there are three mentioned, grace,
righteousness, and life; Origin thinks that the devil must be understood,
to be set against the grace of Christ, ab inuentis rebus author inventi
nominatur, the author of the invention is named in the things invented, etc.
for sin came in by the devil: some think that the wrath of God must be
supplied, which reigned by sin, Piscator: but I think rather with Calvin,
that beside the necessary parts of the comparison, the Apostle makes mention
of grace, vt fortius in figuret memoria, etc. that it might better stick in
our memory, that all is of grace.

5. The Apostle speaks of the time past, sin had reigned, because that
although sin do still reign in the children of disobedience, yet in the
faithful it reigns no more, Par.

6. By righteousness, some understand, iustitiam operum, the righteousness of
(...) gloss. interlin. so also Bellarmine lib. 2. de iustificat. c. 6. but the
justice of Christ is rather understood: as the Greek interpreters well
expound, and as is evident by the clause in the end, By our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is notwithstanding both our justification; and sanctification.

7. The ordinary gloss here well observes, that in the kingdom of sin,
mention is not made of Adam from whom sin came, because the Apostle speaks
not only of original, but of actual sins, both which are remitted in
Christ.

8. Thorough Jesus Christ our Lord: Jesus per gratiam, Dominus per iustitiam,
nostre per gloriam, Jesus by grace, Lord by his justice, and ours, because he
brings us to glory, Gorrhan.

4. Places of Doctrine.
Doct. 1. Of the difference between Christian and worldly hope.
v. 5. Hope makes not ashamed: This is the property of the hope of
Christians, that is never confounds them, or makes ashamed: because it is
founded upon Gods promises who both is immutable and changes not, and is also
omnipotent, able to perform, whatsoever he promises: But so it is not in
humane or worldly hope: for that often puts man to rebuke, because he is
deceived in his hope, and fails in the thing hoped for; and the reason is,
for that he reposeth his confidence in man, who is either deceitful and hops
not his promise, or is not of power to perform it: therefore the Prophet
says, Cursed be the man, that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm,
Ierem. 17.5.

Doct. 2. Of the properties and effects of faith.
v. 2. Being justified by faith: 1. Unto faith is ascribed justification, as
in these words, and remission of sins in purifying the heart, Act. 15.9. 2.
faith is the foundation of thing hoped for, Heb. 11.1. 3. it is the cause of
the producing and bringing forth of good fruit, Iam. 2.8. Show me thy faith
out of thy works, etc. 4. it overcomes the tentations of Satan: for by the
shield of faith we quench all his fiery darts: Ephesians. 6.18. 5. by faith we
attain unto the understanding of the word of God, which otherwise is
unprofitable, Isay. 7.9. Unless ye believe, ye shall not understand, as some
translations do read: and the Apostle says, that the word did not profit the
Israelites, because it was not mixed with faith, Heb. 4.2. 6. faith obtains
our requests in prayer, Iam. 2.16. the prayer of faith saves the sick. 7. it
works the salvation of the soul, Luke 7.50. Thy faith has saved thee.

Doct. 3. Of the reign and dominion of death.
v. 14. Death reigned from Adam to Moses: Before sin entered into the world,
death had no dominion: but now it has gotten a tyrannical and general
dominion over men, both of all sorts and conditions, both young and old, and in
all ages: as here it is said to reign even from Adam to Moses: that age, was
not exempted from the dominion of death, wherein sin seemed least to abound;
but Christ has overcome death, and destroyed the dominion thereof, both in
that he has taken away the sting thereof, which is sin, that death is not
hurtful unto them that believe, but brings their souls unto everlasting
rest: and in the general resurrection, our bodies which death had seized on,
shall be restored unto life; as our Blessed Savior says, I am the
resurrection, and the life, etc. Ioh. 15.25.

Doct. 4. Of the difference of sins.
v. 14. Even over them, that sinned not after the like manner, etc. Here the
Apostle sets down this distinction of actual and original sin; some do
sin in like manner, as Adam did, that is, actually; some not in like manner,
that is, there is a secret and hid sin in the corruption of nature, which is
not actual, but in time breaks forth into act, as the seed shows it self
in the herb.

Doct. 5. There is no salvation or life without Christ.
v. 17. Much more shall they, which receive, etc. reign in life, etc. As in
Adam sin and death entered, and so reigned over all, so life reigns by Jesus
Christ: then they which are not graft by faith into Christ, but remain only
in Adam, cannot be pertakers of life: they are still under the kingdom of
sin and death: wherefore the Turks, Jews, and all other, that are without
the knowledge and faith of Christ, howsoever they dream of a kind of Paradise,
and terrene happiness after this life, yet they can have no assurance of life,
seeing they are strangers from Christ: So S. Peter says, Act. 4.12. That there
is no other name given under heaven, whereby we must be saved.

Doct. 6. That life does accompany righteousness.
v. 17. The Apostle says, that they which receive the gift of righteousness,
shall reign in life: then as sin reigned unto death, so righteousness
reigns unto life: wheresoever then righteousness is found, whether inherent,
as in the Angels, or imputed, as in the faithful, who have the righteousness
of Christ imputed unto them by faith, there is the kingdom of life: then they
which do feel the kingdom of righteousness to be begun in them, who both
by faith are justified in Christ, and their faith is effectual working by
love, they are assured to enter into life: as S. Paul knew, after he had kept
the faith and fought a good fight, that there was a crown of righteousness
laid up for him, 2. Tim. 4.8.

Doct. 7. Of the use of the law.
v. 20. The law entered, etc. that the offense should abound, etc. This is the
proper use of the law, to bring a man to the knowledge of his sin, and to
show him in what state he stands by nature, a transgressor of the law, and
so subject to the curse: but we must not rest in this use of the law, there is
a second and more principal end, that by the abounding of sin, grace may
more abound: and in this sense the Apostle calls the law, a schoolmaster to
bring us to Christ, Galath. 3.19. that we by the law seeing our own
weakness and insufficiency, should seek unto Christ Jesus, to find
righteousness in him, which cannot be obtained by the law.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. Whether a good conscience and integrity of life be the cause of
peace with God:
Pererius disput. 1. in c. 5. numer. 2. urges that place of the Prophet Isay,
c. 32.17. s he work of justice shall be peace, even the work of justice and
quietness, and assurance for ever: whereupon he infers, that opera
iustitiae, etc. the works of justice and the keeping of Gods commandments,
do work in us this tranquillity and peace of the mind.

Contra. It might be here answered, that peace of conscience is the work of
our true justice, that is, Christ, who is called the Lord our justice or
righteousness, Ierem. 23.10. but that this interpretation agrees not with the
former words, v. 16. Judgment shall dwell in the desert, and justice in the
fruitful field: where the Prophet speaks of the external practice and
exercise of justice.

2. Iunius seems to understand these disiunctiuely; the fruits of the
spirit, which should be powered upon them, v. 15. should bring faith, justice,
peace, as the Apostle shows, these to be the fruits of the spirit, Romans
14.17. righteousness, peace, joy in the holy Ghost: so also Faius: But this
distinction here cannot be admitted, because it is directly said, the work of
justice shall be peace, tranquillity.

3. But the best answer is; that righteousness procures peace, not effective,
because it works this inward peace, which is wrought in us by the grace of
justification, but declarative, it declares, confirms, and assures unto us
our peace; as S. Peter exhorts, that we make our election and calling sure by
good works, 2. Pet. 1.9. not that our works make our election sure in it
self, which depends on the purpose of God, but it is made sure unto us; so
the peace of conscience wrought in us by faith, is confirmed and ratified unto
us by a good life, even as good works are testimonies of our faith, and in
that sense are said by S. James c. 2. to justify.

Controv. 2. Against invocation of Saints.
1. By whom we have access through faith: this text is well urged by Peter
Martyr, and Pareus against the invocation of Saints: for if by Christ we have
access unto God, what need we the help of other mediators and intercessours?
the Papists then do much derogate unto the glory of Christ, in bringing an
other (...), to enter us, and cause us to have access unto God; And further
two arguments may be urged out of the Apostles words; he says we have access
by him through faith: but Saints are not the object of our faith, we must only
believe in God. Ioh. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. 2. we have
access unto this grace, namely, whereby we are justified; but by the Saints we
are not justified, therefore by them we have not access and entrance.

Controv. 3. Of the certainty of salvation, and of final perseverance.
v. 5. We have access unto this grace, wherein we stand: Calvin out of this
place refuteth two errors of Popish sophistry; the one that the faithful for
the present cannot be certain of the grace of God, and of the remission of
their sins, the other that they are not sure of final perseverance: But to
stand in grace signifies to be sure of the grace and favor of God: one may
attain unto the favor of the Prince, but he is not sure to continue in it;
But Gods favor in Christ is most constant; whom Christ loves, he loves to
the end, Job. 13.1. Tolet here foisteth in one of his Popish drugs, that
tranquillity, and peace of conscience, and certainty of remission of sins,
is not the fruit or work of faith in the faithful; for the wicked, that know
not their sins, have also a quiet conscience, Tolet. annot. 1. Contra. There
is great difference between a senseless, and a quiet conscience; the wicked
feel not the prick of conscience, because their sins are concealed from
them, but the faithful have peace of conscience after the sight of their
sins, which they know to be remitted in Christ; So Paul was alive without the
law, but afterward when sin reviued, he died. Romans 7.9. where then the
conscience is cast into a slumber of security, sin reviuing awaketh and
troubles it; but where sin is remitted in Christ, the conscience cease to
be troubled and perplexed, as in the wicked.

Controv. 4. That the tribulation of the Saints is not meritorious, though it
be said to work patience.
We must understand, that the Apostle diuersely uses the word (...), works:
for it is sometime ascribed unto the principal efficient cause, as unto God
the author and worker of all good things in us, 2. Cor. 5.5. sometime to the
second or next vnderworking cause; as the Apostle says, of beneficence or
liberality, that it works or causes thanksgiving unto God: sometime the
effect is ascribed by this word unto the isntrumental cause; as Romans 4.15. the
law is said to work or cause wrath: and our light and momentanie afflictions,
are said to cause or work unto us an exceeding weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4.17.
because they are means to withdraw our minds from earthly things, and to
stir up faith in us: So tribulation works patience, not as the efficient
cause, but as the organe and instrument, whereby the spirit works patience in
us: it procures patience, not sicut causa effectum, etc. as the cause the
effect, as Caietan, but eam exercendo, augendo, ostendendo, in exercising,
increasing, and showing forth our patience, Gorrh: to the same purpose,
Pererius: exercendae patientiae materia and occasio est, tribulation is the
matter and occasion of exercising our patience: This then is to be understood
according to the phrase of Scripture, which does use to pronounce that of the
sign and instrument, which is proper unto the thing; as when it speaks of
the Sacraments: for of it self tribulation works not patience, as is seen
in the wicked, who thereby are driven to impatience and despair: here then is
no place to prove any merit in the afflictions of the faithful.

Controv. 5. That we are not justified by the inherent habit of charity.
Whereas the Apostle says, v. 5. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts,
etc. Pererius understanding the Apostle to speak here of that love and
charity, which is infused as an habit into the mind, whereby we love God;
sets down here certain positions concerning this inherent charity. 1. he
affirms, that this charity is that justice, whereby we are formally made
just and righteous before God, disput. 2. numer. 10. 2. this charity, whereby
we are justified, he affirms esse donum omnium donerum maximum, to be a gift
far exceeding all other gifts. 3. this charity, re non distingui a gratia
gratum faciente, is not indeed distinguished from grace making us acceptable
unto God. 4. Against the opinion of Caietane, Scotus, Gabriel, he holds, that
there is in those which are justified, the habit of charity permanent and
remaining when the act cease, whereby they are formally made just before God:
otherwise they should not be held to be just before God, in their sleep, or
when they cease to work, disput. 3. numer. 17.18.

Contra. Although all these questions are here impertinent, because the Apostle
treats not here of the charity or love, which is in man toward God, but of
Gods love toward us, as has been showed at large before, quest. 7. yet it
shall not be amiss briefly to counterpoise these erroneous assertions with the
contrary true and sound positions.

1. An inherent righteousness, and infused charity in the faithful we deny
not: but not such, as whereby we are formally made righteous and justified
before God: both because all our righteousness is as a stained cloth, Esaias.
64. it is imperfect and weak, and therefore not able to justify us: and for
that the Scripture testifies, that it is the righteousness of Christ which is
applied by faith, whereby we are justified before God, as the Apostle calls
it, The righteousness of God, thorough the faith of Christ, Romans 3.22. Philip.
3.9.

2. Charity is not simply the greatest of all other gifts, and so absolutely
preferred before faith, but only wherein they are compared together, namely,
in respect of the continuance: because faith and hope shall cease, when we
enjoy those things which are believed and hoped for: but love shall remain
still: so Chrysostom expounds the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13.13. Thus Hugo says
well, that charity is said to be the greatest, quia non excidit, because it
falls not away: but otherwise faith is the greater, in quantum est cognitio,
and generans omnes alias virtutes, as it is a knowledge, and engenders all
other virtues.

3. The Thomists are herein contrary to the Jesuit, who affirm, that gratia
gratum faciens, grace which makes us acceptable to God, is in respect of
charity, as the soul is to the powers and faculties which proceed from it:
And so indeed the grace that makes us acceptable unto God, is the love and
favor of God in Christ, which is, as the efficient cause of that other love
and charity, which is infused into us, and wrought in us by the holy Ghost:
And that our love of God makes us not first acceptable unto him, the Apostle
evidently testifies, 1. Job. 4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved him, but
that he loved us: we were first then accepted and beloved of God, before we
could love him again.

4. We grant, that faith, hope, and charity, are habits of the mind infused
by the spirit, and permanent in the soul: for as the wicked do attain unto
evil habites of vice and sin; so the faithful have the habit of virtue:
but this is the difference; that an evil habit is acquisitus, gotten by evil
custom, but the good habites of the intellectual virtues of faith, love,
hope, are iufusi, infused and wrought in us by the spirit.

But we deny, that by any such inherent habit we are made formally just: they
are not causes of our justification, but rather the fruits and effects: we have
the habit of faith, because the spirit of God works in us belief: and we
love God, because he loved us first, and gave us his spirit, which works this
love in us, Faius. So then the faithful even in their sleep are justified,
not by any inherent habit, but because they are accepted of God in Christ, as
the Apostle says, Christ died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we
should live together with him.

Controv. 6. Against the heresy of impious Socinus, who denies that Christ
died for our sins, and paid the ransom for them.
Whereas the Apostle here says, v. 8. that Christ died for us, we according to
the Scriptures so understand it, that he offered a sacrifice for our sins,
Heb. 10.12. that he as our high Priest offered himself for our redemption, Heb.
7.27. that he was our surety and paid our ransom for us, Heb. 7.22. and
saved us from our sins, in bearing the punishment due unto the sam^ and so he
died for us, that is, in our place and stead, and so purchased our redemption:
(...) wicked Socinus thus wresteth and misconstrueth these words, that Christ
died no (...) wise for us, then for our profit and benefit, in confirming by
his death his doctrine and example of life: by the which he says he brought
salvation unto the world, and not by dying for us, as in our stead, or to pay
by his death our ransom: his wicked objections are these.

1. Object. The Apostle says, 1. Ioh. 3.16. He laid down his life for us, and
we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren: Christ died for us, as we
must die for our brethren, which is not to die in their stead, but only to
profit them by our example.

Answ. The Apostle does not simply compare the death of Christ, and of the
faithful dying for their brethren together: but only in this, that in both
love is expressed to the brethren, though not in the like measure: But Christ's
death does not only by the example thereof profit the Church, as the death of
the martyrs did: but thereby man's salvation and redemption also was wrought.

2. Object. S. Paul says, that he suffered for the Colossians, 1. Coloss.
1.24. which was not to satisfy for them, or he suffered in their stead, but
only to confirm their faith, and so to edify them.

Answ. There is great difference between the sufferings of Christ for his
Church, which was to redeem it, and the sufferings of Paul for his brethren,
which only was to edify them.

3. Object. As Christ is said to have died for us, so likewise the Scripture
says he died for our sins, Galath. 1.4. the meaning is not in stead or place
of our sins; but. because of our sins: in the same sense he died for us,
that is, for our cause, not in our stead.

Answ. This is a childish cavil: for the Scripture shows a manifest
difference between these two phrases, to die for us, that is, to save us, and
to die for our sins, not to save them, but to purge them, and take them away.

4. Object. That which no law or custom ever allowed, is not to be affirmed
of Christ: but one to die for an other, is warranted by no law nor custom:
indeed one may pay an others pecuniarie mulct or debt, because ones money may
become an others, but the death of one cannot be an others.

Answ. 1. The assumption is not true, for even among the Romans there were
some found, that did offer themselves to present destruction for their
country, as Decius the Consul and Curtius: these examples are far unlike
unto Christ's, yet they show, that it is not against all use and custom one to
die for another.

2. The proposition fails diversely. 1. Christ's example is singular, the like
president cannot be found, as the Apostle shows, v. 7. that he died for his
enemies, which never any did: therefore we must not seek for law or custom
to measure this singular act of Christ by. 2. it is also false, that no law
nor rule can be found for this: for it is revealed in the Evangelical law;
that God gave his son to die for the world: the law of Moses indeed
required that the same person that sinned should die: but that which was
impossible to the law, is fulfilled in Christ, Romans 8.2. yea the blind high
Priest spoke the truth unwittingly, Ioh. 11.50. That it was expedient; that one
die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not: he little thought
that Christ should redeem the people from everlasting death yet ignorantly
uttered that which the Lord intended.

5. Object. It is a great cruelty and injustice to punish him that is innocent,
and to let go unpunished the offenders: they then accuse God of cruelty and
injustice, in delivering up his innocent son to death for us sinners.

Answ. 1. Gods acts are not to be measured according to the rules of humane
proceedings; for the like temper of justice and mercy cannot be found among
men: neither have any the like absolute power, as God has, to dispose of all
things, according to his will and pleasure: who if he should, as he made the
world of nothing, so being it of a sudden to nothing again, should not
therefore show himself either cruel or unjust.

2. Neither is it unjust, for the innocent to suffer punishment for the
offenders, upon these conditions: 1. If both of them be of the same nature. 2.
If the innocent party do willingly offer himself. 3. If he can by his own
strength overcome the punishment. 4. and if thereby he can effectually procure
the salvation of others: all which do concur in Christ's voluntary suffering
for us.

6. Object. The Scripture says, The same soul that sins shall die, Ezeck.
18. it was therefore unjust, that Christ should die, that had not sinned, and
those escape which had sinned.

Answ. These legal sentences show, what God might, according to the justice
of the law, have required of every one: they are no rules of Gods proceeding
in mercy with his children according to the promise of the Gospel.

7. Object. God might, if it had pleased him, have freely forgiven men their
trespasses: therefore Christ needed not to have died for them.

Answ. 1. First, it is no good argument, a posse, ad esse, from that which may
be, no that which is: God might do it, therefore he did it, or would do it,
is no good consequent. 2. Neither is it true, that God could otherwise have
forgiven men, then by the death of Christ, his justice being presupposed: for
God cannot deny himself, seeing the sentence was past, that they should die
the death, if they transgressed, this decree must stand, and the death
deserved, must be satisfied for: neither is this any want or defect in Gods
power, but an argument of the perfection of his nature, that he cannot lie,
neither is mutable.

8. Object. It is perfect mercy to forgive freely, and perfect justice, that
the offender should be punished only: but in God is perfect mercy and justice.

Answ. 1. It is true, that perfect mercy, and perfect justice considered
apart, and by themselves, have these effects and properties: but so can they
not be incident into one and the same subject: therefore seeing Gods mercy and
justice are tempered together, they must be so considered, as the one destroy
not the other. 2. Indeed the rigor of the law requires perfect justice, but
in the Gospel of Christ is propounded a way how the severity of Gods justice
should be moderated with equity, and tempered in mercy, or else no (...)
should be saved.

9. Object. One man can but redeem one: and therefore either there must be
found out an infinite sort of redeemers for all men, or Christ redeemed but one.

Answ. The antecedent is false: for many times for one captive Prince a
thousand common prisoners are set at liberty: much more available for all was
the redemption purchased by Christ the Prince of our salvation, ex Pareo.

Controv. 7. Against other objections of Socinus, and other impugning the fruit
and efficacy of Christ's death, in reconciling us to God his father.
1. Object. Whereas the Apostle says, v. 8. God sets forth his love toward
us* hence it is objected, that seeing God loved us before the foundation of the
world, and whom he loves, he is not angry with, therefore Christ needed not
to have died to reconcile us to God, and to appease his fathers wrath toward us.

Answ. 1. The antecedent is true concerning those whom God loved simply, and
was never offended with them, because they had not sinned against him, such
were the Angel^ but it is not true of those whom God was offended with for
their transgression, and yet he loved them not only as his creatures, but as
his children whom he purposed to redeem in Christ, 2. So then in a diverse
respect God both was angry with them as sinners, and yet he loved them, under
this condition, that they should be saved by the redemption of Christ, in him
they were elected and beloved before the foundation of the world: the argument
then follows not, God loved them in sending his son to die for them, and so
reconcile them, therefore it was needelesse that Christ should die for them,
which were beloved of God already, for God loved them in Christ, whom he had
ordained before to be their Mediator and Redeemer.

2. Object. As herein God showed his love toward us so it would seem a cruel
part in God, so to be delighted in the death of his son.

Answ. 2. God had no delight in his sons death in respect of his suffering
and torments, but as it was a satisfaction for the sin of the world, and the
price of our redemption, 2. and Christ the son of God was not forced
hereunto, but offered himself willingly of his infinite love to die for man.

3. Object. It had been a greater love, if the father himself had died for
us, then in sending his Son: thus Pareus reports how a Jew objected unto
him as he took his Journey toward Silesia, ann. 78.

Answ. First, we must not curiously search into Gods secrets to know the
reason of his will, why the son of God rather then the father took our flesh
and died for us: Secondly, yet these reasons may be alleged hereof. 1. the
father and son being but one God, the father as God did work with his
son, in finishing our redemption. 2. because God was offended, and it was
God, that must satisfy, for none else could do it, therefore there must be
one person in the Godhead, that must satisfy, namely the Son, and one that
must be satisfied, namely the father. 3. what greater love could God the father
show, then in giving his own Son, the most dear thing unto him. 4. It was
the Redeemers and Saviors part, to restore us unto the dignity of the sons
of God: unto whom did this more properly belong, then unto the Son of God?

Controv. 8. That Christ's death was a full satisfaction for our sins, against
Socinus his cauills.
Object. If Christ's death were a satisfaction unto the justice of God for the
sins of the world^ then 1. it must have been performed by the same person
that had offended. 2. the justice of God required a punishment equivalent to
the offense, namely, everlasting destruction and malediction, which Christ
sustained not. 3. the Scripture no where speaks of any such satisfaction for
us by the death of Christ.

Answ. 1. As in humane Courts there is a double kind of justice, either strict
or rigorous justice, or justice moderated and tempered with equity and
clemency: as if a king inflict upon a traitor either the punishment of death,
or the mu^ct of ten thousand talents, in the rigor of justice he may exact
either, but if he shall in his clemency accept an 100. talents of an other,
that shall undertake for the offender, here now is justice tempered with
mercy: So is it with God, he deals with some in strict justice, as with the
reprobate Angels, and reprobate men, that do despise Christ and his
redemption, but with his elect by deals in the other kind of tempered
justice, accepting the satisfaction of Christ for them, not a stranger from
them, but made man like unto them.

2. Though Christ suffered not eternal pains, yet in respect both of the
excellency of his person, that suffered, and the bitterness of that agony,
which he endured, did bear that punishment which in Gods gracious acceptance
was equivalent unto everlasting pain.

3. And though the Scripture use not the very term of satisfaction, yet
there are words of like f^^ree and efficacy applied to the death of Christ, as
(...) ransom, redemption, and such like, as Matthew. 20.28. to give his life for
the ransom of many: Romans 2.14. are justified, etc. by the redemption that is
in Christ Jesus, and in many such places th^^ like phrases are found.

Controv. 9. That Christ's death was not only satisfactorie, but meditarious,
against Socinus.
Object. 1. No satisfaction of a due debt, has merit in it, for no more is
paid then is due Christ then by his death merited not, because he paid our due
debt: neither does the Scripture ascribe any merit to Christ's death.

Answ. 1. It is true, that he which satisfies for his own debt, therein does
not merit: for he paieth but that he owes, but he that satisfies for an
others debt, meriteth two ways, first in respect of the debtor, in paying that
he owes not, then in respect of the Creditor, who by an agreement, couenanteth
to accept the satisfaction of the undertaker, not as a recompense only for the
debt, but as a merit to deserve further grace and favor for the debtor: So
Christ has truly merited in respect of us, in paying our debt for us, and in
respect of God, who accepts the death of his son as truly meritorious of
his grace and favor for us.

2. And further herein appears the merit of Christ's death. 1. in respect of
the excellency of the person that died. 2. of the perfect obedience and
fulfilling of the law. 3. his great love and willingness in suffering. 4. and
beside his satisfaction, he was a faithful martyr and witness of the truth,
Revel. 3.14.

3. The Scripture, though in direct terms, it ascribes not merit unto the
death of Christ, yet it uses words equivalent, as the word (...), acquisitio,
purchasing, includes merit, as Act. 20.28. Christ is said to have purchased
his Church by his blood, and Ephesians. 1.14. It is called the redemption of the
possession purchased, etc. which is all one as if he had said merited: See more
in Pareus dub. 7.

Here follow certain questions and controversies of weight, touching
original sin.
Controv. 10. That there is original sin in men by the corruption of nature,
against the opinion of the Hebrews.
The Hebrews do reject this saying of the Apostle, that sin entered into the
world, and death by sin: and they urge us to show some authorities out of
the old Testament, to prove the propagation of Adams sin to his posterity.

Paulus Burgensis addit. 2. thus consureth their opinion.

1. That death which was inflicted upon Adam for his transgression remains,
quoad (...), as it is a punishment, is evident by that place, Genes. 3.3. Dust
thou art, and to dust (...) return, which sentence of mortality is executed
as we see by experience upon all Ad^^s posterity.

2. Then he proves, quod illud peccatum transijt ad posteras quoad culpam,
that (...) sin did also pass over unto his posterity, even in respect of
the fault: this he proves by the testimony of the Hebrews themselves: just
by the words which they use in circumcision, which are these, Deus noster, pars
nostra, and protector noster, praecepit erui carne^ nostram ab inf^^^^, propter
foedus suum quod posuit in causa nostra, God our portion, and our protector,
has commanded that our flesh should be delivered from hell, for his covenant
like which he has placed in our flesh, etc. But infants which are circumcised
have not deserved hell by any actual sins, which they had committed,
therefore they are guilty of hell in respect of original sin: To this
purpose also he produces the testimony of R. Salmo, who gives this note upon
that place, Genes. 2.4. These are the generations of heaven and earth, etc.
that in two places only this word teldoth, generations, is written fully,
namely with chalom in the beginning and end; in this place before Adams fall:
for in the beginning men were created secundum plenitudinem (...) and
perfectio^^^, in their fullness and perfection: but after Adam had sinned,
their generations were corrupted, and therefore Genesis 4. and other where that
word it not expressed fully, with chalom in the end: the other place is, Ruth,
4. These are the generations of P^^^rs, etc. these the word toldoth, is written
fully, because Christ the son of David, was the Son of P^^res, for until
he came the generation of man should not be restored* ^^ Burgens.

3. But there are evident places beside out of the old testament, for the
proof of original sin: as Genes. 9.21. the imagination of man's heart is
evil from his youth: and David confesses, Psalm. 54. I was borne in iniquity,
and in sin has my mothere conceived me, etc.

Controv. 11. That Adams sin is entered into his posterity, by propagation,
not imitation only, against the Pelagians.
The Pelagians held these two heretical positions concerning this matter: 1.
That Adams sin is derived into his posterity, nor by any natural
propagation, but by corrupt imitation: 2. the other, that death is entered into
Adams posterity, not as a punishment of Adams sin: but as a defect of nature
issuing out of the frail and brittle composition and constitution of man's
body: these strange assertions, are thus confuted by Augustine.

1. If the Apostle had spoken here of the beginning of sin by imitation, not
by propagation, non eius principium fecisset Adamum, sed diabolum, etc. he
would not have made Adam the beginning, but the devil etc. for he sinned
first: he was a lier from the beginning, John 8.44.

2. As he in whom all are quickened, and made alive, beside that, he gave an
example of righteousness to those that imitate him, dat etiam occultissimam
fidelibus gratiam, etc. gives also secret grace unto the faithful: etc. so he
in whom all die, beside the example of imitation in transgressing Gods
commandment; occulta etiam labe, etc. he also infected all his offspring; with
the secret contagion of concupiscence: Augustine. lib. 1. de peccator. merit.
and remissi. c. 9.

3. Further Augustine presses these words of the Apostle: Romans 5.16. the fault
is of one offense to condemnation, but if men are only guilty of condemnation
for their actual sins: he should have said, condemnationem fieri ex multis
peccatis etc. that condemnation came through many offenses, not through one:
epist. 89. ad Hilarium.

4. And in an other place he urges this reason: because many in sinning do
not propound unto themselves the example of Adam, but have other occasions
which move them: as when a thief kills a man, he did it, nihil de Adamo
cogitans, thinking nothing of Adam, but to this end, that he might have his
gould, etc. Adams eating of an apple which was forbidden, can yield no example
of imitation to a murderer: and there are many wicked men in the world, that
never heard of Adams transgression: to this purpose Augustine: lib. 6. cont.
Julian. c. 12.

5. Beside the Apostles words evidently conuinceth them: for the Apostle says
as sin entered, so death by sin: then as death actually is propagated, so
also sin, Tolet. annot. 15. And death is entered upon all, because all have
sinned: seeing then infants die, it follows that they sin, but not
actually, therefore they have original sin: P. Martyr.

6. Hence it is evident, that the commentaries which pass under Hieromes name,
are forged: for that author says upon this place: insaniunt, qui de Adamo per
traducem ad ^^ asserunt venisse peccarum: they are mad, which affirm that
sin is come upon us, as traduced and derived from Adam: etc. for Hierome
living in the same time, that Pelagius broached his heresy, did condemn and
detect it, as Augustine, and other orthodoxall writers did.

Controv. 12. Of the manner how original sin is propagated against the
Pelagians: where it is disputed, whether the soul be derived from the parents.
The Pelagians to strengthen their error in denying the propagation of
original sin from Adam to his posterity; objected thus: the seat and place
of sin is the soul, but the soul is not propagated nor derived by
generation from the parents: therefore neither sin.

To this objection diverse answers are made: 1. Some think that original
sin is conveyed by that carnal pleasure and delight, which the parents have
in the act of generation but this is not so, for these two reasons: 1. because
that carnal pleasure is not sin, (...) some evil affection beside do
concur with it: for without that delight there is no generation: which if it
were necessarily accompanied with sin, the Scriptures would not have given
liberty to marry, if it were in it self a sinful act: 2. And if it were
admitted, that this natural delight were sin, yet there by that infirmity
only should be conveyed, whereas original sin is a general corruption of
nature.

2. Some think, that God creates the souls of men, agreeable to their
corrupt bodies like as he gives unto dogs, and other creatures spirits
answerable to their state and condition: But this opinion is rejected likewise:
for if God should create or make any soul evil he should be the author of
sin.

3. Some do think, that the soul of man is derived also ex traduce, as they
term it, and propagated from the parents, as the body is: this opinion
Tertullian seemed to favor, and Augustine holds it probable. Genes. ad.
liter. c. 10. some of their reasons are these: 1. because in the making of the
woman it is not said, that God breathed into her the breath of life, as it is
expressed of Adam, and therefore it is like that she had, as her body, so her
soul from Adam: Answer. Nay rather the contrary is inferred, because no
mention is made of the soul and spirit of Eve, that it had the like beginning
which Adams had: otherwise he would have said, this is soul of my soul, as he
says, bone of my bones, flesh of my flesh. 2. Genesis 46.26. it is said that, 66.
souls came out of the loins of Jacob: Answ. here the soul is taken for
person: and by a synecdoche, the whole man is understood by a part: and that is
said of the whole, because of the unity of the person, and the near
conjunction of the soul and body, which is true only in the one part, namely
the body, which only came out of the parents loins: in the same sense,
Marie is said to be (...), the mother of God, because Christ both God and man
was borne of her, and yet he was borne only as man. 3. If the soul be not
propagated by generation, but created in the body, then it would follow, that
God on the seventh day had not made an end of the creation. Answ: it follows
not, God ceased from creating any new kind, but now the inspiring of the soul
is but a continnuing of that way of the soul, which God in the first creation
made for it.

The better opinion then is, animas creando infundi, and infundendo creari:
that the souls are infused by creation, and created by infusion, the reasons
of which opinion are these. 1. the direct words of Scripture, Zacha. 12.1: God
is said to have formed the spirit of man within him: And Hebr. 12.9. he is
called the father of spirits. 2. an other ground of this opinion is taken from
the nature and condition of the soul: it is a spiritual and immateriall
essence, immortal and incorruptible, and therefore cannot come of corruptible,
and corporal seed: 3. Christ's soul came the same way, which other men's souls
do, for otherwise he should not be like us in all things, sin excepted: but
his soul was not propagated from Marie: for if he had both his body and soul
from her, he might as well be said to have been in the loins of Abraham when
he paid tithes to Melchisedech, as Levi, Hebr. 7.10. and yet though Leui had
his body only, not his soul, from the loins of Abraham, he is said to be in
his loins, because he came from thence by the ordinary and common generation,
but so did not Christ: seeing then this opinion is refused of the generation
and derivation of the soul; we also reject this answer concerning the
propagating of original sin.

4. This then is our more full answer unto this objection of the Pelagians: 1.
although we can not give a sufficient reason of this, how original sin
should be propagated, yet it is enough for us, that it is so, that we are all
by nature the children of wrath. 2. it is not true, that only the flesh and
body of man is propagated from the parents: for then man should confer less
in his generation, then brute beasts, from whom not the bodies only but the
spirits do issue in the generation of their kind: so then, totus homo ex toto
homine nascitur, whole man is generated of whole man: and anima, licet non
materialiter, tamen originaliter, the soul, though not materially, yet
originally is taken from Adam: Pareus: we do not say, that the soul of man is
derived from the soul of the father, yet man consisting of body and soul is
begotten of his father, the Lord being the father of spirits, concurring in
that natural act of carnal generation. 3. it is denied, that the soul only
is the feate of sin: it is the corruption of the whole man consisting both of
body and soul: the whole man then is corrupted, and so the feate and place of
sin: Pareus: and how the soul being created pure, comes to be infected
with sin, Lyranus well shows, sicut liquor bonus inficitur ex corruptione
vasis etc. as a good liquor is infected by the corruption of the vessel: so
original sin provenit ex carne causaliter, sed tamen in anima est subiective
and formaliter: comes of the flesh as the cause, but it is in the soul as
the subject and formally, like as sickness and infirmity comes of corrupt
and unwholesome meats, as the cause, but the meat is not capable of sickness as
the subject, the body is the subject of sickness: to this purpose Lyranus:
Faius expresses it by this similitude: the pure soul is infected with the
contagion of impute seed, sicut manu immunda flos insignis pol^^^tur, etc. like
as a fair flower is polluted with unclean hands: Pet. Martyr yet more
distinctly shows the manner how this pollution enters into the soul: and
corporis impuritate, and imbecillitate sua: by two ways, the impuritie of the
body, and it own weaknesse^ for both the soul is weak, and not able to
resist the corrupt inclination of the flesh: it is not created in such strength
and perfection, as Adams soul was: and the body is unapt and unfit for any
spiritual work: and this may suffice for an answer unto this objection of the
Pelagians concerning the original of the soul.

Controv. 13. Against the Pelagians, and Papists, that original sin is not
quite taken away in baptism.
1. The Pelagians object further, that there is no original sin propagated
unto Adams posterity, or at the least remaining in them: for that which is
taken away and blotted out, remains not, now original sin is taken away in
baptism, and therefore it is no more extant.

Answer. There must be two things considered in sin: the act thereof as the
matter, and the guilt: now there is herein a great difference between
original and other actual sins, for in those the act is transitory and
remains not, and the guilt is remitted by faith in Christ: in original
sin, though the guilt thereof be remitted in baptism, yet the matter
thereof, which is the corruption and deprauation of man's nature remains, it
passes not away, as the transitory act of other actual sins: and for the
more full demonstration hereof, Augustine uses two similitudes: like as the
corn is sown without chafe or straw, and yet the corn that springs of the
seed has both: and as they which were circumcised beget children, that are
uncircumcised, and had need of a new circumcision: so the fathers being
regenerate by a new birth, yet do beget unregenerate children: the sanctity
of the parents no more passes to their children, then their knowledge, and
other virtues, Mart.

2. The Romanists deny not but there remains a corruption of nature still in
the children of God after Baptism, but they say it remains vt poena and
exercenda vert^tis materia, not as a fault, but as a punishment, and matter or
occasion for the exercising of virtue: Lyran. And it was concluded in the
Council of Trent, in baptism tolli omne illud quod veram habet and propriam
rationem peccati, all that to be taken away, which has the proper and true
nature of sin, Council. Trident. sess. 5. the Rhemists also affirm that
children baptized have neither mortal nor venial sin, annot. 1. Ioh. 1.
sect. 5.

Contra: 1. We confess that the guilt and punishment of original sin is
washed away by faith in Christ's blood; but yet the stain and blot remains
still: though in Christ we are delivered from the punishment due unto sin;
yet the evil quality of our nature is not purged away, namely, our natural
pronenes and aptnes to evil: which shall not fully be purged, until the
resurrection, when we shall put off all corruption together with mortality: to
this purpose Augustine says well, Meminisse debemus omnium peccatorum plenam
remissionem, etc. we must remember that there is full remission of our sins
in baptism, hominis vero qualitatem non totam continuo mutari, etc. yet the
quality or condition of man is not strait changed: de peccator. merit. and
remissi. lib. 1. c. 25. 2. and that original corruption, has the very nature
of sin, even after baptism, the Apostle shows evidently. Romans 7.7. where
he calls the concupiscence of our nature sin: see further hereof. Synops.
Centur. 3. er. 11.

Controv. 14. What original sin is, against the Romanists and ^some others,
and specially against them, which hold it to be Adams sin imputed only to
his posterity.
1. Faber and Erasmus in their annotations upon this place, seem to be of
opinion that original sin is only a pronenesse and aptness unto sin,
which is graft in us by nature: But this is refelled by the Apostle here, who
says, that in Adam all have sinned, and therefore death also is entered upon
all: death is the stipend of sin: if then death actually is gone over all, so
also sin.

2. Flacius Illyricus held original sin to be a kind of substance: But, this
is a dangerous opinion: God only is the Creator of substances, and natures:
but he made not sin.

3. As he gives too much to original sin, making it a substantial thing in
man: so the Romanists too much extenuate it, and allow it too little: 1.
Pighius and Catharinus think that original sin is nothing else, but the
preuarication and transgression of our first parents, made their posterities
only by imputation, because Adam in himself contained all mankind, and God
made his covenant not only with him, but with all his posterity, being then
in his loins: and so his sin is imputed unto them: but there is nothing in
men naturally, that has the proper nature of sin: which is defined to be
dictum, factum, vel concupitum, etc. somewhat said, done, or coueted against
the law of God, which cannot be in infants: to this purpose Catharinus, and
before him Pighius, in 1. contr. de peccat. origin.

Contra. 1. Bellarmine lib. 5. de amissi. great. c. 16. and Pererius. disput.
16. in 5. c. ad Roman: would confute this opinion, and prove that original
sin is a real and inherent corruption in the nature of man, and not imputed
only: because as we were sinners in Adam, so we are made just by Christ, which
is not by the imputation of his righteousness, but by an inherent justice,
which is given unto us by the merits of Christ, etc. But this were to confute
one error by another: for the Apostle evidently and expressly shows c. 4.3.
that Abraham's faith was imputed and counted unto him for righteousness: and
therefore the justice, whereby we are counted just before God, is the justice
of Christ imputed to us by faith: so also Adams sin is imputed to his
posterity: but beside there is an euilnes and prauitie of nature procured by
the transgression of Adam; as beside the imputed righteousness of Christ, there
is also in the faithful an inherent righteousness also, which is their
holiness and sanctification, but they are not thereby justified before God.

2. We have better reasons out of the Scripture to refute this assertion: for
where there is no sin, death has no power: because all are sinners by
nature, they all die: otherwise the Apostle had not reasoned well, that death
reigned from Adam to Moses, because all had sinned, v. 14. And v. 19. the
Apostle says, that by one man's disobedience many are peccatores constituti,
made sinners, which is more then to be counted sinners, or to have sin
imputed.

3. That definition is of actual sin, which is of such things as are said,
done, or coueted against the law of God: But sin is more generally taken for
any thing which is contrary to the law of God: now the natural rebellion and
resistance of the flesh, in not being subject to the will of the spirit, but
continually striving against it, which is to be seen even in children, who
sees not that it is contrary to the law of God, and has in it the nature of
sin?

4. David complains that he was borne in sin, and conceived in iniquity,
Psalm. 51. and S. Paul Romans 7. calls his natural corruption, sin dwelling
in him: So that these holy men confessed that they were sinful by nature:
Otherwise, if there were not in us original sin by nature of our own, but
only Adams imputed, it would follow, that his posterity should be punished
not for their own, but another sin: which were against the rule of Gods
justice, Martyr.

Controv. 15. That original sin is not only the privation of original
justice.
Bellarmine with other of the Romanists, will not have original sin to be
any evil positive quality in man, but only carentia iustitiae originalis,
and habitualis aversio a Deo: a wanting of original justice, and an habitual
aversion from, and a forsaking of God: Bellar. lib. 5. de amission. great. c.
15. Lyranus adds an other clause, that original sin is a defect or want of
original justice, cum debito habendi eam, with a due debt or obligation to
have the same, etc. Now their chief reason, that original sin is no evil
habit or positive quality, but only a defect or privation, is this, because
God is the author of all positive things, that have a being or existence: but
he is no way the cause of original sin: Bellarm. ibid. Thoring. replic. ad
addit. 5. Paul. Burgens. And if it were an habit, Adam could not have
transmitted it to his posterity. Bellarm. ibid.

Contra. 1. Paulus Burgens. takes exception to Lyranus difinition of original
sin: that it is not a mere privation, but habitus corruptus, a corrupt
habit: like as in a disease there is not only a privation of health, but
there is also some positive thing, habet humores male dispositos, the humors
also are evil affected and disposed: and so is it in original sin, there is
an evil quality and habit beside the want of original justice: and
therefore it is called concupiscence, quae sonat aliquod positivum, which
foundeth and signifies some positive thing, etc. This exception of Burgensis
is just, and his opinion herein is agreeable to the Apostle, who calls
original sin peccatum inhabitans, an in-dwelling sin, Romans 7.20. and
corpus mortis, the body of death: original sin then has a kind of
existence, for how else could it be called a body of sin or death? see more
hereof elsewhere, Synops. Cen. 4. err. 14.

2. Concerning the reasons objected. 1. God is the author of every substance,
and of every natural quality, but not of unnatural dispositions or
qualities; as neither of diseases in the body, nor of vices in the mind: this
evil quality was procured by man's voluntary transgression. 2. and though
habites, which are personal, and obtained by use and industry, are not
transmitted to posterity, yet this evil habit was not personal in Adam, as
he is considered, vt singularis persona, as a singular person, but by him it
entered into the nature of man, as he was totius humanae naturae principiu^, the
beginning of the whole nature of man.

3. Burgensis takes another exception unto Lyranus addition, and he thinks
that Adams posterity is not bound to have the original justice which was
given to Adam: for they have no such bond, either by the law of nature, for
that original justice was supernaturally added, or by any divine precept; for
God gave unto Adam no other precept; but that one, not to eat of the forbidden
fruit; and therefore they were not bound at all to have or retain Adams
original justice: Thus Burgens.

Contra. 1. Herein I rather consent unto Thoring the Replic. upon Burgens. who
thus argues, that this debt or bond, to have original justice, was grounded
upon the law of nature, which is the rule of right reason; for by nature every
one is tied to seek the perfection and conservation of it kind: and this
original justice tended unto the perfection of man; which though it were
supernaturally added unto man, yet it was not given him alone, sed pro tota
natura, for the whole nature of man, and so he concludes well, that man is
culpable in not having this original justice, though not culpa actuali, quae
est suppositi, by any actual fault, which belongs to the person or subject,
yet culpa originali, quae est natura, by an original fault, which is in
nature. To this purpose the Replic. And this may be added further, that if
Adams posterity were not debtors in respect of this original justice, then
were they not bound to keep the law, which requires perfect righteousness,
and so it would follow, that they are not transgressors against the law, if
they were not bound to keep it: the first exception then of Burgensis may be
recieued, but not the second.

2. Pighius also, who denies original sin to be a privation or want of
original justice, holds it to be no sin to want that justice, which is not
enjoined by any law unto mankind: for no law can be produced which binds
infantes to have that original justice, and therein he concurreth with
Burgensis.

Contra. But this objection is easily refuted: for first, man was created
according to Gods image, in righteousness and holiness, which image Adams
posterity is bound to retain: but he by his sin defaced that image, and in
stead thereof begat children after his own image, Genesis 5.3. in the state of
corruption. And whereas Pighius replieth out of Augustine, that the image of
God in man consists in the three faculties of the soul, the understanding,
memory, and will: Augustine, must not be so understood, as though herein
consisted only the image of God, but as therein is shadowed forth the mystery
of the Trinity: for the Apostle expressly shows, that this image of God is
seen in righteousness and holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.

An other law is the law of nature, which is the rule which every one is to
follow: Cicero could say, that convenientur viuere, etc. to live agreeably to
this law, is the chief end of man: to this law even infants are also bound:
there is a third law, which is the moral, which says thou shall not lust,
which prohibiteth not only actual but original concupiscence: And whereas
Pighius here obiecteth, that a law is given in vain of such things as cannot
be avoided, therein he shows his ignorance: for it is not in man's power to
keep the law; for then it had not been necessary for Christ to have died for
us, who came to perform that which was impossible by the law, Romans 8.3. yet
was not the law given so in vain: for there are two special uses thereof,
both to give us direction how to live well, and to bring us to the knowledge of
sin, xe Mart.

4. This then is original sin: 1. it consists partly of a defect and want
of original justice, in that the image of God, after the which man was created
in righteousness and holiness, was blotted out by the fall of man: partly in an
evil habit, disposition and quality and disorder of all the faculties, and
powers both of body and soul: This was the start of man after his fall, and
the same is the condition of all his posterity by nature.

Augustine also makes original sin a positive quality, placing it in the
concupiscence of the flesh: not the actual concupiscence, but that natural
corruption which although it be more general, then to contain it self within
the compass of concupiscence only, yet he so describes it by the most
manifest effect; because our natural corruption does most of all show and
manifest it self in the concupisence and lust of our members.

2. The subject then and matter of original sin, are all the faculties and
powers of soul and body: the former is the pravitie and deformity of them,
the efficient cause was the perverseness of Adams will, the instrument is the
carnal propagation, the end or effect is everlasting damnation both of body
and soul without the mercy of God: Martyr.

3. Original sin is taken either actiuely, for the sin of Adam, which was
the cause of sin in his posterity: which is called originale origmans,
original sin giving beginning: or passiuely for the natural corruption
raised in Adams offspring by his transgression: which is termed originale
originatum, original sin taking beginning.

4. Of this original sin taken both ways there are three misserable
effects: 1. participatio culpa, the participating in the fault or offense: for
we were all in Adams loins when he transgressed; and so we all sinned in him,
as here the Apostle says. 2. imputatio reatus, the imputation, of the guilt
and punishment of sin; we are the children of wrath by nature, subject both
to temporal and eternal death. 3. there is naturae depratatio vel deformitas,
the depravation and deformity of nature, wherein there dwells no good thing,
Romans 17.18.

Controv. 16. Of the wicked heresy of Marcion and Valentinus, with the
blasphemous Manichees.
1. Origin out of the words of the former verse, where the Apostle speaks of
our atonement and reconciliation by Christ, confureth the heresy of Marcion
and Valentinus, whose opinion was, that there was some substance, quae
naturaliter Deo sit inimica, which naturally is an enemy to God: for if it
were so, that this enemy, were natura, non voluntatis, in nature, not in the
will of man, there would be no reconciliation: for things in nature contrary,
and enemies one to the other, cannot be reconciled.

2. The Manichees also are here confuted, who did hold, that sin was of God,
as the anchor and beginner thereof: for they did make two beginnings one of
good, the other of evil, and two Princes, one of light, the other of darkness:
this wicked fancy is here confuted, for the Apostle shows, that sin entered
by Adam, and so descended to his posterity, Faius.

Controv. 17. That all sins are mortal, and worthy of death by nature.
v. 12. And death by sin: if then death came in by sin, yea children having
only original sin are subject to death: hence it is evident, that all
sins are in themselves worthy of death: so that it is a vain distinction,
which the Romanists make between venial, and mortal sins: as though some
sins were pardonable in their own nature: In that some sins are
pardonable, it is of grace and mercy in God, not in the quality and property
of the sin, Martyr. Indeed there is some sin remissible, some
irremissible, as sin against the holy Ghost: but this difference arises not
so much from the nature of the sin, as from the quality of the offender,
whose heart is so hardened, that he cannot repent him of the blasphemy against
the spirit: Neither yet does it follow, if all sins are mortal in their
own nature, that therefore all sins are equal: for as there are degrees in
the punishment of death, so there are degrees in the sins themselves: and
though even great offenses are pardonable in the mercy of God, yet pardon in
such sins is more hardly obtained.

Controv. 18. That Henoch and Elias are not yet alive in their bodies.
v. 12. And so death went over all men: Hence then it is concluded, that Elias
and He^^^, do not yet live in their bodies; whom the Romanists hold shall come
in the end of the world to preach against Antichrist: Gorrhan would thus help
the matter, that de^h entered upon them reatis, non actu, not in act, but in the
guilt: their death is deferred, it is not taken away, etc. for they hold that
they shall be killed by Antichrist in the end of the word.

Contra. 1. That it is appointed unto men to die, the Apostle testifies Heb.
9.27. none are exempted from the common law of death: as it is said, 2. Sam.
14.14. We must needs die, and we are as water spilt upon the ground, that
cannot be gathered up again: and the Psalmist says, Psalm. 88.48. What man
lives and shall not see death? Therefore Henoch and Elias are subject to this
general law of death. 2. And if they were yet alive, they must be either in
the celestial or terrestiall Paradise: but the terrestiall was destroyed in
the flood, and there they could not be preserved: and from the celestial
Paradise, none can return to die again, that is no place or habitation for
mortal creatures: See further hereof Synops. Centur. 5. er. 32.

Controv. 19. The Virgin Marie conceived in original sin.
The Romanists in their annotations upon the 14. v. do affirm, that whereas
all other are conceived and borne in original sin, Christ only is excepted,
and his mother for his honor, and by his special protection (as many godly
men judge) preserved from the some, etc.

Contra. 1. But this error is evidently confuted by the Apostles words, who
says, that in him, (that is in Adam) all have sinned: therefore even the
Virgin Marie also: for only Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost without the
seed of man of a virgin, and therefore he only was conceived without sin. 2.
and it was more for Christ's honor to be borne of a sinner, himself no sinner,
to show his purity and perfection, then come clean and undefiled even out a
vessel not naturally cleansed from sin. 3. If the holy Virgin must be
conceived without sin, because of her Son, that was borne without sin,
then by the same reason the mother of Marie must have the same privilege,
because she brought forth Marie without sin, and so her mother before her,
and thus this privilege must run up still unto Christ's progenitors.

4. Why are they afraid to determine this point absolutely, that Marie was
conceived without sin, but set it down only as a private opinion of some
godly men: whereas Sixtus the 4. has decreed it was so, and thereupon for the
strengthening of his opinion, instituted the feast of the conception of the
Virgin Marie, and added these words to the salutation of Marie, and benedicta
sit Anna matter tua, de qua sine macula tua processit caro virginea, and blessed
be Anna thy mother, from whom thy virgins flesh proceeded without spot: 5. they
will not deny, but that Bernard, the Master, of sentences, Thomas Aquin. and
before them Augustine, were godly and devout men all which held the contrary,
that the Virgin Marie was not conceived without sin. August. de Genes. ad
liter. lib. 10. c. 18. Bernard. epist. 174. Magister lib. 3. distinct. ^. Thom.
Aquin. upon that place.

Controv. 20. Against merits.
v. 16. The gift is of many offenses: hence is inferred, that seeing our
justification by Christ is called a grace, and gift, that it proceeds from
the free love, grace, and favor of God; Pareus here well infers, facessant
ergo merita congrus, etc. away with all merits either of congruitie as
preparations unto grace, or of condignitie unto salvation: for if our
justification and salvation were of merit or work, it were not of grace: as
the Apostle concludes, Romans 11.6. If it be of grace, it is no more of works:
for then work were no more work, etc.

21. Controv. That the punishment of original sin is everlasting death.
v. 18. By the offense of one the fault came of all unto condemnation, etc.
Here are two opinions to be refuted, the first is of those, which either
promised unto Infants dying without baptism in original sin, the kingdom
of heaven, as one Vincentius did hold, whom Augustine confuseth, lib. 1. de
origin. animae, c. 9. or else did assure unto them an happy estate in some
middle place between heaven and hell, as the Pelagians, August. haeres. 88.
unto which opinion Pighius and Cathari^us, two Popish champions, come very
near, who think that Infants dying in their infancy, and so in original
sin, should enjoy an happy and blessed estate here in earth after the
general resurrection.

The other opinion is generally of the Romanists, which hold, that Infants
dying without baptism, shall have poenam damni, the punishment only of loss,
in being deprived of the vision of God: but they shall not have poenata
sensus, the punishment or torment of sense or feeling: and here some do exempt
them from all torment both inward and outward, as Thomas with other Schoolmen,
in 2. sentent. distinct. 33. some do think, they shall have internum animi
dolorem, the inward greese of mind for the loss of the heavenly beatitude: as
holds Pet. Lombard. 2. sentent. distinct. 33. with some other schoolmen, to
whom Bellarmine subscribeth, lib. 6. de amiss. great. c. 6.

1. For the first opinion that infants dying in their original sin are not
excluded heaven, these arguments are brought.

1. The infants shall be afflicted, with no sensible punishments, because they
had no evil mind, will, or purpose while they lived here.

2. Neither is there any contrition or sorrow in this life required for
original sin, much less in the next: to this purpose Pighius.

3. Cartharinus among other reasons, urges that place, Dan. 12.2. that many
shall awake out of the dust, some to everlasting life, some to shame: whereupon
he infers, that all shall not rise to one of these ends, but some, and so
there should be a third sort, that should neither go to heaven, nor hell, but
enjoy a third place.

4. There shall be a new heaven and a new earth: as the new heavens shall not
be without inhabitants, so neither the earth, which is most like, shall be the
place for such infants.

Contra. 1. Though infants actually in their life showed no evil purpose,
will, or intent, yet it is sufficient to their condemnation, that they had an
evil inclination by nature, which would have showed it self if they had lived
to years of discretion: the only cause, why their evil inclination appears
not, for that their mind has not fit organes or instruments, to exercise the
faculties thereof: like as the young cubbes of foxes and wolves are killed, and
destroyed, when they are yet young, though they have yet done no harm, because
it is certain, if they should be suffered to grow, they would follow their
kind: so the Scripture says, that the imaginations of man's heart are evil
from his youth, Genesis 9.21.

2. And holy men even for their original sin have showed great contrition
and sorrow in this life: as David confessing his sin, begins with his very
sinful birth and conception, Psalm. 5.1. so S. Paul cries out, Romans 7.
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!

3. In that place of Daniel, many, is taken for all, as Augustine and Theodoret
expound that place: as S. Paul in the fifth chapter to the Romans v. 17. by many
understands all; as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: for
otherwise it would follow that all should not arise, that sleep in the dust,
but only some.

4. And it is a weak reason, there shall be inhabitants of the new earth,
therefore infants shall inhabit it: Bellarmine thinks that the earth shall
be covered with waters, and so have no inhabitants at all, but this is an idle
speculation: for the earth shall then be restored to a perfect estate, and not
to lie hid under the waters: and to what end there shall be a new earth, it is
curiosity to enquire, the scripture having not expressed it: And if it be
appointed for the habitation of the Saints, to pass from heaven to earth, and
to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, it is a work consequent, that
infants shall be those Saints: thus much shall suffice for the answer unto
these reasons.

5. And further the opinion it self to make any kind of happiness out of the
kingdom of heaven, and to invent a third place between heaven and hell, is
contrary to the Scripture: which forteth all men into two ranks or companies,
which are appointed to two places: they are either of the sheep at Christ's
right hand, which shall enter into life, or of the gootes at his left hand, for
whom hell fire is prepared, Matthew. 25. And the Scripture testifies, that all
that shall be saved, shall walk in the light of the celestial Jerusalem,
Revel. 22.4. and without it shall be dogs, c. 12.15. none then can be saved
out of it,

2. Now we come to the other opinion of the Romanists, that send infants dying
without baptism to hell, but they only attribute unto them a punishment
without any sense, unless it be the inward grief and dolor of mind, to see
themselves excluded the kingdom of God.

Contra. First it is an uncharitable opinion to send all infants to hell that
die unbaptized: for the grace of God is not tied to the outward element: God
can save without water: it is not the want of baptism, but the contempt
thereof, that condemns: the Scripture says, Mark. 16.16, he that shall
believe, and be baptized shall be saved: but he that will not believe, (not he,
which is not baptized) shall be damned: here are three opinions, 1. the Papists
generally hold, that all infants dying without baptism, are damned: but this
is a cruel and uncharitable opinion, as is showed before: See else where more
hereof. Synops. Centur. 3. er. 3.

2. Some think that many of the infants of the Saints are saved even without
baptism, by the covenant of grace made unto the faithful and their seed, but
not all, for some of the children of the faithful do not belong unto
election, such were Ismael, Esau. Thus Pet. Martyr.

3. But the better opinion is, that all the infants of faithful parents dying
in their innocent estate before baptism, are saved by the general covenant of
grace, made to the righteous and their seed: because there is now no bar or
impediment put in to binder the efficacy of that covenant, as in those, which
live unto the years of discretion, and deprive themselves by their impiety
and unbelief, of the benefit of that covenant.

Secondly, that such infants as are not saved by Christ, dying before baptism,
or after, do suffer the sensible pains of hell fire, though in the least and
easiest degree of all, it is thus proved.

1. The Scripture says, Revel. 10.15. Whosoever was not found written in the
book of life was cast into the lake of fire. Infants then which are condemned,
shall be punished in hell fire.

2. We see that infants even in this life do suffer in their infancy pain
and torment of body: it therefore stands with Gods justice that infants even
for original sin should feel sensible torments:

3. If they will grant that they shall have the inward dolor of the mind to
see others admitted into the kingdom of God, and themselves excluded, why not
also pain of body? seeing the Scripture says, that there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth, when men shall see the Patriarchs entering into heaven,
and themselves excluded, and thrust out at the doors. Luke 13.28.

4. Christ died for infants, as well as for others, and bare the punishment due
unto them for their sins: but he suffered both the torments of body and
mind: therefore both were due unto infants.

5. Gregory is of this opinion: perpetua tormenta percipient qui nihil ex
propria volunta^^ peccauerunt, they shall receive everlasting torments, which
had not sinned by their own will: in 9. c. Job. so also Augustine: but he
says mitissima omnium pana erit eorum, their punishment shall be most gentle
and easy of all other, which beside original sin have added none other
sins, etc. and this may be safely affirmed with Augustine: But that when
follows, has more doubt: non audeo dicere, quodijs, vt nulli essent, quam vt
ibi essent, sotius expediret, I dare not say, that it were better for them not
to be at all, then to be there, Augustine. Enchirid. c. 93.

Controv. 22. That Christ's essential justice is not infused into us.
v. 17. Much more shall they which receive abundance of grace, etc. Osiander
did hold, not Lucas Osiander, who has written brief annotations upon the old
and new Testament: but another of that name before him, that the justice of
Christ is some real thing infused into the faithful, and that it was his
essential justice, as he is God, that is communicated to the faithful, ex
Faio. in v. 17.

But the Apostle evidently refuteth this error. c. 4.22. where he shows that
it was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness, because he believed in God: if we
are justified by faith, then not by the essential justice of Christ, which
still remains in Christ's person, as the subject thereof; but the
righteousness whereby we are justified before God, is the righteousness of
Christ, as he is man, which is apprehended by faith: and this also is evident
in this place, where the Apostle ascribes justification to the abundance of
grace received; and how is it received but by faith?

Controv. 23. Against the patrones of universal grace.
v. 18. By the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward all men, etc.
Hence of (...) Huberus, and before him the Pelagians would prove, that the
benefit of justification is as universal toward all, even infidels and
unbelievers, as the condemnation, that came in by Adam: for the Apostle on both
sides names all; for otherwise the benefit by Christ, should be inferior
unto the loss in Adam, which redounded generally upon all.

Contra. 1. This term of universality ( all) must be restrained according to
the nature of the subject: as Adam transfused his sin unto all, which were
his offspring, so Christ also justifies all his, that is, all which believe in
him: so by all, the Apostle understands, the universal company of the
faithful. 2. the pre-eminence of the benefit consists not in the equality
of the number, that Christ should save as many, as are lost in Adam, for then
there should be only an equality, not a superiority.

3. But herein is the prerogative of grace seen: 1. in the excellency of the
effect, for life is a more excellent thing then death, and righteousness, then
sin. 2. in the powerfulness of the work, it shows a greater power to
save, then to destroy, to justify, then condemn: for it is an easier matter
to destroy, then to save, to pull down, then to build up, to mortify, then
to reviue and raise to life. 3. the pre-eminence is in the amplitude and
largnes of grace, in that we are justified not only from one, but all kind of
sins, as well actual as original; whereas original sin is only derived
from Adam: See more hereof, quest. 15.

Controv. 24. Against the Popish inherent justice.
v. 9. So by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous, etc. The
Romanists, as Bellar. lib. 2. de. iustificat. c. 1. Pererius disputa. 17. do
much urge this argument against imputative justice, that we are not justified
by the righteousness of Christ imputed by faith, but by an inherent
righteousness wrought in us by Christ, whereby we are formally made just:
because we are so made righteous and just in Christ, as we became sinners in
Adam: but that was not by imputation of Adams sin, but by sin dwelling in
them, whereby they are formally made sinners: therefore we are formally made
righteous by an inherent justice remaining in us, and not imputed only:
Pererius further urges the phrase, iusti constituentur, many shall be made
just, which is not all one, as to be reputed just, or to be just by imputation;
but to be just indeed.

Contra. 1. The comparison between Adams disobedience, and Christ's obedience
does hold very well even in this point of imputation: for as there is in
making of us sinners, both an imputation of Adams sin to his posterity, as
coming out of his loins, as also an habitual prauitie and corruption of
nature, the effect thereof: so their is a double operation of Christ's
obedience: both it is imputed unto us by faith, whereby we are justified before
God, and thereby there is wrought in us holiness and righteousness, which is
our sanctification, but by this, because it is imperfect in this life, we are
not justified before God. 2. and whereas the Apostle uses the word (...),
constituentur, shall be made or constituted just, we confess that he means,
they shall be made just indeed in Christ: but therefore the word is put in the
future tence, because in this life our sanctification is but begun, it shall
not be absolutely perfect till the next life, when all imperfection and
impuritie of our nature shall be clean taken away, and then shall we be made
perfectly just indeed: See a more full answer to this objection, Synops.
Centur. 4. er. 56.

3. But if they shall further reply, that we are rather made sinners by the
real corruption of our nature, then by the imputation of Adams sin, and so
consequently we should rather be justified by an inherent righteousness, then
imputed only; we answer, that herein appears the pre-eminence of grace, that
Christ's righteousness only imputed is more able to justify us, then Adams
sin only imputed, was to condemn us.

Controv. 25. That we are justified both by the active and passive obedience of
Christ.
Piscator in his annotations upon this verse urges this point, that we are not
justified by the obedience of Christ in his life, which was his active
obedience, but by his passive obedience in his death, because if we be
justified by his righteousness acted in his life, then should he not have
needed to have died for us: for being justified already by the righteousness
of his life, there was no cause for Christ to be punished for us, being
already made just by his righteous life.

Contra. 1. Though the Apostle do principally mean the particular obedience
of Christ in submitting himself to his fathers will in his death, to give his
life for his sheep, as it is opposed to Adams particular disobedience in
eating of the forbidden fruit: which was in re facillima, in a thing most
easy to have been kept: whereas Christ's obedience was in re dissicillima, in
a most hard and difficult thing, to give himself for us even unto death: yet
this his particular obedience in his death depended upon the general obedience
of his life, whereby he merited the imputation of his righteousness: for the
merit of Christ's passion, depended upon the holiness and worthiness of his
person, which was manifested in his life.

2. There are two parts of our justification, remission of our sins, and the
making of unrighteous: the one was the proper work of Christ's death that paid
the ransom due unto our sins, the other of his perfect holiness and
righteousness, which was manifested in his rising from the dead: and therefore
the Apostle joins them both together, Romans 4.28. Who was delivered to death
for our sins, and is risen again for our justification: see further of this
matter, Controv. 20. in c. 4.

Controv. 26. Against the Philosophers, who placed righteousness in their own
works.
The heathen Philosophers and wise men were utterly ignorant of this making of
men righteous by an others obedience: for they held them only to be righteous,
which by continual exercise and practice of virtue attained unto an habit of
well doing, which they ascribed only to their own industry and endeavor.

Contra. These wise heathen in many things bewrayed their gross and palpable
ignorance: 1. they knew not what remission of sins was, neither how sin
entered into the world, or how it was taken away, they thought that by their
well doing only afterward, the former memory of their sins was worn out;
whereas it is in God only to blot out the remembrance of sin. 2. they
ascribed their virtues, such as they were, to their own free will and
endeavor, whereas Christian religion teaches us, that God is the author of all
good things, and that man of himself is not able to think or conceive a good
thought. 3. they erred in seeking to be made righteous and just by their own
works, which being imperfect, and diverse ways blemished, are not able to
justify us before God, who is absolutely perfect: true it is that every
Christian must endeavor to live well, and advance his faith with fruitful
works: but it is Christ's perfect obedience, and not our own which is
imperfect, that makes us truly righteous before God.

Controv. 27. Against the Manichees and Pelagians, the one giving too much, the
other too little to the law.
v. 30. The law entered, that the offense should abound, etc. the Manichees urge
these and such like places, against the law, as though it were evil, not
distinguishing between the proper effects of the law, which it works of it
self, as the Prophet David expresses them, Psalm. 19. It conuerteth the soul,
gives wisdom to the simple, gives light to the eyes, etc. and the effects
of the law, which it works by reason of the weakness of man, as it serves
to reveal the knowledge of sin, and to make it more abound: But the Apostle
himself, that here thus testifies of the law, confesses that in it self,
the law is holy, Romans 7.12. for although we are not able to perform that which
the law commands, yet the things are holy, just, and good which the law
requires, and the desire of the godly longs after them.

As the Manichees detracted from the law, so the Pelagians ascribed too much
unto it: for they held that the law was sufficient to salvation, and that if a
man did once understand what was to be done, by the strength of nature he could
do it: the law then served to reveal unto them the will of God, and there
own strength sufficed, in their opinion, to perform it: They being further
urged, that the grace of God was necessary, did in words acknowledge it: but
by grace they understood first the nature of man, which was first given him of
God, then the doctrine only and knowledge of the law.

The Popish schoolmen differed not much from this opinion, who hled that a man
by the strength of nature may keep the precepts of the law, quoad substantiam
operis, in respect of the substance of the work, but not, quoad intentionem
praecipientis, according to the intention of the lawegiuer: But it is evident
out of the Scripture, that, no not the regenerate (much less natural men) are
able to keep the commandments of God perfitly, as S. Paul shows by his own
example, Romans 7. And if it were as the Pelagians held, that the law were
sufficient to salvation, then Christ died in vain.

Controv. 28. Of the assurance of salvation.
v. 21. Grace might reign by righteousness unto eternal life, etc. Hence it
is evident, that life is a consequent of righteousness, as death is of sin,
and that the faithful are as sure to obtain life, if they have
righteousness, as Adam and Adams children were sure to die, after they have
sinned: So Chrysostom upon this place collecteth well, Noli itaque cum
iustitiam habeas, de vita dubitare, vitam enim excellit iustitia, matter quippe
illius est, do not therefore doubt of life and salvation, if thou have justice:
for justice excels life, being the mother thereof: This is contrary to the
erroneous and uncomfortable doctrine of the modern Papists; that it is
presumption for any man to be assured of his salvation: see further hereof
elsewhere, Synops. Centur. 4. err. 25.

Controv. 29: Of the diverse kinds of grace, against the Romanists.
v. 21. So might grace also reign, etc. The Popish Schoolmen have certain
distinctions of grace, which either are not at all to be admitted, or else they
must be first qualified, before they can be received.

1. Of the first kind is that distinction of grace, that there is, gratia
gratis data, gratia gratum faciens, grace freely given, and grace that makes
us acceptable unto God: two exceptions may be taken hereunto: 1. there is no
grace, but is freely given, otherwise it were not of grace, that is, of favor:
but they in making one kind of grace only, that is freely given, they
insinuate, that there are other graces, which are not freely given. 2. the
grace, which makes us acceptable to God, they hold to be a grace or habit
infused, for the which we are accepted: wherein they err, in ascribing that to
a created or infused grace, which is only the work of the free grace and
favor of God toward us: this word ( grace) is either taken actively for the
love, grace, and favor of God, or passiuely, for those several gifts and
graces, which are wrought in us by the favor of God: the first grace is as the
cause, the other graces are the effects: the first is without us, the other
within us: the first is the original grace in God, the other are created
graces: Now we hold that we are made acceptable unto God, only by the first
grace of God toward us, which is grounded in Christ, the Romanists ascribe our
acceptance with God to the other: see further hereof, Synops. Centur. 4. err.
27.

2. Of the other sort is the distinction of grace, operans, and cooperans,
working, and working together: as the working grace is that, which alone
changes the will, and makes it willing, the grace working together, is that
wherewith the will of man works for the effecting of that which it wills.
This distinction must be qualified: for to make the will of man a joint worker
with grace, is against the Apostle, who says, that it is God which works in
us both the will, and the deed, Philip. 2.13. But thus it may be admitted,
that man's will being once moved, and regenerate by grace, is not idle, but
then works with grace not of it own strength, but as it is still moved and
stirred by grace: see further hereof, Synops. Centur. 4. err. 30.

3. Of this sort, is that distinction of grace, praeveniens, and subsequens,
grace preventing and going before, and following grace: which are not indeed
two diverse or several graces, but diverse effects of one and the same grace:
Gods grace preuenteth man's will, and changes it, of unwilling, making it
willing, and then it follows, to make the will of man fruitful and
effectual; and this we acknowledge: but the grace subsequent or following, is
not merited or procured by the well using of the first preventing grace, in
which sense this distinction is to be rejected.

6. Moral observations.
Observe. 1. To follow the works of the flesh is enmity against God.
v. 10. When we were yet enemies, etc. They which delight in such works as God
hates, are enemies to God: whereupon Origin gives this note, quomodo
reconciliat us est, qui causam mimici secum gerit, etc. how can he be said to
be reconciled to God, which yet retains the cause of enmity, etc. he then
which continues in such works as are hateful unto God, cannot be said to be
reconciled by the blood of Christ: as the Apostle further shows, That no
unrighteous person shall inherit the kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6.9.

Observe. 2. Of the reconciling of enemies.
v. 10. When we were enemies, we were reconciled, etc. As God did reconcile us
to himself, being yet his enemies, so we are taught herein to be like unto
our heavenly father, to be willing to be reconciled; and to be at atonement
with our enemies: as Abraham made a league with Abimelech, and as Jacob did the
like with Laban, who pursued him to have wrought him some mischief.

Observe. 3. Wherein we ought to rejoice.
v. 11. We rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus, etc. The Apostle here shows
wherein the joy of a Christian consists, that whereas the world rejoices
some in riches, some in honor, some in pleasure, some in their strength,
humane wisdom, and the like, the Christian man is taught to rejoice in his
redemption and salvation in Christ: as our Blessed Savior would have his
Apostles to rejoice, because their names were written in heaven, Luke 10.20.

Obser. 4. Of the two kingdoms of grace and sin, life and death.
v. 17. If by one offense death reigned, etc. The Apostle here points our two
kingdoms, the one of sin and death, the other of righteousness and life:
there are node in the world, but belong unto one of these kingdoms: Therefore
it must be our great care, to examine our selves, unto which kingdom we are
subjects: by nature all are under the kingdom of darkness, and from thence
we cannot be delivered, but by Christ: as the Apostle says, Coloss. 1.13. who
has delivered us from the Prince of darkness, and has translated us to the
kingdom of his dear Son, we must therefore examine our selves whether we
have faith in Christ, 2. Cor. 13.5.

Observe. 5. Why the Lord suffers his sometime to fall, and to be plunged in
sin.
v. 20. Where sin abounded, there grace abounded much more, etc. God then
sometime seems to leave his children to themselves, that they afterward
being recovered and restored by grace, may have more experience of the
goodness and mercy of God, and of the excellency of grace: as David after
his fall, repenting of his sin, celebrateth the multitude of Gods mercies,
Psalm. 51.1. and Peter after he was converted was bid to strengthen his
brethren, Luke 22.32. as then being more able to comfort others by the
experience of Gods mercy, which he had himself received.

Observe. 6. None ought to despair of forgiveness of sin.
v, 20. Grace abounded much more: Grace is more predominant then sin, and the
Apostle in the comparison set forth between Christ and Adam, shows before,
that grace in Christ is more able to save us, then sin was in Adam to
condemn us: let no man then despare of mercy, and say with Cain, his sin is
greater then can be forgiven; but rather with S. Paul, Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief, 1. Tim. 1.15.

CHAP. VI.
3. The text with the diverse readings.
WHat shall we say then? shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? (
or be increased. Be.)

2. God forbid: ( let it not be. Gr.) we that are dead to sin, how yet shall
we live therein?

3. Know ye not ( brethren. L. addit.) that as many of us, as have been
baptized ( all we which have been baptized. B. G. but the word is (...), not
(...)) into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his death?

4 We are buried together with him by baptism into his death, that like as
Christ was raised ( did rise up, S. L. but the word is (...), was raised up.)
to the glory. Be. S.G. (by the glory. L. B. V. but (...), by, is here taken
for (...), in) of the father, so we also should walk in newenesse of life.

5 For if we be graft together ( with him. G. Be. ad.) by the similitude of his
death. Be. S. B. (rather, then to the similitude. G.L. for we are graft into
Christ, not into th^^ similitude) so shall we be ( by the similtude, which must
be supplied out of the former clause: some insert (be partakers. B. V.) but the
other word (graft) is better understood of his resurrection.)

6 Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed ( or abolished. S.V.) that henceforth we should not
serve sin.

7 For he that is dead, is justified, L.V. S.B. (freed, G.S. Be. but the word,
(...), properly signifies, is justified) from sin.

8 Wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we believe, that we shall also live
with him.

9 Knowing, that Christ being raised (not, rising. S. L. see ver. 4.) from the
dead dies no more: death has no more dominion over him.

10 For in that he died, he died once to sin: but in that he lives, he
lives unto God.

11 Likewise think ye also, that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to God
in Jesus Christ our Lord.

12 Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey
it in the lusts thereof, ( obey the lusts thereof. S. L. but here the word
((...), it,) is omitted.)

13 Neither yield your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin: but
yield ( give. G. B. exhibit. L. apply V. S. (...).) your selves unto God, as
alive unto God from the dead, and yield your members, as weapons of
righteousness unto God.

14 For sin shall not have dominion, ( let it not reign. S. but the word is
in the future tense) for ye are not under the law, but under grace.

15 What then? shall we sin, because we are not under the law but under
grace? God forbid: ( let it not be. Gr. as v. 1.)

16 Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves as servants to obey, his
servants ye are, to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience ( of the hearing of the ear. S.) unto righteousness?

17 But God be thanked, that ye have been the servants of sin; but ye have
obeyed from the heart, that form of doctrine whereunto ye were delivered.

18 Being then made free from sin, ye are become the servants of
righteousness.

19 I speak after the manner of men, ( I speak (...), some humane thing. Gr.
L.V.) because of the infirmity of your flesh: for as ye have yielded your
members servants ( to serve. L. to the service. S. but the word is (...),
servants.) to uncleanness and iniquity, to commit iniquity, so now yield your
members servants to righteousness and holiness: ( unto sanctification. L. V. S.)

20 For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free unto righteousness, (
from righteousness. G. B. that is the meaning, but the word in the original,
is put in the dative.)

21 What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? for the
end of those things is death.

22 But now being freed from sin, and made the servants of God, ye have your
fruit unto holiness ( in holiness. G. holy fruits. S.) and the end everlasting
life.

23 For the stipend ( stipends. Gr. wages. G. reward. B.) of sin is death,
but the gift of God ( the grace of God. L. the word is (...), a grace, a gift)
is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. The Argument, Method, and Parts.
In this Chapter the Apostle shows the necessary conjunction between
justification, and holiness, and newenes of life: and there are two parts
thereof: in the first, to ver. 12. he lays down the doctrine: then he
exhorts, v. 12. to the end.

In the doctrine he proves the necessity: 1. of mortification, and dying to
sin, propounded, v. 1.2. from the efficacy of baptism, which signifies
that we are dead and buried with Christ, v. 3.4. and from the end of Christ's
crucifying, v. 6.2. of sanctification, propounded, v. 8. proved, from the
mystery of baptism, v. 4.5. from the virtue of Christ's resurrection, who is
risen, and dies no more, ver. 9.10. and then he concludes, ver. 11.

1. The exhortation follows, which has two parts; 1. one dehorting from
sin, which is propounded and explaned, v. 12.13. then amplified by three
arguments. 1. from their present state and condition being under grace, v. 14.
with the preventing of an objection, v. 15.2. from the inconveniencie of the
service of sin, which is unto death, set forth by the contrary, v. 16.3.
from the efficacy of the doctrine which they obeyed, v. 17.2. the other part
stirs up to newenesse of life, propounded, v. 18. amplified 1. a pari, v.
19.20. as when they served sin, they were free from righteousness: so being
freed from sin, they must be the servants of righteousness: ab effectis,
from the effects of sin, shame, and death, v. 21. which are amplified by the
contrary effects of sanctification, holiness, v. 22. and eternal life, set
forth by the contrary, on the diverse manner: sin deserves death as the
just stipend: but life eternal is not deserved, it is Gods free gift, v. 23.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. Of the meaning of these words, shall we continue in sin? v. 1.
1. The Apostle preuenteth here an objection, which might be occasioned by the
former words in the end of the fifth chapter: where the Apostle said, where
sin abounded, grace abounded much more: by occasion of which words, the
Apostle might fear, least two sorts of men might take advantage: the false
teachers, which did continually pick quarrels with the Apostles doctrine, as
some affirmed, that he said we might do evil, that good might come thereof,
c. 3.8. He might fear also, least the weak might receive encouragement hereby
to nourish the^ infirmities still.

2. But either of these so inferring, did misconster the Apostles words: and in
this kind of reasoning, there are three Paralogismes or fallacies committed. 1.
they take non causam pro causa, that which is not the cause for the cause: for
the abounding of sin, is not the cause of the abounding of grace: Augustine
says, non peccantis merito, sed gratiae supervenient ^^^uxilio, etc. where
sin abounded, grace abounded more, not by the merit of the sin (...) by the
means of help by grace, etc. the Apostles speech is to be understood
occasionaliter, by way of occasion, and they take it causaliter, by way of a
cause, Hugo: sin in it own nature is no more the cause of grace, then the
disease is of medicine, Ma^^ qui laudat beneficium medecinae non prodesse dicit
morbos, etc. he that praises the benefit (...) Physic, does not commend the
disease, Augustine. so then man's unrighteousness does not in it self set forth
the justice of God, but ex accidente, by an accident, Pareus. proveniter
bonitate Dei, qui bona elicit ex malis, it comes of the goodness of God, who
decree^^ good out of evil, Lyran. 2. the second fallacy is, in that they thus
obiecting, make the Apostles words more general, then he meant or intended
them: for the abounding of sin is not the occasion of the abounding of grace
in all, but only in those which acknowledge and confess their sins, Martyr.
as it is evident, in damnatione malorum, in the condemnation of the wicked,
Lyran. there Gods justice rather, then his grace and mercy shows it self.
3. a third fallacy is, they apply that to the time to come, which the Apostle
only uttered of time past: the abounding of sin in men before their
conversion and repentance sets forth the abundance of the grace and mercy
of God, in the forgiveness of their sins past; but not so, if sin abounded
after their conversion and calling, Mart.

3. The Apostle propounds this objection in the person of the adversary by
way of interrogation, thereby expressing both affectum indignantis, the
affection of one angry and displeased, that his doctrine should be thus
perverted: and he shows also securitatem conscientiae, the security of his
conscience, that he was free from any such thought.

4. By sin, neither does the Apostle understand the author of sin, namely,
the devil, as Origin, for then one should be said improperly to remain in
sin, that is, in the devil. 2. Neither yet is it taken, for fomes peccati,
the matter or occasion of sin, as Pererius: which is the appetite or desire,
that stirs up to sin: Tolet misliketh this, because sin must be taken
here in the same sense, as it was used before, in the end of the former
chapter, where it is taken for sin it self: and Pet. Martyr adds this
reason, because insul^^^ peccati, the assaults of sin remain still in the
regenerate. 3. but sin is here taken for the corruption and depravation of
our nature: in the former chapter thereby was specially signified, reatus, the
guilt of original sin derived from Adam, Beza. for there are these two
things in sin, the guilt derived from Adam, and the corruption of our nature
which is the effect thereof, Pareus.

Quest. 2. What it is, to die unto sin, v. 2.
1. The Apostle answeareth the former objection negatiuely, denying the
consequent: that it follows not, that because where sin abounded, grace
abounded more, that therefore we should sin, that grace may more abound: and
of this his answer the Apostle in this chapter gives two reasons, the one
from the contraries, that seeing we are dead unto sin, we cannot still live
unto it: the other from the condition and property of servants, who must be
wholly addicted to their service, whose servants they are: then seeing we are
the servants of Christ, we must no longer serve sin, v. 16. to the end of
the chapters.

2. They are said to be dead unto sin, that obey not the lusts thereof, that
are as dead men, not to be moved unto sin, not to do the works thereof:
but this death of sin is inchoatae, only begun in this life: it shall not
be perfected, till all corruption and mortality be taken away.

3. There is great difference between these two phrases, to die unto sin,
which the Apostle uses here, and to be dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. the first is
taken actiuely, for the mortifying of sin, the other passiuely, to be
mortified in, or by sin: and in this phrase the preposition (...), in, must
be supplied, as Coloss. 2.13. in the Latin tongue, mori peccato, to die to
sin, is put in the dative, but mori peccato, in the ablative, signifies to
die with; or by sin, Tolet: And in this latter sense, they are said to be
dead absolutely without any other addition, as v. 13. of this chapter, and in
other places, Beza.

4. Chrysostom here gives this note, that whereas sometime the Apostle says,
sin is dead, here he says, we are dead to sin, quoniam auditorem excitare
studet, in illum transfert mortem, because he could quicken the desire of the
hearer, he transferreth death to him, that he being dead in sin should
abstain therefrom.

Quest. 3. What it is, to be baptized into Jesus Christ, v. 3.
1. Origin thinks, that this is so said, to make a difference between the
baptism of Christ, wherewith we are baptized, and the baptism of John, which
is not of Christ, but of the law: But seeing John baptized in his name, that
was to come, how was it not of Christ? and if John's baptism were of the law,
then Christ should have been baptized with an other kind of baptism, then his
members, which is not to be admitted.

2. Some think, as Ambrose in this place, that the Apostles altered the form
of baptism, which was at the first prescribed to be done in the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost: But it is not like, that the Apostles would
change that prescript form, which was appointed by Christ himself: the
Apostle makes mention of Christ, (though he intend the whole Trinity) because
as Origin says, whom Haymo follows, it was not convenient that the Apostle
speaking of death, vt nominaret vel patrem vel spiritum, etc. should name
either the Father or the holy Ghost, because the Son of God only died for
us, etc. or rather mention is made only of Christ, because baptism was of his
institution, and the benefits represented in baptism, were procured and
purchased by Christ.

3. Some give this sense, to be baptized into Christ, is to be baptized with
that baptism which has the virtue and efficacy from Christ, ex Tolet.
Chrysostom understands according to the similitude and example of Christ:
for that which the cross and the grave, were to Christ, baptismus est factus
nobis, baptism is become to us.

4. Erasmus, thus we are baptized into Christ, that is, in corpus eius
mysticum, into his mystical body, etc. but the Apostle speaks of Christ
himself: though it be true, that they which are graft into Christ, are also
members of his mystical body.

5. The vulgar Latin reads in Christo, to be baptized in Christ, not into
Christ, that is, in fide Christi, in the faith of Christ, Lyran. or in
institutione eius, by his institution, gloss. interlin. some also which follow
the Greek text, and read, into Christ, do thus interpret, in nomine Christi,
in the name of Christ, Mart. Pareus. Faius. But it is one thing to be baptized
in Christ, an other into Christ.

6. Wherefore by this phrase better is signified, that we are by baptism
incorporated into Christ, in Christo coalescentes, we grow up together with
Christ, Beza. Genevens. in^^^^us Christum, we put on Christ, Calvin. inserimur
Christo, we are graft into Christ, Tolet. vt implantaremur, that by baptism we
should be planted in Christ: Osiander: which phrase the Apostle uses
afterward, v. 5. if we be grafted with him, etc.

Quest. 4. Of the diverse significations of the word baptism, and to be
baptized.
1. Haymo here makes 4. kinds of baptism. 1. one with water only, such was
the baptism of John, that gave not remission of sins. 2. the baptism of the
spirit, such was the baptism of the Apostles in the day of Pentecost. 3. the
baptism both with the spirit and water, such as is now in use in the Church.
4. the baptism of blood, such as Martyrs are baptized with: But 1. it is
untrue that John only baptized with water, not with the spirit: for he
baptized for the remission of sins, and when Christ was baptized, the spirit
descended in the likeness of a dove: 2. the other two baptismes of the spirit,
and the baptism of blood, are not properly baptismes, but only in a
metaphorical speech.

2. This word baptism is taken two ways, either properly for the washing with
water in the sacrament, or figuratively, as either for the receiving of the
gifts of the spirit: as Acts 1.5. our Savior promises, that his Apostles
should be baptized with the holy Ghosts or as for the doctrine, which
accompanied John's Baptism: as Acts. 18.25. Apollos is said to have known
nothing but John's baptism, that is his doctrine: Beza. Acts 19.5.

3. And as baptism is diuersely taken, so there are diverse things in baptism
to be considered: three visible and three invisible, the three visible, the
Minister that baptiseth, the party that is baptized, and the water: the three
invisible are the soul of the party baptized, which is cleansed, and faith in
those that are of years, and the holy Ghost, which works the remission of
sins: Haymo.

Quest. 5. What it is to be baptized into the death of Christ. v. 3.
The Apostle uses to this purpose three phrases: to be baptized into the death
of Christ, to be buried by baptism into his death, v. 4. and to be graft into
the similitude of his death, v. 5. all these shall be handled together.

1. Cyrillus thinks it is said the similitude of his death, because Christ
rose again from death, and so it was rather an image, and shadow of death,
then a death in deed: but thus he should confound these two which the Apostle
joins together, the similitude of his death, and of his resurrection.

2. Origin notes certain heretics, who gathered hereupon, that Christ died
not indeed, but only had a certain similitude of death: visus est magis mori,
quam vere mortu^ est, he seemed rather to die, then indeed died: But if it
were so, then as Origin inferred, nec vera erat resurrectio, neither was
Christ's resurrection in truth: nec vere saluati s^^^^ neither should we be
truly saved.

3. Therefore Origin gives this sense: it is called the similitude of death
because Christ so died unto sin, that yet there was no sin found in him:
which cannot agree unto us, for to be without sin, solius Christi est, it
only belongs to Christ: But this is not the Apostles meaning: for he said
before, we were baptized into the death of Christ, which is the same, as to be
graft into the similitude of his death.

4. Origin also has an other exposition: that Christ is exemplum nobis ad
imitationem propositum, an example set before us to imitate: but this is
dangerous, because of the error of the Pelagians, who think that our
conformity with Christ, arises of our imitation of him: as they held that
original sin is nothing else but a corrupt imitation of Adam: whereas
indeed, on the contrary, our imitating of Christ proceeds of our conformity
with him: and the word is not (...), similitude, or likeness, but (...), which
is more then a bare likeness, it shows a conformity unto Christ, Beza.

5. Basil. lib. de. baptis. understands it of baptism, which he says is a
similitude of the cross and passion of Christ: but the Apostle rather shows
the effects and fruits of baptism: and baptism represents all the parts
of regeneration, both dying, and being buried unto sin, and rising unto
newness of life, it is not a representation of his death only.

6. Chrysostom thus understands the similitude of his death: because Christ's
death was carnis, of his flesh, our death, is peccati, of sin: so also Haymo
following Chrysostom, in hoc est similitudo, quod ille mortuus est corpore,
nos vitijs, herein is the similitude, he died in body, and we to our sin:
But here is more then a similitude only unto the death of Christ: we receive
virtue and efficacy from his death to die unto sin.

7. Some apply it unto the manner of baptism, as Ambrose, cum mergeris, mortis
suscipis and sepulturae similitudinem, when thou art drenched in the water,
then thou have a certain similitude of the death and resurrection of Christ,
lib. 2. de Sacram. c. 7. so Chrysostom, nos quidem aqua, ille tellure, we are
buried in the water, he in the earth, etc. so also Lyranus, baptizatus megitur
in aqua, he that is baptized, is drenched in the water: so also Gorrhan, tertia
immersio repraesentat triduum mortis, the thrice dipping in the water
represents the three days of Christ's death: and the lifting up out of the
water his resurrection: But if this were the meaning: then of necessity this
ceremony should be used in baptism, to go into or to be drenched in the
water.

8. Wherefore to be baptized into Christ's death, and to be buried into his
death, and to be graft into the similitude of his death, are applications in
particular of that, which the Apostle said before in general, that we are
baptized into Christ: for in baptism all the fruits of Christ's death, burial,
and resurrection are sealed unto us: first, on Gods behalf the benefits
procured by Christ's death, sepulture, and resurrection are offered unto us in
baptism, which is the Sacrament of faith, whereby we are graft into Christ,
and we in baptism do for our parts profess to renounce the devil, the
world, and the flesh, Pareus: Our sins then are two ways mortified and
buried, first, by the remission and not imputing of our sins, purchased by
the death of Christ, which is our justification, then by our daily dying and
being buried unto sin, which is our sanctification, Melancthon. and both
these are represented in baptism, and communicated unto us by faith in Christ:
by the virtue of whose death we die unto sin, and by the power of his
resurrection, we rise up to newenesse of life; like as the branches receive
juice and sap from the tree: And though the death of Christ, were in respect
of the nature that died, corporal, yet in respect of the person which died,
being God and man, the effects were spiritual, in causing us to die unto
sin, and to rise up to newenesse of life, Gorrhan.

Quest. 7. Of the meaning of this phrase, to be graft, etc.
1. Chrysostom thus applies this similitude: as the body of Christ being in
the earth, fructum edidit orbis salutem, etc. brought forth fruit the salvation
of the world: so ours being buried in baptism, fructum attulit, iustitiam,
brings forth fruit, namely, righteousness: but in this application, here only
is showed a likeness between Christ and us, the efficacy is not mentioned,
which we receive from Christ.

2. Haymo thus expounds it, Christ as a tree, pascit and vmbram praestat,
both feeds and gives shadow: he feeds the angels contemplatione, by
contemplation of him; homines cognitione, men he feeds by the knowledge of
him: but here no reason is showed, why we are said to be graft into Christ.

3. Origin thus urges the similitude, omnis planta post hyemis mortem,
resurrectionem veris expectat, every plant after the death, as it were, of
winter, expects the resurrection, as it were, of the spring: so Christ's death
was as the winter, and his resurrection as the spring, and this world is unto
us as winter, but the spring shall be in the resurrection.

4. Oecumenius uses this allusion: like as the plant, that which is set into
the ground, quandam mortificationem sustinet, etc. undergoes a kind of
mortifying, and then sprouteth out again: so Christ as a plant was laid in the
earth, but rose again: and we also being as plants buried in water in
baptism, do come forth to bring forth fruit: But in these two explications,
as in the first, the reason is not showed, why we are said to be graft into
Christ; but only the similitude explained, how he is said to be graft, and we
also.

5. Erasmus, because the word is (...), planted together, refers it to the
planting of the Jews and Gentiles together into one body: But Tolet well
observes, annot. 5. that the Apostle speaks of our planting into Christ, not
of one into an other.

6. The meaning then of this phrase is this: that Christ is the vine, and we
the branches, as our Savior shows, Job. 15. and so we are by faith, whereof
baptism is the Sacrament and seal, planted and graft into Christ, and do
receive of his grace and spirit, as the branches receive the juice of the tree:
and as the tree and branches die together and grow together: so Christ's death
causes us to die to sin, and his resurrection makes us to rise unto
newness of life, Pareus: But as similitudes must not be urged in every point,
so must not this: for between the natural grafting of plants, and our
supernatural and spiritual planting into Christ, there is great difference:
for in the one, the stock for the most part is the worst, but the science or
plant is of a better kind, and corrects the euilnes of the stock: but here
it is far otherwise, for we are of our selves wild plants, and the stock
into the which we are planted, is good, and full of sap, Martyr.

Quest. 8. What resurrection the Apostle speaks of, v. 5.
1. There is some difference in the reading of the words: Chrysostom, who
thinks that the Apostle speaks here, de futura resurrectione, of the
resurrection to come, will not have the word (...), similitude, supplied, non
subiunxit, and similitudini resurrectionis, the Apostle added not, and to the
similitude of the resurrection: But then the Greek construction cannot hang
together, if for of the resurrection, being in the genitive case, (...) cannot
agree with (...), graft in, which before is joined with a dative, (...), to the
similitude: Haymo will have it put in the dative, to the resurrection: but in
the original it is in the genetive: Therefore the word similitude, must be
supplied: that as he said before, we are graft into the similitude of his
death: so we shall be to the similitude of his resurrection and so Origin also
reads.

2. Concerning the meaning of these words, Chrysostom, Origin, Tertullian,
Haymo with others, understand them of the second resurrection: and they urge
this reason, because the Apostle puts the word in the future, erimus, we
shall be, Chrysostom: and whereas else where the Apostle speaks in the time
past: has raised us up together, Ephesians. 2.5. but here in the future: Origin
thereupon infers, that there are two resurrections, one of the mind in this
life, the other of the body in the next: But this is no argument, taken from
the time: for the Apostle speaks in the future tense, because our renouation
is not perfect in this life, but we must daily rise from the dead works of
sin to the newnes of life, Beza.

3. The Apostle then here specially intends the first resurrection unto
newenesse of life: as he said before, as Christ was raised up from the dead, by
the glory of the father, (not, to the glory of the father, as Beza, and the
Syrian interpreter, for the praeposition is (...), per, thorough: yet it
signifies that Christ being raised up by the glorious power of the Godhead,
for he has one power with his father, was raised up to live in glory, as the
Apostle faith afterward, v. 10. he lives unto God,) so we should walk in
newenesse of life.

4. Yet from hence also we have an assurance of the resurrection of our bodies,
Calvin, that by Christ's resurrection, we now are raised up to the life of
righteousness, and afterward to the life of glory: as the Apostle joins
them both together, Coloss. 2.3. for ye are dead, and your life is hid with
Christ in God, when Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in glory, Mart.

Quest. 9. What is understood by the old man, v. 6.
1. The old man some take for the body, the new for the soul, as Haymo
alleges out of Augustine: but even the prauitie of the affections and mind,
are part of this old man, and therefore the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.23. be
renewed in the spirit of your mind.

2. Neither is the old man here taken for man's nature, but the corruption
thereof, as Theodoret, veterem hominem non naturam appellat, sed pravam mentem,
the old man he calls not our nature, but the depraved mind: and in that he
says our old man, he distinguishes the old man from our selves: then we our
selves are not this old man, but it is aliq^^d nostrum, something of ours,
Pareus.

3. Now it is called the old man, in two respects, first as Adam the old man,
is compared with the latter Adam, and from Adam is derived original sin,
which brings forth such evil fruits in us, before we are regenerate:
secondly, in respect of our selves, because our former conversation is old,
being compared with our renovation and regeneration, Beza, the first both is
according to the first Adam in sin, our second and new birth is according to
the latter Adam in holiness and righteousness.

4. To this our state in the old man, belong these three things. 1. the
guiltines of sin. 2. the custom and continuance in sin. 3. fomes peccati,
the occasion, procurement, enrising unto sin, which proceeds from the sin
of our parents, ex Thom.

5. But whereas the ordinar. gloss. gives this note: that whereas the oldnes
of our nature consists in two things, in culpa and poena, in the fault and
punishment: Christus sus simpla vetustaie duplicem nostram consumpsit, Christ
by his single oldnes, that is, his death, has taken away both ours, etc. this
can no way agree with the scope of the Apostle: for if the old man be of Adam,
and we are made new in Christ, then cannot the old man be said to be in Christ.

Quest. 10. What is meant by the body of sin, v. 6. that the body of sin
might be destroyed.
1. Haymo propounds this interpretation among others: that as Christ is the
head of the elect, and they with all their virtuous actions are his body; so
the devil is as the head of sin, and the ungodly with all their sins are
his body: so that this body of sin should have relation unto the devil as
the head: but this body of sin the Apostle called before our old man, it
has relation to our selves, not unto the devil.

2. Some do take this body for our flesh, in qua peccatum haeret, whereto
sin cleaves, Beza, Genevens. and before them Theodoret: but this cannot
agree with the phrase which the Apostle here uses, that the body of sin may
be destroyed: for the body is not crucified or destroyed, but sin, which
dwells in the body.

3. Origin has an other exposition: by the body of sin we may understand
proprium aliquod corpus, the proper body of sin: whereof these are the
members, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, with other particular
sins, as S. Paul calls them, Coloss. 3.4. and this sense follows
Chrysostom, this body of sin he understands to be vniuersam malitia^
nostram, the whole malice of our nature: so Lyran. congeries peccatorum, the
company of sins is called the body of sin: as there is a body also of
virtues and good works, Gorrhan. as Matthew. 6.22. If thine eye be single, the
whole body shall be light, if it be wicked, the whole body shall be dark

4. And this multitude and company of sins is so called for diverse reasons:
1. because as the body has diverse members, so our inborne concupiscence
brancheth forth into diverse sins, Mart. 2. propter robur and tyrannidem,
because of the strength and tyranny which it exercises in the children of
disobedience, Faius. 3. quod ab eo facile homines divelli non possunt, because
men cannot easily be plucked from their sins, no more then from their body,
Phocius. 4. because men are addicted to their sins, and love it as
themselves, Photius, ibid. 5. But in this place, the Apostle uses this phrase,
the body of sin, because he had spoken of crucifying before: bodies use to
be crucified, Pareus. and we are as (...), as it were concorporated with
Christ, which word the Apostle uses, Ephesians. 3.6. and we were crucified in his
body upon the cross together with him.

5. But here we must take heed of the error of Florius Illyricus, who did hold
that original sin was a substance, and not an accident only, because it is
called here a body, and the old man: But this is a metaphorical speech, it is
called a body by a certain similitude, as it is showed before: and the
Apostle calls it afterward, verse 12. sin in the mortal body, it is
therefore a kind of spiritual body in these our mortal bodies.

6. But in that the Apostle adds, that we should not serve sin, he shows
that the regenerate, are not quite freed from sin, but sin does not reign
in them, neither are they servants any longer unto it: so we must make a
difference between these two, peccare, and peccato servire, to sin, and to
serve sin: the regenerate do sin, while they are in the flesh, but they
do no longer serve sin, Bucor.

Quest. 11. How the dead are said to be freed from sin. v, 7.
1. Some do understand this of the spiritual death in baptism before spoken
of, Lyran. Ofiand. P. Martyr thinks that the Apostle speaks of
mortification, which is the effect of justification, not de morte naturae, of
the death of nature: But then this had been a repetition of that, which he
said before, verse. 6. whereas it contains rather a reason thereof.

2. Some understanding this to be spoken of the natural death of the body,
from whence the Apostle takes his similitude, by being freed or justified
from sin, do mean, purgatum esse a peccatis, to be purged from sin,
Basil. lib. de baptis. But this cannot be, that all the dead should be purged
from their sin, though they cease from the actions thereof.

3. This better is interpreted of the natural death, that they which are dead
do thenceforth cease from the actions of sin: and so Chrysostom
understands here the word, justified, liber est a peccatis, is free from
sin; that is, the actions of sin cease, Calvin. like as a servant, when he
dies is free from the service of his master, as Job. 3.19. so he which is dead
is free from the dominion of sins past: then the thief cease to steal,
the adulterer to commit adultery: the word then, (...), is justified, is the
same with (...), is freed, which word the Apostle uses, v. 18. and it is a
synecdoche, when one kind is taken for the whole: to be justified and absolved
in judgment, is one kind of freedom, and it is taken here for the general to
be set free; as a thief dying is set free by death, as if he had been
justified and absolved in judgment, Piscator.

4. But hence it follows not, that the dead do not sin afterward: they are
free from the sins committed in the body, yet the wicked even after death
being tormented in hell do not cease to sin, being full of despair,
blasphemy, impenitencie: and therefore their sins not ceasing, their
punishments cannot determine: Let this be observed against the opinion of the
Origenists, who infer that because when men are dead there is an end of
their sin, that at the length there shall be an end of their punishment, and
God shall have mercy upon them.

Quest. 12. What life the Apostle speaks of, v. 8. We believe that we shall
also live with him.
1. Some understand it of life everlasting, in coelo post generalem
resurrectionem, in heaven after the general resurrection, Haymo: so also
Origin, Chrysostom, Theodoret: but it is evident, that the Apostle speaks of
the life of grace, v. 11. ye are dead to find, but are alive to God, etc.

2. Neither is it to be understood only de vita gratiae, of the life of grace,
as Lyran, Tolet. annot. 8. and Basil understands it of the newenesse of life:
lib. de baptism. for the AApostle thus expounds himself, 2. Tim. 2.11.12. if
we be dead with him, we shall also live with him, that is, shall reign with
him, as the Apostle says in the next verse following, if we suffer, we shall
also reign with him.

3. Wherefore the Apostle by living with Christ understands generally both
the life of grace present, and of glory afterward, Mart. and this life is
distinguished into three degrees: 1. our regeneration in rising unto newenes of
life. 2. our perseverance in continuing unto the end. 3. the third degree is in
everlasting life after the resurrection, Pareus.

Quest. 13. How death is said to have had dominion over Christ, v. 9.
In that the Apostle says v. 9. Death has no more dominion over him, it is
inferred that death had sometime dominion over him: 1. Origin to remove this
doubt, how death may be said to have had dominion of Christ, understands it
of his going down to hell, ad locum vbi mors regnavit, unto the place where
death reigned: but thus the doubt remains still, for Christ (whom he would
have descend to hell) went thither as a conqueror, hell had no dominion over
him: therefore that cannot be the meaning. 2. and Haymo his interpretation is
as harsh, who by death understands the devil, which had dominion by his
ministers, as he entered into the heart of Judas, Christo permittente, by the
permission of Christ: it is harder to say that the devil had dominion, then
death over Christ. 3. Origin has an other exposition, that Christ dominatum
pertulerit mortis, quia formam servi susceperat, did bear the dominion of
death, because he took upon him the form of a servant; and upon all such
death has dominion: but it was not necessary that Christ should have died
though he had taken upon him our nature, seeing he was without sin, which
causes death.

4. Wherefore death is said to have had dominion, quia sponte, and volens se
subiecit m^rti, because he willingly submitted himself to death for our sin,
Mart. Calvin.

Quest. 14. How Christ is said to have died to sin, v. 10.
1. Hilarie lib. 9. de Trinitat. thus reads, that which died, died once to
sin, and understands it of Christ's body, making the article (...), a
relative of the neuter gender: so also Laurentius Valla, and Iacobus Stapulens.
but this would seem to favor the Nestorian heresy, that divides Christ's
person, to say that Christ died not, but his body died: and (...), may be
taken for the conjunction (...), in that he died, as Galath. 2.20. in that now
I live: to this purpose Erasmus, Beza.

2. For the meaning Hilarie thus expounds, Christ died to sin, quia mortuus
corpore, because he died in the body, wherein was the similitude of sin,
lib. 9. de Trinit. so also Augustine in Enchirid.

3. Haymo thus: mortuus est semel peccato, id est, semper, he died once to
sin, that is, always, because he never had sin at all.

4. Some understand sin, as the cause, wherefore Christ died: that the sins
of the world were the cause why Christ died: so Ambrose, he died for sin,
that is, for, or because of sinners, sermon. 18. in Psalm. 18.

5. But the better sense is, that Christ died to sin, that is, tollendo, to
take away sin, so Chrysostom, mortuus est vt illud tollerat, he died for
sin to take it away: Christ died otherwise to sin, then we do, ille
expiando, nos amitiendo, he to expiate and purge our sins, we to leave it,
Pareus.

Quest. 15. How Christ is said now to live unto God, ver. 10.
1. Oecumenius thus understands: he lives to God, eo quod sit Deus, because
he is God, that is, by his divine virtue. 2. Pareus thus, ad gloriam Dei
patris, he lives to the glory of God his father, that by his life the Church
should be glorified: but thus Christ lived in the days of his flesh, both by
the power of God, and to the glory of his father: as our Blessed Savior
himself says, Ioh. 6.57. As the living father has sent me, so live I by the
father. 3. Neither is Christ said so to live unto God, as we are said in the
next verse, to be alive unto God, that is, by the spirit of grace: for so
Christ lived unto God all the days of his flesh. 4. Chrysostom thus
expounds it, to live to God, sine fine vinere, is to live without end, that
is, eternally, never any more to die. 5. But not only the eternity of Christ's
life is hereby expressed, but the glory and majesty also: as Haymo
interprets: he lives in gloriam paternae maiestatis, in the glory of the
majesty of his father, as Revel. 18. And am alive, but was dead, and behold I
am alive for evermore, etc. 6. And by this phrase is expressed the indissoluble
union, which Christ has with God the father: the Apostle hereby does not only
signify that he now lives in eternal happiness, sed indivulse Deo haerere,
but is inseparably joined unto God, Martyr.

Quest. 16. Of these words, v. 11. likewise think ye, etc.
1. Likewise think ye: 1. Origin says the Apostle uses this word, because
this death, which he speaks of, namely, dying to sin, in cogitatione
consistit non in effectu, consists in the cogitation, not in any external
effect. 2. Chrysostom because that which he speaks of non potest ad oculum
repraesentari, cannot be represented to the eye, but is apprehended by faith.
3. Haymo gives this sense, they must in memoriam reducere, often bring to
remembrance, and bethink themselves that they are dead to sin: so also
Tolet, annot. 15. and Faius. 4. but the word (...), signifies rather, collect
ye, gather ye; it is the inference of the conclusion from the head to the
members: that we are certainly dead by the commemoration of his death, so is
the word used, c. 3.28. (...) we conclude, Beza, Pareus.

2. Dead to sin, but alive to God: Some do interpret this of the life of the
Saints in the resurrection, when they shall live to God for ever, never to die
any more: but the Apostle speaks of the life of grace, as the next verse
shows.

3. In Jesus Christ, etc. 1. Origin makes this the sense, to live in
righteousness, holiness, peace, is to live in Christ, because Christ is all
these: and to the same purpose Chrysostom: he that has obtained Christ, has
received every virtue, and grace with him. 2. Gorrhan refers it to the
imitation of Christ: making the severe parts of Christ's life an example of so
many degrees of our spiritual life: to his conception answeareth, propositum,
the purpose of new life: to his nativity our regeneration, to his death our
labor in dying to sin, to his sepulture, cessatio vitiorum, the ceas^ing of
sin,; to his resurrection answeareth nova vita iustorum, the new life of the
righteous: to his asscention, processus virt^tum, our proceeding in virtue, to
his sitting at the right hand of God, gloria beatorum, the glory of the
Blessed Saints. 3. But here is more signified, then a similitude or conformity
to, and an imitation of Christ: the Apostle expresses the author and efficient
cause of our dying unto sin and living unto God, namely, Christ Jesus,
Christo auxiliante, Christ helping us, Oecumen. Christi opere, by the work of
Christ, gloss. interlin. per Christum mediatorem, by Christ our Mediator,
Lyran. as the Apostle says, Galath. 2.20. I live by faith in the Son of God,
Bucer, Pareus, with others.

Quest. 17. How sin is said not to reign, etc. ver. 12.
1. Chrysostom and Theodorets observation seems here to be somewhat curious,
that the Apostle speaks of the reigning, not of the tyrannizing of sin: the
difference between which two is this: the one is of necessity, the other is
voluntary: he would not have them willingly to submit themselves in obedience
unto sin, although it do play the tyrant in suggesting evil thoughts and
desires; yet they should resist them, and not suffer sin to have a peaceable
kingdom: to this purpose Theodoret: But this distinction is not necessary:
for the kingdom of sin in man is a mere tyranny: the kingdom properly in
man is peculiar to the spirit: because sin usurps upon them, that by right
are an others subjects, even Gods: and though the wicked do obey sin
willingly, yet it is of necessity also, because it is not in their power to
resist sin.

2. Gregory better observes upon this place: that the Apostle says not, let
not sin be, but let it not reign, quia non esse non potest, it cannot but be
in our members: but it may not reign.

3. Pererius here confuteth Beza, for giving this note upon this place: the
Apostle shows how far we are dead to sin, while we are in this life, vt
reluctetur spiritus, non tamen vincat, that the spirit always resists, but
overcomes not, etc. whereupon he thus cauilleth, that if the spirit overcome
not the flesh, then is it overcome of the flesh: But Beza his meaning only is,
that our sanctification is not perfect in this life, but that there remains
some relic of sin, which always resists the spirit, as the Apostle
shows in his own example, c. 7. so the spirit overcomes in part, because
sin reigns not in the regenerate, but there is not a perfect victory in
this life, because sin has a dwelling still and being in us, in this
mortal flesh, though the kingdom thereof be subdued.

Quest. 18. What the Apostle means by mortal body, ver. 12.
Let not sin reign in your mortal body, etc. 1. Chrysostom thinks this
is added by way of encouragement to signify, certamina in hac re temporaria
esse, that the strife and combat herein is but temporary: so also Photius, he
shows, quod temporaria sit contra peccatum lucta, that the fight against
sin is but temporal, because the body is mortal, and for a time.

2. Origin has two interpretations, first, the Apostle speaks of the dead
body, to show, that sin need not reign in us: for he that is dead is free
from sin: but the Apostle says not, in mortuo, sed mortali corpore, in the
dead, but in the mortal body: there is great difference between (...), dead,
v. 7. and (...), mortal, which is the word used here.

3. Further he says, that the Apostle calls this body mortal, ad
distinctionem alterius corporis, quod immortale est, to distinguish it from
that other body, which is immortal, when sin shall have no dominion or
command at all over us: this sense Tolet also follows.

4. The ordinary gloss further adds: that here is a secret promise of
immortality, si non regnet peccatum, if sin reign not, the body now
mortal, shall be afterward immortal.

5. Theophylact thinks that mention is made of the mortal body, to signify
that all the pleasures of the body are but momentanie, minus sunt stabiles
corporis voluptates, and therefore they are not much to be desired: to the same
purpose Bucer, ne innitamur rei fallacissima, that being admonished by our
own frailty, we should not trust to so uncertain and deceitful a thing.

6. Theophylact notes beside, that hereby the Apostle insinuates,
mortalitatem hanc fuisse corpori a delicto inditam, that this mortality was
inflicted upon the body by reason of sin, and so we should by the meditation
of death and mortality be terrified from sin.

7. But as these notes and collections may safely be received, so this further
may be added, that the Apostle makes mention specially of the mortal body,
because the parts and members thereof are the instruments of sin: that
although the mind are inward faculties be tempted, yet that we should resist,
and not bring the evil motions and suggestions into execution: and this may
appear to be the Apostles meaning, by the next words v. 13. neither give your
members as weapons of unrighteousness, etc. Beza.

8. Some think that the Apostle insinuates the danger of eternal death,
that if sin do reign, corpus moriturum est in aeternum, the body shall die
eternally, gloss. interlin. but the body is said to be mortal in respect of
the present mortal state, because it is subject to death.

9. P. Martyr thinks the meaning to be this, because the concupiscence which
the Apostle would not have here to reign in us, is per corpus derivatum,
derived from Adam to us by the body: But I prefer the former
interpretations, but especially the 7. yet so, as that with Ambrose, by mortal
body we understand the whole state of man, both the powers of soul and body,
by the figure synecdoche, when one part is taken for the whole: So also Pareus,
Faius.

Quest. 19. Of those words, that ye should obey it in the lusts, etc. v. 12.
1. The Syrian interpreter reads, that ye should obey the lusts thereof:
but, here the Greek word ((...), it) is omitted: which is referred to the
first antecedent sin: that ye should not obey it, that is, sin, which is
put in the feminine gender: in the lusts thereof, that is, of the body: and
therefore Beza to take away the anbiguitie, explaineth it thus: that ye should
obey (sin) in the lusts thereof.

2. The Apostle puts it in the plural, lusts, because from the prauitie and
corruption of our nature do arise many and diverse lusts and concupiscences,
Martyr.

3. Thus sin is compared to a tyrant reigning and raging, the lusts are as
the edicts and precepts of sin, whereby it reigns and rules: men yielding
to their corrupt concupiscence as are the vassals and slaves of sin, Calvin.

4. The Apostle expounds himself, what he meant before by the reigning of
sin, that is, to obey it: no man in this mortal body can be void of
concupiscence, and unlawful desires, but the faithful must strive against
them, and not become subject unto them: Pelican.

5. This obedience consists in two things, the one, to be at command to obey
and yield subjection unto sin, the other to take up arms in the defense of
sin, which is touched in the verse following: Pareus.

6. Concupiscence is taken two ways, sometime it is the name fomitis innati,
of that inborne occasion and original of sin, sometime actus interioris, of
the inward act of the mind, whereof there are three degrees: there is
propassio, the propassion, or first motion, then delectatio, the delight,
thirdly consensus, the consent, the Apostle here speaks not of the first
motion, which no man can help, but of the second and third, which by Gods
grace may be stayed, that a man neither delight in, or consent unto those evil
motions, which arise in his mind: gloss. ordinar.

7. Neither is this a superfluous exhortation unto them, whom he said before v.
11. to be dead to sin, that sin should not reign in them; because our
mortification is not here perfect, but every day more and more we must proceed
therein: and by such exhortations is our mortification still perfited: Pareus.

8. And here by lusts we must understand, not the natural desire and lust of
the body, as after meat, drink, sleep, and such like, but the unnatural,
unnecessary, and inordinate lasts, as specially after these things, which
concern the taste, feeling, and such like: Faius.

Quest. 20. How we are not to give our members as weapons unto sin. v. 13.
1. Chrysostom here notes that the body as a middle and indifferent thing
between sin and righteousness, it may be both used as weapons for sin,
and as an instrument of righteousness, as both the soldier uses armor of
defense for his country, and the thief against it; and he makes mention here
of two Kings, God, and sin, showing what great difference and odds there is
between them: that it should be a shame for us to leave the service of God,
and to betake us to the vile servitude of sin.

2. Origin here also ascribes a difference in the Apostles phraise: he
speaking of iniquity, makes mention only of our members, which must not be
given as weapons unto it, but he wills us to give our selves unto God:
because when first we have devoted our selves our inward mind, and desire to
Gods service, so we shall make also our members instruments of holiness.

3. Theophylact notes, that sin is called by the name of iniquity, because
he that sins, in scipsum, vel in proximum iniurius est, is injurious and
unjust against himself, or his neighbor.

4. By members we must not understand only the external parts of the body,
as the eyes, ears, hands, but the inward also, as will, affection, heart: that
none of these must become the instruments of unrighteousness: Pareus.

5. The Apostle sets down two parts of our service unto God, as he did
before of service to sin: the first is obedience and subjection, give your
selves unto God, the other is, to strive and fight for the kingdom of
righteousness, as before he forbad them to use their members as weapons for
sin; Pareus.

6. The Apostle inserting these words, as alive from the dead, gives a reason,
why we should not serve sin, but bequeath our selves to the service of God;
because we having received so great a benefit, as to be raised in Christ from
the death of sin, should now as no more dead, but as living, serve God: and
therefore in this regard, iustum est, it is just, as Chrysostom infers: so
the Apostle says, are alive, and therefore potestis, yea may, and ye were
dead, and therefore debetis, ye ought to give your selves unto God: gloss.
interline. Origin makes it as an effect and consequent of the former, that in
giving your selves to God, yea by this means shall die unto sin, and live
unto righteousness: but it is rather a reason taken from the end of our
spiritual mortification, as is observed before out of Chrysostom.

Quest. 21. What it is not to be under the law but under grace. v. 14.
There are two things, which do encourage men to fight, bonitas causa and
facilitas victoriae, the goodness of the cause, and the facility of the
victory: both these arguments the Apostle uses here: the goodness of the
cause he showed before, which was to take part with God, and to fight his
battles against sin: the easines of the victory he now sets forth,
because we are not under the law but under grace, which does help us and give
us strength to resist sin: But these words are diuersely expounded.

1. Origin understands here the law of the members, which continually
resists against the law of the mind: But as Beza well notes, the law of the
members is not put absolutely without any other addition, as it is here, but
always something is added by way of explanation.

2. Neither does the Apostle speak here of the ceremonial or judicial law,
from both which we are free, from the first wholly, both from the obligation,
but not from the substance, in observing the equity of these laws: the
Apostle speaks of neither of these, but of the moral law, against the which
the concupiscence of the flesh continually inciteth and stirs men up.

3. The Apostle then speaks here of the moral law: in the which three things
are to be considered, the substance in the observation thereof, and the
consequents, either justification in observing it, or malediction if it be not
observed: the question is in which of these respects, we are said to be free
from the law, and not under it in this place: it is confessed of of all, that
we are free from the justification by the works of the law: the question is
here of the other two the malediction of the law, and the observation or
obedience of it: some take the first to be here meant: that not to be under the
law, but under grace is not to be under the curse of the law but to have
remission of sins in Christ: so Haymo, ye are not under the law, quae punit
and damnat peccatores, which punishes and condemns sinners, but under the
grace of Christ, that is, the remission of sins: to the same purpose
Vatablus, to be under grace, is to have the conscience assured, omne peccatum
nobis remissum esse, etc. that all sin is remitted us by the mercy of God:
so also Calvin, they are not under the law, that is, opera eorum non exiguntur
ad severum legis examen, their works are not now exacted according to the
severe censure and examination of the law; thus also Melancthor. Piscator
likewise, legi satisfecistis in Christo, yea have satisfied the law in Christ:
But Beza refuteth this interpretation upon this reason, because the Apostle
speaks not here of the remission of sins, but of mortification, and of the
fruits of righteousness begun in us by the spirit.

4. Some do understand it of the observation of the law, in respect of the
manner, not of the substance; for we are still under the obedience of the law,
to perform the holy works and duties, which are therein prescribed: but we
are not now under the law, for the manner of our obedience, to be forced
thereunto by fear, and terror, but the grace of God makes us willing and
able in some measure to keep the law, which prescribed what was to be done,
but helped not toward the doing thereof: thus Augustine: Lex reos faciebat
iubendo, and non adiuvando, gratia adiuvat vt quisqne sit legis factor, the law
made men guilty, in commanding, not in helping, but grace helps every one to
be a doer of the law: And to this purpose he makes sour degrees of men, ante
legem, sub lege, sub gratia, in pace, before the law, under the law, under
grace, in peace: ante legem non pugnamus: before the law we do not so much as
fight or strive against sin at all: under the law, pugnamus, sed vincimur, we
fight, but are overcome: under grace pugnamus and vincimus, we fight, and by
grace overcome sin: in pace ne pugnamus quidem: but in the state of peace,
which is in the kingdom of heaven, we shall not so much as fight, because then
all our spiritual enemies shall be subdued, we shall have none to resist us,
as to this purpose Augustine upon this epistle. To this sense of Augustines
subscribeth reverend Baza in his annotations upon this place, Osiand. and
Faius: Theophylact concurreth with Augustine, Lex iubet tantu, nihil opis
afferi: the law bids only, it affords no help: to the same purpose before
him Chrysostom. and Ambrose in their Commentaries: Thomas Aquine here shows,
how two ways one may be said to be under the law: one may be said to be sponte
and voluntary subiectus, subject to the law willingly, as our blessed Savior
is said to be made under the law, Galath. 4. likewise one may be subject,
inuitus, and alege coactus, against his will, and as urged by the law, through
fear and terror: but he which has received grace, and does willingly that
which the law commands, not for fear, but of love, he is said not to be
under the law, but under grace: All these make this to be the meaning, that
seeing we are not under the law, which gave strength unto sin through our
weakness, but gave no strength to keep it, but have received grace, whereby the
commandments are not grievous unto us, but easy and pleasant to be observed,
that we need not fear, left sin should have the dominion: As the first do
understand the Apostle here to speak of justification, so these apply these
words unto sanctification.

5. But it is better to join them both together: by grace to understand both
justifying grace, whereby we are justified by faith in Christ by the remission
of our sins, and the grace of sanctification, whereby we do mortify our
carnal lusts, and rise up daily unto newness of life: and so they are said to
be under the law, that are under their sins, neither having remission of
their sins past, nor yet grace to resist them afterward: to this purpose
Chrysostom, we have not the law, which only commands, sed gratiam, quae
praeterquam priora dimittit, ad futura quoque cauenda animat, but grace, which
beside that it forgiueth that which is past, it does arm us to take heed of
that which is to come: likewise Ambrose upon this place, cui data est remissio
peccati, and in posterum caeuet peccata, etc. he, to whom is given remission
of sins, and takes heed of sin afterward, sin shall not have dominion
over him, neither shall he be under the law, etc. Thus Pet. Martyr
understands the Apostle; that both by grace in Christ our sins are not
imputed, and in him our obedience, though imperfect, is accepted: Pareus also
under grace comprehends both justifying and sanctitying grace: by the one our
sins are pardoned, and forgiven us, by the other we are enabled to run the
ways of Gods commandments, and in some good measure to keep them.

6. But we must here take heed of the leaven of the Popish Pharisees, who thus
interpret to be under grace, esse in statu in quo datur gratia, per quam
impleri possunt praecepta, to be in that state, wherein grace is given, by the
which the commandments may be fulfilled, To^^^ with whom concurreth Pererius
taking upon him to confute Calvin, for affirming it to be impossible for a
righteous man in this life, implere vniversam legem, to fulfill the whole law:
But their assertion is most false: for if it were possible for any man in this
life to keep the law, then might he be without sin, which is contrary to
the Scripture: Iam. 3.2. in many things we sin all: 1. Ioh. 1.8. if we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: See more of
this point, Synops. Centur. 4. er. 6.

Quest. 23. Whether the Fathers also that lived under the law, were not under
grace.
1. The time of the Law and the Gospel, and the state of the Church under both,
must be considered, not as one opposite to the other, but as differing only in
some degree less, or more, the fathers were fully under the law, which was
then urged with fear and terror, but in part under grace, which was not then
fully revealed, but only shadowed forth in types and figures: the faithful
now in the time of the Gospel, are fully under the state of grace, the Messiah
being now exhibited to the world, whom the fathers believed in to come: but
under the law we are in part, in respect of the substance thereof, which now
rather shows us the way wherein we should walk, then urges and enforces
us: we are delivered from the fear and terror of the law: And that both they
then, and we now, are under grace, though not in the same degree, S. Peter
testifies Act. 15.11. We believe through the grace of Jesus Christ to be
saved, (...), even as they.

2. The fathers had even the help and assistance of grace under the law, to
walk in obedience to the law: verum id non habebant ex lege, but they had it
not by the law, Pet. Martyr.

Quest. 24. What the Apostle means by the former doctrine, whereunto they
were delivered.
1. Origin, according to his manner is here somewhat curious; for he
distinguishes between doctrinam and formam doctrinae, doctrine it self and
the form of doctrine: he says that in this world only we have a form or
shadow of doctrine, because here we only know in part, but in the next world
we shall have the doctrine it self: But the Apostle intends not here to show
the difference between knowledge in this life and the next.

2. Chrysostom seems to understand only the rule of good life by the form
of doctrine: quis est typus doctrinae? recte vivere: what is the type or form
of doctrine? to live well: But this form of doctrine is more general, it was
not only touching manners, but concerned also points of faith and belief: as
is evident. 2. Tim. 1.13. Keep the pattern of wholesome words, which thou
have heard of me in faith and love.

3. Neither is this form of Doctrine every rule of faith set down by
teachers, the which people are put upon at their first conversion, as the
Rhemists here insinuate in their annotations: for a form of doctrine may be
set down by heretical and false teachers, as is prescribed by the Romanists
to the Indians, who in their first conversion to Christianity do drink in
their drugges and errors of doctrine: But this form of doctrine, was the rule
of faith, per Apostolos and Christum praedicata, preached by Christ and his
Apostles, as Lyranus well interprets.

4. The doctrine then taught by the Apostles, called here (...), the form of
Doctrine, is compared to the stamp or seal, and we are as the wax (as Basil
uses this resemblance, tractas. de baptism.) which receive the print and work
of this seal, being changed into the same.

5. And we are said to be delivered, which as Chrysostom says, shows
auxilum diuinum, the divine help, whereby we are delivered: for none can come
unto Christ, unless his father draw him: Ioh. 6.44. we cannot come our selves
unto God, or receive the words of wholesome doctrine, but the Lord must open
our hearts, as he did the heart of Lydia: Origin here well notes, that men are
delivered up two ways, one in justice, when they are delivered up to their
own hearts lusts, and to a reprobate sense, which the Apostle spoke of before,
Chap. 1.24. the other when they are delivered up in mercy to be taught and
instructed unto salvation.

6. Lyranus here observes three properties of Christian obedience, it must be
prompte, ready, ye have obeyed, voluntaria, willing, ye have obeyed from the
heart: and discrete discreet, according to the form and pattern of catholic
and found doctrine.

7. Hereunto may be added that annotation of the ordinary gloss, that it is
called the form of doctrine, quia imaginem Dei deformat am restituit, because
it restores the image of God deformed and defaced in us.

8. And whereas they are said to be delivered, it is better understood of the
delivering them to be instructed and taught by God, as Origin well expounds:
Deus tradidit^^ instituantur, God delivered them to be instructed: then of the
Ministry of men, as Vatablus: for in this sense the doctrine is said to be
delivered by the teachers: but to deliver the hearers to be instructed, and to
profit by the form of doctrine, which is taught, is the work of God.

Quest. 25. How we are made servants of righteousness.
1. Origin bath here a curious observation that every one which does
righteousness, is not the servant of righteousness, as every one which
sins, is the servant of sin: for God does righteousness, and yet he is
not said to be servus iustitia the servant of righteousness: as the devil is
the servant of sin being fallen from justice.

2. Though properly we are not said to serve justice, because he is a servant,
which obeys rather an other man's will, then his own, yet the Apostle uses
these words; pressing the same similitude still, for indeed to serve justice,
it is true liberty, nay, as Chrysostom says, it is omni liberate melius:
better then all liberty whatsoever, so afterward v. 2. he speaks of a
freedom from justice, which is indeed a bondage, rather then freedom.

3. The Apostle here sets down both the parts of Christian liberty, which
is freedom from sin, and service unto righteousness: and by joining both
these together, he admonishes us of our miserable state of thraldom under
sin, wherein we sometime were, that we might take heed never to come into the
same again: like as if one were delivered from a tyrant, it should be said
unto him, take heed you fall not into his hands again, Chrysostom: as the
Romans, when they had expelled Tarquinius their King, so hated the very
memory of his name, that they banished also L. Tarquinius Collatinus, a good
man, only because he did bear the same name: such a detestation they had of
Tarquinius, and of his tyrannical government: so we should hate the very
memory and name of the service of sin; Martyr.

Quest. 26. Of the meaning of these words: I speak after the manner of man,
because of the infirmity. v. 19.
1. Some think this to be a qualifying of the former words: either because the
Jews might have been offended by the term of service, who held themselves to
be a free people, Faius: or the Romans, which were then the Lords and
commanders of the world, Bullurger: some think the offense might be taken by
the word freedom, least some carnal man might have taken advantage thereby of
carnal liberty, Osiander: but the continuing of the same terms and phrases
afterward of service, and servants shows that the Apostle uses not any such
mitigation or qualification of his former speech.

2. Some refer it to the matter of the Apostles exhortation, showing the
easines and facility of it: as if he should say, moderatum quod exigo, I
desire but an easy and moderate matter: as in the same phrase the Apostle
says: 1. Cor. 10.13. there has no tentation taken you, but such as
appertains to man, Chrysostom: so also Origin: whereas we ought more
earnestly to serve justice, then we served sin: communiter ago, eadem and
similia requiro, I deal with you after a common and plain manner, I require
but the same and like things; to serve justice but in the same manner, which
you served sin: The same sense follows Augustine: quaem admodum ad
pec^andum nullus vos cogebat ti^or, etc. as unto sin no terror compelled you,
but only the delight and pleasure of sin, so unto righteousness, let not
fear enforce you, but pleasure and delight draw you, epistola. ad Auastas.
likewise Gregory, sinequaquam amplius potestis, saltem tales estote in
fructibus bonorum operum, and^ If ye can do no more, yet at the left be ye in
bringing forth of good fruit, as ye were before in evil: Theophylact to the
same purpose, vel parem Deo praestare seruitutem, etc. be ye ready but to
perform unto God the like service, which ye did unto sin: So also Haymo
says, ^^lte leuius potest quis deseruire virtutibus, quam v^^ijs, one may more
easily serve virtue, then he served vice: as he gives instance in an
adulterer, that always is in fear of the coming of the husband, and of the
shame of the world, whereas the man that lives chastely in matrimony, is
without any such fear: thus expound also Calvin, Martyr, Tolet, Pererius with
other, of the equality of our service unto righteousness and sin, that we
should so much serve the one, as we served the other: the Apostle might have
required more, but he spares them, because of their infirmity: But this may
be objected against this exposition, that this is no such small service, to
serve righteousness, as before we served sin: with constance,
cheerfulness, delight, seeing the most perfect man living cannot perform it:
therefore this is a point of perfection, it is no indulgence and condescending
to their infirmity.

3. But although this phrase (...), I speak an humane thing, or (...),
according to man, which is all one with the Apostle, be otherwhere taken in the
former sense, for some humane and easy thing; yet here with Beza I refer it
rather to the Apostles phrase, who in civil, humane, and usual terms and
similitudes sets forth heavenly things, as Christ says Ioh. 3.12. If when I
tell you of earthly things ye believe not, how should ye believe, when I tell
you of heavenly things.

4. This phrase, according to man, has diverse acceptions: 1. sometime it is
taken in the worse part, for the corrupt use of men, as Galat. 1.11. Paul
preached not his Gospel after man. 2. sometime it signifies that which is
common and ordinary, as. 1. Cor. 10.13. 3. it is taken for an humane custom,
or fashion, as 1. Cor. 15.32. S. Paul had fought with beasts at Ephesus after
the manner of men, as others used to do. 4. sometime it is referred to the
humane and ordinary phrase of speaking, as in this place.

4. Places of Doctrine.
1. Doct. That baptism is not to be iterated.
v. 3. Have been baptized into his death, etc. Hence it is inferred, that
baptism is not to be iterated, or more, then once to be administered, because
as men are but once naturally borne, and are once to die, so because in
baptism our spiritual birth and death are represented, it suffices once to
be baptized: this makes against the Hemerobaptistae, which think it
necessary daily and often to be baptized: but as man has but one natural
birth; so our supernatural birth in baptism is sufficient.

2. Doct. That infants have sin.
In that the Apostle says of all, that they are baptized into the death of
Christ, that is, to die unto sin, that the body of sin might be destroyed,
as he says v. 6. hence Augustine concludes, lib. 6. cont. Julian. c. 1. that
children have sin: for to what end else should they be baptized to die unto
sin?

3. Doct. Of the comparing and conferring of Scriptures together.
v. 3. All we which have been baptized unto Jesus Christ, etc. Hence Origin
notes, because the Apostle adds not, all we that are baptized in the name of
the Father, the Son, and holy Ghost, that it is his manner, when he cites
any Scripture, not to alleadg the whole text, but those things only, quae
praesentis causae requirit assertio, which the state of the present cause
requires: Pareus further adds, that, what is breefely touched in some place
of Scripture, is more at large handled in another, as here the mystery of
baptism is opened, which is but breefely set forth in the first institution of
baptism, where Christ only bids to preach and baptize in the name of the
Trinity:

4. Doct. Of the mysteries set forth in baptism.
v. 3. Here are three mystical points expressed in baptism: 1. in that we are
said to be baptized into Christ: whereby is signified, our implanting and
grafting into Christ, which word the Apostle uses v. 5.2. there is a
communicating of the death and resurrection of Christ: his death with all the
fruits thereof, is applied unto us: 3. our renouation, and newnes of life,
with our spiritual dying unto sin, is also shadowed forth in baptism,
Pareus.

5. Doct. Of the distinction of sin reigning, and not reigning.
v. 12. Let not sin reign, etc. All sin in the wicked and unregenerate is
peccation regnans, reigning sin, whether it be original or actual, because
they give the reine unto sin, and obey the lusts thereof: In the regenerate,
though to speak properly there be no absolute kingdom of sin, because it
cannot possess them totally and finally, but at length they wrestle forth; yet
every sin in the regenerate committed against their conscience, and depriving
them for the time of the hope of remission of sins, is a reigning sin, when
they do not resist it, but obey the lusts thereof, such was David's adultery:
sin not reigning in them is their original concupiscence, their infirmities,
sins of ignorance, omission, and such like, which they do daiely mourn for,
and strive against.

6. Doct. What manner of service must be performed to righteousness.
v. 19. As you have given your members servants to uncleanness, etc. so, etc. We
must serve righteousness, as before we served sin. 1. libenter, willingly
and cheerfully: 2. vigilanter. 3. celeriter, speedely, not putting off our
service. 4. potenter, mightily, with all our strength, and power. 5. ardenter,
earnestly, zealously, not coldly, or slackely. 6. indesinenter, constantly,
without ceasing, intermission, or giving over, Gorrhan.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. Against the administering of the sacraments in an unknown tongue.
v. 3. Know ye not, etc. Hayma takes this to be a reprehension of the Apostle
reproouing them for their ignorance, as if he should have said: certe id puto
ignoratis, I verily think ye are ignorant: and if ye be, I will show it unto
you, etc. But Origin better infers: that the Apostle speaks taquam
scientibus and edoctis, as to men of knowledge, etc well taught: and hereupon he
shows that in the Apostles time, the use was otherwise, then in his days:
non, et numie fieri videmus, typus tantum modo mysteriorum, bis, qui
baptizantur, sed virtus little and ratio tradebatur, then, not only the type it
self, and mystery of the sacrament was delivered to those which were
baptized, as now is used to be done, but the efficacy and reason thereof, etc.
the meaning of the sacrament explaned, so that none were ignorant; what was
signified thereby, as the Apostle speaking here of baptism, and of the
spiritual use and signification thereof, appealeth upon their knowledge: which
shows the superstition of the Romanists, who cause the sacraments to be
administered unto their people in the latin tongue, and so they are kept in
ignorance, not knowing the right use of the sacraments, but resting only in
the outward ceremonies, and superstitious vsages which they have brought in,
and added to the sacraments.

Controv. 2. Concerning inherent justice.
Stapleton, a notable champion for the Romanists, Antidot. p. 312. thus
reasons out of the Apostles words, v. 2. for inherent justice: they which are
dead to sin, are wholly renewed in the inward man, and so by their renouation
are acceptable unto God, and thereby justified: but by the grace of Christ, we
die unto sin, not to live unto the same any more: Ergo thereby we are
accepted of God, and reconciled to him.

Contra. The proposition diuersely fails, 1. this renouation of the inward
man is not total, or perfect, but only in part: though sin do no longer
reign in them, that are justified, yet the relics thereof remain still: the
understanding, will, and affections, are but reformed in part, for the Apostle
faith, we know in part, 1. Cor. 13.9. and as our knowledge is, such is our
chariti^: indeed in the next world, when we are glorified, all imperfection
shall be done away, and we shall be perfect as God is perfect, but while we
dwell in these houses of clay, we are compassed with many imperfections. 2.
This our renovation, though it be not perfect, yet is accepted thorough the
perfect obedience of Christ: but it is not accepted as our justification,
whereby we are reconciled unto God, for that which instifieth us, must be
perfect: which is only the righteousness of Christ, applied unto us by faith:
See further touching inherent justice, Synops. Centur. 4. exr. 56. and Contr.
14. following.

Controv. 3. That the Sacrament of baptism does not confer grace by the
outward work.
v. 3. Know ye not, that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ,
have been baptized into his death, etc. Hence the Romanists would infer that
baptism does work in all, regeneration: for all that are baptized into the
death of Christ are regenerate, but all that are baptized into Christ, are
baptized into his death: therefore all that are baptized are regenerate, and so
the very sacrament does by the external act confer grace: to this purpose
the Romanists.

Contra. 1. The conclusion should be, all that are baptized into Christ are
regenerate, and that we grant: all they which receive baptism aright, that is,
by faith, apprehend the promise of remission of sins, either then, as they
which are of years, or after, as infants when they come to years of
discretion they are regenerate; so the conclusion is true of all the faithful
that are baptized: for the Apostle speaks here only of such, including
himself in the number: so also he says, Galat. 3.27. All ye that are
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: but they only are baptized into him,
that by faith are graft into him, and made lively members of his mystical
body: And thus much Lombard lib. 4. distinct. 4. affirms out of Hierome, in
Ecclesia, qui plena fide non accipiunt baptisma, etc. in the Church, they which
with a full faith do not receive baptism, do take the water, not the spirit,
etc.

2. And these reasons may be alleged hereof: 1. justification does often go
before baptism, as Abraham first believed, and then was circumcised, and
Cornelius after he had showed his faith, was baptized by S. Peter, Act. 10. 2.
Origin does infer as much out of the Apostles words here: because the Apostle
says, we are buried with him by baptism into his death, docens per hoc, quia
si quis prius mortuus est peccato, is necessario in baptism consepultus est
Christo, he teaches hereby, that if one be dead before unto sin, then of
necessity he is buried with Christ in baptism; but if any before do not die
unto sin, he cannot be buried with Christ: nemo enim aliquando vivus
sepelitur, etc. for no man is at any time buried alive, etc. thus Origin, and
before him Tertullian, lib. de poenitent. Dieu baptized non vt delinquere
desinamus, sed qua desivimus, etc. he bid to be baptized, not that we should
leave off to sin, but because we had left already, etc. Tolet here
answeareth, that his meaning is, that they which are to be baptized, must come
with a purpose amplius non pecca^^i, not to sin any more: and further to
Origin, though he name him not, he makes this answer: that we are said to be
buried in baptism, not because we first die unto sin, before we are
baptized, but for that baptism signifies, that we are dead to sin, as the
grave shows that they which are buried are dead, and non solum id significat,
sed efficit, and it does not only signify it, but effects what it
signifies, etc. Tolet. annot. 3.

Contra. 1. Tertullian says more then so, they which come to be baptized,
cord iam lati sunt, etc. are already washed in heart: but their hearts cannot
be washed and cleansed, without remission of their sins.

2. The grave signifies in deed, that they which are buried are dead, but they
were dead before, neither does the grave make them dead, it receives them
first being dead: so then if we be buried in baptism, it shows that a
spiritual death must go before, as the people which came unto John's baptism,
confessed and repented of their sins, Matthew. 3. yet this death to sin, is
increased, ratified, and confirmed in baptism.

3. But if justification and remission of sins go often before baptism it
will be demanded, to what end we are then baptized: We answer 1. because God
has so commanded, and therefore it were great contempt not to obey the Lords
commandment. 2. the benefits received before, by those visible signs are
enlarged and increased. 3. and although they are justified before God, yet it
is not known unto the Church, into the fellowship whereof they are received by
that outward Sacrament. 4. baptism also seals the assurance of the kingdom
of God, which they receive in their justification, but it is sealed, confirmed,
and ratified by the sacrament of baptism: like as Princes gifts, after they
are granted, do pass under the great seal, Martyr. See more of this
controversy, Synops. Centur. 2. err. 96.

Controv. 4. That baptism serves as well for the remission of sins to come,
as of sins past.
v. 3. We have been baptized into Jesus Christ: Baptism then is a seal of
our uniting, graffing, and incorporating into Christ by faith, by whom we have
remission of all our sins past, present, and to come, and therefore the use
of baptism extends it self unto the whole life of man, that by the
effectual and lively remembrance thereof, he is confirmed and strengthened in
the hope of the remission of all his sins in Christ: so Chrysostom well
says, upon the 5. verse, non ad hoc tantum valet baptismus, quod prior a
delicta deles, sed quod and ad futura cauenda monet: baptism only avayleth
not hereto, that it blotteth out our sins past, but armeth us to take heed
of sins to come, etc.

Contrary unto this truth is the Popish doctrine, that baptism is prima
tabula post ^^fragium, etc. the first table, as they call it, after shipwreck,
and penance is the second table: so that they will have baptism serve only
for the remission of sins past: This conceit of baptism began to be taken
up long ago: this made Constantius, defer his baptism til he was old, and
the like is reported of Nazianzen in his life: and hereupon grew that common
error, that before baptism men took unto themselves a greater liberty to
s^^^: as in Augustines time they used to say, sine illum facere, nondum est
baptizatus, let him alone, he is not yet baptized: See also further of this
point, Synops. Centur. 3. error. 11.

Controv. 5. Whether in baptism our sins be clean taken away.
v. 6. Knowing that our old man is crucified with him, etc. Hence Pererius with
other Romanists would infer, in baptismo tolli and deleri penitus peccata,
etc. that in baptism our sins are wholly removed and blotted out, that
those sins, which were before baptism, are after baptism none at all: and
not as the heretics say (so the Romanistes blaspheme the Protestants) that
sins remain after baptism, but they are not imputed: to this purpose Pere.
disput. 2. annot. 9.

Contra. 1. Pererius with the rest of that sect do misreport our opinion: for
we do not say, that in baptism our sins are only hid, and not imputed, and
yet remain still: but we hold, that our sins are blotted out, and removed
for ever, quoad culpam, reatum, and poenam, in respect of the fault, guilt, and
punishment: but there remains macula, a blot still, and stain of sin: the
corruption, and imperfection of our nature, with some relics and remainder of
sin do still remain: and this is evident both in that original sin
remains after baptism, which the Apostle calls, peccatum inhabitans, sin
dwelling in him, Romans 7.10. even after he had been baptized. 2. whereas
Pererius obiecteth that saying of Beza, to confirm his opinion, that in those
which are truly sanctified in Christ, sin once dies, ^^^is, is so weakened,
vt pristinas vires nunquam accipiat, etc. that it shall never receive the
former strength, but daily as the body in the grave rotteth away, donec
penitus intereat, etc. ^^till it altogether perish, etc. In these words Beza
affirms not, that in baptism there is a pursue death of sin: but that
sin beginning to die, is weakened more and more, and never returns to the
former strength: which is most true, that the regenerate do more and more die
unto sin, and every day the power of sin is decayed in them, till at length
together with morralitie, they put of all corruption: See further, Synops.
Centur. 3. er. 10.

Controv. 6. Of the baptism of infants.
1. The Anabaptists do thus infer out of this place of the Apostle, v. 5. we
are buried by baptism into his death, etc. they which are baptized must
profess their mortification and dying unto sin, which infants cannot do,
and therefore they are not to be baptized; And Christ bid his Apostles to go
teach all nations, and baptize them: infants are not capable of doctrine, and
fit to be taught, therefore they are not to be baptized.

Contra. 1. They which neither in baptism nor after make profession of their
mortification, are not to be baptized: they which are of years, must so
profess in their baptism: it is sufficient for infants to do it afterward:
for the use of baptism is not for the time present only, but for afterward,
otherwise we should need often to be baptized. 2. Infants are within the
covenant, for God promised to be the God of the faithful, and of their seed:
and therefore the sign of the covenant, is not to be denied unto them: and
seeing infants were circumcised under the law, in stead whereof baptism is
succeeded, infants by the same warrant are to be baptized, unless we will make
the state of infants under the Gospel, inferior unto the condition of infants
under the law. 3. When the Apostles were bidden to preach and baptize: a
course was prescribed them, and that or those times to begin with preaching,
and then to baptize: for first they which were of years, must believe, which
was wrought in them by preaching the word, for faith comes by hearing, before
they could be admitted to baptism. 4. But it will be objected, that this use
of baptizing infants is not Apostolical, it was brought in by Hyginus Bishop
of Rome, and Tertullian lib. de baptism, misliketh that use.

Contra. 1. Hyginus only made a decree concerning Godfathers, and Godmothers,
as they are called, that undertake for infants in baptism, which shows that
the baptizing of infants was in practice before: 2. Tertullian in his old age
fell into the heresy of Montanus, and therefore much is not to be ascribed to
his judgment concerning this matter, Martyr.

Controv. 7. Of the confidence and assurance of salvation.
v. 8. We believe that we shall also live with him, etc. Hence it is well
inferred, that the faithful are assured by faith, both of their perseverance
in the state of grace in this life, and of everlasting life in the next: for,
we believe, says the Apostle, that we shall live, etc. we nothing doubt of it:
and in the same sense, the Apostle said before, (...), knowing, ver. 6. and
again, (...), knowing, v. 11 (...), gather ye, or conclude ye, as the word is
taken, Romans 3.28. and here (...), we believe, all which words implie, a
certainty without doubting.

Contrary hereunto is the doctrine of the Romanists, which hold it to be a
point of presumption to have assurance of salvation: and whereas we urge S.
Paul's example, that was sure nothing could separate him from the love of God in
Christ, they answer, that S. Paul and other holy men, had it by special
revelation.

Contra. S. Paul makes it not his special case to be assured of salvation:
but here he speaks generally of all the faithful, we know: Tolet also one
of their own writers, thus expounds this place, we believe, credimus
intellectus, etc. we believe in the understanding that spiritual life is given
us with the death of sin, confidimus etiam nos in ea per seueraturos, and we
are confident that we shall persevere therein: See further hereof, Synop.
Centur. 4. err. 25.

Controv. 8. That Christ shall not die in the next world again for those,
which were not healed here.
v. 9. Death has no more dominion over him, etc. Origin by this text confuteth
their error, who hold that Christ should suffer in the next world the like
things, as he did here for them, quos dispensationis eius medicina sanara non
poserat, whom the medicine of his dispensation could not heal in this present
world: and they used this reason, because in the next world they shall either
do well still, or evil, non erunt profundo silentia, there shall not be
silence altogether: then as Lucifer fell in the beginning, so may they be apt
to fall then, having the use of freewill: for virtus est mutabilis, virtue is
changeable.

Origin thus refuteth this error. 1. because it is contrary directly to the
Apostles words here, that Christ died once for all, death shall have no more
dominion over him, such us the force and efficacy of the cross of Christ, vt
sufficiat ad sanitatem and remedium non solum praesentis and futuri seculi, sed
etiam praeteritorum, etc. that it suffices not only for the health and
remedy of the present, and world to come, but of the ages past; and non solum
humano ordini, etc. and not only for the order and condition of men, but even
for the celestial orders also, etc. Christ by his death redeemed the one from
their sins, and settled and established the other. 2. and though the nature of
man be mutable here, yet so shall it not be there, vbi ad culmen virtutis
ascenderit, when it is come to the height and perfection of virtue: for there
shall be charity, which as the Apostle says, nunquam excidit, never falls
away. 3. The Apostle could say, that neither life, nor death, things present,
nor to come, nor any thing else, could separate him from the love of God in
Christ, how much less shall the liberty of freewill be able, then to separate
us. 4. And Lucifer did fall, antequam ad beneficia filij Dei charitatis
vinculis stringeretur, when as yet the bond of charity had not fastened him to
the benefits of the Son of God: But it is now otherwise with those celestial
spirits, whose state is now made firm and sure in Christ.

Controv. 9. Against the sacrifice of the Mass.
v. 10. For in that he died, he died once: This place is very pregnant against
the Popish sacrifice of the Mass, wherein they say they do daily offer up
Christ's body in sacrifice unto God: for there is no oblation of Christ in
sacrifice but by death: he died but once, and therefore one sacrifice of him in
his death suffices for all, and the Apostle says, Heb. 10.14. that he has
with one offering, made perfect for ever, them that are sanctified: This then is
a blasphemous derogation to make iteratiue sacrifices, as though that one
sacrifice had been imperfect: and whereas they allege that their Mass is a
sacrifice applicatorie of Christ's death, such applications are superfluous,
seeing the death of Christ is effectually applied by faith, which is reviued,
strengthened, and increased by the commemoration of Christ's death in the
Sacraments: See more hereof, Synops. Centur. 3. err. 31.

Controv. 10. Concerning freewill.
v. 12. Let not sin reign, etc. This place may be urged by the adversaries
of the grace of God, to prove that man has some power in himself to resist
sin, seeing otherwise the Apostles exhortation should be in vain to exhort
men unto that which is not in their power.

Contra. 1. The Apostle elsewhere evidently teaches, that man has no power or
inclination of himself to any thing that is good, as 2. Corinthians. 3.5. We are
not sufficient to think any thing of our selves, but our sufficiency is of
God, Philip. 2.23. it is God, that works in you both the will and the deed of
his good pleasure: we must not then make the Apostle contrary to himself, as
though in this place he should ascribe any thing to man's freewill. 2. the
Apostle speaks here to men justified and regenerate by the spirit of God, by
the which they are enabled to perform this, whereunto they are exhorted: so
that this ability is not in themselves, but from God. 3. the Apostle shows a
difference by thus exhorting between these actions, which the Lord makes in
other creatures, which either have no sense at all, or sense only, which
creatures God uses without any stirring at all, feeling, and inclination in
them, and those, which he works in man, whose reason, will, and understanding
he uses by incicing and stirring it up. 4. So then these exhortations are not
superfluous, for thereby we are admonished rather what we ought to do, then
what we are able to do, and by these exhortations of Gods word, grace is
wrought in us to enable us to do that, which of our selves we have no power to
do: See further Controv. 15. following.

Controv. 11. That concupiscence remaining in the regenerate, is properly sin.
v. 12. Let not sin reign: The Apostle here speaks of concupiscence, which
is sin, though it reign not in us: the very suggestions and carnal
thoughts, that arise in the regenerate, have the nature of sin, though they
yield not consent unto them.

Bellarmine with other of that side, do expound these and such like places,
lib. de amist. great. c. 10. com. 3.
wherein concupiscence is called sin, de causa vel effectu peccati, of the
cause or effect of sin: so concupiscence is improperly called sin, in their
opinion, either because it is the effect and fruit of Adams sin, as a writing
is called ones hand, because the hand writ it, or because it brings forth
sin, as we say, frigus pigrum, flouthfull cold, because cold makes one full
of flouth.

Contra. 1. Concupiscence is sin properly, because it is contrary to the
law of God, it strives and rebelleth against it, and continually stirs us
up to do that which is contrary to the Law: sin properly is the
transgression of the law, as the Apostle defines it, 1. John 3.4. therefore
concupiscence being contrary to the law of God is properly sin: S. Paul
also calls it sin dwelling in him, Romans 7.17. 2. Whereas it may be objected
that all sin is voluntary, but the motions and suggestions of the flesh are
involuntarie: we answer that all sin is not voluntary, for then original
corruption should not be sin, which is even in children, which can give no
consent: and yet in respect of the beginning and root of this sin, which was
Adams transgression, it was voluntary: See more of this controversy, Synops.
Papism. Centur. 4. err. 16.

Controv. 12. Whether a righteous man may fall into any mortal or deadly sin.
v. 12. Let not sin reign: there is then peccatum regnans, sin reigning,
as when one sins against his conscience, and sets his delight upon it,
and follows it with greediness, and so for the time, loses the hope of
forgiveness of sin, and makes him subject to everlasting death without the
mercy of God: peccatum non regnans, sin not reigning, is original
concupiscence, suggestions, motions of the flesh, infirmities, and such like:
Now the Romanists simply deny, that a righteous man can commit any mortal
sin, neither can any continuing the Son of God fall into it: Rhemist. 1.
Ioh. 3. sect. 3. Among the Protestant writers some think, that the righteous
may have sin for the time reigning in them, as Aarons idolatry, and David's
adultery shows: so Vrsinus vol. 1. page 107. but Zanchius denies it,
miscellan. p. 139.

Contra. 1. Touching the assertion of the Romanists, it is manifestly convinced
of error by the example of David: for it is absurd to think that in his fall
he ceased to be the child of God: for he that is once the son of God, shall
so continue to the end: David was a righteous and faithful man, and yet fell
into great and dangerous offenses, which they call deadly and mortal sins.

2. The other may be reconciled by the diverse taking and understanding of
reigning sin: for if that be understood to be a reigning sin, which is
committed of an obstinate mind, with contempt of God, without any feeling or
remorse of conscience, so we deny, that any of the elect can fall into any
such sin: but if that be taken for a reigning sin, when for a time the
conscience is blinded, and a man is overcome and falls, yet rather of
infirmity, then obstinacy, yet afterward such upon their repentance are
restored: in this sense, sin may reign in the righteous, as in Aaron, David:
but it is said improperly to reign: because this kingdom of sin continues
not, it is but for a time.

Controv. 13. Against the Manichees.
v. 22. In your mortal body: Theophylact hence reprooueth the error of the
Manichees, who affirmed, that the body of man is wicked and evil: but seeing
the Apostle compares it to armor or weapons, which the soldier uses for his
country, the theife and rebel against it: so the body is an indifferent
thing: it may either be abused as an instrument of sin, or by the grace of
God it may be applied to the service of the spirit, as the Apostle shows, v.
19. Give your members as servants unto righteousness.

Controv. 14. Concerning inherent justice.
v. 13. Neither give your members as weapons of unrighteousness, etc.
Bellarmine infers out of this place, that as sin was a thing inherent and
dwelling in us before our conversion, so instead thereof must succeed
righteousness, per iustitiam intelligit aliquid inherens, by righteousness he
understands a thing inherent in us, from whence proceed good works.

Contra. 1. We do not deny but that there is in the regenerate, a
righteousness inherent and dwelling in them, which is their state of
sactification or regeneration: but by this inherent justice, are we not
justified before God, but by the righteousness of Christ imputed only: for
here the Apostle treats not of justification, but of our sanctification, and
mortification, which are necessary fruits of justification, and do follow
it; but they are not causes of our justification. 2. Wherefore this is no good
consequent; There is in the righteous an inherent justice, Erg. by this justice
they are justified before God: See further hereof, Synops. Centur. 4. err. 56.

Controv. 15. Against the power of freewill in the fruits of righteousness.
v, 20. When ye were the servants of sin, ye were freed from righteousness:
Beza does urge this place strongly against the popish freewill: for in that
they are said to be free from justice, (that is, as Anselme interprets,
alieni a iustitia, estranged from justice, it shows that they have no
inclination at all unto justice: it bears no sway at all: nullum erat eius
imperium, it had no command at all over you.

Pererius disput. 5. numer. 33. makes an offer to confute this assertion of
Beza, but with bad success: for those very authors, whom he produces, make
against him: first he alleges Anselme following Augustine, liberum arbitrium
(says Augustine) vsque adeo i^ peccatoribus non perijt, vt per ipsum maxim
peccent, etc. freewill is so far from being lost in the wicked, that thereby
they do sin most of all, etc. But who denies this, the wicked have freewill
indeed, free from compulsion, it is voluntary, but inclined only unto evil:
which Anselme calls libertatem culpabilem, a culpable freedom: and he
therefore fitly distinguishes between these two phrases of the Apostle, he
says they are (...) free, not freed, from justice, least that sin might be
imputed unto any other, then to themselves: but afterward, v. 22. he says
(...), liberati, freed from sin: to show that this freedom is not of our
selves, but only from God: and so he concludes, haec voluntas quae libera est
in malis, etc. ideo in bonis libera non est, quia non liberatur ab eo, qui eam
solus, etc. this will, which is free in evil, because they delight in evil,
is not therefore free in good things, because it is not freed by him, who only
can make it free from sin, etc.

With like success he cites Thomas in his Commentary here, who thus writes:
semper itaque homo, sive in peccato fuerit, sive in gratia, liber est a
coactione, non tamen semper liber est ab omni inclinatione, man therefore
always, whether he be in sin, or in grace, is free from coaction and
compulsion, but he is not always free from an inclination, etc. where he
affirms the same thing which we do, that the will of men is free always
from compulsion, for it always wills freely, without constraint that which
it wills: but it is not free at any time from an evil inclination: it is not
free a necessitate, from a necessity of inclining unto that which is evil, of
it own natural disposition.

Controv. 16. Whether all death be the wages or stipend of sin.
v. 13. The stipend of sin is death: Socinus part. 3. c. 8. page 294.
grants that eternal death is the reward of sin, and the necessity of
mortality, and dying, but not ^^^ corporal death it self: for Adam before
sin entered, was created in a mortal state and condition: and Christ has
redeemed us from all sin, and the punishment thereof, therefore corporal
death is no punishment of sin, because it remains still, neither has
Christ redeemed us from it.

Contra. 1. It is evident, in that the Apostle speaks of death, here
absolutely without any restraint, or limitation, that he means death in
general, of what kind soever: and of the corporal death he speaks directly
c. 5.12. by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, which is
specially understood of the bondage of mortality, which Adam by his
transgression brought upon his posterity.

2. It is frivolous distinction to make a difference between death and the
necessity of dying: for what else is mortality, then a necessity of dying,
which if it be brought in by sin, then death also it self.

3. Adam, though he were created with a possibility of dying if he sinned, yet
this possibility, should never have come into act, if he had not actually
sinned.

4. Christ has indeed delivered us from all punishment of sin both
temporal, and eternal, as he has delivered us from sin: for as our sins
are remitted, never to be laid unto our judgment, and yet the relics and
remainder of sin are not utterly extinguished; so the Lord has effectually
and actually delivered us from eternal death, that it shall never come near
us; but from temporal death, as it is a punishment only: for he has made it
an entrance to a better life, and he has taken away the power thereof, that it
shall not seize upon us for ever; because he shall raise us up at the last day,
and then perfectly triumph over death for ever.

5. Origin here understands neither eternal nor temporal death, but that
qua separatur anima per peccatum a Deo, whereby the soul is separated from God
by sin: But then the Apostle had made an iteration of the same thing, for
sin it self is the spiritual death of the soul, and therefore the death
here spoken of, is an other death beside that, namely, that which follows as
the stipend of sin, which is everlasting death, unto the which is in the next
clause opposed eternal death.

Controv. 17. Against the distinction of venial and mortal sins.
v. 23. The stipend or wages of sin, is death: Faius by this place does well
confute that Popish distinction of venial and mortal sins: they say that
venial sins are those, which in their own nature are not worthy of death,
but the Apostle here notes in general of all sin whatsoever, that the
stipend and wages thereof is death, because all sin is (...), the
transgression of the law: 1. Ioh. 3.5. and death is the wages of them, that
transgress the (...): that gloss then of Haymo upon this place may seem
somewhat strange: hoc non de omnibus peccatis intelligendum est, sed de
criminalibus, etc. this is not to be understood of all sins, but only of
those which are criminal, such as S. John speaks of c. 5. there is a sin
unto death, I say not that thou should pray for it, etc. for the Apostle
speaks there of sin against the holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven,
for the which it is in vain to pray: If the Apostle there should mean all
criminal sins, then it would follow, that we should not pray for the
conversion of heretics, adulterers, murderers, and such like. We confess,
that there are some mortal sins, some venial, but not in their nature: to
the faithful and penitent all sins are venial, to the unbelievers and
impenitent, sins are morttall: it is the mercy of the forgiuer, not the
quality of the sin, that makes it venial, yet this takes not away the
difference of sins, as though they were equal: for small sins are more
easily pardoned, and great sins, where they are forgiven, are more hardly
pardoned; where they be not, they are more or less punished, according to the
greatness of the sin: see further of this point, Synops. Centur. 4. er. 6.

Controv. 18. That everlasting life cannot be merited by good works.
Arg. 1. v. 23. But the gift of God is eternal life: The Apostle in changing
and inuerting the order of his speech, whereas he had said the stipend of sin
is death, faith not, the stipend of righteousness is eternal life, but the gift
of God, etc. evidently shows, that everlasting life is not due as a reward
merited by our works, but as a gift of grace through Christ Jesus: Thus
Chrysostom expounds this place: he says not, merces benefactorum vestrorum
vna aeterna, sed donum Dei: life eternal is the reward of good works, but it
is the gift of God: Theodoret, non dixit eam esse mercedem, sed gratiam, etc.
he says not eternal life is a reward, but grace or favor: Nam licet quis
summam and absolutam iustitiam praestiterit, for although one could perform a
perfect justice, yet temporal things are not correspondent to eternal:
Theophylact: non quasi retributionem laborum dat eam Deus, sed ex gratia per
Christum, qui hac omnia nobis promeruerit, God gives not eternal life, as a
recompense of our labor, but by grace through Christ, who has merited all
these things for us.

Answ. Our aduersaries-doe all here concur in this answer, that everlasting
life is therefore called a grace, quia bis meritis redditur, quae gratia
contulit, because it is rendered for and unto those works which were wrought in
us by grace; so Pererius, eternal life though it be due unto good works, yet
it is given freely, nam merita illa principaliter a Dei gratia profecta sunt,
for these merits, to which it is due, do principally proceed from the grace
of God, etc. Pere. disput. 7. numer. 42. so also Tolet in his annotat. and the
Rhemistes upon this place: also Stapleton has the same answer: which they all
would seem to take from Augustine, who says the Apostle might have said, the
stipend of our justice is eternal life: but he called it the grace of God,
that we should understand, ipsa bona opera, quibus vita eterna redditur; ad Dei
gratiam pertinere, that good works themselves, to the which eternal life is
given, do belong unto the grace of God: August. de great. and liber. 8.9.

Contra. 1. Whereas Augustine says, recte potuisse dicere, the Apostle might
have well said otherwise: it is enough for us, that the Apostle did not in this
place say otherwise: and as Pet. Martyr says, by this means most evident
places of Scripture might be avoided, if we may say, aliter potuisset dici, it
might otherwise, thus, or thus have been said. 2. but for the thing it self,
Augustine is so far from approouing the merit of works to eternal life,
that he makes the good works themselves to belong unto grace: as he says
else where, pro hac gratiam qua ex fide viuimus, accepturi sumus aliam gratiam,
in qua sine fine in calis vinimus, for this grace, wherein we live by faith, we
shall receive an other grace and favor, wherein we shall live without end in
heaven: in Psalm. 14.4. 3. for how can God be a debtor to us to bestow a second
grace, because he conferred an other grace before: we are endebted to God for
the former grace, he is not a debtor to us to bestow a second grace: as
Bearnerd well says, merita omnia Dei dona sunt, and ita homo magis propter
ipsa Deo debiter est, quam Deus homini, our merits are Gods gifts, and so for
them man is more debted to God, then God to man, de annunt. Mar. sermon. 1.

Argum. 2. Where the crown is of mercy it is not of merit: but the crown of
everlasting life is in mercy, Psalm. 103.4. which crowns thee with mercy and
compassions.

Answ. Pererius has here two answers. 1. that either by mercy we may
understand Gods protection in this life, whereby he compssaeth his children as
with a crown. 2. or if we take it for the crown of everlasting life, it is
called a mercy, because the merits for the which it is rendered, promanant
principaliter ex gratia per misericordiam data, do principally flow forth from
grace given them in mercy. Pere. disput. 9.

Contra. 1. If Gods protection in this life be of mercy without our desert,
then much more everlasting salvation is of mercy, which is less merited. 2.
the other is a mere cavil: for what graces soever any have received in this
life, how perfect soever they be here, they shall have need of mercy in the
day of judgment: as the Apostle says, 2. Tim. 1.18. the Lord grant, that he
may find mercy with the Lord, at that day, etc. beside the mercies received
in this life, lib. de correct. and great. c. 13.
he wishes he may also find mercy then: so Augustine collecteth upon these
words, Iam. 2.13. there shall be judgment merciless to him that shows no
mercy: that they which have lived well shall have judgment, cum misericordia,
with mercy, they which have lived evil, shall have judgment without mercy:
where then there is need of mercy, there is no standing upon merit.

Argum. 3. That which is of grace cannot be also of works, as the Apostle
reasons, Romans 11.6. if it be of grace, it is no more of works, or else grace
were no more grace, etc. but eternal life is of grace, Ergo not of works.

Answer. 1. The Apostle may either here speak of the natural works of men,
and so such works do destroy grace, not of the works of grace, which are
indeed meritorious of eternal life: 2. the Apostle speaks of election, which
is of grace, non propter hominum opera prvoisa, not upon the foresight of man's
works: Thus Pererius, disput. 8. numer. 48.

Contra. 1. The Apostle excludes even the works of grace: for the question is
of good works, not of evil, but all good works are of grace: for God works
in us both the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13. and that even good works, which
are of grace, are excluded, the Apostle shows elsewhere: Ephesians. 2.8. By grace
are ye saved etc. not of works, least any man should boast of himself: for ye
are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, etc. 2. The
Apostle indeed speaks of the election of grace: but yet the rule is general,
that grace and works in the matters of salvation cannot be matched together:
for he proves election to be of grace, and not of works, by his general
axiom or proposition, because that which is of grace cannot be of works: and
if election be of grace and not of works, then everlasting life also, which
depends of our election, must of necessity be of grace also.

Argum. 4. That which is of works is by debt, as the Apostle says, Romans 4.4.
To him that works the wages is not counted by favor, but by debt: But God is
endebted to no man therefore life eternal is not of works, because it is not
by debt.

Answer. Pererius here answers by indistinction: that there is a lawful kind
of meriting de condigno, of worthiness: the one is perfect and absolute, which
presupposes no gift of grace, whereof it depends: such were the works of
Christ, which were absolutely meritorious ex rigore iustitiae, even according
to the strict rule of justice, by the reason of the excellency of his divine
nature being united in one person to his humanity: there is another kind of
merit, ex suppositione diuinae gratiae, upon the presupposall of divine grace:
so the works of men proceeding of grace, and their free will working together,
are merita apud De^^^, merits with God: like as natural things, though they
have that virtue and actiuitie from God, are the true causes of their effects.
Pere. disput. 10. numer. 53.

Contra. 1. This answer overthrows it self, for if men's good works proceed
of the grace and gift of God, then cannot God be any ways endebted for his
own: as David says, 1. Chron. 29.14. All things come of thee, and of thine
own hand have we given thee: and the Apostle says, Romans 11.35. Who has given
unto him first, and he shall be recompensed: if then we might challenge any
thing at Gods hands as a debt by way of recompense, we must first give unto him.

2. There is not the like reason of natural, and supernatural things: the
natural causes have their virtue at once from God, and then they afterward
work according unto that nature and property, wherewith they were once
endued: but in supernatural the grace of God is necessary, ad omnes actus, to
every act: as the horse, when he goes of his own accord, is the natural
cause of his going: but the order that directs him is the cause of his going
in the way, and of his going to such a place: so grace is the cause of our well
doings we concur indeed as natural causes of the action, but the goodness of
the action is only from God.

3. God then is not endebted unto man for the merit of his work, neither in
justice in respect of us, is he bound to recompense us: but yet he is another
way endebted, in respect of his promise, and so it is just with him, in regard
of his word, and promise, to perform that which he has promised: which
promise he made only of his free grace: and this point is touched also by
Pererius, praesertius vero adiuncta Dei promissione de remunerandis, etc.
especially the promise of God being adjoined for the rewarding of the good
works of the righteous, etc. in regard of this promise we grant, which is
merely of grace, not for the merit of the work, the Lord works himself a
voluntary debtor of eternal life.

Argum. 5. The Apostle says, Romans 8.18. That the afflictions of this present
life, are not worthy of the glory, which shall be showed, etc. here he
evidently shows that our works are not meritorious or worthy of eternal
life.

Answer. Pererius here also thus distinguishes: that works may three ways be
considered: in respect of the natural cause, as they proceed from man's
freewill, in respect of the matter, wherein they are expressed, and the time of
continuance, which are but temporal, and for a time, and thirdly as they are
wrought in us by the grace of God: in the two first respects, they have no
cause of merit, but in the third, conuenientem habent proportionem equalitatis
and dignitatis, etc. they have a fit proportion of equality and worthiness with
the reward of eternal life: thus Pere. disput. 11.

Contra. 1. The very scope of the place takes away this distinction: for the
Apostle v. 17. says, If we suffer with Christ, etc. he speaks of such
sufferings and afflictions, as are endured for Christ: which are the works of
grace: for a man of himself without grace, cannot suffer for Christ: therefore
even good works as they proceed in us of grace, are not meritorious or worthy
of eternal life.

2. Good works are so far from being meritorious causes of eternal life,
that they are not always and in all, causa sine qua non, the cause without the
which we cannot attain unto life, as in infants: and in them which are of
years, though without good works they cannot be saved, yet good works are
rather a beginning of eternal life, then the cause thereof.

3. To conclude this point therefore, in a merit there must four things
concur 1. it must be a free service, which we otherwise are not bound unto.
2. it must be of our own. 3. it must be perfect. 4. it must be proportionable
to the reward. But our works fail in all these, 1. we can perform nothing
unto God, but that we are already bound to do, 2. neither have we any good
thing of our own, which we have not received. 3. and our best works are
imperfect. 4. and between our temporal service, and an everlasting reward,
there is no proportion: therefore we cannot merit. See more hereof, Synops.
Centur. 4. er. 79.

6. Moral observations.
Observe. 1. Of perseverance.
v. 4. So we also walk in newnes of life. Origin hence well collecteth, that
this newnes of life, semel facta non sufficiat, once done, suffices not: ipsa
novitas innovanda est, this newnes must still be renewed from day to day, as
the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 4.16. our inward man is renewed daily; for as that
which waxes old, is every day oulder and oulder, so that which is new must
continually be renewed, otherwise it cease to be new: so that we must walk
on still, persevere, and increase in this newnes of life.

Observe. 2. Of the continual strife with sin.
v. 13. Neither give your members weapons. The Apostle using this phrase of
weapons, shows, that there is a war in us: some fight for sin, and make
their members weapons and instruments thereof: but the children of God must
fight and strive against sin, and hold up their weapons against the tyranny
and dominion thereof: this combat between the spirit and the flesh, the
faithful always find in themselves: as the Apostle says, Gala. 5.17. The
flesh coueteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these
two are contrary, so that ye cannot do those things, which ye would.

Observe. 3. Our obedience must be from the heart.
v. 17. But ye have obeyed from the heart, etc. Origin here again observes,
that we must yield our obedience unto righteousness, not in words only, and
outward show, but inwardly from the heart: I am afraid, says he, that there be
many of us, qui verbis vndeemur obedire iustitiae, which in words seem to obey
righteousness, but in our hearts serve sin, etc. As the Apostle says of
some, 2. Tim. 3.^. having a show of godliness, but have denied the power thereof.

Observe. 4. Of freedom from sin.
v. 18. Being made free from sin, etc. Chrysostom here shows, that it is
in vain for a man to have been baptized, and taken upon him the profession of
Christianity, if he be not freed from the kingdom of sin, and do ouerrule
the lusts thereof: quid proderit purpura regis esse vestitum, etc. si non
adsit, qui iubenti pareat, etc. what does is profit to put on the kingly
purple robe, if there be no man to command: as is a king without subjects, so
is a Christian that has put on Christ in baptism, and has no command over
his passions and lusts.

Observe. 5. We must serve righteousness, as before we served sin.
v. 19. As you have given your members, etc. Origin has here this profitable
note: that although we should serve righteousness much more, then we served
sin, yet the Apostle says in effect, eadem postulo, similia requiro, I
require but the same, and the like things: dud^^ currebant pedes, etc. of late
your feet did run to the temples of Idols, now let them run to the Church
of God; your hands was stretched forth to oppress men, let them be stretched
forth to the poor; your eyes wandered to gaze upon women, now let them look
upon the poor; your ears were delighted with vain sounds, now let them be
turned to hear the word of God: your tongue which was exercised in cursing,
now let it be occupied in praising and blessing of God, etc.

Observe. 6. Against oppression.
v. 19. To iniquity to commit iniquity, etc. Chrysostom here takes occasion
to enueigh against those, which for love of money oppressed the poor, which
sin, after his rethoricall manner, he thus amplifieth. 1. he makes them worse
then thieves that rob by the high way: for they do it in fear, and in secret
places, these audaciously fill cities with their cruelty. 2. they are worse
then murderers, homicida simul ac subito gladio percutit, the murderer
kills at once, but he which casts the poor in prison, and there suffers
him to lie and rot, pro vna mill mortes infert, for one death inflicteth many.
3. Canem summopere curans, etc. this oppressor is very careful for his dog,
sed propter canem, etc. but for his dog he neglects man, for whom Christ
died. 4. He is worse then bruit beasts, illa siquidem cognata diligunt, etc.
for they love their like, but one man despises an other. 5. they set more by
their houses in decking and adorning them, then by their own souls: while
thou make thy house fair and beautiful, anima^ interim desolatam habes,
thou have a desolate and forelorne soul: if thy maid should be bravely set
forth, and thy wise attired nothing like, thou would be offended; yet thou
neglectest thy soul, and furnishest thy house and other meaner things, and it
grieueth thee not. 6. and here he reprooueth such curiosity by the example of
the Philosopher, who coming into a neat and shining house, finding no place
to spit upon, spit in the owners face, thereby deriding his nicenes and
curiosity: to this purpose Chrysostom in his morals upon this chapter.

Observe. 7. Of the shame that comes by sin.
v. 21. What fruit had ye in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? There
are some of that impudency, that they are not ashamed of their sin: such
Jeremy compares to the unshamefast whore, Ierem. 3.3. Thou hads a whores
forehead, thou would not be ashamed: there is another sort, which are
ashamed of their sin, but it is an unprofitable shame, it brings them not
to repentance: such Jeremy compares to the thief, that is ashamed, when he
is found, Ierem. 2.26. but for all that he will not leave his theft: of the
first sort were the Sodomites, that were impudent and shameless, in their
sin: of the second Cain, that was ashamed, but repented not: there is a third
sort, that are ashamed, and this their shame brings them to repentance: as
Ierem. 31.19. after I converted, I repented, etc. I s^ote upon my thigh, I was
ashamed, yea even confounded, etc. Such was the shame which David had for his
sin committed, Psalm. 51.3. I know mine iniquities, and my sin is ever
before me: sin then, obiective, by way of an object works shame, but
effective, by way of the effect, by the working of the spirit it leads by the
remembrance thereof to repentance.

Observe. 8. That we must examine our selves.
v. 21. What fruit had ye, etc. Origin here notes, vnde nos ipsos discutere
debemus per f^rgula, etc. whereupon we must examine our selves in every thing
we do, whether therein we serve sin, or righteousness, etc. there is not any
act, wherein we serve the one or the other: so the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 13.5.
examine your selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in
you unless ye be reprobates, etc.?

CHAP. VII.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1. Are you ignorant brethren, ( know ye not, B.G.) for I speak to them
that know the law, ( are skillful of the law, Be.) that the law has dominion (
power, B.) over a man, as long as he lives? ( as long time as he lives, L.Gr.)

2 For the woman which is in subjection to a man, ( is under the man, L. Gr.)
is bound to the man, while he lives by the law: (better, then her husband yet
living is bound to the law, L. Rhemists.) but if the man be dead, she is
delivered from the law of the man.

3 So then, while the man lives, she shall be called ( counted, B. be made.
T.) an adulteress, ( a wedlocke-breaker, B.) if she become an other man's:
B.Gr. ( if she be coupled to an other man. T. couple her self, etc. be with an
other man. L.R. take an other man. G.) but if the man be dead, she is free from
the law, ( of the man, L. ad.) so that she is not an adulteress, though she
become an other man's.

4 Therefore, my brethren, ( or even so, B.G.) ye are made dead also ( or
mortified, Be. L.A. dead, B.G.) to the law, by the body ( in the body, Be.T.)
of Christ, that ye should be unto an other, even unto him that is raised (not,
risen, L.T.) from the dead, that we should fructify L. (bring forth fruit, Be.
B.G.) unto God.

5 For when we were in the flesh, the motions ( infirmities, T. affections, Be.
lusts. B. passions, L. (...). Gr.) of sins, which were by the law, did work,
L.B. (had force. Be. G. were effectual) in our members, to bring forth fruit
unto death.

6 But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead, (not, of death, L.
or we being dead unto it, B.G.T. see the question following upon this place)
wherein we were holden: that we should serve in the newnes of the spirit, not
in the oldnes of the letter.

7 What shall we say then? is the law sin? God forbid: ( let it not be, Gr.)
yea, I knew not sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the
law had said, Thou shall not lust.

8 But sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence: B.G.T. (some read thus, sin taking occasion, by the
commandment, etc. Be.L. see v. 11. following) for without the law sin was
dead.

9 For I once was alive without the law: but when the commandment came, sin
revived, but I died.

10 And the commandment, which was ordained unto life, the same was found to
be to me unto death.

11 For sin took occasion by the commandment, and deceived me, and thereby
flew me.

12 Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment is holy, and just, and good.

13 Was that then, which was good, made death unto me? God forbid: but sin,
that sin might appear, wrought death in me by that which is good: L. G. T.
A. (some thus, but sin (was death unto me) that sin might appear in
working in me death, by that, which is good, Be. B.) that sin might be out of
measure sinful by the commandment.

14 For we know, that the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin.

15 For what I work, I acknowledge not: ( allow not, G. understand not. L.)
for, not, what I would, that do I: but what I hate, that I do.

16 If I do then, that which I would not, I consent to the law that it is good.

17 Now it is no more I, that work it, but sin, that dwells in me.

18 For I know, that good dwells not in me, (that is, in my flesh) for to
will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not.

19 For I do not the good, which I would: but the evil, which I would not,
that do I.

20 Now if I do, that I would not, it is no more I that work it, but sin,
that dwells in me.

21 I find then a law L. Gr. (this law to be imposed, Be. by the law, B. Ge.)
that when I would do good, evil is present with me: ( see the question
following upon this verse.)

22 For I delight in the law of God, concerning the inner man:

23 But I see an other law in my members, rebelling against the law of my
mind, and leading me captive to the law ( in the law, L.) of sin, which is
in my members.

24 O wretched man, that I am, who shall deliver me out of this body of death?
Be.T. ( the body of this death. L. B.G.)

25 I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: Then I my self in my mind
serve the law of God, but in my flesh, the law of sin.

2. The Argument, Method, and Parts.
IN this Chapter the Apostle shows how we are freed and exempted from the
service of the law, yet so, as that he commends the law in it self, and
delivers it from all blame, laying the imputation upon his own weakness and
infirmity, where he takes occasion to show the combat between the flesh and
the spirit.

This Chapter then has three parts. 1. he shows how we are delivered from
the law, to v. 7. 2. he excuses and commends the law, to v. 14. 3. he
shows the infirmity that remains in the regenerate and the combat
between the flesh and the spirit.

1. In the first part the Apostle shows that we are not freed and discharged
from the moral obedience of the law, but from the servitude and bondage
thereof, in respect of the curse, and irritation and provocation to sin: this
is set forth by an allegory, taken from the law of matrimony: the
proposition is contained, v. 1.2. 3. consisting of three parts: like as the
woman is 1. free from her husband when he is dead, v. 2. 2. after his death she
may take an other husband, and therein is no adultresse, v. 2. 3. the third is
employed; that she may also bring forth by an other: the reddition follows,
which has three correspondent parts: so we are 1. dead to the law. 2. we are
married to Christ. 3. to bring forth fruit unto him, v. 4. this last part is
amplified by the contrary, that as sin by the law did fructify unto death,
v. 5. so we now being freed, should fructify unto the spirit, v. 6.

2. Then he takes upon him the defense of the law; that whereas he had said,
v. 5. that the matrons of sin, which were by the Law, etc. did bring forth
fruit unto death: hereupon two objections might arise; that the law is the
cause of sin, and of death, to both which he answeareth.

The first objection is propounded v. 7. is the law sin? then he answers,
1. in bringing a reason from the effect, that the law connot be sin, nor the
cause thereof, because it reuealeth and discovers sin, v. 7. 2. he shows
how not the law, but sin taking occasion by the law, wrought concupiscence,
revived in him, deceived him, and in the end slew him: all which he gives
instance of in his own person, v. 8. to v. 12. 3. he shows what the law is
in it self: just and holy, v. 12. the second objection follows. v. 13. that
it might seem, that the law being good, wrought death in him: then the answer
is, that not the law, but sin by the law wrought death.

3. The Apostle in this third part shows first the combat between the flesh
and the spirit, to v. 24. then the issue thereof, v. 24.25. the combat is set
forth in three degrees. 1. in that he by sin is brought to do that evil
which he would not; where he shows the opposition between the law
commanding, and his will consenting: and sin ouerruling him, and his flesh
obeying, v. 14. to v. 18. 2. the next degree is, that he is hindered by sin
from doing the good which he would: this is prounded v. 18. then proved by the
contrary effects, v. 19. and by the contrary causes: the law moving to
good, whereunto he consents, and sin hindering him, v. 20.21. 3. the third
degree consists in his delight and ioying in good in his inner man: but he is
captiued by the law of his members unto sin, v. 22.23.

The issue is this: first he desires and expects to be delivered from this
spiritual bondage and captivity, ver. 24. secondly he gives thanks for this
freedom in Christ, that he is not yet wholly captiued unto sin, but in his
spirit he serves the law of God.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. How the law is said to have dominion over a man as long as he lives.
1. We must here distinguish between these two, cessare legem, the law to
cease, and dominionem legis cessare, the dominion of the law to cease:
Theodoret thinks that the Apostle treats of the ceasing of the law, so also
Gorrhan: but that the law is not ceased, the Apostle shows afterward, giving
an instance in one of the commandments, Thou shall not lust: but the dominion
of the law is ceased, which served to condemn, but we are under grace, which
has delivered us from the bondage of the law: Tolet. annot. 1.

2. By the law: 1. neither with Sedulius do we understand the law of nature:
for he speaks unto the Jews, that knew the law, whereas the law of nature
was known also unto the Gentiles. 2. neither with Ambrose by the law, do we
mean the Gospel, for we are not dead unto this law, as the Apostle says, v.
4. we are dead to the law. 3. neither is the law of the members here
understood, as Origin, which is always evil, rebelling against the law of
the word: but the law which the Apostle here speaks of, is holy and good,
ver. 12. 4. nor yet do we understand the civil law of the Romans, to whom
the Apostle does write, as knowing their own laws: as Haymo and Lyranus
indifferently understands, Lex Mosaica vel Civilis, the Mosaicall or Civil
law. 5. The Apostle then makes mention of the moral law of Moses, as is
evident by that instance, which afterward he brings in, of that commandment,
Thou shall not covet: Tolet. Mart. Pareus.

3. These words, while he lives, are diversely interpreted. 1. some refer it
to the law, as long as the law lives or remains: so Origin, Ambrose,
Erasmus, and Origin adds this reason, because the man is afterward resembled
to the law, who being dead, the woman is free: but this reason shows, that
it must be referred rather to the man, then the law: 2. and so indeed, it is
more fitly said of the man, while he lives, then of the law: and in
grammatical construction, it is better referred to the nearer word, then the
further off, Beza. 3. some do join it unto man, which word because in the
Greek signifies both sexes, Chrysostom thinks that the death of both is
insinuated: for if the woman be free when her husband is dead, much more, when
she is dead also: but then this verse should be confounded in sense with that
which follows: whereas the Apostle speaks first in general of the law,
which only bears rule over a man, while he lives, and then of the
particular law of matrimony. 4. some think that these words, while he or it
lives, are indifferently referred either to the law or man: for both we are
said to be dead to the law, v. 4. and the law also is said to be dead, v. 6.
Mart. but it is better joined with man, as the nearest word.

4. Tolet thinks, that the Apostle speaks not here generally of the law of
Moses, but of the particular law of matrimony, annot. 4. but, as is before
showed, it is better to understand the Apostle to speak generally here of the
law, which binds a man only while he lives: and so we are dead in Christ,
and no longer bound to the law: and then he does illustrate the same by the
particular law of marriage: the law was as the man, or rather sin that
received strength by the law, we as the wife, the law being dead in Christ, in
respect of the bondage thereof, we are free: Pareus.

2. Quest. Whether the woman be simply free, if the man be once dead.
v. 3. If the man be dead, she is free. Lyranus gives this note, that if the
man should chance to die, and yet be raised again, as some were, the woman
were not bound in that case to receive the man as her husband, nisi de
condecentia, but in decency only, and supervenienti novo consensu, by a new
consent and contract: Pererius affirms the same, and gives instance of
Lazarus, that if any should rise again as he did, non futuram vxorem eius,
quae ante fuerat, disput. 1. number. 2.
she should not be his wife, that was before, but upon a new contract.

Contra. Though this be but a curious and unnecessary question, yet because
the occasion is ministered by them, it shall not be amiss herein to examine the
truth. Indeed when we shall rise again to an immortal state, as in the
general resurrection, neither the man shall be bound to the wife, nor the wife
to the husband, because they shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage:
but when any is miraculously raised again to the mortal state and condition
of this life, the case is otherwise, as may appear by these reasons.

1. Other conjunctions, which are not so near, as between the father, or
mother, and the children, do not cease, neither are extinct by such a
temporal death: as it is said, Heb. 11.35. The women received their dead
raised to life: that is, the mothers acknowledged their children raised again,
as the widow of Sarepta, and the Shunamite, had their sons restored unto them
again being dead, the one by the Prophet Elias, the other by the Prophet
Elisha: the question is, whether those children so raised, were freed from the
obedience of their parents: I think not: no more is the wife in that case
freed from her husband; because the conjunction is nearer between the man and
wife: as Genesis 2.24. Therefore shall a man leave his father and mother, and
cleave to his wife.

2. When the Sadduces put the question to Christ, of a woman that was married
to seven brethren, whose wife she should be in the resurrection: our Savior
answered them not, that the woman was free from them all by death, but because
that in the resurrection they neither marry, not are married, but are as the
Angels in heaven, Matthew. 22.30. So then the reason why they are free after
death, is, not simply because they are dead, but because they shall rise to an
incorruptible state, and not return from death again to their former mortal
condition.

3. Pererius himself confesses, that if one that is baptized, or has
received orders should be raised from death, he should not need to be baptized
or consecrated again, because those Sacraments do imprint in the soul an
indeleble character, and so does not matrimony.

But this may serve as an argument against his conceit: that matrimony in this
case shall no more be iterated then the other: for there is no such character
imprinted more in them, then in matrimony: for he which is baptized or
consecrated may utterly fall away, and become an Apostata from the faith, what
then is become of this badge or character? See further Synops. Cent. 2. er. 96.
if then there is no more character left in the one then in the other, if by a
temporal death for a time, the efficacy of baptism and orders be not
extinguished, neither is the bond of matrimony loosed: for such is no perfect
death, but a kind of slumber or trance for a while, which I hope they will not
say, dissolueth the marriage bond.

Quest. 3. Whether that the woman have not the like liberty and freedom in
respect of the bond of marriage, as the man has.
v. 3. But if the man be dead, the woman is free, etc. The woman is not free
but by the death of the man: because this is affirmed only of the woman's
freedom, and not of the man's, it may seem, that the man may be otherwise free,
then by the death of the woman: And indeed Ambrose is of this opinion, writing
upon the 7. chap. of the 1. to the Corinthians: that the man may marry again,
his wife being lawfully repudiated, even while she lives, but so cannot the
woman, and his reason is, quia inferior non omnino hac lege vtitur, qua
superior, the inferior is not to use the same law or privilege which the
superior does: Caietanus herein agreeing with Ambrose alleges the custom
which the Jews had: it was lawful among them for the man to give his wife a
bill of diuorcement, but not for the woman to give it unto the man.

Contra. 1. S. Ambrose opinion herein is contrary to the Apostle S. Paul, who
says, that the man has not power over his own body but his wife, as the
wife has not power over her own body, but the husband, 1. Cor. 7.4. so in
matrimonial duties he makes them both equal, as Lyranus well infers here,
idem est iudicium de viro, the same law or judgment also is for the man.

2. Herein then I rather subscribe to Hieromes opinion, quicquid viris iubetur,
hoc consequenter redundat in foeminas, that which is commanded unto men
redoundeth also unto women: for an adulterous woman is not to be dismissed, and
an adulterous husband to be retained, aliae sunt leges Caesarum, aliae Christ's,
aliud Papinianus, aliud Paulus noster praecipit, etc. the laws of Caesar and
of Christ are diverse, one thing Papinianus prescribes, an other thing Paul,
Hierm. ad Occan.

3. And that liberty among the Jews was granted unto them for their hardness
of heart: it was a permission, no dispensation, a toleration, not a concession:
and yet the woman had liberty by that custom, being sent away by a bill of
diuorcement, to marry again, as the man did.

4. Yet thus much must be acknowledged, that whereas it was permitted, that
many of the fathers should have diverse wives, yet it was a monstrous thing, and
never tolerated for a woman to have many husbands, that there is some
difference herein between the condition of the man and woman: that in respect
of the general law of nature for procreation, the man is more privileged, who
may beget by diverse women, whereas one woman cannot conceive by diurse men: so
that in the woman such change should show her lust only and wantonness, which
in the man was exercised for the desert of procreation: yet the special law,
and covenant of matrimony considered, the man has no more liberty to go
unto strange flesh then the woman.

Quest. 4. Why the Apostle says, we are dead to the law, v. 4. and not rather,
the law is dead to us.
1. Some think, that in this similitude the man is compared to the law, and we
are resembled to the woman, and so the Apostle in the application of the
similitude, should have rather said, the law is dead to us, because the man is
free, when the man is dead: but the Apostle changes of purpose his speech: he
would not say the law is dead, but we are dead to the law, imbecillitaris
Iudaeorum rationem habens, etc. having respect unto the weakness of the Jews,
left they might have been offended, being so much addicted to the law: and
last he might have given occasion to those heretics, which are enemies to the
old Testament, thereby to accuse the law: Theodoret: so also Calvin, comparing
the law to the husband, voluit exigua inversione etc. he would a little deliver
the envy of so hard a term, auandae offensionis causa, noluit exprimere, he
would not expressly say the law is dead to avoid offense: Bucer, so also
Pet. Martyr, Pareus: But Beza misliketh this exposition, for the law cannot be
said to be dead, unless the ceremonial law be understood, which the Apostle
speaks not of but of the moral law: Tolet adds this reason, because the
Apostle expressly distinguishes these three, virum, mulierem, and legem, the
man, the woman, the law, and concludes that by the death of the man, we are
freed from the law.

2. Chrysostom salveth the matter thus: that the Apostle speaks of a double
liberty, both by the death of the man and woman together: for if the woman be
dead as well as the man, she is much more free: and so in the application, the
Apostle indifferently puts the case, of the death of unto the law, as the
woman, or of the law to us, as the man: But the similitude only runs upon
the freedom of the woman by the death of the man: the application should be so
likewise.

3. Haymo understands here two husbands, and one woman or wife: the law is
one husband, under whom the woman, that is, the soul is said to be, the other
is sin, whereof the Apostle speaks, v. 3. while the man lives, for while
sin lives in man, he is subject to the law: But the other husband which the
Apostle speaks of, is Christ reigning in us by his spirit, as v. 4. that we
should be unto an other, unless he will say that the Apostle speaks of three
husbands, which he does not, for an other, does insinuate but one beside.

4. Some think that in the application of this similitude, we are not so
curiously to insist upon the particular points of this resemblance between the
man and wife: whether the law be as the husband, or the man regenerate as the
wife: by the death of either of them indifferently follows freedom, if either
we be dead to the law, or the law to us, Faius: But the Apostle in the
similitude presses only the death of the man, whereby the woman is free:
likewise Gorrhan expounds, ye are mortified, or dead to the law, that is, ye
are no m^^ bound to the law, as if the law were dead: but to be dead to the
law, and the law to be dead to us, though in effect they are all one, yet the
sense is d^lerse.

5. Hugo Cardinal. makes three in the similitude, the man, the wife, and the
law of matrimony, and three in the application, the law as the man, the
soul as the wife, and sin as the marriage: but says he in this is the
diversity in the similitude, the man dies, but in the application the woman
dies, that is, the soul unto sin: But if this difference and dissimilitude
be admitted, then the Apostle should not have fitly applied to his purpose the
similitude which he had propounded.

6. Augustine better by the husband understands sin, by the wife man, lib.
83. qu. 66. but this is not a full explication of the Apostles mind: for here
it is not expressed, what part the law bears in this similitude.

7. Therefore Tolet thus explaineth this similitude: he says by the Apostle
here, triplicen distingui, there is distinguished a threefold state of man, the
old man, the new man which is regenerate, and the natural man, considered as
Gods creature, which was first under the condition and servitude of the old
man, and then under the new: the old corrupt man, and the new regenerate man
he makes the two husbands, and man considered in himself is as the wife; so
we are said to be mortified to the law, that is, the old man is dead were
sin, and so unto the law, because sin being destroyed, the dominion of
the law also is abolished; to this purpose Tolet. annot. 5. Beza somewhat
diversely thus applies the similitude, he makes two marriages, in the first,
sin is as the husband, which had the strength by the law: the flesh was as
the wife, and the particular sins were the fruits ^ in the second marriage,
the spirit of grace by Christ is as the new husband, the regenerate man the
wife, and the children the fruits of holiness, and in this sense we are said to
be mortified to the law, in respect of the first husband, which is within us;
These two expositions much differ nor but in this, that Tolet makes one and
the same wife, which was before married unto sin, and afterward to the
spirit; Beza makes two wives, the first, the state of the unregenerate, the
second of the regenerate man; But the Apostle seems to speak of one and the
same wife, which is the soul of man, first subdued unto sin, and then in
subjection to Christ so then not the wife is said to be mortified, for how then
should she be joined to an other husband? but the first husband, that is, the
old man is mortified to the law, because when sin lived, the law did bear
dominion in accusing and condemning us: Now that the law is not as the husband,
but sin, the Apostle evidently shows, v. 5. When we were in the (...) the
motions of sin which were by the law had force in our members to bring forth
fruit was death: here the Apostle expresses four things in this first
marriage: the wife, we are the flesh, the husband, the motions of sin, for
that is the husband, which begets children which are the evil fruits unto
death: the fourth thing is the law of the man, touched before in the
similitude, v. 2. and here, the law is that which gave strength unto sin.

7. But an other reason also may be yielded, why the Apostle says, we are
mortified to the law: because in this reddition, he jointly applies the two
similitudes before alleged: the one, that the law has no dominion over one,
but while he lives, v. 1. the other that the woman is bound to the man, but
while he lives: in the application, he puts both together: to answer to
the first, he says we are mortified to the law, and so it has no more power
over us: and touching the second, he says, that being dead, wherein we were
holden, namely, sin, v. 5. we should be now for an other husband.

Quest. 5. How we are said to be mortified to, and freed from the law.
We are not freed from the law, in respect of the obedience thereto: for the
moral law is in force still, and Christ came to confirm the law, not to
destroy it: but we are freed from it, as the bare letter of the law is set
against the spirit: 1. because the law commanded only, but gave no grace to
perform, as the Gospel does. 2. the law only manifested our sins, in not
being able to keep the law, which are healed in the Gospel: 3. the law
commanding, made the froward nature of man, so much more sinful, in crossing
the commandment. 4. Men then obeyed the law for fear, and by constraint,
which now they do willingly by grace. 5. but in these two things chiefly
consists our liberty and freedom from the law, a rigida exactione, we are
freed from the strict observation of the law, which Christ has fulfilled for
us. 6. and ab ea qua inde sequitur maledictione, and from the malediction and
curse which follows thereupon, which Christ has freed us from, being made a
curse for us, Calvin. 7. Pareus shows how in these three things the servitude
of the law consisted. 1. in the declaration of sin. 2. in the condemning of
it. 3. in increasing sin, per accidens, by an accident, because our corrupt
nature is carried to do that so much the more, which is forbidden: So the
liberty of the law consists in these three points opposite to the other
three. 1. the law does not now set forth our sins, which are not imputed
unto us being justified by faith in Christ. 2. it condemns us not, for there
is no condemnation to those which are in Christ. 3. neither does it stir us
up to sin being dead to sin in Christ: the two first parts of liberty we
do fully enjoy in this life: but the third is only begun here, because we
are still compassed about with many infirmities, but it is not fully perfited
until the next.

Quest. 6. What is meant by the body of Christ, v. 4.
1. Some understand by the body of Christ, completionem veritatis, the
fulfilling and accomplishment of the figures of the law (which was but a type
of things to come) in exhibiting the truth, Gorrhan: 2. some, incarnationis
mysterium, the mystery of the incarnation of Christ, gloss. interlin. 3.
Lyranus, incorporationem cum Christo in baptismo, our incorporating with Christ
when we were made his members in baptism. 4. Beza reads in corpore, in the
body, to show our conformity with Christ, that we as his members are in him
and by him dead unto the law: Pet. Mart. also approves this sense, effecti iam
membra Domini, etc. being made the members of our Lord, we do follow our
head. 5. But by the body of Christ, rather we understand the passion of Christ
in his body upon the cross: that is, per victimam Christum, etc. by Christ
our sacrifice, who satisfied for us: Melanct. by the body of Christ, dum cruci
affixum est, while it was nailed to the cross, where he took away the
handwriting of the law, which was against us, Calvin, so Oecumen. by the body
of Christ, pro nobis interemptum, slain for us: so also Ambrose, tradens
corpus suum Servator mortem vicit, and peccatum damnavit, our Savior
delivering up his body overcame death, and condemned sin, etc. So we are
dead unto the law in the body of Christ: because he in his body was made a
curse for us, to redeem us from the curse of the law, Par.

Quest. 7. Of the meaning of these words, v. 6. being dead unto it.
There are 3. readings of these words. 1. some read (...), we are delivered
from the law (of death:) so the vulgar Latin, and Ambrose, with Anselme,
Haymo, and Origin also makes mention hereof, though he approve an other
reading: But the moral law, is not properly called the law of death, which
title better agreath unto sin, which indeed is the law of death: and Beza
observes that no Greek copy, but one which he had seen so reads.

2. Some read (...), being dead in the nominative, which some expound thus, in
the which we were held as dead, Origin: but here is a traiection or transposing
of the words, which stand thus in the original, dead, wherein, etc. not
wherein we were dead: some use a harder kind of traiection, we which are dead
are delivered: whereas the order of the words is this, we are delivered from
the law being dead, etc. some use no traiection at all, but supply the
pronounc it, or that, dead unto it, wherein, etc. and they understand the law,
Theophylact, Erasmus, Bucer, Calvin, P. Mart.

3. But the better reading is in the genetive, (...), and some join it with
the word (...), law, the law being dead, wherein, etc. but it is rather put
absolutely, and the pronoune that or it must be supplied, that being dead
wherein we were holden: not in Oecumenius sense, who understands it actiuely,
we are dead by sin, but passiuely with Chrysostom, that being dead, namely,
sin, wherein we were holden, id quod detinebat, peccatum, etc. that which did
hold us, namely, sin, has now nothing to hold us with.

Quest. 8. What is meant by the newenesse of the spirit, and the oldnesse of
the letter.
1. Origin understands by the oldnes of the letter, the ceremonies of the
law, as circumcision, the Jewish Sabbaths, by the newenesse of the letter the
spiritual and allegoticall sense; so also Haymo says, he serves God in the
newenes of the spirit, that spiritually practices the circumcision of the
heart, not the carnal observation of the ceremonies: But S. Paul treats here
of the moral, not the ceremonial law, as Tolet well observes, annot. 18.

2. Chrysostom, and Theophylact following him, understand the oldnes of the
letter, of the external obedience which was practiced under the law: the
newenesse of the spirit they expound to be the inward obedience of the heart,
wrought in us by the spirit of Christ: But we must here take heed, that we do
not so think, that the literal sense of the law only concerned outward
obedience, for it required the perfect love of God, and our neighbor, and
restrained the very inward concupiscence: Neither must we imagine, that all
they which lived under the law, only served God in the oldnes of the letter,
yielding only external obedience: as Chrysostom seems to insinuate: that
they were commanded only to abstain from murder, adultery, and such like:
but we are restrained from anger, wantonness, the inward motions: for many of
the holy men under the law, had the newenesse of spirit in the renovation of
their inward desires, as the faithful have under the Gospel.

3. Some by the oldnesse of the letter understand sin, which was not reformed
by the letter of the law: by the newenesse of the spirit, the fruits of
righteousness, as Hierome epist. ad Hedib. quest. 8. vivamus sub pracepto, qui
prius in modum brutorum, etc. let us live under the precept, which before as
brute beasts said let us eat and drink, etc. so also Tolet. annot. 8. but if
by the oldnes of the letter, we understand sin, how can any be said to serve
God in sin.

4. Ambrose by the newenesse of the spirit does understand, legem fidei, the
law of faith, by the oldnes of the letter, the law of works: but the Apostle
here speaks of our obedience and sanctify which is the fruits indeed of
justification, rather, then justification it self.

5. Wherefore the Apostle rather by the oldnes of the letter understands the
outward and external obedience only, ot iosam legis notitiam, the idle and
fruitless knowledge of the law, without the true conversion of the heart: the
newenes of the spirit is the true sanctity both of body and soul wrought in
us by the spirit of God: which is called new, compared with our former state
and condition under the old man, and in respect of our new marriage with
Christ, Pareus: so Calvin, non habemus in lege, nisi externam literam, etc. we
have not in the law, but only the external letter, which does bridle our
outward actions, but does not restrain our concupiscence: so Pet. Martyr
understands quoddam obedientia genus, a certain kind of outward obedience,
but not such as God requires: to the same purpose Osrander, the newenes of the
spirit is when we serve God, move and spontaneo spiritu, with a ready and
willing spirit: they served God in the oldnes of the letter, that is,
indignabundo spiritus, with an unwilling mind: And the law, as Beza well
notes, is called the letter, quia surdis canit, because it speaks as unto
deaf men, till they be regenerate and renewed by the spirit of grace.

6. So here are three things set one against the other: solutio contra
detentionem, liberty or freedom against detayning or holding: the newenesse
against the oldnes, the spirit against the letter, Gorrhan.

Quest. 9. How S. Paul being brought up in the knowledge of the law, could
say, I knew not lust, 7. and I was alive without the law, v. 9.
1. The occasion of this question is, because elsewhere the Apostle professes
his integrity, as Philip. 3.6. touching the righteousness, which is in the
law, I was vnreproouable: and Act. 23.1. he says, I have in all good
conscience served God unto this day: how then could he be ignorant of the law,
or be without the law?

Ans. 1. It may be answered, that either S. Paul spoke of his first age in the
time of his childhood, when he knew not the law, or he speaks figuratively in
the person of an other: But neither of these is likely: not the first, for the
things, which the Apostle here touches, show the law wrought in him all manner
of concupiscence, are not incident into the age of children or unexperienced
young men: nor the other, for thoroughout this whole chapter the Apostle gives
instance in himself, as v. 24. O wretched man that I am, and 25. I thank my
God, and so he does here: the Apostle then speaks here neither of his present
state, nor yet of his first age, but of the middle part of his life when he
lived a Pharisie.

2. That commendation then, which S. Paul gives of his former life, while he
was a Pharisie, did only concern his outward carriage, which was to the
judgment of the world without reproof; and he kept a good conscience,
according to his knowledge, yet was it far from a pure conscience: because he
had no knowledge then of our faith in Christ, whose way he persecuted, whereby
the heart is purified, Act. 15.9. Notwithstanding then his outward show of
obedience, his heart and affections were not right within, and so he had not
the true use and understanding of the law: as Augustine says, lib. 1. ad
Bonifac. c. 9. potuit intus esse in affectionibus pravus prauaricator legis,
etc. he might inwardly in his perverse affections be a transgressor of the law,
and yet outwardly fulfill the works of the law, and c. So Saint Paul himself
confesses, Tit. 3.3. We our selves were sometime unwise, etc. serving lusts,
etc.

Quest. 10. What law the Apostle speaks of, v. 7. is the law of sin.
1. Some think that the Apostle by the law, here understands the precept
which was given to Adam in Paradise, not to eat of the forbidden fruit: of
this opinion was Methobus, in Epiphanius haeres. 64. and Heirome makes mention
of it, epist. ad Hedib. qu. 8. but he rejects it: Theodoret has the like
conceit: that the law is here understood to be the law of Moses, mandatum
vocat, quod Adamo datum est, but that he calls the commandment which was
given to Adam: Theodoret in Commentar.

But 1. Photius in Oecummenius rejects this opinion, because no where does
the Apostle call that particular commandment given unto Adam the law. 2. Tolet
further adds these reasons: the Apostle speaks of the very inward desire
and concupiscence: but the act was forbidden Adam, that he should not eat of
the forbidden fruit: and again the Apostle in saying, I knew not sin but by
the law, insinuates, that sin was before, but he knew it (...) but before
that commandment was given unto Adam, it had been no sin in him, to have
eaten and received the fruit of the tree.

2. Some think that the Apostle speaks not of the law of Moses, but of the
law of nature: for before the witten law was given, men had knowledge of sin,
as Cain knew he had sinned, and Abimelech was not ignorant that adultery was
sin: thus Heirome, and before him Origin.

But 1. Photius in Oecumenius thus refelleth this opinion: that the Apostle
speaks not of the law of nature: because the Apostle had said before, ye are
dead to the law, v. 4. in this sense then some should be found, naturali lege
priuati, deprived of the natural law: and again the Apostle says, I was
alive sometime without the law: but neither Adam, nor any other living were at
any time without the law of nature. 2. Tolet adds, that if the Apostle had
meant the law of nature, he would not have said, I knew not sin but by the
law, but rather, sin was not but by the law. 3. And concerning the objection
of Cain and Abimelechs knowledge of sin, Chrysostom answers, that the
Apostle says, omnem concupistratu^, vehementiam significans, sin wrought in
me all manner of concupiscence, signifying the vehemenencie of it, etc. that
although these sins did reign before, yet they appeared not to be so great
sins, as afterward by the law; and Theophylact adds, noscibatur peccatum,
sed nondum erat concupiscentia interdicta, sin was known before the law,
that is, outward and notorious sins, but yet the inward concupiscence was not
restrained.

3. Tolet thinks that together with the moral law, the Apostle means the
ceremonial and judicial law, because by them also were the knowledge of
sin: But the Apostle giving instance of the inward unlawful concupiscence,
which was not punished by the judicial nor ceremonial law, shows, that he
speaks not of them.

4. Wherefore it is evident, that the Apostle means none other, but the
written moral law of Moses, because he gives instance of the last
commandment, thou shall not covet, Martyr. Pareus.

Quest. 11. What lust or concupiscence the Apostle speaks of: I had not
known lust, etc. except, etc.
1. Some think, that here, by concupiscence, the Apostle intends all sin
whatsoever: as Anselme, and the ordinary gloss following Augustine, bona est
lex, qua ^^^dum concupiscentiam prohibet, omnia peccata prohibet, etc. the law
is good, which while it forbids concupiscence, forbids all sins, etc.
Heirome epist. 152. refuses their opinion, which take this for the
commandment, and by concupiscence, he thinks to be understood, omnes animi
perturbationes, all the preturbations, and passions of the mind whatsoever, as
of fear, grief, desire; But it is evident, in that the Apostle propounds
the very words of the line, that he has reference to that precept, thou shall
not lust; whereby indeed all corrupt concupiscence and desire whatsoever is
forbidden.

2. By this concupiscence is not understood only the act of concupiscence, as
Pererius holds, with other Romanists; we understand not, says he, ipsam
concupiscendi facultatem, sed actum ipsum concupiscendi: the faculty of
coveting, but the act it self; disput. 8. numer. 47. nor yet the second
motions of concupiscence, only whereunto the will consents, but even the
first unlawful desires and motions, which have not the consent of the will. And
that this may the better appear; it shall not be amiss, further to show what
concupiscence is, and the diverse kinds thereof; there is a threefold
concupiscence, naturalis, sensitivus, voluntarius, the natural, which is even
in stirps and plants, as to covet and draw unto them their food and
nourishment, and this is properly called (...), desire; the sensitive is in
bruit beasts, the voluntary and sensitive both in man, and they are called by
the word (...), concupiscence. 2. further this concupiscence is divided into,
(...), and (...), the faculty it self, and the exercising or act thereof: and
both of them are considered, either physice, as they are natural, as to covet
meat, drink, and such like, which are things indifferent, or morally as they
have relation to the commandment: 3. and herein there is to be considered,
both the ma^ter and object of concupiscence, and the manner: as if either
things unlawful be desired, as the wife, horse, servant of our neighbor,
which appertain not to us, or if we exceed measure in desire of things
unlawful, as of meat, drink, apparel, riches, and such like, or desire them
to an evil end.

3. Now to apply this, which has been said to our purpose. 1. neither the
natural desire, as of meat and drink is forbidden by this commandment, as
being a thing indifferent, nor yet the supernatural, as to covet and desire
such things, as concern the glory of God, and the salvation of our souls:
for these are good desires, and conformable to the will of God: but the evil
and unlawful desires are forbidden either in the matter, or manner. 2. not the
act of concupiscence only, but the very faculty it self, ipsa
concupiscibilitas is forbidden, as it is corrupt, and auerse from God. 3. and
not only the second motions, which have the consent of the will, which the
schoolmen call concupiscentiam formatam, the formed and perfect concupiscence;
but even the first motions, which have not the deliberate consent of the will,
which they call informem, the unformed concupiscence: contrary to the opinion
of Pererius, and other Romanists, who thinks concupiscentiam carnalem, sed vt
a voluntate approbatam, etc. that carnal concupiscence only, as it is
approved of the will, to be forbidden in this commandment: disput. 8. numer.
47. but the contrary shall appear afterward, controv. 8. that the law
forbids, cupiditatem nudam, the very base and naked concupiscence, as Beza
calls it, because prauas cupiditates, evil and disordred lusts and desires,
the very law of nature reproved: and Augustine says, cupiditate^ voco motum
animi, etc. I call concupiscence the very motion of the mind, to enjoy either
himself, or his neighbor, or any other thing, non propter Deum, not for God:
de Doctrine. Christian. lib. 3. c. 10.

Quest. 12. Why the Apostle gives instance in the tenth commandment, thou
shall not lust, and alleges not all the words of the law.
1. The Apostle could not give instance in the grosser, and more notorious
sins which even the wiser sort of the Gentiles abhorred, nor yet in the vile
and corrupt affections of man, which the Philosophers also condemned; but he
singleth out those corruptions, which could not be discerned by the light of
nature, especially so much obscured, and darkened, and could not be perfectly
known, but by the law of God: Tolet. annot. 9.2. And this the Apostle does to
show the excellency of the law of God, beyond both the law of nature, and the
politic laws of men: for the first; the law of nature is much obscured,
obliterated, and empaired by the blindness and corruption of man's nature: but
the written law though it were much deprived by the corrupt gloses of the
Scribes and Pharisees, lex tamen scripta m^^ sit eadem, yet the written law
remained the same, and being well examined was able to reprove the false
interpreters thereof: and it is more perfect, then other humane laws, which
only bridle the outward act of sin, but they can not meet with the inward
concupiscence as the law of God does.

2. And S. Paul contenteth himself only to repeat the first words of the
commandment, not adding the rest, thou shall not covet thy neighbors house,
etc. as Moses does: for he having to doc in hominis durioribus, with a rude
people, and of hard understanding, gives instance in some sensible, and
particular objects: but S. Paul writing, scientibus legem, to men knowing the
law, thinks it sufficient to give them only an hint, by producing some words
only of the law. Neither yet did Moses express all the particulars of this
law, but having reported some, he concludes with this general clause, nor any
thing that is his. And indeed in all the commandments Moses uses the figure
called synecdoche, by one part signifying the rest: and that both in the
negative part, wherein forbidding the most notorious vices, he meets with the
rest, as our Savior shows, Matthew. 5. how the law binds not only the
hands, but even the heart and affections, in the sins of murder, adultery,
and such like: as also in the affirmative, the contrary virtues in every
commandment, being comprehended in the prohibition of the contrary vices: so
that Aristotle's ten predicaments are not so general to contain whatsoever
is in the world, as Moses ten commandments are to comprehend all vices
committed in the world. ex Martyr.

Quest. 13. What sin the Apostle means, v. 8. sin took an occasion, etc.
1. Some by sin here understand the devil, who taking occasion by the
commandment, did tempt man more strongly to break it, Methodius, Ambrose,
Oecumenius, saving that the first by the law understands the commandment
given to Adam in Paradise, the other two the law given by Moses; But in this
sense, it cannot be properly said sin revived, if by sin we understand the
devil: or thus sin did dwell, in the Apostle, as he says, v. 10.

2. Chrysostom understands this sin to be vitium de fidiae, the vice of
flouthfulnes: that man having received a law, by his negligence, was not the
better for it, but the worse: But he expresses not the whole mind of the
Apostle.

3. Anselmus will have it to be peccati fomes, the matter or nourishment of
sin: which (as Lyranus) is called sin, for that it is the cause of sin,
as the Sun is said to be hot, being the cause of heat: But the Apostle
calls it sin properly, because it was forbidden by the commandment.

4. Hierom. epist. ad Hedib. qu. 8. takes this to be the sin, quod lege
prohibetur, which is forbidden by the commandment: which while it is forbidden
does inflame the concupiscence the more: but the Apostle speaks not of
actual sin, before it is committed, but of sin dwelling in him, v. 17.

5. This is none other but naturae corruption, the corruption of our nature,
Calvin. lib. 1. de peccand. the lust or desire of sinning, Hyper. peccatum
regnans in homine, sin reigning in man, Tolet. annot. 11. which is none other
but the original pravitie of our nature, called before lust or concupiscence,
v. 7. it is pravitas nativa, our natural pravitie: Pareus.

14. Quest. How sin took occasion by the law.
1. The Greek word (...), occasion, is taken three ways: first, it properly
signifies (...), the opportunity of doing a thing: but so the law was not the
occasion, as offering any opportunity; for there can be no opportunity to do
evil. 2. it signifies, any circumstance or accident, whereby one is
occasioned to do any thing; as the burning of an house, may be said to be the
occasion of building it again. 3. an occasion is that which draws a man from
doing that he intended; as a rub in ones way turns him beside the way: Both
these last ways sin took occasion by the law; for both the prauitie of our
nature is more inflamed by the prohibition; and we seek to build our ruinous
house, which the law pulls down, and beside because the law stands up in
the way of sin, we decline it, as a thing which hinders us in our pleasant
and plain journey following after sin, and therefore we wish that it were
removed, as a rub, or block out of our way, Faius.

2. Diverse ways did sin take occasion by the law. 1. the corruption of man's
nature turns good things to the occasion of evil: as the Pharisees by
Christ's coming and preaching had the more sin: and the Apostle says, Hebr.
10.29. Of how much more punishment suppose ye he is worthy, which treads
under foot the Son of God: habet peius supplicium occasionem per exhibitum
maius beneficium, the greater punishment is occasioned by the greatness of the
benefit exhibited; Chrysostom: sin then is increased by the giving of the
law, because of men's unthankfulness for so great benefit. 2. And beside such is
the corruption of man's nature, vt ea quae prohibentur magis desiderentur, which
are forbidden, are more desired, Origin: so was the commandment given to Adam,
an occasion, that he coueted the more to eat of the forbidden fruit: and like
as there are four diseases, which are the worse for the applying of medecines
unto them, as the gangrena, and the leprosy called elephantiasis: much like a
restie horse, that the more he is spurred, and kicked, the more he gives
back: or as if a sick man-beeing forbidden to drink cold water, should the
more desire it: Martyr. 3. An other reason is, because man's nature desires
liberty, and therefore refuses to be bridled by law: and yet it is destruction
libertatis, the very destruction and overthrow of liberty, for a man to do
what he lift, sine fraeno legis, without the bridle of a law. Lyranus. 4. And
further by the law comes the knowledge of sin, and so man's corrupt nature,
having sin showed it, does then begin to covet it, as the Sun light
shows the beauty of a fair woman, and then the lustful eye is carried with
a desire after her, Gorrhan: or like as Ambrose resembles it, as the art of
Physic shows the nature of persons to avoid them, and yet one abuses his
knowledge in doing hurt by them: lib. 1. de Jacob, and vita brat. c. 4. And
this was the reason, why Solon would make no law against parricides, least that
men by that occasion might think of that sin, which they did not dream of
before. 5. Add hereunto that, as a circumstance may accidentally stir up
that which is a cause of it self of the action; as David's walking upon his
house carried his eye to look upon the beauty of Bersheba, and so to desire
her: the like occasion might sin take by the law. Pareus. 6. And the Devil
took occasion by the law more strongly to tempt man, to make his sin the
greater in transgressing of the law. 7. And one contrary accidentally is
increased by an other, as hot water is more strongly congealed. Gorrhan. 8.
And every nature adversantibus adversatur, resists that which resists it,
as one stone breaks an other, Hugo: so vice resists virtue.

3. But it is further to be considered, that the words are, sin, (...),
taking occasion: for the law indeed gave not occasion, but sin took it:
Beza, Calvin.

15. Quest. Of what time S. Paul speaks, when he knew not the law, and
afterward sin took occasion by the law, etc.
1. Methodius understands it of the time, while yet Adam had not received the
commandment of not eating the forbidden fruit: but it has been showed
before, that the Apostle speaks here of the moral law given by Moses, as
appears by that particular instance of the tenth and last commandment.

2. Origin will have it understood of the Apostles childhood, and so also
Hierome, that then he knew not sin: but these things, which the Apostle
mentions, as the working of concupiscence, and the reviving of sin, are not
incident into the age of children.

3. Chrysostom understands, the time before the law, when many sins were
not known, till the law came: and so he thinks that the Apostle in his own
person describes the state of all those, which lived before the law: but in
this sense, the person of S. Paul should be excluded, who lived not in those
times.

4. Wherefore he aims at that time, when he was a Pharisie, before he had the
true knowledge of the law: for the Pharisees contented themselves only with
the external observation thereof, as is evident Matthew. 5. where our Savior
delivers the law from their corrupt gloses: Pareus, Faius.

Quest. 16. What the Apostle means by all concupisence. v. 8.
1. Chrysostom understands augmentum concupiscentiae, the increase of
concupiscence, which was more inflamed. 2. Augustine, summa^ and consummatam,
concupiscence perfected, which now after the law given did not only covet
evil things, but lege prohibita, forbidden by law. 3. Ambrose, because after
the law came, then all sin came, before there was sin, sed non omne, quia
crimen prauaricationis decrat: but not all, because the sin of transgression,
and preuarication was not yet, ex gloss. 4. Martyr expounds it of all actual
sins: but the Apostle speaks only of concupiscence. 5. By all
concupiscence then we may understand with Hierome, omnes perturbationes animae,
all the passions and perturbations of the mind: epistol. 151. and with Anselme,
cuiusque peccati contra quodcunque mandatum concupiscentiam, the concupiscence
of every sin whatsoever against every commandment: with Faius, every kind
of concupiscence, not only the concupiscence of the flesh, but the
concupiscence of the eyes, which Saint John speaks of, 1. epist. c. 2. with
Gorrhan, every degree of concupiscence, cogitationem, consensum, opus, the
thought, the consent, the action: with Pareus, all the vicious motions of the
concupiscence, primas and secundas, both the first, and second: with
Oecumenius, quas non noueram concupiscentias ex lege didici, etc. I learned by
the law concupiscence, which I knew not, and those which I had learned, I
committed.

Quest. 17. In what sense the Apostle says, sin was dead, and he alive
without the law. v. 8.
1. Methodius in Epiphan. haeres. 64. by sin, understands the time of man's
innocence, when the devil lay as dead, because yet there was no commandment
given, whereby man should be allured unto sin: Ambrose by sin likewise
interprets the devil, but he refers it to the time before the law when
the devil was secure, having man sure enough in his possession: But this
opinion is rejected before; for how could the Apostle say, v. 20. that sin
dwelled in him, if he meant the devil by sin; and he says that sin
revived, when the law came; then in this sense the devil must be supposed to
have been alive before, to have been busy in working before he tempted Adam.

2. Theodoret, and Caietane following him, do understand this to be spoken of
the time of man's innocence, when as sin was dead, there was no sin at all
before the law was given; But beside, that man could not be said to be alive in
Paradise without a law, being created with the law of nature; the Apostle
saying, that sin by the law wrought in him all manner of concupiscence,
supposes some to have been before.

3. Hierome epist. 121, and Origin following him, do take this for the time of
childhood: for then sin is dead, because they have no knowledge of it, for if
a child smite his father, or mother, it is counted no fault: and when they come
to years of discretion sin reviveth: But the reviuing of sin shows that
it lived before, which cannot be said of children, that sin first lived, and
afterward died, and then reviued again.

4. Augustine lib. 1. contr. 2. epistol. Pelag. thus understands the Apostle,
that before the law of Moses was given, man is said to have lived as without
law, and sin then to have been dead, because it was not perfectly known
before the law was given: so also Chrysostom, Haymo: But if all this be
referred to the time before the law was given, Paul could not have given
instance in himself as he does.

5. Wherefore S. Paul's meaning is, that he was alive without the law: that is,
vinere mi^ividebar, I seemed to be alive unto my self, when as yet being a
Pharisie, he had not full understanding of the law: then sin also seemed to
be dead: because as yet he did not feel the burden of sin, nor his
conscience did not prick him, while he contented himself with the outward
observation of the law: thus Pareus, Osiander, Beza, Calvin.

And further it is here to be considered, that there is a twofold death of
sin, non vera, a death not in truth, when sin lurketh only and lies hid,
and shows not it self: of this the Apostle speaks here: and there is mors
vera, a true death of sin, when we truly die unto sin in Christ, which
death the Apostle treated of before, c. 6.

Quest. 18. How sin is said to have revived.
1. Origin here makes mention of the error of the Pythagorian heretics, who
imagine that the souls of men, lived before in the bodies, some of birds, some
of beasts, when they lived as it were without a law: and so sin is said to
reviue in the soul: But this is a gross error: for in those creatures which
have no reason, sin cannot be said to live, or have any being at all, and
therefore not to reviue.

2. Bucer seems thus to understand it, that sin lived before, that is,
qualis coram De^ erat, apparuit, it appeared, such as it was before God, but
now it is said to revive, because it is made known to us: but the living, and
reliuing, or reviving of sin, must be understood in respect of the sin.

3. The most do understand it simply, without any relation, a former life of
sin: capa apparere, it began to appear, gloss. ordinar. interlin. apparnit
delictum esse, it appeared to be sin, Theophylact: incepit vires explicare,
Mart. it began to show the strength: which sense is not much to be misliked.

4. Some have here reference unto the first knowledge of sin; which Adam had
after his transgression; as Augustine, vixerat aliquando in Paradiso, quando
contra datum praceptum satis apparebat admissum, etc. it lived sometime in
Paradise, when it sufficiently appeared by the transgression of the
commandment, etc. but afterward it lies as dead in children, till they come
to the knowledge of the law: then peccatum in notitia (...) hominis reviviscit,
quod in notitia primi hominis aliquando vixerat, sin reviveth in the knowledge
of man that is borne, which sometime was alive in the knowledge of the first
man, etc. to this purpose August. lib. 1. ad Bonifac. c. 9. which sense Pareus
follows, likewise Tolet. Haymo adds further, that sin lived not only in
Adam, but in Cain, who said his sin was greater, then could be forgiven: but
it died in their posterity, which came unto that error, that they thought that
to be no sin, which was sin: But seeing the Apostle speaks of the
reviving of sin in himself, we must not go further then the Apostle, to
seek out this first life of sin.

5. Wherefore, as Beza well observes, a threefold state and condition of the
Apostles life is here to be considered: when he lived sub ignorantiam legis,
under the ignorance of the law, that sin reigned: afterward he lived sub
cognitione legis, under the knowledge of the law, but only of the outward
letter, observing the external works only of the law, whereas he before made
conscience of no sin: at this time sin seemed to be dead, he pleased
himself in his outward obedience: then he came to the sight of his sin, and
so he died, his conscience accused him, that he was worthy of eternal death.

Quest. 19. How sin is said to have deciued, v. 11.
1. The meaning is not, as Methodius, and Ambrose, likewise Haymo, that the
devil seduced Adam: for not Adam, but Eve was seduced, as Saint Paul says, 1.
Tim. 2.2. but the deceitfulnes of sin, consists herein, 1. inducitur error
practicus, there is brought in a practical error: that the sinner is deceived
by the pleasantnes of the object, thinking that to be good, which is evil,
Tolet annot. 14. as Eve was deceived by the pleasantnes of the apple. 2. operit
laqueum peccati, it hides the poison and not the sin, Hugo, it shows the
bait, and hides the hook. 3. cogitationem auertit a supplicijs, it turns
aside our cogitation from the punishment of sin, and persuades a man, that
either the sin is not so great, and shall have either no punishment, or but a
small: and so it brings a man to unbelief, not to give credit to the word of
God, who threatens sinners: as the Devil first persuaded Eva, that she should
not die at all. Martyr. 3. Some will have this word expounded, non de re ipsa,
sed de notitia, not of the thing it self, but of the knowledge: that at length
he perceived how far he had been deceived, and lead out of the way, Hyper.
But it rather shows the proper effect of sin taking occasion by the law,
which is to deceive: the other to acknowledge our error, is the effect of the
law, and not of sin: as Pelican well understands here sin taking
occasion by the law, does draw us out of the way, as a sick man takes
occasion to act those things which are forbidden, ex mandato medici, by the
charge given by the Physician to the contrary.

4. Then the Apostle shows three effects of sin taking occasion by the law:
first it deceives, then it works all manner of concupiscence, and then it
kills, it brings death to the soul, Mart. so impostura causa est
concupiscentiae, etc. imposture or deceit is the cause of concupiscence, and
concupiscence of death, Oecumen. Thus every man is tempted, seduced, and
entised by his concupiscence, as S. James says, 1.14.

Quest. 20. How sin is said to have stain him.
1. Not occisum me esse ostendit, it shows that I was staiue and dead by the
law; as Bucer, Hyper. for the Apostle speaks of sins, not of the law, which
shows the reward of sin to be death. 2. nor yet is the meaning, it fly me,
per perpeirationem peccati, by the committing of sin, Hugo: inducendo ad
opus, in bringing sin into act, Lyran. for though one sin may bring forth
an other, yet sin is one thing, death an other, which is the stipend or wages
of sin. 3. Osiander thus: lepit eum adigere ad desperationem, it begone to
drive him to despair: but the Apostle speaks not of his particulate case,
but of the general effect of sin, whereof he gives instance in himself. 4.
therefore the meaning rather is, concilionit vnibi mortem, it procured death
unto me, Pere. ad mortem eternam tradit, it delivers me over to eternal
death; Gorrhan: addicit morti, makes one guilty of death; Fuius: which must
be understood of the proper fruit and effect of sin, without the grace and
mercy of God.

Quest. 21. How the law is said to be holy, just, good, and likewise the
commandment.
1. Concerning the first, the commendation and titles of the law, 1. Thomas and
Caietane refer the holiness of the law to the ceremonial precepts, the
iustnes to the iudici^s, the goodness to the moral. 2. Lyranus, it was holy in
teaching our duty to God, just in prescribing duties toward our neighbor, good
in respect of our selves, teaching us what is good and right. 3. Haymo does not
distinguish these, but says the law is holy, just, good, because it commands
holiness, equity, goodness, and intends to make the obseruers such: so also
Calvin, Martyr, with others. 4. But Theodoret better distinguishes them thus,
whom Oecomenius follows: the law is holy, in respect of the matter, because
it prescribes holy things, just, in propounding rewards and punishments, good,
in respect of the end, to bring the obseruer unto goodness of life. 5. Pareus
distinguishes them in like manner, but he adds further, that all these
titles are given unto the law in the foresaid respects, both with relation to
the author, who is most holy, just, and good, and to the doctrine it self, of
the law, which is likewise holy, just, and good, and in regard of the effects,
of holiness, goodness, which is wrought in man before his fall, and it shall
bring forth in the state of glory, though now it fails of the effect by
reason of man's infirmity.

2. Whereas the Apostle speaks both of the law, and precept or commandment,
1. Vatablus takes them for the same, herein following Origin, but then the
Apostle should seem to commit a tautalogie. 2. Oecumenius takes the law for
Moses law, the precept for that which was given to Adam, but this opinion is
refused before. 3. Theophylact will have the commandment as general, the law
as the particular, because there are other commandments beside the law. 4. so
also Osiander, Nazianzen, as Faius reports him, will have the law so called
in respect of us, because it contains a rule of such things, as are to be
done, and a commandment as it is prescribed of God. 5. The most of our new
writers do thus distinguish them: the law, and quicquid ea pracipitur, and
whatsoever is commanded therein, Martyr, Calvin, and before them Hugo Cardin.
6. But I prefer Beza his interpretation, whom Pareus follows: who by the
law understands generally the whole decaloge, by the commandment, that
particular precept, wherein he gave instance before, namely, that, Thou shall
not lust: yet Haymo will have one commandment here taken for all.

22. Quest. How sin is said to be out of measure sinful.
1. Methodius in Epiphanius, whom Gorrhan follows, still continues his
interpretation, understanding here the Devil, that he is this sin out of
measure, by his manifold temptations causing men to sin; but the Apostle
speaks properly of sin which is discerned, and known by the law, and so is
not the Devil: Pareus. 2. Ambrose as he is alleged by Pet. Mart. does
infer upon these words, out of measure, that there is a certain measure and
degree of sin, the which if a sinner once pass, his punishment shall be no
longer deferred, as he shows by the judgment of God upon the Sodomites and
Cananites: but this is not the Apostles meaning here. 3. Faius will have this
understood not of sin it self, but of the sinner, that he is become by
transgressing the law in a manner sin it self, (...), the sinner is made as
it were sin: But the Apostle still speaks of the fruits of sin in the
sinner: and as Origin says, finxit personam peccati, he signeth a certain
person of sin. 4. The meaning then is this, that sin by the commandment
was more inflamed and increased, quia minus peccati est, si, quod non
prohibetur, admittas, it is a less sin to commit that, which is not
forbidden: Origin: and so Ambrose, because sin of knowledge is worse then
sin of ignorance, because it shows contempt, l. de Job. c. 4. and hereby
the multitude of sins is expressed, invalescenie cupiditate ruimus in omnia,
concupiscence and lust increasing, we rush into all sins, Martyr, and so
Augustine expounds it of the abounding of sin, lib. 1. quest. ad Simplic.
qu. 1. the vehemency and rage of sin is hereby signified, which as it were
rising against the law, sins so much the more: like as an horse that is
unbroken, the more he is curbed with the bridle, the more he stingeth out, Par.
and as he which is sick of a fever is more inflamed by wine, which is by
reason of the infirmity, the wine is not properly the cause, Lyra^.

5. But whereas Hierome epist. ad Algas. thinks that the Apostle commits
here: solecisme, because (...), sinner, is of the masculine gender, and (...),
sin, of the feminine; Erasmus well observes, that here is no solecisme at
all: for it is usual in the A^o^^e dialect, to join an adjective of the
masculine, with a substantine of the feminine: as Beza observes the like, Romans
1.20. where (...), is put for (...), eternal, the other word (...), power,
being of the feminine gender.

6. But whereas, the Apostle says the law is just, it follows not hereupon,
that we are justified thereby; for the Apostle else where says, Gal. 3.11.
that no man is justified by the law: Gorrhan gives this solution, that the
Apostle means the ceremonial law; but even the Apostle excludes the moral
law from being able to justify us: the best answer is, that the Apostle
shows what the law is in it self, it was given to justify us: but that
which was ordained unto life, is found to be unto death, as the Apostle said
before, v. 10. by reason of the iufirmitie of man, and the corruption of his
nature: And again whereas the Apostle says here the law is good, and yet the
Lord by his Prophet says, Ezech. 20.25. I gave them statutes that were not
good: Gorrhan here answers, that they were good in themselves, but became
evil, ipsorum vitio, by their fault: Iunius understands that place of the
hard judicial laws, and sentences of death both ordinary and extraordinary:
But rather it is referred to the ceremonial laws, which were as a yoke and
burden laid upon the people, which they were not able to bear, as S. Peter
expounds, Act. 15.10.

Quest. 23. How the law is said to be spiritual.
1. Origin thinks it is called spiritual, because it must be understood not
literally, but spiritually: But the Apostle treats here of the moral law,
where was no place for allegories. 2. Theodoret, because it was given of God,
who is a spirit. 3. Ambrose, because the law directed us to the worship of
God, who is a most pure spirit. 4. Augustine, because it cannot be fulfilled,
nisi a viris spiritualibus, but of spiritual men: but no man in this life is
so spiritual, that he can keep the law. 5. Thomas, because concordat cum
spiritu hominis, it agrees with the spirit of man, that is, reason: so also
Lyranus, because it directs: man to follow the instinct of the spirit, or
reason: so also Gorrhan, spiritum hominis aleus, it nourishes the spirit of
man: But the very spirit of man is corrupt and contrary to the law by nature,
and therefore the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.23. be renewed in the spirit of your
mind. 6. Pet. Martyr gives this reason, why it is called spiritual, because
it requires not only the external obedience in the outward works, but the
spiritual in the heart and affections. 7. But hereunto it may be added, that
it is spiritual, because it requires a spiritual, that is, a perfect
obedience both in body and soul, and an angelical and divine obedience, to
follow virtue and shun vice: so Chrysostom and Theophylact, and Calvin,
Pareus, Osiand. following them. 8. that seems to be somewhat curious which
the ordinar. gloss. here observes, that the Law is only called spiritual,
because therein are those: things: quae Dit sunt, which are Gods: but the
Gospel is called lex spiritus, the law of the spirit, because there, Deus ipse
est, God himself is.

Quest. 24. How the Apostle says, he is carnal and sold under sin, v. 17.
1. Pererius well observes here, that one may be said to be carnal two ways,
quia ser^^ carni, because he serves the flesh: or he which by reason of his
corrupt nature procliuis est is prone unto concupiscence; to this purpose
Pareus, that in the first sense the unregenerate are said to be carnal; in the
other the regenerate, because they are yet infirmitatibus abnoxque subject to
infirmities, quia nondums habent spirituale corpus, because they have not yet a
spiritual body, freed from all infirmities, such as they shall have in the
resurrection: August. lib. ad Bonifac. c. 10. so we have inchoatam non plenam
liberationem, a deliverance begun in Christ, but not yet perfect, till our
last enemy death shall be destroyed.

2. Likewise where the Apostle says, he was sold: 1. Some take the word
properly for such a selling, wherein there is a buyer, a thing sold, and a
price, which they refer either: unto Adams selling himself to the devil for
an apple, Lyran. gloss. ordinar. or to a man's selling of himself by his
actual sins, for the sweetness of pleasure, which is as the price which men
sell themselves to the devil for, Tolet. annot. 16. Gorrhan: But in this sense
S. Paul being a spiritual and regenerate man, cannot be said to be sold. 2.
wherefore this metaphor is not largely to be taken, as when Ahab is said to
have sold himself to work wickedness, 1. King. 21.25. for there are two kinds
of slaves, one that sells himself into captivity, and willingly obeys a
tyrant: or one which against his will is brought into servitude, as Joseph was
sold by his brethren into captivity: and this is S. Paul's case here, Pareus:
And Augustine notes that sometime selling in Scripture, is taken for a simple
tradition or delivering over without any price, lib. 7. in Iudic. c. 17. and so
indeed the Hebrew word machar, signifies, as well to deliver as to sell, as
Isay, 52.3. the Israelites are said to be sold for naught: and the Lord will
redeem them for naught: But these two are said in a diverse sense: Men are
said to be sold for naught in respect of God, he receives no honor, but
rather dishonor by their selling over unto sin: they are redeemed for naught
in Christ, in respect of themselves, because they gave nothing for their
redemption: but yet in respect of Christ and his price, they were not redeemed
for naught, but by the most precious blood of Christ, Mart. Pererius thinks
they are said to be redeemed for naught comparatively, because that momentarie
pleasure for the which a sinner sells himself, is nothing to the price and
dignity of his soul, numer. 72. but rather selling is here taken for a plain
delivering over, as is before showed out of Augustine: Now two ways are the
regenerate sold over to sin, in respect of their original corruption, and of
their carnal infirmities which remain still in their corrupt nature, to the
which they are subject still, Pareus: but the unregenerate are said to be sold
over, as Ahab was, because they give themselves wholly over unto sin: Beza
does well express these two kinds of servitude or selling over, by the like
difference in humane servitude: for some are slaves because they are borne of
ser^ile and bond parents, others make themselves bond: like unto the first are
the regenerate, and the unregenerate as the second.

Quest. 25. Of these words, v. 15. I allow not what I do, what I would, that
do I not.
1. Chrysostom thinking that the Apostle speaks this in the person of an
unregenerate man, refers this word (...), I know not or understand nor, to
the understanding, not that a sinner knows not when he sins, sed tenebrosa
quada^ vertigine obvoluor, but I am overtaken with a kind of dizines, that I
know not how I was overtaken: so also Origin, non rem ipsam, sed causam rei
dicitur ignorare, he is said not to know not the thing, but the cause thereof,
that is, how, and by what means he came to sin: But it is evident by the
words following, what I would, etc. that the Apostle speaks of his will
rather then understanding.

2. Pererius likewise inclining to think, that this is spoken in the person of
a carnal man, will have this understood, of a general and universal
knowledge, will, and hatred; that men in general know and will virtue, and
hate vice, but not in particular: But the Apostle here speaks of doing, and
not doing, which must be referred to particular actions.

3. Augustine, very well interprets, non agnosco, I know not, that is, non
approbo, non consentio, I approve not, consent not: but yet he understands
the Apostle only to speak of the first motions of concupiscence, which have
not the consent of the mind: concupiscere nolo, and tamen concupisco, etc. I
would not covet, and yet I do, but I consent not to concupiscence, etc. lib.
1. cont. epistol. pelag. 1.10. but this seems to be no fit exposition, facio,
i. concupisco, I do, that is, I covet, as the ordinary gloss out of
Augustine: and the Saints do not only cupere, sed etiam facere, desire, but
do sometimes things which ought not to be done; yet we must not think that
the Apostle here speaks of gross sins such as the faithful sometime may
fall unto, as was the adultery of David, for in such sins there is no
resistance between the will, and the deed, but they which fall into them, are
for the time given over.

4. Methodius agreeing with Augustine, that the Apostle speaks of righteous
men in his own person, by this evil, which he would not, he understands
evil cogitations, quae occurrunt been operanti, which come into the mind of
him that is about a good work, etc. This is true, but not al: for sometime a
righteous man, may in passion break out into some action which he would not, as
he may say some things, quae non dicta vellet, which he would not had bin
spoken: Osiander.

5. Cassianus collat. 33. c. 15. by the good, which he would, understands the
contemplation of the mind: from which he is hindered, occupatione rerum
corporalium, by the business of outward corporal things, which is called evil,
not that it is sin, but comes of sin, etc. He well also interprets this
of the righteous man, yet this exposition is not so fit: for the Apostle
speaks of the proper effects and friuts of sin in him, v. 17.

6. Oecumenius distinguishes here the times: what I would, liber a peccato,
when I am free from sin, I do, quando in peccato sum, when I am in sin:
But the Apostle speaks of one, and the same time: as may appear by the words
put in the present tense, (...), I will, (...), I do, (...), I hate.

7. Wherefore the Apostle shows here the strife that is in a righteous man,
whose chief will and desire is to do good, but he is often overcome of his
carnal affections, and does that, which in his inward will and desire he would
not: as David in his have did swear he would put Nabals house to the sword,
which afterward being well advised he would not: Martyr. Now in that he says,
what I hate, that do I: we must not think that the regenerate do sin as
constrained against their wills, sed non tota voluntate, but it is not with
their whole will: Pareus; that is also carnis voluntas, a will of the flesh,
but the Apostle calls that his will, quod pracipue cordis affectu appetebat,
which he desires cheefely, Calvin.

8. Hence then appears the difference between the regenerate, and the
unregenerate: they are so divided, vt praecipue cordis affectu ad Deum
suspirent, that in the chief desire of their heart, they do sigh after God,
and desire to do his will, yet are hindered and pulled back by the relics of
sin: by the other, sine repugnantia in cupiditates feruntur, are carried after
their desires, and lusts without resistance: and though they are sometime
pricked in conscience, it cannot be gathered thereby, that there is in them any
love of virtue, or hatred of vice, but God suffers them to be tormented, vt
iudicium suum demonstret, to show his judgment: Thus M. Calvin.

Pererius obiecteth against this exposition: that in this sense, etiam iniqui
censen^ sunt piorum nomine, wicked men shall be counted good, and godly: so
that they have some fear of God, and some desire to do well; which may be
found in the wicked: Pere. disput. 14. numer. 81. Contra. 1. Calvin requires
more in a righteous man, that there be in him a lone of virtue, an hatred of
vice, and that his chief desire should be set upon God: I hope he thinks
not, that it is so with the wicked and ungodly. 2. neither can there be any
true desire in the wicked to do well, etc. as Tolet confesses, imperfectam
voluntatem ad (...) etiam fine gratia, etc. that an imperfect will unto that
which is good even without grace may be in a sinner and unregenerate man:
annot. 18. which is contrary to the words of our Savior, Ioh. 15. 1. Without
me you can do nothing.

Quest. 26. What the Apostle understands by flesh, I know that in me, that is
my flesh, dwells no good thing, etc. v. 18.
1. Lyranus by the flesh here understands the sensuality, which always
rebelleth against reason: and he says there are these two parts in man,
sensuality, and reason, which are otherwise called the flesh and the spirit,
the inward and outward man: so also Gorrhan interprets, in carne, i. homine
sensuali, in the flesh, that is the sensual man: of the same mind are present
Romanists: as Tolet, who says a man has two parts, rationalem and sensualem,
the rational and sensual: likewise Per. disput. 15. Bell. de stat. peccat. l.
5. c. 7. their reasons are these.

1. Pererius urges the Apostles words, v. 26. I in my mind serve the law of
God, etc. that the Apostle manifestly distinguishes the mind, that is the
reason from the sensual part.

2. The Apostle himself calls these the outward and inward man. 2. Cor.
4.16. the outward man is the body, the inward the mind.

3. Tolet thus reasons, si in ratione habitaret malum, etc. if evil dwelled
in the reason, then could it not will that which is good, as here the Apostle
says, to will is present with me.

Contra. 1. By the mind the Apostle understands the mind regenerate by grace,
as he says, Ephesians. 4.23. be renewed in the spirit of your mind.

2. By the outward man, the Apostle understands all the inward and outward
corruptions, which must daily decay: and by the inward man which must be
renewed all the powers and faculties both of soul and body, which must be
renewed.

3. In the natural reason evil may dwell, as it is obscured, and darkened by
sin, and yet the will being reformed and regenerate by grace, may incline to
that which is good.

2. Wherefore by the name of flesh, as Calvin well interprets, the Apostle
comprehends omnes naturae dotes, etc. all the gifts of nature, and whatsoever
is in man, only the sanctification of the spirit excepted; so that on the one
side is signified totus homo, the whole man as he is unregenerate, on the
other, the whole man as he is regenerate, Martyr: as it may be thus showed.

1. The Apostle writing to the Corinthians, which were believers,
distinguishes between the natural man, which perceives not the things, that
are of God, and the spiritual man, 1. Cor. 2.14.15. and afterward he denies
that they were such spiritual men, but carnal, c. 3.1. yet were they
regenerate: there is then in a regenerate man, somewhat that is carnal, and
somewhat that is spiritual.

2. The fear of sin is in the rational part; but sin is in the flesh,
therefore even in the reason there may be somewhat carnal; Tolet answers
that though sin be in the reason, yet it has the effect cheefely by the
flesh. Contr. The will brings forth sin, and that belongs to the
rational part; the body does but execute the edict of the reason and will:
therefore the rational part being the place and fear of sin, is carnal:
yea Tolets own words may be urged against himself: he confesses, peccatum
adeo infirmam fecit rationalem partem, that sin has made the rational part
so weak, as that it cannot of it self perfectly will that which is good,
though the flesh should not contradict it, etc. there is then somewhat carnal
in the soul, because there is sin.

3. The Philosophers, as Aristotle, lib. 1. Ethicor. c. 13. made two parts of
the mind; (...), the reasonable, and (...), that which is void of reason,
where the affections, and passions of the mind are: If the Apostle should make
no other difference between the flesh and the spirit, his Apostolical
Theology would afford no greater comfort, then profane Philosophy.

Quest. 27. How the Apostle says to will is present with me, etc. but I find
no means to perform, etc. v. 18.
1. Tolet, agreeing with those, which understand the Apostle here to speak of
a man unregenerate, and in his sin, thinks that a sinner even without grace
may will that which is good, voluntate imperfecta, with an imperfect will,
annot. 20. But the Apostle affirms the contrary, Philip. 12.13. That it is
God which works in us both the will, and the deed: therefore a carnal man
cannot have any good will of himself.

2. Pererius expounding the Apostle to speak here in the person of a man
regenerate, restrains this will of the Apostle to concupiscence: to will is
present, that is, non concupiscere, not to covet that which is evil, but he
could not perform this, that is, to have no concupiscence, though he did not
consent unto it: but this opinion is refused before, qu. 25.3.

3. But even they which are regenerate do fail in the very good works which
they do, not that their will is altogether ineffectuall: sed efficaciam operis
negat respondere voluntati, he denies that the efficacy of the work does
answer to his will: Calvin: he wills and desires being moved of the spirit,
but he cannot perfect the work as he would: he finds always some
imperfection in the work: therefore the Apostle uses the word (...), to perfect
or perform: aliquo tenus progrediuntur sancti, etc. the Saints do make some
proceeding, but they are far off from perfection. Object. But God works in
his, both the will, and the deed. Ans. God indeed works both, but not always,
not alike; the Saints sometime will and perform good things, sometime they are
willing, but want strength; But the Apostle speaks not here as though always
his will came short, but that ostner then he would his will was crossed in good
things: and therefore he uses the word dwelling; this grace and strength did
not always dwell and continue with him, Pareus.

4. But Pererius thus obiecteth: 1. if Saint Paul's will consented at any time
to his concupiscence, how could he say, v. 17. it is no more I that do it, but
sin? 2. how could he delight in his mind in the law of God, if there were
sin? 3. if S. Paul did those things, which he would not, then fornication,
adultery and such like.

Cont. 1. It was the part of the will unregenerate, which consented not to the
will renewed, which Saint Paul calls his will, and not the other, because he
cheifely desired good things. 2. in the regenerate part he delighted in Gods
law, though in his unregenerate, sin remain. 3. S. Paul speaks not of such
gross sins, but of the secret force of concupiscence, which often carries
away even the regenerate.

28. Quest. Of the meaning of these words, v. 21. I find a law, etc.
1. Some do understand this law of the moral law given by Moses, some of
the law of concupiscence, which afterward is called the law of the members: and
of both sorts there are diverse opinions.

Of the first there are two sorts, some do interpret it, as though the Apostle
should commend the law, some that he sets forth the weakness and want of
strength in the law.

Of the former sort, 1. Origin would have the words transposed thus: because
when I would do good, and evil is present, I find a law, and I delight in
the law, etc. But this traiection of the words seems somewhat hard. 2.
Photius in Oecumenius, does transpose them thus, I find the law to be good
unto me willing to do, etc. so also Augustine lib. 2. cont. 2. epist. Pelag.
c. 10. and Anselmus whom Bellarmine follows, join good with the law: but it
may be gathered v. 19. I do not the good thing I would, that good must be
joined with the word do, not with the law. 3. Chrysostom thus interprets, I
find the law, fave^tum, auxiliantem, favoring, and helping me: so also
Theophylact, and Lyranus says, that the Apostle shows the consent between
the written law, and the natural law, which moves him to do that which is
good: so also the Syrian interpreter, I find the law to consent to my mind.
4. Some supply the word good, I find the law to be good, Haymo, Hugo,
Gorrhan, Pareus. 5. Pareus has an other exposition, that the law is taken
here for studium legis, the study of the law, and he thinks the word (...),
is present, or at hand, may be supplied out of the latter part of the verse in
this sense, I find the study of the law to be present with me, when I would
do good: But all these expositions tending to the commendation of the law, are
removed, because of the last words, because evil is present with me: for how
can this be a reason, that the law helps or consents, or is good and
profitable to him, being willing to do good: to say with Pareus, that (...),
because, may be taken for (...), although: or with Faius, for (...), but, or
that it is superfluously added, it seems not to be so fit.

Of the other sort, that hereby show the weakness of the law, which serves
to discover sin, 1. Some give this sense, invento legem, agnosco debilem, I
find the law, that is, to be but weak, it cannot help me or make me better,
but though I would do good, yet evil is present: Photius in Oecumen. 2. or I
find by the law, that when I would do good, evil is present, Vatab.
Genevens. Calvin: but here the preposition per, by, is inserted, which is not
in the original. 3. Erasmus to the same purpose, I find the law this to
work in me, that I understand, when I would do well, that evil is present,
etc. but here many words are added, not in the original.

Of them that understand the law of the members, 1. Beza thus interprets, I
find legem impositam, this law to be imposed upon me, by reason of the
corruption of my nature: so also Mart. that when I would do good, evil is
present. 2. some directly understand, legem carnis, the law of the flesh, the
concupiscence, which hinders him being willing to do good: so Tolet, Osiand.
and these two last expositions are most agreeable to the text, because it is
added as a reason, because evil is present with me, in which words he shows
what law he means, that which is opposite unto him, which is further
explained in the verses following.

Quest. 29. How the Apostle says, v. 21. evil is present with me.
1. Ambrose has here a curious observation: evil is said to be present
adiacere, to be ready at hand, because it lutketh in the flesh, as at the
door, that when one is inclined and willing to do good, sin is at hand to
hinder: And he gives this reason, why sin has the habitation in the flesh
rather then in the soul, because the flesh only is derived ex traduce, by
propagation, and not the soul: which if it were propagated as well as the
flesh, sin rather should have the fear in the soul, because it sins
rather then the flesh, which is but the organe or instrument of sin: likewise
expounds Tolet, adiacet mihi, it is naturally resiant in my flesh, as he said
before, that to will is present with me, that is, naturally in his mind,
annot. 21.

2. But 1. Ambrose reason concludes not: for though the flesh have the
beginning by propagation, and not the soul, and so the first pollution is by
the flesh: yet sin disperseth it self into the whole nature of man, both
soul and body, as the Apostle shows, Coloss. 2.18. that there is (...), a
mind of flesh, or fleshly mind. 2. neither naturally is the mind willing or
apt unto that which is good, for why then should the Apostle exhort, to be
renewed in the spirit of the mind, Ephesians. 4.23. the aptness and inclination
of the mind unto good, is by grace: the meaning then of this phrase is nothing,
else but to show, the readiness and strength of our natural concupiscence,
which lies in wait, and is at hand to hinder every good work, and to stir
us up unto evil.

Quest. 30. Of these words, I delight in the law of God, etc. v. 22, 23. of the
number of these laws, and what they are.
1. Concerning the number: 1. some refer these laws unto two: the law of God,
and the law of the mind, they make one and the same, the law of the members,
and the law of sin, also they think to be one: Pareus, Martyr, Tolet. annot.
22. 2. Photius in Oecumenius makes three laws, he distinguishes the law of
God, and the law of the mind: the law of the members, and the law of sin he
confounds. 3. But Hierom. epist. ad Hedib. qu. 8. and Ambr. in Luc. 17. do
recite four laws, as they are here named by the Apostle, the law of God, the
law of the mind, the law of the members, and the law of sin: so also Calvin,
Hyper. and the Apostle indeed sets down so many.

2. The like difference is, what these laws should be. 1. Oecumenius thus
describes these laws: two are without us, the law of God, the knowledge
whereof we have by the preaching of the Gospel, and the law of the members,
which comes by the suggestion of Satan ministering evil cogitations; two of
them are within us, the law of the mind, that is the law of nature, which is
imprinted in the mind, and the law of sin, which is the evil custom of
sinning. 2. Pererius will have the law of God to be the written law, and the
law of the mind the natural law: the law of the members the natural
concupiscence, and inclination unto the several proper objects of the desire,
the law of sin, is deordinatio earundem virium, the disordering of the
natural faculties, and abusing of them unto evil. But all these fail herein:
1. the law of the mind is not natural, for naturally the mind is not apt
unto that which is good, without the work of grace. 2. and the law of the
members is internal and within us. 3. neither is this the natural faculty of
desiring, which is not evil, but the disordered pravitie of nature. 3. Pet.
Mertyr as he makes the law of God and the law of the mind to be the same, yet
in a diverse respect: for it is called the law of God, in respect of the author,
and of the mind, in regard of the subject: so in his judgment the same is
called the law of sin, because concupiscence in it self is sin, as the
efficient, and the law of the members, because they are as the instruments. 4.
But I rather consent unto M. Calvin, who understands the law of God, to be
the moral law, the rule of equity, and the law of the mind, to be the
obedience and conformity, which the mind regenerate has with the law of God:
and by the law of the members, the concupiscence, which is in the members,
consenting to the law of sin. 5. And further the law of the members, and the
law of sin, are not severed in subject: they are both in the members: but
thus they differ: Some think the law of the members to be the corruption, and
pravitie of our nature, called before the body of sin, c. 6.6. and the law
of sin, the evil concupiscence springing from thence: so Vatablus, the law
of the members, is vis in carne, the strength of the flesh resisting the law of
the mind: and the law of sin, is affectus carnis, the carnal affections: so
Haymo interprets the law of the members, onus and pondus mortalitatis, the
burden of mortality, and the law of sin, to be evil concupiscence,
custom, and delight in sin: so Lyranus understands by the law of the
members, fomitem peccati, vel inclinationem pravam, the food and matter of
sin, or the corrupt inclination, and the law of sin, consuetudinem pravam,
the evil custom of sinning. 6. But I rather with Beza, by the law of sin,
understand the corruption of nature, by the law of the members, the evil
concupiscence springing from thence: for otherwise the opposition between the
law of God and the mind, on the one side, and the law of the members and of
sin on the other, will not be correspondent and answerable together: for the
law of the members must be set against the law of the mind, and the law of
sin against the law of God: like as then the regenerate mind is conformable
to the law of God, so the unregenerate members are captived to the law of sin
in the members, which is the corruption of nature, even original sin.

31. Quest. Why these are called laws, and why they are said the one to be in
the inner man, the other in the members.
1. For the first: 1. Chrysostom gives this reason, it is called the law of
sin, propter vehementem and exactam obedientiam, because of the exact and
forced obedience which is given unto it: for the laws of tyrants, are so called
abusive, though not properly, Calvin: lex quia dominatur, it is a law because
it rules, gloss. 2. Lyranus, a law is called a ligando, of binding, ducit
membra ligata ad mala, it leads the members, and holds or tieth them to
that which is evil: they can do no other. 3. Pererius, sicut lex dirigit,
etc. as the law directs to that which is good, so the law of sin to that
which is evil. 4. legitime factum est, it comes justly to pass, that illi
non serviat suum inferius, t. caro, that man's inferior, that is, his flesh
should not serve him, seeing he served not his superior, namely, God, gloss.
ordinar. Anselmus, so it is called a law, as in justice imposed of God upon
man for his disobedience.

2. For the second, the one is called the law of the mind and inner man, the
other the law of the members and outward man: 1. not that the mind and reason
only wherein the natural law is written, is the inner man, and the sensitive
part is the flesh, as Lyranus, Gorrhan, with others, which opinion is confuted
before, quest. 26. for even the mind is corrupt and so carnal in the
unregenerate, as the Apostle speaks of some which were (...), corrupt in
their mind, 2. Timoth. 3.8. 2. But the regenerate part is called the inner
man, and the unregenerate both in soul and body the outward. 1. because intus
potissimum regnat, it reigns chiefly within, and is discerned chiefly and
known in the mind, Mart. 2. quia in cordis conuersione, etc. because it
consists in the heart, nec patet hominum oculis, and is not open and apparent
unto the sight of men, Pareus: in which sense it is called the hid man of the
heart, 1. Pet. 3.4. 3. and because non externa vel m^^dana quaerit, it seeks
not things external, belonging to the world, whereas appetitus carnis vagi
sunt and extra hominem, the fleshly appetite is wandering, and as it were
without a man, Calvin: and as Caietane, carnalibus officijs immersae sunt, the
faculties of the outward man, are drenched as it were and wholly spent in
carnal offices. 4. and the regenerate part is called by the name of the inner
man, and the mind, per excellenciam, because of the excellency: for as the
mind is more excellent then the body, so is the spirit, then the flesh,
Calvin.

Quest. 32. Of the Apostles exclamation, O wretched man that I am!
1. The word, which the Apostle here uses, (...), signifies one, that is
perpetus. pugnis fatigatus, wearied with continual combats, Beza: like as a
champion, which striving along time, is like at last to be overcome of his
adversaries unless he be helped: the vulgar latin reads, O unhappy man,
but that is not so fit. 2. neither does the Apostle thus cry out, either as a
man in despair, or doubting, by whom he should be delivered, but he shows
his great desire: vox est anhelantis, it is the voice of one breathing and
panting, desiring to be delivered from this servitude: Calvin. 3. and by this
exclamation, certaminis gravitatem ostendit, he shows the greatness of this
combat, out of the which he was not able to wrestle by his own strength: and
if Paul were not able, who is? it is then a patheticall speech like unto that,
Psalm. 86. Who will give me the wings, as it were of a done? Faius. 4. And in
this crying out, the Apostle shows the state of all men in this life, into
what misery they are brought by their sin: and likewise his desire, longing
to be delivered therfrom: Pareus.

Quest. 33. What the Apostle understands by this body of death, from the
which he desires to be delivered.
1. Ambrose by the body of death, understands vniuersitatem vitiorum, a
general collection of sins, which he called before, the body of sin; but
there was not in the Apostle such a gathering together and confluence of all
sin. 2. Pererius charge Calvin to agree with Ambrose, who understands by
the body of death, massam vel congeriem peccati, ex qua homo constatus, the
mass and heap of sin, whereof man consists, and thereupon he cries out,
o hominem impurum atque impium, O wicked and filthy man, that is not ashamed
so to charge the Apostle, etc. Whereas Calvin only says, that there were in
the Apostle, reliquiae peccati, some relics of sin, of that mass of sin
and corruption, which is in man: Calvin then and Melancthon do thus understand
the Apostle, naturam hanc carnalem immersam esse peccato, that this carnal
nature is wholly drowned and drenched in sin; so also Martyr, vitiatam and
corruptam naturam intelligit, he understands our corrupt nature: but the
Apostle speaks of death here, not of sin. 3. neither is the body of death
taken here properly for sin, as Faius thinks it was called before the body
of sin, c. 6. and it is considered, tanquam moles and onus incumbens, as a
mass or burden lying upon us: so also Roloch: it is taken for sin in this
place, which is in the body, and in the whole man: likewise Piscator, mortem
intelligit peccatum inhabitans, by death he understands the sin that
dwells in us: and so before them Vatablus, a concupiscentia; etc. he wishes
to be delivered from concupiscence, which did make him guilty of eternal
death: and before him Photius in Oecumenius, applies it to the corporal and
sinful actions, which bring the death of the soul: But in their meaning the
Apostle should say in effect, who shall deliver me from this sinful body?
what could an unregenerate man have said more? 4. neither yet do I approve of
their opinion, which refer it only to the mortality of the body, as
Theophylact, morti subiecti, subject to death: Lyranus, quia sancti resurgent,
etc. because the Saints shall rise in an immortal body: and Pererius, a
corpore mortis huius, from the body of this death, that is subject to
mortality and corruption: for the Apostle has respect thus crying out unto
the conflict between the flesh and the spirit, from which he desires to be
delivered. 5. Cassianus by the body of death would have understood the terrene
business and necessity, quae spirituales homines a coelestium meditatione
retrahit, which draws spiritual men from the meditation of heavenly things:
but the Apostle spoke before of the combat between the flesh and the spirit:
and they are not all carnal, which are occupied in the necessary affairs of
this life. 6. Tolet joining the pronoune this unto death, not unto the body,
reading thus from the body of this death, will have reference to be made unto
the tyranny of the law of concupiscence, whereof he spoke before: but the
pronoune is better joined to body, as the Syrian interpreter, Erasmus, and
Beza, well observe: for of his flesh and members he spoke before, but of death
he made no mention: This demonstrative then this, is better referred to body.
7. Wherefore the Apostle calling his present state out of the which he desires
to be delivered, this body of death, joins both mortality and sin
together; he means his mortal body subject to sin, as Hierome expounds,
quod morti and perturbationibus est oppositum, which is opposed to death, and
perturbations, apolog. advers. Ruffin. and so Beza, the Apostle by the body
designeth, carneam corporis molem, the fleshie mass of the body, which is
nothing else, but mussa mortis and peccati, a lump of death and sin: so
Origin, it is called the body of death in quo habitat peccatum, quod est
mortis causa, wherein sin dwells, which is the cause of death. 8. And this
deliverance which the Apostle longs for, is not the spiritual deliverance in
this life from the captivity of sin, as Tolet, but the final deliverance
from the bondage of mortality and corruption which we look for in the
resurrection, as Augustine expounds, lib. 1. cont. epist. Pelag. c. 11. and
so the Apostles meaning is, non finiri hoc confluctus, etc. that these
conflicts cannot be ended, as long as we carry this mortal body about with
us, Pareus. And here we may consider a threefold state of man's body, the one
in Paradise, cum non potuit mori, when it was in man's power, if he had not
sinned not to die at all: under the state and condition of sin, where non
potest non mori, he cannot but die, a necessity of death is laid upon all
Adams posterity: under the state of glory, non possumus mori, we cannot die:
we shall be exempted from the condition of all mortality, Pererius.

Quest. 25. Why the Apostle gives thanks to God, ver. 25.
1. There is some difference in the reading of these words: the Latin
interpreter thus reads, the grace of God thorough Jesus Christ, so also
Origin before, who makes it an answer to the former words of the Apostle, who
shall deliver (...) likewise Augustine follows this reading, sermon. 45. de
tempor. but all the Greek copies have (...), I give thanks and the Apostle did
not ask the question before, who should deliver him, but suspirat pot^^s, be
sigheth, and shows his desire to be delivered, Beza.

2. For the meaning of the words. 1. some think that the Apostle gives thanks
for his redemption in Christ, Mart. that he is delivered a reatu peccati, from
the guilt of sin original and actual, Roloch: and that his sins are not
imputed, Osiander, and before them Oecumenius, quod me liberavit per mortem
filij, that he has delivered me by the death of his Son: But this
deliverance the Apostle had already obtained: he speaks in the future sense,
who shall deliver me? 2. Theophylact refers it to the former benefit, quod
viriliter adversatur peccato, that he did manfully resist sin, which strength
he had not either by the law of nature, or by the law of Moses, but by grace in
Christ: So also Pareus thinks the Apostle does give thanks, that he does not
succumbere in certamine, sed vincere, give over in this combat, but at the
length overcomes: But the Apostle wishes yet a further deliverance, which as
yet he had not, because he speaks of the time not to come, who shall deliver
me, and yet he gives thanks for it, as enjoying the fame in hope. 3. Tolet
and Pererius think that the Apostle gives thanks, that he was delivered from
concupiscence, quod non mentem trahit in consensum, that it did not draw his
mind to consent: and so he was delivered from it, as it was malum culpae, as
there was sin or fault in it, that is, to consent unto it, but not as it was
malum poenae, a punishment, that is, concupiscere to covet or desire simply
without assent: so also Lyranus: But if the Apostle did not sometime thorough
his infirmity give consent unto his concupiscence, how could he say it did
lead him captive unto the law of sin: and more it is proved at large
afterward, that the commandment, thou shall not lust, whereof the Apostle
confesses himself a transgressor, v. 7.18. does not only restrain the first
motions of concupiscence, which have not the consent of the will, but the
second also which have, controv. 8.4. Vatablus will have this thanksgiving to
be referred to the deliverance, which the Apostle expected in the life to come.
5. But it is better to join them together, as Augustine does, sermon. 45. de
tempor. the grace of God, nunc perfect innovat hominem, etc. does now
perfectly renew a man by delivering him from all his sins, and ad corporis
immortalitatem perducit, and brings him also to the immortality of the
body: Lyranus likewise comprehends both these deliverances, that both the
regenerate are here delivered from their sins, and in the next life, shall be
freed from all corruption, as the Apostle says, Philip. 3.21. Who shall change
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body: so
Chrysostom says, the Apostle gives thanks, quod non solum principibus malis
liberamur, sed eoru^, quae futura sunt, capaces facti sumus, that we are not
only delivered from the former evils, namely our sins, but are made capable
of the good things to come: thus also Pelican, the Saints rejoice, se
primitijs spiritus donatos, etc. that they are endued with the first fruits of
the spirit, which give them certain hope of the inheritance to come: and Beza,
the Apostle shows, that he rests in that hope, quam habet in Christo
fundatam, which he has grounded on Christ.

35. Quest. Of these words, I in my mind serve the law of God, etc.
1. By the mind, the Apostle understands the inner man reformed by grace, by
the flesh, the part unregenerate: so that in this speech of the Apostle a
double figure is to be admitted: first a metonymie, in that the subject is
taken for the adiunct, the mind, for the sanctity and holiness wrought in the
mind by grace, as Vatablus well interprets, secundum spiritum meum doctum a
spiritu sancto, in my spirit taught by the holy spirit: and the flesh for the
carnal sensuality, whereby it is lead: there is also a synecdoche, the
principal part being taken for the whole, the mind regenerate, for all the
regenerate part both in the mind and body, because it chiefly shows it
self there; and the flesh for that part which is unregenerate in the whole
man, both in the mind and body, because it is chiefly exercised, and executed
by the body: see before Quest. 26.

2. We are not to understand here two distinct and several parts, the one
working without the other: as the Romanists, which will have the inner man to
be the mind, and the sensual part the flesh: for in this sense neither does
the mind always serve God, wherein there is ignorance, infidelity, error,
nor yet does the sensual part always serve sin: for many virtuous acts are
exercised thereby: see this opinion before confuted, Quest. 31. But these two
parts must be understood as working together, the flesh hinders the spirit,
and blemisheth our best actions. Faius.

3. And whereas the Apostle says, that in my flesh I serve the law of sin,
we must not imagine, that the Apostle was given over unto gross carnal works,
as to commit murder adultery; but he shows the infirmity of his flesh, and
specially he means his natural concupiscence, and corruption of nature, in
the which he gave instance before: against the which pugnabat, luctabatur, he
did strive, and fight. Martyr.

4. Neither yet must we think, that the Apostle, serving the spirit one way,
and the flesh an other, was as a mutable or inconstant man or indifferent: like
as Ephraim is compared to a cake but turned and baked on the one side Hos. 7.8.
or as they, which Revel. 3. are said to be luke warm, neither hot, nor cold:
for these of a set purpose were such, and willingly did dissemble: but the
Apostle sets forth himself, as a man neither perfectly sound, nor yet
sick, but in a state between both: that although he labored to attain to
perfection, yet he was hindered by the infirmity of his flesh, like as an
Israelite dwelling among the Iebusits: Faius.

5. And whereas the Apostle said before, v. 15. it is not I that do it, but
sin that dwells in me: and yet here he says, I my self, etc. in my self
serve the law of sin: the Apostle is not contrary to himself: for he
speaks here of his person that does both, there of of the cause; Tolet.
annot. 25. and so he shows, secundum repugnantia principia, se repugnantia
habere studia, that according unto the contrary beginnings or causes, he has
contrary desires, Pareus.

36. Quest. Of that famous question whether S. Paul do speak in his own
person, or of an other here in this 7. chapter.
There are of this matter diverse opinions, which yet may be sorted into these
three orders. 1. Some think that the Apostle speaks in the person of a man,
not yet in the state of grace. 2. Some of a man regenerate, from v. 14. to the
end. 3. Some that the Apostle indifferently assumeth the person of all
mankind, whether they be regenerate, or not. And in every of these opinions
there is great diversity.

1. They which are of the first opinion, 1. Some think, that the Apostle
speaks in the person of a natural man, and shows what strength a man's free
will has by nature without grace: so Iulianus the Pelagian, with other of that
sect, whose epistles Augustine confuteth: so Lyranus, he speaks in the
person, generis humani lapsi, of humane kind after their fall. 2. Some will
have the person of a man described, sub lege, and ante legem degentis, not
living only before the law, but under it, having some knowledge of sin: so
Chrysostom, Theophylact, whom Tolet follows, annot. 4. 3. Some think that
the Apostle describes a man not altogether under the law, nor yet wholly under
grace: but of a man beginning to be converted: quasi voluntate and proposito ad
meliora conversi, as converted in mind and desire unto better things, Origin:
so also Basil. (...) ^egal. breviar. and Haymo says, the Apostle speaks ex
persona hominis poenitentiam agentis, in the person of a man penitent, etc.

2. They of the second sort do thus differ. 1. Augustine confesses that
sometime he was of opinion, that the Apostle speaks in the person of a
carnal and unregenerate man, but afterward he changed his mind, upon better
reasons, thinking the Apostle to speak of a spiritual man in the state of
grace: lib. 1. Retract. c. 23. lib. 6. cont. Julian. c. 11. but Augustine
reteining this sense, thinks that the Apostle, saying, v. 15. I allow not
that thing which I do, speaks of the first motions only of concupiscence,
quando illis non consenttatur, when no consent is given unto them: lib. 3.
cont. Julian. c. 26. which concupiscence the most perfect man in this life can
not be void of: so also Gregory understands, simplices motus ceruis contra
voluntatem, the simple motions of the flesh against the will: and hereunto
agrees Bellarm. lib. 5. de amission. great. c. 10. Rhemist. sect. 6. upon this
chapter. 2. Cassianus collat. 23. c. 15. understands a man regenerate: but
then by the inner man he would have signified the contemplation of celestial
things, by the flesh, curam rerum temporalium, the care of earthly things. 3.
Some think that the Apostle so describes a regenerate man, as yet that he may
sometime become in a manner carnal: we see in this example even of Paul
regenerate, etiam regeneratum nonnunquam mancipium fieri peccati, that a
regenerate man, may sometime become the slave of sin. Rolloch. 4. But the
founder opinion is, that the Apostle in his own person speaks of a
regenerate man, even when he is at the best, that he is troubled and exercised
with sinful motions, which the perfectest can not be rid of till he be
delivered from his corruptible flesh: of this opinion was Hilarie, habemus nunc
nobis admistam materiam, quae mortis legi and peccato obnoxia est, etc. we have
now mixed within us a certain matter, which is subject to the law of death and
sin, etc. and until our body be glorified, non potest in nobis verae vita
esse natura, there can not be in us the nature and condition of true life:
Hilar. in Psalm. 118. Of the same opinion are all our foundest new writers,
Melancthon, Martyr, Calvin, Beza, Hyperius, Pareus, Faius, with others.

3. Of the third sort, 1. some are indifferent, whether we understand the
person of the regenerate, or unregenerate, gloss. ordinar. and so Gorrhan
shows how all this, which the Apostle has from v. 18. to the end, may in one
sense be understood of the regenerate, in an other of the unregenerate. 2. Some
think that some things may be applied unto the regenerate, as I am carnal
sold under sin: but some things only can be applied to the regenerate, as
these words, I delight in the law of God, etc. Perer. disput. 21. number. 38. and
yet he rather inclines to think, that the Apostle takes upon him the person
of a man regenerate: And Origin seems to have been of this mind, that
sometime the Apostle speaks in his own person, as I thank God through Jesus
Christ, and sometime in the person of a weak man, and young beginner, as in
the rest. 3. Some take all this discourse of the Apostle, neither to touch the
regenerate, or unregenerate in the particular, but the nature of mankind in
general: as Hierome notes, that the Apostle said not, O wretched sinner, but
O wretched man, vt totam complecteretur naturam omnium hominum, and non tantum
peccatorum, etc. that he might comprehend the nature of all men, and not only
of sinners: lib. 2. cont. Pelag. so also Erasmus, humani generis in se personam
recipit, etc. he takes upon him the person of mankind, wherein is both the
Gentile without the law, the carnal Jew under the law, and the spiritual man
made free by grace: Annot. in hunc locum.

Now of all these opinions, which are ten in all, we embrace the fourth of
the second fort: and this diversity of opinion may be reduced to this point,
whether the Apostle speak in his own person of a man regenerate, or in an
assumed person of a man unregenerate: the other particular differences, have
been dispersedly touched before. Now then the arguments shall be produced with
their answers, which are urged on both sides: and first for the negative, that
the Apostle gives not instance here of a man regenerate, and spiritual, but
carnal and unregenerate.

Argum. 1. Origin urges these reasons: first the righteous man is not said to
be carnal, 2. Cor. 10.3. We do not marry after the flesh: But the Apostle
here says, v. 14. I am carnal.

2. Of the righteous the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 6.20. ye are bought for a
price, but here the Apostle says, v. 14. I am sold under sin.

3. Of the righteous it is said, c. 8.9. the spirit of God dwells in you: but
here the Apostle confesses, that no good thing dwells in him.

4. Origin also presses these words, v. ^8. in my flesh I serve the law of
sin, if the Apostle should speak thus of himself, desparationem mihi
videtur incutere, it were able to strike despair unto us, that there is no man
who does not serve sin in the flesh.

5. The regenerate, such as Paul was, do not only will that which is good,
but perform it also: but this man cannot do, that he would, of whom the
Apostle speaks, ver. 15. Tolet.

6. The righteous and just man cannot be said to be captiued unto sin, as the
Apostle says of that man, whose person he bears, v. 23. Cassianus collat.
22. in fine.

7. The Apostle speaking of himself, and of others which are regenerate, said
before, v. 5.6. When we were in the flesh, etc. the motions of sins, etc. had
force in our members, etc. but now we are delivered from the law, etc. But here
the Apostle speaks of a man, that is captiued unto the motions of the flesh,
so that the Apostle if he should speak here of a regenerate man, would
contradict himself.

8. The scope of the Apostle is to show the invaliditie of the law, that it
cannot take away sin, but sin rather is increased thereby, by reason of the
weakness of man's nature: it is therefore more agreeable to the Apostles intent,
to give instance of a carnal man, in whom sin yet reigns, then of a
regenerate man, that by grace is brought to yield obedience to the law, Tolet.
c. 10. in tractat.

9. Hierome, and before him Origin thus show, that the Apostle here assumeth
the person of an other: like as Daniel being a just man yet prays in the
person of sinners, saying, c. 9. we have sinned, we have done wickedly, Hierome
epist. 151. ad Algasiam.

The former arguments answered.
1. The regenerate simply are not called carnal, but secundum quid, after a
sort they are carnal in respect of the unregenerate part: as the Apostle
speaking to the Corinthians, that were believers, and justified, sanctified, 1.
Cor. 6.11. yet calls them carnal, in regard of the sects and divisions among
them, 1. Cor. 3.1. And one is said to be carnal two ways, either he which is
altogether obedient to the flesh and fleshly lusts: or he that does not yield
himself unto them, but strives against them, and yet against his will feels
the violent motions thereof: so the Apostle confesses, that though he war
not after the flesh, ye^ he walks after the flesh, 2. Cor. 10.3.

2. The righteous is bought for a price, and redeemed from his sins, and yet
in respect of his unregenerate part, the corruption of nature and relics of
sin remaining, he is said to be sold under sin, not simply, as the
unregenerate is given over wholly, but in part only.

3. In the faithful as they are regenerate, the spirit of God dwells, but in
their unregenerate part sin inhabiteth: there is no inconvenience to grant,
that two diverse inhabitants may dwell in one and the same house, in two
diverse parts: for the Apostle speaking of the regenerate, says, Galat. 5.17.
The spirit lusts against the flesh, and the flesh against the spirit, and
these are contrary one to the other: they which feel not this fight and
combat are either Angelical, as the Saints in heaven, or they have not yet
received the spirit at all, as they which are carnal.

4. There are two kinds of services to sin, the one is a willing service,
such as is in the unregenerate, the other unwilling, and in a manner forced, as
in the regenerate.

5. The unregenerate have no will at all to do good, for the wisdom of the
flesh is not subject to the Law of God, neither can be, Romans 8.7. the
regenerate receive grace to will, and sometime to perform, though not as they
would: they are therefore regenerate though not perfectly, as none are in this
life.

6. There are two kinds of captivity, the one, when one is wholly captiued
under the bondage of his own voluntary sin, the other is a forced
captivity under the bondage of original sin, this is in the righteous, not
the other.

7. The Apostle is not contrary to himself: for it is one thing to obey the
lusts of the flesh, as the unregenerate and carnal; an other, to feel the
motions of the flesh, and to strive against them, as in the regenerate.

8. The Apostles intent and meaning is to show, that the law in it self is
good and just, and that it comes by reason of man's own infirmity, that it
is otherwise to him, and thereupon the Apostle to set forth the perfection of
the law, gives instance in the regenerate, that they are not able to keep
the law, much less the unregenerate: so that it is more agreeable to the scope
and purpose of the Apostle, to speak of a man regenerate, then of one
unregenerate.

9. Even Daniel, though he be called a man of desires, that is, beloved, and
excepted of God, yet had his sins, which he confessed in his own name, and
person: as David is said to be a man after Gods own heart, yet he had his
sins and imperfections.

Arguments for the affirmative part, that S. Paul speaks in his own person
as of a man regenerate.
First these two points must be premised, that the Apostle speaks of
himself, not of another, still continuing his speech in the first person, I am
carnal, I will, I consent, I delight, and so throughout, that it should be a
great forcing of the Apostles speech, to make him to speak of another and not
of himself: secondly the Apostle from the 14. v. to the end, speaks of his
present state, (who was then regenerate) as may appear, because while he was
yet under the law, he speaks as of the time past, v. 9. I was alive, and v.
10. sin seduced me: but from the 14. v. he speaks of the time present, I am
carnal, and so throughout to the end of the chapter.

Argum. 1. Hence then is framed our first reason: the Apostle speaks of
himself, as he then was, because he speaks in the present tence: but then he
was a man regenerate; Ergo.

Theophylact answers; the Apostle says, I serve, v. 15. that is, serviebam,
I did serve: Contra. As the Apostle says I serve, so he says, I delight in
the law of God, v. 22. and in this verse. 25. I thank God, etc. which
immediately go before the other, I serve: but those words must be understood,
as they are uttered, of the time present, therefore the other also.

Argum. 2. Gregory urges these words v. 18. to will is present with me, he
that says he will, per infusionem gratiae, quae in se iam lateant semina
ostendit, does show what seed lies hid in him by the infusion of grace, lib.
29. moral. c. 15.

Ans. Even the unregenerate by nature do will that is good: they may
imperfecte velle (...) sieve gratia in peccato, imperfectly will that is good
without grace even in the state of sin, Tolet. in. tractat. c. 9.

Contra. There is bonum natural, morale, spirituale, that which is naturally
good, morally good, spiritually good: the first one by nature may desire, as
b^ute beasts do the same, and therein they do neither good, nor evil: the
second also in some sort, as the heathen followed after moral virtues, but
they did it not without sin, because they had no faith; but that which is
spiritually good, the carnal have no mind at all unto: for it is God, which
works both the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13.

Argum. 3. Augustine presses these words, v. 17. It is not I that do it, but
sin that dwells in me, this is not vox peccatoris, sed iusti, the voice of
a sinner, but of a righteous man: lib. 1. cont. 2. epist. Pelag. c. 10.

Ans. A sinner may be said not to do evil, not because he does not consent
unto it, but because he is not only moved of himself, but drawn by his
concupiscence: Tolet. ibid.

Contra. There is nothing in a man to give consent unto any action, but either
his spiritual or carnal part: but in the unregenerate there is nothing
spiritual, but all is natural; therefore whatsoever such an one does he wholly
consents; he himself is not one thing, and his sin another to give
consent: but he is wholly moved and lead of sin.

Argum. 4. Augustine adds further: the Apostle thus begins the 8. chapter:
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which words follow
as inferred upon the other: which shows that the Apostle spoke before of
those which were in Christ Jesus.

Ans. Nay rather those words following upon the other, who shall deliver me,
etc. which the Apostle utters of a man not yet delivered or freed from his
sin, and makes answer, the grace of God, etc. show, that he spoke before as
of our not being in the state of grace: Tolet. ibid.

Contra. 1. It is the bondage of corruption, which the Apostle desires to be
delivered from, as is showed before, qu. 33. neither does the Apostle answer,
the grace of God, etc. but I give thanks to God, as likewise has been
declared qu. 34. before: but one not in the state of grace, cannot give thanks
unto God: therefore the immediate connection of these words, c. 8. shows that
he spoke before of those, which are in Christ.

Argum. 5. Further Augustine thus reasons: a carnal man cannot delight in
the law of God, in the inner man, as Saint Paul does: neither indeed is there
any inner man, that it regenerate and renewed in those which are carnal:
Pareus.

Ans. 1. The unregenerate may delight in the law, as Herod did: and it is
nothing else, but velle bonum, to will that which is good: Tolet. ibid. and
they have also the inner man, which is the mind, as the outward man is the
body.

Contra. 1. The carnal cannot delight in the law, but they hate it, as Psalm.
50.17. this hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee: Herod
gave care to John Baptist, not of love, but for fear, for afterward he put him
to death: Hypocrites and carnal men, may stand in some awe, and fear a while,
but it is not of love, nor in truth, or from the heart. 2. the inner part, is
that with spiritual, and renewed: but in the wicked their very mind is
defiled, Tit. 1.15. therefore in them there is no inner man: see before qu. 26.

Argum. 6. The Apostle desires to be delivered from his corruptible and
sinful body, hoping then for perfect liberty: but in the resurrection the
carnal shall have no such liberty: they shall rise to greater misery.
Augustine.

Ans. The deliverance there spoken of is by justification from sin, not in
the resurrection. Tolet. ibid.

Contra. The Apostle evidently speaks of being delivered from this body of
death, that is, his mortal body, which shall not be till the resurrection.

Argu. 7. The children of God, that are regenerate, do only find in themselves
the fight and combat between the spirit and flesh, Gala. 5.17. as the Apostle
does here, v. 22. Pareus.

Argum. 8. The unregenerate do not use to give thanks unto God, but they
sacrifice to their own net, as the Prophet says, Hab. 1.16. they give the
praise to themselves: But S. Paul here gives thanks: Faius.

Argum. 9. No man but by the spirit of God, can hate and disalow that which is
committed against the law of God, as the Apostle does here, v. 15. Hyperius.

Argum. 10. To what end should the Apostle thus at large show the effects and
end of the law for their cause, qui prorsus sunt a Deo alieni, which are
altogether strangers from God, and care not for his law? Faius: by these and
such like reasons it is concluded, that S. Paul speaks in the person of a man
regenerate.

Quest. 37. Whether S. Paul was troubled with the tentations of the flesh, and
with what.
1. S. Paul was before his calling tempted and carried away with diverse lusts,
as he confesses Tit. 3.3. then giving consent unto them, and following the^
with delight: after his calling he felt also the pricking and stirring of his
flesh, but it had not dominion over him, as before: as here the Apostle
shows, how he did find the law of his members rebelling against the law of
his mind and spirit: and these temptations of the flesh the Lord suffered the
Apostle to be troubled with, least he should be extolled by reason of his other
excellent gifts, as he himself shows, 2. Cor. 12.7. whereupon Gregory well
says, custos virtutis infirmitas, infirmity is the guardian and keeper of
virtue, ad ima pertrahit caro, ne extollat spiritus, ad alta sustollit
spiritus, ne prosternat caro, the flesh draws us down, that the spirit lift
us not up, and the spirit does rear us up, that the flesh should not
altogether cast us down, lib. 19. Moral. c. 4.

2. But whereas the Apostle says, There was given unto me the prick of the
flesh, etc. 2. Cor. 12.7. 1. neither thereby is signified the afflictions and
griefs which the persecutors put his body unto, as Chrysostom. Theodoret. 2. or
the pain of the head, gloss. ordinar. or the cholike, as Lyranus, or some
other such bodily infirmity, which would have much hindered the Apostle in his
ministry. 3. nor yet much less, was this prick the lust of his flesh, as
Hierome thinks epist. 22. and Haymo, so also Pererius disput. 23. for it is
not like that Paul's body being tamed and kept under, with fastings,
watchings, labor, had any such fleshy desire. 4. But hereby is better to
understand, omne tentationum genus, etc. every kind of carnal temptation
wherewith S. Paul was exercised, Calvin, Beza.

4. Places of Doctrine.
Doct. 1. All things fall out to the wicked for their hurt.
v. 8. Sin took occasion by the commandment: Pet. Mart. hereupon well
observes, that all things to the unregenerate fall out unto evil: for if the
law do give advantage to sin, which is holy, just, and good of it self,
how much are other things turned to their hurt, as all things to them that love
God fall out to their good, Romans 8.28.

Doct. 2. Of the necessary use of the law.
v. 8. Without the law sin is dead: That is, it lies hid, and is unknown:
hence both Pareus, and Piscator note, concionem legis in Ecclesia necessariam,
that the preaching of the law is necessary in the Church, that sin may be
known, and come to light: and thus the law by revealing our sin, is a
schoolmaster to lead us to Christ, Galat. 3.19. to find righteousness in him,
which we have not in our selves.

Doct. 3. Of the effects of the law.
v. 9. When the commandment came, sin reuived: There are 3. effects of the
law here expressed by the Apostle: two it brings forth of it self: the
manifestation of sin, and thereupon the sentence of death: the third it
works not of it self, but accidentally, namely the increase of sin,
through the perverseness of man's nature, which strives against that which is
forbidden, Par.

Doct. 4. Of a fiuefold state of man.
v. 23. I see an other law in my members, etc. 1. In Paradise man had natural
concupiscence, but without disorder or rebellion against the mind. 2. before
the law concupiscence rebelled against reason and without resistance. 3. under
the law men resisted concupiscence, but could not vanquish it. 4. under grace
they strive against it and prevail. 5. in heaven these shall be no
concupiscence at all, Perer. disput. 17.

Doct. 5. How death is to be desired.
v. 24. Who shall deliver me? S. Paul desires to be dissolved to make an end
of sin: and thus death may be wished for, as the only remedy of our
misery: the wicked do oftentimes desire death, but it is rather vitae
fastidio, quam impietatis taedio, for that they are weary of their life, not
of sin, Calvin.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. Against Purgatory.
v. 1. The Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives: This shows the
presumption of the Pope, who takes upon him to prescribe laws and rules unto
those which are dead, and their souls as they imagine in purgatory: for no
law imposed upon the living does bind them when they are dead: and concerning
the authority of man, it determines in this life, Matthew. 10.28. Fear not
them which kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul: the Pope then is
no more able to free and absolve the soul after death, then he is to kill and
condemn it.

Controv. 2. Of the lawfulnes of second marriage.
v. 2. If the man be dead, she is delivered from the law of the man: Hence the
lawfulnes of second marriage is proved: for if the woman be free when the man
is dead, and so likewise the man, then is it lawful for them to marry again:
for now they are, as though they never had been bound: Hierome then herein was
deceived, who seems to speak hardly of second marriages, though in words he
will not condemn them: for he says, that a woman marrying after the first
marriage, does not differ much from an harlot: lib. 1. cont. Iovinian. and they
which are twice married he compares to the unclean beasts in Noah's arc: But
Hierome is to be pardoned this oversight, who too much extolling virginity,
which he confesses he had lost himself, ad Eduoch. was carried away in heat
and passion so to ^^i^e of second marriages.

2. The Romanists, though they dare not condemn second marriages simply, yet
in that they denied such to be admitted to orders, as have been twice married,
they show what base conceit they have thereof: Pererius to help this matter,
says that S. Paul would, a Bishop to be the husband of one wife, not because
he condemned second marriages, sed quod ^^ maxim ducebat dignitatem and
sacramentum Episcopi, etc. but because it best become the dignity and
sacrament Episcopal, to be the husband of one wife, as Christ is the spouse of
one Church, etc. disput. 1. number. 2.

Contra. 1. S. Paul means such, as had but one wife at one time, not one
after an other: for there were many in those days, which were newly converted
from Iudaisme, that had more then one wife at once, for among the Jews it was
tolerated: and even by their own decrees, he was counted infamous, qui duas
simul vxores habet, which had two wives at once: decret. Gregor. lib. 1. tit.
21. c. 4. not he which had two one after an other: see (...) elsewhere, Synops.
Cent. 1. err. 78. 2. A dignity Episcopal we acknowledge, but no Sacrament:
for Christ instituted only two, baptism and the Eucharist, which answer unto
the two principal Sacraments of the old Testament, Circumcision and the
Paschal lamb. 3. If it be decent for a Bishop to be the husband of one wife,
as Christ is of one Church: why will they not then allow them to have any wife
at all. 4. Christ indeed is the husband but of one Church at one time; yet the
Church of the old Testament, and the Church of the new did one succeed an
other: so then this resemblance may hold very well, if likewise a Bishop be the
husband of one wife after an other.

Controv. 3. Whether the marriage bond be indissoluable before the one party
be dead.
1. Pererius would prove the negative, that marrying cannot be dissolved,
quoad vi^culum, in respect of the bond, if it be lawfully contracted, but
only, quoad torum, in respect of their bedding, and conuersing together, no
not for fornication: but after death, by this place of the Apostle, v. 3. If
while she lives she take an other man, she shall be called an adulteress: the
Apostles words are general, that till death part them, neither of them is free.

Contra. 1. The Apostle speaks of marriage, as it was instituted of God,
which by Gods ordinance was to continue as long as life lasts; for God
appointed in the beginning, that the man should cleave unto his wife: here then
the Apostle had no cause to speak of the cases wherein divorce is admitted,
either civilly, as the law of Moses permitted the men to give a bill of divorce
to the women: or by Christian liberty or immunitie, as in the cases of
fornication, or desertion: for when there happens any other separation of
marriage then by death, it falls not out, nisi per vitium, but by the fault of
the one, as Chrysostom here observes: for the Jews were permitted to give
their wives a bill of divorce for the hardness of their heart, as our Savior
says, Matthew. 15. and either their wives were in fault, for the which cause
they dismissed them, or they were in fault, in seeking to be rid of their
wives: likewise in divorce upon fornication, the party divorced was in fault,
but in the case of desertion, the party forsaking was in fault: so none of
these separations was without the fault of the party: but the Apostle speaks
of the institution of marriage, according to Gods ordinance, as it is found and
entire without any such impediment, or let coming between: in which sense it
is not dissolved but by death.

2. Erasmus further answers, that the Apostle only takes his similitude
from marriage: and in a similitude, it is not necessary, that every thing
should agree, neither is it to be pressed in every point.

3. But that in two cases the marriage bond may be dissolved, beside death, by
the fault of either party delinquent, namely for fornication, and upon wilful
desertion, it is evident: the first by the words of our Savior, Matthew. 19.9.
Whosoever shall put away his wife, unless it be for whordome, and marry
another, etc. commits adultery: the other by that place of the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 7.15. if the unbelieving depart, let him depart, a brother or sister is
not in subjection in such things: Pareus, dub. 1. see further else where,
Synops. p. 685. 687.

Controv. 4. That the disparitie of profession is no cause of the dissolution
of marriage.
v. 4. If the man be dead: Gorrhan here puts in a distinction of civil
death, which is by profession, ante carnaletu copulam, before carnal
knowledge, or natural, which is by death properly: for it is the common
opinion of that side, that the man or woman having contracted matrimony, may
either of them forsake the other, before the consummation of marriage, to take
upon them the profession of single life. The Romanists also have another
opinion, that marriage contracted in the time of infidelity before baptism,
is dissolved, and made void, if either of the parties afterward be converted to
the Christian faith: Bellar. de matrimon. c. 12.

But these two exceptions for the disparitie of religion, or profession, to
dissolve matrimony, are contrary to the rule of our Savior, Matthew. 19.9. who
allows no marriage to be dissolved, but for fornication: and Saint Paul
directly prescribes, that the woman should not forsake her unbelieving
husband, if he be content to dwell with her, 1. Cor. 7.13. See further hereof,
Synops. Centur. 3. er. 82. er. 95.

Controv. 5. Whether the bill of divorce, permitted to the Jews, did lawfully
dissolve matrimony under the law.
This question arises by reason of the Apostles general words here, that if
the woman take another man, as long as the first lives, she is called an
adulterer: hence then this doubt is moved, what was to be thought of the men,
which dismissed their wives under the law, and married others, and the woman
likewise so dismissed married again, whether it were adultery in them.

1. Some are of opinion, that by the bill of diuorcement given, the very bond
of matrimony was dissolved, and that then it was lawful for either party to
marry again: as Scotus, Dorandus, Poludanus in 4. Sententiar. distinct. 33.
Caietanus in 24. Deuter. Abulens. in c. 19. Matthew. qu. 49. and Burgens. against
Lyranus, in 24. Deuter. But the words of our Savior Christ make against them,
who says, that Moses permitted them so to do for the hardness of their heart,
Matthew. 19.8. it was therefore tolerated only, and suffered because of their
infirmity, it was not made lawful: and our Savior Christ adds, from the
beginning it was not so: this their instance then of distinguishing their
wives, was a departing from the first institution.

2. Wherefore their opinion is more sound, which think, that although because
of the hardness of their heart, to avoid a greater mischief, namely
vxoricidium, the murdering of their wives, they were permitted to send them
away; yet the marriage was not in truth dissolved: they married again, sine
poena legali, without any legal punishment, but yet non sine peccato, not
without sin: Thus Pererius; showing the same to be the opinion of Thomas,
Bonaventure, Lyranus, with others, and before them Augustine, lib. 19. cont.
Faustum. c. 26. and Hierome in c. 2. Malach. And further Augustine shows,
that Moses intendment, in granting a dismission of the wife upon a bill of
diuorcement, was to have them reconciled: that whereas only the Scribes were
to write the bills of diuorcement of purpose, henc interposuit moram, he put in
this caution, to delay the matter, that while the man went unto the Scribe,
while his bill was in writing, his mind might be altered, especially by the
persuasion of the Scribe, who in his discretion was not to write any such bill,
if reconciliation might otherwise be had.

So then of this liberty of the Jews, the like judgment is to be given as of
the polygamie or marriage of many wives, that neither was void of infirmity,
which God did bear within those times: but neither was ever simply lawful,
the first institution being violated.

Controv. 5. Against the works of propitiation.
v. 4. That we should bring forth fruit unto God, etc. This place is well urged
by Pet. Martyr against the propitiatory works unto justification, which the
Romanists affirm may be done by men yet unregenerate, and not yet called: Here
the Apostle evidently shows, that they which bring forth fruit unto God, must
first be an others, that is, married unto Christ: they cannot do any thing that
good is without him, as our Blessed Savior himself says, Without me ye can
do nothing, Ioh. 15.5.

Controv. 6. Against the heretics which condemned the law.
v. 5. The motions of sins, which were by the law: By these and such like
places the Marcionites, Valentinians, Manichees, took occasion to condemn the
law as evil, because thereby sin was increased: But Augustine answeareth,
de verbis Apostoli sermon. 4 that they do imponere Christianis non simplicibus,
sed negligentibus, etc. deceive Christians not so much simple, as negligent,
for it is no hard matter says he to refell their blasphemies by that which the
Apostle writes afterward in this chapter, for v. 12. he says, the law is
holy, and the commandments just and holy, just and good: and in that the
motions of sin are said to be by the law, id ex eo fit, quia in carne sumus,
it comes of this, because we are in the flesh, Mart. the law then took
occasion by the weakness of our flesh, and so the evil motions did rise up in
us.

Controv. 7. That we are freed by grace from the strict and rigorous
observation of the law.
Pererius disput. 6. misliketh these assertions of M. Calvin, and takes upon
him to confute him: diligenter meminerimus, etc. let us diligently remember
that this is not a solution from that righteousness, which is taught in the
law, sed a rigida exactione, and ab ea quae jude sequitur, maledictione, but
from the and strict rigorous exacting of keeping the law, and the malediction
and curse which follows thereupon: And he heapeth up diverse places of
scripture to show, that the obedience of the law is now exacted of us, as
Romans 2. Not the hearers of the law, but the doers shall be justified, Romans
3.31. Do we destroy the law by faith? God forbid, yea, we establish the law,
Perer. disput. 6.

Contra. 1. Pererius in confuting their opinion, that hold we are freed from
the obedience of the law, fights with his own shadow: and Calvin, whom he
refelleth as he is by him alleged, says in express words that we are not
freed from the righteousness of the law to keep it: And therefore he sets
down his opinion falsely: as though he or any other Protestant should affirm,
Christianos esse a legis observatione liberatos, that Christians are freed from
the observation of the law, as he puts the case.

2. But their opinion, that Christians are bound to keep the law, and are
enabled to keep it by grace, and in keeping thereof are justified, is
contrary to the doctrine of the Apostle, that we are justified by faith
without the works of the law, Romans 3.28.

3. It is then a most true assertion, that we are freed from the rigorous and
strict observation of the law, which was required of the Jews, to be
justified by the keeping of it, and from the curse which follows upon the not
keeping of the law: for it is written, Cursed is every one, that continues
not in all things which are written in the book of the law: from which curse
Christ has delivered us, being made a curse for us, as the Apostle shows,
Galat. 3.10.13. see further Synops. Centur. 4. err. 60.

Controv. 8. That concupiscence though it have no deliberate consent of the
will, is sin, and forbidden by the commandment.
The contrary is mentioned by the Romanists, motus concupiscentia adres
illicitas, etc. the motions of the concupiscence to unlawful things, whereby
man is stirred up to desire any thing against the law of God, unless the will
and consent be thereunto, not to be sin, Pererius disput. 8. with the rest of
that rank: their reasons are these.

1. Argum. That which is natural in man, non potest rationem habere mali,
cannot be counted evil: but concupiscence is natural, and was in man before
his fall: and if any man should be now created of God in pure naturalls without
original sin, he should feel the motions of concupiscence, not to be
obedient unto reason, Pererius: Stapleton adds antidot. p. 360. that the
Scripture seems to command some concupiscence: as the Apostle says, he that
desires the office of a Bishop, he desires a good work, 1. Timoth. 3.1.

Contra. 1. As concupiscence is a natural faculty, it is neither sin nor
forbidden, if the concupiscence be of things lawful, as of meat or drink,
and in due manner not to covet them much, and to a good end, to covet them to
the glory of God, and our own, and our neighbors good: but the concupiscence
as it is tainted and corrupted with original sin, is evil and forbidden by
the commandment. 2. This concupiscence in the unregenerate is continually
evil, in the regenerate there may be a concupiscence of lawful and
indifferent things, as either of those things, which are proper and peculiar to
a man, as the desire of a man to his wife, or of things which are common and
appropriate to no man, as to desire an office: but yet even the concupiscence
in such things, though it be lawful, yet it is not without some fault even in
the regenerate, by reason of the corruption of their nature; only the
concupiscence and desire of spiritual things, is simply lawful, but such
concupiscence is without the compass of the commandment, Thou shall not covet.

2. Argum. Involuntaria non sunt peccata, etc. that which is inuoluntarie is
not sin, but such motions of concupiscence, which have not the consent of the
will are inuoluntarie: Pere. Stapleton, ibid.

Contra. 1. The proposition is not generally true, for not the will of man, but
the law of God is the rule of good and evil: and original sin in infants is
not voluntary, but it is propagated by a necessity of nature corrupted by the
fall of Adam: and the Apostle says Gala. 5.15. ye cannot do those things,
which ye would. 2. the sins, which at the first are voluntary, afterward
become necessary, as he that has gotten an habit of intemperancie, can
hardly refrain, though he would: so that it is true, which Aristotle says,
lib. 3. Ethicor. c. 5. nemo volens malus, nec invitus foelix, no man is evil
with his will, not happy against his will: So that it suffices that sin was
once voluntary, though it afterward became necessary; as original sin with
the motions of concupiscence, that do proceed from it, though now it be
necessary and cannot be avoided, yet in Adam it was voluntary, by whose
willing transgression, a necessity of sinning is transmitted to his posterity.

3. Argum. Whatsoever is truly and properly sin is taken away in baptism,
both original sin, and the corrupt motions springing from thence: therefore
such motions in the baptized are not sin.

Contra. 1. As original sin is taken away in baptism, so all other sins
are: for baptism serves for the remission of all sins, Act. 2.38. even then
sins are wholly removed in baptism, it would follow, that they which are
baptized, should have no sins at all. 2. Wherefore in baptism, reatus
tollitur, the guilt of sin is taken away, yet sin it self remains: but
it is not imputed: neither does sin remain in the full strength, but the
power thereof is subdued, and the kingdom of sin in the regenerate
vanquished, but yet there remain some relics of sin still, as long as we
are in this flesh: and this daily experience shows, how they which are
regenerate are not altogether freed from the inhabitation, and in-dwelling of
sin, though it reign not in them. 3. And whereas Pererius obiecteth
Augustine, who confuting that slander of the Pelagians, who affirmed that the
Catholics should hold, baptismum non auferre sed radere peccata, that baptism
does not take away sin, but as it were shave it, because concupiscence
remains, the root of sin; denies that the Catholics teach any such
thing, but that baptism indeed does auferre crimina, take away sins: lib.
13. cont. 2. epist. Pelag. Augustine must be understood to speak of the guilt
of concupiscence, which is removed in baptism: as he says, lib. 6. c. 8.
cont. Julian. quamvis eius reatus, qui fuerat generatione contractus, sit
regeneratione transactus, though the guilt thereof, contracted in the
generation, be transacted and done away in regeneration, yet it remains still
in homine secum confligente, in man having a conflict with himself, etc.

4. Argum. The la^^ commands not things impossible, which can not be avoided,
but these first motions of concupiscence, no man can shun or avoid:
Augustine says, nec impossible Deus hominis imperare potuit, quia iustus etc.
neither could God command any impossible thing to man, because he is just, nec
damnaturus est hominem pro eo, etc. neither will he condemn a man for that,
which he that is godly can not avoid: sermon. 61. de tempor. Perer. ibid.

Contra. 1. The law simply is not impossible to man, considered as he was at
the first created of God: in that it is now impossible, it is by reason of the
weakness and frailty of man's flesh, Romans 8.3, which imbecillitie of nature came
in, by man's voluntary transgression. 2. The Law though impossible to be kept
by a natural man, was given unto other ends, then that he should, or could
perfectly keep it, and in keeping thereof be justified: but it was given as a
schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3.19. that finding themselves
weak, they might seek to be clothed with the righteousness of Christ. 3.
Augustine speaks of a possibility by grace, not in nature, Nemo quantum
possumus melius novis, quam qui ipsum posse donavit, no man can better tell,
what we can do, then he which gave us power, etc. which Augustine affirms,
not as though any man had power by grace to keep all which is commanded, but
only to show against the Manichees, hominem posse vitare peccata, that a man
by grace may decline (some) sins, which they denied.

5. Argum. S. James says, c. 1.16. When lust has conceived it brings forth
sin, and when sin is perfected, it brings forth death, hence it
follows, that either concupiscence is not sin, it only brings forth
sin, or if it be, it is no mortal sin, for sin only when it is perfited
brings forth death.

Contra. 1. It follows not concupiscence brings forth sin, therefore it
is no sin: it follows, that it is not that sin, which it begets or
brings forth, but yet one sin may beget an other: this is like, as if a man
should thus reason: a man begets a man, therefore he is not a man: he is not
indeed that man, which he begets, yet a man therefore, because he begets
a man; and so one sin may bring forth an other. 2. neither does it follow,
sin which is perfited brings forth death: Ergo, sin not perfited brings
forth death: which is as if one should thus reason: the father begets a
mortal man, therefore the grandfather does not: sin perfited is said to
bring forth death as the nearest cause; but yet sin not perfected or
produced, as the remote cause also brings forth death: for otherwise neither
original sin, not yet the second motions of concupiscence, which have the
consent of the will, should be worthy of death, before they do break forth
into act: Now our contrary arguments, that even concupiscence it self without
the consent of the will, either of things unlawful, or of things lawful
unlawfully is sin, are these, and such like as follow.

Argum. 1. Whatsoever is forbidden by the law is sin: for sin is defined
to be the transgression of the law, 1. Job. 3.4. but the very first motions
of concupiscence are forbidden by the law, and are a transgression thereof:
Ergo. So Augustine, multum honi facit, etc. he performs a great good, that
does as it is written, thou shall not go after thy desires, Eccles. 18. sed
non perfectum bonum facit, etc. but he does not that which is perfectly good,
who fulfilleth not that which is written, thou shall not lust, etc. lib. de
mixed. and concupiscent. c. 23. etc. 29.

Answ. Pererius answeareth, 1. that the motions of concupiscence having not the
consent of the will, are not forbidden by the commandment. 2. and S. Augustine
means not that the precept, thou shall not lust, cannot be fulfilled here, so
far as it binds a man, but as it excludes concupiscence altogether: which
cannot be till the next life, disputat. 9. numer. 50.

Contra. 1. The Apostle means the very lusts and unlawful desire of the
heart, without consent of the will, as he says, v. 15. what I hate, that do
I: his concupiscence tempted him even against his will: and whereas he says,
he had not known lust without the law, he means the very first motions: for
the second motions, which have the will concurring, as envy, hatred, and such
like, many of the heathen, which knew not the law condemned by the light of
nature as evil. 2. it is true, that to be without concupiscence, is not
incident to this life: yet is it a breach of the commandment: for the precept
so far binds, as it is commanded: if then we be commanded, not to covet at
all, and yet we do covet, we are bound to keep it, and in not keeping of it
we sin. 3. further, if the last commandment as not of coveting a man's wife
restrain not the very first rising de^^^es, it should not differ from the 7.
precept, which restrains the lusts of the heart, that have the will
consenting, Matthew. 5.28.

Argum. 2. That which hinders us from doing our duty unto God, in loving him
with all our heart and strength, and in obeying of his will, is sin: but this
does concupiscence: for it hindered the Apostle, v. 19. I do not that good
thing which I would.

Ans. Pererius answers, that concupiscence does not hinder us from loving of
God, and doing of his will, so far as we are bound to this life: for God may be
loved with all the heart two ways: one is modus perfectionis, the way of
perfection, which is when the heart actually loves nothing but God, and thus
God shall be loved only in heaven: the other way is, so far as it binds a
man in this life, when the heart is habitually inclined unto God, so that it
admit nothing against it: as this kind of love is not hindered, as he says by
the first motions of concupiscence: to the same purpose he alleges Thomas,
that a precept is two ways fulfilled: the one is perfectly, quando pervenitur
ad finem, when we attain unto the end intended by him which gives the
precept: the other imperfectly, cum non receditur ab ordine ad finem, when we
depart not from the way which leads to the end: as when the captain bids
his soldiers fight to obtain the victory: he which fights and has the
victory perfitly fulfilleth his will, he also which fights and does his
best, does his will also, though he get not the victory: the first kind of
fulfilling the precept shall be in patria, in our country, the other is in
via, in the way.

Contra. 1. We grant, that there shall be a greater perfection of obedience in
the next life, then can be attained unto here, but even that perfect obedience
is propounded unto us here, and required of us, Matthew. 5.28. Ye shall be
perfect as your heavenly father is perfect: whereupon Augustine, cur non
praeciperetur in hac vita ista perfectio, etc. why should not this perfection
be commanded even in this life, though no man can attain unto it here, non
(...) recte curritur, etc. for we cannot run right, if it be unknown whether
we should run, etc. lib. de spirit. and liter. c. vltim. And seeing Christ's
righteousness, and obedience of the law, was most perfect, and he came to
perform that which was required of us: it follows, that God in the strict
rule of his justice required of us perfect obedience, which not to perform, is
sin. 2. If God do command the end as our perfection, then he which comes
short, and fails of the end fulfilleth not the commandment: as if the
soldier be commanded not to give over, till he have the victory, breaks his
generals charge, if he get not the superiority of the enemy: And he which
misseth of the end, must needs also recedere ab ordine ad finem, fail in the
means to the end: for otherwise, he might atchieue the end. 3. And that
concupiscence hinders our obedience even in this life, the Apostle shows, v.
19. I do not the good thing which I would.

3. Argum. The Apostle directly calls even concupiscence, wherewith he is
unwilling, sin, v. 20. If I do that I would not, it is no more I that do
it, but the sin that dwells in me: Ergo, it is sin.

Answ. Pererius answeareth, that it is called sin, either because it is
effectus peccati, the effect of sin, as the writing is called the hand,
because it was written with the hand: or because, it brings forth sin, as
frigus, cold, is called pigrum, slothful, because it makes one so.

Contra. 1. But that is properly and truly sin, which causes death, for
death came in by sin: as the Apostle says of concupiscence, that it slew
him, and was unto him the cause of death, v. 10.11. 2. S. Augustine also
confesses, that concupiscence is not only poena peccati, the punishment of
sin, and causa peccati, the cause of sin, sed ipsum peccatum, but sin it
self.

Pererius answeareth that Augustine understands not peccatum morale, a moral
sin, but vitium naturae corruptae, a fault or vice of our corrupt nature, as
the vices in the body, as blindness or deafenes, are called peccata, seu errata
naturae, the faults or errors of nature, because they are against the
integrity and perfection of the nature of the body: so the rebelling of the
carnal concupiscence against the law of reason, is against the integrity and
perfection of the soul, and so an error of nature.

Contra. 1. We grant, that there are natural faults both in the soul, as
forgetfulness, ignorance, dullness of understanding, in the body, weakness,
infirmity, blindness, and such like, which are the fruits and effects of
sin, but not sin themselves: but concupiscence is none of that kind: for
all these infirmities are effects and passions: but the concupiscence rebelling
against the mind, is active and working, and Augustine himself gives a
reason, why he calls it sin, quia inest illi inobedientia contra dominatum
mentis, because there is in it disobedience against the law of the mind,
governed by grace: so that it disobeyeth not only the law of the mind, but
resists the motions of the spirit; now all disobedience to the will of God is
sin. 2. and that it is not natural, but a moral and spiritual sin,
appears by the effects, because it causes the spiritual death of the soul.

Argument. 4. Unless the precept, Thou shall not lust, did prohibit the very
first motions, that have not the consent of the will, then should there be no
difference between this and the other precepts, which do condemn also ipsos
prauos affectos, the evil affections, as of wrath, envy, in the sixth, of lust
and carnal desire, to the which the will is inclined, in the seventh; so then
this commandment, ipsos appetitus, quibus titillamur, does condemn the very
appetite, which tickleth us, though it have not our consent: Calvin: Pererius
answers, that the other commandments only prohibit, ipsos externos actus,
the eternal acts of stealing, committing adultery, and such like. numer. 58.

Contra. 1. Our Blessed Savior confuteth him, who Matthew. 5. shows how in the
former commandments the very affections and inward purposes are restrained,
as of anger in the sixth, thou shall not kill, of lusting after a woman in the
heart, in the seventh, thou shall not commit adultery. 2. yea Pererius
confuteth himself, confessing afterward, numer. 60. praeceptis illis
legalibus, ^on solum externa peccata, etc. in those legal precepts, not the
external works of sin only to be prohibited, but the very inward
concupiscence: But we have stayed somewhat to long in this controversy.

Controv. 9. That the commandment, Thou shall not lust, is but one.
1. The Roman catechism, which the Romanists generally follow, divide the
last commandment into two, the first forbidding the coveting of things of
pleasure, as the neighbors wife, the other things of profit, as our neighbors
house and goods: and they make the two first commandments, thou shall have no
other Gods, etc. and thou shall make to thy self no graven image, etc. but one.

2. Contra. 1. The Apostle calls it (...), a commandment, in the singular
number, not commandments. 2. if they were two commandments, it should not be
known, in what order they should be set, which before the other: for Exodus 20.
it is first said, thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, but Deuter. 5.21.
thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, is put in the first place. 3. beside,
if every particular act of coveting should make a diverse commandment, the
number of them should be infinite: Pareus.

3. Pet. Martyr herein concurreth, that the precept, thou shall not lust, is
but one, but he has here a singular opinion by himself: that the two first
commandments, thou shall have no other Gods, etc. and thou shall not make to
thy self, etc. are but one: and the first commandment he would have that to
be, which is set as a preface before the rest, I am the Lord thy God, which
brought, etc. for here it is enacted, that the Lord only is the true God; and
in this first commandment, the Gospel is offered unto us: for in that mention
is made of their deliverance out of Egypt; there the promise concerning Christ
is contained: But this is only a private opinion and a singular conceit of so
learned a man, by himself: which may be thus reasoned against; 1. all the
commandments are propounded imparatively, thou shall not do this, or thou
shall not do that: but those words are uttered enuntiative, they are
propounded only, not spoken by way of commanding. 2. and if he will have the
temporal deliverance out of Egypt, to contain a promise of Christ, it is so
much the rather no part of the moral commandments: for the law and faith are
opposite, one contains not nor includes an other: as the Apostle says, the
law is not of faith, Gal. 3.12. no more is faith of the law.

10. Controv. Against free will.
v. 19. The evil, that I would not, that do I. The Rhemists note here, that
this makes nothing against free will, but plainly proves it, because to
consent or not consent is always free, though the operation may be hindered by
some external force.

Contra. 1. The will of the unregenerate is free from coaction, and compulsion,
but not from a necessity always of willing that is evil. 2. and in the
regenerate, of which state the Apostle speaks in his own person, the will is
reformed by grace to will that which is good: as our blessed Savior says,
Ioh. 8.33. If the Son make you free, then you are free in deed: this place
then evidently makes against the natural strength of free will unto that
which is good.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Every one must descend into himself.
v. 7. I knew not sin, but by the law: As Paul here gives instance in
himself, and examineth his sins by the law; so every one is taught by his
example to enter into himself, and call his life and acts to account: as David
says, Psalm. 32.5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, etc.

2. Observe. Against phanaticall spirits, that excuse sin.
v. 17. It is no more I, that do it: men that are given over to all carnal
lusts, must not think to excuse themselves thus, that it is sin, that does
it, and not themselves: for they must also say with the Apostle, v. 16. I do
that which I would not: they cannot then apply this to themselves, qui non
pugnant, which do not fight or strive against sin.

3. Observe. Of delighting in the law of God.
v. 22. I delight, etc. Hypocrites may seem to conform themselves often to
the obedience of the law, as Herod, that a while heard John gladly, but it is
not in love, or with delight, which is only in them that are regenerate: as
the Prophet David says, that the law of God was sweeter unto him, then the
honey or honey comb, Psalm. 19.

Observe. 4. Of the fight and combat between the spirit and the flesh.
v. 23. I see an other law, etc. Only the righteous do feel this strife in
themselves, the spirit drawing them one way, and the flesh an other: as the
Apostle here shows in himself, and so, as Gregory says, fit certo
moderamine, etc. this is done in such moderation, that the Saints while they
are in spirit carried one way, and hindered by the flesh, nec desperationis
lapsum, nec elationis incurrunt, they neither fall into despair, nor yet are
lifted up in mind: the like combat between the spirit and flesh we may find
to have been in David, Psalm. 73. 2.17. in Elias, 1. King. 19.4. in Jeremy, c.
20.7. the like temptations Hierome felt in himself, pallebant or a iciunijs,
and men's desiderijs ardebat in frigido corpore, my face was pale with fasting,
and yet my mind burned with desire even in a chill body, epist. 22. this is
much to the comfort of Gods children, not to despair when they are likewise
tempted.

CHAP. VIII.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1. Now then there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus,
which walk ( walking. Gr.) not after the flesh, but after the spirit: ( which
walk not after the flesh. L. S. detr.)

2 For the law of the spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me (
thee, S.) from the law of sin, and of death.

3 For (that which was impossible to the law, in as much as it was weak
because of the flesh) God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful
flesh ( flesh of sin, Gr. in a form like unto flesh subject to sin, Be.
this is the sense, but not the meaning of the words) and for sin, (not, of
sin, L.V. the word is (...), for) condemned sin in the flesh: ( in his
flesh, S. ad.)

4 That the righteousness ( the justification, L.T.S. the right, Be. the word is
(...)) of the law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit.

5 For they which are after the flesh ( which are in the flesh, S. which are
carnal. V.B.) do savor the things of the flesh, Be. G. (do think the
things of the flesh, S. are carnally minded, B. (...), Gr.) but they that are
after the spirit, the things of the spirit.

6 For the wisdom of the flesh is death: but the wisdom of the Spirit, is
life, and peace,

7 Because the wisdom of the flesh ( the affection of the flesh, V. the
fleshly mind, B. the understanding of the flesh, S.) is enmity against God:
for it is not subject to the law of God, neither in deed can be.

8 So then, they that are in the flesh, can not please God.

9 Now ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, seeing the Spirit of God (
not if so be the spirit of God, L.S.B. the word (...), is taken for (...), for
as much: as 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.) dwells in you: but if any have not the Spirit of
Christ, the same is not his.

10 And if Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin: but the
Spirit is life, because of righteousness. ( for righteousness sake, B.G.)

11 But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you,
he that raised Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by
his spirit ( because of his Spirit, V.L.S.B. but the preposition (...), put to
a genitive case, rather signifies, by) that dwells in you.

12 Therefore brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the
flesh:

13 For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye mortify the deeds
of the body ( flesh. L.) by the Spirit, ye shall live.

14 For as many as are led ( driven, V. (...)) by the Spirit, they are the
sons of God.

15 For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again unto fear: but ye
have received the spirit of adoption ( of Sons. S. of the Sons of God. L.
add.) whereby ( wherein, L.) we cry, Abba father.

16 The same spirit bears witness with our spirit that we are the sons of
God.

17 If we be sons ( children. G.) we are also heirs, even the heirs of God,
and joint heirs ( heirs annexed. G. partakers of the inheritance of, S.
coheires. Be. V.) with Christ: if so be we suffer together, with him, that we
may be also glorified together, with him.

18 For I count that the afflictions of this present time, are not answerable (
or meet, V. Be. S. worthy. L. B. G. but the word (...), (worthy) being
construed with the preposition(...), is rather taken in the first sense.) to
the glory which shall be revealed unto us.

19 For the earnest expectation, B. ( fervent desire. G. expecting with lifting
up the head. Be. or fastening of the eyes. S. as the word, (...), signifies.)
of the creature ( the created world. Be.) waits, when the sons of God
should be revealed.

20 Because the creature ( the created world. Be.) is subject to vanity, not
of it own will, but by reason of him, which has made it subject ( subdued it
under hope. G.B. but these words (under hope,) are better referred to the next
verse. B. S.)

21 Under hope that the creature also shall be delivered, from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

22 For we know, that every creature ( the world created. Be. all the
creatures, S. (...),) groaneth together ( or sigheth) and trauaileth in pain,
together with us, unto this present.

23 And not only the creature, but we also, which have the first fruits of the
spirit, even we do sigh, ( groan. L. V. mourn. B.) in our selves, waiting
for the adoption, ( of the sons of God. L. ad.) even the redemption of the
body.

24 For we are saved by hope: but hope, that is seen, is not hope: for that
which one sees, why ( not how, G. B. (...),) should he hope for?

25 But if we hope for that we see not, we do with patience abide it, ( expect
it. Be.)

26 Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities: for this, what we should
pray for, as we ought, we know not: but the spirit it self makes
intercession ( makes request, L.G.) with sighs, ( groans. B.S.V. which
cannot be expressed.

27 But he that searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning ( sense. Be.
understanding. S. desire. L. affection. V. (...), sense, meaning.) of the
spirit, for he makes intercession for the Saints, according to God, (that is,
according to his will. S. G. according to his pleasure. B.)

28 Also we know that to those which love God, all things work together ( God
helps them in every thing. S. ad.) for the best, ( unto good. Gr.) even unto
them which are called of his purpose ( predestinate to be called. S. called to
be (Saints. ad.) of his purpose. L.)

29 For those whom he knew before, he also predestinate to be like fashioned (
or conformable) to the image of his son, that he might be the first borne
among many brethren.

30 Moreover whom he predestinate, them also he called, and whom he called,
them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified.

31 What shall we then say to these things? if God be for us ( on our side. B.
G.) who can be against us?

32 Who spared not his own Son, but gave him up for us all; how shall he not
also with him give us all things?

33 Who shall lay any thing to the charge ( or put in any accusation against.
Be. of Gods chosen) it is God, that justifies.

34 Who is he that condemns? ( who shall condemn. det. G.) it is Christ,
which is dead, or rather, which is risen again, who is at the right hand of
God, and makes intercession B. Be. L. (makes request. G.) for us.

35 Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or the sword?

36 As it is written, For thy sake are we killed all day long: we are counted
as sheep for the slaughter.

37 Nevertheless in all these things, we are more then conquerors ( we do
overcome. L. S.V.B. but the compound word, (...), signifies more, then simply
to overcome) thorough him that loved us.

38. For I am persuaded ( am certain. V. B.) that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, not things present, nor things to come,
( nor strength. ad. L.)

39. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

2. The Argument, Method, and Parts.
In this Chapter the Apostle concluding the doctrine of justification,
remooueth and takes away the impediments: 1. the relics and remainder of
sin in the sons of God, do not hinder their justification, to v. 17.2.
neither are their afflictions an impediment, which he exhorts them by diverse
reasons patiently to suffer, to v. 31.3. then he concludes with the certainty
of salvation in the elect, v. 31. to the end.

1. The first impediment, that the relics of sin, which remain in the
servants of Christ (whereof the Apostle gave instance in himself in the former
Chapter) do not hinder their salvation, he takes away, but with a double
limitation, if they be in Christ, and do not walk after the flesh: both which
are propounded v. 1. and afterward amplified and handled more at large.

The first limitation he sets forth, 1. by the fruits and effects of the
spirit in the faithful, in freeing them from sin, and so from death and
condemnation, whereof he gives instance in himself, v. 2. from the end of
Christ's incarnation and death, which was to destroy sin, and fulfill
righteousness, which the law could not do, v. 3.

The other condition and limitation, that they must not walk after the flesh,
if they would have Christ to profit them, 1. he proves by this argument,
justification and righteousness is not for them, that cannot please God, v. 8.
the conclusion follows, that righteousness and justification is not
appointed for such, v. 4. the assumption he proves by showing the contrary
effects of the flesh and the spirit, as 1. they savor the things of the flesh,
v. 5. the wisdom of the flesh brings forth death, v. 1. it is enmity
against God, v. 7. but the spirit works the contrary to all these. 2. Then
follows an application of this general doctrine to the comfort of the
Romans, that they are not in the flesh, 1. from the efficient, the spirit of
God dwells in them, v. 9. 2. from the conjunction they have with Christ's they
are Christ's, which he shows by their present mortification, v. 10. and the
hope of the resurrection, v. 10. 3. Then he infers a vehement exhortation,
that they should not walk after the flesh, v. 12. 1. from the effects, that
would follow, they should die, set forth by the contrary, v. 14. which he
proves by two effects, the external is their invocation of God, v. 15. the
internal, the testimony of the spirit. v. 16.

2. In the second part he exhorts unto the patient bearing of affliction, by
diverse arguments, 1. from the end, the partaking of glory after our
sufferings, v. 17. 2. from the impuritie of our afflictions, and the reward, v.
18. 3. from the less to greater: the creature groneth and trauaileth, and
waits for deliverance, v. 19.20.21.22. much more we, v. 23. 4. from the
nature of hope, which is not of things that are seen, v. 24.25. 5. from the
effects wrought by the spirit by occasion of affliction, which is prayer with
sighs, which are not in vain, the Lord hears them, v. 26.27. 6. from other
effects, in general they work for the best, v. 28. in particular, they make
us conformable unto Christ, v. 29. which he shows by the first cause the
purpose of God in the decree of predestination, which vocation, justification,
glorification follow, v. 30.

3. In the third part he shows the immutable state and condition of the
elect: 1. from the power of God, v. 31. 2. from his beneficence, who together
with Christ gives all good things, v. 32. 3. from his mercy, justifying us in
Christ from all our sins, v. 33.34. 4. from the effects of faith in Christ,
which is victory in all afflictions, v. 37. and therefore they cannot separate
us from Christ, v. 35. 5. from the immutable love of God in Christ, which is so
sure a bond, as nothing can break it, as the Apostle shows by a particular
induction, v. 38.39.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. Who are said to be in Christ.
v. 1. There is no condemnation to those, etc. 1. P. Martyr here well observes
the wisdom of the Apostle: who before speaking of the humane infirmities, and
of the force of sin, in our members, gave instance in himself: that no man,
though never so holy should be thought to be freed altogether from sin in
this life: but now coming to set forth the privilege of those which are in
Christ, he makes it not his own particular case, but infers a general
conclusion, that there is no condemnation, not only to him, but not to any,
that are in Christ Jesus: And here the argument well follows from the
particular to the general: for like as that which is incident by nature to one
man, is common to another: so the privilege of grace is common to all that are
sanctified. 2. to be in Christ, Tolet interprets, to have the grace of
regeneration whereby we are delivered from the servitude of sin; and so the
Syrian interpreter, seems to think, who joins the words thus together,
which walk not after the flesh in Christ: but these are two diverse effects,
to be graft into Christ, which is by faith, and not to walk after the flesh,
which is the fruits of faith: per fidem facti sumus vnum in Christo, we are by
faith made one with Christ: Beza, insui per fidem, graft in by faith. 3. indeed
upon this conjunction with Christ follows a material conjunction: that as we
are made one flesh with him, so also one spirit: he is not only partaker with
us of the same nature, but we do receive of his spirit: that like as the
branch does receive not only substance from the vine, but sap and life: as in
matrimony, there is a conjunction not only of bodies, but even of the
affections: so is it between Christ, and his members: but this is only the
material conjunction, as Pet. Martyr calls it: the formal conjunction is by
faith.

Quest. 2. What is meant by the law of the spirit of life.
1. The law of the spirit of life. 1. Chrysostom by the law of the spirit
understands the holy spirit, whereby we are sanctified: and this difference
he makes between the law of Moses, and this law, that is said to be
spiritual, because it was given by the spirit; but this is said to be the law
of the spirit, quia spiritum suppeditat, because it supplieth the spirit to
those which receive it: So also Bellarmine understands it of the spirit,
which is shed into our hearts, enabling us to keep the law: lib. 4. de
iustificat. likewise Thomas, interprets it to be spiritus inhabitans, the
spirit that dwells in us, and sanctifies us: so also Tolet annot. 2. Pere.
And these make this grace of the spirit infused, a cause of our spiritual
deliverance from sin. 2. Calvin also understands the grace of the spirit,
which sanctifies us: but this is added, says he, not as a cause, sed modum
tradi quo solvimur a reatu, but the way is showed, whereby we are freed from
the guilt of sin: so also Hyperius: Piscator understands here the spirit of
sanctification: But seeing our sanctification is imperfect, this were a weak
ground for us to stay upon, to assure us, that we are far from condemnation.
3. Beza neither takes this for the law of the spirit, nor for the law of
faith, but he understands perfectam naturae nostrae in Christo
sanctificationem; the perfect sanctification of our nature in Christ, whereby we
are delivered: But this righteousness of Christ, if it be not applied unto us
by faith, how can it deliver us. 4. Some by the law of the spirit of life, do
interpret with Ambrose, legem fides, the law of faith, and with Haymo, gratiam
sancti Euangeli, the grace of the holy Gospel, which teaches faith: Pareus,
Faius, the doctrine of the Gospel is called the law of the spirit and life,
because it is the ministry of the spirit and life: the law was spiritual, in
as much as it prescribed and commanded spiritual obedience: but was not the
ministry of the spirit and life, but rather of death: Pareus, so also
Osiander: doctrina euangelij side apprehensa, the doctrine of the Gospel
apprehended by faith, does deliver me: likewise Rolloc: liberatio hac non est
regeneratio, sed peccatorum remissio, this dedeliuerance is not regeneration,
but remission of sins; and his reason is, because the Apostle speaks of a
full and absolute deliverance from sin and death, which is in remission of
sins, not in regeneration, which is but in part. 5. But I rather join both
these together, regeneration, and remission of sins, from the which we are
delivered by the grace of Christ: as Augustine comprehends both; for sometime
he expounds the Apostles words of the remission of sins, lib. 1. de mixed.
and concupis. c. 32. how has he delivered us? nisi quia concupiscentiae
reatum, peccatorum omnium facta remissione, etc. but that the spirit of life
has dissolved the guilt of concupiscence, remission of all sins being made:
sometime he applies them to this work of regeneration: the law of the spirit
of life has delivered thee from the law of sin, and death: ne scilicet
concupiscentia, etc. re in peccatum and mortem pertrahat, etc. lest
concupiscence challenging thy consent, should draw thee into sin and death:
lib. 1. cont. 2. epist. Pelagian. c. 10. And Calvin also though he cheefely
insist upon the second, as he is alleged before, yet he omitteth not the
first: by the spirit of life, understanding the spirit of God, which has
besprinkled our souls with the blood of Christ: not only to cleanse them, a
labe peccati, quoad reatum, from the stain of sin in respect of the guilt,
sed in veram puritatem sanctificat, but to sanctify us with true purity, etc.
And the joining of these two together does best fit the occasion of these
words, and most agrees unto the words themselves: for the Apostle having
before spoken both of our justification in Christ, and our sanctification in
not walking after the flesh, now brings in this as a reason of both: which is
the spirit of life in Christ, applied unto us by faith: and concerning the
words, the spirit of regeneration answers to the law, that is the force of
sin, and the life of grace to the law of death: from the first we are
delivered by the spirit of sanctification, from the other by the life of
righteousness in our justification.

6. But Origens exposition is far wide, who by the spirit of life
understands the spiritual sense of the law: and so he will have in the law
both literam occidentem, and spiritum vi^ificantem, the killing letter, and the
quickening spirit: for the Apostle here directly against the law opposes the
spirit of grace and life in Christ.

Quest. 3. What is understood by the law of sin, and death.
1. Some by the law of sin understand the moral law, which was the ministry
of death, and by it came the knowledge of sin: So Ambrose, who propounds
this objection, that seeing the Gospel, and law of faith is likewise unto
sin the savor of death unto death, unto some the savor of life unto life;
as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 2. why faith if it work the same thing, which
the law does, may not be said also to be lex mortis, the law of death; makes
this answer: qui non obediunt fidei, non occiduntur a fide, sed a lege, etc.
they which obey not faith, are not killed by faith, but by the law, because
they which came not unto the faith, are condemned by the law, as guilty of
sin and death, etc. But this were to confound the law and faith, as though
the law commanded and prescribed the Evangelical faith, for the law punishes
only the breach and transgression thereof: but the law commands one thing,
namely, do this, and thou shall live: says only in the Gospel requires of
us to believe, Romans 4. 10.9. Pet. Martyr gives this answer: that the Gospel,
quamdiu f^ris sovat, etc. so long as it only foundeth outwardly, and the
spirit works not within, does differ nothing from the law: but when the
spirit works inwardly together with the preaching of the Gospel, then it has
the effect to salvation: which the law cannot have, because it requires other
things then the Gospel: the Gospel then is not the ministry of death, as the
law, not for that it does not punish unbelievers, as the law does the
disobedient, but in respect of the doctrine of salvation by faith, which men
are capable of by grace, whereas the doctrine of works by the law can bring no
salvation unto any, no not being in the state of grace. Together with Ambrose,
Vatablus, and Pareus, by the law of death will have the law of Moses to be
understood, quia peccatum deteget and occidit, because it discovers sin,
and kills it, judging it worthy of death: so also Bellarmine lib. 4. de
iustificat. c. 13. ration. 5. and gloss. interlin. But if the law do condemn
sin, and sentence it with death, it is not the law of sin being against
it: it is called the ministry of condemnation, 2. Cor. 3.9. but so it is
nostro vitio, by our fault, not of it self: but that is said to be the law of
a thing, which it properly prescribes, and aymeth at.

2. Origin seems to understand, the ceremonial law, which was impossible to
be observed, as he gives instance of the law of the Sabbath, and of
sacrifices: as before by the spirit he interprets the spiritual sense of the
law: But the Apostles intent is not here, to compare the literal and
spiritual sense of the law together: but to show what liberty we have
obtained by Christ, from sin and condemnation.

3. Some by the law of sin and death, understand carnis imperium, the
dominion or power of the flesh, or of sin reigning in the flesh, and the
tyranny of death which follows, Calvin: the law of sin, is the law of the
members, which the Apostle spoke of before: Chrysostom, Pet. Martyr: the
accusing of sin, and power of death: Osiander: or ab obligatione, from the
bond and obligation of sin and death, Lyranus: a iure peccati, etc. from the
right or power of sin and death, as Erasmus: we are delivered both from the
power and guilt of sin, for Moses law the Apostle no where calls the law of
sin: Chrysostom: So here there is mention made of three laws: two good, the
law of grace, which takes away sin, the law of Moses which is mentioned in
the next v. which shows sin, but takes it not away, and one evil law,
namely of sin, which makes us guilty: gloss. ordin.

Quest. 4. Of the best reading of the 3. verse.
1. Erasmus and Vatablus do supply the word, effecit, or praestitit, did, or
performed: in this sense, that which was impossible to the law, etc. God
sending his Son, etc. did etc. This reading also follow the Ecclesiastical
expositors, collected by Marlorat: but this supply is not necessary, the
sense is full and perfect without it, as afterward shall appear.

2. Some do transpose the words thus, because the law was weak by reason of
the flesh: Syrian interpreter: but in the original, the words (...), wherein,
do follow after (...), the law: it were an hard construction, to set the
relative before the antecedent.

3. Neither need we with Camerarius to supply the preposition (...), for, or
because: as thus to read, because of that which was impossible to the law, etc.
which reading Pareus follows, and Beza misliketh not.

4 Neither need we here to admit an Hebraisme, with Tolet, who will have the
participle, sending, according to the phrase of the Hebrew, to be taken for he
sent: because he would coin those words, and for sin, unto the last clause,
which do hang on the words going before.

5. Neither is it put in the nominative, (...), in this sense such was the
weakness of the law, as Beza: for here also diverse words must be supplied.

6. But the best reading is, to put it in the accusative; the thing impossible
to the law, in as much as it was weak, etc. and to refer it to the last
clause, condemned sin in the flesh, by way of opposition: in this sense, God
sending his Son, etc. condemned sin in the flesh, which was impossible to
the law, as the Latin well observes: and so our English translations do well
express it thus: for that which was impossible to the law, etc.

Quest. 5. What is meant by the similitude of sinful flesh.
1. The Maniches, and Marcionites did wrest the Apostles words to signify,
that Christ had no true humane flesh, but a similitude and likeness only: But
Basil epistol. 65. well answers them, that this word similitude, must not
simply be referred to flesh, but to sinful flesh: for Christ was like unto
us in all things, sin only excepted.

2. The Commentatie which goes under Hieromes name, says it is called the
similitude of sinful flesh, quia erat ad peccandum proclivior, because it
was prone unto sin: but yet he took it without sin: for Christ's flesh
being conceived without sin, had no pronnes, or aptnes at all unto sin:
unless he mean humane flesh in general, and not that particular flesh, which
was assumed by Christ.

3. Some by the similitude of sinful flesh, interpret similem per
passibilitatem and mort^^tatem, like in mortality and suffering, gloss. inter.
Lyranus: so also Melancthon: peccatur in speciem visa est, it seemed as
sinful flesh, because he sustained the punishment do unto our sins:
likewise Osiander: because he bare our punishment, he was taken of some to be a
great sinner: But this sense is to much restrained, and too particular.

4. Nor yet does Erasmus well translate (...), in specie, in the show of
sinful flesh: for so the Angels and Christ himself, before his incarnation
appeared in humane shape.

5. But Theophylact well interprets, he had our flesh, secundam substantiam,
sed pecca^^ expertem, in substance, but void of sin: so also Basil, with
other Greek expositors car^^^ nostram in naturalibus affectibus, he took our
flesh with the natural affections: he took our very flesh: as Phil. 2.7. he
was found in shape as a man, Pareus. Beza, with others.

Quest. 6. Of these words; and for sin condemned sin in the flesh.
1. Origin by sin, understands sacrifice for sin: so many of our new
wi^^^ Melancthon, Bucer, Calvin, Osiander, Martyr: so also Pererius, Vatablus,
disput. 4.10. so they interpret, pro peccato, 1. per peccatum, by sin, by
sin, that is, by his sacrifice so sin, he condemned sin in the flesh: but
though elsewhere, sin is taken in that sense, for sacrifice for sin, as 2.
Cor. 5.21. he made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin: yet it is but
an hard construction here: for the preposition (...), signifies not by or
thorough, but pro, for.

2. Augustines exposition is yet more hard, who by sin understands the
flesh of Christ, which he took, like unto sinful flesh, and therefore it is
called sin, lib. 3. contra 2. epist. Pelag. c. 6. but the Apostle says
afterward, he condemned sin in the flesh, this should be superfluously put,
if by sin he had meant the flesh before.

3. Hilarious in Psalm. 67. by sin which is condemned interprets the devil,
who was condemned and judged in Christ's death by that sin, which he had
committed by the Jews in putting Christ to death: this seems hard also.

4. Anselme by death in the first place will have death signified, which is the
effect of sin: and so Christ by his death condemned sin: but the Greek
preposition will not bear this sense.

5. Chrysostom and Theodoret, whom Tolet follows, devise this sense, that
Christ condemned sin, tanquam reum iniquitatis, as guilty of great sin and
iniquity, because it rose up against Christ being innocent, and caused him to
die: so they do give unto sin a certain person, which for the great offense
which is had committed, was condemned.

6. But all these expositions fail herein, because they join these words and
for sin, to the last clause, condemned, whereas they are a part of the former
member, how God sent his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for
sin, that is, vt tolleret peccatum, to take away sin, so Beza, Pareus,
Rolloch: and this exposition Oecumenius also makes mention of: so that this is
the end why God sent his Son, to take away sin.

7. There is also an other exposition which the ordin. gloss. has, and
Gorrhan, peccatum de peccato, sin of sin, they interpret to be the
corruption of our nature, springing from the sin of Adam: But this fails
with the rest in seuering the words from the former sentence.

Quest. 7. How Christ condemned sin in the flesh.
1. Tolet understands it of the dominion of sin, which it had before in our
members, but now in Christ sin is deprived of his dominion.

2. Beza refers it to the sanctification of our nature in Christ, which he
took without sin, and by flesh he understands the humane nature sanctified
in Christ,

3. Chrysostom joins these two together, that Christ both non peccavit,
sinned not at all, and so sin overcame not him, and in that he died, vicit
and condemnavit peccatum, he overcame and condemned sin: likewise Haymo
says, Christ two ways condemned sin, because he sinned not in his flesh,
and mortificando in cruce, and he condemned it by mortifying the same upon the
cross.

4. Erasmus gives this sense, convicit and coarguit peccatores, he convinced
and reproved sinners: that is, he showed them to be hypocrites and deceivers,
which hitherto had deluded the world, with a false show of justice: and yet
they put Christ to death as a transgressor of the law: but the Apostles
intendment is to show what Christ has wrought for us, not what he did against
his adversaries.

5. Socinus will have the meaning to be no more but this, that Christ did not
satisfy by his death for sin, but exauthoravit, abolevit, he did abolish
sin, and take away the power and authority thereof, for he came to do that
which the law could not do, which was not to punish and condemn sin, for
that the law could do, but to deliver us from the servitude of sin, Socinus
part. 2. c. 23. p. 195.

Contra. 1. True it is, that Christ by his death has also abolished the
kingdom of sin, that it shall no longer reign in his members: but first it
was abolished by the sacrifice of Christ's death, who bare the punishment of our
sin in himself: and this is the proper sense of the word, to condemn, that
is, inflict the punishment of sin: as in this chapter, v. 34. who shall
condemn us? so before c. 2. 1. c. 5.16. 2. S. Paul does not so much show what
Christ came to do, namely that the law could not do, but the reason, why he
came to do it, because the law could not, by reason of the weakness of our
flesh. 3. the law indeed did condemn and punish sin: but by the law every
one was to bear his own sin, the law could not appoint one to bear the
punishment for all, as Christ did, whose sufferings are made ours by faith.

6. Some of our own writers do understand this condemning of sin, of the
abolishing of the kingdom thereof, and of our sanctification and regeneration:
Bucer, Musculu^: these differ both from the Papists, whose opinion is set down
before, that is, who make regeneration a part of justification; the other, a
consequent only, and effect thereof: and the Papists differ from Socinus
opinion, who presupposes no satisfaction at all to be made for our sins by
the death of Christ: But yet these words can not properly be referred to the
condemning of sin in us by the work of regeneration: for, this Christ did in
his flesh, or by his flesh, not, in carne, i. homine, in the flesh, that is
man, as Lyranus.

7. Wherefore the meaning indeed is, that Christ in his flesh, being made a
sacrifice for us upon the cross, did bear the punishment due unto our sin,
and God condemned sin in the flesh of his Son, that is, poenas peccato
debitas exegit, he did exact the punishment due unto our sin: Pareus: and by
condemning it in the death of his Son has freed us from condemnation. This
to be the meaning, 1. the use of the word, to condemn, shows touched before.
2. the scope of the Apostle, which is to show, that there is no condemnation to
those which are in Christ, because Christ has himself freed them therefrom,
by bearing the punishment of sin. 3. the consent of other places of Scripture
prove the same, as Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
law, being made a curse for us and, 1. Pet. 2.24. Himself bare our sins in
his body on the tree. And thus diverse of the fathers expound this of Christ's
death: as Chrysostom, eo quod mortuus est, peccatum vicit and condemnavit, in
that he died, he overcame and condemned death: and Origin, per hostiam cornis,
etc. by the sacrifice of his flesh he condemned sin in the flesh.

8. The other sense which the Greek scholiast follows, that sin was
condemned in Christ's flesh, quia illam peccato inanem servavit, because he kept
it free from sin, and so internecio peccati est punitio, the killing of sin
is the punishment thereof: though it be also found and very comfortable, yet it
is not here so fit: because it is said, that God sending his Son condemned
sin in the flesh: so that it is better referred to the suffering of Christ,
then to his active obedience.

Quest. 8. Who are after the flesh, and savor the things of the flesh, v. 5.
1. Origens sense is here rejected, who understands the Jews which carnally
understand the law, them he will to be after the spirit, which did follow the
spiritual sense of the law: for in all this discourse S. Paul treats
specially of the moral law of Moses, as he gave instance in the tenth
precept, thou shall not lust, c. 7.8.

2. Nor yet, as Tolet annot. 15. with other Romanists, must we understand,
spiritum nationalem, seu mentem, the reason or mind: for even the mind in
carnal men, is carnal: qua carnea sunt mente volutant, they do in their
mind think of carnal things: they have mentem carneam, a fleshly mind,
Theophyl. and Chrysostom says, that a carnal life, totem hominem carnem
facit, makes the whole man flesh: and if we give our mind to the spirit,
ipsam spiritualem efficiemus, we shall also make it spiritual: to walk after
the spirit is then to be guided by the grace of Gods spirit. Theodor.

3. Sometime, to be in the flesh, signifies to remain in the body: as, 2.
Cor. 10.3. though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh:
sometime, even the regenerate are said to be carnal in respect of that part
which is in them carnal, and unregenerate: but here it is taken in an other
sense, for them, which are altogether lead by their carnal affections:
affectus carnis malitians dixit, affectus spiritus gratiam, the affectious of
the flesh he calls the malice thereof, the affections of the spirit, grace:
Chrysostom.

4. Now carnal things or the things of the flesh are of three sorts: Some are
good, as the knowledge of arts: some indifferent, as riches, honor, some
evil, as the works of the flesh, adultery, drunkenness: so that two ways
men here may err, either in the matter: when they follow things in their
nature evil, as the sinful works of the flesh: or in the manner, when they
follow things of this world in themselves indifferent, but with an evil mind:
they do not refer them to the glory of God: But they prefer things
temporal Before eternal: like as lingua febricitantis infecta cholera, etc.
the tongue of a sick man infected with choser, takes sweet things for
bitter: Lyran. neither yet is it unlawful for them which are spiritual to be
occupied in the things of this life: but they must refer all to Gods glory,
and prefer things spiritual before external: like as lingua been disposita,
a tongue which is not distempered, does judge rightly of every taste.

Quest. 9. How the wisdom of the flesh, is enmity against God.
1. Pareus well notes, that the Apostle here uses not the word (...), which
signifies prudence it self, least he should seem to have condemned that
natural gift and faculty: but (...), which notes the act rather and
execution of that faculty, and he adds to it (...), of the flesh, not
condemning or rejecting all prudent actions, but such as proceed from the
pravitie of the flesh.

2. And the Apostle says, is enmity, not an enemy, as the Latin reads,
for then it should be (...), in the neuter, not (...), in the feminine, and
here the word is (...), with the accent in the first syllable, which signifies
enmity, not (...), accented in the last syllable, which is the adiective in
the femine gender, enemious: and the Apostle speaks in the abstract, not by
the figure Metalepsis, taking it for the concrete, enmity, for enemy, the
substantive for the adjective, as Pareus, nor yet does he so speak, vt
vehementior fit oration, to make his speech more vehement and forcible, Martyr:
but hereby is expressed the irreconciliable enmity between the flesh and the
spirit: for that which is an enemy may be reconciled, as Esau was to Jacob;
but enmity can never be reconciled, Faius.

3. Now the Apostle here gives a reason of the former verse, why the wisdom
of the flesh is death, because it is enmity with God, from whom comes life:
but yet the wisdom of the spirit is not so the cause of life and peace with
God, as the wisdom of the flesh is of death: for this is the meritorious cause
of the one, so is not the wisdom of the spirit, that is, regeneration of the
other: but it is as the mean and way, whereby we are assured of salvation, and
to have peace with God: but that which procures and works it, is faith in
Christ, Romans 5.1. therefore here the Reader must take heed of a corrupt note
of Lyranus, that the confidence of the spirit, meretur vitam gratiae in
prasenti, etc. does merit the life of grace in this present, and the peace of
glory in the next.

4. And as the wisdom of the flesh is enmity with God, so the wisdom of the
spirit is enmity and freindship: which is defined to be a mutual goodwill
which is declared by freindly parts and offices for virtues sake: thus then
Aristotle's rule is found to be false, inter valide in aequales non dari
amicitiam, that there cannot be freindship between such as are much unequal:
for in the beginning there was freindship between the creator and his
creature: and this ancient amity is renewed, and restored by Christ; who
vouchsafes to call his Apostles friends, Ioh. 15.14.

5. But by flesh 1. neither with the Manichees must we understand the substance
of the flesh: for by flesh he means the prauitie and corruption of the flesh.
2. nor yet with Chrysostom, do we interpret it to be carnalem vitam, only a
carnal life, which only shows the corrupt actions: but it signifies the
prauitie of our nature. 3. neither do we with Ambrose only refer it to the
understanding, quae non potest capere divina, which is not capable of divine
things: for here the continuance rather and rebellion of the flesh is
signified, then the impotencie and weakness of it. 4. nor yet by the flesh is
understood only the sensual part, and by the spirit, rationabilitas mentis,
the reasonablenes of the soul: but even the mind also is carnal, as
Theophylact calls it, carneam mentem, a carnal mind: as v. 9. if any have
not the spirit of Christ: but their own natural spirit, they always have.

6. And whereas it is said, it is not subject to the law of God, neither can
be, 1. neither is it to be restrained to that particular law of the Gospel, of
rendering good for evil, which carnal men transgress, that render evil for
evil, as Haymo. 2. not yet, because they think God can do nothing beside
that which is to be seen and found in nature, gloss. ordinar. for this but one
particular act of carnalitie. 3. nor yet is it to be understood with this
limitation, ^^m eo perseueret, if a man continue in the flesh he cannot so long
be subject unto the law of God: Oecumen. for the Apostle speaks of the
wisdom of the flesh it self, not of those that are in it: which can never be
changed, to become subject unto God: but they which are in the flesh, may cease
to be in the flesh, and so please God. 4. and this does manifestly convince the
Pelagians of error, which hold that a natural man might fulfill the law of
God: and of the Popish schoolmen who affirmed, that a man without grace might
keep the law, quoad substantiam operis, in respect of the substance of the
work, though not, ad intentionem legis, after the intention of the law.

Quest. 10. How they which are in the flesh cannot please God. v. 8.
1. Not they which follow the law, secundum literam, according to the letter,
as Origin: the Apostle speaks generally of all, as well Jews as others that
are in the flesh.

2. Neither as the Maniches, by the flesh is understood the body, for so none
in this life should please God.

3. Nor yet as Hierome, in his passionate and too much love of virginity, and
partial and preiudicate opinion of marriage; that they which inseruiunt
officio coniugali, serve the marriage duties, were in the flesh: and thus also
Pope Syricius did descant upon these words applying them against marriage:
epistol. ad Himmer. Tarracon. but they are said to be in the flesh, qui post
concupiscentias eunt, which follow the lust and concupiscence of the flesh.

4. But this must be understood with a limitation, quamdiu tales fuerint, as
long as they are such, as Theophylact with other Greek expositors: as
Augustine does set it forth by this example; as the same water may be both
frozen with cold, and be made hoate with the fire; so the same soul of man may
be first subject to the flesh, then to the spirit.

Quest. 11. Of the dwelling of the spirit of God in us, v. 9.
Seeing the spirit of God dwells, etc. not if the spirit, as the vulgar
latin has it, and so the Romanists read: and so Lyranus expounds the former
words, ye are not in the flesh, i. esse non debetis, ye ought not to be: for
so Chrysostom and Oecumenius well observe non ^^a ponit, vt quidubitet, he
says not thus as doubting, but certainly believing, that they had the spirit.

2. And in that he says, the spirit dwells, 1. he shows that the spirit is
otherwise in them, then in other things: for he is every where, and in all
things immensitate essentia, in his infinite essence, but he is in the
faithful, praesentia and efficacia gratia, by the presence, and efficacy of
his grace. 2. in that the spirit is said to dwell, thereby is signified that he
is not in us, tanquam hospes, as a stranger, but indigena perpetuus, an
indweller for ever: as Job. 14.16. he shall abide with you for ever, Pareus. 3.
and as a dweller in an house, does not only occupy it, but also, in ea
imperat, does command, and bear rule, and sway in it: so the spirit dwells
in the faithful, as the ruler and commander in the house: the spirit and the
flesh may be in the same house together, if the flesh be as the servant, and
the spirit as the master; but if the flesh have the masterie, the spirit
departs: like as where extreme cold has taken possession there can be no
heat at all, but if the extremity of cold be abated, then there may be place
for heat: Martyr. 4. And here we must distinguish, as Origin well does,
between the extraordinary gifts of the spirits, such as the Prophets, and
Apostles had, when the spirit came upon them in the likeness of fiery tongues,
and the ordinary gifts: for where the spirit is, those extraordinary graces
always follow not; but those which the Lord seem to be convenient: for God
gives unto every one as he will, 2. Cor. 12.11.

3. And whereas the Apostle says, he that has not the spirit of Christ is not
his: Origin well thus expounds, creatura eius est, sed non discipulus, he is
his creature still, as all other things are, but he is not his Disciple, nor a
member of his mystical body.

12. Quest. Of the meaning of these words, v. 10. The body is dead because of
sin, the spirit is life, etc.
1. Origin understands the two parts of man, the body and the soul: and he
give in this sense; the body is dead because of sin: mors imponitur, ne
peccet, death is imposed upon the body, that it should not sin, always
remembering the end: and so the spirit vivit ad faciendam institiam, lives to
work righteousness: but the Apostle shows the cause of death in the one,
namely sin, and of life in the other, namely righteousness, rather then the
end of both.

2. Ambrose seems by the body to understand the whole man, that is dead
because of sin, and by the spirit the holy Ghost, ^^ author of life, because
he is given to justify us so also Chrysostom will have the holy Gh^^t to be
understood, which only is not life in himself, but gives life unto others:
so also Martyr: but the other opposite part of the bod^^ shows that the
spirit has relation also unto man.

3. Some understand the first clause of mortification: as if the Apostle should
say the ^^ die is dead, quantum attinet ad peccati operationem, in respect of
the operation of sin: Oecumen. Piscat. but in this sense, the same thing
should be expressed in both clauses, the mortifying of sin, and living unto
righteousness, which the opposition between the contra^^ parts of the body,
and spirit, will not hear.

4. Calvin, and so Osiander, will have the body to signify the unregenerate
part, the spirit, the spiritual and regenerate: but in this sense the Apostle
uses to oppose the flesh in the spirit, not the body and the spirit.

5. Wherefore by body we may better understand, that mortal part of man which
is subject to death: and by the spirit the inward part of man, namely, his
soul regenerate, which lives by faith: Beza thinks that the life of the
soul is here understood, when it is separate from the body: Chrysostom
refers it to the life of the resurrection: Lyranus to the life of grace now
in present: But we may better comprehend both, that both now for the present,
the spirit of man lives by grace, as the just is said to live by faith, and
that also is a pledge of life everlasting afterward: And this sense is most
agreeable to the scope of the Apostle: for hitherto he has showed how the
spirit of Christ has freed us from the law of sin in the flesh: now he
comes to set forth the other part of our liberty, which is from death: and
first presently in the spirit we live by faith, and then afterward the body
also shall live in the resurrection by the spirit of Christ, which the Apostle
shows in the next verse.

Quest. 13. How the quickening of the dead is ascribed to the spirit of Christ,
seeing all both good and bad shall rise.
1. M. Calvin's opinion is here refused, who thinks that the Apostle does not
here speak of the last, and final resurrection, sed de continua spiritus
operatione, but of the continual working of the spirit in us in mortifying the
relics of sin: so also Piscator, vificabit corpora vestra ad
sanctificationem, shall quicken your bodies unto sanctification, etc. But in
that sense our bodies are said to be mortua, dead, not mortalia, mortal: and
the Apostle speaking of the time to come, points at the resurrection, which
shall be, not that which is present in rising unto newnes of life.

2. There are three arguments of the resurrection here expressed by the
Apostle, the first from the power of God: he that raised Christ from the dead,
shall also raise us up: secondly, from the correspondencie of Christ with his
members: as Christ was raised from the dead, so shall we that are his members:
thirdly, from the office of the spirit, who shall raise us up that are his
temples wherein he dwells, Pareus.

3. As God is said to have raised Christ up by his spirit, so Christ raised up
himself by his eternal spirit, omnia quippe divina p^^er per Filium in
Spiritu Sancto operatur, all divine things the father works by the Son in
the holy Ghost, Oecumen.

4. Although our redemption purchased unto us by Christ, was sufficient at once
to have redeemed both our souls and bodies, tamen ordinate nobis datur, it is
given unto us in order and by degrees: that as Christ had first a passible
body before he had a glorious body, so our bodies must first be mortal
before they can have immortality, Lyran.

5. Now although the members of Christ shall be raised up by his spirit, yet
the wicked also which have not the spirit of Christ, shall also rise again,
but unto judgment: they shall be raised up by the omnipotent power of God, but
the righteous shall be raised by the spirit of Christ, and therefore it is not
said he shall raise, but vinificabit, he shall quicken your mortal body, quod
ipsa resurrectione maius est, etc. which is a greater work then the
resurrection, and only granted to the righteous: Chrysostom, whom Martyr,
and Pareus follow.

Quest. 14. What it is to be lead by the spirit of God.
1. There are two kind of actions of the spirit, general, wherbey all things
move, live, and have their being: and special, whereby the Lord works in
the hearts of his children, such is the work of sanctification, Calv.

2. And in that they are said to be lead, we must not think, that any are
compelled by the spirit: but this signifies, vehementem inclinationem, non
coactionem, a vehement inclination, not coaction, Gorrhan: God by his spirit ex
nolentibus volentes facit, of unwilling makes us willing: so he draws us
volentes, willing, consequenter, not antecedenter, we are willing afterward not
before, Pareus.

3. And although men are so led by the spirit, as that they follow his
direction willingly, yet they follow also necessarily: this leading and
moving of the spirit is effectual, and cannot be resisted, Melancth. yet this
takes not away the liberty of the will in it self; like as a blind man
follows his leader willingly, though it be not free for him to go which way
he will: the will of man remains free in it self; as when one is set in two
ways he may take which he will, yet by an accident, the will may
notwithstanding it is free in it self, be determined and limited certainly to
one thing: as a blind man by his leader is directed to take one certain way:
so the spirit of God directs and guides the will unto that which is good,
and the corruption of our nature to that which is evil.

4. Chrysostom here further notes, that it is not said, they which live by
the spirit, and Theophylact, they which have received the spirit, but they
which are lead by the spirit, to show that the spirit must be the guide and
ruler of our life, quemadmodum navigij nauclerus, as the Pilot is of the ship,
and the rider of the horse: hereby then is expressed the continual actiuitie,
and operation of the spirit in us.

5. And this similitude may be taken, either from those, which are guided and
directed, as the blind man in the way: or from them, which wanting strength of
their own, are borne and carried of others: and so we are both ways lead by
the spirit: for we neither can see the way unto that which is good, unless the
spirit direct us, neither have we power and strength to follow it, unless the
spirit draw us.

Quest. 15. What is understood by the spirit of bondage.
1. Not the evil spirit, namely Satan, by whom they are lead which walk
after the flesh, as Augustine upon this place: for the Apostle speaks not of
two diverse spirits, but diverse effects of one and the same spirit, working
fear and bondage by the law, and freedom by the Gospel.

2. Neither yet is this spirit the soul of man, which sometime is in the
servitude of sin, sometime it enjoys the liberty of the spirit: for v. 16.
the Apostle makes a manifest difference between this spirit and our spirit.

3. Nor yet is this spirit not the holy Ghost, but the law, so called because
it was given by the spirit, as Chrysostom. for even the fathers under the law had
the spirit of God, as shall be showed in the next question.

4. But by the spirit the holy Ghost is signified: which by the law works
fear, by the Gospel confidence and assurance.

Quest. 16. Whether the fathers under the law had only the spirit of
servitude.
1. Chrysostom has here many strange assertions of the people of the Jews
that lived under the law: as 1. Spiritum sanctum non acceperant, etc. the
people of the Jews had not received the holy spirit: the law is called
spiritual, so also the manna which they did eat, and the rock whereof they
drank are called spiritual, quia supra naturam perfecta erant, they were
perfect above nature: And to make this his assertion good, he says, that they
opere tenus continebantur, were restrained only by the law from the outward
act, we from the very inward thoughts: they only used corporal purgations
and had a promise only of temporal blessings, as of a land that flowed with
milk and honey.

Contra. 1. The Scripture evidently testifies, that Moses and the rest of the
Prophets were endued with the spirit of God: and it is said of Saul, the spirit
of God departed from him: then he had it before: and seeing they received
Christ, when they did eat manna, and drink of the rock, they had also his
spirit: for without Christ's spirit, they could not spiritually eat or drink
Christ. 2. and that the law of Moses restrained not the outward act only, but
the heart and affections, our Blessed Savior shows, Matthew. 5. where he
delivers not a new exposition of the law, but he does clear it from the
corrupt glosses of the Jews. 3. and though they had many more carnal rites,
then we have, yet even in those external ceremonies spiritual graces were
represented: as the Apostle says, that circumcision was the seal of the
righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. 4. yea and under those temporal promises,
they looked for celestial, as the Apostle shows that they sought an heavenly
country, Heb. 11.16.

2. Some think that here two diverse states are not compared together of the
fathers that lived under the law, and of us that are under the gospel, but
only two diverse degrees of our conversion: as first by the law we are made
to know our selves, and thereby terrified, and afterward we find Evangelicall
comfort by faith in Christ, Martyr: and so M. Calvin thinks, that the things
themselves, the ministry and operation of the law and of the Gospel, are
here set one against an other, rather then the persons.

3. But here is both an opposition of the persons and things together, as
Origin does illustrate this place by that Galat. 4. where they which were under
the law, are likened unto children, which were under tutors and governors, and
we in the Gospel are like the heir that is come to age, and has no more
need of tutors: but yet our state is not set as opposite to theirs, as though
they had only the spirit of bondage, only they differ in degrees: for they
also had the spirit of Christ, but not in that evident and conspicuous manner,
which we have, Pareus. And here we may divide the Jews into 3. sorts: some
were altogether carnal, which had no knowledge of Christ, such only had the
spirit of bondage: some were perfect and spiritual, as Moses and the Prophets,
who had the spirit of Christ, though for the time they served under ceremonies:
some were weak, yet having knowledge of the Messiah, they received also of his
spirit; though not in the same degree with the other, Martyr.

Quest. 17. Of the diverse kinds of fear.
v. 15. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear. 1. There are two
kinds of fear, a servile fear, when one is moved only by the fear of
punishment, and so kept in awe and obedience, and there is filialis timor, a
filial fear, such as is in children: when one fears to offend God, not so
much because of punishment, as because he finds the Lord gracious and good
unto him: of this fear the Prophet speaks, when he says, the fear of God
endures for ever, of the other S. John, perfect love excels fear:
Angustine thus resembles these two kind of fears; the servile fear is like
as an adulterous woman is afraid of her husband, least he should come and find
her in her wickedness: the other fear is seen in a chaste wife, who fears
to offend her husband, least he should depart from her.

2. But the Master of sentences, makes four kinds of fear beside the
natural fear of death. 1. There is mundanus timor, a worldly fear, as when a
man forsakes Christ for fear he should loose his life or goods, this is a
fear of men, and this is altogether perniciosus, pernicious and dangerous. 2.
timor seruilis, the servile fear is, when men do well for fear of
punishment: this fear is good and profitable, sed non sufficiens, but not
sufficient. 3. there is a fear called initialis, a fear in the beginning,
when one so fears punishment, as yet he is moved with the love of God and
virtue; this fear is bonus and sufficiens, a good fear and sufficient. 4.
then is there timor castus and filialis, the chaste and filial fear, which
bonus est and perficiens, is good and perfect, and is nothing else but a
reverence of God joined with love.

3. Fear also is taken two ways, either in respect of the object, for the
commotion of the mind expecting some imminent or approaching danger; or it
signifies only a reverence and observance, which is the effect of the other:
and in this sense the spirit of fear is said to have rested upon Christ, Isay.
11.2. in whom there was no fear of punishment, which is due unto sin,
whereof Christ was free: there was in him only a reverence of God, observance,
and obedience: the natural fear of death also he had, but thereof we speak
not here, and this kind of fear of God may be said also to be in the Angels,
and in the elect that are in heaven.

4. But whereas the Apostle says, 1. Ioh. 4.18. there is no fear in love: 1.
neither does the Apostle speak of humane fear, when one fears to suffer
persecution for Christ: but he that loves God expels all such fear: he is
ready to suffer any thing for Christ. 2. not yet does he refer us, only to
that perfect love of God, which shall be in the next world, when all fear
shall be chased away. 3. but he means a servile and desperate fear, which is
severed from faith and hope, which drives to despair: such was the fear that
Judas had.

Quest. 18. Why the Apostle joins together two words of the same sense, Abba,
father.
1. The first of these words is an Hebrewe or Syriake word, and signifies
father, and in three several places in the Gospel do we find, these two
words repeated in this manner, Mark. 14.36, Galath. 4.6. and in this place:
Augustine, if the place be not corrupted faith, that Abba, is a Greek word,
and pater, a Latin, epist. 178. but Augustine could not be ignorant, that S.
Paul wrote not in Latin, and therefore, that place in Augustine is most like to
have been mistaken by the writers, and such as copied it out: Thomas says
better that Abba is an Hebrew word, and pater, father, is both a Greek and
Latin word.

2. Now why these two words of the same signification should be joined together
there are diverse reasons given. 1. Chrysostom thinks that the Apostle uses
the word Abba, because it is puerorum legitimorum vocabulum, that word which
legitimate children do use, they first of all learn to call father. 2.
Augustine sermon. 13. de verbis Apostol. whom Anselme follows, thinks that
the Apostle uses these two words, one for the Jews, the other for the
Gentiles, to signify the adoption and calling of them both to be one people:
so also Martyr, and M. Calvin, who applies here the prophecy of Isay, c.
19.18, that all should speak the language of Canaan, non respicit linguae
idioma, sed cordis harmomonia^, he respects not the propriety of the tongue,
but the harmony and consent of the heart, in the worshipping of God: but Beza
refuses this as too curious. 3. he therefore thinks that the latter word is
added as an explication of the former, so also Pareus, and Tolet annot. 13. who
gives this as a reason, because Christ in his prayer, Mark. 14.36. uses this
ingemination, abba, father, and yet it is certain he used only the Hebrew
word: But this here may be answered, not as the ordinar. gloss. that Christ
used both an Hebrew and Greek word before his passion, because he suffered both
for Jews and Gentiles, for Christ spoke in the Hebrew, not in the Greek
tongue: rather as the Syrian interpreter translateth, Christ did double the
word father, father, abba, abba, which the Evangelist retains in the first
place, because it was as familiarly known as the other. 4. Lyranus thinks
that by the ingemination of this word, is expressed duplex Dei paternitas, a
double kind of fatherhood in God, one by creation, common as well to the bad as
good, and a special kind of paternitie, by adoption and grace, peculiar to the
righteous: But the Apostle here speaks only of the invocation of the
faithful, how they cry Abba, father. 5. Wherefore I resolve here with
Erasmus, that this is spoken (...), by way of conduplication: this repetition
facit ad (...), is for more vehemency: it is (...), more forcible and
effectual to double the word, father, Faius: ista conduplicatio
amplificationem continet, this doubling of the word serves for amplification,
Calvin: as it is familiar and usual in Scripture, for the Saints in their
prayers to show their vehement affection, to double the word, Lord, Lord.

3. Calvin here well observes, how the Apostle, having said before in the
second person, ye have not received the spirit of bondage, now changes the
person, whereby we cry, including himself, vt sortem communem omnium
sanctorum exprimeret, to show the common condition of all the Saints.

Quest. 19. Of the testimony of the spirit, what it is.
v. 16. The spirit bears witness. 1. Caietan here well observes, that this
testimony of the spirit is internal, for it testifies unto our spirit and
conscience, that we are the sons of God; and beside it is a testimony de
facto, in fact, that we are indeed the sons of God, not de possibili, of a
possibility only, that we may be; thus far Caietan well: but he further
shows that this testimony of the spirit arises partly of our love toward
God, partly of our continual experience of Gods provident care in preserving
of us: but Chrysostom well says, that this testimony of the spirit is not
only, vox praestiti charismatis, sed and praestantis illud paracleti, the
voice of the grace or gift which is conferred upon us, but of the comforting
spirit, the comforter: the testimony then of the spirit is understood to be an
other thing beside the testimony of the graces and effects of the spirit in us.

2. Origin interprets this testimony, of the affection of the mind, when we
are obedient unto God not for fear, but of love.

3. Ambrose, Anselme, refer it to the imitation of God and Christ, whereby
the spirit makes us like unto God.

4. Haymo thinks this inward testimony of the spirit rises of our good
works, so also Gorrhan, cum spiritus noster per spiritum sanctum bona agit,
when our spirit by the spirit of God does the things which are good, it bears
witness that we are the sons of God.

5. Most understand this testimony of the cry in our hearts when we call God
our father, which the Apostle spoke of before, Tolet. annot. 14. Martyr,
Osiander, clamor iste testimonium est, this crying in our hearts is the
testimony, Faius: But Chrysostomes reason before alleged rejects all
these: there is difference between the testimony of the spirit it self, and
the effects and operations thereof: and first the spirit inwardly persuades
us, that we are the sons of God, and then it makes us also in our hearts to
cry Abba, father.

6. Theodoret understands this testimony of the spirit, to be sacram
doctrinam, the sacred truth and doctrine, which confirms us to be the sons
of God, and so Lyranus interprets it, de veritate catholicae fidei, of the
verity of the catholic says, confirmed by the spirit by signs and miracles,
whereby we are adopted: but the Apostle speaks of an internal testimony,
not of external doctrine: though by the preaching of the truth the testimony
of the spirit is wrought in us. 7. Lyran^^, ^eside has an other
interpretation, of the special revelations, which S. Paul and some oth^^ had:
But the Apostle speaks of that general testimony of the spirit of God,
which is wrought in the hearts of all the faithful.

8. Therefore this testimony of the spirit is that inward assurance of the
spirit of God in our hearts, whereby we are assured, that we are the sons of
God: as Sedulius understands here the spirit it self, which is given as an
earnest penny in our hearts, 1. Cor. 2.22. perhibet testimonium in cordeper
occultam inspirationem, it gives testimony in our heart by secret
inspiration, Haymo: and as Oecumenius, non solius charismatis vox est sed
donantis spiritus, it is not only the testimony or voice of the graces of the
spirit, but of the spirit the giver: for first our spirit is assured by our
faith, love, godly life, prayer, invocation, which are the fruits of the
spirit, then the spirit it self, concurring with this testimony of our heart,
seals it up, and makes it sure: these two testimonies must not be severed;
for he that relyeth upon the immediate testimony, and revelation of the
spirit, without this other testimony, deceives himself, Pelican.

Quest. 20. Whether the testimony of the spirit, and of our spirit be one and
the same.
1. Some reading thus, the spirit bears witness to our spirit, are of opinion
that this testimony is but one, the spirit of God testifies, and the spirit
of man is testified unto (...) Ambrose expounds, that this testimony of the
spirit, is redditum spiritui nostro, gi^^ unto our spirit; but the Greek word
is (...), bears witness together, with our spirit, rather, then to our spirit,
as do read, L.G.B.V. for in this latter sense, the word needed not to be
compounded with the preposition (...), together, or with.

2. Some will have the spirit of God, and our spirit here both to give
testimony, but in one and the same thing: as this clamor, cry, which the
Apostle spoke before of, whereby we call Abba, father, is the testimony of the
spirit and of our heart together, Tolet, Faius: so also Chrysostom, ipse nos
charismate suo nos loqui docuit, he taught us so to speak by his gift in us:
so they will have the meaning to be this, that this calling Abba, father, is
both the testimony of our heart, and of the spirit whence it proceeds: but
the crying Abba, father, is the effect of the testimony of the spirit, it is
not the testimony it self, for first the spirit, obsignat, etc. seals in
our hearts, that we are the sons of God, then apperit os, it opens our
mouth, Beza.

3. Pererius reports the opinion of some, which make the testimony of the
spirit to be the general promise sealed in the Scriptures, that God loves
those which believe in him: and the testimony of our spirit to be that
particular apprehension, which every one has, as that he loves God and
believes in him: and so the testimony of the spirit should frame the
proposition in general, and the testimony of our spirit should infer the
assumption: but this testimony of the spirit whereof the Apostle speaks, is
not the external and general promise, but the particular evidence, which
every one has in himself, that he is the Son of God.

4. So then here are two testimonies, the one is of our own spirit, which by
the peace of conscience, faith, and other graces of the spirit in us, does
assure us that we are the sons of God, Mart. and of this testimony the
Apostle speaks, 1. Ioh. 3.21. that if our own heart condemn us not, we have
bouldnes with God, but this must be the spirit of a man regenerate, not the
natural soul of man: as Origin here well observes a difference between the
soul and the spirit, as the Apostle does distinguish them, 1. Cor. 2.11. 2 Thessalonians. 23. Pareus: the other testimony is of the spirit of God, that
confirms this testimony of our heart, which of it self is but weak, if it
were not supported by the spirit: then seeing the testimony of our own spirit
is weak, it pleases God for our further confirmation to join thereunto the
testimony of his spirit, Mart. like as in battle they are called sy^machi,
striuers together, which do one help the other: so the spirit of God and our
own spirit regenerate by grace do witness and testify together, that we are
the sons of God, Erasmus, Beza, Caiet. Mart. Pareus, Faius, all these make
here two testimonies, of the spirit of God, and our own spirit.

Quest. 21. How we are said to be heirs, and what our inheritance is.
v. 7. If we be children, then also heirs: 1. Chrysostom here well observes
the Apostles wisdom, who while he spoke of heavy things, as what they should
suffer, if they lived after the flesh, v. 13. passed it over quickly, but now
treating of the privileges of the faithful, and of the good things, which are
given unto them, he amplyfieth his speech: that they are Sons, and not only
so, but heirs, and heirs of great things even of God, and joint heirs with
Christ.

2. Origin also here notes, that the Apostle still ex consequentibus
syllogismum nectit, does frame a syllogism by the consequents: as ye have
received the spirit of adoption, therefore ye are sons: if sons, ye are
heirs: for the servant expects a reward, the son looks for the
inheritance: and if heirs then the heirs of God, and heirs of glory.

3. But there is great difference between this inheritance, and the
inheritances of men. 1. Origin notes, that with men all sons are not
inheritors, as Abraham gave gifts unto his other sons, but left the
inheritance to Izaak: but here all the sons of God are heirs. 2. Haymo
observes, that here an inheritance is confirmed in the death of the father,
but God dies not: though now he seem to be absent from us, and afterward when
we are admitted to our inheritance, we shall see him as he is: gloss. ordinar.
and yet Christ dying left us as an inheritance his peace: but this is most
strange that here the heir must first die and be mortified, before he can come
to the inheritance, whereas in the world, he dies that leaves the
inheritance. 3. And among men the inheritance must be divided into parts, if
all the sons be heirs: but here tota habetur a quolibet bono, the whole
inheritance is enjoyed of (...) one admitted thereunto, though not alike, but
in degrees, Lyran.

4. and this our inheritance is not limited: as the Apostle says, all things
are yours, 1. Cor. 3.21. whether things present, or to come: for the present,
Christ has left us his peace: my peace I give unto you: and he has left us
his Testament, as his will, that we should believe it: Haymo who further
shows, how we shall be heirs with Christ, both of his glory, for when he
appears we shall be like him, 1. Ioh. 3.3. and of his dominion and power: as
he promises his Apostles, that they shall sit upon twelve seats, and judge
the twelve tribes of Israel, Matthew. 19. And this prerogative shall not be given
only to the Apostles, but even the Saints shall judge the world, as the
Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 6.3. Par. This twofold inheritance of Christ's glory,
and dominion is well touched by Origin, Christus non solum in partem
haereditatis, sed etiam in consortium potentiae adducit, Christ does bring us
not only into a part of his inheritance, but into the fellowship of his power:
But whereas Christ only is named to be heir, I will give the nations for
thine inheritance, Psalm. 2. we must understand, that he only is the natural
heir, being the only begotten son of God, but we are heirs by adoption
and grace, and so are admitted to be heirs with Christ.

5. But here Chrysostom has an harsh note, that the Jews under the law were
not heirs, as our Savior says, Matthew. 8. that the children of the kingdom
shall be cast out, whereas our Savior there speaks of the hypocrites, and
false worshippers among the Jews, not generally of all: as there are also
among Christians many hypocrites, and false children, that shall never be
heirs: And the Apostle in saying Galat. 4.1. The heir as long as he is a
child differs nothing from a servant, etc. evidently shows, that even the
faithful under the law were heirs, though kept under the ceremonies and
rudiments of the law for a time, as children that shall be heirs, under
tutors and governors.

Quest. 22. How these words are to be understood, if so be ye suffer with him.
1. They which follow the Latin translation here, si tamen, etc. yet if, or
if notwithstanding we suffer with him, do think that our sufferings are the
cause of our glory afterward: so Stapleton and the Rhemists infer, that as
Christ's passions were a cause of his glory, so is it in his members: but the
Apostle remooueth this conceit, inferring in the next verse, That the
afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory, etc. but between the
cause and the effect there is a worthiness, and a due proportion: See further
hereof among the controversies following.

2. Ambrose, whom Calvin and Beza follow, think this is required as a
condition, that they which look to be glorified, must first be partakers of
Christ's sufferings: and so our sufferings are necessary as a condition, and the
way wherein we should walk, and as a (...) of our obedience, not as a cause:
this sense may safely be admitted: And here a difference is to be made between
the legal conditions, and Evangelical: for there 1. the condition require^
was exactly to be performed, and a perfect obedience was required to satisfy
the law: but in the Gospel our willingness and godly endeavor is accepted in
Christ, though we come short of the precept. 2. there the reward could not be
had without the condition performed: here (though if time and place serve, we
must show our obedience) yet in some cases the promise is had without the
condition, as the thief upon the cross was saved without any such condition
of obedience. 3. the obedience of the law was exacted, as a cause of the
reward propounded: but in the Gospel it is necessary only as a fruit of our
obedience: the cause is the mercy of God, and his gracious promises in Christ.

3. Chrysostom will have the Apostle to reason here from the greater to the
less, that if God did so much for us, when we had done nothing at all, much
more will he reward us, if we suffer for him.

4. But here I subscribe rather to Pet. Martyr, who thinks that the Apostle
makes mention here of the sufferings of the Saints, because they are argumenta
and indicia, arguments and tokens, that they are the heirs of God: for in
their constant sufferings they have experience of the power and goodness of
God, whereby they are kept and preserved unto salvation: Pareus indifferently
follows this, and the second interpretation.

Quest. 23. How we are said to suffer together with Christ.
1. Not in compassion only toward the sufferings of Christ, but by imitation,
in being partakers of the like afflictions, must we suffer with him, Erasmus.

2. Neither do the Saints by the merit of their sufferings attain unto the
kingdom of heaven, as Christ did by his, as the Rhemists here note: but we
must suffer with Christ only to show our obedience and conformity to our
head.

3. Nor yet is it enough to suffer, for many are punished for their evil
doing, and there are that will endure much in the world upon vainglory: but
our sufferings must be for righteousness sake, as Christ's were.

4. And herein must our sufferings be like unto Christ's: that as he yielded
himself to the death of the cross, 1. both to show his obedience unto the
will of God, 2. and to take away our sin: so we likewise in our afflictions
should show our obedience, because so is the will of God, and that we thereby
should seek to mortify sin in us, Mart.

5. Now the passions of the Saints are of two sorts: they are either internal,
in mortifying the lusts of the flesh, or external in suffering persecution and
trouble for Christ's sake.

6. And as we suffer with Christ, when we bear the like rebukes for the truth
as he did, so also Christ suffers in us and together with us: the afflictions
of his members he takes to be his own: as he said to Saul, why persecutest
thou me?

Quest. 24. Of the meaning of the 18. verse, I count that the afflictions, etc.
1. I count, not I think, as the vulgar Latin, the word is (...), which
signifies not an opinion, which is uncertain, but a due value and estimation
of the thing, as Erasmus well observes here: quasi subducit rationem, he does
as it were cast up his account, that the afflictions of this life, are nothing
answearble to the glory to come: so also Beza, by the like use of this word
elsewhere, as c. 3.28. c. 6.11. will have it here to signify perpendere, to
weigh, consider, etc.

2. The afflictions or passions: the Apostle gives instance rather of the
afflictions of the Saints, then of their virtuous works and actions, because
they are more painful, Perer. and the Apostle applies this comfort in regard
of those times, when there were great persecutions for the name of Christ.

3. Of this present time: if not the afflictions of those times, when the
greatest persecutions were for Christ, were worthy, etc. much more of any
other time, Gorrhan: and he means all the afflictions of this life present,
not only which the Martyrs suffered, but if it were possible for any to bear
all Jobs afflictions, and whatsoever torments, si his possunt esse graviora, if
there could be any greater, they should not be worthy of that glory, Origin,
Haymo: and hereby is also signified, finiri cum vita, that these afflictions
are ended with the life, Perer.

4. Are not worthy: the word is (...). 1. Beza here refuses the common
interpretation, condigna, condign or worthy, and reads, non sunt paria, are
not equal: because the word signifies the equality and like weight of such
things, as are weighed in a balance together: so also Faius: likewise Calvin
thinks that the Apostle here speaks not de dignitate, of the dignity, or
worthiness, or price of our sufferings, but only of their condition and
quality, that they are nothing being compared to eternal life: But I rather
with D. Fulke and Pareus think, that this is a pregnant proof against the
Popish opinion of merits: tollit omne meritum condigni, it takes away all
merit of condignitie: for if the sufferings of the Saints, neither for quality
nor quantity, are proportionable to the glory of the life to come, it
follows necessarily, that they are not worthy: And the Romanists also
contend that the Apostle here treats not de merito operum, of the merit of
our works: Tolet annot. 17. but only shows that in respect of the
lightness and shortness of our sufferings, there is no comparison between
them, and the glory to be revealed: in this point therefore, it is better to
dissent from them. 2. Likewise we must here take heed of a corrupt gloss of
Caietans, who thus notes, that the Apostle says not, they are not worthy, ad
poenas temporales pro peccatis remissis luendas, in respect of the temporal
punishment due unto our sins that are remitted: for that is not true: Job
says the contrary that his calamity was greater then his sins, Job. 6.1.
but he says only they were not worthy of the glory: for 1. the Latin text,
which Caietan follows, reads thus corruptly, I would my sins whereby I
have deserved wrath, and my calamity which I suffer, were waighed in a
balance, this, as the sand of the sea would appear heavier: whereas the true
reading is this, I would my grief (or indignation, that is, perplexity of
mind arising of his troubles) were well waighed, and my miseries were laid
together, it would now be heavier then the sand of the sea where is no mention
made at all of sin. 2. in this reading there should be little less then
blasphemy uttered against the justice of God, that Jobs afflictions exceeded
his sins. 3. Neither is there any punishment remaining for sin once
remitted.

5. Of the glory. 1. Chrysostom here notes, that the Apostle describes the
joys of heaven, by that thing which is most desired here, namely, glory: he
says, not of the rest to come, for there may be rest where there is no glory:
but where glory is, there is rest: Origin also here observes, that in this
present life consolation is ministered to the Saints, secundum mensuram
passionum, according to the measure of their sufferings: to which purpose he
alleges that place, 2. Cor. 1.5. As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so
our consolation abounds thorough Christ, but the glory to come is not given
secundum mensuram, etc. according to the measure of our sufferings, but far
beyond: thus Origin here.

6. Which shall be revealed: Origin here observes well, that there is gloria
revelata, glory already revealed, and revelanda, and to be revealed: so
Chrysostom. although this glory be also at this present, iam tamen abscondita,
yet it is now as hid: as the Apostle says, our life is hid with Christ in God:
but when Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall we appear with him
in glory.

7. In us or toward us: 1. They which read in us, some refer it to the
glory of the body, the just then shall shine as the Sun, Haymo: some to the
knowledge of the mind, Origin: some to the clear vision which we shall have of
God, Perer. and he says in us, that is, the righteous: to the wicked this
glory shall not be revealed, gloss. interlin. and hereby he makes a
difference between man and other creatures: for man shall first be glorified,
and then other creatures, whereof he speaks immediately after. 2. but the
words are in the original ((...)) which signify, erga nos, toward us:
Chrysostom, Mart. Vatab. Genesis B. L.

Quest. 25. Wherein the sufferings of this life are not proportionable, and so
not worthy of the glory to come.
1. Passiones sunt paruae, our sufferings here are but little, ^. Pet. 5.10.
After that ye have suffered a little: but the glory of the next life shall be
exceeding great, as 2. Cor. 4.17. it is called a most excellent, etc. weight of
glory.

2. Pancae sunt, they are but few, in respect of the variety and multitude of
joys in the kingdom of God, Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is the fulness of
joy, and at thy right hand, there are pleasures.

3. Breves, they are but short: as the Apostle says, Affliction is for a
moment, but the glory shall be eternal, 2. Cor. 4.17.

4. They are mixtae gaudio, mingled here and allayed with comfort: as 2. Cor.
1.5. At our sufferings abound, so our consolation abounds, etc. but there
shall be glory without any mixture of grief, Revel. 21.4. God shall wipe all
tears from their eyes.

5. Our sufferings are obligatae and debitae, are a due debt in respect of our
sins, there is not any cross but it is justly laid upon us for sin, Psalm.
32.6. thou forg^nest the punishment of my sin, but everlasting glory is the
free gift of God: it is not otherwise due but by the grace and mercy of God;
it is the gift of God, Romans 6.23.

6. Passions here are communes common to good and bad: therefore S. Peter would
not have any suffer as an evil doer, 1. Pet. 4.15. But the glory to come is
only promised to the righteous: it is called the liberty of the sons of
God. v. 21.

7. And to conclude, to put all these together, the afflictions of this life
are nothing comparable to the glory of the next, neither in quality nor
quantity: for the quality, the sorrows of this world, cannot be so great as
the joys of the next, and for the quantity, they are but short and light.

Quest. 26. How the Creatures are said to wait, and to be subject to vanity,
and to be delivered, etc. and to groan, v. 19 v. 23.
1. Chrysostom well observes, that here the Apostle throughout saineth a
certain person of the creatures, giving unto them affections, as well desire,
hope, sorrow, greeuing: as the Prophets do sometime bring in viniam
lamentantem, the vineyard wayling, the mountains howling and lamenting: and
here the Apostle by this patheticall and emphaticall description of the
general desire and hope of the creatures to be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, encourages and hearteneth the Saints with patience to endure
affliction, upon hope of their deliverance.

2. First, he says (...), the earnest desire of the creature, expects, which
word Theophylact interprets anxiam expectationem, the careful expectation:
so Calvin, Martyr: Ambrose, frequentem, the continual expectation, Hilarie,
long inquam, a desire a far off, the word properly signifies erecto capite
expectare, to expect with putting forth of the head; the word is compounded of
(...), an head: Beza: and so the Syrian interpreter, oculos intendit, the
creature expects, and sets the eyes, as earnestly looking and beholding:
and whereas he says, the expectation of the creature expects, that is an
Hebrew pleonasme; to express the continual desire and expectation of the
creature: Now there is a twofold expectation, or desire of the creature: one
natural, as for the earth and trees to bring forth fruit; and this propension
and inclination they have by nature: there is another supernatural desire, as
when any thing tends to an end above the natural constitution: as the
corruptible body, to the state of incorruption in the resurrection: and so the
creatures are said to expect when the sons of God shall be revealed: not that
they have any sense or knowledge who are the sons of God, but then they
expect their own liberty from the bondage of corruption, when the glory of
the sons of God shall be made manifest.

3. The nature is said to be subject to vanity. 1. which is not simply to be
understood of corruption, as Chrysostom expounds: for neither are the
heavens of a corruptible nature, as other things, nor yet should the elements
have been incorruptible though man had not sinned, seeing they were to serve
for the generation and procreation of things, which cannot be done without
corruption: Tolet annot. 15. 2. And Origens speculation is vain, who
understands this vanity to be the bodies, into the which the souls, which
were before, were detruded. lib. 1. perearch. c. 7. And Erasmus conceit is
somewhat too curious, that interprets (...), vanity, frustrationem; the
deceiving or disapointing of the creature, which saileth of that end, at the
which it aymeth, namely immortality, in multiplying one individuum,
particular, by another: but it misseth of that end. 4. wherefore by vanity is
understood the frail condition of things, which is much degenerated since the
creation, both in the heavens, and the earth, and in the elements: and they do
look to be restored again to their perfect estate: Beza.

4. Not of it own will: 1. not signifying thereby, as Theophylact, that all
things were made by the providence of God, not virtute sua, by their own power
or virtue. 2. neither is it spoken comparatively, because they look for a
better estate, and so are said not to will that which is worse; Pere. 3. but
this their vanity is contra naturalem propensionem, against their natural
inclination: for every thing by nature would decline and shun the corruption
thereof: God made all things perfect in the beginning, but by man's sins even
according to the ordinance of God, all things were subdued to vanity; Pareus.

5. Under hope: not that there is any hope in the creature: but the Apostle
ascribes unto them figuratively humane affections: and here hope is taken for
the thing hoped for: as where it is said in the Psalms, the Lord is my hope:
Tolet annot. 10. hereby only is expressed the excellency of that state to the
which the creatures shall be restored.

6. Into the glorious liberty, etc. 1. Theodoret refers it to the time,
when the sons of God shall be glorified: and so Ambrose reads in liberate,
in the liberty of the sons of God: that when the sons of God, shall enjoy
their liberty, then the other creatures shall be freed from their corruptable
estate. 2. Chrysostom interprets propter libertatem, they shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption, because of the liberty of Gods children; as
for man's cause they were enthralled, so for man's cause they shall be enlarged.
3. But here more is signified, that the creatures also, though they shall not
be partakers of the glory, yet they shall have a more perfect estate, Calvin.

7. Every creature groueth, etc. which neither with Origin can be understood of
the Angels, for they are not subject to grief or groaning: 2. neither is it to
be referred to men, as Augustine, whose opinion shall be examined in the next
question. 3. but here the Apostle continues the former figure called (
prosopopeia) ascribing unto the unreasonable and senseless creatures, a kind
of sense and feeling of their misery, and longing desire to be easied from it,
as a woman that trauaileth: Par.

Quest. 27. What creatures the Apostle here speaks of.
1. Origin in one exposition, by the creature understands the soul of man,
which it subdued to vanity, by reason that it is enclosed in the body, and is
constrained to serve unto the necessities thereof: and else where he has yet a
more strange conceit, which is mentioned before, qu. 27.3. that the souls
having an existance before the bodies, are subdued to vanity being joined to
the bodies: But the Apostle by the creature understands a distinct thing from
man, and therefore not the soul: as he infers v. 25. not only the
creature, but we also, etc.

2. Origin has another application, by the creature understanding the Angels
and Ar^angels, which are set over nations, and are presidents of battles and
other affairs: and so are subject to vanity, in respect of the temporal
affairs of this life, wherein they are employed: and P. Mar. shows how in a
tolerable sense, the angels may be said to be subject to vanity, in respect of
their employments about things of the world: Theodoret and Ambrose, do
understand part to be spoken of the sensible and visible creatures unto the 22.
v. where because the Apostle adds a term of universality, every creature
groneth, here they also include the Angels, who as they are said to rejoice
over them that repent, so they are grieved at the ungodly: But Augustine
rejects this interpretation, upon this reason, because the Apostle says that
the creature is subject to vanity, and shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, and groneth: which things, de excellentibus illis virtutibus
credere nefas est, to believe of those excellent virtues and powers were a
wicked thing: yet Augustine ends with a quaere, whether these things may in
any good sense be understood of the Angels, as they do help our infirmity,
and so may be said to be like affected with us: Augustine in hanc epistol.
numer. 50. But Thomas absolutely refuses this interpretation upon this reason,
because in the next world the Saints shall be like the Angels: and therefore
the Angels cannot in any sense be said to be subject to vanity, or to groan:
seeing we, when we shall be like the Angels, shall be exempted and free from
all such things.

3. A third exposition there is: by the creature to understand man, and either
the righteous and just man only, or man in general both righteous and
unrighteous: the first sense follows Gregory, nolens seruit mutabilitati
corruptionis, he against his will is subject to this mutable, and corruptable
estate, waiting with patience until the time come, when he shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption: Greg. lib. 4. moral. whom Caietanus and
Catharinus follow: So also Hugo Card. Gorrhan: But the Apostle saying
afterward, and not only the creature, but we also, which have the first fruits
of the spirit, do sigh in our selves: so that the Apostle distinguishes the
creature whereof he speaks from the sons of God, which have the first fruits
of the spirit: neither will it satisfy, to say, that the Apostle makes two
degrees of righteous and just men, one that has attained a more excellent
degree, which have received the first fruits of the spirit, and are called the
sons of God: such as the Apostles were: the other, which are not so perfect,
yet they also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, as well as the
other, Haymo: for the Apostle by the Sons of God generally understands all
the faithful, so many as shall be heirs of salvation, as he infers, v. 17.
If children, then also heirs.

4. Augustine understands by every creature, man in general, that partaketh
with the nature of every creature, he has understanding with the Angels,
sense with bruit beasts, and has a vegetative life with plants: and man as he
is taken naturally, shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, that is,
such as do not yet believe, shall be called to the faith, and they shall also
be the sons of God: to this purpose Augustine lib. 83. quest. c. revealing of
the sons of God, as the Apostle says here of the creature, v. 19.

5. The most general and received interpretation is, by the creature, to
understand corporalia and irrationalia, things corporal and unreasonable,
comprehending the heaven and stars with the earth together with living
creatures of all sorts, trees, and plants: Thus Ambrose upon this place, and
epist. ad Horontion: to him consent, M. Calvin, interpreting this place
depecudibus and plantis, of beasts and plants with other creatures, so also
Pet. Martyr, Faius, Pererius: But this exception may be taken against this
sense: because the bruit creatures which now only serve for our necessary use
shall not be partakers of the glory of the Sons of God, there shall then be
no use of them, probabile est abolendas esse, it is probable, that they shall
be abolished.

6. Therefore it remains that we understand here by the creature only in
animata insensata, the things without life and sense, as the heavens and
elements, and the earth with the things therein: Chrysostom, so Oecumenius
also understands sensu carentem creaturum, the creature that wants sense:
so Beza says, that by the creature is signified mundi machina coelesti and
elementari regione constans, the frame of the world consisting of the
celestial and elementarie region: so also Rollach, Bucanus loc. 37. quest. 8.
Pareus seems also to include the bruit beasts, yet he thinks they shall be
abolished: Tolet also understands sensibiles vniversi parts, the sensible
parts of the whole world, the heavens, the stars, the elements, and earth: of
the same opinion with Chrysostom, are Ireneus lib. 5. c. 36. and Hilarious lib.
12. de Trinitat. And in this sense all things will agree: that these creatures
are subject to vanity, and do as it were groan under the bondage of
corruption, and shall be restored to the glorious liberty of the sons of
God: the only doubt is, because afterward v. 22. the Apostle adds a particle
of universality, every creature, and so it should seem, that the Apostle
excludes no creatures at all: But why the Apostle there says, every
creature, shall be showed qu. 33. following.

Quest. 28. Of the servitude of corruption, whereunto the creature is subject,
and wherefore.
1. Their observation is somewhat curious: that take this to be the vanity and
mutabilitie to the which the heavens are subject: because whereas in the
beginning the Sun was to keep his course in the equinoctial only, (for
then there should have been a continual spring, and indifferent temper
without either parching heat or pinching cold) now the Son has changed his
course, and runs in the oblique circle of the Zodiake, etc. But this is not
so, for seeing the Sun and Moon were appointed in the creation, to
distinguish the seasons and times of the year, this could not be, if the Sun
in following the declining circle of the Zodiake by approaching and remoouing,
did not make some inequality of days and difference of seasons, Faius.

2. Chrysostom shows, how the earth is now cursed to bring forth thistles,
and the heavens also shall wax old, as does a garment, Psalm. 102. and shall be
changed into a better mould: whereunto further may be added, that the Sun and
Moon have their eclipses, the sky is cast over with clouds: the stars with
evil influences do infect the air: the air is oftentimes unwholesome and
pestiferous: the earth is stricken with barrennes and becomes unfruitful,
Pareus: add hereunto that demonstration of the Preacher. Eccles. 1. how he
gives instance of the vanity of all things in the Sun: that rises and
sets, and runs about where he began, the winds go in a circuit from
the South to North, and thither again, so the rivers run into the Sea, and
out of the Sea to their springs and fountains again: And thus the creatures
are in continual labor, as Elihu says to Job, c. 37.11. He makes the clouds
to labor, or he wearieth the clouds to water the earth.

3. Pet. Martyr yet more distinctly shows the vanity of the creatures,
whereunto they are made subject for our cause, in these four things. 1. they
are in continual labor to serve man's necessity. 2. they are often punished
together with man, as is evident in the destruction of the old world, and in
the destruction of Sodom. 3. they have a certain sympathy and fellow-feeling
of man's misery. 4. and most of all they are constrained to minister their
service to the wicked desires of the ungodly; as the Sun to give his light,
and the earth her fruit: as the Lord says, Hoshea 2.8.9. because they bestowed
their wine and corn upon Baal, that he will take away the corn, and the wine,
which he lent them.

4. Chrysostom here answeareth an objection, whether any injury be offered to
the creature, for being thus subdued to vanity: nequaquam, quia propter me
facta est, no, because it was made for me, and therefore suffers with me, and
with me together shall be restrained.

Quest. 29. Whether the heavens and earth are corruptible, and shall perish in
the end of the world.
1. We do first detest the opinion of the heathen Philosophers, which held
that the heavens were of an incorruptible nature: such were they whom Peter
notes, that objected thus: where is the promise of his coming, for since the
fathers died, all things continue alike from the creation, 2. Pet. 3.4. this
opinion is contrary to the Scripture, which evidently testifies that the
heavens shall perish, Psalm. 102. and shall be consumed with fire, 2. Pet. 3.7.
for there is no visible thing created, which had a beginning, but also shall
have an end.

2. But yet we refuse their opinion likewise, that held the heavens to be so
corruptible, as that they shall utterly be abolished: which seems to be the
sentence of Chrysostom: for he says that the inhabitants of the earth, non
eandem cum coelo and terra patientur internetionem, shall not have the same
end and destruction which the heavens and earth shall have, which he
interprets omnimodam perditionem, a thorough and absolute perdition and
destruction, etc. of the same opinion seem to be most of the Greek fathers,
Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius upon this place: likewise Basil homil. 1. in
Hyperium, Gregor. Nyssen. lib. de creation, homin. c. 4. And whereas some
Scriptures are alleged, which seem to favor this opinion, as Psalm. 102.27.
They shall perish, but thou shall endure, and Luke 21. Heaven and earth shall
pass. 2. Pet. 3.10. The heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the
elements shall melt with heat: to these places it may be answered, that the
heavens shall not utterly perish, but shall be changed, as it follows, Psalm.
102.27. As a vesture shall thou change them: and they shall pass away, as
Gregory says, per eam quam nunc habent imaginem, by that image of corruption
which now they have: and to the same purpose he cites the Apostle, figura
((...),) huius mundi, etc. the figure or fashion of this world passes, 1. Cor.
7.37. And the fire shall serve only to purge the elements and earth, not
utterly consume them to nothing.

3. Wherefore the founder opinion is, as Gregory satih, the heavens both shall
pase away, and yet shall remain: ab ea, quam nunc habet specie per ignem
tergetur, it shall be stripped by fire of that fashion, which now it has, ea
tamen in sua natura servatur, it shall be preserved in it own nature: the
substance shall not be abolished: and this he proves by that text, The earth
remains for ever: not as some read, The earth remains not for ever,
Ecclest. 1.3. Gregor. lib. 17. moral. c. 5. Hierome proves as much by that
place Isay. 30. The Moon shall shine as the Sun, etc. non interitum
significat pristinorum, sed commutationem in melius, it signifies not the
destruction of the old, but a change for the better: Hierome upon the 65.
chapter of Isay: Pareus proves the same out of Peter, who competeth the
destruction of the world by water and by fire together, 2. Pet. 3.7. as then
the world was not destroyed utterly by water but changed, so it shall be by
fire also: Pererius numer. 74. does collect as much by S. Paul's words here,
that they shall be delivered from the servitude of corruption into the
liberty, etc. but if the heavens and earth that shall be delivered be not the
same, but new heavens, then not the same but other heavens shall be restored
unto that glorious liberty.

Quest. 30. How the creature shall be delivered, etc. into the glorious
liberty.
1. Theodoret refers it to the time when the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God shall be manifested: and so Ambrose reads in liberate, they shall be
delivered into the liberty: that is, when the Sons of God shall receive
their liberty: but the Greek text will not bear this sense: the word is not
(...), in, but (...), into.

2. Chrysostom interprets, propter libertatem, they shall be delivered
because of the liberty of the sons of God, as though it showed the cause of
this deliverance.

3. But more is expressed, that they shall be delivered into, etc. they shall
not only be freed and exempted from their corruptible state, but they also
shall put on an incorruptible state, and in their kind be partakers of the
glory of the sons of God: as Chrysostom also says, propter te male habet
corruptibilis facta, rursus propter te incorruptibilis erit, because of thee it
became corruptible, and for thy sake again it shall be incorruptible.

4. Some think, that they shall only be delivered in being exempted from
corruption by the utter abolishing of them; when the creature cease to be any
more, it shall be delivered from corruption: ex Pareo: but not to be at all, is
worse, then to have a being though in some misery, therefore this were no
deliverance, but a more corruptible estate, still to remain corrupted, and
abolished for ever: and the Apostle says not only that they shall be
delivered from, etc. but into the liberty: as they shall put off the one, so
they shall put on the other.

5. They which here comprehend also the brute beasts, and other creatures
having sense and life, do thus qualify these words, non consortes futuros,
etc. that the creatures shall not be partakers of the glory of the sons of
God, sed suo modo, etc. but in their kind, they shall be fellows with them in
that glorious state: Calvin: But it is not probable that such kind of creatures
being now appointed only for the necessities of this life, for the food,
clothing, and other services of man, which then shall be at end, shall then be
restored to any such glory: Wherefore we insist upon the 3. interpretation,
that these creatures which the Apostle speaks of, shall also be glorified
with the Saints: there shall be new heavens, and a new earth, Apocal. 21.1. and
the heavens shall be decked and adorned with stars: the Moon shall shine as
the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be seuenfold, Isay. 30.26. and the
earth with trees and plants, Apocal, 22.3. but to what end and use the heavens
and earth shall then serve, it is not revealed unto us in Scripture, and it
were curiosity for us to determine: yet it shall not be amiss to add
somewhat of this mystery.

Quest. 31. To what end the new heavens and earth shall serve in the next world.
1. The Sun and Moon shall not then serve either to give light unto the
world, there shall then be no darkness: and the glory of God, and the Lamb
shall be the light of the heavenly Jerusalem, Revel. 22.23. neither shall they
serve for times and seasons, years, months and days, as now: for then there
shall be no Summer or Winter, nor any darkness: the Sun shall not then go
forth as a giant to run his course, as now: Psalm. 19.6. but then all the
creatures shall rest, and their ministry and service, such as is now, shall
cease: not yet shall the earth then yield fruit for the use of men, as now: it
shall be a time of rest, and the great year of Iubile to all creatures: they
shall all be freed, and delivered from servitude, as the Apostle says here, v.
21. the word is (...), service or servitude.

2. Neither yet shall the new earth be without inhabitants, which is
Bellarmines opinion, because it shall remain operta aquis, covered with water,
and so be unfit for habitation, Bellar. lib. 6. de amission. great. c. 3. resp.
ad object. 7. for 1. the state of all things shall then be most perfect, not
confused and mingled together, as in the beginning the earth was covered with
water, before God made a distinction, and separation: 2. and then there shall
be no Sea, Revel. 22.1. as now: much less shall all the earth be a continual
sea: 3. and the Scripture speaks evidently, that the meek shall inherit the
earth, Matthew. 5.5. which promise being not performed in this world, shall be
fulfilled then.

Neither yet shall the Saints inhabit the earth, to live in terrene pleasures
in eating and drinking, and sporting themselves with terrene delights, as
Cerinthus the heretic held, and as the Turks are made to believe, by their
false prophet Mahomet, and the carnal Jews also do dream of such a
terrestiall Paradise: the Turkish histories do to this purpose make mention of
one Alahodinas the founder of the Assassines, who used this devise to get many
followers: he provided a place most pleasantly situated, abounding with all
earthly delicacies and pleasures, whether he would cause some to be conveyed
being cast into a sound sleep, and after they had solaced themselves there a
while, by the like intoxicate drink he would return them to their former
place: who when they were awaked would report, that they had been in Paradise:
But the new heavens and earth, shall not abound with carnal and corruptible
pleasures; there shall dwell righteousness, 2. Pet. 3.13. that is, spiritual
delight.

4. And the opinion of Catharinus a Popish writer, that infants dying in their
original sin shall be the inhabitants of the earth, is but a mere fancy:
he thinks that they shall not go to heaven, as being impure, neither will
he thrust them down to hell, because they committed no actual sin:
Bellarmine confuteth this fantastical opinion, by this reason, because then
there shall be but two places, heaven and hell: a place of joy, or of torment,
Bellar. lib. 6. de amissi. great. c. 3.

5. Wherefore it is most probable that the heaven and earth shall both be the
seat of the blessed; that there shall be an intercourse between heaven and
earth: As the Angels sometime came from heaven and appeared in humane bodies,
and Moses and Elias talked with Christ in the mount: and out Savior himself
after he was risen again was 40. days conversant with his Apostles in the
earth: and which are good probabilities, that the Saints shall pass to and fro
from heaven to earth: and shall follow the lamb, whether soever he goes, as
it is, Revel. 14.4. But of this great mystery and secret, nothing can
certainly be affirmed: it is enough for us to believe, that there shall be new
heavens, and a new earth prepared for the righteous: and that God shall have a
glorious Church, new Jerusalem, both in heaven and upon earth: for in them both
the new heavens and earth, shall righteousness dwell, as S. Peter says before
alleged. See more qu. 35.2. following.

Quest. 32. Why the Apostle says, every creature, v. 22. having hitherto named
the creature without any other addition.
Here are diverse opinions: some do think that more is contained here, under
the name (creature) then before: some that as much was said before by the
Apostle, and that the same thing is set down here, but yet more expressly: And
in each of these opinions there are some differences.

1. Of the first sort. 1. Ambrose thinks, that where the Apostle said before,
the creature is subject to vanity, Angels there are excluded: but here in that
he says, every creature groneth, he understands the Angels, who though they
are not subject to vanity, yet they do groan as it were and grieve for us, as
they do also rejoice for us; Ambrose to this purpose, epistol. 22. But the
same creature groneth, which hops to be delivered from the bondage of
corruption; for otherwise this could not be a reason of the former verse, if
the Apostle spoke not of the same kind of creatures: if angels then are not the
creatures, which shall be delivered, neither are they the creatures, which groan
with us.

Of the second sort: 1. Origin in both places understands Angels, but he
makes the difference to be in the word (...), groneth together, every creature
groneth together in compassion both Angels, and others: but every creature does
not simply groan, as being subject to misery, namely the Angels: and
therefore here the Apostle says, every creature; But if the Angels be not
subject at all to groaning, as indeed these blessed spirits are not, then
neither can they be said to groan together.

2. Augustine understanding by the creature man, says he is called every
creature, because he communicates with the hature of every creature; both of
the intelligent spirits, sensitive creatures, and vegetative plants: so gloss.
interline. quia habet communionem cum omni creatura, because he has communion
with every creature: but see this refused before, qu. 28.4.

3. Our new writers, as Pet. Martyr, Calvin, with others; both here and before
understand generally all creatures in the world, which do labor with us under
the burden of corruption: but all creatures in general shall not be partakers
of the glorious liberty of the sons of God, as has been also showed before
qu. 28.5.

4. The ordinaire gloss. thus observes; the Apostle says, every creature,
noting not singula generum, sed genera singulorum, not the particular of every
kind, but the kinds of the particulars: But if the Apostle mean every
particular creature before, and here the kind, then every creature should not
be as much, as the creature which was spoken of before.

5. Wherefore with Chrysostom and Theophylact, I think the Apostle speaks
here of creatures without life, as before; but he says all, that is, structura
mundi, the frame of the world; which Beza interprets, totum mundum conditum,
the whole created world, to show the consent of them together; and he says
(all,) ad maiorem expressionem sententi^, more expressly signifying his
meaning: and because the principal parts of the world, perpetu^ sunt, are
continued and joined together, Tolet: yet under the continent, may be
insinuated the things contained: and so all creatures in the continent of the
world do communicate with us in this groaning.

Quest. 33. Whom the Apostle understands, v. 23. we which have the first
fruits of the spirit.
1. We neither understand with Origin, primitias spiritus, the first fruits of
the spirit, to be the spirit it self, which is called the first fruits, that
is, the chief and more excellent spirit above all other: for the spirit is one
thing, and the fruits, that is, the gifts of the spirit an other.

2. Nor yet with Augustine, by the creature is understood the soul, and the
body, wherein man communicates with other creatures, and by the spirit, the
spiritual part of man, which is offered as the first fruits unto God;
Augustine lib. 83. quest. c. 67. for the Apostle speaks here of man
sanctified by the spirit, diverse from the creatures before mentioned.

3. Nor yet are the Apostles here understood only, which had received the
excellent and miraculous gifts of the spirit: as Origin also has this other
exposition, which Ambrose follows, epistol. 22. Anselme, Lyranus, Thomas,
gloss. interlin. Gorrhan, Perer. disput. 15. Haymo, Gualter.

4. But the common exposition is to be preferred, which Chrysostom and
Theodoret follow: that the faithful are here insinuated which have received
the grace of justification: so also Calvin, Martyr, Beza, Pareus, Osiander: for
though the Apostles had more excellent gifts then others, yet here they are not
compared with other faithful, but the other faithful are compared with the
creatures before spoken of: that if they sigh and groan, then we much more,
that have received the first fruits of the spirit: which do show that as we
have but the beginning now, so we shall have the perfection and accomplishment
afterward in the kingdom of God, Gryneus: as the first fruits in the law, spem
faciebant futurae messis, did give certain hope of the harvest to come, Pareus.

5. And whereas the Apostle adds, waiting for the adoption, even the
redemption of our bodies, he must be understood to speak of the perfection of
our adoption, and redemption, now begun in our souls, and bodies in part,
but then perfited, when our bodies shall be freed from corruption: And Origin
gives a good satisfaction here, because the Apostle says, we are saved by
hope: we are now then adopted, redeemed, in hope: but when these things shall
be perfited and finished, we shall have r^m, not spem, the thing, not the hope:
And another doubt also may be answered, that although salvation, and sighing
cannot stand together: for a man cannot sigh for that he has, yet because he
says we are saved in hope, we may sigh for the accomplishment of that, which
we hope for: Gryneus: so then the Apostle speaks of our adoption and
redemption, as it shall be perfited and consummate in the next life, not as it
is inchoate and begun here in this: for we are now redeemed, and now are we
the sons of God by adoption, as the Apostle said before, v. 15. But yet we
have not full possession of our inheritance, as Saint John says, 1. epist.
3.2. We are now the sons of God, yet it appears not what we shall be: our
adoption is taken three ways in Scripture, 1. one is of our election, as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.3. We are predestinate to be adopted in Christ. 2. the
second is of our vocation, whereof the Apostle spoke before, v. 19.3. and there
is an adoption in our glorification, when we shall have a full and perfect
fruition of eternal glory, which the Apostle means in this place: Pareus.

6. Origin, by the body here understands the Church: but the Apostle, the
redemption of our body: now the Church is not our body, but Christ's: The
Apostle means then, that when our mortal body shall be delivered from
corruption, then shall our adoption be perfect, which now the Saints do sigh
and long for.

Quest. 34. That no living creatures shall be restored in the next world but
only man.
v. 23. Because the Apostle says of the faithful, waiting for the adoption,
the redemption of the body: here it may be inferred, because other creatures
are not partakers of adoption, therefore neither of the redemption of their
bodies to immortality: for the more explication hereof, three things shall be
breefely touched, 1. what creatures shall remain after the resurrection, 2. to
what use, 3. what creatures shall not be restored.

1. Concerning the first, it has been showed before, qu. 28.6. that the
creatures which shall be restored into the glorious liberty of the Sons of
God, shall be the heavens and earth, and the elements between them: for so the
Lord promises by Isaiah, 65.17. Saint Peter believes the same according to
Gods promise. 2. ep. 3.13. S. John in vision seem the same accomplished, Revel.
21.1. what shall be the form and fashion of the new heavens and earth is not
expressed in Scripture, and it were curiosity for us to enquire: but new
heavens, and earth, we are certain by the Scriptures that there shall be:
which Chrysostom well expresses by this similitude, que madmodum nutrix
regium puerum educans, etc. like as a nurse, that brings up a King^ son,
when he comes to his kingdom, she also is made partaker of his preferment:
so the creatures, as the heavens and earth, which are now our preseruers and
nourishers, after that man is brought to his glory, shall be glorified also
with him.

2. Concerning the use: first for the heavens. 1. they shall not then serve for
man's necessity, as now, for he shall not need the Sun to give light, nor the
clouds to rain. 2. neither to inform and instruct man touching his creature,
for we shall then know, as we are known. 3. nor yet shall the Sun then run
his course as now: for there shall be no time, Revel. 10.6. which is measured
by the course of the Sun: neither any more generation of things, which is now
procured by the heat and motion of the Sun. 4. yet though it be probable
that the Sun shall have neither heat, nor motion, the light thereof shall be
increased seuenfold: Isay. 30.28. for many things are in this world lightsome
but give no heat: as the glistring and shining precious stars. 5. and the
heavens shall serve then to be an habitation and seat of the blessed: as the
Apostle says, They shall be caught up in the clouds, and meet the Lord in the
air. 1. These. 4.17. and the Saints by the continual sight of great glory of
the heavens shall be stirred up to praise and magnify their glorious Creator.

Concerning the earth it shall serve also to be the seat and habitation of the
blessed: for although now the heavens only are the seat of the blessed souls,
where Christ sits at the right hand of the throne of majesty, Heb. 8.1. yet
both the new heavens and new earth shall be then the habitation of the
righteous: as Saint Peter evidently speaks, 2. epist. 10.13. We look for new
heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, that is the
righteous, as Bucanus well interprets, Bucan. loc. 39. qu. 17. And Origin
collecteth as much out of our Saviors words, Matthew. 5. that the meek shall
inherit the earth: sed and terra speranda est, non haec, quae arida dicitur,
sed illa erit mansuetorum terra, etc. but an earth is to be hoped for, not
this, which is called the dry land, and is seen of the eye, but the earth of
the meek, which the eye has not seen, etc. And this seems to be the
meaning of Christ, because he there speaks of blessedness, which is not to
be found in this earth: Augustine also seems to be of the same opinion, lib.
20. de ciuitat. Dei. c. 16. where he affirms, that then the elements, as they
had here corruptible qualities meet for our corruptible bodies, so they shall
put on incorruptible qualities agreeable to incorruptible bodies: But this
agreement needed not, if the bodies of the Saints should not converse, where
the new earth and new elements are: Reason also gives as much; that the Saints
should there triumph, and praise God, where before they were persecuted and
afflicted, and God was dishonored: But Pet. Martyr obiecteth that place, 1.
These. 4.17. that the bodies of the Saints shall be caught up in the clouds, and
therefore he thinks they shall not live in the earth: to this we answer that
not the earth only, but the heavens and earth shall be the place and seat of
the blessed: that the Saints following the Lamb, whethersoeuer he goes,
Revel. 14.4. shall visit the earth also, and shall go and come, as it
pleases God, as before has been touched, qu. 32.5. But herein we must not be
too bold to wade without ground: how the Saints shall be disposed of, whether
some to heaven, some to the earth, whether the same shall be sometime in
heaven, sometime in earth, or how else as it pleases God, we leave these as
great mysteries not revealed: but that the Saints shall then be upon the earth,
we are certain out of Scripture, as has bin showed.

3. Now it remains to be showed, what creatures are not like to be restored
in the next world: and here we affirm this as most probable, though thereof
there be no certainty, that the unreasonable creatures, as fowls, beasts,
fishes, shall then cease, and be no more: of which assertion these are the
reasons.

1. Non sunt ad immortalitatem condita, these creatures were not created for
immortality: as the rest, which shall then remain, the heavens, the earth,
Sun and Moon: not that they were ad immortalitatem fac^a, made by their
constitution apt unto immortality, as schoolmen give instance of the heavens,
which are a simple body without qualities one repugnant to another: for as
Pet. Martyr well observes, immortality is the frank gift of God, and it
dependenth not a vinaturae, from the force of nature: for naturally the heavens
and earth, as they had a beginning, so they must have an end: But in this
purpose of God these creatures, which shall remain, were created of God to
immortality, so were not the unreasonable creatures: Bucan. loc. 37. qu. 8.

2. Those creatures only beside man shall be glorified, which shall
immediately pass from their corruptible state into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God, v. 21. and therefore the creature is likened to a woman
travailing with child, till she be delivered, v. 22. but the unreasonable
creatures, after they are dissolved, do not enter to glory, they fall unto
corruption, and their life and spirit is extinguished with them: but the
heavens and earth which continue the same, shall in the same instant, when they
are delivered from corruption, receive a glorious liberty: wherein appears
the equity also of God, that those creatures which from the beginning of the
world unto the end thereof, were subdued unto vanity for man's cause, as the
heavens and earth shall be restored to liberty with man, rather then those
creatures which are but a while under this servitude of corruption, because
their time in the world is but short they being renewed and multiplied by
continual generation.

3. If the unreasonable creatures, should be restored, then either the same
that were before, as the same body of man, shall rise again, or some other of
the same kind newly created, but not of the first, for the parts of those
creatures die with them, and therefore their bodies shall not be restored to
life: Bucan. loc. 37. qu. 8. nor the second; there shall then be no new
creation: for it is called the day (...), of the restitution and restoring of
all things (not of creation,) Act. 3.21. So Pet. Martyr defines, solos homines
excitandot a mortuis, that men only shall be raised from the dead: though he
will not determine of the other, whether any of those kinds of creatures shall
still continue.

4. Pet. Martyr has this saying, that no kind of creatures shall remain, nisi
opus aliquod habuter^ sunt, unless they shall have some service or work: for
it is against nature to constitute any thing, quod omnino sit otiosum, which
should be altogether idle, etc. then seeing there shall be no use of these
creatures, which now serve for the use of man, as for his profit in feeding,
clothing, carrying, laboring, or for his pleasure, it follows, that they
shall not be at all.

5. And further, nulla promissio facta est, etc. no promise in the Scriptures
is made concerning those creatures, as there is of the heavens and earth:
therefore it is probable, that they shall not then remain, Gualter: But
because the Scripture is silent herein, certainly as a point of faith it
cannot be determined: and we may here safely profess with the Master of
sentences, se nec scire, quod in scripturis sacris se non meminerit legisse,
that he is ignorant of that which he remembers not to have read in the sacred
Scripture, etc. yet in this question, what is most probable, and comes
nearest to the truth, the former reasons may demonstrate to any of
understanding.

Quest. 35. How we are said to be saved by hope, v. 24.
1. For the coherence of these words, 1. Chrysostom thinks the Apostle
makes mention of hope, because he had spoken before of the excellent graces of
the spirit, which he called the first fruits, ne omnia in hoc tempore
quaereremus, left we should make account of all things as present. 2. some make
this as a reason of the sighing and longing of the faithful, because they have
only yet things in hope: Tolet. 3. Martyr thinks the Apostle answeareth an
objection how it may stand with the condition of children to sigh and groan,
because yet they have their salvation but in hope. 4. some make the objection
this: how can it be said that we wail for our adoption, seeing we are already
the adopted sons of God in Christ: and so the answer shall be, that we have
these things only in hope; Rolloch. Piscator. 5. But it is rather an other
argument of consolation, to move the faithful patiently to bear their
tribulations from the nature of hope. Pareus, Gryneus.

2. Hope is taken three ways in Scripture. 1. it signifies generally the
doctrine of faith, as 1. Pet. 1.15. be ready to give an answer to every man,
that asks a reason of that hope, which is in him. 2. hope is taken for the
object of hope, the thing hoped for, as Gal. 5.5. we wait for the hope of
righteousness through faith: and afterward in this place, hope that is seen,
(that is the thing hoped for) is no hope. 3. it betokens that godly affection
of the mind, in hoping for that which is promised and believed. Gryneus.

3. Salvation is taken sometime for justification in this life: Tit. 3.5. Not
by the works of righteousness, etc. but according to his mercy he saved us:
But here it signifies the perfection and happy estate both of soul and body
in the kingdom of heaven. Pere. disp. 16.

4. But these words of the Apostle must not be so taken, as though we had only
things in hope, and nothing in possession: for we are now justified by faith,
and sanctified by the spirit: but the perfection and accomplishment of these
things we have only in hope: Martyr.

5. And two conditions are considered in the things hoped for, that it is both
difficult, for if it were easy and in our own power, we would not hope for
it: and beside, though it be hard, and difficult, yet is it not impossible: for
then we should despair altogether, and never hope for it: Martyr: and hereunto
add a third quality required in hope it self, that it is not wavering and
doubtful, for that is contrary to the nature of hope, but it is certain and
firm, and therefore is it called the ankor of the soul, Heb. 6.19.

6. We are said to be saved by hope, not efficienter, not as though it were
the cause of salvation, but consequenter, in respect of the sequel and
consequent: that after we have patiently waited and expected by bope, that the
thing hoped for will certainly follow.

Quest. 36. Of the difference between faith and hope.
They differ three ways. 1. ordine, in order and prioritie. 2. operatione, in
the work and operation: and obiecto, in the object.

1. Faith goes before hope, and begets hope: as the Apostle defines hope,
Heb. 11.1. it is the ground, hypostasis, or foundation of things hoped for: for
first we believe the things promised, then we hope for them, and in the third
place follows our love and delight in them: yet faith is not the efficient
cause of hope: the spirit of God is the author, efficient, and working cause of
all these graces: but the way and manner of working them is according to this
order: that first we have faith, then by faith the spirit brings us to hope.

2. The operation of them is diverse: for it is the proper effect of faith to
justify us, and assures us of remission of sins in Christ: but hope does
not justify us: it does by patience uphold and support the soul in the
expectation of the finishing of that, which is begun in us by faith.

3. The object of them both does differ 3. ways, modo, gradu, tempore, in the
manner, the measure or degree, and the time: 1. in the manner, for faith
relyeth upon the promise it self, hope rests in the thing promised. 2. in
the measure, initium salutis fide habet^r, complementum spe, the beginning of
salvation is had and obtained by faith, the complement and perfection thereof
by hope. 3. in the time, for faith apprehends the promise of remission of
sins and justification as present, hope is exercised in the expectation of
eternal life to come.

Quest. 37. Whether things hoped for cannot be seen.
It will be here thus objected, 1. we look for heavens and earth in the next
world, but they are seen: Origin answeareth, that they are not these heavens
and earth which are now visible, which we look for; but other heavens and
earth: as Saint Peter says, we look for new heavens and new earth, 2. Pet.
3.13. for as touching these visible heavens and earth, they shall pass away,
Matthew. 5.18.

2. Object. Stephen saw the heavens open, and Jesus sitting at the right hand
of God, Act. 7. he saw that which he hoped for: Gorrhan answeareth, he saw
indeed gloriam Christi non suam, the glory of Christ, but not his own glory:
hope is of those things which belong unto a man himself: he saw the glory of
Christ, which shall be communicated to his members: but his participation of
that glory he saw not, but hoped for it.

3. Object. Saint Paul was taken up into the third heaven, and heard things not
possible to be uttered, and being there he likewise saw the glory of Christ.
Ans This was not any corporal sight, but a spiritual vision and sight: for
Saint Paul determines not whether his spirit were then in the body, or out of
the body, when he was so taken up.

4. Object. A man running in a race may set his eye upon the price which he
runs for, ^^ hops to obtain: Caietan answeareth, that there are two
things considered in that which is hoped for: materiale, the material part,
the thing it self, and formale the formal part, which is the possession and
obtaining of it: the first may be seen, the second is not seen, but only
hoped for.

Quest. 37. What spirit is said to help our infirmities. v. 26.
1. Chrysostom by the spirit understands the spiritual gift of prayer, that
whereas the Church was in heaviness, and much perplexed, then he which had the
gift of prayer did rise up, and by framing of a prayer showed the people how,
and what they should pray for: But thus it may be be excepted against this
sense. 1. the spirit is not thus taken throughout this Chapter: and diuersely
in the same place to understand the same word is not so fit. 2. this spiritual
gift of prayer, which Chrysostom urges, was not general, but given unto few,
but here the Apostle speaks of the general supply and helping of the
infirmities of Gods children. 3. and this is a perpetual consolation of
Christ's Church to have their infirmities supported in their prayers: whereas
that gift was miraculous, and was to continue but for a time.

2. Lyranus exposition is more unfit, who understands the spirit to be the
Angel, which is given unto every one for his keeper, which directs him in his
prayers; but Angels are not the searchers of the hearts, as this spirit is.

3. Neither do we with Ambrose take the spirit here pro gratia spirituali, for
the spiritual grace: lib. de spirit. sancti, c. 12. the spirit here mentioned
is the author and efficient cause of our comfort and help: the spiritual
grace is only an effect of the spirit.

4. Wherefore by the spirit here is better understood, the holy Ghost himself,
as Origin interprets, and Ambrose in an other place, epistol. ad Horantion.
so also Martyr, Beza, Pareus, Tolet, Pererius. And though the spirit be said
afterward to make request for us, that must not be so taken, as though the
spirit were our mediator unto God; but he is said to make request, because he
stirs us up to make request, as the spirit is said to cry Abba, father,
Gala. 5.6. that is, the spirit makes us to cry Abba, father, as the Apostle
said before (...), whereby we cry abba, father.

Quest. 38. What infirmities the spirit helps in us.
1. The spirit helps our infirmities of our understanding: for of our selves
we know not, what is good for us, what otherwise: what to be followed, what to
be avoided. 2. the infirmity of our will is helped, which is not of it self
so settled on the desire of heavenly things, as it ought to be. 3. the
infirmity of our memory is succored, to remember Gods benefits received,
judgments infflicted, precepts enjoined, and our sins remitted. 4. there is
an infirmity in our concupiscence in rebelling against the spirit. 5. an
infirmity of impatience is murmuring against God, when affliction is sent. 6.
there is a spiritual slothfulness, in being unwilling to take in hand any
difficult or laborious work of virtue. 7. And inconstancy beside in being
weary of weldoing, and in not continuing and perseuering to the end. 8. A
special infirmity in our prayer, is to pray either ante tempus, for things
before the time, or to ask contraria, things contrary to the will of God, or
modo indebito, in asking them in undue manner: all these infirmities, and
specially the last are helped by the spirit.

Quest. 40. How we are said, not to know how to pray, as we ought. v. 28.
Augustine epist. 121. ad. Probam. moves this question, how the Saints are
said to be ignorant how to pray, seeing they cannot be ignorant of the Lords
prayer, which contains ^ (...) rule of all things meet to be prayed for.

1. Augustine answers to this effect, that the Lords prayer indeed
prescribes in general what good things are to be desired, and what evil
things to be declined: but the Apostle here is to be understood to speak of
temporal things, as the desire of prosperity, and the turning aside of
adversity, which are in themselves indifferent: and herein one may err in his
desire, as he gives instance in Saint Paul, who desired the prick of his
flesh, wherewith he was buffeted to be taken from him, which was not granted,
as not being meet for him: and some have their desire in temporal things to
their hurt, as the Israelites, when they longed for flesh: to this purpose also
Pet. Martyr and Pererius, that the Lords prayer is a rule not general, but yet
in specialibus erramus, we may fail and err in the particular: and the Lords
prayer is of things simply good to be prayed for, or simply evil to prayed
against: but the Apostle speaks here of things indifferent, as of temporal
blessings, or temporal afflictions.

2. But more particularly, herein appears our ignorance in our prayer, 1.
when we crave any temporal blessing, which may be to our hurt, as Satan had
his desire in afflicting of Job, but it was to his further confusion. 2. when
we pray against any affliction, which is for the trial of our faith, and so
for our spiritual good: as Paul would have been delivered from that strife and
combat, which he had with his flesh, 2. Cor. 12. 3. when a good thing is
asked, but of an ambitious mind, as the sons of Zebede ambitiously desired of
Christ the cheifest places in heaven. 4. so some thing may be craved of a
preposterous zeal, as James and John would have had fire come down from
heaven upon the Samaritants, Luke 9.15. 5. some thing may be asked unseasonably
and out of time, as Marie spoke to Christ to supply the defect of wine, before
his hour was come, Job. 2. 6. yea we may fail in the desire of life eternal,
in respect of the manner, though not for the thing; because we know not whether
it be better for us through prosperity, or adversity to enter into Gods
kingdom.

Quest. 41. How the spirit is said to make request with sighs that cannot be
expressed.
1. The spirit is said to make request for us, but in an other sense then
Christ is said to make request for us, v. 34. for Christ makes intercession,
vigore meriti, by the vigor and virtue of his merit; but the spirit is said to
make request, interpellere faciendo, by causing us, and stirring us up to make
request: Pareus: unction docet, the spirit by the anointing teaches us how
to frame and direct our prayers, Gryneus.

2. With sighs. 1. Augustine epistol. 121. c. 23. expounds it causally,
because the spirit makes us to sigh: and he gives instance of that place,
Deu. 13. the Lord tempts you, that he may know whether you love him, that is,
vt scire vos faciat, to make you to know: so also Gregory lib. 2. moral. c.
22. 2. Ambrose epist. 23. does not expound it causally but figuratively, as God
is said in Scripture to be grieved, to be angry, and such like things are
ascribed unto God, which agree not to the divine nature. 3. some add further
that the spirit is said to sigh, not only causally because he makes us sigh,
but instrumentally, because the spirit is said to do that, which he works by
his instruments. annot. 26. but the first sense is most apt, because to sigh,
and groan, can no wise agree unto the spirit in his person, but in respect of
the work, which is by the spirit effected in us.

3. They are called gemitus inexplicabiles, sighs which cannot be expressed.
1. Origin refers it to the spirit it self: quomodo cuarrari potest, etc.
how can that be uttered, which the spirit speaks unto God: so also Ambros.
epist. 23. says they cannot be uttered, quia sunt gemitus spiritus sancti,
because they are the sighs of the spirit. 2. August. epist. 121. c. 15. says
they cannot be expressed, because we desire that we know not, so also Anselme,
and the ordinary gloss. that cannot be expressed, which we know not. 3.
Lyranus refers is to the unspeakable desire of the Angels concerning man's
salvation. 4. some give this sense, they are unspeakable, in respect of the
object, because they are de re inenarrabili, of a thing not to be uttered, that
is eternal life, Gorrhan. 5. Pererius understands it of the unspeakable
work of the spirit in the heart of man, which is such, as cannot be uttered.
6. Tolet thus, annot. 27. because the spirit after an unspeakable manner
prays for us with sighs, when we seem to ask the contrary: as when
Jeremy and Job complained and were impotent in their prayers, and in their
heat and passion seemed to ask one thing, yet the inward intention, meaning,
sighing, and groaning of the heart obtained an other. 7. But we need not go
far for the meaning of these words: they have relation to the greatness of the
troubles and afflictions of the Saints, which are such, as cannot be uttered
and expressed by words, but only by inward sighs and groans, facit gemere
plus, quam dici possit, etc. the spirit causes to sigh and groan more then can
be expressed: gloss. ordinary: when as the tongue verbum proferre nequit,
cannot bring forth a word, but the heart sigheth within. Pareus.

Quest. 42. Of these words, v. 27. He that searches the hearts, knows what
is the meaning of the spirit, etc.
1. Chrysostom understands it as before de cord spirituali, of the
spiritual heart endued with the gift of prayer, not of the holy Ghost; for
then the Apostle would have said, he that knows the spirit, not he which
searches the heart; But if the Apostle should speak here of spiritual man
that having the gift of prayer, prays for the congregation, his sighs are not
such, as cannot be expressed, for he utters them by prayer. 2. the Apostle
makes mention of the heart, because the spirit immediately makes not request,
but by the moving, and stirring of the heart.

2. Origens exposition also is somewhat strange, who interprets these words,
he makes request according to God, of the divine nature: that the spirit
makes request, not according to the flesh, but according to God: whereas
Christ died, not according to God, that is, as he was God, but according to the
flesh, and he makes an other difference between the interpellation of the
spirit, and our redemption by Christ: for Christ died for the ungodly, as Saint
Paul says, but the spirit makes request only for the Saints: These are
dangerous, and violent expositours: according to God, here signifies nothing
else but according to the will of God, as Haymo says, ea facit nos postulare,
quae Deo placent, the spirit makes us to ask those things which are pleasing
unto God.

3. Here then are three reasons couched together to assure us of the efficacy
and fruit of our prayers: 1. from the nature and property of God, who
although the inward sighs of the heart, cannot be expressed by us, nor made
known unto man, yet God knows the meaning of the spirit which moves us to
sigh and make inward requests; from the manner and matter of our prayers, that
are according to the will of God, as the spirit teaches and directs us: 3.
from the object of our prayers, which are made for the Saints, for such as are
sanctified by the spirit of God, and so acceptable unto him in Christ.

Quest. 43. Of the nature, condition, and property of a true and lively
prayer, out of v. 27.
In this one verse are expressed 1. the efficient cause of prayer, which is the
spirit of God, which is said to make request, that is, to stir us up unto
prayer. 2. the object of our prayers, to whom they must be directed, only to
God the searcher of the heart.

3. The form of our prayer, which must be made according to the will of God.

4. The instrument and organe of the spirit, is the inward meaning, sighing,
and sobbing of the heart and inward man, although there be no vow at all
expressed.

5. The helping and vnderworking causes, are the Saints: so then impious and
profane persons cannot truly pray: for they are not guided by the spirit of
grace, who is the author of prayer in us, and the moouer of us to every good
work: Gryneus.

Quest. 44. How all things make together for the best to those that love God.
1. Caietanus, because the Greek word (...), works together, is in the
singular number, he refers it unto God, and puts (...), all, in the
accusative, not in the nominative case: that it is God, which works all
things for the best unto his servants: But the usual reading is better, that
all things work together, etc. for God is not so fitly said to work together
with his creatures.

2. And they are said to work together, 1. either among themselves, as Origin
says, collaborant, they labor together. 2. or in respect of the Saints
themselves, which ask these things of God, they work together with them,
Haymo. 3. or rather they do concur or work together, cum causa piorum
salutem operante, with the cause, which works their salvation, namely God;
Pareus, and before him Haymo: cooperatur Deus, God works together in
fulfilling all things belonging to their salvation. 4. but Pererius sense we
refuse; they are said to work together, quia concurrere debet bonus vsus
liberi arbitrij, because the good use of our freewill must concur, etc. for
what is man's freewill without the spirit of grace, it is able to do no good
thing of it self: as the Apostle said before, v. 26. that the spirit helps
our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we ought.

3. All things. 1. which is either to be taken so generally, as Origin
comprehends even the spirit also that helps our infirmities: for the
Apostle would not so shuffle together the Creator and the creature. 2. neither
yet is Augustines exposition so fit, that extends it ^^o the sins of the
Saints, which also profit unto their salvation, quia inde humiliores rediunt
and doctores, because after their repentance and rising again they return
more humble, and better instructed: lib. de corr. and great. c. 9. so also
Lyran. who adds further, that the remembrance of their former sins makes for
their glory, as the scarre of the soldiers wound sets with his valor: But
this is not agreeable to the Apostles mind, who speaks not here of the
sins, but of the sufferings of the Saints. 3. As these make the Apostles
words too general, so Haymo does too much restrain them to the prayers of the
Saints, that if they chance to ask unadvisedly, yet God turns it to their
good, either in not granting that they ask, or in changing it for some
better thing. 4. Wherefore the Apostle specially means, that all things, that
is, all afflictions and tribulations shall be turned to the good of the Saints:
as Chrysostom interprets, omnia, etiam tristia includit, in saying all, he
includes also, heavy things, etc. so Calvin, Martyr, Pareus, with others:
though it be very true, that not only afflictions, but all things whatsoever
shall fall out for the best: And here Bernard well observes, that all things
so work together, vt inter haec omnia, etiam quae nihil sunt, numerentur, etc.
that among all these things, even those are numbered, which are indeed nothing,
as sickness, Bernard sermon. de fallac. pres vitae.
death and such like, which have no nature of their own, but are naturae
corruptiones, corruptions of nature.

4. To those which love God: 1. the Apostle rather says, which love God, then
which believe in God, for these causes. 1. for that the love of God does most
show it self in affliction, when a faithful man is willing to endure all
things for the exceeding love of God. 2. and hereby Saint Paul does distinguish
a true faith working by love, from a sained faith which has no such love, Mar.
3. and least any should think, that by the merit of their love toward God,
this benefit is obtained, for all things to work for the best, the Apostle
adds, which are called, to show, that God first loves them in calling of
them, before they could love God, Calvin: and so the ordinary gloss. well
notes, because the Apostle adds, which are called, non aliunde est, quam a
praedestinatione, etc. it is not from any other cause, that all things work
together to their good, then of predestination, it is not of their merit: 3.
Origin, whereas all things are said to work together, etc. to them that love
God, infers, that to them, which are not yet so perfect to love God, but
retain still the spirit of fear, some things may fall out for the best, but
not all: But though there may be diverse degrees in the love of God, and so
some more or less are made partakers of this benefit, yet not only some
things but all to such, as love God, shall fall out for the best, so long, as
they remain in the love of God: But if they have not the love of God at all,
then nothing shall be for the best, but even the good things shall fall out
unto their hurt: as Chrysostom well collecteth, that as to those which love
God, etiam quae nocitura videntur, even those things, which seemed hurtful,
are for their profit, so to them which love not God, quae profutura videntur,
damna sunt, things which seemed to profit, are hurtful.

5. Called of this purpose: 1. Chrysostom, Origin, Theodoret, Oecumenius do
understand this not of the purpose of God, but of man, that God called those
whom he foresaw to have a purpose to consent unto their calling: But this is a
very erroneous interpretation: God in Scripture is said to call men not
according to the purpose of men, but according to his own purpose, as c. 9.11.
that the purpose of God might remain according to election. 1. Tim. 1.9. Who
has saved us according to his own purpose and grace: Ephesians. 1.5. Who has
predestinate us according to the good pleasure of his will: in these and such
other places, this purpose is interpreted to be the purpose of God, not of men:
and herein Tolet annot. 31. and Pererius numer. 107. do well concur together
in giving testimony to the truth, in rejecting the erroneous interpretation of
the Greek expositors. 2. so then here the Apostle insinuates a distinction of
callings: some are only external, and not effectual, some are internal by
the efficacy of grace according to the purpose of God: so our Savior in the
Gospel, many are called, but few chosen: he speaks of the external calling
only, but the Apostle here mentions the other effectual calling, which
always and only follows election.

Quest. 45. Of the meaning of these words, v. 29. Those whom he knew before he
also predestinate, etc.
1. They are deceived, which here do understand this foreknowledge of God, of
the foresight of their faith, which should believe: as Haymo, quos praesciuit
credituros; etc. whom he foresaw should believe, them he predestinate: so also
Osiander, with other Lutherans, who do hold election to depend ex prouisa
fide, of the foresight of faith: whereas faith is the fruit and effect of
predestination, not the cause thereof: whereof more follows to be handled
among the controversies.

2. And as we make not Gods prescience here the cause of predestination, so
neither with Caietane do we make predestination the cause of Gods prescience:
ratio quod sciat ill^ fore, est quod volendo decrevit illa fore, the cause that
God knows things to come, is because he willed and decreed them to be: and
Origin before had the like conceit, in eo, quod futurum sit id, quod nondum
est, in hoc voluntas magis est, quam praescientia conditoris, in this, that,
what yet is not, shall be, therein the will rather of the Creator, then his
prescience is seen, etc. for in the order of nature, first the knowledge of a
thing, which is in the understanding, goes before the determination and decree
which is in the will.

3. Neither here do we admit their distinction, who would have the
foreknowledge of God only to concern the reprobate, and predestination the
elect: and so they set praescites, they which are foreseen or foreknowne
against the predestinate: for the Apostle here says, that God predestinate
whom he knew before, then are not the wicked only said to be foreseen of
God, but the elect also, Beza: nay, Origin well observes that in the
Scripture, the wicked are not said to be foreseen of God at all, not that any
thing can escape Gods knowledge, sed quia omne quod malum est, scientia eius
and praescientia habetur indignum, but because whatsoever is evil is counted
unworthy of the knowledge or foreknowledge of God.

4. Some do take this foreknowledge of God, pro verbo elegendi, for the word
of electing, as 1. Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God,
Calvin: but here election and foreknowledge are distinguished: foreknowledge
goes before election.

5. Wherefore by prescience here, we understand not simply the foreknowledge of
God, but his foreacknowledging, which is a knowledge with approbation: the word
is not (...), he knew before, but (...), praecognovit, he acknowledged before:
in this sense it is said, The Lord knows who are his, 2. Timoth. 2.19. and
Romans 11.2. Has God cast away his people, whom he knew before, that is, loved,
approved, for they had no good works which the Lord did foresee: thus Martyr,
Bullinger, Pareus, with others: and Pererius, significat scientiam
approbationis, it signifies the knowledge of approbation: disput. 21. number.
100. wherein he crosses the judgment of his fellow Jesuit Tolet, who
denies, that this word does belong at all unto approbation and dilection,
which are the acts of the will, but only unto the knowledge in the
understanding.

6. So then here the Apostle sets sorth these three mystical acts of the
Blessed Trinity before the world was created: the purpose of God, which is
general to save some, and condemn others: then the foreknowledge and
approbation of God, in electing of some, and refusing of others: thirdly,
predestination, in appointing unto the elect, both the end of eternal life,
to the which he decreed to bring them, and in ordaining the way and means
thorough faith in Christ to atchieue that end, Gryneus.

Quest. 46. Wherein our conformity to the image of Christ consists.
v. 29. To be made like to the image of his Son: 1. Caietans observation is
somewhat curious, that in the original, the word image is put in the genitive,
(...), of the image, not to the image, to show that this our conformity is
not mediately referred to Christ, immediately to his image, but that we must
directly imitate Christ, in bearing his similitude and image: for the Greek
construction of the word signifying, similitude, requires a genetive case: and
it is all one in effect, to say, conformes imaginis, as the Latin interpreter
reads, or conformes imagini, as Beza, likeness of the image, or to the image.

2. Athanasius epist. ad Serapion: Basil lib. 5. cont. Eunom. do take the
spirit of God, to be the image of the Son: to the which image we are made
conformable in holiness and purity.

3. Origin refers it to the soul of Christ, which was endued with all
graces of the spirit, wherein consists our conformity; to imitate those
virtues and spiritual graces which were in Christ.

4. Theodoret places this conformity in being made like unto the glorious
body of Christ.

5. Chrysostom, Theophylact, herein will have this conformity to consist,
because, that as be is the Son of God, so we are by grace the adopted sons
of God: so also Lyranus, filiatio adoptiva est quaedam similitudo filationis
naturalis, the adoptiue sonneship, is a similitude of the natural sonneship of
Christ.

6. But to speak more distnictly: this conformity to the image of Christ, is
not in the essence of the divine nature, but in divine qualities and graces, in
which sense S. Peter says, we are partakers of the divine nature, in fleeing
the corruption which is in the world, 1. Pet. 1.4. that is, in holiness and
purity we must be like unto God: This conformity is either inchoate and
begun in this life, or perfect in the next: in this life, it is either a
principal conformity unto Christ in holiness and righteousness, as Ephesians.
4.23. We must put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness: or it is accidental in being made partakers of Christ's
sufferings, 1. Pet. 4.13. our perfect conformity in the next life, is to be
made like unto Christ in glory, 1. Ioh. 3.3. When he shall appear, we shall
be like him, Gryneus.

Quest. 47. How Christ is said to be (...), the first borne among many brethren.
1. This is added by the Apostle, as a limitation of our conformity unto
Christ: though there be a likeness in us and a similitude unto Christ, yet not
an equality, he still retains the dignity of the first borne: so this
conformity unto Christ is not an authentical proportion, in making us equal,
but in a geometrical, reserving the pre-eminence unto Christ the natural
Son of God.

2. Christ is called the first borne two ways, first equivoce, improperly, as
he is the Son of God by nature, but we are only sons by grace, and so we
are sons as he is, but in the same kind: then vnivoce, more properly he is
called the first borne as he is man, who has received in his humane nature the
plenitude and fullness of grace, and communicated it unto the faithful, whom
he vouchsafes to call his brethren, Dominic. Sotus in hanc epist.

3. Haymo shows how Christ may be said to be vnigenitus, and primogenitus,
the only begotten, and first begotten Son of God, both in his divine and
humane nature: in the divine he is the only begotten, because he is only the
son of God by nature, and so has no brethren: he is also the first begotten,
because he was ante omnem creaturam non factus sed natus, he was before every
creature not made, but borne: and so S. Paul calls him the first borne of
every creature, Coloss. 1.15. As he is man, he was the only begotten Son of
Marie, and the first begotten, because he first arose from the dead, first
ascended into heaven: and so he is called the first borne of the dead, Coloss.
1.18.

4. Yet to speak more properly and distinctly, he is said to be the only
begotten Son as he is God, and the first begotten as he is man, Chrysostom.
Theophyl.

5. Now herein consisted the prerogative of the first borne. 1. in the
pre-eminence of birth, they were the first. 2. in their office and anthoritie,
they were the rulers of the house after the father, and the Priests of the
family, before the Leviticall orders were established. 3. in their
inheritance, they had a double part to the rest of their brethren, and they did
keep and nourish the family, as Joseph did who had Rubens birthright: So
Christ is more excellent then his brethren. 1. in his nature, both divine,
wherein none of his brethen can partake with him, and humane, which he only
took without sin. 2. in his offices he exceeds, being anointed both to be
our Prophet, to reveal unto us his fathers will, and our Priest, in offering up
himself in sacrifice for us, and now in being the Mediator of our prayers,
and our king in governing us by his holy spirit, and by the scepter of his
word. 3. he also has the pre-eminence in his glorious inheritance, he is
glorified above all creatures, and is of all even of the Angels adored: which
glory he imparteth unto his faithful members in measure.

Quest. 48. Of certain doubts out of the 30. verse, whom he predestinate, them
also be called.
Origin here notes certain doubts. 1. Object. Whereas it is said, whom he
knew before he predestinate, hence it will follow, that God did not foreknowe
or foresee those whom he did not predestinate. Answ. Origin here gives good
satisfaction, showing that according to the phrase and use of Scripture, God is
said to know or foreknowe some, that is, in affectum recipere, and sibi
sociare, to affect them, and associate them to himself: as in this sense Adam
is said to have known his wife, that is, joined her in society unto him: And
thus only they are foreseen and foreknowne of God, that is, beloved,
approved, whom he predestinate unto life.

2. Object. The Apostle says, whom he calls he justifies, and yet there are
many called which are not justified, nor ordained unto salvation.

Answ. Origin here propounds a good answer, videtur mihi vocationis quaedam
differentia, etc. there seems unto me to be a certain difference of
callings, etc. but Origin proceeds not well in the explication of this
distinction: some (says he) are called, secundum propositum boni, according to
their good purpose, but some are called, that have no such good purpose at all:
whereas the difference of callings is not in the purpose of the heart, but in
the grace of God, which makes unto some their calling effectual, which some
wanting that grace do resist and disobey: so Haymo interprets well, quos
vocauit per gratiam, whom he called by grace. There is then an external
calling only, without the inward work of grace, and with this, election is
not always joined, there is beside an inward effectual calling by grace,
concurring with the outward, and this necessarily follows predestination, and
this the Apostle speaks of here.

3. Object. Whom he calls he justifies, etc. Hence it will follow, nihil
culpae habere, etc. that there is no fault in them which are not justified,
because they are not called. Ans. Origin answeareth, that justification, non ex
sola vocatione pendet, does not depend only of vocation: but from the desire
which men have unto their salvation, whereby their vocation it made effectual:
but this is dangerous, to make the efficacy of ones calling to depend upon his
own will and desire: and it is contrary to the Apostle, it is not in him that
wills, or in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, Romans 9.16. The
better answer is: 1. that no man that is called outwardly by the preaching of
the word, and yet thereby is not converted unto God, can excuse himself,
seeing he resists the grace of God offered. 2. in that God gives more grace
unto some, then to others, whereby their calling is effectual, no other reason
can be given thereof then the good pleasure of God, and we must not dive too
deep into Gods secrets, to know a reason of his doings.

4. Object. But why does the Apostle omit sanctification, joining unto
justification, glorification: the answer is, that sanctification must be
understood, and it is here by a synecdoche included in justification, as the
more principal: yet otherwhere the Apostle expresses them both, as 1. Cor.
6.11. But ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, Pareus.

5. Object. But why does the Apostle speak as of a thing already past and
done, he has glorified, whereas the glorification of the Saints is yet
expected. 1. Origin answeareth that there is a double kind of glory, one, quam
iustificati in vita praesenti, etc. which the justified do enjoy in this life
present, an other, quae speratur in futura, which is hoped for in time to come.
2. some answer that it is true of many of the Saints, that they are now
glorified in heaven: But the Apostle speaks in general of all that are
justified by Christ, not of some only. 3. therefore I prefer Haymo his
solution, who says it is the manner of Scripture, sic narrare futura, tanquam
praeterita, to speak of things to come, as already done and past because of
the certainty of them.

Quest. 49. Of the difference between the purpose or counsel of God, his
preference and predestination.
Seeing the Apostle here mentions these three together, v. 29.30. it shall
not be amiss briefly to show the difference between them.

1. The purpose of God, (...), 1. has other names beside in Scripture, as his
determinate counsel, Act. 2.23. the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.4. and
the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. 2. the purpose of God and his
providence differ: for the one is general concerning the government and
disposition of all things in the world, the other specially concerns the
state and condition of men: but more distinctly the purpose of God is taken
three ways: 1. generally it signifies the counsel of God for the
administration of all things in general, as Ephesians. 1.11. He makes all things
according to the counsel of his own will: and in this sense the providence
and general purpose of God, are all one. 2. it is taken for the counsel of
God in electing of some, and rejecting of others: as Romans 9.11. That the
purpose of God might remain, where the Apostle speaks of the election of
Jacob, and the reiection of Esau. 3. it more specially signifies the counsel
of God touching the salvation of the elect: as it is taken here, v. 28. called
of his purpose.

2. Concerning the prescience of God, (...). 1. this difference there is
between the knowledge of God and his prescience or foreknowledge: the
knowledge of God is not only extended to the things which are, have been, or
shall be, but even unto the things which never were, neither shall be: but his
prescience is only of those things which shall have a being. 2. Gods
prescience is taken two ways, either for his general foresight not only of
those things which the Lord himself intends to do, but even of the evil,
which be decrees to suffer to be done: and thus as well the reprobate are
foreseen of God, as the elect: in this sense the Apostle says, Act. 15.18.
From the beginning of the world to the end, the Lord knows all his works:
secondly, it signifies, not the simple and absolute knowledge of God, but his
liking and approbation of that which he knows, as 2. Tim. 2.19. The Lord
knows who are his: and thus S. Paul understands Gods prescience here, those
which he knew before he predestinate, v. 26. 3. out of this prescience and
approbation of God proceeds his election: that upon whom he casts his love
and affection, he electeth and selecteth them from the rest, whom he leaves to
themselves as S. Peter joins them together, 1. Pet. 1.2. Elect according to
the foreknowledge of God.

3. Concerning predestination, called (...). 1. it is taken either generally
for the determination of God, touching the salvation of the elect, and the
condemnation of the reprobate: as Fulgentius defines predestination, est
praeparatio operum Dei, etc. it is a preparation of the works of God, which in
his eternal counsel he decreed to do to show his mercy or his justice in:
in this sense it is found in Scripture, Pareus: though there be other words
equivalent, as some are said to be (...), foreordained to damnation, Iud. 4.
and the vessels of wrath are said to be prepared to destruction, Romans 9.22.
Gryneus. Or predestination is taken more specially for the decree and
appointing of such as are elected unto everlasting salvation: as Augustine
defines it to be praeparatio beneficiorum Dei, etc. The preparing of the
benefits and mercies of God, whereby they are most certainly delivered, that
are delivered: and the ordinary gloss defines predestination, to be
praeparatio gratiae, a preparation and appointing of grace. 2. Predestination
is not only of the end, but of the means tending thereunto: as the elect are
predestinate to be called, justified, adopted in Christ, and to be in the end
glorified: as Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him, etc. that we should be
holy: and v. 5. he has predestinate us to be adopted thorough Jesus Christ:
but this part of predestination, which decrees the means to bring the elect
to salvation, is properly called ordination, as Act. 13.48. as many as were
(...), ordained to everlasting life, believed: the means unto eternal life,
which is faith, falls under the ordinance of God.

4. Concerning election (...). 1. Some think that it follows predestination
in order, in respect of us, for with God these is no distinction or time, and
order in these things: as Bucanus loc. 36. quest. 3. but it rather goes before
as the Apostle first says, Ephesians. 4.1. 4. he chose or elected us in him, etc.
that we should be holy, then he says, v. 5. who predestinate us, etc. and v.
11. in whom also we were elected being predestinate: for first the persons are
elected, and then the thing is decreed, which is predestinate unto the elect,
namely, eternal life, with such things as do accompany it: By election then
such as shall be saved are sorted out: which word the Apostle uses, Ephesians.
1.11. we were sorted out, (...). 2. This then is the order: first, there is the
purpose of God in general to glorify his name in saving some. 2. then he
foreseeth, likes, and approoueth a certain number according to his good
pleasure, whom he chooses out, electeth, and separateth from the rest; then he
does predestinate them unto everlasting life, and ordains the way and means,
whereby they are brought unto life.

Quest. 50. Of these words, v. 31. If God be on our side, who can be against us?
1. This word if, is not dubitantis, but ratiocinantis, a word of doubting, but
of reasoning, inferred out of the premises: as Augustine. sermon. 16. de verbis
Domini, has reference here to the next verse before, whom God has
predestined, called, justified, glorified, with them he must needs be:
Origin whom Pareus follows puts this back to all before alleged in this
chapter: as that the spirit of God dwells in us, that we have the spirit of
adoption, and are the heirs and sons of God, and so rehearses the rest: if
God be thus with us, how can we miscarrie: so also the ordinary gloss
following Augustine, God is with us, praedestinando non existentes, vocando
aversos, mortificando peccatores, glorificando mortales, in predestinating us,
when as yet we were not, in calling of us being strangers, mortifying us
being sinners, in glorifiying of us being mortal.

2. Origin here also well observes, that where the Apostle says, who can be
against us? he denies not, but that we have many adversaries, but they cannot
prevail against us: so also Chrysostom, contra nos est ipse orbis, the world
is against us, people, tyrants, yea our own kindred: but they are so far
from hurting us, that will, they nill they, causa sint nobis coronarum, they
are unto us a cause of a greater crown.

Chrysostom here further notes the great privilege of the faithful, quam
non habere poterit, qui diademate conspicuus, which yet he cannot have that
wears a crown of his head: for he has many that rise up against him,
barbarous and others, yea many of his own rebellious subjects: but against the
faithful none can stand or prevail.

Quest. 51. Of those words, v. 32. Which spared not his own Son.
1. He spared not his own Son: His only Son by eternal generation, not
any of his adoptive sons: such as the faithful are, whom the Apostle before
called the sons of God by adoption, Origin: and this sets forth the
unspeakable love of God, in that he spared not the most precious and dearest
thing unto him, as Abraham's obedience was commended, in that he was willing at
Gods commandment to have offered up in sacrifice his only son Izaak, Martyr.

2. And it is more to say, he spared not, then he gave, to show the greatness
of the love of God, that spared not his greatest treasure for our redemption,
Bucer: as Mauritius the Emperor, would not spare his treasure to redeem the
Christians, captives with the Persians, which turned to his ruin.

3. But gave or delivered him: 1. God gave his Son, and the Son also gave
himself for us, and both of love: Judas also delivered him up in betraying
him, but of malice: habebit ille mercedem malitiae, Christus laudem gratiae, he
shall have the reward of his malice, and Christ the praise of mercy, gloss.
ordinar. 2. and this sets forth the love of God the more quod non
simpliciter, sed occisioni tradidit, that God gave not his Son simply, but
unto slaughter, Chrysostom. 3. and he gave him for us all, non solum pro sanctis
and maguis, sed and pro minimis, etc. not only for the Saints and great ones,
but even for the lest, Origin: etiam pro vilibus, ingratis, quin and inimicis,
yea for vile persons, unthankful, yea his enemies, Chrysostom. but the Apostle
puts in this limitation, for us all, that is which believe: Christ's
redemption is sufficient mill mundis redimendis, to redeem a thousand worlds,
if they had grace to believe, but it is only availeable for the faithful:
Pareus: as Origin says he was given, pro minimis qui sunt in ecclesia, even
for the lest that are in the Church.

4. How shall he not with him give us all things. 1. the word is (...), freely
give, which shows that all things are given us freely of God, without any
merit or desert of ours, Pareus. 2. all things are given us with Christ, both
because in him are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, so that he
which has Christ, has all other spiritual graces, he that has Christ has
all things: as also because Christ is made heir and Lord of all, we together
with him are also heirs of all things, Origin: quid de opibus dubitas, cum
herum habeas, what need thou doubt of riches having the master and Lord
himself, Chrysostom. all things superior a ad fruendum, equalia in futuro ad
conviuendum, inferiora ad dominandu^, both things superior, as the Blessed
Trinity to behold, and enjoy things equal, as the Angels to live with, and
inferior, to have rule over them, gloss. ordin. in the present righteousness,
and in the time to come life everlasting, gloss. interl. 3. and as Christ with
all his treasures and graces, is given unto us, so we are given to him: as the
Apostle says, 2. Cor. 3.22. Things present, things to come, are all yours, and
ye Christ's: but here is the difference, Christ is given unto us freely without
any merit of ours, but we are not given unto Christ freely, he has purchased
us with his blood.

Quest. 52. How nothing can be laid to the charge of the elect.
1. Lyranus refers this to the final judgment, when none shall dare to say
any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, but the consolation is more general,
even in this life is the comfort of Gods children, that no accusation laid in
against them, can do them hurt: though Satan accuse them, the law condemn
them, yet God is greater, that does justify them.

2. Augustine lib. 3. de doctrine. Christian. c. 3. whom Haymo follows, does
read all with an interogation: Who can lay any thing to the charge, etc. God
which justifies? and then the answer must be supplied, no: so also the next
clause, who shall condemn? shall Christ? but the better reading is in both
clauses only to read the first part interrogatiuely, and then the answer
follows containing the reason, why none can accuse the Lords elect, because
God does justify them, nor any can condemn them, because Christ died for
them, so Chrysostom and Hilarie lib. 10. de Trinitat.

3. Two reasons are given why no accusation can take place against the elect:
because they are elected, and so Gods purpose cannot alter, or change toward
them: and Christ's redemption is sufficient to deliver them: which is set forth
in four degrees: he died for the expiation of our sins, rose again for our
righteousness, is ascended and sits at the right hand of God, from whence he
sent his spirit, and he makes intercession for us, whereby his merits are
effectually applied unto us.

4. But Origin gives here a corrupt gloss upon this word elect, nisi electus
fueris, nisi^ omnibus te probabilem exhibueris, etc. unless thou be an elect
and choice one, and approve thy self in all things, thou shall have thine
accuser: and Chrysostom likewise interprets this election of the present
state of integrity, which every one is found in; and he uses this
similitude, like as a breaker of horse, pullos eligit, etc. makes choice of
the best colts which he sees to be meetest and fittest to run, so God makes
choice of souls: true it is, that God electeth none, but holiness and
integrity of life does follow and accompany them: yet is it not their own
integrity, but the righteousness of Christ, which does free them from
accusation in this world, and from condemnation in the next, as the Apostle
shows, v. 34. that none can condemn us, seeing Christ has died for us.

Quest. 53. How Christ is said to make request for us.
1. Chrysostom understands this interpellation and making of request, of the
love of Christ toward us, and the care of his Church which he still has, and
otherwise he thinks he makes not intercession: so also Theophylact, the
Apostle hereby shows nothing else quam summam eius in nos charitatem, then his
exceeding great love toward us.

2. Theodoret and Oecumenius interpret it of the representation of Christ's
humanity, and the exhibiting of his glorious body in the sight of his father:
so also gloss. interlin. he makes intercession, representatione humana, by the
representing of his humane nature: the sight whereof is a continual
postulation or request for us.

3. Rupertus lib. 9. de dinin. offic. c. 3. refers this intercession to the
sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, the efficacy and virtue whereof still
remains and cries unto God for mercy for us: to this purpose also Haymo:
Lyranus adds further, yet speaking therein without any good warrant, that
Christ does make request for us, ostendendo latus and vulnera, by showing his
side and wounds; Calvin says, that Christ is not to be imagined to be ^^ a
suppliant petitioner for us, but he appears by the virtue of his death and
resurrection, quae vivae orationis efficaciam habent, which have the efficacy
of a lively prayer.

4. Ambrose thinks that Christ does still preces fundere, power out prayers
unto God as he is man, even in the proper signification of the word: so also
Gregor. Nazian, ^rat. 4. Theolog. and Origin he thinks further, that Christ
still offers prayers, cum luctu and lachryma, with wayling and tears, hom.
7. in Lev. which are not seemly for that place of glory: And that Christ
still offers up vocal prayers, Tolet is of opinion annot. 35. whose reason
is, because even the Saints being in glory do now offer up prayers: Pet.
Martyr also thinks that Christ does now fundere preces, power out his prayers
for us, because he still is our high Priest for ever.

5. Cyril, cited by Oecumenius, takes this making of request for us to be that
vehement and earnest prayer, which our Blessed Savior made in the days of his
flesh, the force, effect, and efficacy whereof remains still.

6. Now then out of all these, to take somewhat: this interpellation or
request, which our Savior makes, is performed, 1. both by appearing now in
the sight of God for us, Heb. 9.24. 2. by the ever enduring force and efficacy
of his blessed sacrifice once offered upon the cross, Heb. 10.19, with one
offering has he consecrated for ever, them that are sanctified. 3. by his will
and desire, that the elect should be always acceptable to his father in him,
Heb. 10.10. by which will we are sanctified. 4. by the unchangeable love of God
toward Christ being well pleased always in his Son, and assenting unto his
holy will and desire, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased,
Matthew. 3.17. Pareus.

7. But that it is not necessary, that Christ should make any vocal or
formal prayers, it may be thus showed. 1. Chrysostom thus reasons, si cadem
cum patre potestate, etc. if he by one and the same power with the father, does
raise and quicken the dead, and do all other things, quomodo precatione opus
habet, etc. how has he need of praying to help us 2. an other reason he
takes from the greater to the less, that seeing Christ has propri^
potestate, etc. by his own power delivered us from condemnation, made us the
Sons of God, and performed all other necessary things for our redemption,
naturamque nostram i^ regali throne constitutam ostentat, etc. and now shows
in heaven our nature placed in a Princely throne, ad facilia illa and minuta,
has he now need of prayer to finish those small things which are behind? 3.
As the Son is said to make request for us, so God is said to ^^create and
beseech us, 2. Cor. 5.10. and the holy Spirit also makes request for the
Saints, Romans 8.27. yet neither God the Father, nor the holy Spirit do these
things otherwise then by their instruments and effects: we must not imagine any
formal prayers to be made, we must not conceive any thing to be done, quod
maiestate illa sit indignum, which is unmeet and not beseeming the divine
majesty: so Christ is said to make request, by the merit and efficacy of his
death, and the continual demostration of his love: to this purpose
Chrysostom: though it must be confessed, that Christ being God and man
otherwise makes intercession for us, then either God the father, or the holy
spirit, which took not our ^^ure upon them. 4. that Christ uses no formal or
interstinct prayers it is evident by that place, Ioh. 11.41. Howbeit thou
hear me always, but because of the people that stood by I said it, that
they may believe that thou have sent me: hence two reasons may be gathered,
that if Christ pray, he always prays, he always is heard: his intercession
then is his continual will and desire which is heard: Christ spoke in his
prayer, that others hearing might believe, but now there is no such cause in
heaven, therefore now no such occasion is of formal and distinct prayers. 5.
Tolets argument is nothing, for the Saints now make no formal prayers in
heaven, but by their voices and desires; Revel. 6.9. the souls under the altar
cry unto God: and Christ is a Priest for ever after the order of Milchisedech,
in that the fruits of his passion and mediation continue for ever, though such
distinct and and formal prayers be (...) powered out.

Quest. 54. Whether Christ's intercession and interpellation for us, do
extenuate the merit of his death.
1. Object. This doubt may be moved, because that seems not to be of
sufficient merit, which needs a further supply: now if Christ's mediation for
us, be a supply unto his death and passion, then was not that alone sufficient.

Answ. 1. The intercession of Christ is not to merit our redemption, which is
purchased by his death, but to apply unto us, ratify, and confirm our
salvation merited by Christ's death: so that the work of our redemption is
perfited by Christ's death, and in respect of the work it self nothing can be
added: but on our part, because we are weak and do often fall into sin, our
salvation had need continually to be confirmed and applied unto us, to which
end Christ's mediation helps. 2. like as other means, as the hearing of the
word, prayer, the receiving of the Sacraments do not argue any imperfection
and insufficiency in the work of our redemption, but in us that have need of
such helps and supplies, whereby Christ's death is applied. 3. And whereas
Christ's mediation is grounded upon the merit of his death and passion, it is so
far from detracting to the merit thereof, that it rather amplyfieth and
sets forth the dignity of it.

Quest. 55. What charity the Apostle speaks of, from which nothing can
separate us.
1. Chrysostom, Oecumen. Theophyl. Origin, and most of the Greek and Latin
exposition, as Augustine, A^b. do understand this of the active love which we
bear toward God: but it is better referred unto the passive love, wherewith we
are beloved of God: for 1. this is more agreeable to the Apostles scope, who
hitherto has urged the love and mercy of God toward us, in our
predestination, vocation, justification, in giving his own Son for us, Mat.
2. the Apostle so expounds himself, v. 39. the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus, Gryn. so also is it taken c. 5.5. the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, (...). 3. and our love toward God, sepenumero
fluctuas, does oftentimes waver and sadeth in it, as in David, 2. Sam. 11.4.
and so it were a very unstable foundation for us to stay upon, (...). The
Apostles meaning then is, that no kind of trouble or affliction which the world
takes to be signs of Gods anger, can yet separate us from the love of God,
and make us less beloved of him.

2. Then the Apostle rehearses six several kinds of affliction, which are
incident to the children of God: the vulgar Latin numbreth seven, adding one
more, namely persecution, which is not in the original: Lyranus sorteth them
into this order: these passions and sufferings of the Saints, are either death
it self, signified by the sword: or dispositions to death, either nearer, or
more remote, and further off: the nearer, are either in respect of the thing,
^^ danger, or in the apprehension thereof, anguish: the more remote, are either
in substractione necessarij, in the subtracting of necessary things, as of
food in famine, of raiment in nakedness: or in illatione nocumenti, in the
offering and bringing in of some hurt; as in tribulation: But the sorting out of
these into their several places does invert the order wherein the Apostle has
placed them, which it is safest to follow.

3. The Syrian translator reads, for us, who shall separate me: which reading
Beza seems to approve, because thereby the Apostle shows how every one
should make particular application of his faith to himself, and the Apostle
was not so secure of other men's faith, as so to pronounce of them: But the
Greek text is more authentical, which reads, us: and Osiander very well
observes thereupon, that the Apostle speaks not of his own person alone,
but of all the faithful in general, to show this certainty of salvation, to
belong unto all that believe.

Quest. 56. Of these words, v. 36. For thy sake are we killed all the day long.
1. Calvin observes, and P. Martyr notes the same, that the 44. Psalm from
whence this testimony is alleged, describes rather the persecution of the
Church of God under Antiochus, then under the Chaldeans: for they were carried
into captivity, and afflicted by the Chaldeans for their idolatry: but under
Antiochus they suffered for giving testimony to the law: and therefore it is
said, for thy sake are we killed, etc.

2. For thy sake: Simply to be killed or put to death is not commendable, but
it is the cause, which makes the sufferings of the Martyrs glorious and
honorable: and there are three things requisite in true Martyrdom: first the
cause, they must suffer for Christ's sake, Matthew. 5.11. then their person, that
they be righteous and innocent, men of integrity, not offenders and evil
livers, for then they cannot suffer for righteousness sake, Matthew. 5.10.
lastly the end must be considered, that they do it not for vain glory, but
in love to God, and his Church: as the Apostle says, If I give my body to be
burned, and have no love, it profits me nothing, Martyr.

3. All the day: 1. Chrysostom refers it to the mind which is always
ready and prepared to suffer for Christ. 2. Origin, omni vitae tempore, all
the time of the life: so also Haymo: iugiter, continually, Pelican: sine
intermissione, without intermission, Pareus. 3. Pet. Martyr understands it of
the continual expectation of death in the time of persecution, so also M.
Calvin. 4. Osiander applies it to the number of those which are persecuted to
death: the tyrants are not content with the death of some few, sed grassantur
in quam plurimos, they rage against many. 5. Gryneus understands, by all the
day, all the time of the world, since the persecution of Abel: but the second
sense before seems to be the fittest.

57. Quest. Wherein the faithful are compared unto sheep: We are counted as
sheep for the slaughter, v. 36.
1. Gorrhan here observes eight several points, wherein they are resembled
unto sheep. 1. for their innocence. 2. their patience. 3. their immolation
and offering up in sacrifice. 4. their doctrine is as the milk. 5. their godly
conversation as the fleece. 6. the tyrants and persecutors are toward them as
wolves. 7. they are fruitful, in bringing forth many children unto God, as
sheep that bring out twins. 8. they are obedient to Christ our chief
shepherd, as the sheep hear the voice of the shepherd.

2. But these resemblances are somewhat far fetched, and concern not the
scope of the Apostle here: herein therefore this similitude consists. 1. as
Chrysostom, Theophylast, Haymo, quia occiduntur sine reluctatione, they are
slain without any resistance. 2. sunt simplices, they are simple as beseems
the flock of Christ. Martyr. 3. like as butchers draw out the sheep to be
killed at their pleasure, so tyrants upon every occasion make slaughter of Gods
servants, even as butchers slay their sheep: as it happened in France in the
great massaker, at Paris, Lions, Orleans, and other places. Gryneus. 4. like as
sheep are killed for their flesh and fleece, so tyranni bona martyrum
rapiebant, did ceaze upon the goods of the Martyrs. 5. herein appears the
conformity between Christ and his members, who was as a sheep lead to the
slaughter, Isa. 53.7. Bucer. 6. add hereunto, they are counted sicut ^ves
morbidae, as specked and diseased sheep, and so killed. Gorrhan.

58. Quest. How the faithful are said to be more then conquerours.
1. The vulgar Latin reads only superamus, we overcome, so also Haymo, and
the Syrian translator so interprets; but the word in the original is (...),
we do more then overcome.

2. Which is diversely expounded. 1. Basil in Psalm. 114. gives this sense, he
overcomes which gives not place to those troubles which are necessarily
inflicted upon him, he does more then overcome, qui vltro accersit molesti^^
etc. which willingly does offer himself ^^ endure more, then is laid upon him:
as Origin gives instance in Job, who beside the plagues which were laid upon
him by the malice of Satan, did of himself (...) unto his sor^^^^es, as in
renting his garments, and scraping his sore wounds with a posthead, etc. but
this observation seems somewhat curious. 2. Chrysostom and Theophyl^^^ (...)
refer it, both unto the afflictions which they suffer, the persons which do
suffer, and the persecutors which procure their sufferings: in the first, which
are te^tations to try them, they are more then conquerors, triumphyng in those
things, in quibus infidias patimur, wherein we are sought to be supplanted: and
concerning the persons of the sufferers, they overcome with great facility,
sine sudore and labor, without sweat or labor: and concerning the
persecutors, flagellati flagellatores vicimus, we being whipped overcame the
whippers: the patience of the Saints, which is invincible, vanquisheth and
wearieth the tormentors. 3. But the fittest sense is, that we are more then
conquerours, because the Saints are nor only not broken and terrified with
their manifold sufferings, but do also glory and rejoice in their tribulation:
Beza: and are brought unto an heavenly kingdom, wherein the excellency of the
victory appears, Osiand.

Quest. 59. Of the diverse interpretations in general of the 38.39. verse. I am
persuaded that neither life nor death, etc.
1. Hugo Card. here observes that the Apostle rehearses an eleven several
impediments, which might hinder the certainty of our salvation, which is
numerus transgressione, the number of transgression, because it exceeds the
number of the commandments by one: and so hereby he thinks whatsoever to be
meant, whereby a man may be seduced or induced to transgress: but this
observation; beside that it is curious, is builded upon a false ground, for
there are but only ten particulars named by the Apostle, the eleventh utque
fortitudo, nor strength, is inserted by the Latin translator, not being in
the original: and Augustine omitteth it, in citing of this text lib. de great.
and liber. arb. c. 17. though it be found in the allegation of Hierome, epist.
ad Algas. qu. 9. yet seeing neither the Greek original, nor the ancient
Syriake translation has it, it is better omitted.

2. Gorrhan sets out this enumeration of the Apostle in diverse heads: as
all kind of actions do either tend ad esse, or been esse, to the being of
man, or his well being: the being of man is either preserved, and that is by
life, or destroyed by death: that which tends unto man's well being, is
either by the spiritual creature only, or by the corporal only, or from the
creature partly spiritual, partly corporal, which is man: the spiritual
creature is expressed by 3. names, Angels, principalities, powers: the
corporal is distinguished in respect of things present or to come: the
creature both spiritual and temporal, is set forth with three diverse
actions, as of violence, signified by fortitude or strength: of craft and
subti^^ie, called depth, or of prosperity, called here height: But this
curious division agrees not with the simple and plain enumeration, which the
Apostle uses, and beside he groundeth this conceit upon the Latin text, which
adds one word fortitude, more then is in the original, he fails also in
the particular explication, of things present, things to come, bright, depth,
as shall be seen afterward.

3. Origin observes well that as the Apostle had rehearsed before omnes
humanas tentationes, all humane tentations, v. 35. as famine, nakedness, the
sword, and such like, now be reckons up tentations, maiores humanis, greater
then humane tentations: as he speaks of Angels, principalities, powers: But
that other note of his is not so good: that whereas before the Apostle spoke,
confidenter, confidently, saying, in all these we are more then conquerours:
yet here valde tenuiter aij^, he says somewhat slenderly or faintely, not that
we are more then conquerours, as before, but nothing can separate us, etc.
whereas in truth, the Apostle saying, I am persuaded, speaks no less
confidently then before.

Quest. 60. Of the diverse interpretations in particular.
1. Death nor life. 1. Origin understands by death, the death of the soul,
which is a separation from God, and by life, the life of sin. 2. Chrysostom
applies it to everlasting death, and an other immortal life: that though they
could promise unto us an other immortal life, to separate us from Christ, we
ought not to give consent. 3. Osiander interprets mors horrenda, vita
aerum^^sa, an horrible death, and a miserable life. 4. Lyranus understands,
amor vitae, the love of this life, and the fear of death, the one threatened
by persecutors, the other promised. 5. But it may be more generally taken, for
omnia discri^i^^, all perils which put the life in danger: Mort. omnia
extrema, secunda and adversa, and ^ll exceeding great prosperity or adversity.

2. Angels, principalities, powers. 1. Origin understands only the evil
Angels, and adversary powers, so Osiander also. 2. Chrysostom only the good
Angels, and Hierome, so also Lyranus, and they understand it by way of
supposition, that if the good Angels should seek to withdraw us from Christ,
which is impossible, yet we should not give (...) unto them: so the Apostle
has the like supposition of the good Angels, Galat. 1.8. Calv. 3. But we may
better understand the Angels good and bad, Mart. Gryn. Pareus, who by
principalities and powers understands the kingdoms and commanders of the
world: but they are titles rather given to the Angels, as Ephesians. 1.21. Gryneus
following Chrysostom.

3. Things present, nor things to come. 1. Not in this world and the next, as
Origin (...) has a speculation of the passage of the soul out of the body,
which in that instant is many times seduced and deceived by the evil spirits.
2. But he means the dangers of this life present, or to come, Mart. Par. 3.
he makes no mention of the things past, for they are overcome already, Lyran.
and as for our sins past, they are forgiven us in Christ, Gryn.

4. Neither height nor depth. 1. Origin understands it of the spirits in the
air, and in the deep. 2. Lyranus of the depth and profunditie of Satan. 3.
Gorrhan of the height and depth of humane wisdom: so also Mart. 4. Osiander
of the diverse kinds of death, as by hanging aloft, and being drowned in the
deep. 5. Chrysostom and Theophylact better understand things in heaven and
earth: the elements above and below, Pareus: ret s^premas and infernas, things
above and beneath, Bulling. 6. Theodoret understands heaven and hell. 7.
Oecumenius, prosperity and adversity.

5. Or any other creature. 1. not beside those which are visible, Origin: for
he had spoken of invisible things before. 2. nor a new creature beside those
which God made, as Ambrose, as equus hipes, an horse with two legs, and such
like, gloss. ordinar. Hugo. Gorrhan. 3. But the Apostle, absolvit inductionem,
does make an end of his induction: because it had been infinite to reckon up
all the creatures, Martyr: so Chrysostom, if there be any other creature of
what manner soever, how great soever.

4. Places of Doctrine.
Doct. 1. How the same work may be both good and sinful as it proceeds
from God, the devil, and man.
v. 3. Sending his Son, etc. God in sending his Son, and giving him up unto
death, only intented his own glory, and the salvation of man, but Satan
stirred up the Jews of envy and malice to put that holy and Just one to
death: so the same action, as it proceeded from God was good, as it came from
Satan and man was evil: So that God is no way the author of evil, though he
be author of that thing which is abused unto evil: Mart. This further is
evident in the affliction of Job, which, as God was the author and worker of
it, tended to Gods glory, and the trial of Jobs faith, but as Satan had his
finger in it, he would thereby have supplanted the faith of Job.

Doct. 2. Of the causes of salvation.
v. 3. Here all the causes of our salvation are expressed. 1. The author and
efficient cause is God, who sent his Son to redeem us. 2. the material
cause is Christ, who came in the similitude of sinful flesh, not that he had
not true flesh, as Marcion the heretic said, but it was true flesh yet without
sin, and so in that behalf like unto sinful flesh, as having the true
nature of our flesh, but not the sinful quality thereof. 3. the form is also
set forth, he condemned sin in the flesh, that is, suffered the punishment due
unto our sin in his flesh. 4. the impulsive or motive cause, was the
imbecilsitie and weakness of the law: for if the law could have saved us, Christ
needed not have died. 5. the final causes were these two. 1. for sin, that is,
he came to expiate, purge, and take away sin. 2. and that the law might be
fulfilled, and the righteousness of the law fulfilled by Christ imputed to us
by faith, v. 4.

Doct. 3. That the holy Ghost is God.
v. 9. The spirit of God dwells in you: Hence Didymus inferred well, that the
holy spirit is God, because he dwells in all the faithful: this infinitenes
and immensitie of the spirit shows that he is God, for who but God can dwell
in so many temples at once: and beside, in that he is called the spirit of God,
that also proves him to be God: for the spirit of God is of the same nature
and substance with God.

Doct. 4. That the three glorious persons of the Blessed Trinity are of one
efficacy and power.
v. 11. The raising up of the dead is a work of Gods omnipotency: but God the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, do all raise up the dead: as God is
said to raise up our dead bodies, because his spirit dwells in us, God the
father then raises, and his spirit also raises and quickens the dead, and
Christ also raises the dead, because the same spirit is here called the spirit
of God, and of Christ: so Ioh. 6.54. He that eats my flesh, etc. I will raise
him up at the last day.

Doct. 5. Of everlasting glory.
v. 18. Not worthy of the glory, which shall be revealed in us: Thomas Aquin.
observes 4. necessary points out of these words concerning everlasting life:
1. it is called glory, to show the excllencie of it: for in this life noble
wits are desirous of nothing more then glory: it is set forth by the name of
that thing which is most desired. 2. it shall be, which shows the eternity
of it: for that which is now present is but short and momentarie. 3. revealed,
the glory to come then is of it self invisible, but God shall so illuminate
our minds, as that he himself will be seen of us. 4. this glory shall be
showed in us, which signifies the stabilitie of this glory, it shall not
depend of external things, as riches, honor, but within us it shall be, and
possess and replenish both our bodies and souls.

Doct. 6. Of the nature and properties of hope.
v. 24. Hope that is seen is no hope. 1. the author and efficient cause of
hope, is God, Romans 15.13. The God of hope, etc. 2. the subject, is the
faithful heart. 3. the object, things which are not seen. 4. the form
thereof is with patience to abide. 5. the effect thereof is joy in the spirit,
Romans 1^.1^. rejoicing in hope. 6. the end is our salvation, we are saved by
hope. 7. the contrary to all is despair, and diffidence, ex Gryneo.

Doct. 7. Of true prayer that consists not in the sound of the voice, but in
the sighs of the heart.
v. 26. The spirit makes request with sighs: The meaning is this, that many
times when the children of God are overwhelmed with grief, and know not
themselves what they pray, but only sobbe and sigh, that the spirit
understands their meaning, and even those sighs and groans, which come of
the spirit do pray for them: Augustine writes excellently hereof, epist. 121.
that the brethren in Egypt, are said crebras habere orationes, sed eas
brevissimas, and raptim iaculatas, to make often prayers, but the same very
short, and as it were of a sudden cast out, etc. whereupon he thus infers,
hanc intentionem, sicut non est obtr^denda, si per durare non potest, ita si
perduraverit, non esse cito rumpendam, the intention of prayer, as it must not
be forced, if it does not continue, so if it hold still, it must not suddenly
be interrupted and broken off: and so he concludes, ab sit ab oratione multa
locutio, sud non desit multa precatso, in our prayer let there be absent much
speech, but let there not be wanting much praying, etc. for as long as the
intention and devotion holds, the prayer cannot be too much, but to go on
still in words the intention being slacked, is much babbling and talking, not
praying.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. That concupiscence remaining even in the regenerate is sin and
in it self worthy of condemnation.
v. 1. There is no condemnation: Bellarmine hence infers the contrary, that
in these words the Apostle does not so much show that there is no condemna^on
to those that are justified, as that there is no matter of condemnation in
them, nihil condemnatione dignum, nothing worthy of condemnation: l. 5. de
amiss. great. c. 7. arg. 3. and consequently concupiscence in them is not sin.

Contra. 1. The contrary rather is inferred out of the Apostles words, that
concupiscence is in it self worthy of condemnation, of the which the Apostle
treated before in the former chapter, but it is not unto damnation, neither it,
nor any other sin unto those, which are justified by faith in Christ. 2. and
the Apostle expresses the very cause, they are justified in Christ, and
therefore though sin remain in them, yet it is not imputed: therefore it is
great bouldnes to deny that which the Apostle in so direct words expresses,
that unto those which are (justified) in Christ, there is no condemnation: not
for that there is nothing worthy of condemnation in them, for then, they
should be altogether without sin, but because they are justified. 3. the
Apostle says not, there is no sin, but no condemnation, Melancth. not that
the same sins remain in those which are justified, which were in them
before, Calvin slaundered by Pererius.
as Pererius slanndereth Calvin to say, disput. 1. numer. 5. but there be still
some imperfections and relics of sin remaining, but not reigning, which
notwithstanding are not imputed unto the faithful, neither are able to
condemn them: and Calvin says no more, but that the Apostle joins three
things together, imperfectionem, the imperfections which are always in the
Saints, Dei indulgentiam, Gods indulgence, whereby their sins are forgiven,
and regenerationem spiritus, the regeneration of the spirit, for carni suae
indulgens, he that is given to the flesh, does flatter himself in vain to be
freed from his sin, Calvin: then cannot the same sins remain, seeing in
the regenerate the flesh is mortified, and sin subdued.

Controv. 2. That none are perfect in this life.
Origens oversight is here to be noted, who thinking that the Apostle spoke in
the former chapter of those which partly served the law of God in the spirit,
and partly the Law of sin in the flesh, says that now he speaks of those
which ex integro in Christo sunt, which wholly are in Christ, not partly of the
spirit, partly of the flesh: but are perfect.

Contra. 1. First Origin confounds justification and sanctification: for the
faithful are indeed wholly graft into Christ by faith, and yet they may have
some infirmities of the flesh remaining. 2. there never lived any of that
perfection, never to be tempted of the flesh, but only Christ: but yet they
which are in Christ do not walk after the flesh, that is, non carnem ducem
sequuntur, they do not follow the flesh as their guide, though they be
sometime tempted of the flesh: but they follow the guiding and direction of the
spirit, Beza in annot. 3. and it has been sufficiently showed before, quest.
36. of the former chapter, that the Apostle there speaks in his own person
as of a man regenerate: and so in this place he means the same, whom in his
own person he described before.

Controv. 3. That regeneration is not the cause, that there is no condemnation
to the faithful.
The Romanists do make this the cause why there is no condemnation to those
which are in Christ, because they walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit, Tolet. annot. 1. Bellarm. 5. de amission. great. c. 10. respons. ad
object. 7. so likewise Stapleton. Antidot. p. 435. who thus obiecteth.

1. Ob. He urges the Apostles words here, there is no comdemnation, etc. which
walk not after the flesh, therefore for that they walk not after the flesh,
there is no condemnation to such.

Contra. The Apostle says not there is no condemnation, because they walk
not, but to them that walk not: regeneration is required as a necessary
condition annexed to justification, not as the cause: so that here is an
answer to two questions together: how we are justified, namely by faith in
Christ, and who are justified, they which bring forth good fruits: the one is
internal, their justification, the other external, namely sanctification,
Beza.

2. Ob. The Apostle says that the law of the spirit, (which Beza interprets
to be the grace of regeneration) does free us from the law of sin, and
death, v. 2. Ergo, it is the cause of justification.

Contra. 1. This interpretation being admitted, that follows not, which is
inferred, for the words are not from sin, but from the law of sin, that
is, from the dominion of sin: and so indeed the grace of regeneration freeth
us, that sin has no more dominion over us. 2. but it is better with Ambrose
to understand by the law of the spirit, legem fidei, the law of faith, whereby
we are freed from sin and death.

3. Ob. If righteousness being present, do not justify us, then being
absent it condemns not.

Contra. 1. Is follows not: for a thing may be insufficient to a work being
present, and yet if it be removed it is sufficient to hinder the work: as
good diet in a sick man may hinder his recovery, and yet if he use it, it is
not always sufficient to help him. 2. and yet here is a difference in this
example: for good diet is an helping cause unto health, but good works are no
cause of salvation, but only a condition necessarily required and annexed.

4. Object. The Apostle says, v. 15. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall
die, but if ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live: therefore
mortification is the cause of life and salvation.

Contra. 1. Hence follows that mortification is necessary unto salvation,
yet not as a cause, but as a necessary condition, without the which there is
no faith, and consequently no salvation. 2. eternal life is the gift of God,
c. 6.23. therefore not due unto our merits; evil works are the cause of
damnation, because they justly deserve it: but it follows not, that good
works are the cause of salvation: for they are both imperfect, and so
vnproportinable to the reward, and they are due otherwise to be done, and
therefore merit not.

Controv. 4. Against the Arrians and Eunomians concerning the deity of the
holy Ghost.
v. 2. The law of the spirit of life, etc. has freedom: Chrysostom homil. de
adorand. spirit. from this place proves the deity of the spirit against the
Arrian and Eunomi^au heretics, who made great difference in the persons of the
Trinity: the Son they affirmed to be a creature and much inferior to the
Father, and the holy Ghost they made servum and ministrum silij, a servant and
minister of the Son: Chrysostom confuteth them by this place: for if the
spirit be the author of liberty and freedom to others, then is he most free
himself, and not a minister or servant: as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 2.17.
where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

Controv. 5. Against the Pelagians, that a man by nature cannot keep and
fulfill the law.
This error is confuted by the express words of the Apostle: who says that
the law was weak by reason of the flesh, and so not able to justify us: by
the flesh the Apostle understands not, substantiam caruis, the substance of
the flesh, as the Maniches were ready to catch at these and the like places to
confirm their wicked opinion, who held the flesh of man to be evil by nature:
nor yet the carnal rites and observations of the law, which were not able to
cleanse the obseruers of them, as Origin here interprets, and Lyranus
following him: But by the flesh we understand with Chrysostom, carnales
sensus, the carnal affections: carnalitatem quae rebellabat, the carnalitie of
man which rebelled against the spirit: gloss. ordinar. concupisentias carnis,
the concupiscence of the flesh, Haymo: prauitatem naturae, the pravitie of
nature, Martyr: which hinders, that none can keep the law to be justified by
it. This then manifestly conuinceth the Pelagians: for if the flesh make the
law weak and unable to be kept, then none by the strength of their nature and
flesh can fulfill the law.

Controv. 6. The fulfilling of the law is not possible in this life, no not to
them which are in the state of grace.
1. The Romanists, out of these words of the Apostle, v. 4. That the
righteousness of the law may be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the
flesh, do infer that they which walk not after the flesh may fulfill the
law: so that either it must be denied, that none in this life, walk after the
spirit, or it must be granted, that by such the law may be fulfilled, Pere.
disput. 5. Bellarmine adds, that if the law cannot be fulfilled, Christus non
obtinuit, quod v^luit, Christ has not compassed or obtained that which he
intended, for therefore he died, that the justice of the law might be fulfilled.

Contra. 1. Indeed Origin, whose errors, and erroneous interpretations our
adversaries themselves will be ashamed of, saving where they serve their turn,
first devised this interpretation: who by the law here understands the law of
the mind, which is fulfilled, quando lex peccati in membris, etc. when the law
of sin in the members resists it not: and Haymo has this gloss, that we
being redeemed by Christ, might spiritually fulfill the works of the law, per
cuius impletionem possumus iustificari, by the fulfilling whereof we may be
justified: But this place is better understood of the obedience of Christ who
fulfilled the law, which is imputed unto us by faith: and thus do not only
expound our new writes, Melancthon, Bucer, Hyperius, Calvin, Beza, with others;
but some of the ancient expositors, as Theophylact, quae lex facere nitibatur,
ea Christus nostri gratia executus est, those things, which the law endeavored
Christ has performed for us; so also Oecumenius, scotus and finis legis per
Christum partus est and exhibitus, the scope and end of the law is obtained and
exhibited by Christ: yet we must endeavor to keep those things, which are
delivered, per conuersationem bonam and fidem, by a good conversation and faith.

2. And that this is the meaning of the Apostle, 1. the phrase shows, that
the law might be fulfilled in us, he says not, by us, Beza. 2. because there
is none so perfect in this life, that neither in thought, word, nor deed
transgresses not the law.

3. The law was weak through the infirmity of the flesh: but the infirmity
and weakness of the flesh remains still even in the regenerate: therefore
neither in them the righteousness of the law can be fulfilled.

4. To the contrary arguments thus we answer. 1. the Apostle says not, that
they which walk after the spirit fulfill the law: but the law is fulfilled in
them, that is, imputed unto them by faith in Christ. 2. though the faithful
cannot fulfill the law, yet Christ performed what he intended, that he might
keep the law for them, and they be justified by faith in him. 3. this clause
then, which walk not after the flesh, is added to show who they are, for whom
Christ has fulfilled the law, and to what end, namely to such, as walk in
newnes of life.

5. Some do think that the Apostle speaks here of two kinds of fulfilling
the law, one imputatione, by imputation of Christ's obedience, which is our
justification: the other inchoatione, by a beginning only, which is our
sanctification, begun in this life, and perfited in the next, when it shall
be fulfilled: Martyr, Pareus: But the other sense is better: for the Apostle
speaks of a present fulfilling of the law in them which walk according to
the spirit, not of a fulfilling respited, and excepted in the next life: which
is most true, but not agreeable to the Apostles meaning here.

6. So the Apostle in this place sets forth three benefits purchased unto us
by Christ, 1. remission of our sins, in that Christ bare in himself the
punishment due unto our sins. 2. then the imputation of Christ's obedience and
performing of the law. 3. our sanctification, that we by the spirit of Christ
do die unto sin, and rise unto newnes of life: which our sanctification is
necessarily joined with our justification, but no part thereof: 1. because it
is imperfect in this life; it is perfect after a sort perfectione partium, by
the perfection of the parts, because regeneration is both in the body, and
soul, but not perfectione graduum, by the perfection of degree; for so it is
only begun here, and shall be perfited in the next life: 2. and
sanctification follows after justification, and so is no part of it; for
first we are justified, then sanctified,

Controv. 7. That not the carnal eating of Christ's flesh is the cause of the
resurrection, but the spiritual. v. 11.
1. The Apostle shows the cause of the resurrection of the Saints, to be the
inhabiting and dwelling of the spirit of God in them; so that the spiritual
communicating with the flesh and blood of Christ by faith is that, by the
virtue and power whereof our bodies shall be raised again at the last day, it
is not the carnal eating of Christ's flesh in the sacrament, as the Romanists
hold (wherewith to the same end they housle the sick) that is in our bodies the
seed of the resurrection; for there may be a spiritual eating and drinking of
Christ's flesh and blood even without the sacrament, which is both necessary
and sufficient unto life; whereof our Blessed Savior treats, Ioh. 5.4.
Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day: Christ speaks not here of the sacramental
eating and drinking, but of his spiritual; for the sacrament was not yet
instituted.

2. And that the carnal and corporal receiving of Christ's flesh is not
possible, neither yet requisite or necessary to the resurrction of our bodies,
does evidently appear by these two reasons. 1. because the Fathers that died,
before Christ was incarnate, could not in that manner eat and drink Christ,
and yet they died in the hope of the resurrection. 2. infants are not admitted
to the sacramental eating, and yet they shall rise again at the latter day;
Martyr.

Controv. 8. Against merits.
v. 12. We are detters not to the flesh, etc. hence it follows, that we are
detters to the spirit, which part the Apostle suppresseth, as being evident
enough of it self out of the other. 1. It is manifest then, that whosoever
service we do perform unto God, it is ex debito, a due debt: we are endebted
to God, 1. by reason of our creation, that he has given us these bodies and
souls, to the end that we should set forth his praise in, the world, 2. we are
bound unto God, for our redemption by Christ, our regeneration and
sanctification by his spirit: all which the Lord has wrought for us, that we
should perform him faithful service. 3. and likewise we are bound unto God
for the hope of our resurrection, and glorification promised in his kingdom,
which the Apostle touched in the former verse.

2. If then, whatsoever service we do unto God, we do but our bounden duty:
then there is no place for merits for our selves, much less for works and
merits of supererogation for others, as the Romanists hold, and teach: for
debitum and meritum, debt and merit do one take away another, as the Apostle
shows Romans 4.5. And whatsoever works we do, they are either according to the
flesh or the spirit, if after the flesh, they are sinful, if according to the
spirit, they are of duty.

3. But they will think here to help themselves by a distinction, that though
our works merit not in the rigor of Gods justice, yet they merit ex
acceptatione diuina, through the divine acceptance, etc. God indeed accepts
of our good works in Christ, yet not as merits, but of grace, and so in mercy
rewards them.

Controv. 9. Whether in this life one by faith may be sure of salvation.
v. 16. The same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God: Though this be an evident place to prove the certainty of
salvation in the persuasion of the faithful, because the testimony of the
spirit is infallible: yet the Romanists are not ashamed to deny, that any such
certainty may be gathered from hence: they say this testimony of the spirit
is nothing else, but the inward good motions, comfort, and contentment of
spirit, which the children of God do daily feels more and more, etc. Rhemist.
annot. And Pererius, it is but gustus quidum spiritualis praesentiae, a kind of
taste of the spiritual presence of grace: and he consents unto Thomas, who
thus interprets this testimony of the spirit to be c^^iecturalem
perswasione^, a coniecturall persuasion: but infallibilis certitudo, an
infallible certainty cannot be had, citra specialem Dei reuelationem, without
the special revelation of God: their reasons are these.

1. Thomas thus argues: a thing may be known either by special revelation
from God, and so it may be revealed unto some, that they are saved: or a man
may know somewhat in himself, and that two ways, certainly, or
coniecturally: a thing is certainly known by the principles thereof: as God
is the beginning of grace: but because God cannot perfitely be known, none can
attain unto this certainty: the coniecturall knowledge is by signs and
effects; as when a man does persuade himself, that because he fears God, and
contemns the world, he is in Gods favor, but this knowledge is imperfect, as
S. Paul says, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified.

2. Pererius adds this reason: four ways may a thing certainly be known,
per lumen natural, etc. by the natural light of the vnderstanding^ by the
light of the Catholic faith, by special revelation: per lumen fidei infusa,
by the light of faith infused: but by none of these can one be assured of his
salvation: not by the first, for it is a supernatural light: nor by the
second, for then all, that believe the Catholic faith should have this
assurance: neither has every Christian the third, which is by special
revelation: neither by the fourth can it be attained unto: for that persuasion
rises of two propositions, the one apprehended by faith, the other collected
out of that by some natural evidence and experience: as faith reaches us,
that all which are truly contrite and penitent, shall be saved: then one out
of his own experience infers: but I am contrite and penitent. Ergo: But
this experience is uncertain, because that many actions proceeding from a man
himself may carry some semblance of those, which are wrought by the spirit:
and a man may have many sins, which he knows not, and so cannot repent him
of them.

Contra. 1. To Thomas argument we answer, 1. that two ways is a faithful man
persuaded, and made certain of his salvation: both by the efficient cause the
spirit of God, which gives such testimony and assurance unto them, and by the
signs and effects, which are wrought in them. 2. though God cannot here be
perfitely known, yet so much is known of God, as may make a man sure of his
salvation: as we know by the Scriptures the great love and mercy of God
toward us in Christ, and his constancy and immutabilitie, that whom he
loves, he loves to the end: all which tend to make us sure of our election
and salvation in Christ. 3. Saint Paul did not think himself to be justified
by the peace of his conscience: for that is a fruit of justification, not the
cause thereof: But Saint Paul knew himself to be justified by faith, and
thereof was assured: the testimony of the conscience, which arises of our
good fruits, is an argument of our lively faith, whereby we are justified. 4.
we confess, that none in this life can attain to a perfect assurance without
some doubting: but there is difference between an infallible and certain
assurance, and a perfect assurance: this shows the degree, the other the kind
and manner.

2. To Pererius we answer, that we are assured by the light of faith infused,
that we are saved, and his exceptions we except against: 1. it is not natural
sense and experience, that assumeth, I am saved, but this is the particular act
or sense of faith relying upon Gods promises: there is a general assent unto,
and apprehension of Gods promises, which makes the proposition: he that
believes in Christ, shall be saved: then is there a particular application,
which is the special act of faith: but I believe, which a man is assured of by
his works: then the conclusion follows, I shall be saved: the propositions
being grounded upon the promise of God is, the object of faith: the assumption
inferred out of the proposition, is the act of faith. Therefore that is a
frivolous objection, that the assumption, I do believe, is not de fide, of
faith; and it has not the express word of God: for fides non creditur, sed
sentitur, faith is not believed, but it is felt and perceived: it apprehends
the general promises of God, and particularly applies them. 2. It is untrue,
that the actions proceeding of the spirit, and such as come from man himself,
are alive: for there is no good thing in us, which the spirit works not:
natural civil works have a semblance indeed and show of goodness, but there
is not any true goodness in them. 3. but this is not to the purpose, for though
a man have many sins, which he knows not, and his works be imperfect, this
in a faithful man hinders not the assurance of his salvation, which is not
grounded upon his works, but upon his faith: indeed if a man were justified by
works, he could never attain unto any security or certainty of salvation:
but it is faith that lays hold on the perfect obedience, and righteousness
of Christ that brings us to this assurance. 4. And as for their special
revelation, whereby they pretend, that Saint Paul and other holy men were made
sure of their salvation, the Apostle takes away this pretext, in making his
case common herein with other faithful men, saying that there was not a crown
of righteousness laid up only for him, but for all them, that love his
appearing, 2. Tim. 4.8. a more excellent degree of assurance the Apostle had,
but the diversity of degree takes not away the truenes of the thing: a true
assurance of salvation all the faithful have, though not in the like degree
and measure. Now on the contrary side, that it is possible for a Christian by
faith to assure himself of his everlasting salvation, and that de facto, in
very deed every faithful man is so assured, we prove it by these testimonies
of Scripture: As, Romans 8.16. The spirit bears witness with our spirit, that
we are the children of God: 1. Cor. 2.12. We have received the spirit of God,
that we may know the things, that are given us of God. 2. Cor. 13.5. Know ye
not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you unless ye be reprobates: and
such other places many might be produced, which show, that we have a certain
knowledge and assurance by faith of heavenly things.

Pererius answers, 1. that either these places must be understood of a
moral, coniecturall, and humane kind of certitude, and assurance, not divine
and infallible, as in the first place, though the testimony of the spirit be
most certain in it self, yet we only by conjectures gather; that it is the
testimony of the spirit. 3. or the Apostle speaks of that special assurance
by revelation, which the Apostles had in those days, as in the second place:
3. or he means the knowledge only of the doctrine and principles of faith,
not of being in the state of grace, as in the third: Pere. disput. 8.

Contra. 1. The Apostle speaks not simply of the testimony of the spirit, as
it is in it self, but as it is to us, it bears witness with our spirit,
that we are the children of God, and thereby we cry Abba father: like as then
children do call unto their fathers, with a confident assurance, not a
coniecturrall opinion, the like certainty have the faithful, that they are
the sons of God, and that he is their father. 2. the Apostle speaks not of
the Apostles and teachers only of those times, but generally of all the
faithful, which have not received the spirit of the world, but the spirit of
God. 3. And the Apostle in the third place expressly mentions such a
knowledge, which the reprobates have not, and they which have it, are not
reprobates: but the knowledge of the doctrine of faith even the reprobates
have, but it is not sanctified unto them.

4. Now then to conclude this point: there is a threefold kind of certitude,
there is one in opinion only, when a man deceives himself in his persuasion,
and thinks that to be, which is not; there is an other certainty in the
truth of the thing, as the Devils know the truth of the articles of faith,
though they have no comfort in them: and there is an assurance as well of the
truth of the thing, as in persuasion and assent of him, which believes; such
is the assurance of faith; the first is only in the will and affection without
any ground, the second in the intellectual part only, the third is in both;
So then in a faithful man both his understanding is illuminate to perceive
celestial things, and his heart and affection is inclined, firmly to believe,
and apply them to himself.

5. Some of the Romanists do not much differ from us in this point of the
certainty of salvation: as Pererius disput. ^: alleges Vega, and Ricuram
Tapperus, who affirm, that a man may be so certain of grace, vt omnicareat
formidine and haesitatione, that he may be without all fear and doubting: See
further of this Controversy, Synops. Centur. 4. er. 20.

Controv. 10. Against the invocation of Saints.
v. 15. Whereby we cry Abba father: Hence Bucer well observes, that the
spirit of God teaches us to call unto God, and cry in our hearts Abba,
father: the spirit sends us not unto Saints: the prodigal child coming home
to his father, w^n^ not to any of his fathers servants, to make them his
Mediators, but he came to his father, and humbled himself unto him, Luke 1.^.
and so our Blessed Savior teaches us to pray; Our Father; etc. and here the
Apostle says, that by the spirit we cry Abba father: See further of this
matter, Synops. Centur. 2. er. 30.

Controv. 11. That a strange tongue is not to be used in the service of God.
v. 15. Abba father: It follows not, because that certain strange words are
retained in the Scriptures, as Messi^s, Cephas, Maranatha, Rabbi, Osanna,
Alleluia, Abba, which words were naturally known unto the Jews: that hence it
follows, that the scriptures and prayers may be read, and rehearsed in a
strange language: for these words, by reason of the near conjunction between
the Gentiles and Jews converted to the faith, were well known, and understood
of the Gentiles: even as the word Amen, is now used and understood of all: from
the use of one or two words which are strange, and yet understood, the argument
follows not for the using generally of a strange language, and the same
unknown: See further also hereof, Synops.

Controv. 12. That everlasting glory cannot be merited.
v. 18. The afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory,
etc. notwithstanding the evidence of this place, which overcomes the Popish
doctrine of the meriting of heaven: yet our adversaries with tooth and nail,
as they say will hold their own: and thus take upon them to prove the merit
of the actions and sufferings of the Saints.

1. Stapleton thus reasons, it is required as a condition of us, that if we
suffer with Christ, we shall be glorified with him: but the condition
performed, the reward of necessity follows.

2. The sufferings of Christ did merit unto him heaven, Phil. 2.7. therefore
our sufferings also do merit heaven for us: Staplet. 486.489.

3. The Rhemists here urge that place, 2. Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction
works for us an exceeding weight of glory: whence they infer, that our
tribulations are meritorious.

4. And whereas the Scripture sets forth the mercy of God in the salvation
of man, which excludes merit; Stapleton answers, that the free mercy of God
is seen in the remission of sins, and about the first justification, not in
giving the reward of glory. Staplet. ibid.

5. And to this place of the Apostle they make this answer: 1. Lyranus says,
that as our works proceed from our free will, they merit not, but as they are
wrought in us by the spirit, so they merit of condignitie. 2. to the same
purpose Bellarmine says, that they are not meritorious of themselves, ex
natura sua, of their own nature, sed ex dignitate principij, of the worthiness
of the cause, that is the grace of Christ, which works them: lib. 5. de
iustific. c. 14. ration. 1. And the Rhemists are bold to add further, that the
sufferings of Christ in themselves, in respect of their greatness, were not
meritorious, but in respect of the worthiness of his person. 3. Thomas says,
that although there can be no merit in men toward God, secundum absolutam
equalitatem, in an absolute equality: yet there may be secundum
praesuppositionem diuina ordinationis, the divine ordinance being presupposed.
4. Tolet annot. and Pere. disput. 10. answer that the Apostle here speaks not
of the dignity and merit of the sufferings of the Saints, but shows that
they being in themselves compared with the celestial glory, are not
proportionable, either for the continuance, or in the sense of sorrow now, and
of joy afterward.

Contra. 1. The condition performed assures us of a reward, but of grace, not
of merit: for like as adoptiue sons among men, are admitted to the
inheritance by the grace and favor of the adoptor, not by their merit, so much
more is the everlasting inheritance given by the grace of adoption.

2. Concerning Christ's meritorious sufferings. 1. he merited not for himself,
but for us: for as he was not borne for himself, so neither died he for
himself, as he did not rise for himself, as Ambrose well says, fi nobis non
resurrexit, vtique non resurrexit, etc. if he rose not for us, he rose not at
all: for he had no reason to rise for himself: de fide resurrect. c. 24. And
the Apostle Phil. 2. shows not the merit, but the order and way how Christ
after he had suffered, was to enter into glory: as our Savior says, Luke
24.26. Ought not Christ to have suffered those things, and enter into his
glory? 2. Christ's sufferings were unlike ours: for they were perfect, and the
redemption for sin: ours are either chasticements for our sin, or trials of
our faith, and so part of our obedience: and therefore they cannot merit, as
Christ's did.

3. Our light and momentarie afflictions are said to work our glory, not as
meritorious, causes, but as preparatiues, and as the way which God has
appointed us to walk in: And so Origin rehearsing here that place of the
Apostle, expounds it: ex momentance and leui tribulationum nostrarum labor
semina quaedam collecta, immensum nobis gloria pendus preparabunt: certain
seeds gathered by the light and momentarie labor of our tribulations, do
prepare for us an exceeding weight of glory, etc. but Origin in the same place
utterly rejects all meriting, nihil dignum inveniri vel comparari ad futuram
gloriam potest, there can be nothing found worthy, or to be compared unto the
glory to come.

4. The Scripture includes merit not only from the beginning, but from the
whole work of our salvation: as Tit. 3.4. Not by the works which we had done,
but by his mercy he saved us: and seeing the reward and inheritance depends
of our adoption, and adoption of our election, both which are of grace; how is
not the inheritance also of grace?

5. None of these answers are sufficient to obscure the evidence of this place;
1. seeing good works proceed not of free will, but are wrought by the spirit,
they therefore merit not: for he that meriteth, must merit of his own: 2.
neither can good works merit of grace: for these are opposite one to the
other, that which is by works cannot be by grace: for then work were no more
work: neither that which is by grace, can be by work, for then grace were no
more grace: as the Apostle reasons, Romans 11.6. therefore they unskillfully
confound them together, grace and works, which the Apostle distinguishes: And
to say that Christ's passions were not meritorious in themselves, is a
blasphemous speech: for his actions could not be severed from his person: for
otherwise they were not Christ's actions, therefore they were in themselves, as
they proceeded from Christ, meritorious. 3. It is Gods ordinance indeed, that
man should do works, and suffer with Christ to show their conformity and
obedience, but not that they should merit thereby: for as the same Thomas
says, compensatio meriti est actus iustitiae, etc. the rewarding and
compensation of merit is an act of justice: and justice is a kind of equality:
where there is no equality, there is no justice, and so no merit. Thom. in. 1.
secund. qu. 114. ad. 1.

4. If the sufferings of this life are neither in quantity nor quality
proportionable to the glory, which shall be revealed, then can they not be
meritorious, for between the merit and reward there must be a proportionable
equality, and an equal proportion: Notwithstanding then all these cauillous
answers, this place of the Apostle, that the sufferings of this time present
are not worthy of the glory, is very pregnant to overthrow the merit of the
sufferings and other works whatsoever of the Saints, in respect of the reward
of everlasting life.

Controv. 13. That hope justifies not.
v. 24. We are saved by hope: by this place both the Rhemists here in their
annotations and Pererius numer. 82. do infer, that faith does not only
justify, but that hope and charity do justify, as well as faith, as here
the Apostle says, we are saved by hope.

Contra. This cavil may diuersely be removed. 1. by being saved, the Apostle
understands not to be justified, for our justification is presently had and
possessed: but by salvation, he signifies the perfection and accomplishment of
our redemption and adoption in Christ: therefore they would deceive us by the
homonymie, and diverse takings of the word: to be saved sometime signifies to
be justified, Tit. 3.5. but so it is not here.

2. We must understand the Apostle to speak of hope, as joined with says,
hope has relation to faith, by the which we are justified freely, D. Fulk. And
when as these things, as our justification, salvation, are ascribed to hope or
charity, we must so take it, that the manner of our justification is showed,
not by the causes, but by the effects: like as then in the will, we look to
the foundation, in a tree to the root: so when the Scripture sets forth any
commendation of hope and love, we must look unto faith, from whence they
spring, and without the which they cannot stand, Mar.

3. The Apostle does not here treat of the cause of justification, sed quo
fulcro in ea iustitia sustentemur, quae nobis per fidem obtingit, but by what
prop we are sustained and vpheld in that righteousness, which happens unto
us by faith: Gualter: so that hope is not the cause of salvation, but it is as
the way and means, whereby salvation begun in us by faith, is brought unto
perfection.

Controv. 14. Whether hope does rely upon the merit of our works.
The Master of the sentences affirms lib. 3. sperare sine meritis, non spem
esse, sed praesumptionem, that to hope without merits, is not hope, but
presumption: so also Gorrhan, illud quod ex meritis patienter expectatur, etc.
that which is patiently expected by merits, is most certainly had and obtained
of God: they reason thus.

Argum. 1. S. Paul affirms, that patience brings forth experience or trial
or probation, and experience hope, Romans 5.4. if hope then arise of our patience
and experience, it has dependence of our works.

Ans. 1. It is evident, that Saint Paul does not in that place make his
gradation by the causes; for tribulation is not the cause of patience, seeing
many by tribulation are driven to despair: but the Apostle only sets down
the order of those instruments, which the spirit of God uses, to work hope in
us thereby. 2. and properly hope causes patience, not patience hope: for the
Martyrs, if they were not thereto enduced by hope, could never endure such
unspeakable torments: like as the Merchant would never put himself into such
dangers by Sea, if the hope of gain moved him not thereunto: and so S. James
shows, that the probation and trial of our faith brings forth patience. c.
3. faith being tried and proved by affliction works patience, and faith
brings forth hope. 3. yet we deny not, but that as hope originally causes
patience, so by our patience and experience our hope is also the more
strengthened and confirmed.

Now on the contrary, that it is but a weak, and indeed a false hope, which
depends upon works, it is thus evident: 1. because by this means hope
should be contrary to faith, which justifies a man freely without relation to
his works: if hope then should be tied to the condition of works, it should
be opposite to faith. 2. our works are imperfect, if hope be built upon an
imperfect and uncertain ground, it can have no certainty in it self. 3. Some
are converted to God, having no good works, as the thief upon the cross, yet
he had hope in Christ, praying unto him to be remembered in his kingdom.

Controv. 15. Against the natural power and integrity of man's will.
v. 26. We know not what to pray, as we ought: this overthrows that error of
the Pelagians, who ascribed unto man power by nature to keep the law of God:
but how can this be, seeing a man cannot tell how to pray as he should, if he
be not aided by the grace of Gods spirit: he must needs come short of keeping
the law, that fails in this principal part of Gods service, namely prayer:
for if a man know not of himself how to pray, and so cannot serve God, as he
ought, he fails in a cheef part of the law of God: And whereas there are three
degrees in the proceeding of every action, the thought conceiueth, the will
consents, the act and work persiteth, none of al these are in ma^s power: not
the first: we are not able of our selves to think any thing: and it is God
which works both the other, namely the will and the deed, Phil. 1.13. And as
these places do exclude this heresy of the Pelagians, who extol the power of
nature altogether; so also they overthrow the error of the Semipelagians the
Papists, who join freewill and grace as works together.

Controv. 16. That predestination depends not upon the foresight of faith or
good works.
v. 16. Those whom he knew before he also predestinate: Chrysostom, and other
Greek expositors following him, as Theophylact, Theodoret, Oecumenius, hence
infer, that Gods prescience is the cause of predestination: praeuidet Deus,
etc. God first foreseeth who are meet and worthy to be called, and then he
does predestinate them: so also Ambrose and Heirome in their Commentaries upon
this place, do interpret that to be the purpose of God, whereby he decreed to
call unto the faith those whom he foresaw would believe: Lyranus says, that
Gods prescience is praeambulum ad praedestinationem, a preamble, and as an
inducement to predestination: The Lutherans do somewhat incline unto this
opinion; as Osiander in his annotation here, quos antequam nascerentur, etc.
praeuidit, etc. whom in his infinite wisdom he foresaw, such as should please
God, etc. The modern Papists are not here all of one opinion: The most learned
among them do affirm election by grace, ante omnium operum prouisionem,
before the foresight of any works: Bellar. lib. 2. de great. c. 10. and
Pererius is of the same judgment, disput. 22.23. upon this chapter: but our
Rhemists are more gross in this point: they say that Christ has not appointed
men by his absolute election, etc. without any condition or respect of their
works: Hebr. c. 5. sect. 7. Now this opinion, that predestination is grounded
upon the foresight of faith or good works, is thus evidently confuted.

Argum. 1. That which is Gods work in man, is no cause in man's behalf why he
should be elected: but faith and to believe is the work of God. Ioh. 6.29.
This is the work of God, that ye believe, etc. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye
saved through faith, not of your selves, it is the gift of God: therefore the
foresight of faith is not the cause of election.

2. Argum. That which is the effect of predestination, is not the cause: but
faith and good works are the fruit and effect, as Act. 13.48. As many as were
ordained to eternal life, believed: he says not as many as were foreseen to
believe, were ordained, etc. Ephesians. 2.4. He has chosen us, that we should be
holy: it is the end and fruit of our election our holiness, therefore not the
procuring or inducing cause.

3. Argum. There is one and the same reason and manner and cause of election
unto all: but some are saved without provision or foresight of their works, as
infants, which die in their infancy: for their good works, which are not,
could not be foreseen: it cannot be here answered, that their good works are
foreseen, which they would have done, if they had lived: for if one may be
elected for the foresight of good works which he might have done, by the same
reason one might be condemned upon the foresight of evil works, which he might
have committed: but this stands not with the justice of God.

4. Argum. First the end is propounded, then the means are thought of, as
tending to that end: the means are no inducement to decree or set down the
end of a thing: life eternal is the end, the means and way thereunto are
faith and virtuous works: these then foreseen of God could not be a motive to
decree the end.

5. Augustine was sometime of opinion, that although God has not chosen the
good works of men in his prescience, elegit tamem fidem in praescientia, yet
in his prescience he made choice of faith, in exposition. huius epistol. But
afterward Augustine retracteth this opinion, lib. 1. Retractat. c. 23.
ingeniously confessing, nondum diligenter quaefieram, etc. quaenam sit electio
gratiae, I had not diligently enquired, not found out, what is the election of
grace, which is no grace, si vlla merita praecedant, if any merits go before.

6. Some Popish writers have devised how to reconcile Augustine with the rest
of the fathers: and they have found out this distinction, that there are two
kinds of predestination, one ad gratiam, to receive grace, and this they say is
without any foresight of faith or works, and the other is ad gratiam, unto
glory and life eternal, which proceeds from the foresight of faith and
works: of this kind of predestination speak the Greek fathers, and Augustine
of the other: Thus Ruard. Tapper. Dryedon, Gabriel Vasquez, as they are cited
and approved by Parerius, disput. 24.

Contra. 1. Augustine evidently speaks of predestination to eternal life,
where he delivers his first opinion of the foresight of faith: for these are
his words, Quid elegit Deus in eo, what did God elect in him, whom he did
predestinate unto life eternal? 2. That is a vain and idle distinction: for
predestination comprehends both the end and the means thereunto; as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.11. in whom we are chosen when we were predestinate,
etc. that we which first trusted in Christ, should be to the praise of his
glory: here both the means, to believe or trust in Christ, and the end,
everlasting glory, are both comprehended under predestination. 3. in this
distinction there is a vain and absurd tautologie, for who would ask this
question, whether the foresight of grace and faith in a man, were the cause
that God ordained him to have grace and faith.

7. Tolet to help out this matter says, that the foresight of faith as a
motive unto election, and the election by grace may well stand together: for
here faith foreseen, is not considered as a merit, but as causa sine qua non,
a cause without the which God has purposed not to call those, which shall be
saved: but notwithstanding, it is been placitum, the good pleasure of God, not
the merit of man. annot. 31.

Contra. In this question of predestination, we must distinguish between the
decree it self, and the execution of the decree: in the execution, good works
are required, not as a meritorious cause of life eternal, but only as such a
cause, without the which life eternal cannot be ^^ad: and this we grant: but
if Gods decree should arise of any such foresight, it is now an inducement and
motive, not a cause only, sine quae non, without the which not: and so Gods
good pleasure should not be the first cause, (higher then the which the Apostle
goes not, Ephesians. 1.5.) if the foresight of faith or good works should induce
the Lord to elect: for now election should not stand upon the will and pleasure
of God, but upon the will and inclination of man.

Controv. 17. Against the opinion of Ambrosius Catharinus concerning
predestination.
This Popish writers opinion is, that God has ordained all men unto eternal
life; yet with this difference: Some he has absolutely appointed unto
salvation without any condition, whose head is Christ, and then the blessed
Virgin Marie: the number of those thus predestinate is certain, and none of
them can perish: there is an other sort of men which are ordained unto
salvation, not absolutely, but under condition of their obedience, and upon the
foresight of their merits: and some of those come unto eternal life, some do
not: of this opinion Sixtus Senensis, Catharinus scholar professes himself to
have been, Biblioth. lib. 6. annot. 248. and that he preached it for ten
years together and in diverse chief cities of Italy, till he saw the
inconvenience and manifold difficulties, that would follow upon that doctrine,
and then he gave over.

Contra. This opinion has diverse absurdities. 1. it allows some to be
saved, which are not predestinate unto life, contrary to the Scripture, which
only promises everlasting deliverance and salvation unto them which are
written in the book of life: Dan. 12.1. Revel. 17.8. c. 20.12. 2. It makes
Gods ordinance and decree to be uncertain, that many whom he appoints to
salvation, yet are not saved. 3. it makes a diversity in the ordinance of God
to salvation, that some are absolutely elected, some upon condition only,
whereas there is one end and the same way for all unto eternal life.

Controv. 18. That election is certain and infallible, of grace without merit,
and of some selected, not generally of all.
1. The Apostle joining all these together, predestination, vocation,
justification, glorification, shows the inseparable coherence of them: that
they which are called by grace and justified, cannot miss of their
glorification, because the Lord cannot be deceived, neither is he mutable.

2. Neither is there here any place for merit: for after justification
follows glorification: if man were to merit his salvation, the Apostle would
not here have admitted it: and if any infer, that merits are comprehended in
justification: we answer, that God is here said to justify, it is his ^is act:
but if man's merits justify, then man justifies himself.

3. And further this place makes against universal election: for seeing men
are predestinate but they are afterward called and justified: it follows,
because all are not called, nor justified by Christ, that therefore all were
not elected unto salvation.

Controv. 19. That the elect cannot fall away from the grace and favor of God,
and be wholly given over unto sin.
v. 35. What shall separate us from the love of Christ? etc. Notwithstanding
this evident testimony of the Apostle, Pererius affirms, that one which is
predestinate, may be fine gratia Dei, without the grace of God, and in deadly
sin: his reasons are these.

1. It was Iovinians heresy, that he which was once justified could not fall
from the grace of God into deadly sin: Hierom. lib. 2. advers. Iouinian. 2.
He urges the examples of Adam, Aaron, David, the Apostles, which fled from
Christ who all lost the grace they had, and fell into grievous sins. 3. If
grace could not be lost, then these exhortations of Scripture should be
superfluous, Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, 1. Cor.
10.12. And work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.13. and
such like.

Contra. 1. The error of Iouinian was, that one being in the state of grace,
could not fall into sin: which opinion the Protestants abhor: for though we
say that the elect cannot fall away from the grace and favor of God, yet they
fall into sin, and the works of grace may be intermitted in them: yet wholly
given over unto sin, they cannot be, which Pererius understands by falling
into deadly sin: so then Iouinian is in one extreme, as also are the
Anabaptists, Libertines, family of love, which hold that a man regenerate
cannot sin at all: and the Papists are in an other, that the elect may be
wholly given over unto sin: the Protestants hold the mean between both,
that as they are not free from sin altogether, so they are not given over
unto sin altogether.

2. These examples do not show, that they were wholly given over to sin, or
that, when they were in sin, they were excluded from the favor of God:
though they were for the time deprived of the sense and feeling thereof.

3. And these exhortations are means to keep the elect from falling away from
God, and a Christian having a sollicitous care to please God is a fruit of
election; it is an argument of their standing, where such care is, not of their
falling.

4. But both these positions are warranted by the Scripture. 1. that they whom
God loves cannot loose the grace and favor of God; for whom he loves he
loves to the end, Ioh. 13.1. and the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance, Romans 11.29. 2. neither can sin reign in the elect of God: though
they may fall into some sins, yet the Lord raises them up again by
repentance; so the Apostle says, be that is borne of God sins not, 1. Ioh.
3.9. which Augustine interprets, non debet peccare, he ought not sin,
Oecumen. non vult, August. de not. and great. 14. Hierom. lib. 2. contr. Iovin.
he will not sin, Caietane following an other interpretation of Augustines,
non ex ea part, they sin not as they are regenerate: Heirome, they cannot
sin, as being as they remain the sons of God; But the meaning is, he
cannot be given over unto the study, and dominion of sin, but though he
sin, yet it is not either totally or finally.

20. Controv. Whether a reprobate may have the grace of God, and true justice?
Pererius, as he denies constancy and continuance in grace to the elect, so
he affirms, that some which are ordained unto everlasting condemnation, may
be for a while right good men, and Dei gratia praeditos, and endued with the
grace of God: which he would prove, 1. by the fall of the Angels, who were
created with grace. 2. by the example of Saul, and Judas, who were at the first
good men, and had the grace of God. 3. so Solomon had the spirit of God, and
yet in the end was a reprobate and castaway. Perer. 27. disput.

Contr. 1. We must distinguish of grace: there are common graces and gifts of
the spirit, which may be conferred upon the reprobate: as the Apostle shows,
that they may be lightened, be partakers of the holy Ghost, and taste of the
good word of God, etc. Heb. 6.4, 5. and yet fall away: that is, may have these
things in some measure: but there is the lively sanctifying grace of Gods
spirit, whereby we are truly enlightened, which is not given to any, but unto
the elect: which grace was promised unto S. Paul, 2. Cor. 12.9. My grace is
sufficient for thee: so then we answer, that the Angels which fell, received in
their creation an excellent portion and measure of grace, but not the like
powerful and effectual grace which the elect Angels had.

2. Saul king of Israel, and Judas one of the Apostles, had many goodly gifts
and graces of the first sort, but true justice, piety, and grace they never
had.

3. But concerning Solomon, he is much deceived, in holding him to be damned:
which though some have affirmed, as Gregor. lib. 2. Moral. c. 3. Solomon
sapientiam non perseveraturus accepit, Whether Solomon was a reprobate.
etc. Solomon received wisdom, but not to persevere: so also Rabanus in 2.
Reg. c. 23. and Lyranus 1. King. c. 7. who urges this reason, that Solomon
never repented of his idolatry; because his Idols remained still unto Josias
time, 2. king. 23.13. which shows that he continued in his idolatry; and
Pererius concurring does press this reason, because no mention is made of
Salomons repentance in the Scripture. disput. 27.

Contra. 1. As these authors hold Solomon a reprobate, so as grave authors hold
the contrary: Heirome upon the 43. of Ezechiel says is was the opinion of the
Hebrews, that Solomon made the book of the preacher, as a testimony of his
repentance: Hilarie in Psalm. 52. agrees, that Solomon was elected: and Paul.
Burgens. addition. sup. c. 2.2. Reg.

^. 2. The text says not that Josias put down the idols, which Solomon had
made, but he defiled the high places, which he had built: now the high places
mentioned in the reign of diverse good kings: as it is said of Asa, that they
put not down the high places, yet his heart was upright with the Lord all his
days: yet was he an enemy to idolatry: so might Solomon be, after his
repentance: idolatry could not be purged out all at one time.

3. For matters of fact the argument follows not negatiuely, it is not in the
Scripture mentioned, therefore it was not done, though in matters of doctrine,
it concludes well: for no mention is made of Daniels refusal of
Nabuchadnezzers odors and sacrifices, Dan. 2.46. and yet it is certain he did
refuse them: And yet notwithstanding Salomons repentance may be found in
Scripture: the book of Ecclesi istes was made after his fall, as a monument of
his repentance: See more hereof, Synops. Papis. p. 3.

Controv. 21. That the elect by faith may be assured of everlasting salvation.
v. 38. I am persuaded, etc. The Romanists to elude this so evident a place for
the certain and sure persuasion, which the elect have by faith of their
salvation, do frame us diverse answers: 1. that Saint Paul had this by
special revelation, it is not generally given to all believers. 2. in general
we are certain, that all the elect shall be saved, but in particular, it is
not known. 3. the word (...), I am persuaded, signifies a moral kind of
assurance, not certitudinem fidei, a certainty or assurance of faith: as the
Apostle uses the same word, Heb. 6.9. we are persuaded better things of you.
Romans 15.14. I am persuaded of you that you are full of goodness: but Paul could
not believe these things of others, by a certainty of faith: to this purpose
Bellarmine lib. de. iustificat. c. 9. Pererius disput. 28.4. for Paul himself
was not certain of his election, thus writing, 1. Cor. 9.27. I do beat down
my body, etc. left when I have preached to others, I my self should be a
reprobate. Staplet. Antidot. p. 503.

Contra. 1. The Apostle, such things as he had by revelation, faith could not
be uttered, 2. Cor. 12.4. they were (...), things not to be spoken: but this
thing touching the certainty of salvation he uttered: it was not therefore any
of those secrets which were revealed: and 2. Tim. 4.8. the Apostle shows how
he came to be assured of a crown of righteousness, even by keeping the faith:
and faith it was not laid up only for him, but for all other, that loved the
appearing of Christ.

2. This assurance was not in general, but in particular: Christ gave himself
for me, Gal. 2.10. and a crown of righteousness is laid up for me, 2. Tim.
4.8.

3. There is a double kind of persuasion: persuasio fidei, the persuasion of
faith, such as this of the Apostles was grounded upon Gods promises, which was
most certain: there was persuasio charitatis, a persuasion of charity, which
S. Paul had of others: this was not so certain as the other, yet neither of
them was coniecturall: for S. Paul, who had the gift of discerning of spirits,
and could pronounce of the election of others, that their names were written in
the book of life, Philip. 4.4. had more then a coniecturall guess of their
estate: and yet it follows not, one can not be certainly persuaded of an
others salvation, therefore not of his own.

4. To that place we answer: 1. that S. Paul speaks not there of his eternal
election, or reprobation, but says in effect, that if his life and doctrine
agreed not, which he preached to others, he might be worthily reproved of men.
2. and yet if it were admitted, that Saint Paul should mean his reprobation
with God, it follows not by this speech, that be doubted of his salvation,
but was sollicitous and careful to do nothing, which might hinder it: a godly
care brings them to a greater certentie: for it is a lively and proper fruit
of their election. 3. Origin upon this place expounds it of S. Paul's state in
time past, aliquando ^etuit, etc. he sometime feared his flesh: but the former
answers are better. 4. howsoever, the Apostle does not there doubt of his
salvation, being most certainly persuaded here. See more Synops. Centur. 4.
err. 21.

6. Moral observations.
Observe. 1. Sanctification must not be severed from justification.
v. 1. There is no condemnation, etc. which walk not after the flesh, etc. The
Apostle here evidently shows, that they which walk after the flesh, are not
in Christ Jesus, not justified by him, and freed from condemnation: although
our sanctification be not any meritorious or efficient cause of salvation, yet
it is such a cause as sine qua non, without the which there is no salvation: 1.
because regeneration is inseperably joined with justification. 2.
sanctification is a testimony and evidence of our faith, without the which it
is dead. 3. it is a fruit of the spirit. 4. and it does necessarily follow
true repentance.

Observe. 2. Sin makes us enemies to God.
v. 7. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity: We see how Satan has poisoned
the whole nature of man by sin, not only the sensual and carnal parts, but
even the mind, wisdom, and understanding; that every part of man by nature is
rebellious unto God; so that justly by nature we are the children of wrath: for
how can the Lord else do, but show his anger and indignation upon his enemies,
the consideration therefore hereof, should work in us a detestation of sin.

Observe. 3. The sons of God must be like their heavenly father.
v. 14. As many as are led by the spirit, are the sons of God: the Apostle
uses this as a forceable motive to persuade us to holiness and piety,
because we are the sons of God: as children do bear the image of their
parents, so the sons of God must express the image of their heavenly father
in holiness and righteousness: their children men are, whose works they do:
if they do not the works of God, but of Satan, Gods children they are not,
but Satan's. Ioh. 8.44.

Observe. 4. Of the contempt of all worldly things.
v. 17. If children, then also heirs, etc. If we then do hope for such a
glorious inheritance in the kingdom of life, we should contemn, and trampie
under our feet the glory and pomp of the world, unless only using them as
transitory things for our necessary use: as S. Paul counted all things as
dung in comparison of Christ. Phil. ^.8.

Observe. 5. No suffering in this world can be answerable to the glory to be
revealed.
v. 18. I count that the afflictions, etc. This difference there is, between
the sufferings of Christians, and the labors which the heathen endured for
their country: their labors were greater, then the end, which they
propounded: Brutus killed his own sons for the liberty of his country:
Torquatus put his own son to death, for transgressing military discipline:
Curtius cast himself into the pit for the safety of his country: these by
their utmost dangers only sought the praise of men, and a terrene liberty of
their country: much more ought we to endure the like for our everlasting
liberty, which far exceeds the weight and measure of all afflictions in
this life; homil. 2. de fest. omnium sanct.
yea Augustine doubts not to say ipsam Gehennam paruo tempore tolerare
oportet, we should for a short time endure hell it self, to see Christ in the
land of the living.

Observe. 6. Predestination excludes and remooueth all presumption.
v. 30. Whom he justified, he glorified, etc. glorification follows not
immediately upon predestination, but vocation, faith, justification,
sanctification, must come between: be that without these presumes of
election, peruerteth the revealed counsel of God to his destruction.

CHAP. IX.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1. I say the truth in Christ (Jesus. L. ad.) I lie not, my conscience
bearing me witness by the holy Ghost, Be. B. V. (in the holy Ghost. Gr. G. L.)

2. That I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in mine heart.

3. For I my self would wish to be separated ( to be an anatbema. V. L. S.
cursed. B.) from Christ, for my brethren, that are my kinsmen according to the
flesh:

4 Which are the Israelites, whose is ( to whom pertains. B. G.) the
adoption, and the ^orie, and the Covenants, ( testament. L.) and the giving of
the law, ( the law that was gren. B.) and the worship ( or service of God. G.
B. inserted for explanation) and the pro^^es.

5 Of whom are the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ came, who
is G^ over all ( in all. V.) blessed for ever, Amen.

6 Notwithstanding it cannot be, that the word should be of none effect: ( fall
away; Gr. for all, which are of Israel ( of the circumcision of Israel. L. of
the father Israel. Be. ad.) re not Israel. ( Israelites. B.)

7 Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are all children: but in
Izaak shall thy sede be called.

8 That is, not they which are the children of the flesh, are the children of
God, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed.

9 For this is a word of promise: In this same time will I come, and Sarah
shall have a son, ( to Sarah a son. Gr.)

10 And not only she L. (that is, Sarah, he, that is, Abraham. Be.G. thus V.
S. B. but it is better referred to Sarah immediately before spoken of, and
Rebekah an other mother of Israel is brought in.) but also Rebekah ( felt this.
G. received this promise.) when she had conceived by one, Izaak our father.

11 For the children not yet being borne, neither having done good or evil,
that the purpose of God might remain according to election; not of works, but
of him that calls: ( of the caller. Gr.)

12 It was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger. ( the greater the
less. Gr.)

13 As it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated.

14 What shall we say then, is there ( any. B.) unrighteousness with God? God
forbid. ( let it not be. Gr.)

15 For he says to Moses, I shall have mercy, on whomsoever I will show
mercy: and I shall have compassion, on whomsoever I will have compassion.

16 So then it is not of him that wills, ( in him. G.) or of him, that
runs, ( of the willer, of the runner. Gr.) but of God that shows mercy.

17 For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, For this purpose have I stirred thee
up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be declared
thoroughout all the earth.

18 Therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.

19 Thou will say then unto me, why does he ( not of whom or what. S.) yet
complain? ( blame. B. is angry. Be. (...), complain.) for who has resisted
his will?

20 But who art thou O man, which pleadest against God? ( disputest with God.
G. answearest God. L. V.) shall the thing formed ( the mass or lump. S. the
work. B.) say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?

21 Has not the potter power of the clay Be. S. B. G. (not the potter of the
clay power. L.V.) of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and
another to dishonor?

22 What if God to show his wrath ( would to show his wrath. G.) and to make
his power known, suffered ( or sustained. L.) with much lenity. B. ( patience
L. B. G. long animitie^ V.Gr. (...),) the vessels of wrath fitted. L. (
perfited. S. ordained. B. prepared. G. compounded. Be. Gr. so the word (...)
signifies) to destruction.

23 And that he might make known ( declare. B. G. show. L.) the riches of his
glory upon the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory.

24 Whom he has also called, even us. B. Gr. (even us, whom he has called, G.
which true that are called. S. but here the order of the words is inverted)
not only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles.

25 As he says also in Osee, I will call them which are not my people, my
people: and her, which was not beloved, beloved. ( and she which has not
obtained mercy, as obtaining mercy. L. ad.)

26 And it shall be ( it shall come to pass. B.) in the place, where it was
said unto them, we are not my people, that there they shall be called the
children of the living God.

27 Also Esaias cries over Israel, V. Be. ( concerning Israel. B. G. for
Israel. L. of Israel, S. but the word is (...), over.) If the number Gr. (
though. Be. G. B.) of the children of Israel, were as the sand of the sea, yet
shall but a remnant be saved.

28 For the Lord will finish and cut short the count ( or sum) in
righteousness. ^ ( will finish the word. B. V. L. will finish the thing, and
cut it off, Be. but he spoke of a (...) sum and remainder before, and
therefore (...), may be here interpreted, the count.) be the Lord will make a
short count ( a short word. Be. L. V. a concise matter. Be.) in he earth.

29 And as Esaias said before, except the Lord of hosts had left us a seed, (
a rem^nt. S.) we had been as Sodom, and had been like unto Gomorrha.

30 What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not
righteousness have apprehended V. Be. L. ( attained unto. G. obtained. B. S.
(...), apprehended) righteousness, even the righteousness, ( which is) of
faith.

31 But Israel, which followed the law of righteousness, has not attained (
o come. Be. V. L.) unto the law of righteousness.

32 Wherefore, because they sought it not by faith, but by the works of the
law ( by the works. L. det.) for they have stumbled at the stumbling stone.

33 As it is written, behold I lay in Sion a stumbling stone and a rock of
offense, and every one that believes on him, Gr. ( in him. G.) shall not be
ashamed, ( confunded. L.)

2. The Argument, Method, and Parts.
Whereas the Apostle had made mention before of predestination, c. 8.30.
whereupon justification by faith is grounded, he in this Chapter does handle at
large this mystery of Gods free and gracious election: and the Chapter
consists of three parts. 1. because he was to treat of the reiection of the
Jews, and calling of the Gentiles, be does first use a pathetical insinuation,
protesting his desire toward the salvation of the Jews, to v. 6. 2. Then he
handles the mystical doctrine of election, remooving diverse objections, to
v. 24. 3. then he declares the use of this doctrine in the vocation of the
Gentiles, and the reiection of the Jews.

1. In the insinuation. 1. the Apostle sets forth his grief, the truth of
it v. 1. the greatness, v. 2. 2. then his desire, v. 3. even to be separated
from Christ, for the salvation of the Jews: with the reasons thereof. 1.
because they were his kinsmen after the flesh, v. 3. 2. they were the people of
God, which he proves by five privileges and immunities, v. 4. 3. of them
were the fathers, of whom Christ descended.

2. The mystery of the doctrine of predestinaion is handled by remoouing
certain objections, which are three.

1. Object. Is propounded v. 6. if the Jews be rejected, and become an
anathema, to whom Gods promises were made, it would follow, that God should be
mutable, and inconstant in his promises.

Answ. 1. He denies the consequent: it follows not, if many of the
Israelites be rejected, that therefore God should fail in his word, v. 6. 2.
he shows the reason, the promise was made only unto the true seed of
Abraham, but all which are carnally descended of Abraham are not his seed, but
the elect only, Ergo: this is affirmed, v. 6. 7. then it is proved, first by
the example of Izaak, that he only was the true seed of Abraham, and not
Ismael: which is proved, 1. by a direct testimony of Scripture, v. 7. 2. by
this argument, the children of the promise are the true seed, v. 8. but Izaak
only was the promised seed, v. 9. Ergo: Secondly, the same is confirmed by
the example of Jacob and Esau: Jacob only was the true seed: this is
amplyfied, 1. by remoouing the supposed causes of this difference between
Jacob and Esau, which was neither their carnal generation, because they were
conceived by one, and at the same time: nor yet their works: for when as yet
they were unborn, and had done neither good nor bad, sentence was given of
them, which he shows by two testimonies of Scripture, v. 12.13. 2. he sets
down the true causes, the efficient, the election, and vocation of God, the
final, that the purpose of God might remain firm, v. 11.

2. Oiection is propounded, v. 14. and it rises out of the former: for if God
elect some, and reject others before they have done either good or evil, he
should seem to be unjust.

Answ. 1. He answeareth negatiuely, it follows not that God should be
unrighteous. 2. then he gives a reason of his answer, taken from Gods
absolute power, and right in the creature, he shows mercy and hardens whom
he pleases: this is propounded, v. 18. and it is handled before by parts:
first that he has mercy on whom he will, v. 15. which is amplified by the
contrary, it is not in the willer or runner, but in God that shows mercy,
v. 16. secondly, the other part is proved by the particular example of
Pharaoh, which is amplyfied by showing the end of his reiection, the setting
forth of Gods glory, v. 17.

3. Object. v. 19. If God does according to his own will elect some and reject
others, and his will cannot be resisted, nor hindered, it would seem a cruel
and unjust part to condemn those which cannot help it.

Answ. The Apostle answeareth negatiuely, not denying that it is Gods will,
that some should be elected, some rejected, but that it follows not hereupon,
that God should be cruel or unjust: which he shows, 1. by the unsearchable
wisdom and justice of God, which man is no more to find fault with, then the
clay with the potter. 2. by Gods absolute power which he has over his
workmanship, as the potter over the clay, v. 21. 3. by the effects, that
howsoever Gods decree stands concerning the reprobate, yet they worthily
deserve to be cast off, because of their sin, wherein God uses long suffering
toward them, v. 22. 4. by the end of the reiection of the one, to show Gods
justice and power v. 22. and of the election of the other, to declare the
riches of his mercy, v. 23.

3. The third part contains an application of this general doctrine of Gods
election to the present state of the Gentiles and Jews: wherein 1. he shows
how the elect and called both among the Gentiles shall be saved, which he
proves by two testimonies out of the Prophet Osee, v. 25.26. and among the
Jews, which should not be saved, but only a selected remnant, which he
proves by 3. testimonies out of the Prophet Esaias, v. 27.28.29. 2. he
infers hereupon the vocation of the Gentiles, showing the cause thereof, the
embracing of the righteousness of faith, v. 30. and the reiection of the
Jews, v. 31. which he amplyfieth by showing two causes thereof, the following
of the works of the law and the stumbling at Christ, v. 32. which he
confirms by a testimony of the Prophet, which concludes the cause both of
the reiection of the Jews, and the taking offense at Christ, and of the
vocation of the Gentiles, namely their faith and belief, v. 33.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. Why the Apostle begins this treatise with an oath; I speak the
truth in Christ, etc.
1. Hugo Cardinal. refers it to the former doctrine of the certainty of
predestination, because he had said, nothing could separate him from the love
of God in Christ. 2. Origin and Chrysostom have relation to the Apostles
extraordinary wish, v. 3. that he wishes to be separated from Christ for his
brethrens sake; which because it might seem strange and incredible, and
contrary to the Apostles confidence uttered before, that nothing could
separate him from Christ, he therefore uses this vehement asseueration, to
show, that he spoke from his heart. 3. Gryneus thinks, that the Apostle by
this vehement speech does purge himself from those cauills and suspicions,
which were taken up of him, as that he was an innouator of the law, a pestilent
and seditious fellow. 4. Haymo thinks, that the Apostle hereby does confirm
his love toward his nation, and shows his grief and sorrow for them, as it
follows in the next verse. 5. But the very occasion indeed, why the Apostle
breaks out into this speech is, because he was to entreat of the reiection
of the Jews, and vocation of the Gentiles; which left it might seem to
proceed from the hatred of his nation, he protests his love toward them, both
by showing his sorrow for their hardness of heart, c. 9. and by his prayer
for their conversion, c. 10. and in staying the insulting of the Gentiles over
them, c. 11. Lyran. and so he protests that he speaks the truth from his
heart as he was bound in conscience, otherwise bearing a most loving affection
toward his nation: to this purpose, Calvin, Martyr, Pareus, Tolet annot. 2.

Quest. 2. Of the form and words of the Apostles oath.
1. I speak the truth in Christ, etc. Origin is here somewhat curious, that
there is some truth in Chrst, some not in Christ, as the Pythonisse that cried
after the Apostles, that they were the servants of the most high God, Act. 16.
and Caiphas, that ignorantly spoke the truth, yet did not speak the truth in
Christ. 2. but S. Paul here does nothing else, but call Christ to witness, that
he speaks the truth, and so he appealeth to three witnesses, Christ, his own
conscience, and the Holy Spirit, Theophyl. Pareus.

2. My conscience bearing me witness, etc. Origin again here does distinguish
of the conscience; for the Gentiles also had a conscience, which did accuse or
excuse them, Romans 2.15. but such a conscience, that is a witness both of good
and evil, cannot be said to bear witness in the holy Ghost: only the
Apostles conscience vbi cogitatio non habet quod accuset, where the thoughts
have nothing to accuse of, is said to bear witness in the holy Ghost; as
Lyranus interprets, a conscience been ordinata, rectified and well settled.

3. I lie not. 1. here are these two things seen in Paul, which Aristotle
requires in a wise man, which are non mentiri, not to lie, and the other,
mentientem manifestare, to be able to detect a liar, and to manifest the truth:
as here S. Paul touches both, Gryneus. 2. and this is added, because one may
lie in telling the truth, supposing it to be false: so the Apostle joins both
together, verity in his words and sincerity in his mind, Pareus. 3. and
further it is the manner of the Hebrewe speech, for more certainty, to deny
the contrary to that which is affirmed, as 1. Sam. 3.18. Samuel told him
every whit, and bid nothing from him: and Ioh. 1.20. He confessed, and
denied not: and so is it here: Tolet ^^ commentar.

Quest. 3. Whether it were lawefull for Paul to grieve for the Jews, whose
reiection was according to Gods appointment.
v. 2. I have great heaviness, etc. 1. That it is lawful to mourn for the
calamities, that fall upon those, whom we wish well unto, appears 1. by the
example of holy men, that have so mourned: as Samuel for Saul, David for
Absalom, Jeremy for the captivity of his people, our Blessed Savior for
Jerusalem. 2. Christians are not without natural affection, as to rejoice for
prosperous things, so to mourn for the contrary: and grief arises a lasione
rei amatae, from the hurt of the thing beloved.

2. But for the solution of this doubt, two things are to be considered in
respect whereof the mind is diversely carried: for in our grief, as we respect
the calamity which is befallen, we do mourn, but looking unto Gods
providence we are well apayed, and do moderate our passions, submitting them to
the will of God: like as natural men among the heathen did prefer the
public state of the commonwealth before their private calamities: as Crassus
when his son was slain, encouraged the soldiers to fight manfully, for that
chance only concerned him: And as a judge, in the execution of offenders,
though as a man he grieueth, that they should be put to death, yet he is well
resolved and contented in the contemplation of justice, that the equity of the
law for the example of others should take place: yea as God himself
delights not in the death of any, yet is well pleased in the punishment of
the wicked, according to the rule and course of his justice: So S. Paul here
does put on as it were two affections, one was natural of humanity, in
pitying the fall of his nation, the other was supernatural in submitting
himself and his will to the will and purpose of God.

Quest. 4. Of the meaning of the word (...), which the Apostle uses, v. 3.
1. Concerning the two Greek words (...), with the Greek letter (...), and
(...), with (...), Budaeus makes this difference between them: he would have
the first to signify the things themselves, which are dedicated to sacred
uses, the other the persons, that were devoted to destruction: and he deriueth
them both from the word (...), of hanging or setting up: that as the one were
set up in the temples, so the others names were set up in places of execution,
in hatred and detestation of them: But Beza very well observes, that in the
Scriptures they are both used in the same sense: so also Tolet annot. 3.

2. Chrysostom interprets anathema, separatum, separated, from the common
use: and it first was used of such things, as for honor sake were separated,
and not to be touched: then secondarily of such things as were separated and
accused, and worthy to be detested of all: and this sense of the word is
agreeable to the words of the Apostle, as the preposition (...) signifies,
from Christ: as Beza well notes here: so then, that was anathema, which was so
separate from common use, as it was not lawefull to be redeemed, but it must be
killed: and some things were so separated for honor sake, as the sacrifices:
some for horror and detestation, as the leprous persons, which were separated
from the congregation, Pareus: and in this sense does the Apostle use the word
anathema here, which answeareth to the Hebrew word cherem, which signifies to
bequeath to destruction.

3. Whereupon Hierome will have this word to signify to kill: and so he
thinks the Apostle speaks of the killing of his body: but cherem simply
signified not killing, but with horror and detestation: as of a thing accursed.

4. Some take the better sense of the word, as it signifies some precious
thing and treasure: whose opinion Chrysostom makes mention of with some
derision: but that it cannot be so taken here, it shall be showed in the next
question.

Quest. 5. Whether the Apostle did well in desiring to be separated from
Christ, from whom he knew he could not be separated.
1. Hierome to avoid the difficulties, that might be here objected, thinks
that the Apostle speaks only of a temporal separation by death, voluit
perire in carne, etc. he would die in the flesh, that others might be saved in
the spirit. epist. ad Algas. quest. 9. epist. ad Hedib. qu. 10. so also Haymo:
But Chrysostom misliketh this sense, upon these reasons. 1. both because S.
Paul had made mention twice before of death that it could not separate him from
Christ, it had been therefore superfluous, and beside no great matter to
speak of the same here again. 2. the death of the body for Christ does not
separate from Christ, but joins more surely unto Christ.

2. Likewise Chrysostom derideth their conceit which take here anathema, in
the better part, and interpret it, to be (...), a treasure laid up; for thi^
had been no great matter for the Apostle to have to wished, q^is delicatulorum
hominum sic non optaret, the most nice and dainty man might have so wished:
Chrysostom: and again in this sense the Apostle woul not have said, a
Christo, from Christ, but coram Christo, before Christ, Mart.

3. Some refer this wish of the Apostle unto the time before his conversion,
and here are three opinions: 1. Some give this sense, that for the zeal of the
Judicial law, he wished then to be separate from Christ, and choose to be a
persecutor of his disciples: Lyran. and the ordinar. gloss. following Ambrose.
2. the commentary going under the name of Hierome says, that the Apostle does
now lament and bewail his sin, for that before his conversion he wished to
be separate from Christ for his brethren sake, ex Pareo: 3. Tolet prefers
this sense, I wished to be an anathema, from Christ, that is, to be a known
persecutor of the Christians, and to be held of them accursed for my brethrens
sake, Tolet. in commentar.

But these interpretations fail diversely. 1. this had been no great matter
for Paul yet being an enemy to Christ, to have wished for the love unto his
brethren so to continue still, Perer. disput. 3. 2. neither had this been to
the Apostles purpose, who intends by this his wish to show his love unto his
brethren: but if he had only spoken of his desire before his conversion, it
might have been answered, that howsoever he might stand well affected to his
brethren then, his mind was altered now, Mart. Perer. 3. The Apostle had taken
a vain oath herein, for there was none which doubted of his hatred to the name
of Christ, before his calling, that he needed not to have confirmed it by an
oath, Pareus. 4. neither does he lament here for his own sin, but for the
present condition and state of his brethren, as is evident v. 4. where he
reckons up the ancient privileges of his nation, which they had now
deprived themselves of, Mart. Pareus.

4. Some think that the Apostles meaning is, that he could have wished his
calling had been deferred yet, and that he for a time had been separated from
Christ, and not to have been yet called, but that his brethren might have come
to Christ before him: but the same difficulty remains still, for if S. Paul
might have wished before to be an anathema from Christ, for the glory of God,
why not also now? ex Mart.

5. Some think that by an anathema, is understood only, dilatio visionis and
fruitionis Christi, a deferring of the vision, and enjoying of Christ: that S.
Paul to convert his brethren to the faith, wished still to remain in the
flesh, and to be absent from Christ, as see the like, Philip. 2.23. so
Oecumenius, Lyranus: But this is not to be an anathema from Christ, only to
have the fruition of glory deferred, Perer. numer. 12.

6. Some understand this separation from Christ, to be indeed deprived of the
glorious vision of Christ: but they will have it limited for a time, volebat ad
tempus privari fruitione Christi, he would for a time be deprived of the
fruition of Christ, for the good of his brethren, Thomas in comment. But he
that is once separated, and stands as accursed from Christ, cannot but
always so remain.

7. Some think that S. Paul spoke thus, impetu quodam charitatis, wishing
himself to be damned for his brethren, by a violent passion of charity, and
not well considering what he wished: But then S. Paul had sinned, if he made
such a vow or wish quadam incogitantia, without any consideration or
bethinking himself: it had showed great rashness, ex Mart. Pareo.

8. Some think that the Apostle uses an hyperbolicall speech, when one
speaks more then he intends, as the Prophet David says, They that hate me
are more then the hatres of mine head, Psalm. 69.4. so here the Apostle, the
more to express his love toward his brethren, does use this hyperbolicall
speech, as though even for their sakes he wished to be a castaway, Dyonis.
Carthusian. But thus they will only make this a colorable and flourishing
speech of the Apostle, which was no doubt a zealous and serious wish and desire
in him.

9. Pareus makes mention of an odd interpretation, which he heard delivered
by one ann. 1568. that afterward played the Apostata from Christ: who by Christ
in this place understood the anointed Priests, alleging for his authority
Eusebius, who in that prophecy Dan. 9. so understands the word Messiah,
Christ: But beside that the word Christ, being absolutely put without any
addition, is not so taken in Scripture, and Eusebius interpretation is therein
distasted and misliked of the best interpreters: this had been a vain and
superfluous wish in S. Paul, for in the beginning of his conversion he was
odious to the high Priests, and even then, they took counsel to kill him,
Act. 9.23.

10. There remain then two expositions, which may be joined both together in
one: Chrysostom says, that S. Paul desired, priuari fruitione and gloria
Christi, to be deprived of the glory and fruition of Christ: Oecumenius goes
yet further, that he wishes, vt per ^eam perditionem glorificaretur Christus,
that Christ by my utter perishing may be glorified in the salvation of the
Jews: and Cassianus c. 6. collat. 23. interprets, to be an anathema from
Christ, aeternis addici supplicijs, to be addicted unto everlasting punishment:
Both these do hang one upon another, for he which is deprived of everlasting
joy, is cast down to everlasting punishment: This then is the Apostles desire,
aterni boni fruitione privari, to be deprived of everlasting happiness,
Martyr: excludi ab omni salutis expectatione, to be excluded from all hope and
expectation of salvation, Calvin: he wishes aeternam abiectionem a Christo, to
be cast off for ever from Christ, Pareus: abijci in aeternos cruciatus, to be
cast into everlasting torment, Osiander. And that this was the Apostles
meaning, appears by the like zealous desire in Moses, who also wished to be
blotted out of the book of life, rather then God should have been dishonored
in the destruction of Israel: both of these were ready, suo exitio aliorum
saluti subvenire, by their destruction to have helped forward the salvation of
others, Gryneus, Mart.

But against this interpretation it is diversely objected. 1. Object. S. Paul
could not wish to be separated from Christ, but he must desire also to be
alienated from his love and favor: which thing to desire it had been sin.

Answ. Chrysostom answers that the Apostle would not by any means be
separated from the love of Christ, nam propter Christi amorem tautopere hoc
ardet desiderio, for the love of Christ he is so much inflamed with this
desire: it follows not therefore, he desires to be separated from Christ,
therefore from his love: he wishes not to be deprived amicita Christi, sed
fructu amicitiae, of the friendship of Christ, but only of the fruit of his
friendship, which was everlasting felicity, Pareus.

2. Object. If S. Paul herein respected the glory of God in the salvation of
the Jews; why did he not likewise wish to be separated for the salvation of
the Gentiles? Answ. S. Paul no doubt was ready to do the like for them: but
there was not the like occasion, for the Gentiles flocked to Christ, and
received the Gospel, but the Jews were stubborn, and every where resisted
their calling: and therefore for them he makes this vow: Mart.

3. Object. But S. Paul knew, that he could not indeed be separated from
Christ, as he professed before, c. 8.38. that nothing could separate him from
the love of God in Christ. Ans. 1. Lyranus thinks that this vow of Paul, as
likewise that of Moses was secundum dispositionem inferioris partis animae,
according to the disposition of the inferior part of the mind, where the
affections are: for love nec mensuram scit nec modum, knows neither measure
nor manner, not in the deliberate and reasonable part of the mind. 2. But the
better answer is: that it was votum conditionale, a conditional, not an
absolute vow, if it were the will of God, as Christ's petition was for the
passing away of the cup of his death, if it were his fathers will, Pareus: so
the Apostle speaks (...), after a sort, and with condition, if it might be,
Gryneus: And to the same purpose before them Oecumenius, (...) absolute haec
dixit tanquam possibilia, sed sub condition, he spoke not these things
absolutely, as if they were possible, but with a condition: for if Paul for the
love of Christ could have been separated from Christ, he should again have
been so much the more firmly joined unto Christ: for if love be the cause of
union, then so great love of the Apostle would have caused so much nearer
conjunction.

4. Object. Though a man be bound by the rule of charity to give his temporal
life for an others spiritual life, yet he is not bound to give his soul
everlastingly to perish, if it were in his choice, that others should not so
perish: like as one is not bound to redeem an others bodily life by the loss
of his, so neither the spiritual life of the soul, by the loss of his own:
Tolet thus obiecteth annot. 4. and therefore he infers that in this sense,
it had been an inordinate and vain desire in the Apostle.

Answ. 1. Some think, that every man is bound to redeem the salvation of
others, by the loss of his own, saving that few can attain unto such
perfection of charity: for the rule of charity is this, that we should do
that for others, which we would have done for our selves: now a man had rather,
that an other should give himself to ransom him, then he should perish: and
Christ was enflamed with such charity, that he became a curse for us: and the
like mind should be in Christ's members to wish to be accursed for their
brethren: as Origin infers, Quid mirum, si cum Dominus pro servis sit factus
maledictum, servus pro ^^^^ribus anathema fiat? what marvel is it, when the
Lord was made a curse for the servants, if a servant become an anathema for his
brethren? Pareus also gives instance in Christ, who was made a curse for us,
dub. 1. Contra. 1. That saying of our Savior, whatsoever you would that one
should do unto you, do unto them: Augustine well understands, ^^^^cta and
iusta voluntate, of a right and just mind, not otherwise: for if a man could
be content upon a lewd mind, that his wife should commit adultery with an
other, it follows not, that the other should yield his wife to his wicked
desire: so for a man to wish, that an other would give his soul for his, were
no just or equal desire. 2. Christ, though he did bear the punishment due to
us, and did bear the curse of the law, yet he was never avuls^^ a Deo,
separated or pulled away from God, Mart. and there is great difference between
the person of the Redeemer, and his exceeding love, and those which are
redeemed, who herein cannot be imitators of Christ.

2. As these do justify Paul's desire, having relation only to the love of
his brethren: so Chrysostom aymeth only at the glory of God, that in respect
thereof, Paul made no account of his salvation: but he expressly makes not
mention thereof, for modesty sake, lest he should seem to boast too much of
his love toward Christ: But Tolet shows the insufficiency of this reason,
because Paul had professed before that nothing could separate him from the love
of Christ: he might also as modestly have wished here to be an anathema for
Christ.

3. I prefer therefore Calvin's solution, that neither Saint Paul had here
respect unto the glory of God alone, or unto the salvation of his brethren
alone, sed charitatem hominum in studio gloriae Dei contungimus, but we join
the love of men with a desire of the glory of God, etc. he wishes the
salvation of his brethren with respect unto the glory of God: as Moses in the
like case in making request for his people, therein desired the promoting of
Gods glory: Now the Apostle says, for his brethren, vt inserviret causae, to
apply himself to the cause in hand, which was to testify the great desire
that he had to their salvation, yet as joined with the glory of Christ: as is
evident v. 5. where he adds, who is God over all, Blessed for ever, Mart.

So then not withstanding these or any other such like objections, I prefer
Chrysostomes interpretation of these words of the Apostle, who in the zeal to
Gods glory, and love to his brethren, wishes that he were cut off from
Christ, so they might be saved: according to that saying in the Gospel, that
it were better that one of the members should perish, Matthew. 5. ^^^
then that the whole body should be cast into hell: for the Apostle had herein
respect unto the glory of God, should have more appeared, in the saving of the
multitude of that nation, as the whole body, he being cut off but as one
member; then that he should be saved, and the whole body perish: to this
purpose Chrysostom. upon that place in the Gospel.

Anselme likewise upon this place says, that Paul optabat perire, desired to
perish, so the rest might be saved; and this sense he confirms by the like
desire of two great Prophets Moses and Micah, this latter, c. 2.11. wishes
thus, I would I were a man not having the spirit, and that I did speak lies,
voluit se alienum esse a spiritis, etc. he wishes to be a stranger from the
spirit, and to be a false Prophet, so that his people might escape all those
plagues which were foretold, as S. Paul here wishes to be estraunged and
separated from Christ: In like manner, Moses obiecit se exitio, Moses did offer
himself to destruction for the people sake: thus Anselme.

But 1. though we allow Anselmes interpretation, he is deceived in his first
proof: for though the vulgar Latin do so read that place of Micah, yet it is
truly according to the original translated thus, If a man walking after the
mind, and lying falsely, etc. that is, if there were one, that were given unto
lies, which would prophecy of prosperous things unto the people, he should be
a meet Prophet for them: And the Prophet was not to wish upon any occasion, to
commit sin, in telling of lies. 2. Concerning the other example of Moses, it
is rightly alleged, but because there is some question about Moses manner of
wish, how it is to be taken, Hexapl. in Exodus in c 32. v. 31.
though elsewhere it be handled at large, it shall not be amiss breefely to
touch it here: for it is a great hinderance to the studious reader, in a point
wherein he expects present satisfaction, to make reference to another book,
which it may be is not so ready at hand.

Quest. 6. How Moses wished to be blotted out of the book of life, for Isreal's
sake.
Moses words are these, Exodus 32.31. If thou will not (pardon their sin,)
blot me out of the book which thou have written: Because that desire of Moses,
and this of Paul here are very like, as Hierome says, If we consider Moses
voice making request for his people, we shall see, eundem fuisse Mosi and Paulo
erga creditum gregem affectum, etc. that both Moses and Paul had the same
affection toward the flock committed to them: it shall not be amiss to insert
somewhat here touching Moses wish. Two things do here breed question, the
manner of Moses wish, and the matter, and sense thereof. 1. for the manner,
Moses uses that bouldnes of speech that a subject will scarcely use speaking
to his Prince, non solum cla^^^ apud Deum, sed reclamat, he does not only cry
unto God, but he reclaymeth and cries as it were against his mind: But Philo
remooueth this doubt, because the Scripture says, that God talked with Moses
as with his friend: he speaks therefore freely and boldly as to his friend:
this liberty then and freedom of his speech is not to be attributed unto his
arrogancy, but unto his friendship and familiarity: lib. quis rerum divinarum
fit haeres.
arrogantis est audacia, amici est fiducia, boldness and rashness shows
arrogancy, but confidence is in friendship. 2. But there remains a greater
doubt as touching the matter and meaning of Moses vow and desire: for whereas
Gods book of life signifies his ordaining of some unto eternal life: which
is of two sorts, either secundum praedestinationem, according to the decree of
predestination which cannot be altered: or secundum praesentem iustitiam,
according to men's present justice: in the first sense it would seem to be
stulta petitio, a foolish request, to desire that which was impossible to be
blotted out of Gods decree of predestination, and in the other it would be
thought to be impia, an ungodly desire, to wish to fall from the present state
of justice: now for the solution of this doubt there are diverse answears
framed.

1. Rabbi Solomon takes this to be the book of Moses law, that it should have
no denomination from him, but that his name might be taken out thence: but it
appears in the Lords answer, I will blot out of that book him that sins,
that this book belonged unto more then Moses only.

2. Rab. Moses Gerundens. thinks, Moses extra se captum, to have been as it
were beside himself, and in his great zeal to his people to have spoken he
knew not what: But seeing Moses prayer was so well accepted of God, it is not
to be thought that he offended in making so rash and inconsiderate a prayer.

3. Paulus Burgensis varieth not much from the first interpretation, he takes
the book here, for the historical narration in Scripture of the acts and
doings of the Saints: and so he thinks, that Moses only desired, that the
great works, which God had wrought by his hand, should not be written of him.
But this had been to pray against the setting forth of Gods glory, which was
manifested in those great works.

4. Caietan understands it, de libro principatus, of the book of
principality: that whereas God had appointed Moses to be governor of a
greater nation and people, if he should destroy Israel, Moses desires rather
to be no governor at all, then that Israel should perish: But the words of the
Lord, I will blot out him that sins, show that Moses speaks not of a
personal writing in any such book, which concerned him alone, but of such a
book, wherein others were written as well as himself.

5. Augustine makes this sense, qu. 147. in Exodus as thou have made it
certain, that I can not be raced out of the book which thou have written, so
let me be as sure and certain, that thou will remit the sin of this people:
But Gods answer, I will blot out, etc. overthrows this sense, for there the
Lord answeareth negatiuely, unto Moses, that he should not be blotted out: then
Moses wish was to be blotted out.

6. Lyranus says, that Moses did thus wish secundum desiderium partis
inferioris animae, according to the desire of the inferior part of his mind,
not in the superior part, which was his judgment and understanding: as Christ
prayed that the cup might pass from him: but yet there is a more sufficient
answer then this, see answ. 6. following.

7. Thostatus qu. 44. in 32. Exodus thinks, that it is an hyperboricall
speech, as that of Rachel, give me children or else I die, and yet she had
rather have had no children, then to have died: yet in such passionate
speeches, they show their seruent and exceeding great desire: But in this
sense Moses should have had no such meaning to be blotted out of Gods book:
the contrary whereof appears in the Lords answer.

8. Oleaster will have this to be the meaning: blot me out of thy book, that
is, obliuiscere (...) perpetuo, forget me for ever: for as we use to commit
those things to writing, which we would remember, so the things which we desire
to forget we blot out: But it is more then a metaphorical speech, as is
evident by the Lords answer to Moses.

9. Heirome epist. 151. ad Algas. and Grego. lib. 10. Moral. c. 7. Euthym. in
Psalm. 68. upon these words, let them be blotted out of the book of the living,
do take this book to be the decree only of this temporal life, and those to
be blotted out, which are deprived of life: so Moses in their opinion wishes
only to be deprived of this mortal life: so also Pererius. But this cannot be
so, for the Lord says, he will blot out him which sins, now not only
sinners, but righteous men are taken away out of this life.

10. But Chrysostomes exposition is best, who lib. 3. de provident. does
interpret these words of Moses, as the other of Paul, of the final separation
from Christ, and of being deprived of the vision of God, and fruition of
Christ: so also Bernard, Moses noluit introduci in gaudium Domini, etc. Moses
would not be brought into the joy of the Lord, the people remaining without.
Bernar. in sermon. 12. in Cantic. the reasons for the confirmation of this, see
in the end of the former question: and the solution of this doubt, how Moses
could desire an impossible thing of God, see also there in the answer to the 3.
objection.

Quest. 7. Whether in matters of salvation, one kindred after the flesh ought
to have any prioritie before others.
v. 3. My kinsmen according to the flesh. 1. Basil regal. brev. res. 190.
delivers this doctrine, that in spiritual matters none ought to have more
respect unto their kindred after the flesh, then unto others, that are not
near in blood: And that saying of Saint Paul, may seem to confirm this
opinion, 2. Cor. 5.16. Hence forth know we no man after the flesh, us though we
had known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more. Contra.
In this place the Apostle opposes himself against these false teachers, which
stood upon carnal prerogatives, and the legal and carnal ceremonies, and the
generation of Christ only after the flesh: these things Saint Paul would no
longer know, that is, trust unto: before his calling he stood upon such outward
privileges, as that he was circumcised, an Hebrew, of the tribe of Benjamin,
and such like, Phil. 3.5. But he counted all these things a dross and dung in
comparison of Christ: and he will not know Christ only according to the flesh,
in respect of his outward state in the world, for our Savior himself says,
Ioh. 6.13: It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. Mar.

2. But that even spiritual things may by the rule of charity be first wished
unto our ^^^ted, it may thus appear. 1. because our natural affection is not
destroyed by religion, but perfected; piety does qualify and moderate
natural compassion, it does not extinguish it. 2. charity must be ordinata,
ordered: it proceeds in degrees: first a man may express his love toward his
own, 1. Tim. 5.4. Let them first learn to show godliness toward their own
house. 3. S. Paul gives this as a reason of his heaviness and grief for the
Israelites, because they were his kindred after the flesh: where though he
uses a limitation: that after the flesh they were only his brethren, but
otherwise they were not, being unbelievers and contemners of the Gospel, yet
it much moved him for them, because they were his kindred after the flesh.

Quest. 8. The causes which made the Apostle to be so much grieved for the
Jews, v. 4.5.
He recounteth diverse privileges and immunities of the Jews, which made him
the more to desire their conversion. 1. in respect of himself, they were his
brethren, not so properly called, but they were his kinsmen after the flesh:
though in other respects they were not his brethren: this phrase after the
flesh, is afterward, v. 5. being spoken of Christ taken in an other sense: it
shows him to be of an other nature, then that which he had after the flesh:
here it shows not a diversity of nature, but a difference of brotherhood in
Paul and the^.

2. Then he reckons up their privileges with relation unto God. 1. they are
the Israelites: they are rather called by that name of Jacob, then by the name
of Abraham and Izaac, for that these had sons, which belonged not to the
people of God, but all Jacobs sons were the fathers of the Lords people, and
they are named of Israel rather then Jacob, because it was the more worthy
name, both for that the Lord imposed it, and for the more excellent
signification: Israel signifies one prevailing with God. 2. Theirs was the
adoption, that is, they were adopted to be a peculiar people unto God, selected
from all the world: and therefore they are called, Exodus 4.22. the Lords first
borne: there is an other adoption, when we are adopted to be the sons of God
by grace, Romans 8.15. but the Apostle speaks here of the outward adoption and
calling to be the people of God. 3. the glory which Chrysostom understands,
in that they were the peculiar people of God, so also Haym. Gor. gloss. interl.
Theodoret, of the miracles and great works whereby they became famous and
glorious: Lyranus of the divine visions and apparitions: but it is better
referred unto the Ark of the covenant, which is called the glory of God, 1.
Sam. 4.21.22. Gryn. Calv. Mart. Tol. Pareus. 4. The covenants, giving of the
law, the service of God: Origin by the covenants or testaments understands
the diverse renewing of Gods covenant with his people, so Mar. Osian. Hier. in
epist. ad Algas. qu. 9. of the old and new Testament, so Haymo, but the new
testament is afterward expressed in the word promises: the covenants were
rather the two tables of covenant, as the Apostle calls them, Heb. 9.4. and
so here the Apostle reckons up three kind of laws which Israel had, the
moral, contained in the tables of the law, the judicial, called here (...),
the giving of the law, and the ceremonial, which consisted of the priesthood
and sacrifices, called here the service. 5. the promises: which were of two
sorts, either temporal, as touching the inheriting of the land of Canaan, or
spiritual of the Messiah, Gryn. both legal promises and Evangelical, Mart.
both of this life and the next, Pelican. these promises first belonged unto
them, and upon their rejecting, they were fulfilled upon the Gentiles, Osiander.

3. The third sort of privileges are with relation unto the fathers, thence
were the fathers, that is, of that nation were the honorable patriarchs, of
whom they are descended: and God promised to be their God, and of their seed,
Genesis 7.4. yea to a thousand generations, Exodus 20.6. though they were
degenerate children, yet unto them belonged the promise made unto their fathers.

4. The forth kind of privilege is with relation to Christ: and of whom Christ
came: some leave out the conjunction and, and understand the fathers of whom
Christ came, so Orig. Haymo, Lyran. following the vulgar Latin: But the better
reading is with the conjunction, and of whom, that is, of the Israelites came
Christ: so Chrysostom. Theophyl. Tertul. l. de Trinit. Iren. l. 3. c. 8. Hilarie
lib. 8. Trinit. with others: according to the Greek original: for it is a
commendation of the whole nation of Israel, and an excellent prerogative that
Christ came of them according to the flesh.

Quest. 9. Of the excellency of the Israelites, and of true nobility.
1. The nobility of the Israelites diversely appears. 1. one thing that
makes a nation noble, is to have genus purum and impermixtum, to come of a
pure and unmingled stocks as the Athenians boasted that they came of
themselves, without the mixture of any other nation, but it was most true of
the Hebrews, they were descended of Abraham, and joined not in marriage but
with themselves. 2. that is counted a noble nation, which has a perfect
government within it self, and live by their own laws, as the Hebrews did,
who had their laws given them of God. 3. they were also of great antiquity.
4. and many excellent and worthy men came of that nation.

2. Some make small account of nobility, and urge much that saying of
Iphicoabes, who being but a cobblers son, grew to be a famous captain,
which being objected unto him, answered, meum genus a me incipit, tuum in te
definit, my nobility begins in me, and thine ends in thee: and nobility
they say is but an outward thing, even as the garments and robes of honor,
which make not a man honorable.

Contra. 1. True it is that virtue without nobility is more commendable, then
nobility without virtue; but when virtue is incident to them, that are
descended of a noble race, it is so much the more glorious. 2. some may much
degenerate from their noble ancestors, as corn and stocks transplanted may
grow wild: as of such as have been ingenious and valorous, may descend cruel
and savage ympes, as the posterity of Alcibiades, so degenerated: and of such
as were gentle and affable may some come, that are dull and blockish, as the
offspring of Cymon and Socrates. 3. yet there is a threefold privilege to be
descended of noble and worthy parents. 1. there do remain some seeds of
generous minds, which one way or other will in time show themselves in the
posterity. 2. the example of the virtues of the ancestors is much to move
and incline the posterity. 3. and beyond all this, the Lord has promised to
be the God of the faithful, and of their seed to a thousand generations: so
that they which are descended, though diverse degrees off from true noble
progenitors, are beloved of God for their fathers sakes.

Quest. 10. Of the meaning of these words, v. 5. who is God over all, blessed
for ever.
1. Erasmus is blamed both by Protestants, as Beza, and Papists, as Tolet
annot. 9. for ^^tering and changing the reading of this verse, making this the
sense, God who is over all, be blessed for ever: and will not have this clause
referred to Christ: but that the Apostle does conclude generally with a
doxologie, giving praise unto God: likewise he thinks that this word ( God)
is inferted, urging that neither Hillarie has it in Psalm. 122. not Cyprian
lib. 6. (...). Iudeos: whereas notwithstanding, Origin, Chrysostom. Theophyl. and
generally all expositors do so read, and manny of them use this place to
prove the divinity of Christ.

2. S. Paul concludes with this doxologie for two reasons. 1. both as
Chrysostom says to set forth the praise of Christ; whom the Jews blasphemed:
2. and as Haymo, to show, that although he was sorry for the reiection of the
Jews, yet he gave thanks to God for all, and rested in his good pleasure.

Quest. 11. Of the meaning of these words, v. 6. all they are not Israel, which
are of Israel.
The Apostle here answeareth an objection, that if it so be that the Israelites
are cast off and forsaken, then it should seem that the word of God is of no
effect, and his promises made void, hereunto the Apostle makes answer by a
distinction of the Israelites, that some are so only in respect of their
carnal generation, some are the true Israelites, which are the children of the
promise, and of the faith of Abraham: But here is some qu^^^ion about the scope
and purpose of the Apostle.

1. Some think that the Apostle intends chiefly to prove the vocation of
the Gentiles, that they are the true Israel of God, and so the promises of God
are not made void: and these make the example of Izaak only typical, thereby
shadowing forth the difference between the true believers and those only
which have the outward calling: to this purpose Chrysostom, who applies this
example to the Gentiles, which are called by the word, and regenerate by
baptism: so the o^rdinar. gloss. and Tolet annot. 16. But if the Apostle
intended only to show by this distinction, the calling of the Gentiles, he had
not sufficiently answered the objection, which concerned the promises made to
the Israelites his kindred after the flesh.

2. Neither yet is the Apostles scope to be restrained only to the nation of
the Jews: as Pet. Martyr seems to think, Israelitico populo promissionem
propositam fuisse indefinite, that the promise was propounded indefinitely to
the people of Israel, which came of Abraham after the flesh, etc. and therefore
he misliketh Chrysostomes application to the Gentiles: for it is evident that
the Apostle in the end of the chapter treats of the vocation of the Gentiles,
whereunto he makes a way by this distinction.

3. So then under the name of the true Israel of God, the Apostle comprehends
those which did imitate the faith of Abraham, whether they were of the flesh
and carnal generation of Abraham, or not, Gryneus: And Haymo makes three kind
of children of Abraham, some are secundum fidem and gratiam, both according to
faith and the flesh, as the believing Jews: some only according to the flesh,
as the incredulous Jews: some according ^o faith but not in the flesh, as the
believing Gentiles.

4. Tolet well observes, annot. 16. that S. Paul's answer is not to the former
objection, that Gods promise took effect in some of the Jews, though not in
all, to whom it was made: for then in part it had not taken effect, but the
promise was made only to the true Israelites, and so in all them, to whom it
was made, it was effectual.

5. And whereas the Apostle brings in the example of Isaac, to prove that
all are not the children of Abraham, that are of his seed, because Ismael was
also of Abraham's seed, but was not the heir of promise: it must be observed,
that neither all that descended of Israel, were excluded from the promise, for
of him came many believing Gentiles, nor all included within the promise, that
came of Izaak, for then all of Israel should be the true Israel: But these two
are propounded as examples, Ismael only of tho^^ which are borne according to
the flesh, and Izaak of those which are borne not by the force of nature, but
by promise and grace.

Quest 12. Of the meaning of these words, v. 10. and not only, etc. but also
Rebecca, etc.
1. This is an imperfect speech, and not only, and therefore somewhat must be
supplied: some therefore insert thus, and not only be, that is, Isaac, Beza,
Genevens. some, and not only (illa) she, understanding Sarah, that is, the
only non accepit devinum responsum, received not a divine answer, Ireneus
lib. 4. (...). or promissionem, (...) promise, gloss. ordinar. or a son by
the help of grace, Lyranus^ ^t the better supply is to put it neither in the
masculine or feminine, but in the neuter, a^^ not only ( hoc) this, that is,
it was not thus only in Ismael and Isaac, but in this other example, which he
now pro^oundeth: see the like phrase before, c. 5.11. and 8.23.

2. For whereas diverse exceptions might have been taken (...) former example:
as that they were of two mothers, and al^^ same of diverse conditions, the one
free the other bound: now the Apostle produces an other example, wherein
neither of these two exceptions can have place: for Jacob and Esau came of one
mother, and they were borne at one birth.

3. The vulgar Latin reads, Rebecca, ex vna concubitu, at one lying in
conception, but in the Greek it is not so, but she (...), having conceived by
one: in the same sense the Syrian translator, companying with him: though it be
not unlike, but that as they were borne together, so they were conceived
together.

4. But Chrysostom here has a strange opinion: that the Apostle leaves this
question undiscussed, why the Lord did make choice of Jacob and refused Esau:
he only answeareth one question by an other: for the Jews might have
demanded, why they were rejected, and the Gentiles accepted, and he answeareth
by the like question concerning the fathers, Isaac and Jacob were taken, Ismael
and Esau refused: and goes no further: like as in the 5. chapter, he shows
that Christ's righteousness is derived to us, as Adams sin is propag^ted, but
there he leaves, and proceeds not to show, how sin is propagated from
Adam: But Chrysostom is in both deceived, for both in that place he proves
the propagation of sin from Adam to his posterity, by the effect thereof,
namely, death, all is sin in Adam, because by sin death entered: and in
this place he shows the first cause of the election of Jacob, and the
reprobation of Esau, namely the free purpose of God, v. 11. that the purpose of
God might remain.

Quest. 13. Whether these examples concern temporal or eternal election and
reprobation.
It is by some objected, that these examples of Isaac and Ismael, Jacob and
Esau, do only show their temporal reiection, not their depriving of eternal
life: but they are set forth only as types of the reiection of the Jews.

1. For the text cited out of Genesis, chap. 15. speaks of servitude, that
the elder shall serve the younger; but one may be in servitude, and yet not
eternally rejected.

2. And this prophecy was not personally fulfilled in Jacob and Esau, but in
their posterity.

3. That other place Malach. 1.2. shows wherein the love of God consisted
toward Jacob, and his hatred toward Esau, because he gave unto Jacob the land
of promise, but unto Esau he made his mountain wast, and gave him a dry and
barren country: Thus Erasmus objected, in his diatrib. pro liber. arbit. and
of late Humius and Huberus.

Contra. To these objections of Erasmus, Luther has sufficiently made answer,
lib. de orbit. c. 166. much differing herein from the Lutherans so called in
these times.

1. First here Luther, and so Pet. Martyr upon this place answer by way of
concession, that if it were admitted, that Saint Paul only speaks of their
temporal reiection, yet it is a strange argument to show, that election is not
by works, seeing even the disposing of this temporal inheritance was not by
works, but according to the purpose of God: secondly it is denied, that this
testimony only concerned the temporal inheritance: for this external
promise of the inheritance of Canaan, had relation to Christ, and the
spiritual promises were therein exhibited: and so the Apostle draws his
argument, a sig no ad rem significatam, from the sign to the thing signified,
Iun. lib. 2. parallel. 10. so also Pareus dub. 9. this right given unto the
younger over the elder, was effectus singularis gratiae, complectens ea omnia,
quae ad foedus Dei, etc. it was an effect of special grace, comprehending all
things belonging to the covenant, and everlasting life.

2. As this prophecy was historically fulfilled in their posterity, so also
it must have some effect in their persons: for it is said to Esau, Genesis 27.40.
Thou shall be thy brothers servant: which seeing it was not fulfilled visibly,
for Esau had a more flourishing outward state than Jacob, it had a spiritual
accomplishment in them, Esau being a servant in respect of Jacob, because he
was cut of from the covenant off grace: And though there be not evident
testimony of the reprobation of Ismael and Esau, yet it is most probable:
seeing Ismael was a mocker and persecutor of Izaak, Gala. 4.29. and Esau is
called a profane person, that they were reprobates: unless it can be showed
that they returned in their life time to the fellowship of the Church, for
without the Church there is no salvation: Par. dub. 4.

3. In Malachie, the Lord uses this as an argument of his love to Jacob, and
hatred to Esau, because he had given a pleasant land to the one, and a barren
ground to the other: but yet the Lord rises higher; and shows how that with
Esau he is angry for ever, and that he will be magnified in Jacob: that place
then cannot be restrained to temporal things.

4. And if these examples only concerned temporal things, then had not the
Apostle alleged them to the purpose: which was to show who were the children
of God, and the children of the promise, v. 8. but this is not to be thought of
the Apostle, that he cited Scripture impertinently: See further hereof, Synops.

Quest. 14. How this saying of the Prophet, Esau have I hated, agrees with
that, Wisdom. 11.2^. Thou hate nothing which thou shall made.
1. Catharinus to dissolve this knot, refers this hatred of Esau unto things
temporal: that Jacob is said to be loved, and Esau hated, because Jacob had
the better blessing, and more temporal gifts bestowed upon him, and Esau
seemed to be neglected; like as the younger sons may say their father hates
them, when the inheritance is given unto the Elder: But it has been showed
before, that these examples are alleged by the Apostle to show who were the
children of promise, and who not, and therefore they cannot be restrained to
temporal things.

2. Augustine says, non edit Deus Esau hominem, sed adit peccatorem: God hated
not Esau as a man, but as a sinner: lib. ad Simpl^^ian. qu. 2. and he explaneth
his mind thus further: distinguishing between these three, creaturam,
peccatum, poenam peccati, the creature, the sin of the creature, and the
punishment; the first God hates not, nor the last, the one he made, the other
he ordained, but he hates the third, that is sin, which he made not like as
a judge condemning a thief, neither hates his person, nor the punishment,
which is according to justice, but the crime of these, etc. upon this answer
insisteth Pererius, and before him: Haymo, non edit naturam, quam fecit, sed
peccatum, quod non fecit, he hated not the nature, which he made, but the
sin, which he made not: so aso Gorrhan: and the ordinary gloss. he hated
nothing in Esau, nisi originale peccatum, but his original sin, etc. But the
Apostle here speaks of an hatred, before Esau had done any evil, and before
the fight thereof.

3. Neither does it satisfy, to say it is spoken comparatively, Esau was
hated, that is less beloved: as a man is bid to hate father and mother to
cleave to his wife, that is, love them less, then his wife: for the Apostle
calls them the vessels of wrath afterward, whom he is here said to hate;
therefore such are not beloved at all.

4. This then is the solution: hatred in God signifies three things. 1. the
negation and denial of his love, and of this degree of hatred sin is not the
cause, but the will of God, that electeth whom he will, and refuses whom he
pleases: thus God hates Esau, and all the reprobate. 2. the decree of
punishment, and this proceeds from the foresight of sin, and thus God is
said to have the wicked. 3. it signifies the anger of God, and his abhorring
of that which he hates; and thus God is said to hate iniquitte: and of this
hatred is that saying to be understood, thou hate nothing, that thou have
made: for God in this sense hates not his creatures, but sin in them: Pareus
dub. 11.

Quest. 15. Of the meaning of these words, I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy.
1. Origin and Heirome, epist. ad Heath. qu. 10. do think that this is an
objection made by some as it were contradicting the Apostle; But this is the
Apostles answer rather to the former objection: is their iniquity with God,
that he should elect one, and reject an other, both of them being in the same
state and condition: to the which the Apostle makes answer, God forbid, and
gives a reason of his answer here out of the Scripture.

2. Chrysostom thinks, whom Theophylact follows, that by this sentence the
Apostle staieth man's curiosity, from requiring the cause why some are elected,
some are refused, which is best known unto God; as the Lord answered Moses
who was desirous to know, why all of the Israelites being guilty of the same
sin, in worshipping the golden calfe, yet were not alike punished: to whom
the Lord answeareth thus in effect: non est tuum scire Moses, etc. Moses it
belongs not to thee to know who are worthy of my mercy, etc. But in this
sense, there were small coherence in the Apostles speech: for then there should
be no answer made unto the former objection, which the Apostle remooueth here:
Tolet annot. 22. neither was this sentence uttered upon any such occasion,
concerning the punishing of sin of the Israelites, and sparing of others; but
whereas Moses had made request to see Gods glory, and the Lord had granted him
to see his backer parts, and so in part yielded unto his request, then this is
added, as a reason thereof; I will have mercy, Mar.

3. Ambrose is far wide, who makes this the sense of these words: I will
have mercy on him, on whom I will have mercy, that is, quem praescivi, whom I
foresaw like after his error to return unto me: so the ord. gloss. cui
praescio misericordiam, whom I foresaw, mercy is to be showed upon: the like
gloss Thomas makes mention of in his Commentary, I will have mercy on him,
quem dignum praenonero misericordia, whom I foresaw to be worthy of mercy.
But this is not agreeable to the Apostles mind: 1. there had been no occasion
of any such objection, if the cause were in the foresight of men's worthiness,
why some are elected, and not others, for then there had been no show of
injustice at all in God, the reason had been plain: Tolet annot. 22. 2. this,
to give unto those which are worthy, respicit iustitiam Dei, respects the
justice of God, whereas the Apostle here refers all unto Gods mercy;
Martyr. 3. neither can that be a cause of election, which is an effect thereof:
for to believe, and to be obedient, are effects of election, then the foresight
thereof cannot be the cause: Pere. dsiput. 7. err. 39.

4. Neither is this only an Hebrew phraise signifying the same thing, as Tolet
ibid. as the Hebrews for more vehemency sake do express the same thing, by
an emphaticall repetition: neither yet are these words so curiously to be
distinguished with Anselme, as to refer the^ to Gods mercy in calling, in
believing, and in working, that whom he shows mercy upon in calling, he will
show further mercy in giving grace to believe, and whom he gives grace unto
believe, they shall have grace also to work by their faith: Lyranus and
Pererius understand the three degrees of Gods mercy, in predestinating, in
giving present grace, and glory to come, and so make this the sense, I will
have mercy, in giving grace to him, on whom I have mercy, in electing him:
and to whom I give final grace I will show mercy in giving him future glory:
Iunius much differs not, I will have mercy (ex facto) in fact and indeed,
upon whom I have mercy, decreto, in my decree of election: parallel. 11. But
Pareus better shows the reason of the ingemination and repeating of these
words: to show, 1. this mercy, gratuitam, to be frank and free, and that
there can be no reason or cause yielded why God shows mercy, but his own
gracious inclination to mercy. 2. arbitrariam, that it is arbritarie depending
only upon the will of God. 3. constantem, that it is constant and immutable:
where he shows mercy, he will have mercy to the end. 4. immensam, this
mercy is infinite and without measure, not only in bestowing one grace, but
many.

5. Further it is to be observed, that thought the same word, to have mercy,
be retained both in the Greek translation of the Septuagint, and in the latin
in both parts of the sentence, yet in the Hebrew there are two words, the one
in the former clause of the sentence, canan, which signifies to show grace,
and favor: the other in the latter part, is racham, to show bowels of
compassion, and beside the Septuagint do put the verb in the present-tense,
in the latter part of both the clauses, whereas in the original the same tense
and time is kept in both; but this is no great difference, the sense still
notwithstanding remains the same.

6. This then is the Apostles meaning; whereas it was objected that if God
elect some and not others, their case being the same, the Lord might seem to
be partial and unjust: he answers in effect thus much, that whereas all are
endebted to God, and without Gods mercy like to perish, here is no injustice,
if God remit his debt to one and not to an other: as Augustine says, debitum
si non reddis, habes quod gratuleris, si reddis, Ad Simplic. lib. 1. qu. 2.
non habes quod queraris, if thou do not pay the debt, which thou owe, thou
have cause to be thankful, if thou do, thou have no cause to complain: So
then the Apostle here shows, that between the decree of election and
reprobation, and the execution thereof, there came between certain
subordinate causes: all are sinners in Adam, for mercy presupposes misery,
where the Lord then finds all in misery, there if he show mercy to some,
and not to others, no man can accuse him of injustice, because he is not
endebted or tied in his justice unto any, but all are by nature the children of
wrath: if then he save some out of that mass of corruption, it is a work of
his mercy, and no injustice is to be imputed unto him, where in justice
nothing is due to any: to this purpose Beza. annot.

Quest. 16. How it is said, It is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but in God that shows mercy.
1. Origin and Heirom. ad Hedib. qu. 10. think that the Apostle speaks here
in the person of one that contradicts and obiecteth against that which he had
said: and Chrysostom says, that the Apostle hero aliam obiectionem inducit,
brings in an other objection: But it is evident by this note of illation ( so
then) that the Apostle thus infers and includes out of the former places of
Scripture alleged.

2. Origin and Photius, with other Greek expositors, supply here the word
solum (only) as if the Apostle should mean, It is not (only) in him that
runs, or in him that wills, but in God that shows mercy: and Origin
will have this sentence to be understood comparatively, as those two other
places, Psalm. 127. Except the Lord build the house, they labor but in vain,
that build it: and 1. Cor. 3. Neither be that planteth is any thing, nor he
that waters, but God that gives increase: But these places are not like: for
the first is a civil action to build an house, wherein the will of man has
some liberty, though it cannot prosper without the blessing of God: and like
as the outward ministry of man is nothing auailable unto salvation, without
the assistance and concurrence of the spirit, so neither can the will or
endeavor of man do any thing of it self toward the attaining of salvation,
but all must be ascribed to Gods mercy: Martyr: and beside the antithesis or
opposition, but in God that shows mercy, excludes that gloss, only: for
Gods mercy and man's will cannot in this opposition be joined as workers
together, seeing the one is excluded, and the other admitted: Pareus: Calvin
here also presses Augustines reason, that if the Apostles words admitted any
such sense, then they might as well be inuerted to say, It is not in God, that
shows mercy, but in him that wills and runs, that is, it is not only
in the one, no more then in the other.

3. Some of the Romanists, that will not have man's free will utterly excluded
in the work of salvation, have this devise: that although there be somewhat in
him, that wills and runs, yet all is ascribed to Gods mercy: because
miserecordia Dei praeuenit voluntarem hominis, etc. the mercy of God
preuenteth the will of man, etc. and man's will being thus prepared, then
works together with grace: Pererius numer. 46. taking upon him herein to
confute Calvin: Thomas Aquine in his Commentary here moving this question,
why, seeing that as free will is not sufficient without grace, so neither grace
suffices without freewill, yet all is ascribed to Gods mercy, answeareth by a
distinction; because the grace of God is agens principale, the principal
agent, man's will, secundum and instrumentale, is the second agent, and the
instrument, to the which the work is not ascribed, but to the principal
agent: as the axe is not said to make a chest, but the artificer that works
with it. Contra. Pet. Martyr uses the same similitude, but to a diverse end:
man's will indeed God uses as an instrument, but not any goodness in man's will,
which it should of it self without grace: the will of man concurreth as a
natural instrument, in respect of the natural faculty of calling: but it
has no inclination to that which is good, but as it pleases God to move it.
Man's will then, is a natural instrument of the action, but not a moral
instrument of the goodness of the action: this is wrought wholly by the mercy
and grace of God: therefore the ordinary gloss here concludes well out of
Augustine, restat vt totum Deo datur, it remains, that the whole be given
unto God: volentem praevenit vt velit, and subsequitur ^e frustra velit, he
preuenteth man to make him will, and follows him with his grace, that he do
not will in vain, etc. And I prefer here the judgment of Tolet and
Bellarmine before other Romanists; the first infers out of this place, non
fuit nisi ex sola voluntate Dei, the calling of the Gentiles was only of the
will of God: annot. 23. the other likewise so expounds this place, that it is
only the mercy of God, nothing at all in the will of man, that he perseuereth
to the end: lib. 2. de great. c. 12.

4. Ambrose by mercy understands the discerning judgment of God, as he
gives instance in David and Saul, how both of them asked pardon of God: but
God discerned vter bono animo peteret, which of them asked of a good mind: and
so he will have the meaning to be, that it was not enough for a man to will and
endeavor, unless God did confirm and allow of his endeavor: But there is
great difference between the mercy of God, and the judgment and approbation
of God: for but part of the work is ascribed to the one, whereas the whole is
due to the other: ex Mart.

5. Now touching the true meaning of the words: 1. neither with Anastasius qu.
59. are they to be restrained to Esaus running and coursing in the field to
hunt for venison for his father. 2. nor yet with Tolet to Jacobs running to the
flock to fetch a kid, Genesis 27. the Apostles doctrine is more general. 3. nor
yet, as the same Tolet annot. 23. is this sentence only to be applied in
general to the calling of the Gentiles, and the reiection of the Jews: but
with August. epist. 101. do we interpret this place of the particular
predestination of every one, that it depends not upon the foresight of the
will and works of men, but only on the mercy of God. 4. Osiander
understands it of the willing and running of natural and unregenerate men
among the heathen; that they were not called in respect of any such will or
endeavor: but as well the calling and running of regenerate, as unregenerate
men, are here excluded from being any cause of election. 5. Neither are those
words to be divided, as though the willer were one, and the runner an other:
but the things only are discerned, by willing, is understood the inclination
and endeavor of the mind, by running the external works and labor,
Gryneus. 6. And here the nominative case must be supplied, which Beza will have
to be election: that it is not in the willer or runner: and so Pareus: Haymo
supplieth, the will is not of the willer, nor cursus, the running of the
runner: Pet. Martyr better understands both; that two things are here
implied: that neither election is in respect of any thing in man, neither that
he has power to will or run of himself. 7. And Beza well interprets,
(...), of him that wills, not volentis, of the willing, to take away all
ambiguitie: least the word (...), God, might be thought to be supplied, in the
two first, as well as in the last: as though the sense should be this, It is
not of God that wills or runs, but that shows mercy.

17. Quest. How the Lord is said to have raised or stirred up Pharaoh, v. 17.
1. Photius in Oecumen. understands it of the raising up of Pharaoh to the
kingdom: so also Rupertus Taitiens. I have raised thee, scilicet in regnum,
that is, to the kingdom: so also the Rhemists in their annot. and Vatablus:
But the Apostle goes further, then to the time of Pharaohs coming to the
kingdom. 2. Chrysostom, so also the Septuag. and Chalde paraphrast, do refer
it to the saving and keeping of Pharaoh alive from the plagues of Egypt, that
Gods power might be showed in him: and to the same purpose Ambrose, whom the
ordinary gloss follows, thus expounds, I have raised thee up, cum apud
Deum mortum esses, being in effect dead before God, in suffering thee to live,
etc. But many beside Pharaoh, were so reserved from the plagues of Egypt. 3.
some understand it permissive, that God is said to have raised him up, in
permitting Pharaoh to rage against his people: permittendo, non agendo, by
permitting, not acting or doing any thing: Rupertus before alleged: and these
think that good things are done volente Deo, God being willing, mala
permittente, and evil by his permission only. But Pet. Martyr here well
shows, that even permission also is not without the will of God, and that
even good works belong unto Gods permission: as Heb. 6.3. This will we do, if
God permit: and this word of raising up, shows more then a permission only.
4. Some refer it unto the means, as the signs and wonders, whereby Pharaoh
was further hardened: so their meaning is, that God did raise him up
occasionaliter, by ministering occasion only: as Anselme, excitavi te quasi
sopitum per mea signa, I did raise thee up or awake thee by my signs, as a
sleep: to the same purpose Lyranus, abusus est signis, he abused the signs,
which were sent to bring him to repentance: Haymo much differs not, duritiam
cordis manifestavi, I manifested or made known by this means, the hardness of
thy heart. But the Apostle arises yet higher to the counsel and purpose of
God, he staieth not only in the external and secondarie means. 5. Beza and
Gryneus understand it of the creating of Pharaoh, that he had made and created
him to that end: but the Apostle as before in the example of Esau and Jacob,
so here, speaks of the purpose and counsel of God, which went before their
creation and birth. 6. Pet. Martyr has this note by the way, that God might
raise up in Pharaohs mind, vehementem cogitationem de tuendo regno, a vehement
cogitation or thought to defend his kingdom: but he by his own corruption
turned this cogitation into malice against the people of God. But this does not
fully satisfy: for the counsel and purpose of God concerning Pharaoh was long
before the raising or stirring up of any such cogitation.

7. Neither must this be referred so unto God, as to make him the efficient
cause of stirring up the malice of Pharaoh; as Pererius slandereth the
Protestants to affirm, that God stirred up Pharaoh, that is, fecisse eum it a
obduratum in malo, etc. to have made him so obdurate in evil, that by
punishing of him diversely, he might take occasion to set forth his power and
glory. Perer. disput. 9. numer. 50. But far be it from us to make God the
author of evil, or the proper cause of any ones hardness of heart: we are
further off from this blasphemous assertion, then the Romanists themselves.

8. Neither do we restrain this only to Gods decree of the reiection and
reprobation of Pharaoh; as though God had ordained Pharaoh to this end, to
show his disobedience, Bellar. lib. 1. de amiss. great. c. 12. in fine.
that thereby Gods power might appear: as Bellarmine imputes this opinion to
Calvin and Pet. Mart. Deum absolute Pharaonem excitasse, etc. that God
absolutely had raised up Pharaoh to resist him, before any foresight at all of
his sin: for God does not ordain or appoint any unto sin. Neither has
Calvin any such saying; his words are these, God raised up Pharaoh to this
end, vt dum ille contumaciter diuinae patientiae resistere nititur, that while
he seeks to resist obstinately the power of God, he being subdued and
brought under might show, how invincible the arm of God is. Pet. Martyr also
thus writes, I have raised the up to this end, to afflict my people, and mihi
resisteres, and to resist me, that my power might be seen in thee. Neither of
these affirm that God raised up Pharaoh, to this end to resist him, but the
end was the demonstration of Gods power, by his obstinacy and disobedience,
which God procured not, but ordered it so, that his glory and power might be
set forth by it.

9. Wherefore for the right understanding of this place, there are four things
to be considered, which will deliver God from all suspicion of injustice. 1.
his absolute power to dispose of his creatures, as it seems best unto
himself, as they may best serve unto his glory; he may take unto himself,
and leave whom he will, and none are to say unto him, What do thou? Isa.
45.9. 2. God did foresee the malice and obstinacy of Pharaohs heart, whereby
he fore-iudged him worthy of perdition; as Habac. 1.12. the Prophet speaks
of the Chaldeans, Thou have ordained them for judgment, and established them
for correction: and in the next verse he speaks of their wickedness, wherefore
do thou look upon the transgressors. 3. God by his secret working, but most
just, is said to stir up the spirit and the wicked, not by inclining their
corrupt wills unto evil, but by his secret power ordering them, to that end,
which he has appointed: as Ier. 51.11. God is said to have raised up the
spirit of the King of the Medes, against Babel: and yet it is certain, that
they sinned in this action, which God stirred them up unto: for God stirred
them up to one end, to be ministers of his judgments upon that wicked nation;
but they therein satisfied only their own cruel and covetous mind: as Isai,
10.5. the Lord says concerning Ashur: I will give him a charge against the
people of my wrath, etc. but he thinks not so: they considered not wherefore
the Lord (...) them as the end of his wrath. 4. Lastly, the end must be
considered, wherefore God raised up Pharaoh: to a most holy and just end, for
the setting forth of his glory: as the wise man says, Prove. 16.4. The Lord
has made all things for his own sake, yea even the wicked against the day of
evil: In these foresaid respects God is said to have raised up and ordained
Pharaoh, without any touch of injustice at all.

Quest. 18. How the Lord is said to harden whom he will, v. 18.
1. Origin thinks that this sentence is part of an objection propounded in
the person of some other: and so also Chrysostom. But it appears to be the
Apostles own assertion, both by the note of illation, therefore he has
mercy, etc. and because the objection follows in the next words, v. 19. thou will say unto me then: which shows this to be no part of the objection; Beza,
Gryneus.

2. Some think that God hardneth by permission only, as Oecumen, indurat. i.
dur^^^ esse permittit, he hardens, that is, suffers and permits to be
hardened: so also Bellarmine, permittit eos male agere, he permits them to
do evil. But this permission, does suppose God, Bellarm. lib. 2. de amiss.
great. cap. 13.
either otiosum, vel invitum, either to be idle and negligent, or against his
will to suffer things: so it will cast upon God either an imputation of
negligence or indulgence, as Heli permitted his sons to sin; or of
impotencie, in permitting things, which he cannot hinder: therefore this devise
of bare permission, does not satisfy.

3. Nor yet did God harden him, per patientiam, by his patience, in sparing to
punish him, Origin: dilatione poenae, by deferring of his punishment, Basil in
Oecumen. for in this sense Pharaoh rather hardened his own heart, in abusing
Gods longsuffering, as the Apostle speaks of those, which through their
hardness of heart despise the bountifulness of God, Romans 2.42. God cannot be
said this way to harden it.

4. Hierome thinks that God does harden the vessels of wrath, and mal^^fieth
the vessels of mercy, causis praecedentibus, upon causes proceeding or going
before, because some believed in Christ, some believed not, Hierome epist. 150.
resp. ad qu. 10. But Pererius refuses this opinion, and upon good ground;
because he makes the wills and dispositions of men, to be the first cause, why
God shows mercy on some, and hardens others: as the same heat of the
Sun mollifieth the wax, and hardneth the clay: whereas the Apostle soli
voluntati diuinae aperte assignat, does manifestly assign the cause to the
only will of God: Pere. disput. 10. numer. 55.

5. And far be it from any to think, that God is the proper efficient cause
of the hardening of man's heart, which is the work of Satan: as Pererius
slaundereth Calvin to say, Deum causam esse efficientem indurationis, that God
is the efficient cause of the hardening of the heart, etc. And thus he
challenging Calvin, because he says, that this word to burden in Scripture
signifies not only permission, sed diuinae irae actionem, but an action of
the divine wrath: which is most true; but yet as the hardening and hardness of
the heart is sin, the Lord has nothing to do with it.

6. Pererius thinks that by hardening here we may understand, ipsam
reprobationis originem, the very beginning of reprobation, that is the will
and purpose of God, non miserandi, not to show mercy: But hardening of the
heart is an effect or consequence rather of reprobation, then reprobation it
self: and thus he will make God the proper cause of this induration and
hardening, which he charged Calvin with before.

7. To understand therefore how God is said to harden the heart: it must be
considered, that there are two degrees thereof, desertio induritae, the leaving
and forsaking of men in their hardness of heart; which is either non apponendo,
vel subtrahendo gratiam, in not giving, or in subtracting his grace: as
Augustine says, he hardens not, impertiendo malitiam, sed non impertiendo
gratiam, not by imparting malice, but by not imparting his mercy and grace:
epistol. 105. ad Sixtumi non quia irrogatur aliquod quo fit homo deterior, sed
quo ferrer melior, non irrogatur: not because any thing is irrogated to make
man worse, but nothing is irrogated, to make him better, ^lib. 1. ad Simplici.
qu. 2. and he likeneth it to the freezing and congealing of the water by the
absence of the Sun, which is done, non impretiendo frigiditatem, sed non
apponendo calorem, not by imparting coldness, but in not putting to heat. The
other degree in hardening, is inflictio grautoris duritiae, the inflicting of a
greater blindness, and hardness of heart: which is done three ways, either
immediately, by God himself, or mediately by Satan, or by themselves, that
are hardened: and so we read in Exodus, that God is said 8. times to have
hardened Pharaohs heart, and thrice Pharaoh hardened his own heart, and five
times his heart is said simply to be hardened, Pareus.

First God inflicteth the hardness of heart as a punishment, when either
inwardly, he gives them up to their own desires, not only in denying unto
them necessary graces, but so working by his invisible power that their
corrupt wills are more and more hardened: as it is said, Revel. 22.11. He that
is filthy, let him be filthy still: hardness then of heart, as it is a
punishment of former sins, is justly inflicted by God, as Augustine says, de
nature. S^g^. cap. 12.
prioribus meritia, etc. hoc redditum est Pharaoni, vt cor eius induraretur,
this was given as a just recompense to Pharaohs former evil merits, in
afflicting the people of God, that his heart was hardened, etc. As hardness of
heart is a punishment of former sins, so it is of God. And God by his
immediate power hardens the heart two ways: 1. the general facultio,
whereby every one moves and wills this or that, is of God: Luther uses
this similitude, as Pet. Martyr alleges him: like as the rider that forces
a lame and halting horse is the cause of his going: but his halting pase
proceeds from the lamenesse of the horse: so God hardens as the general
moouer, but the euillnes of the action proceeds from the corruption of man.
2. But more then this, God does by a more special providence so ouerrule even
the hearts of wicked men, that they are ordered unto that end, which the Lord
will himself: and so Hugo well says, that God invisibili operatione, malas
voluntates ad suum arbitrium temperat and ordinat, Hug. de S. Vict. lib. 1. de
sacram. par. 5. c. 27.
etc. by his invisible operation does temper and order even wicked wills
according to his own mind, etc. yet God gives unto evil and perverse wills,
non corruptionem sed ordinem, not corruption but order, etc. and he shows it
by this similitude: like as when one is cast down headlong, and is ready to
fall, if one make a way seeing he must needs fall, that he tumble down one
way rather then an other, he in some sort may be said to incline and make a way
for him to fall: and yet causes or procures not, but only disposes his
fall: And thus God may be said to harden ^^erly.

Outwardly also God hardens by his works, as either his mercies showed upon
others, as the Egyptians hated Gods people, because the Lord blessed them: and
in this sense it is said, that God turned their heart to hate his people, Psalm.
105.25. that is, by creation of those benefits, which he bestowed upon them: or
by his judgments inflicted upon the wicked themselves, as Pharaohs heart was
the more hardened by the plagues which were sent: of this kind also it is, that
the wicked are many times hardened by the ministry and preaching of the word,
which is sent to convert them, but they pervert it to their destruction: so it
is said unto the Prophet Isay, 6.9. Go, etc. and shut the eyes of (...)
people, make their heart fatt: the Prophet is said to harden their heart,
because it was hardened by occasion of his preaching.

Secondly, God hardens by his instruments: as when he delivers up men unto
Satan to be seduced by him, and gives them over into his power: as God is
said to have stirred up David to number the people, 2. Sam. 24.1. which was
indeed the work of Satan, 1. Chron. 21.1. so God bid the lying spirit to go
and deceive Baals Prophets, 1. Kin. 22.21. and the Apostle says of the wicked,
that the God of this world has blinded their minds, 2. Cor. 4.4.

Thirdly, the wicked do harden their own hearts, when God gives them over
unto their own wicked and corrupt desires; as the Apostle speaks of the
heathen, that God g^^e them up to their own hearts lusts, Romans 1.24. And thus
Pharaoh is said to have hardened his own heart: And thus, as has been
showed, God is said to harden the heart: But it will thus be objected on the
contrary.

1. Object. To tempt man is all one as to harden him, but God tempts none,
Iam. 1.13. therefore neither does he harden them.

Answ. God tempts not with any such temptation, as proceeds from a corrupt
beg^^ing: such as are the tentations which are caused by man's own
concupiscence: for as God not tempted, he has no corrupt affections to be
tempted, so neither does he tempt by inciting or stirring men up to evil:
neither does he in this manner harden: but as God may tempt externally for the
trial of men's faith and obedience, as he tempted Abraham, and so he tempted
Israel in the desert: so the Lord by external means, and in such manner as he
have said, hardens in his justice without any injustice at all, Martyr.

2. Object. If God hardened Pharaohs heart, why then did he send Moses so often
unto him, to bid him let his people go? God should seem herein to be
contrary to himself, in making show of one thing, and yet intending an other.

Answ. Pet. Martyr here uses this distinction: Gods will is to be considered
two ways; there is voluntas signi vel antecedens, the will of the sign, or
the will going before: and there is voluntas consequens seu beneplaciti, the
will following, or of Gods good pleasure: As when Jonas was sent to preach to
the Ninevites, that they should within 40. days be destroyed, that was the
will of the sign, or the revealed will of God: but yet the Lord upon their
repentance purposed to spare them, that was the secret will, and good pleasure
of God: yet were not these wills the one contrary to the other: but the one
wrought for the other: as Jonas preaching brought them to repentance, that Gods
pleasure might be fulfilled in spring of the city: so Moses was sent to
Pharaoh, to make him without excuse, that Gods justice might be manifest in
giving him over to the hardness of heart.

3. Object. Hardness of heart is of God, hardness of heart is sin, therefore is
would hence follow that sin is of God.

Ans. Hardness of heart is not of God simply, or as it is sin, but
accidentally only (...) it is the punishment of sin: hardness of heart is
then ascribed unto God, as the Judge to Satan as the tormentor and
executioner, to the wicked themselves, as to the party guilty, Pareus, dub.
16.

4. God is not angry with his own work: but he is angry with men for their
hardness of heart: therefore it is no way Gods work.

Answ. Hardness of heart as it is sin, or the cause of sin it is not of God,
but the Lord is offended with it: but as it is a punishment of sin, so is it
of God, and the Lord is pleased that the obstinacy of the wicked should be
punished, Gryneus.

Quest. 19. Of the objection propounded, v. 19. Thou will say, why does he yet
complain, etc.
1. This is the third objection: the first was of inconstancy, which might
seem to be imputed unto God in rejecting the Jews, which was answered before
v. 6. the second of injustice, in casting off some and choosing others, before
they had done any good or evil, 5.14. now the third is of cruelty, which
might be furmised in God, i^ being an (...) those that are hardened, which
notwithstanding is according to his own will: this ph^^^ion the Apostle now
begins to answer.

2. Why does he yet complain, or is angry, (...) the word signifies both:
the latin reads queritur, complains: by the mistaking of which word, some
taking it for ^^ritur, with a dipthong, which signifies to be sought or
enquired: some have here (...) threefold sense; as first it may be taken
impersonally, why is it enquired, whence it (...) one is good an other evil;
or passively, wherefore is it sought for, or why should any seek to be good,
seeing all is as God will; or actiuely, why does God complain of sinners,
seeing all is according to his will: so Gorrhan and the ordin. gloss. but the
last only is the right meaning, the other two senses do arise by the
mistaking of the word.

3. God complains in many places in the Scriptures of the wickedness of men,
as Isa. 1.26. How is the faithful city become an harlot: so our Savior
takes up this complaint over Jerusalem; how often would I have gathered
together, etc. Matthew. 23. now the objection is, why God should thus complain,
seeing herein his will is not gainsaied or resisted.

4. And the force of the objection consists in these two points. 1. Ob. That
which (...) according to Gods will, he cannot justly be offended with; but that
some are hardened (...) agreeable to Gods will: here we must answer by a
distinction of Gods will; for that which is not contrary to Gods revealed
will, he cannot be displeased withal, but if the question be of his secret,
and hid will, the proposition is not true.

2. Ob. That which cannot be avoided, is not justly punished, but the hardening
of (...) reprobate cannot be avoided, therefore, etc.

Answ. Here must be admitted a distinction of necessity, there is necessitas
coactia^^, compelling and enforcing necessity, when the will is not free, but
urged and compelled, and necessitas naturae, the necessity of nature: as men
considering their natural corruption cannot but sin, there is necessitas
infallibilitatis, a necessity infallible: as that which God has decreed,
cannot otherwise be, Martyr: of the two latter kinds of necessity, the
proposition is not true, but only of the first: that which cannot be avoided,
is not justly punished, if a man be willing to avoid it: seeing then the will
of wicked (...) is wholly ^^^ried after sin, howsoever there is a necessity
in their nature, and in respect of Gods decree not to do otherwise: yet
because they are not compelled, but they sin willingly, they are
notwithstanding justly punished.

Quest. 20. Of the Apostles answer to the former objection, who art thou O man
that pleadest, etc. v. 20.
1. The Apostles answer is first personal, showing the insolency and
presumption of man, that dare take upon him, thus as it were to call the
creator to account for his works: of such the Prophet Isay says, 49.10. Woe
unto him that strives with his maker: the other? answer is real, that is,
concerning the thing it self: which consists of a secret concession, that
both are true, that God hardens whom he will, and that none can resist Gods
will; or do otherwise then he has determined: and these is a nogation
insinuated, that yet notwithstanding God is not unjust, which he shows by the
absolute power that God has ever his creature, by the similitude of the
potter, Gryneus: Tolet makes here two answears of the Apostle in this
similitude proposed, one to stay the curiosity of such gain sayers, v. 20. the
other to satisfy the humble and willing to learn, that God casts off none
without their own demerits, v. 22.

2. Origin well observes here a difference between those which ask
questions, and make objections of curiosity, for they deserve no other answer
but this, tu quis es, who are thou man, etc. and such as desire to be satisfied
for their own instruction, non puio, quod si fidelis servus and prudens
interroget, etc. I do not think that if a faithful and wise servant should
have asked any question being desirous to understand; that it should have
been so answered him: but his desire should have been satisfied as Daniels
was, c. 9.

3. Augustine concerning this answer of the Apostle, lib. 83. qu. 68. makes
mention of two cauils of certain heretics here objected, the one of the
Marcionites and Manichees, that Paul having nothing to answearto these
objections, fell to chiding: some other thought the Scriptures were corrupted,
and that these words were inferred by others: To both these cauils Augustine
answeareth thus in effect: to the first, that seeing the Apostle spoke by the
spirit of God, it were blasphemy to think that he had nothing to say: and to
the other, if this be admitted, that the Scriptures are corrupted, we should
have no certainty of any thing.

Quest. 21. How the similitude, which the Apostle brings in of the potter, is
to be understood.
1. Hierome epist. ad Hedib. que. 9.10. makes this a dissimilitude rather then
a similitude, in this sense: O man think not, that God has made thee like a
piece of clay, without any will or motion: for the clay cannot answer the
potter any thing: but thou make answer to God, O man who art thou that
answearest, etc. to the same purpose Photius in Oecumenius, as he is here cited
by Tolet ann. 26. But seeing that the Scriptures unto the which the Apostle
here alludeth, do often compare God to a potter, and men unto the clay, under
the potters hand: this interpretation seems to cross altogether the Apostles
meaning, that neither God should be as the potter, nor men as the clay.

2. Chrysostom thinks that S. Paul only alleges this similitude to this
end ad obedientiae silentium exprimendum, etc. to show how we should be
obedient and silent, not to be inquisitiue in these things, as the clay is
under the potters hand, suffering him to work his pleasure: But as we confess
this to be true, so there is more comprehended in this similitude, which gives
unto God, an absolute power over men to dispose of them, as it pleases him, as
the potter does of his clay.

3. Origin would expound this place by the like, 2. Tim. 2.21. If any purge
himself from these he shall be a vessel unto honor, here (says Origin)
memoravit rationem, etc. he remembers the reason, wherefore some are made
vessels to honor, some to dishonor: if any man purge himself, etc. so Jacob
was a vessel to honor, because he purged himself, etc. to the same purpose
Ambrose in his commentary here. But 1. these two places are not alike: for S.
Paul there speaks, neither of the decree of election, nor of the cause of our
vocation (...) calling, but de officio, of the office and calling of a
Christian, how he ought to be unlike to the reprobate, and carry himself as a
vessel sanctified and purged for the glory of God: as Calvin well
interprets that place. 2. and if it were thus, that God upon the foresight of
works good or evil, should elect or reject, then should he not have the like
power which the potter has over the clay, Mart.

4. Wherefore the Apostle in the enforcing of this similitude reasons a
minori, from the less to the greater, that if a potter have such power over
his vessels which he makes, God has much more over his creature, to frame and
fashion it, as it may best serve for his glory. But yet this similitude is not
in every point to be pressed, but in diverse things there is a dissimilitude.
1. God makes man of nothing, but the potter has a matter prepared before, out
of the which he makes his vessels, Pareus. 2. the clay has no motion or
understanding, as man has, Faius. 3. and it is a greater matter to destroy a
man, then a piece of clay, Faius. But herein this similitude holds, 1. like
as there is no difference in the matter, out of the which the potter frames
diverse vessels: so all men by nature were as one corrupt mass. 2. As the
potter has absolute power to do with his clay as he will, for the the use and
service of the house: so God the Creator may dispose some to honor some to
dishonor, as he sees it to make most for his glory. 3. as the clay if it
could speak, is not to reason with the potter, so neither is man to question
with God, for making him so. 4. and as the potter, nihil adimit into, etc.
takes nothing from the clay, of what form soever he make it: so neither does
the Creator any wrong to the creature howsoever he dispose of it, Calvin: who
thinks that the Apostle in this place has reference rather to that place,
Isay 49.9.10. then to the other Ierem. 18.2. where the Prophet is bid to go
down to the potters house: But the Apostle rather alludeth unto both these
places, as Martyr observes.

5. But against this application of the similitude, it will be thus objected.
1. Object. Erasmus obiecteth, as he is here cited and confuted by Pet. Mart.
that the Apostle treating only of the temporal reiection of the Jews,
alludeth to that place of Jeremy, which must be understood of the temporal
rejecting and casting off the Jews. Ans. P. Mart. here answeareth, that 1.
neither in that place does the Prophet only speak of temporal things, but as
they were types and shadows also of spiritual, which must be joined together
in those prophetical predictions. 2. neither does the Apostle only here
speak of the temporal reiection and forsaking of the Jews, but of the
spiritual, as is evident, c. 10.1. mine hearts desire is, that they might be
saved, etc. he makes express mention of their salvation.

2. The Apostle seems to change the question, which was not whether the Lord
had power as the potter, to dispose of his vessels as it pleases him: but why
the Lord should complain and be angry with his work, which is made according
to his own will. Answ. 1. Tolet and Faius here answer, that for God to
complain, or be angry, is the same, as to make a vessel of dishonor: he
makes some vessels of dishonor, that is, he is angry with them, and
complains of them: but this answer satisfies not: for God complains in
Scripture and shows his anger against those, which were before ordained to
destruction: therefore Pareus here better makes this answer: that as the
potter has a double right to break in pieces the vessel which he makes, both
in respect of his power, because he is the potter, the maker and fashioner of
it, and in respect of the vessel it self, if it chance to be tainted with some
evil savor, he may with much better right break it into shiuers: so God,
beside that by the right of his Creatorship, he may dissolve that which he
made, he also is justly angry with the creature for the sin and corruption
thereof, which it has voluntarily committed.

Quest. 22. What the Apostle means, by the same lump or mass, v. 21.
1. Some by the same mass understand the sin of idolatry, wherewith the
Israelites were infected in Egypt, as well as the Egyptians, and yet the Lord
out of this mass saved the Israelites and destoyed the Egyptians: But Pet.
Martyr refuses this interpretation. 1. because that which is generally
delivered by the Apostle, they restrain to particular kind^ of men. 2. the
Apostle treats not of the punishments inflicted by God upon some rather then
others, the reason whereof is evident in the diversity of men's works: but he
speaks of the decree and purpose of God from the beginning.

2. Method. l. de resurrect. as he is cited by Oecumen. understands this
lump or mass^ of the elements, out of the which the Lord shall frame the
bodies of men in the resurrection some to rise to honor, some to dishonor: But
there is great difference between the decree o^ election and reprobation
whereof he treats here, and the execution thereof in the resurrecti^^

3. The most do understand the mass of corruption; when as all mankind by the
transgression of Adam was polluted, and enthralled under sin: so Augustine,
Vterque electus and reprobus, ex eadem massa tota damnata originaliter, etc.
Both the elect and reprobate are originally out of the same mass of damnation,
yet God as a potter out of the same mass, makes one vessel to honor, an
other to dishonor, etc. decivitat. Dei, lib. 15. c. 1. Pet. Martyr also
consents, consideravit hominem Paulus post peccatum, Paul here considers
man after his fall, as being most vile and abject both in body and mind,
etc. likewise Pareus understands here, massam corruptam, the mass of
corruption, because by this means the justice of God better appears in
judging the reprobate and showing mercy on the elect, dub. 17. Bellarmine also
lib. 2. de amiss. great. will have by this mass understood, genus humanum
peccato corruptum, whole mankind being corrupt by sin.

Beza refuses this interpretation upon these reasons. 1. because in this sense
the Lord cannot be said to make vessels of dishonor, but rather to leave them
in their natural corruption, being already vessels of dishonor. 2. if God
should first behold men as corrupt by sin, before he decreed and determined
what should become of them, this might be some imputation to his wisdom, as
first creating men before he had appointed how to dispose of them. 3. and in
this sense, the reason of Gods justice were evident, in leaving men already
corrupt, so that there would be no place for that objection of Gods injustice,
here propounded by the Apostle.

4. Therefore Beza with whom Faius concurreth, does by this mass understand
the first creation of man out of the dust of the earth: as the very term of
clay, which the Apostle uses shows, out of the which Adam was taken.

5. But I think, that by this mass we may more safely understand, generally,
the same original and beginning of man, whether in the creation, before sin
yet entered, or in his corrupt state: for if it should be restrained only to
the latter, it were a limitation of Gods power, as though he had not absolute
right to dispose of his creature, as it pleased him, without respect unto
sin: neither yet must the latter be excluded, because the Prophet takes clay
in that sense, for mankind as it now stands in the state of corruption, Isa.
45.9. showing that God may dispose of men in this world, according to his good
pleasure: And Pareus, though he resolve, dub. 17. that this mass is better
taken for the state of corruption, yet in his annotation upon the 22. v. he
comprehends both: that God has power ex eadem massa damnata, imo ex nondum
creata, out of the same damned mass, yea out of the same mass, not yet
created to make some after one fashion, some after another: for the Apostle in
alleging this similitude of the potter does not so much show what God does,
as what he may do: even as the potter has absolute power to dispose of his
clay, to make thereof what vessels he thinks good: so God out of the same
mass or matter, whether it be considered in man's creation or transgression,
may diversely dispose of his creatures, they having all one and the same
beginning, as the vessels out of the same clay.

23. Quest. Of the 22. v. What and if God would, etc.
1. What if God: some will have the 30. verse to answer unto this, what shall
we say then, etc. but then the sense should be suspended too long: Theodoret
thus expounds; if thou are desirous to know, why God punishes some, etc.
know that he does it justly bearing with patience, etc. but here too much is
inferted to make up the sense; some give this sense, quod Detu? what does God?
if he would, etc. but thus the order of the words is inverted, which stand
thus, what if God would: therefore the sense is thus best explaned: if we
understand with Augustine, if God would, etc. what would thou then answer or
object to God: or with Calvin, Beza, Pareus, who can accuse God of injustice,
etc.

2. Concerning the occasion of the words, it is this: whereas the Apostle
before insisted upon Gods absolute right and power over his creature, to
dispose of it at his pleasure, as the porter does his clay: least that the
profane might have taken occasion hereby, to have accused God of tyranny,
that he should cast off some unto everlasting destruction of his own will, now
he shows, that Gods purpose in rejecting some, and electing others, is
grounded upon most just reasons: for none are cast off but worthily for their
sin: and so the Apostle here touches the reasons both why some are cast off,
others elected: there are three reasons rendered of the former; because they are
vessels of wrath, that is God is justly offended with them for their sins;
then he shows his power in judging them, and further they abuse Gods
patience, and therefore are justly punished, the cause why God electeth others,
is for the setting forth of the riches of his glory.

3. Where they are called vessels, some of wrath, some of mercy: we are to
consider, that this word vessel is used in a threefold respect, natural,
civil, spiritual, and eternal: in the first respect, the body is said to be
a vessel with relation to the soul, because it is as the vessel thereof: as
the Apostle says, 1. These. 4.4. Let every one know how to possess his vessel
in holiness: in the Second, some are said to be vessels, in respect of their
calling public, as Paul was Gods chosen vessel, to carry abroad his truth,
Act. 9.15. private, as the woman in the family is called the weaker vessel, 1.
Pet. 3.7. But here they are called vessels in respect of Gods eternal purpose:
that some should be ordained for wrath for ever, some for everlasting glory.

4. But where the Apostle says, to show his wrath: Origin here has a note
somewhat curious: he observes that in Scripture the Lord is said to manifest
his wrath, but his goodness he hides, as Psalm. 31.29. How great is thy goodness,
which then hidest for them that fear thee, etc. and the reason he says is
this, because it is expedient for men, esse sub (...) irae, to be under the
fear of Gods wrath, etc. But the word tzaphan used in that place, signifies
as well to lay up, as hide: and in this place the Apostle speaks as well of
the declaring of the riches of Gods glory toward the vessels of mercy, as of
manifesting his power toward the vessels of wrath.

5. Now whereas the Apostle calls as well the reprobate as the elect, the
vessels of God, the one of his mercy, the other of his wrath, thereby we see,
that God uses them both, as his instruments, though not in the same manner:
for he powers of his grace into the vessels of mercy, and so makes them fit
instruments for himself; the other he uses also not by infusing that euilnes
unto them, which they have, but by moderating, ordering, and ouerruling the
same, as it pleases him.

6. We must also consider that there are two kinds of vessels of wrath, there
are some such in respect of their present state, which may become vessels of
glory, such was Paul: some are vessels of wrath in the eternal decree of
reprobation, as Judas was: and those the Apostle speaks of here.

Quest. 24. In what sense the vessels of wrath are said to be prepared to
destruction. v. 21.
1. Whereas the vessels of wrath are said to be prepared in the passive, but it
is said in the active, God has prepared the vessels of mercy, Ambrose as Pet.
Martyr cites him, ascribes the first unto God, that the vessels of wrath are
prepared to destruction, and B^^r thereunto consents: but the preparation of
the vessels of mercy he refers to Gods prescience: whereas God did not
only foresee, but ordained also the vessels of mercy: but seeing that the one
is uttered in the passive, the other in the active, the vessels of wrath are
not so prepared of God, as the vessels of mercy are.

2. Chrysostom goes an other way, for he thinks, that the vessels of wrath
are made so propria iniquitate, by their own iniquity, and the vessels of
mercy are made propria benevolentia, by their own good will, and he adds,
licet potior pars sit Dei, modicum t^^^s ipsi attulerunt, for although the
better part be Gods, yet somewhat they bring of their own: and Origin thinks
that they are called vessels of mercy, quia seipsos emundaverunt, etc. because
they have purged themselves from the filthiness of sin: But in that they are
called vessels of mercy, and God is said to prepare them, it is evident, that
it is only in God mercy, that calls them, and God prepares them, not
themselves.

3. But this is the reason of this different speech, because the vessels of
mercy God only has prepared, they have nothing of themselves: but the
vessels of wrath are partly prepared of God, partly of themselves and of
Satan: if we consider the nature of these vessels, they were created of God,
or the end it is also ordained of God, but in respect of their sin, they are
prepared of themselves by the corruption of their own nature, and by the
malice of Satan: So they are neither wholly prepared of God to destruction,
nor of themselves, but partly by both, as has been showed: See Pareus dub. 18.

Quest. 25. Of the testimony cited v. 21. out of the Prophet Hosea.
1. Concerning the allegation of the words there is some difference: for both
the order of them is inverted, and the words themselves somewhat altered, for
that clause, which the Apostle puts last, is first in that place, Hos. 1.23.
and where the Apostle says, I will call her beloved, which was not beloved,
the Prophet says, I will have mercy on her, that was not pitied: S. Peter in
alluding to this place, 1. epist. 2.10. he keeps the same words, but he
changes the order, ye were in times past not under mercy, but now have
obtained mercy: this part of the sentence he makes the last, which with the
Prophet is the first: to reconcile this doubt, 1. the vulgar Latin retains
both, beloved, which was not beloved, and she which obtained not mercy, has
obtained mercy: but Beza coniectureth well, that one of these was put into the
text out of the margen, by the unskillful writers: for there is but one in the
original. 2. Hierome to whom Erasmus subscribeth, thinks there were two
readings of this place: some had (...), not beloved, some (...), not pitied,
and the letter he would rather to be received: but seeing the first reading is
in the ancient original, as appears by the Syriake translation, it is
therefore the rather to be preferred. 3. wherefore I approve Iunius solution,
lib. 2. parall. 13. and Pareus in this place, that the Apostle in citing these
testimonies does follow the sense rather, then the words, for brevity sake,
and the better to apply them to his present purpose.

2. But as touching the scope of that place, and the meaning of the words,
whereas the Prophet seems directly to speak of the Israelites, the question
is, how the Apostle applies it to the Gentiles. 1. Origin answeareth that God
speaks not in mountains and rocks, and other terrene places, but in the
heart, there the conscience tells every one whether he belong to the people
of God or not, etc. But this is not sufficient to look unto the inward
testimony of the heart, we must have also external testimony from the
Prophets of the calling of the Gentiles, otherwise the Jews will not be
answered.

3. Therefore Chrysostom thinks, that the Apostle makes this collection a
pari, from aparitie and equality, Erasmus says, a simili, from the like, that
seeing the Israelites for their sin were cast off to be no people, they were
in the same case with the Gentiles, that were no people also, and therefore
aequa ratione vocentur, they may with as good right be called. 3. some of our
new writers, as Calvin, Pet. Martyr, think that the vocation of the Gentiles
is proved out of this place by a certain consequent: for the Prophets use,
when they denounce judgments against the people for their sins, to raise
them up with spiritual comfort again in Christ, and vbi erigitur regnum
Christi, where the kingdom of Christ is set up, there must be a concurse of
all people, from all parts of the world, Calvin.

4. Augustine whom Haymo follows, understands this place of the Jews,
which were no people, when they refused Christ, and said, we know not whom he
is, but were his people being afterward converted unto Christ as 3. thousand
were called at one sermon by S. Peter, Act. 2. But this had not been to the
Apostles purpose, who intends to prove the vocation of some from the
Gentiles.

5. Therefore the Prophet directly in that place prophesies, that they should
become the people of God. 1. because the Gentiles were known by this name, not
the people of God. 2. and of the Israelites literally it cannot be understood,
for they never returned again to be a people.

Quest. 26. What is meant by the short sum or account which God shall make in
the earth, v. 28.
1. Touching the words here alleged, they are somewhat diversely set down in
that place, Isay. 10.21.22. for there the sentence stands thus, the
consumption decreed shall overflowe with righteousness: but here the word,
ouerflowe is omitted, which some understand of the ouerflowing of the justice
and righteousness of God, by the knowledge of Christ, into all the world,
Calvin: some of the efficacy of the faith of the Gospel, which shall ouerflowe
to wash away and cover their sins as an ouerflowing stream does wash and
cover the earth, Osiand. and the word charatz, determined and decreed, is
translated abbreviated and shortened, thus the Septuagint do read that place
keeping yet the sense: which being a received translation thorough the world
which had so continued 300. years, the Apostle refuses not to follow.

2. Concerning the meaning. 1. some interpret this word consummate, to be
Christ, who was as it were abbreviated, and shortened in respect of his
incarnation, Anacletus epist. 2. Hier. epist. ad Algas. qu. 10. 2. Origin
applies it to Christ's abridging of the law into two precepts, the love of God,
and our neighbor, and to the short sum or compen^^^^ of the faith set forth
in the Creed: so also Cypr. de orat. Dom. and Haymo. 3. Tertullian
understands it of the doctrine of the Gospel which is abridged, the multitude
of legal ceremonies being cut off. lib. advers. Marcion. so also Chrysostom
and Theophylact. 4. Photius understands it of the perfection of the Gospel,
after the which no other doctrine shall succeed, as it succeeded the law. 5.
Ambrose lib. de Tobia. c. 50. refers it to the consummation or consumption
of our sins in Christ. 6. Gorrhan wresteth it to the counsels of perfection
given in the Gospel, which the law had not: but all these are wide; for the
Apostle here minds not any comparison between the law and Gospel.

3. Therefore this sense is not agreeable to the scope of the Apostle, to
understand by this short sum, the final remainder of the Israelites, that
should be saved: that like as few of them returned from the captivity of the
Chaldeans which the Prophet historically intends, so but a few of them should
come unto Christ, from the captivity of sin and Satan: and so the Apostle
to this end alleges these testimonies to prove by the Prophets the
abiection of the Jews, as he out of the former affirmed the vocation of the
Gentiles.

Quest. 27. Why God is called the Lord of hosts. v. 29.
1. In the Greek the Hebrew word Sabbath is retained, which signifies hosts:
1. Faius gives this reason, why some Hebrew words are retained in the Greek,
and some Greek in the Latin, as kirieleeson, Lord have mercy upon us, yea
and some Latin words are still kept in the Greek original, as Modius,
quadrans, consul, Centurio, and the like, that there might appear vnum corpus
ecclesiae, but one body of the Church, consisting of all these languages. 2.
But a better reason is rendered by Beza annotation: that these Hebrew words
being familiarly known, were still used of the Christians, because from the
Jews and Hebrews first was derived the Christians faith, and so from the
Greeks to the Romans: And the reason why some latin terms were taken up by
the Grecians, was the large dominion of the Romans, who together with the
bounds of their Empire, did also propagate their language. 3. but these
peregrine and strange words were not used upon any superstition, as though
there were any holiness in the words: as the Romanists for that cause may
seem to commend the use of a strange tongue in their service.

2. Now God was called the Lord of Sabbath. 1. some think in respect of the
stars and host of heaven, which the heathen worshipped, to show that he was
superior to the gods of the heathen. 2. some understand the Angels by these
hosts, Lyranus. 3. some Angels, Men, and Devils, and therefore the Prophet does
say thrice, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath; Isay. 6. Gorrhan. 4. some
think that there is a relation to the hosts of the Israelites, in the midst
whereof the Arc went in the wilderness. 5. But rather generally here must be
understood the whole host of heaven and earth, Mar. as Genesis 2. ^ and not only
in respect of the number of them, but propter (...), for the decent and comely
order, wherein all things were made: Faius. 6. and this title is given unto God
in the old Testament, not in the New, to signify, that the law was then data
in timore, given in fear, but in the new in love, Hug.

28. Quest. What is understood by seed.
1. Origin by this seed understands Christ, who as the seed is left in the
earth, so he was to be buried, and rise again, and so fructify to the
everlasting good of his Church: but for this seed, we had all been as Sodom,
still in our sins: Iunius in his parallels upon this place misliketh not this
application to Christ; thinking, that whereas the Prophet has the word sarid,
remnant, the Apostle of purpose turned it seed, with reference to Christ, that
came of the Jews; but Beza and Martyr reject this, as not agreeable to the
scope of the Apostle here. 2. Photius in Oecumen. understands the Apostles,
but for whose preaching, the whole world had been left in their sins as
Sodom. 3. Gorrhan interprets this seed to be the word, without the which we
had been as Sodom and Gomorrha, paret essemus in poena. quia similes in
culpa, we should have been equal in punishment, because like in sin. gloss
ordinar. 4. But the Prophet has relation to the overthrow and destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrha, wherein there were none left, Chrysostom. save only Lot and
his company, who were strangers, and so not of the city: so without Gods
mercy the people had been utterly destroyed in the captivity of Babylon, if
the Lord had not reserved a remnant to himself: and so when Christ came to
offer them spiritual deliverance, the whole nation generally refused him,
only a small number cleaued unto Christ: thus Martyr, Pareus.

29. Quest. How the Gentiles obtained righteousness that sought it not, and the
Jews missed of it, that sought it.
1. Whereas this might seem a strange paradox, that they which seek
righteousness, should not have it, and they which seek it not, obtained it;
Origin thinks here, by a distinction to dissolve this knot: it is one thing,
says he, sectari, to follow, which is understood of a prescript form of
doctrine, such as the written law was, which the Gentiles had not, and
therefore could not follow it: it is an other thing to follow the law of
nature, which the Gentiles had, and followed: but the Apostle here speaks not
of any law, which the Gentiles followed at all, but that they obtained that,
which they neither sought not followed.

2. Chrysostom thinks that the Apostle shows here the reason of the
electing of the Gentiles, and rejecting of the Jews, namely the faith of the
one, and the incredulity of the other: But these are not the causes of the
decree of election, and reprobation, but the effects: for three things the
Apostle treats of in this chapter concerning election, and reprobation, of
the beginning thereof in Gods decree, of the end, which is the glory of God,
which two the Apostle has handled hitherto, and of the means, says of the
one, and incredulity of the other, which the Apostle touches here.

3. Tolet here distinguishes between the law of righteousness, and
righteousness it self: the Jews followed the law, but not righteousness,
because they did not the works of the law, but abounded in sin: but it is
evident, that the Apostle by the law of righteousness, understands the
perfection, which the law required, which were the works of the law, unto the
which the Jews attained not.

4. Some by the law understand only the ceremonies and rites of the law, by
observing whereof the Jews could not attain unto righteousness: but it is
evident that throughout this epistle the Apostle understands even the works
of the moral law, as c. 7. he directly makes mention of that law, whereof one
precept is, thou shall not lust.

5. Some make a difference here between, iustitiam legis, ex lege, the justice
of the law, and justice by the law: the justice of the law, is such works,
which the law requires, but the justice by the law, is such works as men do
according to the prescript of the law, of their own strength without faith:
the Apostle rejects this in the matter of justification, but not the other:
to this purpose Bellarmine lib. 1. iustificat. c. 19. And so the Apostle here
says, that the Jews sought the law of righteousness, but while by their own
power they sought to fulfill it, they could not attain unto it: he alleges
to this purpose Angustine, who says, iustitiam legis non implet iustitia quae
ex lege est, lib. 3. cont. 2. epist. Pelag. c. 7.
etc. the righteousness which is of the law fulfilleth not the righteousness
of the law, etc. and the righteousness by the law he interprets to be that,
quam homo suis viribus facit, etc. which a man does by his own strength.

But 1. it is evident, that the Apostle indifferently uses these phrases, the
righteousness of the law, and by or from the law: as he takes the
righteousness (...), of God, Romans 3.22. and (...), by or from God, Phil. 3.9.
for one and the same: so whether we say the righteousness of faith, which the
Apostle calls the law of faith, Romans 3.27. and the word of faith. Romans 10.8.
or the righteousness (...), by or through faith, there is no difference, but
in words. 2. Origin has the like curious distinction upon these words of the
Apostle, Romans 3.30. who shall justify circumcision of faith, and
uncircumcision through faith, between (...), of faith, and (...), through
faith, he makes this difference; that to be justified ex fide, of faith, is to
begin with faith, and end with works, and to be justified through faith, is
to begin with works and end with faith, etc. whereas the Apostle intends
one and the same manner of justification: the like curiosity there is in this
distinction, between the righteousness of the law, and by the law.

3. And the very words of the Apostle, They followed the righteousness of the
law, show as much, which he interprets afterward, They sought it by the
works of the law, that is by the righteousness of the law: the works of the
law, are the righteousness of the law, which are excluded from justification,
Romans 3.28. neither did the Jews so cleave unto the works of the law, as that
they excluded the grace of God: for the Pharisie in his vain glorious prayer,
Luke 18. gives formal thanks unto God. 4. And although Augustine seem to
make some difference between these terms, yet he is far off from thinking,
that we are justified by the fulfilling of the law, but by faith only: his
meaning only is, that we have no power to do the works of the law of our
selves, but by the grace of Gods spirit; and concerning justification by faith
only, and not by works, he says, quantaelibet fuisse vertutis antiquos
iustos praedicas, lib. 1. cont. 2. epist. Pelag. c. 21.
non eos salvos fecit nisii fides, of how great value soever you report the
ancient righteous persons to have been, nothing saved them but their faith,
etc.

5. Some by the righteousness of the law in the first place understand the
righteousness prescribed in the law, but in the latter, the true
righteousness of the Evangelical law: and make this to be the sense, while
they followed the legal righteousness, they could non attain unto veram
iustificationis rationem, the true way of justification, Calvin, quae est
propria Evangelij, which is peculiar and proper to the Gospel, Hyper. so also
Tolet, and Lyranus understands in the latter place, legem fidei Catholicae,
the law of the Catholic faith; and before them Origin thus expounds, that
while they followed the law according to the letter, they attained not unto the
law of the spirit: for if the Apostle did mean the same law, he would not have
said, that they attained not unto that law, which they had: to this purpose
Origin: But the Apostle says not, they attained unto, or had the law of
righteousness, but only followed it; and in both places the law of
righteousness is taken in the same sense: that whereas the Jews endeavored
by keeping of the law to be justified, they failed, and came short even of that
justice which they sought for in keeping of the law: Martyr, Pareus, and so
Chrysostom excellently shows a threefold difference here between the Gentiles
and the Jews: first the Gentiles 1. found justice, 2. which they sought not
for, 3. and the most perfect justice, even of faith, which exceeded the justice
of the law: But the Jews, 1. missed of justice, 2. which they earnestly sought
for, 3. yea they attained not unto the justice of the law, which is the less
and inferior kind of justice, because they sought not aright, namely by faith.

Quest. 30. How Christ is said to be a stumbling stone and rock of offense, v.
33.
1. In the citing of this testimony three things are to be noted. 1. that this
former testimony is collected out of two places of Isay, the first words, I
lay in Sion a stone, are taken out of the 28. c. v. 16. the other, a rock of
offense, and a stumbling stone, are found, c. 8.14. 2. The Apostle in both
places admits diverse words, only alleging that, which was most pertinent
to his purpose. 3. whereas the Prophet says, I lay in Sion, lapidem
probationis, a stone of trial, and the Apostle translateth it, lapidem
offendiculi, a stumbling stone, Iunius lib. 2. parall. 15. does thus reconcile
them, that which the Prophet sets down in general, that Christ is a stone
of trial to all, the Apostle does particularly apply, and by way of
consequent unto believers: that unto them, he is a stone of trial, in that
they take occasion to stumble at him: But other interpreters think, that these
words, a stumbling stone, and rock of offense, are rather cited out of the
other place, Isai, 8.14. where both these words are found.

2. How Christ is a stumbling stone and rock of offense, is diuersely
interpreted. 1. the ordinary gloss which Gorrhan follows, does thus
earnestly distinguish between a rock and a stone, the one is rough and
vnhewne, the stone is wrought and fashioned: so Christ was a rock of offense,
before he was as it were hewed and squared in his passion, when they took
offense at Christ, because he made himself the Son of God: but in his
passion, he was a stone to stumble at, for then most of all they were offended
at him. But this is too curious. 2. Faius thinks that he was a rock of
offense and scandal in respect of the Jews, and a stumbling stone to the
Gentiles: the one were thereby turned out of the way, and the other were kept
from coming into the way: But this is alleged specially against the Jews,
that stumbled at Christ: as he was a stumbling block to them, so he was
foolishnes to the Gentiles. 3. Tolet annot. 39. does thus distinguish these
two: the stone to stumble at, is the stone, which men fall upon, and so the
Jews were offended at Christ; the rock of offense, is that which falls upon
them: so Christ was lapis offensionis propter eorum incredulitatem, a stumbling
stone, because of their incrudulitie: and a rock of offense, per punitionem,
by their punishment: so the ordinary gloss. Christ is called the one in
respect of his stare and condition, quo apparuit malis, wherein he appeared to
the evil: and the other, in regard of that, quod in futura faciet malis, which
in time to come he shall do unto the wicked in punishing of them: he is a
stumbling stone, in praesenti per culpam, in the present by their fault, which
believed not upon him: in futura per poenam, and a rock of offense in time to
come by their punishment: Gorrhan. And this difference Tolet would further
approve, by the signification of the words: for abeu is a little stone, fir
for one to stumble at, but tzur a rock, is a great stone able to ouerwhelme
one: and both these kind of offenses are noted by our Savior, Matthew. 21.44.
Whosoever shall fall on that stone shall be broken, but on whom it falls, he
shall be broken all to powder: so Augustine well observes this difference,
sermon. 40. de verb. Domini. Iudaeos offendisse in Christum, etc. that the Jews
stumbled at Christ, when he was a small stone in the world: but being a great
rock in the day of judgment, he shall fall upon them, etc.

All this is a truth, that Christ shall fall upon them, that fell and were
offended at him: but this is not the Apostles meaning here, for he alleges
this testimony for proof of that, which he alleges before, they have
stumbled at the stumbling stone: And Saint Peter likewise understands this
place, that Christ passiuely is a stone and rock of offense to stumble at, not
actiuely in falling upon them, 1. Pet. 2.8. a stone to stumble at, and a rock
of offense to them which stumble at the word, etc. so then the one word is
(...), an exposition of the former.

3. Now these were the things, which the Jews were offended at in Christ, 1.
at the vilitie and baseness of his person: for they expected a glorious Messiah,
that should be of power and state in the world. 2. at his conversation, because
he did company with sinners: 3. at his doctrine, because he reprooueth them
for their corruptions of life, and superstitious doctrines, Martyr, Pareus. 4.
They blasphemed both his humanity, in saying he was a man given to eating and
drinking, a companion of Publicans and sinners, and in blaspheming his divine
nature, saying that he cast out devils through Beelzebub the prince of the
devils.

4. But where it is said, I lay in Sion a stumbling block, four things are
here observed. 1. who lays this stone God. 2. who was this stone, Christ. 3.
where laid, in Sion, in the Church of God, among the Jews: to what end, to
stumble at: yet this was not the principal end for Christ was appointed to be
a precious, and eiect stone: but he is, a stone to stumble at, through the
obstina^ie and hardness of heart of unbelievers: both these ends are set forth
by Simeon, Luke 2.34. This child is appointed for the fall and rising again of
many in Israel: and by Saint Peter, 1. ep. c. 2.7. Unto you which believe, it
is a precious (stone) etc. and to those, which are disobedient, etc. a stone,
to stumble at: But the principal (...) which the Lord intends, is the
building and raising up of many by this stone: the accidental end, is the
falling, and stumbling of many through their own unbelief.

Quest. 31. Of the meaning of these words, he that believes in him shall not
be ashamed.
1. The Apostle here follows the translation of the Septuagint in the
original Isay. 28.16, the words are, be that believes, shall not make have:
Beza thinks, that the Septuagint for iachish, which signifies, be made have;
did read (...), ashamed: But allowing that the Septuagint did read the
original, as now it is, there is no great difference in the sense: for that
which the Prophet did express by metaphor, the Septuagint do mandate
properly: Tolet annot. 35. or rather they put the consequent for the
antecedent, (...) the effect for the (...): because he which is rash and makes
have, is ashamed in the end, and confounded him. lib. 2. per act. 15.

2. Touching the meaning of the Prophets words, be that beleeueth^ shall not
make have: 1. Lyranus gives this sense: that in the prophets times, the
faithful should with patience wait for the coming of the Messiah, and not
seek to prevent the time: and when the Messiah should come in the flesh, they
should not make have, in wishing his second coming before the time. 2. Paulus
Burgensis thinks to mend this exposition, and makes it (...) worse: he
understands it of those; which were not hasty to believe in Christ, but yet
at the length believed, as Christ says to his two Disciples, Luke 24.25. O
slow of heart to believe all, that the Prophets have spoken: But this was a
rebuke unto them, whereas the other is a commendation of those which believe.

3. Martyr better expounds it of the patience of the Saints, which do wait
for the fulfilling of Gods promises in due time, not hasting to use unlawful
means: and more particularly the Prophet there reprooueth those which would
not wait upon God for his deliverance, but depended upon present helps; Iun.
annot. as also it has a spiritual application against those, which made have
in endeavoring to be justified by their own works, and so prevented and
forestalled their justification by faith.

4. And whereas the Apostle says, shall not be confounded: some do refer it
to the day of judgment, when the faithful shall not be confounded or ashamed,
cum venerit no futuro, when Christ shall come in judgment: gloss. interline.
Haymo: But it is more general, showing that the faithful neither in the time
present, nor to come shall be ashamed; and not to be confounded, signifies,
non frustrari, not to be frustrate or disappointed of their hope; Mar, and here
more is understood then said, he shall not be confounded, that is, shall be
confirmed, comforted, established, Faius: so David says, Psalm. 25.1. In thee
have I trusted, let me not be confounded.

Quest. 32. Whether it be the property of faith to make one not to be ashamed,
which is ascribed to hope. c. 5.5.
This doubt is easily removed, for though hope have this property, that he
which has a steadfast hope in the end, is not ashamed, because he is made
partaker of his hope, whereas he which has a vain confidence, is abashed and
ashamed, when he sees himself deceived, and disappointed, yet this property
hope has, because it is grounded upon faith, which is by the Apostle called
the ground of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. therefore this effect, not to be
ashamed, is ascribed also to faith, because it is always accompanied with
hope, and hope is included in faith: Martyr.

4. Places of Doctrine.
Doct. 1. Concerning oaths.
v. 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not. 1. hence it is evident, that it is
not lawful to swear by any creatures but only by God: for whereas an oath is
nothing else but an appealing unto the testimony and judgment of God, who
both searches the heart, and punishes perjury, for the confirmation of the
truth in a doubtful matter: and so two things are requisite in him, whom we
swear by, both knowledge to discern the heart, and power to judge, because
both these are peculiar to God, to be a searcher and knower of the heart, and
to be able to punish: therefore it follows, that God only is to be called to
witness in an oath; and beside it is a part of invocation, which only
belongs unto God. 2. hence also we have an evident argument of the divine
nature of Christ, because the Apostle here swears by his name. 3. As also
here we learn how oaths may be distinguishe^ and the diverse kinds of them: as
there is an oath called promissorium, a promising oath, which is of the time to
come, when one promises and undertakes by his oath, to do this or that: as
Eliah swear unto Obadiah, that he would show himself, that day unto the King,
1. king. 18.15. there is assertorium, an affirming oath, which is of the time
present or past, as when one swears, that such a thing was done or not, or
such a thing is true: and this kind of oath is either iudiciale, in public
judgment, when an oath is required of the parties, or voluntarium, when one
takes a voluntary oath, such is the Apostles here.

Doct. 2. Of the moderation to be used by Preachers.
v. 2. I have great heaviness, etc. S. Paul, thought in this chapter he be to
entreat of the reiection and reprobation of the Jews for their unbelief, yet
he first shows his loving affection unto them: neither concealing the truth
for affection, not yet exasperating them with rigorous speech: so the Preachers
of the word, should use such moderation, that neither in their silence and
forbearing to speak the truth, they should incur the just suspicion of
flattery, nor yet in their sharp invectiues against those, whom they do
reprove, they should be justly blamed for their indiscreet severity: Mar.

Doct. 3. That Christ is God and man.
v. 5. Who is God over all, etc. 1. Christ is God, because the Apostle swears
by his name, v. 1. and he is called God blessed over all, etc. 2. he is also
perfect man, because he is said to come of the fathers concerning the flesh,
etc. 3. and yet these two natures concur to make but one person, because it
is said of Christ, who is God over all blessed for ever, etc.

Doct. 4. Of the diverse kinds of divine promises.
v. 8. Children of promise etc. some promises are general to all, as that the
world should no more be destroyed with water, that the seasons of the year, as
seed time and harvest, and the rest should continue: or peculiar to the Church
of God, which are either concerning things temporal, comprehended under the
name of bread in the Lords prayer, which the Lord promises so far sorth as
he sees it to be meet and convenient: or spiritual, which are either
peculiar unto some special callings, as were the gift of tongues, knowledge of
secrets, elocution and utterance to the Apostles: or general, belonging to the
whole Church, and the same external, as the promise of the word and
Sacraments, or internal, as of faith, hope, justification, remission of
sins: The Apostle speaks here of spiriuall and special promises, which
were shadowed forth in those times by temporal blessings.

Doct. 5. Of election.
v. 11. That the purpose of God might remain according to election, etc.
Concerning election these points are hence concluded: 1. that God has decreed
some to be elected unto salvation before the beginning of the world. 2. That
the decree of election is the purpose of God to show mercy on some in,
bringing them unto glory. 3. that the free and gracious purpose of God is
only the cause of election, without the foresight of faith or works. 4. that
it is certain and immutable. 5. the effects thereof are vocation,
justification, sanctification, c. 8.30. whom he predestinate them he called,
etc. 6. the ends two, the happiness of the elect, and the glory and praise of
God, in the setting forth of his mercy.

Doct. 6. Of reprobation.
v. 18. Whom he will he hardens: Concerning reprobation, these points also
are here set forth. 1. that some are reprobate from the beginning, as God hated
Esau before he was borne. 2. what reprobation is, the purpose of God in leaving
some in the mass of corruption, and in ordaining them to be damned for their
sins. 3. the cause of reprobation, is the purpose of God to leave some in
their natural corruption. 4. the effects are, desertion, hardening of heart,
the subtraction of the grace of God. 5. the ends, the just condemnation of the
wicked, and the demonstration of the power of God. See more hereof among the
Controv. following.

Doct. 7. Of scandals and offenses.
v. 33. Rock of offense. 1. A scandale is any thing done or said, whereby one
is made the worse, either of himself or by some accident. 2. it is of two
sorts, given justly, or unjustly taken, as the offense at Christ was taken and
not given. 3. the cause of offenses, is first the malice of Satan, and
obstinacy of unbelievers, and the just judgment of God concurring there
withal, as the Jews by their own blindness stumbled at Christ, and received
that as a punishment of their unbelief.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. That succession of Bishops is no sure note of the Church of Christ.
v. 5. Of whom came the fathers: 1. Though the Jews might allege, that they
had the fathers, yea, they could show a perpetual succession of high Priests
from Aaron until the times of our blessed Savior, yet for all this they were
rejected, and not acknowledged for the Church of God: In like manner the
Romanists, pleading for themselves by succession of Bishops, do but build upon
a weak ground, unless they could also show a continual succession of true
doctrine, together with an outward succession of persons and pace.

2. Our Blessed Savior was a Priest after Melchisedech, without any such
continued succession, and the Apostles, the first planters of the Gospel, could
show no succession from the high Priests: neither is it necessary in these
times, where religion is corrupted, and the Church deformed, to expect a local
succession for the restoring of religion.

3. Yet the succession of godly Bishops is much to be accounted of where the
true faith is continued withal: and for this reason did the fathers,
Tertullian, Irenaeus, Augustinae, ascribe so much to the succession of
Christian Bishops, who transmitted unto their successors true and found
doctrine together with their place: See more of succession, Synops. Centur. 1.
err. 20.

2. Controv. Against the old heretics the Manichees, Arrians, Nestorians,
confuted out of the 5. v.
1. Where the Apostle says; of whom came Christ according to the flesh, the
Manichees are confuted, which denied Christ to have any true flesh, but only
in show; whereas the Apostle says, that Christ came of the Israelites
concerning the flesh: he therefore had true (...), because he took his nature
of them. Likewise their heresy is confuted, that think Christ brought his
body, from heaven, and took it not of the Virgin Marie: for then how could it
be true, that Christ according to the flesh came of the fathers?

2. The Arrians also are confuted, who denied Christ to be God, but only
affirmed him to be a creature: for the Apostle says of Christ, who is God
blessed for ever: as Athanasius epist. ad Epictet. urges this place against
those, which denied the humanity of Christ: so Tertullian. lib. de Trinit.
Hilar. lib. de Trinit. Theophylact upon this place do allege it against
those, which impugn the divine nature of Christ.

3. The Nestorians also which denied the uniting of Christ's two natures into
one person, but only affirmed it to be by grace, are here refelled: for the
Apostle speaks of one and the same Christ, which according to the flesh came
of the fathers, yet was God above all blessed for ever: Ireneus lib. 3. cap.
18. applies this place against such a like heresy of those which divided
Jesus from Christ, and affirmed Jesus to be one, and Christ an other.

3. Controv. Against the profane and impious collections of Eniedinus, and
Socinus late heretics.
Whereas the Apostle expressly says of Christ, who is God over all, blessed
for ever, etc. these two forenamed heretics contend by their impious cavills
to show, that Christ's divine nature is not proved out of this place.

1. This phrase, who is blessed for ever, is always in Scripture given unto
God the father: as Romans 1.23. 2. Cor. 1.3. and 11.31.

2. Not every one, that is called God in Scripture, is consequently that chief
and great God.

3. Christ is said to be over all, that is, men, as the most excellent man of
all, not over all whatsoever.

4. He is said to be over all with a limitation, for he is not over him that
has subdued all things unto him, 1. Cor. 15.27.

5. And in that he is over all, he has it not by nature but of gift, Philip.
2.9.

Contra. Erasmus seems first to have given occasion to these newfangled
Dogmatists, who likewise in his annotations upon this place, thinks this
Scripture not so fit to prove the divine nature of Christ: adding that herein
there is no danger, seeing there are more direct places to prove Christ's
Godhead by: But Pet. Martyr here answeareth well, non convenit vt Ecclesiae
armamentarium sine causa exhauriatur, etc. it is not convenient, that the
armorie of the Church should without cause be diminished: seeing the fathers,
as Origin, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Cyprian, cont. lud. lib. 2. c. 5. Hilarious in
Psalm. 122. do all allege this place for the proof of Christ's deity, it is
not fit, that we should suffer it to be wrestled out of our hands: their
cauills are thus answered.

1. Where the father is said to be blessed for ever, the Son is not excluded,
and in some places Christ is said expressly to be blessed for ever, as Matthew.
21.9. Blessed is be that comes in the name of the Lord: and if the Creator be
blessed for ever, Christ is included by whom all things were created, Ioh. 1.
Coloss. 1.

2. He which is said to be God over all, as Christ here, must of necessity be
that chief and great God.

3. Some indeed read super omnia, over all things, as Origin, the Syrian and
Latin interpreter: and this is agreeable to that place, Coloss. 1.17. He is
before all things, and in him all things consist: and the Apostle names both
things visible and invisible: and so Origin well expounds, he is above all
things, that is, powers, principalities, and every thing that is named.

4. He is above all things, that is, all creatures, and above all, as the
father is above all, and yet neither above the Son or the holy Ghost: the
father then is here excepted: for Christ and his father are one, non post
patrem ipse, sed de patre, he is not after the father, but of the father,
Origin.

5. S. Paul in that place speaks of the exaltation of Christ as he is
Mediator and according to his humane nature: and so he has it by gift: but as
he is God, he is over all by his eternal generation, as the only begotten
Son of God.

Controv. 4. That the water in Baptism does not sanctify or give grace.
Chrysostom shows here a fit analogy and resemblance between the birth of
Izaak o^ Sara by the word of promise, v. 9. and our spiritual regeneration in
baptism: the barren womb of Sarah, he likeneth to the water, which of it
self has no efficacy, erat vterni ille aqua frigidior, propter sterilitatem
and senectutem, that womb was more unapt for generation, then water, because
of the barrenness and old age thereof: like as then Izaak was borne of that
barren womb by the word of promise, ita and nos oportet ex verbo nasci, so we
are borne of the word: To this purpose Chrysostom, who makes the element of
water of it self but a dead thing, and like unto Sarahs barren womb, which
could not have conceived, but by the word of promise: So the Apostle says,
Ephesians. 5.25. Cleansing it by the washing of water thorough the word: the water
cleanses, but by the operation of the word: This then overthrows that
opinion of the Romanists, which affirm that the sacramental sign in the
sacraments confer grace: See further hereof, Synops. Centur. 2. err. 76.

Controv. 5. Against the vain observation of Astrologers in casting of
nativities.
v. 10. Rebecca, when she had conceived by one, etc. Augustine lib. 2. de
doctrine. Christian. c. 21. by this Scripture confuteth the folly of
Mathematicians, who in casting of men's natiuities do observe the aspect of the
planets, and so do calculate and conjecture of the disposition of men: for
Esau and Jacob were borne at the same time of one and the same parents, and yet
they were of diverse dispositions and qualities, and conditions of life.

Controv. 6. That the souls had no beeng in a former life, before they came
into the body.
It was Origens error who therein did too much Platonize, that the souls in
the former life, according to their works good or evil, were accordingly
appointed of God to salvation or damnation. But this error is evidently
convinced by the Apostle here: for Esau and Jacob had neither done good nor
evil, before they were borne: Lyranus adds two other reasons to convince
this error. 1. if there had been an other life before, then the world was not
created in the beginning, as it is said Genesis 1.1. for that the souls had a
being and beginning before. 2. and temporale non potest esse causa aeterni, no
temporal thing can be the cause of that which is eternal: the actions then
and works of the soul, could not be the cause of the act of Gods eternal
will.

Controv. 7. Whether the foresight of faith or works be the cause of election.
This was in time past maintained by the followers of the Pelagian sect, as it
appears by the epistles of Prosper and Hilarious Arelatens. sent to Augustine:
and not much differing is the opinion of the Greek expositors: as Theodoret in
these words ( that the purpose of God might remain according to election,)
understands the purpose of men foreseen of God, according to the which he
electeth: But the Apostle evidently calls it the purpose of God, and
therefore not of men: Chrysostom. and Photius cited by Oecumenius, do here
understand the purpose of God: but where it is added, according to election,
they say this election presupposes a difference and diversity of wills
foreseen of God.

The late Lutherans tread in the same steppes^ who at the first did hold that
the foresight of faith was the cause of election: but now they have somewhat
refined that assertion: and their opinion now is, fidem non esse electionis
causam meritoriam, sed instrument alem, that faith is not the meritorious but
the isntrumental cause of election: their arguments are these.

1. Argum. Photius thus reasons: electio de illis fit; qui aliqua in re
differunt, election is said to be of those, which differ in some thing: God
then did see some difference in them which he elected from others.

Contra. 1. Augustine at the first was somewhat moved with this argument,
which made him devise an other sense of the Apostles words, to this effect:
that it was said unto the children being not yet borne, and before they had
done either good or evil, the elder shall serve the younger: least the purpose
of God should remain according to election, which he supposes to rise of some
difference in the parties elected: to this purpose Augustine, lib. ad
Simplician. quest. 2. But this parenthesis, or interlaced sentence is ^^tered
by the Apostle affirmatively, That the purpose of God might remain, etc. it
cannot therefore be drawn to a negative sense: And indeed Augustine whether
upon this or some other reason, otherwise expounds these words, epist. 115.

2. But the best answer is, that the proposition is not true, for election in
God presupposes not a difference: God may make election even in things in
themselves equal, by the right of his Creatorship, and make a difference: as
evidently appears in the creation of the world, when all things were equal
at the first, in that indigested himpe and mass, whereout the creatures were
made: and yet our of it were different creatures made: some lightsome, as the
Sun and stars, some dark and obscure, as the earth and earthly things: And
so the Lord in his decree of predestination made a difference in his election,
according to his good pleasure of things, which differed not before: And so
there is a difference indeed in those which are elected from others, sed non
invenit Deus, sed ponit ipse in hominibus differentiam, but God finds not any
such difference in men, but he makes it, Pet. Martyr: the difference then
depends not of the nature of the things, but of the purpose and counsel of
God.

2. Arg. 1. S. Paul says, Ephesians. 1.4. He has elected us in him, that is, in
Christ: but none are in Christ without faith: that then which joins us to
Christ, is the cause of election. 2. again, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. we are said to be
chosen to salvation in faith. 3. and Heb. 11.6. It is impossible to please God
without faith: the elect are pleasing to God: therefore by faith they were
accepted. 4. and seeing faith is the isntrumental cause of salvation, why not
also of election? Thus the Lutherans reason for the foresight of faith.

Contra. 1. Not every thing whereby we are joined unto Christ, is the cause of
election: but that whereby we were first given unto Christ, which is the
absolute and free mercy of God: who elected us of his free grace and mercy,
and in Christ appointed to bring those whom he elected unto eternal life: And
the Apostle does expound himself, what he means, by being elected in
Christ: that is, he has predestinate us to be adopted thorough Christ: faith
then in Christ is not the cause of election, but a mean subordinate to bring
the elect unto salvation.

2. We are said to be chosen in faith, not faith foreseen, as the cause of
election, but in faith present as a mean unto salvation.

3. The same answer may serve to the third place objected: which must be
understood likewise, de fide praesenti, non praevisa, of faith present, not of
faith foreseen: for God thorough his mercy elected us, being yet his
enemies: his love therefore was before any foresight of faith: by his mercy he
made us acceptable unto himself, by the election of grace, before he saw any
thing in us.

4. It follows not, that every thing which is the cause of salvation should
be the cause of election: it is true in the general cause, which is the mercy
of God, which causes as well the one as the other: but not in the next and
immediate causes: as for example, the father is the cause of his son, and the
son of the nephew, and yet the son is not the cause of the father; so election
is the cause of faith, and faith of salvation: but it therefore follows not
that faith should be the cause of election. And Hunnius that was at the first a
great patron of this cause, in the end argues, that faith in the mystery of
election was to be considered neither vt causam meritoriam, as a meritorious or
isntrumental cause, sed vt partem illius ordinis, etc. but as a part of that
order which God had appointed, that is, a mean unto salvation, Pareus dub. 6.

3. Arg. If God simply should elect some and refuse others without foresight of
their faith: how is he not an accepter of persons?

Ans. The accepting of person is, when against the rule of justice a man of no
good parts or qualites is preferred before him that is well qualified: But
there is no fear of this in Gods election: for he finds all alike in
themselves: none endued with any good gifts or qualities, but as he gives
them: therefore herein he is no accepter of persons, in preferring one before
an other, all being alike. Now on the contrary side, that the foresight of
faith or any thing in man is not the cause of election, but only the good
pleasure and will of God, it may be thus further confirmed.

1. The Apostle in saying, not by works, but by him that calls, excludes
whatsoever in man: for if either the foresight of faith or of any other thing,
and not only of works should be the cause of election, then it should not be
only in the caller, as the Apostle here says, Mart. Pareus, Tolet annot. 19.

2. The effect of election is not the cause: faith with the fruits thereof are
the effects of election, Ephesians. 1.4. he has chosen us that we should be holy:
Pareus.

3. The eternal decree of God is not founded in that which is temporary: the
faith or good works of men are but temporary things: and therefore they
cannot be the ground and foundation of Gods eternal decree. Faius.

4. Faith is the work of God, Ioh. 6.29. therefore not the cause of his
election: so the same thing, should be the cause of it self: and so also be
before it self. Pareus.

5. If election depended upon the foresight of good works, then it would
follow, that we are justified by works: for from election and predestination
proceeds our vocation, and from vocation justification: and if election be
out of the foresight of works, then justification also which follows election
by degrees. Mart.

6. Lyranus adds this reason further, Deus non vult finem propter ea, quae
sunt ad finem, God will not appoint the end for those things which tend unto
the end: but rather these are for the end: now faith and works are but the
way to the end, and therefore they cannot be the cause of the appointment of
the end, that is, that men should attain unto everlasting glory: Lyran. upon
this place.

7. Tolet also annot. 16. urges this reason: whereas the Apostle says, v. 14.
is there iniquity with God? if he had meant that the difference in the decree
of election arises out of the foresight of faith, then the reason had been
apparent, and there had been no show at all of any injustice in God, and so no
place for this objection at all: See further of this question before, c. 8.
contr. 16.

Controv. 8. That not only election unto grace, but unto glory also is only
of the good will of God.
Stapleton antidot. p. 126. will have this place of the Apostle to be
understood only of election unto grace, which is the first effect and fruit
thereof, and this only proceeds from the free grace and mercy of God, but
the election unto glory, which is the last effect thereof is not without the
foresight of works: he reasons thus.

Argum. Election to glory is not only of him that calls, for it is also by
justification, for whom he justified he also glorified, Romans 8.30. but the
election whereof the Apostle speaks here is only of the caller, therefore he
speaks not here of election unto glory, but of election only to the first
grace.

Contra. 1. Other Romanists herein dissent from Stapleton, as Bellarmine lib.
2. de great. c. 15. shows that men are freely elected not only unto grace,
but unto glory: so also Peter. disput. 5. and before them Thomas in his
commentary denies, that praescientia meritorum, the foresight of merits is
the cause of predestination to glory; likewise Lyran. here.

2. And for the argument: Glorification, as well as grace is only of God that
calls as the efficient cause: justification goes before glorification, not
as an efficient, or meritorious cause, but as a mean appointed of God to that
end.

3. But that the Apostle speaks evidently of election as well unto glory as
unto grace it is evident. 1. he treats of election unto the promise: for he
makes express mention of the children of the promise, v. 8. but the promise
comprehends both the first grace in our vocation, and the rest that follow,
justification, glorification. 2. he speaks of election joined with the
dilection and love of God, Jacob have I loved: but whom God loved he loves to
the end, and brings them unto eternal life. 3. v. 23. the Apostle in direct
terms makes mention of the vessels of mercy prepared to glory: he
therefore speaks here of election to glory.

Controv. 9. That the Apostle treats as well of reprobation in this place, as
of election.
Huberus, who defends universal grace, will have the Apostle here only to
speak of election, and not of reprobation: for he holds all generally to be
elected: the same is the assertion of Stapleton antid. p. 565. against Calvin,
that S. Paul treats only of election here, and not of reprobation at all: he
reasons thus.

Argum. 1. Only election is of God that calls, the purpose of God is
according to election, therefore the purpose of God is of election.

Answ. 1. The purpose of God is according to election, but not only, which
must be assumed, or else nothing can be concluded: but the purpose of God is as
well concerning reprobation as election: the purpose and counsel of God is
general to both, and it sorteth it else either into the purpose of election or
reprobation.

2. And that the Apostle intends in this discourse, as well to speak of
reprobation as of election, it thus appears. 1. by the text it self: he
expressly mentions both the love of God to Jacob, and his hatred of Esau, v.
22.23. he speaks of the vessels of wrath and of the vessels of mercy. 2. so
much also is insinuated by the nature and property of election: for an
election of some supposes that there is a reiection and reprobation of others:
As when Moses says unto Israel, the Lord chose you above all people, it
follows that as they were elected, so all the rest were refused and rejected.

Controv. 10. Whether as well the decree of reprobation, as of election, be
without the foresight of works.
Here are two opinions opposite in two extremes one to the other; the one was
of the Pelagians, who utterly condemned the absolute decree of reprobation,
without any respect of works; and Catharinus also in his commentaries upon this
epistle: some other do make the decree of reprobation and damnation to be a
free act of the will and purpose of God, as election is. But beside these there
is a third opinion between both, that the decree of reprobation, neither
issues only from the free and absolute will of God, not yet altogether
depends of the foresight of sin; but proceeds in part from them both. We
will now examine these opinions in order.

1. Of the first sort that hold the decree of reprobation altogether to
proceed from the foresight of sin, some do hold strange paradoxes, as
Catharinus before named, whose opinion is this, that God appointed all to be
saved, but some absolutely, as Marie, and other holy men and women, some
conditionally, if they believed and did works, they should be saved, if
otherwise, they should be damned; not much differing is the opinion of Becanus,
a late Popish writer, who affirms that God simply in the beginning appointed
all to be saved voluntate primaria, by his first and principal will, but
secundaria voluntate, by his secundarie will he would some to be condemned for
their sin, cap. 1. loc. 12. de pradestinat. etc. 5. loc. 4.

But the former of these opinions, is distasted by the Romanists themselves, as
Pererius in c. 8. ad Romans disput. 25. refuses it upon this reason, because vna
est ratio, etc. there is one and the same reason of all that are predestinate
unto salvation; how then can some be certainly appointed and absolutely, some
uncertainly and conditionally; for all which are ordained unto life, are
written in the book of life, out of the which none can be blotted out. And
against Becanus assertion it may thus be objected.

1. If God indeed would have all to be saved, why are not all saved? for none
can resist the will of God; this then shows either God to be impotent in not
performing his will, or variable in changing his purpose concerning those, whom
he first intended to be saved; neither of which imputations must be laid upon
God. 2. seeing God gets glory as well by showing his power and exercising
his justice upon the wicked, as by showing mercy upon the elect, the one is as
primarily the will of God as the other; for God primarily intends his own
glory, but in the punishment of the wicked Gods glory is set forth, therefore
the decree of justice as well as of mercy stands with the primarie and
principal will of God.

2. Augustine though nothing favoring these erroneous conceits, yet he
refers reprobation unto the foresight of original sin, and considers
man in massa corrupta, in the mass of corruption, as all have transgressed in
Adam, Vniversa massa poenas dedit, etc. the whole mass (of mankind) is worthy
of punishment, and if the punishment of damnation, should be rendered unto all,
non unjust proculdubio redderetur, it should not be rendered unjustly, etc. and
again in an other place, vna quaedam massa peccati supplicium debens diuina
iustitiae, etc. there is one mass of sin, which is endebted to the divine
justice: quod sieve exigatur, sieve donetur, nulla est iniquitas, which though it
be exacted or pardoned, there is no iniquity: ad Simplic. lib. 1. qu. 2.

In this assertion there is no inconueniencie, to say that God beholding and
foreseeing all men by the voluntary transgression of Adam in the state of
corruption, did of his free mercy elect some to be saved in Christ, the others
he left in their corruption, and so for their sins decreed the^ to damnation:
for here can be no imputation of injustice at all: for it is free where one
has diverse debtors to remit the debt unto one, and to exact it of another.

So then if the reason be demanded, why some are rejected of God, it may be
answered, that man's voluntary transgression, bringing all his posteririe into
bondage, being foreseen of God, is a sufficent cause of their reiection; but
if it be further demanded, why God out of this mass of corruption, has
elected some, and not others, there no other reason can be given, but the good
pleasure of God, Ephesians. 1.5. so that the absolute decree of reprobation, is
grounded upon the foresight of man's corruption, but of the comparatiue, as why
one is rejected and left, and not an other, no reason can be rendered, but Gods
gracious and free purpose.

Against this opinion of Augustine, there are two principal objections. 1.
Pererius disput. 12. thus obiecteth: the Angels had no original sin, they
were all created in the state of grace, and yet some of them were elected, some
reprobate: therefore sin is not the cause of reprobation.

Ans. 1. As the Angels were created in the state of grace, so also was Adam in
Paradise; and as Adam fell by voluntary transgression and so enthralled his
posterity, so did the Angels that fell, abuse the gift of freewill, and so for
their pride were justly condemned for ever: so then the foresight of the
apostasy of the reprobate Angels, was the cause of their reiection and
condemnation: as the Apostle says, Iud. 6. The Angels, which kept not their
first estate, he has reserved in everlasting chains: as man then has
original sin, out of the which proceed actual sins, which are the ground
and cause of reprobation and condemnation; so the Apostate Angels for their
sin of pride were rejected: only here is the difference, that the Angels
fell irrecouerable, falling by their own pride being not seduced: but man
falling by the sedition and tentation of the devil, has a redeemer in Gods
mercy provided for him.

2. Pareus thus obiecteth: the foresight of original corruption is general
and common to all mankind, therefore it cannot be the cause of the reprobation
of some only: dub. 8. argum. 4. so also Vrsinus catech. 3. p. 357.

Ans. Not simply the foresight of original corruption, which all are subject
unto, but it being considered together with Gods decree, because he purposed
to deliver some, and not others, is the cause of reprobation.

3. Some do wholly refer the decree of reprobation and election only to the
will and purpose of God: and think, that no other cause can be rendered, why
God has elected some, and condemned others but the absolute will, pleasure,
and purpose of God: their reasons are these.

1. As God loved Jacob, before he had done any good, so he hated Esau, without
any respect unto the evil which he did, Romans 9.11.

2. The Apostle also says, v. 18. That God has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will be hardens: Gods will is the cause of both.

3. And God is compared to the potter, that as he has power over the clay to
make thereout vessels of honor, or dishonor, as he thinks good: so much
more the Lord may out of the same mass, make some vessels of mercy, some of
everlasting shame.

4. Our Blessed Savior makes this the reason, why God had hid the mystery of
salvation from the wise men, and revealed it to babes, because O Father, thy
good pleasure was such, Matthew. 11.25.

Ans. 1. Why God loved not Esau as well as Jacob, the cause was only the
gracious purpose of God: and hereof neither the good works of the one, nor the
evil works of the other were the cause: yet both of them being considered in
their original corruption, as it was Gods mercy to deliver the one, so it was
no injustice to leave the other. 2. here the hatred of God is taken only for
the not conferring of his grace and love, which God freely bestowed without
respect unto works: but that hatred, which is an ordaining of men unto
everlasting punishment, is not without respect unto their sins.

2. Mercy presupposes misery, and hardening a corrupt inclination in the
heart before, for the which it is hardened: here then man's miserable estate is
insinuated, out of the which some by Gods mercy are delivered.

3. By that similitude the Apostle shows what God may do by his absolute
power, not what he does: he deals not with men, as the potter with the clay,
though he might; that is stricto and absoluto iure, by his strict and absolute
right; but aequissimis rationibus, upon most equal and just conditions: he
might do as the potter does, but yet he takes not that rigorous and strict
course.

4. It is indeed Gods good pleasure to reveal the secrets of his will to whom
he pleases, and to hide them from whom he will: because he is not bound unto
any, he may do with his own, as he please and bestow his graces freely: but
if he should keep them from all, none had cause to complain, seeing their
natural blindness and corruption was brought upon them by the voluntary
corruption of Adam: and though it was Gods gracious favor, to reveal unto
some his will, yet the rest were hardened and blinded justly through their own
wilfulness and obstinacy against the truth.

And further against this opinion of the absolute decree of reprobation,
without any respect unto the sins of men original and actual, these two
strong objections are made: first there would be an imputation of injustice
upon God, if he should decree any to be condemned but for sin: for like as
none are indeed in time condemned but for sin: as the Apostle says, Ephesians.
5.6. For such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience, etc. so the decree of damnation before all time must be upon the
foresight of sin.

Secondly, whereas God in Scripture is set forth to be exceeding abundant in
mercy, as Psalm. 25.10. All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth: and
Psalm. 144.9. His mercies are over (or above) all his works: and James 2.13.
mercy rejoices against judgment: Now the Lord should be accused of severity
and inclemencie, and far more ready and prompt unto justice, then mercy, if
he out of his own will should decree more to be condemned, then to be saved:
these objections, the former position of the absolute decree of damnation
being maintained, cannot possibly be answered.

4. Whereas to shun these rocks of offense, and to prevent these objections,
some here have found out a middle or mean way, to refer the decree of
reprobation partly to the will of God, as the efficient, partly to the
foresight of sin, as the material cause thereof: And here these distinctions
are brought in.

1. Lyranus thus distinguishes, that reprobation is either taken large,
largely, and so it signifies only simplicem negationem ad gloriam, a simple
denial of glory: and this has no cause in Gods prescience, but only in the
will of God: or it is taken proprie, properly, for ordinario ad poenam, an
ordaining unto punishment, and so it is not willed or decreed of God, nisi
propter culpam, but for sin: Bellarmine also flees to the same distinction
of negative reprobation, lib. 2. de great. and liber. c. 17.
which is not to have mercy, and positive to decree unto condemnation: of this
the foresight of sin (he says) is the cause, of the other the free will of
God: But seeing this negative reprobation contains a privation and denial of
everlasting glory, this also must arise from the foresight of sin: for God
excludes none out of his kingdom but for sin: as the Apostle says, 1. Cor.
6.9. Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

2. Gorrhan has this distinction: there is a double kind of reprobation,
temporalis, the temporal, which is, non appositio gratiae, the not affording
or giving of grace, and eterna, voluntas non apponendi, the eternal, which is
the will or purpose of not giving of grace: this is without the foresight of
any merit, but not the other: like unto this is that difference which some
make between the decree, and the execution of the decree: the first is without
respect unto sin, but sin comes between, before the other: But this does
not satisfy, as Pareus well observes: for the same cause moved God to decree
punishment, which moves him in time to execute punishment.

3. Some do thus consider of predestination, that it is of two sorts: there is
decretum(...), a decree simply called, of those things whereof God is the
author and efficient cause himself, such is the decree of election unto life:
there is decretum (...), secundum quod, a decree after a sort, which may also
be called, permissivum, the decree of permission, as the other is effectivum,
an effecting and working decree: of this latter sort is the decree of
reprobation: the means which lead thereunto, God only permits, and
effects not, as the sin and iniquity of men, for the which they are
worthily condemned: to this purpose Rollocus in 8. ad Roman. p. 181.182. But
this does not satisfy: for the decree of damnation is as well an effecting
decree, as is the decree of election: God wills and decrees the damnation of
the wicked as effectually in his justice, as he effectually wills the
salvation of the elect: as the wise man says in the Proverbs, 16.4. That the
Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea even the wicked for the day of
evil.

4. Iunius against Puk^us resp. ad ration. 72. makes two degrees of
reprobation: decretum praeteritionis, the decree of preterition, which is the
purpose of God, not to show mercy, and this is absolute without any respect
unto sin: then there is decretum ex praescientia, the decree of reprobation,
issuing forth of God prescience: and so none are decreed to be condemned, but
for sin: some call the first decretum non miserandi, the decree not to show
mercy, the other decretum puniendi, the decree of punishment: Pareus dub. 8.
p. 913. cites Mr. Perkins, who calls them, decretum deserendi, the decree of
desertion, and ordinatio ad poenam, an ordaining to punishment: Pareus out of
his own judgment says, that there are two acts of reprobation, negativus,
the negative, that is not to have mercy, and affirmativus, the affirmative,
which is to condemn: the negative act, is either reprobation from grace, or
from glory: the first of these which is a reiection from grace, be thinks
only to proceed from the good pleasure of God, but not the other: all these
distinctions are the same in effect, which else where I have followed, Synops p
822.
allowing that distinction especially of Iunius, as giving full satisfaction in
this matter: But now I find some doubts and objections, which are not yet
removed by these distinctions.

1. Seeing damnation necessarily follows reiection, and where grace is
denied, glory cannot follow: if the denial of the one should be the absolute
act of Gods will, so by consequence should the other also.

2. And the Scripture shows that the cause why God rejects man, is for that
they reject God first; as Samuel says concerning Saul, 1. Sam. 15.23. Because
thou have cast away the word of the Lord, the Lord has cast away thee: and
Romans 1.24.27. the Apostle shows that the giving up of the Gentiles unto their
hearts lusts, was a just recompense of their error; therefore because the
substraction and denial of grace, the hardening of the heart, the blinding of
the mind, are punishments of sin, and sin goes before the punishment
thereof, it follows that these things, as they are not temporally inflicted
but for sin, so neither are they eternally decreed but upon the foresight of
sin.

3. If God should absolutely reject any otherwise thou for sin, and more are
rejected, then elected, then should Gods justice far exceed his mercy, and
his severity far surpass his clemency.

To this last objection Thomas Aquin. makes this answer by a distinction, that
bonum proportionatum communi status naturae, etc. the good things which are
proportioned to the common state and condition of nature, are found in the
most: but bonum quod excedit com^^^^ statum, etc. the good things, which exceed
the common state, are found in few: as they are found more, which have
sufficient knowledge and direction for the government of their life, then they
which want it, such as are idiots and fools; but there are few, which are
found, that have the profunditie and depth of knowledge: and of this kind of
everlasting life, it exceeds the common state and condition of humane nature,
and therefore it is no marvel, if it be found in the fewest and smallest
number: to this purpose Thomas 1. part. qu. 25. artic. 7.

But this answer is not sufficient; he has given a good reason, why eternal
life is not merited, or procured by man's deserts, because it is a gift, which
exceeds the proportion, and condition of man's nature; but yet the reason
appears not, neither is the doubt satisfied, why, seeing God abounds in
mercy, everlasting life is not given unto the most: therefore Thomus adds
further, that Gods mercy appears in that he directs some unto life from
the which the most decline, by the common cause and inclination of nature: And
indeed this is the best and most sufficient answer, that Gods mercy herein
exceeds his justice, that whereas all men by nature are the children of
wrath, and God might justly ^aue them in their sin, as he did the reprobate
Angels, yet out of that mass of corruption he saves some, to bring them unto
glory; so then, unless the fall and transgression of man he presupposed,
there is no way to magnify Gods mercy above his justice. Thus Thomas Aquin,
though he mislike Augustines opinion (who makes the foresight of original
^^^ne the ground of the decree of reprobation) and thinks that God absolutely
rejects the reprobate without any foresight of sin, yet is constrained to
seek shelter here for the ^^^iding of this objection.

5. Wherefore fully to decide this great question, and controversy touching
the decree ^^ reprobation, we will determine of it in this manner.

1. There is reprobatio indefinita, and definita, a reprobation indefinite;
that is, that some ^^e elected, some rejected: and a definite reprobation,
whereby some are certainly rejected, and not others; of the first the cause is
only in God, for the demonstration of his mercy ^^^ard the elect, and of his
justice and power toward the reprobate, as the Apostle shows v. 22.23. and so
the wise man says, Prove. 16.4. that God made all things, even the wicked for
himself: and to this purpose Thomas well says, that the reason of election
and reprobation is taken from the goodness of God, quae multiformiter in rebus
representatur, which by his means is diuersely represented and set forth in
the creatures: when a^ some things are in an high, some in a low degree: If all
should be elected, Gods justice should not appear, if all were condemned,
where were his mercy? But of the definite and certain reprobation, why some
are in particular rejected, the cause is the foresight of their sin.

2. Again reprobation is considered two ways, absolute, comparate,
absolutely, as in rejecting these and these, and comparatively, in rejecting
these rather, then those: of the first the reason is the general corruption of
mankind, which transgressed in Adam, who abused his freewill in choosing evil,
it being in his power to have made choice of the good, and so he brought all
his posterity into bondage unto sin; in which state of corruption God justly
might have left all, if it had pleased him: but of the comparatiue reprobation,
why God left others in their natural corruption, and freed others, no reason
can be given, but the good pleasure of God: as Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 2.3. We
were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others, but God who is rich in
mercy through his great love, etc. has quickened us: so Augustine well says,
quare hunc Deus trahat, and illum non trahat, no^ (...) dijudicare, si non vis
errare, why God draws one (out of that mass of corruption) and not an other,
take not upon thee to judge, if thou will not err. epistol. 105.

3. We must distinguish between absolutum ius Dei, and ordinatum, the absolute
right which God has over his creatures, and his moderate or subordinate right:
By his absolute right the Creator has power to dispose of his creature, as it
pleases him, to life or to death, as the potter has power of the same clay to
make some vessels of honor, some of dishonor: and if the Lord should thus
deal with his creature, even without any respect unto sin, no man could
accuse, or challenge God: But he deals not thus with us, secundum spiritum
and absolutum ius, according to his strict and absolute right; but according to
his subordinate right, whereby he proceeds not against the creature, either
in condemning it, or decreeing the same to be condemned, without just cause
given by the creature: And thus the Apostle deals in this place: by the
similitude of the potter, v. 20.22. he shows what absolute power, and right
God has if he would please to use it, and v. 22.23. he speaks of the other
ordinary right and power, which God indeed uses in proceeding against the
vessels of wrath, prepared (by their own sins) unto destruction. Pareus. And
Tolet here well observes, that the Apostle makes two answers unto the
objection propounded, one to stop the mouths of gainesayers, in urging the
absolute power of God, the other to satisfy the faithful, in showing that God
does not execute his wrath upon any but for their sin: annot. 28.

Concerning this distinction of the strict or absolute right and power of God,
and his ordinary or rather subordinate right, though it be admitted on both
sides, both by Protestant, and Popish writers, yet there is this difference. 1.
Some do think, and so profess and teach, that God uses as well his
absolute, as subordinate power in the decree of reprobation: and thus Bucer,
Calvin, Zanchius, affirm that God by his absolute will has reprobate and
rejected some, without respect unto their sins. 2. Pareus, who also
acknowledges Gods power herein, yet he would not have this doctrine handled
either in schools, or before the people, but according to Gods subordinate
power, in rejecting no otherwise then for sin, p. 912. 3. Both these think
that God brings this his absolute power into act: but I think it more safe,
to hold that God might if it please him, use that absolute power, which if he
did, none could accuse him of injustice, but he deals otherwise in this
mystery of reprobation, refusing none but justly for their sin: and this is
that which Augustine affirms, lib. de praedest. and great. c. 16.
by way of supposition in this manner: Si hominum genus, quod creatum const^^
primitus nihilo, etc. if mankind, which at the beginning God created of
nothing, were not brought forth endebted both to sin and death, and yet the
almighty Creator should condemn some of them to everlasting destruction, who
could say unto him, Lord why have thou done so? God in his infinite power might
have done thus, but not according to the ordinary course of justice.

Then seeing I absolutely subscribe unto the judgment of Augustine, seen
before in the 2. opinion produced, that man's original corruption is the first
ground of the decree of reprobation: out of the which God in mercy saved some
by the election of grace, leaving others, which adding to their original
corruption other actual sins, are made worthy of condemnation: and so
Augustine well concludes, investigabilis Dei miserecordia, de persever. lib.
2. c. 11.
etc. the mercy of God is unsearchable, whereby he has mercy on whom he
will, no merits of his going before, and unsearchable is his truth, whereby he
hardens whom he will, ( eius praecedentibus meritis) his merits going
before, but the same with his, upon whom God shows mercy. Learned Pareus
hereunto agrees, dub. 17. massa damnata proprie est obiectum, etc. the damned
mass is properly the object of election and reprobation: Vrsinus also as
Pareus has set forth his works, defines reprobation, page 356.
to be the immutable and eternal decree of God, whereby he has decreed in his
just judgment, to leave some in their sins, etc. and not being made
partakers of Christ, to condemn them for ever: Judicious Polanus has the like
definition of reprobation, in his partitions: It is the decree, whereby God
purposed to himself to leave those, of whom it pleased him not to have mercy,
in everlasting destruction, unto the which they should be obnoxious, for their
sins, for the declaration of his justice. In these distinctions all the
causes are touched of everlasting damnation, and the ^^re-ordaining thereunto:
the efficient, is Gods decree and purpose, the material, is sin, the
formal, the denial of mercy, and the leaving them to themselves, the final
cause, is the setting forth of the justice of God: And thus I trust it has
been sufficiently showed, how the decree of reprobation, may safely be held to
proceed from the prescience of original and actual sin, and not to be an
absolute act of Gods will and purpose, as the decree of election is: and in
this resolution of this question (whatsoever I have before thought and written
otherwise) I set up my rest, as the safest from any inconvenience, and the
fittest to give satisfaction to the contrary objections, which are such as
here follow.

1. Object. Seeing the number of the reprobate far exceeds the number of
the elect, how is Gods mercy magnified above his justice?

Ans. They which hold an absolute reprobation without relation unto sin,
cannot here remove this doubt: for if God out of his own will should cast off
more, then he receives, he should be far more just then merciful: But this
being first laid as a foundation, that God casts off none, but for sin, in
that he saves some out of that mass of corruption, whereas he might justly
leave all, his mercy exceeds his justice; and in these three points. 1. in
that God in the beginning made man righteous, Ecclesi. 7.31. and gave him
freewill so to have continued if he would, and if he had not willingly
transgressed, he should have remained in the state of grace, and favor with
God, and not have tasted of his justice. 2. after man had fallen, and brought
all his posterity into the bondage of corruption, Gods mercy appeared, in
saving some, whereas he might in justice have condemned all, as he did the
reprobate Angels, that kept not their first state. 3. his mercy is evident
even toward those, which are left in their corruption, that the Lord denies
not unto them means, whereby they might be called, if they had grace to use
them: and he suffers even the vessels of wrath with much patience, not
presently cutting the^ off, as he might: in all these points Gods mercy
exceeds his justice.

2. Object. When God had made Adam righteous, it was in his power to have kept
him from falling, that all might have been saved: is not God therein
accessarie to their sin, is suffering that which he might have hindered?

Ans. 1. (...) was fit that the Creator having made man with free will, should
suffer the creature freely to exercise that natural power and faculty, which
was given him, as other creatures do^^ their kind. 2. although God permitted
Adam to fall, yet he knew how to use it for (...) further demonstration of his
glory: and in this behalf it is just with God to suffer evil ^^^^e in the
world, which he knows how to turn unto good: as he suffered Job to be (...)
of Satan, for the trial of his faith.

3. But in that God saves some out of that mass of corruption and perdition,
and not all, how is he not now partial, and an accepter of persons, in dealing
unequally with those which are in equal state and condition?

Ans. Where one is bound to give equally to all, there it is partiality and
injustice not to give unto all alike: but in free and voluntary gifts one may
give unequally unto those, which are of equal sort without any touch at all:
as when a man has two debtors, he may forgive unto one his debt, and yet
require it of another: So God is not bound to give his grace unto any,
especially where they have willingly fallen from his grace, as Adam did in
Paradise, and we in him: we being then all now endebted unto Gods justice in
our natural corruption, God may have mercy where and on whom he will: it is
lawful for him to do with his own, as he will, Matthew. 20.15.

4. Object. It seems to be an hard and cruel part to destroy any for the
setting forth of ones power and magnificence, as the Turk and other Tyrants
make no account of men's lives to serve their pleasure.

Ans. 1. No earthly potentate has that power over his subjects, which God has
over his creatures: therefore though it be unjust in the one, it is not in the
other. 2. for one to destroy another for his honor and glory sake, may seem
hard: but to bequeath them to destruction worthily for their faults, to get
glory thereby, is not unjust: and so although God in the destruction and
condemnation of the wicked, intend his glory, yet they are worthily condemned
for their sin.

Object. 5. He that wills the end, wills also the means, that bring and
lead unto that end: if God have appointed the damnation of the reprobate, then
he wills also sin, which is the means to that end.

Ans. He that simply wills the end, wills also the means, but God simply
wills not the damnation of any, but for their sin.

Object. 6. If God have foreseen the sins of the reprobate, and wills
their just damnation for sin; how is it said, he would have all to be saved?

Ans. God simply wills not the damnation of any, but for sin: and no other
thing appears in the revealed will of God, in that he offers means of
salvation to all, but that he would have all to be saved: this then is to be
understood of the absolute and revealed will of God.

7. Object. If God foresee the sins of the reprobate, and decree their
punishment, why does God complain of sinners, seeing his will in them is
fulfilled?

Ans. Augustine answeareth 1. God justly complains of sinners, quia non cogit
eos peccare, because he does not constrain them to sin: howsoever Gods
decree cannot be altered, yet their will is not forced, they sin willingly,
and so are justly condemned. 2. and when God complains of sinners, by this
means those, on whom God shows mercy, are called, and compunguntur cord,
and are pricked in heart, howsoever the other are hardened.

Object. 8. If the case so stand, that the reprobate are appointed to
damnation, then it skilleth not what a man does; for though he should repent
him, yet if he be a reprobate, it cannot help him?

Ans. If ^^^were apparent who were elected, who a reprobate, then indeed all
contrary endeavor were in vain: but seeing we have no other way to prove
our election, then by our faith and fruits, we must thereby labor to make our
election sure, 2. Pet. 1.10. 2. for one to be a reprobate, and yet to repent,
are contraries: for he that is a reprobate can never have grace to repent, and
he that has grace truly to repent, may be assured he is no reprobate.

Object. 9. But if God have foreseen the sins of the reprobate, and that
which God foreseeth must needs come to pass, then the reprobate sin of
necessity, they cannot do otherwise; how then can they be justly punished for
that, which they cannot avoid?

Ans. There is a double kind of necessity, the one is called antecedens
nec^^^^^tas, an antecedent necessity, or going before, which proceeds from
necessary and working causes, as when a thing is forced by violence and
strength, as a stone out of the hand it is necessary it should go there is
consequens necessitas, a following necessity, or by way of consequent, which
is upon supposition of the effect: as when we see one fit, this being
supposed, that we see him fit, it is now necessary being done; and yet he was
not forced to fit: so it is in this case, the reprobate do sin necessarily,
not by a necessity forcing their will, but an infallible necessity following
the effect: for they therefore sin, not because God did foresee they would
sin, but therefore God foresaw it, because they would sin: The reprobate
then do sin freely without any compulsion, and therein are guilty, though
they were foreseen to sin, and because of the corruption of their nature
could do no other.

And thus is this doctrine delivered from all those cauils, and objections; and
man i^ found only to be the cause of his own ruin and destruction, but the
beginning of our salvation is from God, according to that saying of the Prophet
Hoshea. c. 13.9. perditio t^^ ex te Israel, salus ex me, thy perdition O
Israel, is of thy self, thy salvation of me: and so I end and conclude this
point with that saying of Tertullian, Deus de suo optimus, de nostro iustus,
etc. God is good and merciful of his own, and just in that which is ours,
etc. lib. de resurrect. that is, the original of mercy is from God, but the
occasion of his justice is from sin which is of our selves.

Controv. 11. Of the difference between the decree of election and
reprobation, and of the agreement between them.
Whereas in both these there are two things to be considered, the decree, and
the execution thereof, here are diverse opinions. Some will have a
correspondencie in election and reprobation in both, and these also are
divided. Some only in the former, that is, the decree. Some will have a
difference in both, as well in the manner of the decree, as in the execution.

1. Of the first opinion were the Pelagians, and some of the Romanists, which
hold, that both the decree of election is grounded upon the foresight of faith,
and the good use of freewill, as also the execution of that decree in the
giving of eternal life they will have procured by good works; as reprobation
both in the decree and execution proceeds from sin, and the foresight
thereof: So the whole work of election they will have to take beginning from
man, as reprobation does: Thus the Rhemists hold, that election is not without
the condition and respect to works, annot. Heb. c. 5. sect. 7. Becanus the new
divinity Reader in Mentz, has this assertion, that predestination is ex
praescientia conditionata, etc. of a conditional prescience, whereby God
foresaw that one would well use the grace offered, and not an other, c. 1. de
praedestinat. loc. 5. But herein other Romanists do dissent from them, as
Bellarmine, Tolet, Pererius, as has been showed before, controv. 7.

2. Other Romanists will have an agreement both in the decree and execution,
but after an other manner: as Pererius following Thom. Aquin. disput. 5. numer.
34. and disput. 12. numer. 66. says that God is the cause of reprobation, as
well as election, quantum ad duo, principium and terminum, in respect of these
two, the beginning and the end: concerning the beginning which is the decree,
he says there is nulla causa meritoria ex part hominis, no meritorious cause
of either on man's behalf: but in respect of the last effect, there is a
meritorious cause in man, both of his good works unto eternal life, and of
evil works to condemnation: But Pererius in two points is far wide, both in
making good works meritorious of eternal life, which is the free gift of God,
Romans 6.23. and in assigning the beginning or first cause of reprobation, and so
of condemnation, in the will of God, and not in the sin of man, contrary to
that saying of the Prophet alleged before, Hos. 13.9. Thy perdition is of thy
self O Israel, as their Latin text reads.

3. Some do make great difference in the execution of these decrees, for good
works are not meritorious of salvation, as evil works are of damnation, the
reason of which difference is, because evil works are perfitly evil, but our
good works are imperfect, and so not proportionable to the most excellent and
perfect reward, and good works are not our own, nor of our selves, as evil
works are, and therefore they merit not: but the decree as well of election,
as reprobation, they hold to be alike, without any relation unto works good or
evil: thus worthy Calvin, Beza, Martyr, with other of our learned new writers.

4. But it is the safer way thoroughout from the beginning of the decree, to
the execution, to hold a perpetual difference between election and
reprobation: that we are elected freely without respect unto faith or works,
for otherwise we should have chosen God first, and not he us, and so we are
also saved freely, not for our works, and yet neither without them: But in the
way of damnation, neither were the wicked decreed to be condemned, neither yet
shall they actually be condemned, but for their sin and the foresight
thereof. 1. because the beginning of damnation is from man, but the decree of
reprobation is the beginning of damnation; therefore that decree must proceed
from the foresight of something worthy of damnation in man. 2. that for the
which God condemns man, he decreed him to be condemned: but for sin is man
condemned. 3. otherwise if it it were God^ absolute will to reject more then he
electeth, his justice should exceed his mercy: see before, contr. 10.

Controv. 12. Whether mercy be a natural property in God, or an effect only
of his will, against Socinus.
v. 18. He has mercy on whom he will: Socinus, that blasphemous heretic,
lib. 1. c. 1. by occasion of these words, goes about to prove, that Mercy is
not a natural property in God, but a voluntary act.

1. Because the Apostle says, He has mercy on whom he will.

2. God always uses his natural properties: but mercy he always shows
not, as toward impenitent sinners.

3. Contrary properties are not naturally in God: but his mercy and justice
are contrary: therefore they are not both naturally in God.

4. Natural properties are not unequally in God, but his justice and mercy
are unequal, for his mercy exceeds his justice.

5. Mercy is nothing else, but a grief conceived upon an others misery, but
there is no such thing in God.

Contra. Before these arguments be answered, these considerations must be
premised. 1. that mercy is otherwise in God, then in man: in man indeed it is
a grief or compassion conceived upon an others misery: but in God it is only
a propension and readiness of the divine will to help those which are in
misery. 2. Mercy in God, either signifies the inclination, power, faculty,
and property to show mercy, and this is natural in God: or the act and
exercising of that property toward the creature, and this is so natural in
God, as yet it is directed by his will. 3. a thing is said to be natural two
ways, either that which only proceeds from the instinct of nature, as the
fire naturally burns: or that whereunto nature inclines, yet not without
direction of the will, as thus a man is said to speak, to understand
naturally: So God is both ways naturally merciful, in himself the first way,
toward his creatures the second: now to the arguments we answer.

1. The Apostle speaks not of the natural property, but of the act of
mercy, which is directed by the will of God. 2. all the natural properties
which are in God he always uses not, nor toward all: as his justice, power,
long animitie, mercy: they are always in God, but he exercises them as it
pleases him. 3. justice and mercy are not contrary, but cruelty is opposed
to mercy: neither is there any contrariety in God, but in the effects in
diverse subjects: as the Sun with the same heat mollifieth the wax, and
hardens the clay. 4. neither are these properties unequal in God, but the
effects and acts only are unequal, as it pleases God to dispose in his
freewill. 5. humane mercy is such as is described, but the divine mercy is of
an other nature, as has been showed: now the contrary arguments that mercy
is a natural property in God, are these.

1. The Scripture describes God by his mercy, Exodus 34. he is called the
father of mercy, rich in mercy: God is described by his natural properties.
2. all virtues in God are essential, and natural, but mercy is one of Gods
virtues. 3. justice is natural in God, but mercy is a part of Gods universal
justice. 4. mercy and compassion is natural in men, they which have it not,
are called inhumane, they are beasts rather then men, therefore much more is it
natural in God: for every good thing in the creature proceeds from the
fountain of goodness in the Creator: See more hereof in Pareus dub. 12.

Controv. 13. Whether the mercy of God in the forgiveness of sin, be an
effect of Gods free and absolute will only, and be not grounded upon Christ:
against the heresy of Socinus, and Ostorodius.
v. 18. He has mercy on whom he will: Blasphemous Socinus, and Ostorodius a
Samosatenian heretic directly impugning the eternal dietie of Christ: by
occasion of these words do affirm, that God of his free mercy, without any
satisfaction purchased by Christ's death, forgiueth sins unto the penitent:
Socinus first makes these and such like objections.

1. The Apostle here says he has mercy on whom he will, therefore of his
own will be remitteth sins without Christ.

2. He does forgive sins for his own sake, Isai. 43.25. therefore not for
Christ.

3. If God should forgive sins for Christ's satisfaction, then both mercy and
justice should be seen at once in the work of our salvation by Christ.

4. God may remit sins without satisfaction, for he may depart from his
right, and remit of his own, as it pleases him.

5. God requires only repentance and innocence of life in them, whose sins
are pardoned: and he forgiueth only for that which he requires.

6. Many examples are extant in the old Testament, of sins pardoned, and
mercy showed without Christ: as in Abel, Henoch and others that pleased God by
faith, believing only that God is, and that he is a rewarder of the righteous,
Heb. 11.6. therefore without Christ.

7. God promises, Ierem. 31. to be merciful unto their iniquites, and to
remember them no more: but where he requires satisfaction for sin, he
remembers it, and is not merciful unto it.

8. We are commanded one to forgive an other, as God in Christ forgave us: but
we must forgive without any satisfaction: Ergo, so God forgave us.

9. The remission of the debt excludes all payment, and satisfaction for it:
to this purpose, Socinus lib. de Servator.

The other impious heretic thus also obiecteth.

1. Gods love is set forth to us in Scripture before Christ died for us, Ioh.
3.16. Ephe. 1.4. but Christ's satisfaction shows that God was offended with us
before.

2. God did remit our sins freely by grace, Romans 3.24. but grace and
satisfaction are contrary.

3. This doctrine of satisfaction by Christ's death, makes God cruel, that
would not receive mankind unto his favor, but by the most cruel death of his
Son.

4. It makes God a Tyrant, in punishing the innocent for offenders.

5. The Son should be more merciful then his Father: for he forgiueth
without satisfaction, so does not his Father.

6. If Christ had truly satisfied for us, he should have suffered eternal
death, and so never have risen again, which had been impossible: these and
other such objections, this wicked Ostorodius has in a book written in the
Germane tongue against Tradelius, cited by Pareus, dub. 13.

Contra. Before we come to answer these objections, the state of the question
must first be opened. 1. the question here is not of the power, property, and
faculty of showing mercy, which is natural in God, and absolute in him
without any condition. 2. but of the act and exercising of this property,
which is either general toward all creatures, and toward all men, both good
and bad, upon whom he suffers the sun to shine, and the rain to fall,
Matthew. 5.45. or special toward the elect, in giving them his grace, and
forgiving their sins: whereof the Apostle speaks, Tit. 3.4. When the
bountifulnes and love of God our Savior toward men appeared, etc. according to
his mercy be saved us. 3. this special act of Gods mercy must be considered
two ways, according to the causes foregoing, which are none other but only
the good pleasure of God, no merit of any creature, no not of Christ himself,
was the cause of his mercy toward the elect, but as the Apostle says, he has
mercy on whom he will: but there are certain conditions which do accompany
or follow this free act of Gods love, and mercy, for the effecting of the
work thereof, in the sanctification and glorification of the elect, which are
these three, the ransom made by Christ, faith in the Redeemer, and our
conversion and turning to God: which conditions God receives not of us, but
conferreth upon us: the first without us, the two other he works in us, that
all may be of grace: these things being thus promised, the contrary arguments
are thus answered.

1. The Apostle speaks of Gods first decree and purpose to show mercy in
electing some by his grace, which indeed is an absolute act of Gods will
without any other motive: and if we understand it of Gods mercy in
forgiveness of sin, it is his will also, it should not be done without
Christ, Ioh. 6.40. This is his will, that every one which believes ^^ the
Son, should have eternal life: the argument then follows not: God has
mercy on whom he will, therefore without Christ.

2. Therefore God forgiueth sins for his own sake, because he forgiueth them
for Christ, who is the Jehovah and eternal God, that forgiueth sins.

3. Neither are Gods justice and mercy showed in the same subject: Gods
justice is seen in the satisfaction of his Son, but his mercy toward us.

4. 1. The argument follows not, God can, therefore he will. 2. neither does
that rule always hold, that one may remit of his own right as much as he
will, this must be added, if it be without wrong done to an other: as the
Parent cannot remit unto his child fear and obedience, because this is against
the law of justice, and so against God. 3. so in this case God cannot remit
sins, without some satisfaction, not in respect of his infinite power, but of
his justice, which is not to suffer his Majesty to be violated without just
punishment, for this were to deny himself.

5. 1. Neither is it true, that God only requires of sinners repentance: for
the punishment due unto sin, must be satisfied for, which Christ did for us.
2. neither if innocence of life were sufficient, is it in our power to
perform it. 3. and further God does not pardon sin for that which he
requires of us, it is his mercy in Christ, for the which he pardons: that
which he requires of us, is a condition to be performed by us, not the cause.

6. It is false, that the faith of Abel and Henoch, and of other holy
Patriarchs had no relation to Christ: for although express mention be not made
thereof: yet always it must be understood: for the Apostle says, Coloss.
1.23. that it pleased God by Christ to reconcile all things to himself: and
all the promises in him are yea and Amen, 2. Cor. 1.20. therefore the promises
made to the fathers were grounded upon Christ, and they were reconciled unto
God by no other way, then by faith in him.

7. If God had required satisfaction of our selves for sin, then indeed had
our sin been remembered: but although Christ has satisfied for our sins,
yet to us they are freely forgiven, and so not remembered any more.

8. The Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.32. Forgiving one an other, as God for Christ's
sake forgave us: though Christ has satisfied for us, yet God requires no
satisfaction at our hands, therefore herein we are to imitate God, to forgive
one an others private offenses without satisfaction, as God forgave us: But in
public offenses, and civil debts, this rule holds not: for if in such
trespasses no satisfaction should be made, the course of justice should be
perverted.

9. The remitting of the debt excludes all solution and payment of debt, by
the party to whom the debt is remitted, and not otherwise: and so the Lord
requires not of us any satisfaction or solution of our debt, which is
discharged by Christ.

The like answer may be made unto the other objections.

1. God loved the elect with an eternal love, and herein appeared his love,
that he sent his Son to die for the elect: yet in respect of their sinful
estate, they had need of a reconciler: so they were eternally beloved in Gods
election, and yet in respect of their present state, God was offended with
them: as a father that purposes to make his son his heir, may yet in the
mean time be angry with him for his misdemenour: See before c. 5. coher. 7. a
more full answer.

2. We are saved freely by grace, notwithstanding the redemption by Christ: as
the Apostle shows, Romans 3.24. if satisfaction had been required of us, or if
we were to have ransomed our selves, it had not been freely by grace; but now
it is.

3. God was not delighted in the death of his Son, in that simply he was put
to cruel death: but in that thereby all the elect were saved, which shows not
cruelty, but mercy in God, in accepting the death of one for all.

4. Neither was Christ forced, the innocent to die for sinners, but he
willingly offered himself to die for us: therein was no tyranny at all.

5. As though God the Father, and God the Son are not all one in substance:
the same mercy proceeds from them both: and the Son as he is God,
remitteth not without the satisfaction of the Mediator.

6. Eternal death is to be considered in the infiniteness and greatness of the
torments of soul and body, and in the eternity and euerduring thereof:
Christ did endure the one, that is, unspeakable torments in body and soul
for us, but not the other, because of the dignity of his person, which
suffered, and the necessity of the work of our redemption, which he
perfected, which could not have been performed, if eternity of punishment had
been upon the redeemer inflicted.

Now how contrary this blasphemous assertion of these heretics is to the
Scriptures, is every where evident: for there is no truth that has more
plentiful evidence out of the Scriptures, then that Christ by his death did
satisfy for our sins, and by faith in him we obtain remission of our
sins, and not otherwise: as Galat. 1.4. Which gave himself for our sins,
that he might deliver us from this present evil world: Galat. 3.13. Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse for us:
Ephesians. 1.7. By whom we have redemption thorough his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins: 1. Pet. 2.23. Who his own self bare our sins in his body upon the
tree, etc. 1. Pet. 3.18. Christ has once suffered for our sins, the just for
the unjust, that he might bring us to God, etc. and an hundredth such places and
more may be produced out of the old and new Testament, for the confirmation of
this truth: he that is desirous to see more of this matter, I refer him to
learned Pareus treatise dub. 13. upon this chapter.

Controv. 14. Against the maintainers of Universal grace.
v. 18. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens: Hence
then it is inferred, that he has decreed to have mercy on some, and not upon
others: then they are in error, which think that God does indifferently offer
grace to all, and that he has elected all unto life, if they will themselves:
as Because tells us, that God simplici affectu desideravit omnes ad aeternam
beatitudinem pervenire, that God simply desired, that all might come to
eternal life, de praedestinat. Calvinist. c. 8.4. And this assertion may seem
to be favored by these places of Scripture, Romans 11.32. God has shut up all
in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all: and 1. Timoth. 2.4. God would
have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.

Contra. Diverse answeares are here found out. 1. Some say that secundum quid,
after a sort, God would have all to be saved, in that he offers means of
salvation to al: but simply he wills only the salvation of the elect, which
he effects and works accordingly. 2. the schoolmen have here a
distinction, that there is voluntas signi, and beneplaciti, Gods secret will,
and his revealed and signified will: by his revealed will he would have all to
be saved, by his secret will only the elect. 3. Augustine has two answeares:
sometime he understands these places distributive, by way of distribution, by
all men he interprets all sorts of men, according to that saying, Revel. 5.9.
Thou have redeemed us unto God thorough thy blood, out of every tribe and
language, etc. sometime he takes it restrictive, by way of restraint and
limitation, understanding all the elect: he will have all to be saved, because
none can be saved but by his will: as that saying is to be taken, Ioh. 1.9.
Which lighteneth every man that comes into the world: not that every one is
lightened, but every one which is lightened, is lightened by him. And this
interpretation in restraining such universal promises to the faithful only,
is agreeable to the Scripture: for whereas the Apostle says in general, Romans
11.32. God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all,
he restrains it only unto those which believe, Galat. 3.22. The Scripture
has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ,
should be given to all that believe, Pareus.

4. But yet none of these answears do fully satisfy: this therefore may
further be added, that in the beginning God made man righteous, and gave him
free will and sufficient strength to have been kept from tentation, if he
would himself: but man abused his freewill, and transgressed and fell: yet God
offreth outward means unto all of their calling, which if they refuse there is
no want on Gods behalf, but on their own: this then is our answer, that God
would all men to be saved, that is, not that God purposes all to be saved, or
gives grace to all to be saved, but that there appears no let on Gods
behalf why all are not saved, either the creation considered, or Gods general
vocation: but man is the cause of his own perdition or ruin.

Controv. 15. Of the sufficiency of Scripture.
v. 17. The Scripture says, etc. Hence may be answered that cavil of the
Jesuits against the Scripture, that it cannot be the judge of Controversies,
because the judge must speak, but the Scripture is a dumb letter and speaks
not: But this the Apostle denies here: for he says, the Scripture says to
Pharaoh: the Scripture speaks, it is not then a dumb and mute Judge,
therefore the voice of the Scripture must be heard, as the only sufficient
Judge to decide and determine all controversies of doctrine: and this the
Apostle evidently shows, by the frequent alleging and citing of the
Scripture in this chapter, showing that he appealeth thereunto, as the supreme
and highest Judge of all truth.

Controv. 16. Of the certainty of salvation.
v. 24. Even us, whom he has called, etc. The Apostle doubts not to affirm
not only of himself, but of others also that are called, that they are
prepared unto glory: so then we need not expect some special revelation, to
make us assured of our salvation (as the Romanists affirm) we are made
certain of our election, by our vocation, Par. and afterward the Apostle
says, v. 33. he that believes, shall not be ashamed: he then that is sure he
shall not be confounded or ashamed, what cause has he to doubt of his
salvation? Mart.

Controv. 17. Against the works of preparation.
v. 30. The Gentiles which followed not righteousness, have attained unto
righteousness: silence it is manifest, that a man cannot make a way, or do
any thing by way of preparation to further his calling; seeing the Gentiles
were converted unto God, when they sought it not: so it is true, which the
Apostle says els-where, Philip. 2.13. it is God, which works in you both the
will and deed of his good pleasure: See further Synops. Centur. 4. err. 81.

6. Moral observations.
Observe. 1. It is not sufficient for children to come of good parents.
The examples of Ismael and Esau, borne of faithful and righteous parents, yet
themselves profane and unrighteous, do teach us, that it is not sufficient for
children to boast of the nobility and virtue of their ancestors, unless they
do also imitate and follow their steps: so the Jews did vaunt themselves
of their father Abraham: but our Blessed Savior denies them to be Abraham's
children, unless they did the works of Abraham.

Observe. 2. How parents may be comforted in their ungodly children.
These examples also may give contentment and comfort unto parents when as
their children prove profane and licentious: to look unto the counsel of
God, who gave grace unto Jacob, but forsook Esau: let their be no diligence
and care wanting in the Parents, to give unto their children good education,
and if other things fall not out answearable to their godly desire, they must
rest contented in Gods will and counsel, which may be hid and secret, but is
never unjust, as Abraham is commended for his care in the instruction of his
children, Genesis 18.18. yet Ismael became a licentious and irreligious man.

Observe. 3. Against curiosity.
v. 20. Who art thou O man that pleadest, etc. Though the Apostle stay all
curious inquiring after Gods secrets, yet men are not hereby forbidden and
discouraged from a modest desire to search and know the truth: for our Savior
does himself bid us search the Scriptures, Ioh. 6.39. and Origin here well
notes; non puto, quod si prudens and fidelis servus interroget, etc. I do not
think, if a wise and faithful servant should ask and enquire after Gods
will, that he should receive such an answer, who art thou, etc. which he
shows by the example of Daniel, who had his desire granted, Dan. 9.

Observe. 4. Of contentment of mind.
v. 20. Shall the thing framed say, why have thou made me thus, etc. Like as in
the doctrine of election, every one must rest contented with Gods good
pleasure, so for the state and condition of this life, we must accept
thankfully of that whereto the Lord has disposed us: if a man be rich of
poor, high or low, let him be content with his lot, the potter has made his
vessel so, and there is no reasoning against our maker: let us say and be
resolved with S. Paul, Philipp. 4.11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content.

Observe. 5. Against security.
v. 24. Even us, whom he has called. S. Paul having sufficiently declared the
doctrine of election and reprobation, does descend unto our vocation, and
calling, teaching us, that we should not insist in Gods secret decree, and so
be secure, but seek to make it sure by our calling: as S. Peter says, 1. ep.
c. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.

Observe. 6. Christ must be preached, though the world be offended.
v. 32. They have stumbled at the stumbling stone, etc. Though the Jews were
offended at the Gospel of Christ, yet did not the Apostles forbear to preach
him: so now many are offended at the preaching of the word, as the
superstitious Papists, and carnal livers: yet the truth must still be urged:
for as the Apostles, so now the faithful ministers, are unto some, the favor
of life unto life; and to others of death unto death, 2. Cor. 2.16.

CHAP. X.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
1. v. Brethren, mine hearts desire ( the goodwill of my heart. Gr.) and prayer
to God for Israel is, for their salvation ( that they might be saved. G.)

2. For I bear them record, that they have the zeal ( emulation L.) of God,
but not according to knowledge.

3. For they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and seeking to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves. G. S. (have
not been subject. G.) to the righteousness of God.

4. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, unto every one, that
believes.

5. For Moses thus describes the righteousness, Be. G. S. (writes of the
righteousness. B.V.) but the preposition is wanting in the original) which is
of the law, that the man, that does these things shall live thereby.

6. But the righteousness, which is of faith, speaks on this wife, Say not
in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven? (that is to bring Christ from
above:)

7. Or who shall descend into the deep? ( of the grave. S. ad.) that is to
bring Christ again from the dead.

8. But what says it ( the Scripture. L. ad.) the word is near thee, even in
thy mouth, and in thine heart; This is the word of faith, which we preach.

9. For if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe
in thine heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.

10. For with the heart man believes ( it is believed. Gr.) unto righteousness,
and with the mouth confession is made to salvation.

11. For the Scripture says, Whosoever believes in him, shall not be ashamed (
confounded. L. B.)

12. For there is no difference between the Jew and the Grecian: (of the Jew
and Grecian) for the same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him.

13. For every one that calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

14. But how shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how
shall they believe in him, of whom they have not hard? and how shall they here
without a Preacher?

15. And how shall they preach, except they be sent? as it is written. How
bewtifull are the feet of those, which bring glad tidings of peace, and bring
glad tidings of good things?

16. But they have not all harkened ( obeyed. L. S. V.) to the Gospel: for
Esaias ^^ith, who has believed our sayings, ( our report. G.)

17. So then faith is of hearing, ( by hearing. B. G. but the preposition
(...), signifies of) and ^earing by the word of God.

18. But I demand ( I say. Gr.) have they not heard? no doubt, their sound
went out into all the earth, and their words into the ends of the world.

19. But I demand ( say. Gr.) did not Israel know God? first Moses says, I
will provoke you to en^ie, ( emulation. L. V. Be.) by them that are no nation,
(not I will bring you to be no nation. L.) and by a foolish nation will I anger
you.

20. And Esaias is bold and says, I was found of them, that sought me not, and
have bin made manifest to them, that asked not after me.

21. And unto ( against, Be.) Israel he says, all the day long have I
stretched forth mine ^^nd to a disobedient, ( not believing. L. V. B. (...),
signifies both, but the first rather here) and gain saying people.

2. The Argument, Method, and Parts.
The Apostle having concluded in the former chapter, how the Gentiles had
received the righteousness of faith, but the Jews through their stubbornes had
rejected it, in this chapter does at large handle the same matter: both setting
forth the difference between the righteousness of the law and of the Gospel,
to v. 14. and then the entertainment thereof in the world, accepted of the
Gentiles, v. 18. and rejected of the Jews, v. 19. to the end.

But first the Apostle uses a preamble somewhat to qualify his former ^peach
touching the Jews: by showing his desire toward then salvation, v. 1. and his
testimony concerning their zeal, v. 2. which he corrects, showing a
threefold defect and want in their zeal, ignorance, pride in establishing
their own righteousness, and disobedience in not submitting themselves to Gods
righteousness. v. 3.

Then follows the doctrine concerning righteousness by faith set forth by
diverse arguments. 1. because Christ is the end of the law, therefore
righteousness is not in the law, but by Christ. 2. by the diverse effects and
properties of the law, which requires works, and of the Gospel, which
exacteth not of a man by his own works to ascend to heaven, or to be
delivered from hell, but only the word of faith: which is afterward set forth
by the parts, believing with the heart, and confessing with the mouth:
gathered into this syllogism: Whosoever believes with the heart, and
confesses with the mouth, shall be saved, v. 10. but thou do believe with
the heart, and confess, etc. Ergo. v. 9.

3. Then he proves righteousness by faith, by a testimony of Scripture. v.
11.4. then from the community of salvation both of Jew and Gentile, which
could not be by the law, v. 12.5. by the effects of faith, invocation; All that
invocate the name of God, shall be saved, Ergo all are justified by faith.

The entertainment of this doctrine in the world, was 1. by acceptance among
the Gentiles: which he shows by the means of faith and salvation, the
preaching of the Gospel, which was offered to the Gentiles, which he proves
1. by the effects set forth by a gradation, If there had been no preaching,
their could have been no hearing, if no hearing, no faith, if no faith, no
invocation, v. 14.15. 2. by a dissimilitude, though preaching was not
profitable among the Jews generally, v. 16. yet the ordinary means of faith
is the word preached. v. 17. 3. by a prophetical testimony of Scripture he
shows that the Gospel was preached to the Gentiles, and their belief
followed thereupon, v. 18.

2. But it was rejected of the Jews: as he shows by three testimonies of
Scripture, the first comparing the Gentiles and Jews together, v. 19. the
other two show the setting forth of their condition, severally of the Gentiles
accepted of God, v. 20. of the Jews rejecting God, v. 21.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. Of the general scope and intendement of the Apostle in this chapter
1. The Jews had two special bulworkes as it were, which they used in defense
of themselves, the one was, that the promises of God, were made unto them, and
therefore they could not miscarie, the other that they had the law, by the
keeping whereof they hoped to be justified: These two bulworkes the Apostle
beats down: as in the former Chapter, he showed, that the promises of God
belonged not to all, but to the true Israel of God: so in this Chapter, he
shakes the other part of their foundation, showing that it is not the
righteousness of the law, but of faith, whereby we are justified before God:
Martyr.

2. And more particularly the Apostle by occasion of those words, chap. 9.
verse 32. That the Jews obtained not righteousness, because they sought it by
the works of the law, not by faith, reprooueth in this Chapter three errors of
the Jews, and delivers these three verities, as opposite unto them. 1.
whereas the Jews believed to be justified by the works of the law, he shows
that there is an other kind of righteousness, namely of faith, whereby we are
justified before God, to v. 9. 2. whereas the Jews thought, that the Gospel of
Christ and the doctrine of first was not available, but only for those of the
circumcision, which question did much trouble the Church, for the deciding
whereof a Council of the Apostles was called together, Act. 15. the Apostle
shows, that herein there is no difference at all, between the Jew and the
Gentile: to v. 14. 3. he also shows, that the Gospel of Christ was as well to
be preached unto the Gentiles as the Jews, which was another thing whereat
they of the circumcision did stick: and this the Apostle declares at large
from v. 14. to the end: Tolet annot. 1. Faius.

Quest. 2. How Saint Paul prays for their salvation, whom in the former
Chapter be showed to be rejected of God.
v. 1. Mine hearts desire and prayer, etc. 1. Tolet answeareth unto this
question, that praedictio non necessitatem imponit, etc. the foretelling of a
thing imposes not a necessity, it only foresheweth what is to come; and
therefore though Saint Paul had foretold in the former Chapter of the reiection
of the Jews, yet he might pray for their conversion, etc. annot. 1. But this
does not satisfy, for if S. Paul had foretold of their reiection, and yet
should pray, for their salvation, he should have prayed against his knowledge:
2. Pet. Martyr answeareth, that before he entreated of election and
reprobation, which cannot be altered, and therefore there he turns himself
unto wishing and vowing, that he might be accursed, so they were saved, not
unto prayer: but here he treats of the justice of faith, which is the gift of
God, and may be attained by prayer: but neither does this satisfy, for it is
in vain to pray for faith to be given unto them, which are not elected, for to
them it cannot be given.

3. Therefore this is the better solution; that although Saint Paul knew in
general, that the nation of the Jews was cast off, yet neither were all in
particular rejected, as he says, c. 11.1. has God cast away his people? God
forbid; for I also am an Israelite: and for such the Apostle might pray:
neither yet were they cast off for ever, but for a time, until the fulness of
the Gentiles were come in: and therefore he prays for their conversion, which
was expected, and whereof he prophecieth, c. 11. Pareus.

Quest. 3. Why the Apostle does thus insinuate himself, by professing his love
unto the Jews. v. 1.
1. The Apostle being to entreat of the falling away of the Jews, and of the
vocation of the Gentiles, a matter very odious unto the Jews, first does use
this insinuation, that they should not think, that he spoke of any evil will
unto his nation: like as Physicians do anoine the lips of the cup, which
contains the bitter potion, with honey, least at the first the patient
tasting the bitterness thereof, should reject it, and rhetoricians do first
seek to procure the favor and good will of their auditorie: so the Apostle
being to deliver the truth, would first avoid all needless offense: And if
the property of the scorpion be, first with his foreclawes to lay fast hold on
a thing, that it may sting with the tail: much more is it lawful to fasten
upon men's affections, to heal them, and do them good. 2. But while this way
and method of insinuation is taken, Preachers must take heed that they offend
not in flattery, and use nothing but gloasing insinuations as the false
Prophets, that preached nothing but pleasing things to the people, and sowed
pillowes under their elbowes: Ezech. 13.3.

And again it must be considered, when such discreet insinuation attempered
with friendly admonitions is like to do good, and when the disease is
desperate, for then sharp speech, and rough and tart reprehensions are most
seasonable: as our Blessed Savior spared not the Pharisees, but called them a
generation of vipers, and Hypocrites: and Herod he ^^^^meth a fox: as Paul
called Ananias painted wall, Act. 23.3. Martyr.

Quest. 4. How the Jews are said to have zeal but not according to knowledge.
1. That which the Apostle here calls zeal, is nothing else, but indignatio
ob rei amatae (...), an indignation or grief for the hurt done unto a thing,
which is loved, with a desire to repel the wrong offered: Par. or ob amantis
iniurtam, for the wrong offered to the lover, when either he cannot enjoy the
thing loved, or has other partners: Mart. but this latter is properly called
jealousy, the other zeal: the first is of God, toward us; he is said to be a
jealous God, when as his people, whom he loves, go a whoaring after others:
the other is toward God, when his faithful servants, are zealous of his
glory, to see it any ways hindered or empayred: so there are three things
concurring in zeal: first a thing must be vehemently loved, secondly a wrong
is offered either to the lover, or to the thing loved, thirdly, there must be
thereupon a grief and indignation conceived.

2. The Apostle here makes two kinds of zeal, there is a right and prefect
zeal joined with knowledge, and an erroneous zeal, which has no knowledge:
but more distinctly zeal may be thus considered: there is a true and unfeigned
zeal, and a dissembling and pretended zeal: of this kind was the zeal of the
false Apostles, Gal. 4.17. They are ielous over you amiss, they would exclude
you, that ye should altogether love them: they seemed to bear a great zeal
and love unto the Galathians, but it was only for their own advantage: and
such was the zeal of Demetrius to Diana, Act. 19. because his profit was
hindered by the decay of Dianaes worship: but a true and unfeigned zeal is
that, when one seeks only the good of that which he loves, without respect
to himself: as Saint Paul was thus jealous over the Corinthians, to seek to
join them for their own good unto Christ. 2. Cor. 11.2. Now of this unfeigned
zeal there are two kinds: one which has knowledge, the other is without: and
this is of two sorts: for there is here a twofold knowledge required, both of
the thing which is desired and affected, and of the wrong which is offered: the
Jews wanted one of these: for they had a knowledge of God, though not perfect,
but they were ignorant of the other: they thought the worship of God to ^^nsist
in the rites and ceremonies of the law, and so Gods glory to be hindered by
the Preaching of the Gospel: the Gentiles were ignorant of both: for neither
had they the knowledge of God at all, neither did they know the way how to
worship him: and so were ignorant, what hindered or furthered Gods glory.

3. Now in that the Apostle makes this as a reason, why he wished well unto
them, and prayed for them, because they had zeal; though not according to
knowledge, this does not justify their zeal, or prove that we may rejoice or
take delight in any thing that is evil: but because their zeal was a good
thing in it self, and they failed in the manner only, the Apostle so far
commends them; as it is said, that Christ loved the young man, that professed
his obedience and observance of the law, though he were far from perfection,
Mark. 10.21. because he saw some good things in him: So the Apostle commends
the zeal of the Jews here.

4. Origin here observes, that as the Apostle says of zeal, that they had a
kind of zeal, but not according to knowledge; the like may be said of faith,
charity, and other graces, that men may have them after a sort, but not
according to knowledge: as he has faith without knowledge, that is ignorant,
that faith without works it dead: and so he has charity without knowledge,
that beasteth of it before men.

Quest. 5. Why the Jews are said to stablish their own righteousness. v. 3.
1. Theodoret thinks it is called their own righteousness, because now the
law was ceased, and the observation of the rites and ceremonies thereof: so
also Gorrhan understands it of the ceremonies of the law, which now were
abolished, and of the traditions, which themselves had invented: but the
Apostle means principally the moral law, and that works thereof.

2. Augustine thinks it to be so called, their own righteousness, that is,
an humanes and imperfect righteousness, because they were not able to fulfill
the law, tract. 26. in Job. so also Anselme: 3. Lyranus, because the law was
given them, and so the righteousness thereof, they took peculiarly to be
theirs, excluding the Gentiles. 4. Chrysostom says ^^ is termed theirs,
because it consisted in their own labor, whereas faith was the gift of God
without their labor. 5. Origin says, their own righteousness was that which
so seemed unto men, but did not make them just before God: so also Tolet, as
the Apostle says, Romans 4.2. If Abraham were justified by works, he has
wherein to rejoice, but not with God. 6. But properly that is called man's own
righteousness, which is supposed to be inherent in him, and is wrought by his
own works and labor; that is Gods righteousness, which is without man, and
extrinsecally is applied unto him by faith.

3. This proper justice of man signifies not such righteousness, as man
seeks to work of himself, but even such as man works by grace: for Gods
righteousness and man's are opposed not only in respect of the cause and
beginning, but in the form and manner how it is applied, the one by faith, the
other by works, and in the subject: the righteousness of faith is inherent in
Christ, and applied to us by faith: the other has man for the subject thereof.

4. The Jews in refusing this righteousness of God, commit three great
faults: 1. they are ignorant of true righteousness by faith. 2. they
ambitiously seek to be justified by their own righteousness. 3. they are
contemners of Gods righteousness, which is by faith, and will by no means be
subject unto it.

Quest. 6. How Christ is said to be the end of the law.
The end of a thing is taken four ways: 1. for the determination and
extremity, and final ending of it: as Psalm. 3.19. Whose end is damnation. 2.
it is also taken for that which first moves the agent, and for the which all
other things are intended. 3. the end, is the scope and mark, which is aimed
at, as the end of faith is the salvation of our souls: 1. Pet. 1. 4. the end
also of a thing, is the perfection thereof: as love is said to be the end of
the commandments: 1. Tim. 1.5. according to these diverse acceptions, is this
place diuersely interpreted.

1. Some take it in the first sense, that Christ ended the ceremonies and
legal rites: in which it is said, the law and the Prophets were unto John,
Matthew. 11. but this is not the meaning here: for thus Christ was an end only
to the ceremonial, not to the moral law.

2. The second way Christ is the end of the law, but not directly: for in
general the law was ordained to make man righteous, and to justify him by the
keeping thereof: but seeing this righteousness could not be obtained by the
law, nor in the law: the law brings us unto Christ, and in him we obtain
righteousness, which the law required but performed not: so then the end of
the law, which was to justify a man, is fulfilled in Christ: thus Chrystsost.
quid vult lex hominem iustum facere, etc. what would the law make a man just,
etc. this the law could not effect, but Christ has effected it: so Melancthon:
Christ is the perfection of the law: donat id, quod lex requirit, he gives
that which the law requires, that is, justification by says in Christ, who
has fulfilled the law for us: so also Beza.

3. Christ also is the end and scope aimed at in the old Testament; all the
Prophets gave witness and testimony unto Christ: as Lyranus cites R. Selam,
and other learned Hebrews, that confessed, that vniuersi Prophetae non sunt
locuti nisi ad dies Messiae, that all the Prophets did not otherwise speak but
having relation to the Messiah: as our Savior says, Ioh. 6.26. Moses wrote of
me.

4. Christ also is the perfection and consummation of the law, in fulfilling
and performing it: he has perfited the ceremonial law, being the substance,
whereof the ceremonies were but shadows: he has performed the moral law,
both in his active obedience, in fulfilling every part thereof, by his holy
life, and by his passive obedience, in bearing the curse and punishment due by
the law for us: and in this sense Augustine says, Christus sinis legis
perficiens, non interficiens, Christ is the perfiting, not the destroying end
of the law. tract. 55. in John.

Of all these, the second and last interpretation are most agreeable to the
scope of the Apostle: who in these words brings a proof of that which he
said before, that the Jews were ignorant of the righteousness of God, because
they were ignorant of Christ the true end of the law: both directly in respect
of Christ who fulfilled the law, and was in all things obedient unto it, which
thing the law intended: and indirectly in respect of us, whose weakness it
discovers in not being able to keep the law, and so directs us to Christ,
being therein a schoolmaster to us, as the Apostle says, Gal. 3.^^.

Quest. 7. How Christ is said to be the end of the law, seeing the law
requires nothing but the justice of works.
The law is taken two ways. 1. more largely for the whole doctrine contained
in Moses, and the Prophets; and in this sense, the law directly makes mention
of Christ, as in this place Saint Paul does prove the righteousness of faith
by the testimony of Moses, as our Savior himself also says, had you
believed Moses, you would have believed me, he wrote of ^^. Ioh. 5.46.

2. The law is taken more strictly for the precepts only of the moral law,
wherein although faith in Christ be not directly commanded, yet it is implied
and intended: in which sense Christ is said to be the end of the law in these
three respects. 1. in respect of his personal obedience and righteousness,
which the law required. 2. in regard of the satisfaction by Christ's death for
the punishment due by the law. 3. and in justifying us by faith in him, that is
our righteousness: whereunto the law brings us as a schoolmaster leading us
up by the hand: as the glass showing the spots, does admonish the beholder
to mend them; so the law discovering our sins sends us to seek out the
only true Physician to heal them.

Quest. 8. That Christ is not the end of the law, that we by grace in him
should be justified in keeping of the law.
1. Pererius says that Christ is said to be the end, that is the perfection
and consummatio^ of the law, quia fide in Christo impetratur gratia, etc.
because that by faith in Christ grace is obtained, to fulfill and keep the
law: disput. 1. numer. 2. and Stapleton Antidot. p. 617. insisteth upon the
same point, that by this fulfilling of the law, which we obtain by faith in
Christ, we are justified.

Contra. 1. We deny not but this also is one of the ends of our coming to
Christ to show our obedience in keeping Gods commandments, as Zachary says
in his song, Luke 2.75. That we being delivered out of the hand of our
enemies, should serve him, etc. in holiness, and righteousness all the days of
our life: yet this is neither required, as the principal end, which is to be
justified by faith in Christ, as here the Apostle says: neither is this our
obedience enjoined to that end, that we should be justified thereby: for we are
justified by faith, before we can bring forth any fruits of obedience, and
therefore by such works, as follow our justification, we are not justified:
and beside our obedience is imperfect, and can not justify us in the sight of
God: but this our obedience is necessary to show our conformity unto Christ,
and to justify our thankfulness for the benefit received by Christ, and to be a
pledge and an assurance of our perfect regeneration in the next life.

2. Herein then Christ is the end of the law, that we by faith in him, which
has fulfilled the law perfitly, should be justified without the fulfilling of
the law in our selves. 1. for the Apostle says not Christ is the end of the
law to every one fulfilling the law, but to every one that believes. 2. this
end, would take away the force of Christ's death: for, to give us grace to
fulfill the law our selves, it was not necessary, that Christ should have
died: for he might by his divine power without his death, have conferred that
grace upon us. 3. and again, if Christ gave us power to keep the law our
selves, this were to establish our own righteousness: for that is our own
righteousness, which is performed by us, though not by our own strength: but
the doctrine of faith does not establish our own righteousness.

Quest. 9. What life temporal or spiritual is promised to the keepers of the
law. v. 5.
1. Origin upon this place thinks, that the law only promised to the
obseruers thereof temporal not eternal life: so likewise Theodoret, Ambrose,
Anselme, Lyranus, Tolet, annot. 5. Pererius disput. 1. numer. 3. do understand
it of escaping only corporal death, which was inflicted upon the
transgressors of the law, as idolaters, adulterers, murderers: But this were
no great benefit, seeing many ungodly men might be free from these offenses,
which by the law were punished by death, and yet in other points might be
offenders against the law.

2. Augustine lib. de. spirit. and lit. c. understands it of the spiritual
life of faith, and justification thereby: per fidem concilians iustificationem,
facet legis iustitiam and vivat in ea, etc. he that has obtained justification
by faith, does the righteousness of the law, and may live thereby: But this
were to confound the law and the Gospel: whereas the Apostle here speaks
only of the righteousness, which the law requires.

3. The law then promised eternal life unto the obseruers thereof, but that it
was impossible for any perfitly to keep the law: so Chrysostom well
interprets, that men should have been justified in keeping of the law, if it
had been possible, but because it was not possible, iustitia illa intercidit,
that justice falls to ground: our Savior also says, If thou will enter into
life keep the commandments, Matthew. 19.16. meaning eternal life, as the young
man had asked the question, what he should do to have eternal life: Pererius
answeareth, that this must be understood of a just man, which out of a lively
charity keeps the commandments: But Christ there speaks not of the
justice of faith working by love, but of such keeping and observing of the
commandments, as the law required, if any could have attained unto it: for as
the question was, not of believing, but of doing, what shall I do, so Christ
makes his answer, of such justice, as was required by the law.

4. But if the law do promise and propound eternal life to the obseruers and
keepers thereof, how does the Prophet Ezech. c. 20.25. call them statutes, that
are not good: the answer is, that the law of it self, promises life, but in
respect of man's weakness, that is not able to keep the law, it is not good,
because it brings death: and so Moses says, Deuteronomy. 30.15. I have set before
you this day, life and death, etc. the law was life to them, that had power to
keep it, which none have in this life, but death unto the trangressors; Faius.

Quest. 10. Whether Paul did of purpose allege that place of Moses. Deuter.
30.12. or allude only unto it.
1. Some think, that Moses in that place directly speaks of the law,
according to the literal sense, and Saint Paul by a certain allusion,
applies that unto faith, which Moses utters of the law: so Theodoret,
Chrysostom, Oecumenius: likewise Tostatus upon that place, Paul per quandam
concordantiam transtulit ad fidem, Paul by a certain agreement has translated
this place, and applied it unto faith: Vatablus also says, that Paul follows
not Moses sense, but some words: But this would extenuate the force of S. Paul's
argument, if he should allude only unto this place of Scripture, and not
confirm that which he intended by the same: and the Apostle himself says,
that the justice of faith thus speaks: that is, as Origin expounds, Christ,
who is our justice by faith, thus speaks by the mouth of Moses: wherefore
Moses in that place speaks of the justice of faith.

2. Some think that S. Paul follows not the litterall, but the mystical
sense of Moses: thus Lyranus thinks that the book called Deuteronomie, the
second law, was a figure of the Gospel, which was indeed a new and a second
law: and that this was figuratively spoken of the gospel, that as they needed
not go to heaven, or to the furthest parts of the Sea to fetch the Law,
because it was near them, as it were put into their mouth by Moses: so neither
need they now seek far for the knowledge of Christ, either to heaven or
hell, seeing he was evidently preached by the Apostles: this sense also
follows Bellarmine de great. and liber. arbit. lib. 5. c. 6. But that Moses
speaks not of the precepts of the law in that place, is evident, because he
shows the facility of them: it is in thy mouth and heart to do it, etc. but
it was not so easy a thing to perform the Law: Bellarmine answeareth with
Tostatus, that Moses speaks not of the performing, but of the knowledge of
the law: whereas the words are directly, to do it: Sotus in his commentary
thinks that Moses speaks of the external observation of the law, which was
ready at hand, but for the internal and spiritual obedience they were to
expect further grace: But Moses speaks directly of the inward obedience, it
is in thy mouth, and in thy heart, etc.

3. Some think that the Apostle applies that testimony uttered by Moses of
the law unto the Gospel, by an argument from the less to the greater: that if
Moses gave such commendation of the law, much more is it true of the Gospel:
But the Apostle shows the justice of faith to be a far different thing from
the justice and righteousness of the law, and therefore not to differ only as
the less and greater, but as things of a diverse nature.

4. Wherefore it may be more safely affirmed, that the Apostle cites this
very place out of Moses: as Origin thinks, haec a Deuteronomio assumpta
sunt, these words are taken out of Deuteronomie: yet the Apostle as an
interpreter alleges them, omitting some things in Moses, and inserting some
other by way of exposition: as that is, to bring Christ again from above, and
to bring Christ again from the dead: and some words he alters, as that which
Moses calls the Sea, S. Paul names the deep, which in effect is the same:
to this purpose Iun. in parall. 16. lib. 2. Faius: and Pet. Martyr affirms
that it is so evident a thing, that Moses here speaks of Christ, that
certain great Rabbines among the Jews confess that Moses in all that 30.
chapter of Deuteronomie, has reference to Christ: yet Pareus inclines to
think S. Paul here uses but an allusion to that place of Moses. dub. 6.

Quest. 11. Whether Moses in that place directly speaks of the righteousness
of faith.
1. Tolet annot. 6. and likewise Caietan which take this place to be alleged
by Moses in the litterall sense, do think that Moses speaks of the
circumsion and conversion of the heart unto God, which belongs unto the
righteousness of faith: that when God should convert and turn their hearts,
they should then not find it an hard and difficult thing to keep the
commandments of God: Pet. Martyr much dissenteth not, that Moses then simply
speaks not of the precept of the law, but vt iam per gratiam facile factu
erat, but as now made easy by grace and faith in Christ: so also M. Calvin
denies not but that Moses in that place speaks of the observation of the
law: but ex suo font diducit, he fetches it from the fountain, and original
thereof, namely the justice of faith.

2. Some think that Moses in that place speaks not only of the law, sed de
vniuerso doctrina, but of the whole doctrine, which he has taught, which was
not only legal, but contained many evangelical promises: But the words of
Saint Paul are against both these interpretations: The righteousness, which is
of faith speaks on this wise, etc. and this is the word of faith, which we
preach, therefore Moses only in that place speaks of the word of faith.

3. Wherefore their opinion is to be preferred, who think that Moses in that
place directly treats of the doctrine of faith, and not by way of consequent
only as Iunius well observes, because Moses says, this commandment which I
command thee this day, but that day Moses delivered not the precepts of the
law, which were given before, but of faith: and so the Apostle ex consilio
Mosis, by the counsel and according to the meaning of Moses himself, applies
this place unto Christ, Iun. lib. 2. parall. 16. so also Faius: est apposita
loci applicatio, etc. it is a fit application of that place: likewise Osiander,
it is no doubt, but that S. Paul appositissime allegaverit, most fitly and
aptly applied that place of Moses to his purpose.

Quest. 12. By what occasion Moses makes mention in that place of the Gospel,
and of the meaning of the words.
1. Origin thinks that Moses, and the Apostles intendment is this, to show,
that Christ is every where: that he is not only in heaven, and in earth but
in every place: to the same purpose Haymo: he instructs us by these words,
ne putemus Christum localem esse, that we should not think that Christ is
confined to a place: But this is not to the Apostles purpose, for of this
point, there was no question.

2. Theodoret expounds it of curiosity: that no one should curiously
enquire, how Christ ascended into heaven for us, and overcame death: to the
same purpose Pet. Martyr: quis ascendet in coelum, vt haec videat, etc. say
not, who shall ascend into heaven, to see this, or go down to the deep, to
be certified of Christ's victory; the word is in thy mouth and heart: it
suffices thee to believe these things, to have been performed by Christ.

3. Anselme does understand Moses and Paul to speak of incredulity, that no
man should doubt of the ascension, and descension of Christ: so also the
ordinary gloss. do not say, who has ascended into heaven, that is, none shall
ascend to heaven, pro iustitia fidei observata, for observing the righteousness
of faith, nor shall descend to hell, for not observing it: for this were to
deny the ascension, and descension of Christ.

4. Lyranus applies it to the certainty of the knowledge of the Gospel,
tollitur omnis excusatio, etc. all excuse is taken away, they cannot be
ignorant of the Gospel being preached and testified by the Apostles, as the
Jews needed not under Moses to have sent far or near to have the law made
known unto them, seeing it was at home even at their doors: to the same
purpose Bellarmine lib. 5. de great. and liber. arbit. c. 6. so also Osiander
applies it to the certainty of the preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles,
which shall be so lively declared, that they shall not need to wish, any to
go to heaven, or to descend into the deep, to bring unto them the word of
promise, seeing Christ has already performed these things for them.

5. Chrysostom understands this place of the facility of the justice of
faith, in respect of the law: that there is no great thing required to be
performed by our selves, as to ascend to heaven or descend into the deep:
licet tibi domi sedenti salutem consequi, thou may even sitting at home,
obtain salvation, though thou go not over thy threshhold: Faius also to the
like purpose shows, how Moses in that place, and S. Paul here show, how the
law is fulfilled for us in Christ: that God requires not of us any difficult
or impossible work to be performed by us, to ascend into heaven, or descend to
hell, to be delivered from the one, and to obtain the other by our own
works: for this were to call both the ascension and resurrection of Christ
into question: but Christ by his resurrection and ascension had performed for
us the work of our redemption: This is some part of the Apostles meaning, but
not all.

6. Wherefore this is the meaning of the Apostle: as he showed before what the
justice of the law required, namely perfect obedience to be performed, in our
selves, which being a thing impossible, there must needs remain a doubt and
despair both of obtaining heaven, and in escaping hell: so now he declares
the nature and property of justifying faith: first per (...), by remoouing
that which is contrary to faith: secondly, per (...), by declaring that which
is thereunto agreeable. And for the first, whereas there are two special
doubts, that trouble the mind, how we may obtain heaven and escape hell: the
Apostle shows, that the righteousness of faith takes away both these
doubts: first no man is now to say in his heart, who shall ascend for me into
heaven to bring me thither, for Christ has done it already: and this were to
bring Christ again from thence to become man for us, and so to ascend again:
neither is any man now to make question, how he shall escape hell, or who shall
descend thither for him: for Christ by his death has delivered us from thence:
faith in Christ does deliver us from all doubt, he therefore that has his
faith grounded upon the passion, resurrection ascension of Christ, shall no
longer be perplexed in his mind, as they are which hope to be justified by the
law, thus Calv. Beza, Par. So then he shows two notable differences between
the law and the gospel: the one requires things impossible to be done, namely,
the complete and perfect obedience of the law, and so leaves the mind in
doubt and despair of salvation: but the Gospel requires not any thing
impossible to be done by us, but only to believe in Christ, and so it freeth
us from all doubt and despair.

Quest. 13. Of these words, the word is near thee, etc.
1. Whereas the Latin translator has, what says the (Scripture,) this word
(Scripture) is not in the original: therefore the same nominative case must be
supplied, which is expressed before, the righteousness of faith, speaks on
this wise, etc. as before he showed what was not agreeable to the doctrine of
faith, to make doubts of salvation, or to seek to be justified by the law: so
now he declares the true property of justifying faith, which requires no
great act to be performed by our selves, but only to believe in Christ.

2. The Septuagint add beside, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, (in thy hands,)
which addition Pet. Martyr thinks nothing to hinder, but to help the
Apostles meaning, because that which we believe in the heart, and confess with
the mouth, must be confirmed by the work of our hands: but it rather crosses
the Apostles meaning, to make mention here of works, which the justice of the
law required: but the justice of faith says otherwise: and Lyranus gloss is
here superfluous and idle, that the Apostle speaks, in casis mortis, in the
case of death, when as there is no time of working, that then it is sufficient
to believe with the heart, and confess with the mouth: whereas the Apostle
generally treats of the justice of faith, how it is sufficient to salvation
unto all.

3. And whereas the Apostle says, it is near thee, in thy mouth, etc. 1. The
meaning is not, it is near thee, that is, consentancum rationi, agreeable to
reason: Hug. gloss. for Christ preached things far beyond humane reason. 2.
Vatablus refers it to the preaching of the Apostles: this word of faith was
in their mouth and heart. 3. Osiander likewise applies it to the multitude of
believers, this doctrine of faith which so many thousands believed, was not
remote or far off. 4. Pet. Martyr expounds it of the knowledge and
understanding of the mysteries, which were hid before: nobis fit prope per
fidem, quod per naturam est remotissimum, that is near unto us by faith, which
was before most remote and far off. 5. But the fittest interpretation is,
that the Apostle shows the facility of the righteousness of faith, that God
requires no hard work of us, to cross the Seas, and climb up the
mountains, or take long iourneys to seek out our salvation: but by the grace
of Gods spirit, this faith is planted in our hearts, and confessed with our
mouths, and nothing else does God require unto salvation: so Chrysostom. in ore
and cord tuo salutis causa, in thy heart and mouth is the casue of salvation:
so Oecumen. brevis salus nihil indigens externis laboribus, salvation has but
a short cut, it needs not external labor: facile credere animo and ore
confiteri potes, etc. thou may easily believe with thy mind and confess
with thy mouth, by the operation of the spirit, Calvin: and it seems to be a
proverbiall speech to show the readiness and facility of that which is in the
heart and mouth: as it is said Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will
fill it, Faius: so Lyranus, ostenditur iustitiae per fidem Christi facilitas,
the facility of righteousness by the faith of Christ is showed: And here
Origens distinction may be received, who says that two ways is Christ near
us, possibilitate, in possibility, and so he may be near unto unbelievers,
for they may have grace to believe: and efficacia, in efficacy and power, and
so he is near unto those, which actually by the spirit do believe with the
heart and confess to salvation.

4. But where the justice of faith is said to be easier then the justice
required by the law, that is not understood in regard of the beginning and
efficient cause of faith: for man has no more power to believe of himself
then to do good works: for it is God that works i^ us both the will and
deed, Philip. 2.13. but the righteousness of faith is easier, in regard of
the manner of the work: because the law requires the obedience thereof to be
performed by our selves: but faith refers us, for the performing of the law
unto Christ: Neither does our salvation depend upon the force and efficacy of
faith, but upon the worthiness and virtue of Christ apprehended by faith: as
when a sick man walks leaning upon his staff, it is his staff that stays
him, not his hand, which only lays hold upon the staff: The justice of the
law is, as if a weak and sick man should be enjoined to stand by himself
without a staff, but faith shows how our weakness is propped and held up by
other helps ^s when a sick man lays his hand upon a staff.

Quest. 14. How Moses that preached the law, is alleged, for justification by
faith.
Ob. The objection is made out of that place, Ioh. 1.17. The law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, etc. but if Moses also taught
justification by faith, then grace also came by him. Answ. 1. Pet. Martyr
answeareth, that Moses is said to give the law, because his principal
intendment was to propound the law: yet he gives testimony also to the
Gospel, because Christ was the end of the law, as the Apostles in the new
Testament preach repentance, which belongs to the law, but their principal
scope and intent is to set forth the faith of the Gospel. 2. Hereunto for more
full answer may be added, that the law given by Moses is taken two ways,
either strictly for the precepts of the moral law, and so Moses was the
minister of the law only and not of grace, or for the whole doctrine
delivered by Moses, wherein also Evangelical promises are contained.

Quest. 15. How Christ is to be confessed.
v. 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth, etc. 1. S. Paul here places the
confession of the mouth first, both because he follows that order which Moses
did, who names it first, and for that we do not know the faith of others,
that believe in Christ, but by their confession, Mart. Pareus.

2. By confession is understood not a bare and naked acknowledgment of Christ,
but the invocation of his name, believing in him, giving praise unto him, and
whatsoever belongs unto his worship: and this must be such a confession, as
is joined with the belief of the heart: and not with a general and
historical belief only, such as the devils have, but a confident trust in
Christ, in believing him to be our redeemer and Savior.

3. Here we are to consider of four sorts of men. 1. some neither confess
Christ, nor believe, and they are atheists. 2. some believe and confess not,
they are timorous and fearful, as Peter when he denied his Master. 3. some
confess and believe not, such are hypocrites. 4. some both confess and
believe, and they are right Christians.

4. The Apostle makes special mention of the raising of Christ from the dead.
1. because this was the most doubted of, his death the Jews and Gentiles
confessed, but his resurrection they would not acknowledge, Mart. 2. and
unless Christ had risen again, all the rest had profited us little, because
in his resurrection he obtained a perfect victory over death, hell, and
damnation, Calvin. 3. and this article of Christ's resurrection, praesupponis
alios articulos, presupposes other articles of the faith, and takes them as
granted: as if he rose, he died, and his death presupposes his birth, Gorrhan.

Quest. 16. How Christ is said to be raised by God.
1. By God in this place is not necessary to understand the person of the
father: but the power of the Godhead in the whole Trinity, whereby Christ as
man was raised up: So Christ as man was raised up by the power of his father:
but as he is one God with his father, so he is said to raise up himself, John.
2.18. Christ is also said to be raised by the spirit of sanctification, Romans
1.4. so then Christ is here considered three ways, as being one God with his
father, as the second person in the Trinity, and as he was man: as he is God
he only raises, is not raised, as he is man he is only raised, and raises
not, as he is the Son of God he both raises himself, and the father raises
him: the father raises the Son by the Son, and the Son raises himself
by the spirit of sanctification: whereby he was declared to be the Son of
God, Romans 1.4. Pareus annot. in v. 9.

2. And generally concerning the works of the Trinity, there is a threefold
difference to be observed: for there are some works wherein the Blessed
Trinity do concur together, both in their divine essence and persons, and
they are joint workers, as all those which are called extra, Wherein the
Blessed Trinity works jointly, wherein severally.
works without them: as all things now ruled and governed by Gods providence,
are so governed by the whole Trinity, as Ioh. 5.17. My Father works
hitherto, and I work: and the spirit of God also works, Psalm. 104.30. If
thou send forth thy spirit they are created: some works are proper and
peculiar unto the glorious persons of the Trinity, as those which are called
ad intra, the inward works: as the father begets, the Son is begotten,
the holy Ghost proceeds: these are so peculiar unto each of them, that what
is proper to one, agrees not unto an other: and thirdly, some works there are,
wherein the Blessed Trinity concurreth in their divine power and essence, as
they are one God, yet with a special relation to their persons: as God the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, both created, redeemed the world, and sanctify
the elect: but the work of the creation is specially ascribed to the person of
the Father, the redemption to the person of the Son, the work of
sanctification to the person of the holy Ghost, considered together with their
infinite and omnipotent Godhead.

Quest. 17. Whether to believe in the heart be not sufficient unto salvation,
without confession of the mouth.
v. 10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth he
confesses to salvation. 1. Lyranus thinks, that the Apostle only gives
instance here of those, which are in casis mortis, at the point of death, in
whom it is sufficient to believe and confess, when they have no time to work:
But the Apostle describes one general way and rule whereby all are justified.

2. The Greek scholiast thinks, that whereas the belief of the heart is
sufficient, yet mention is made of confession in two respects, both in regard
of others, which by this confession are to be instructed, and the time of
persecution, when it is necessary to make public confession of the faith: But
this which the Apostle requires is to be performed of every believer, and at
all times.

3. Bellarmine infers out of this place, fidem non sufficere ad salutem,
that faith is not sufficient unto salvation, but that the confession of the
mouth, and other works are also required as causes concurring unto salvation:
which place, he says is so evident, that in the colloquie at Altenburge, one
for ad salute^, to salvation, would have put, de salute, of salvation.

But we are not driven to such a straight, as to use any such shift: lib. 4. de
iustificat. c 7.
we will send Bellarmine to his ancient Cardinal Tolet, who upon this place
thus writes; oris confessio nos non iustificat a peccato, etc. sed iustificati
tenemur eam palam profiteri, etc. the confession of the mouth does not justify
us, but being justified, we are bound publicly to profess it, that we may
obtain everlasting salvation, etc. confession then of the mouth is not
required as a cause of salvation, because it is no part of justification, but
as a necessary effect that follows.

4. Pet. Martyr thinks, that by salvation here is not understood, as in the
former verse, the remission of sins, but vlteriorem perfectionem, a further
degree of perfection in them that are justified: as the Apostle in the same
sense bids us to works out our salvation with trembling and fear, Phil. 2.
so also Gorrhan interprets, ad salutem, to salvation, ad salutis
perfectionem, to the perfection of salvation: But this were to give way unto
them, which ascribe only the beginning of salvation unto faith, and the
perfection unto works.

5. Wherefore the Apostle makes not here confession the cause of salvation, as
belief is of justification: but faith is the cause also of confession, which
is required, not as a cause, but tanquam medium, as a way and mean unto
salvation: for justification and salvation, are here to be considered as the
beginning and end: by faith we are justified, which faith must bring forth
lively fruits, as the confession of the mouth, and the profession of the life,
before we can attain to salvation: to this purpose Pareus dub. 8. likewise M.
Calvine says the Apostle shows only how a true faith may be distinguished
from a fained faith: the faith which justifies must be such a faith as
brings forth lively fruits, as the frank confession of the mouth: And Beza
adds, that the Apostle makes faith and belief here the cause both of
justification, and of salvation, because the confession of the mouth, to the
which salvation is ascribed, is an effect and fruit of faith: and so according
to that rule in Logike, causa causae, est causa causati, the cause of the
cause, is the cause of that which is caused by that cause: And so as Beza well
concludes, confession is via qua pervenitur, the way whereby we come unto
eternal life: as also other good works in the life are the way, but not the
cause: which, as Origin collecteth, are here also included, under confession:
for he can not confess Christ to be risen from the dead, which does not walk
in newnes of life: as the Apostle says, which God has ordained for us to
walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. now we use to walk in the way.

18. Quest. Of these words, Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord, shall
be saved, v. 13.
1. The word here translated ( saved) in that place of the Prophet Joel, 2.32.
signifies to be delivered, which in effect is all one: the Septuagint, reading
(...), shall be saved, do put the consequent for the antecedent: for he that
is delivered, shall consequently be saved: the Prophet there prophesies of the
spiritual benefits, which the Church of God should receive by the Messiah, and
so we are here to understand, not any temporal, but a spiritual and eternal
deliverance.

2. This sentence is brought in by the Apostle upon these two occasions, both
to prove his former general proposition, that God is rich in mercy to all
both Jew and Gentile: for the Prophet generally says, whosoever, excluding
none, whether Jew or Gentile: Calvin: as also the Apostle shows the
difference between the justice of the law, which requires doing, and the
justice of faith, which requires nothing but believing, and confession in the
invocating of the name of God, Melancth.

3. Calls. 1. Gryneus thinks that invocation, the principal part of the
worship of God, is here taken for the whole: as also Origin says, invocare
nomen and adorare Deum, vnum, to invocate the name of God, and to worship God,
are one and the same: But as Pet. Martyr thinks, invocation here rather is
taken properly, for the prayers of the faithful. 2. neither does he speak of
any invocation, but of that, which is in faith: whereof the Apostle makes
mention, 1. Cor. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy
Ghost: so the ordinar. gloss. he that prays, invocateth, but this he can not
do, nisi prius credat, unless he believe before.

4. Shall be saved: He says not, he shall obtain, that which he prays for,
for many times one may pray ignorantly for that which is not meet for him: but
yet by his faithful prayer, he shall come unto salvation, Mart.

5. By the name of the Lord, Origin well understands Christ Jesus, as he
shows by that place of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 1.3. with all that call on the name
of our Lord Jesus: and he further thus infers: if that Enoch, Moses, Aaron
did call upon God, and he heard them, sine dubio, etc. without doubt, they
called upon the Lord Jesus: and Gorrhan gives this reason, why Christ is said
to be the name of his father, quia per cum, sicut per nomen notificatur,
because by him as by a name the father is made known.

6. But that other gloss of Origens here is very corrupt: that whereas he
moves this question, where the Apostle, 1. Cor. 12.3. writes to the Church
at Corinth, with all that call upon the name of the Lord Jesus, whom the
Apostle should mean hereby, as though these were not of the Church: he
resolves, that these which are said to call upon, etc. are those which believe
in Christ, but yet are not fully sanctified, nor joined to the Church, but are
but beginners, and novices as it were in the faith: whereas the Apostle in that
addition, means those faithful brethren which were in other parts of Achaia,
to whom he writes as well, as to the church of Corinthus, as it appears in
the inscription of his second epistle to the Corinthians, c. 1.1.

Quest. 19. Of the gradation here used by the Apostle, v. 14. and the occasion
thereof.
1. Whereas the Apostle rises up by decrees, they which do invocate God must
believe, and belief presupposes hearing, and hearing preaching, and preaching
sending: Chrysostom thinks, that hereby the Apostle intends to discover
the ignorance and incredulity of the Jews, that it was their fault, that they
believed not: on Gods behalf there was no want, and so he would have it a
proof of his former charge, that the Jews were ignorant of the righteousness
of God: But if the Apostle directed his speech against the Jews only, it
should have no coherence with that which went before, where he showed, there
was no difference between the Jew and Grecian.

2. Neither yet, as Lyranus says, arguitur hic infidelitas non credentium,
does the Apostle in general reprove the infidelity of those which believed
not among the Gentiles: he rather shows the contrary, that God was believed
upon among the Gentiles, because he was there called upon.

3. Osiander takes it, that the Apostle by certain degrees comes to set
forth the necessity of the ministry of the Gospel: to make a difference
between those among the Gentiles, which truly invocate the name of God, which
cannot be where the ministry of the Gospel is not: and those which boast that
they are the worshippers of God, as the Turks, but yet receive not the
ministry of the Gospel.

4. Gryneus following Beza, makes this the scope of the gradation: that as
invocation is a testimony of faith, faith of vocation, vocation of election
and salvation: so invocation is a sure note of salvation: and so they would
have it a proof of the former proposition, Whosoever calls upon the name of
God shall be saved.

5. Pareus thinks the order to be this, that as hitherto the Apostle had set
forth the doctrine of justification by faith, and the difference between it
and the justice of the law: so now he shows the means, how this justifying
faith is obtained, which is by hearing of the word preached by those, which are
sent thereunto.

6. As this is true, that the ordinary means to beget faith is the preaching
of the word; so the Apostle hereby shows how the Gospel was to be preached
unto the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews, because God had appointed them to
believe in his name, because his name should be called upon among the Gentiles,
which could not be without faith, nor faith without preaching, nor preaching
without sending: and thus Saint Paul does together justify the vocation of the
Gentiles, and his Apostleship, and sending to preach among them: to this
purpose Calvin, Martyr, Hyperius, Faius, with others.

Quest. 20. Of these words, v. 15. How bewtifull are the foete, etc. whether it
be rightly cited out of the Prophet.
1. The Apostle here leaves the Septuagint, and follows the Hebrew text: yet
with some omission, and alteration: the Septuagint read thus, adsum tanquam
(...) in montibus, I am present, as pleasantnes, or beauty in the mountains,
etc. for the word (...), ( hora) with an aspiration signifies time,
opportunity, and beauty, and without an aspiration ( ara) carefulnes: the
Apostle here rather follows the Hebrew original, leaving the vulgar
translation of the Septuagint.

2. But he omitteth some things, as these words, upon the mountains, because
this did specially concern the situation of Jerusalem: but the Apostle
applies this text, to the solemn embassage of the Apostles to the whole
world: and yet even that part also of the prophecy was fulfilled in the
Apostles, who were first sent to preach the Gospel in Judea which was a
country full of hills, and so discurrebant per montes, they did go up and
down upon the hills: And whereas the Prophet Isai, 52.7. whence this place is
taken does speak in the singular number: how beautiful are the feet of him,
that brings glad tidings; the Apostle does use the plural, therein
expressing the force of the Hebraisme, which by the singular understands the
plural.

3. The Prophet in that place speaks of the deliverance of the people from
the captivity of the Assyrians: but because all those particular and temporal
deliverances, were grounded upon the spiritual deliverance by Christ: that
place specially intends the spiritual joy, which the Church of God should
have in the message of their spiritual deliverance: Mar. Origin upon this
place, and Cyrill upon Isay, likewise Ambrose epistol. 11. do interpret that
place, and apply it unto Christ, whom the Prophet speaks of in the next
verse before, behold it is I that do speak: But seeing Saint Paul does
directly apply it to the preaching of the Apostles, no other sense is to be
followed: and so also Tertullian. lib. 3. cont. Marcion. expounds it of the
Apostles.

4. Their feet are said to be bewtifull: 1. not as Origin in an allegorical
sense, quia ambulabant per viam vitae, because they did walk in the way of
righteousness: for this was not peculiar to the Apostles, but common to all
the faithful. 2. nor as Haymo, because the Lord had washed their feet, for
Saint Paul's feet were not then washed. 3. wherefore here by a figure, membrum,
a part is put for the whole person: Vatab. the message of the Apostles was
welcome: and their feet are named, because they travailed preaching the
Gospel: Par. and thereby is also signified, that the Gospel should not be
propagated by force and strength, sed humili praedicatione, but by a lowly and
humble kind of preaching. 4. and their feet are said to be bewtifull, both in
respect of the manner of their teaching, which was alluring and delighting, in
respect of their sweet exhortations, and holy life, Tolet: and the powerful
demonstration of the truth by miracles, Martyr: but especially in respect of
the message it self, which was the preaching of redemption by Christ.

5. But whereas the word used by the Prophet, bashur, signifies simply to
declare, publish, or bring tidings: the Greek word (...), signifies of it
self to evangelize, that is, so bring good tidings, so that the other word
(...), good things, may seem to be superfluous; Origin answeareth, that one
may annuntiare bona, bring tidings of good things, and yet not, been, well, as
the heretics which do profess the Trinity, the Father, Son and holy
Ghost, but not syncerely.

6. But this is somewhat curious, the Apostle does express the Prophets word,
which signifies a bare message, by the word Evangel, or Evangelize, more fully
to set forth the Prophets meaning: the good things, which the Gospel brings
tidings of, are the peace of conscience, and the spiritual good things both in
this life, as remission of sins, justification, and in the next life,
eternal.

Quest. 21. Of these words, v. 16. but they have not all believed our report,
etc.
1. Chrysostom thinks, this is an objection made by the Jews, that if the
Apostles were sent of God, how comes it to pass, that all believe not their
message, and so by this sailing in the message, they would except against their
authority: But these words are not objected in the person of the Jews: they
are the Apostles words: because he says, our report, and he gives a reason
out of the Prophet, for Esaias says: But the Apostle indeed preuenteth a
cavil of the Jews, or whosoever might object, that if they were sent with so
great authority from God, how it came to pass, that all obeyed not their
doctrine: he answeareth, this need not seem strange, because it was foretold
long ago by the Prophet: for although faith presupposes hearing, yet hearing
always brings not faith; like as where there is justification, there is
vocation, but not contrariwise, does justification always follow upon vocation.

2. They have not all obeyed, etc. this the Apostle calls, obedience to the
faith, Romans 15. whereupon it is called also the law of faith, Romans 3.27.
because it requires obedience, as the law does, but not in the same manner:
for the law requires obedience even of those which are unwilling, but gives
no strength to obey, and by that obedience it promises life and salvation: but
the faith of the Gospel makes us willing, and gives strength in some measure
to obey, though not thereby to be justified. Mar. this obedience of faith is
twofold. 1. in willing, receiving, and attending unto the doctrine of faith, as
it is said of Lydia, Act. 16.14. 2. and this attentive obedience in hearing,
and believing, brings forth a practical obedience in life, as S. Peter
says, 1. epist. 1.14. as obedient children, not fashioning your selves to the
former lusts of your ignorance: Gryneus.

Quest. 22. Of the saying of the Prophet Isay, Lord who has believed, etc. c.
53.1. cited by the Apostle, v. 16.
1. The Prophet has not the word Lord, but the Septuagint, whom the Apostle
follows, do infert it by way of explanation: for the Prophet in that place,
turns himself unto God, complaining of the small number of those, which
should receive the preaching of the Gospel: and somewhat is omitted, which the
Prophet has: as to whom is the arm of God revealed? which is to be
understood, de interiori revelatione, of the inward effectual revelation, and
expectation of the spirit, called the arm of God: which is the secret cause,
why all do not receive the Gospel: But it was not necessary that the Apostle
should repeat all these words, which the Prophet there has, he only takes
that which was for his purpose.

2. Origin observes, that where the Scripture uses to ask the question, who
etc. sometimes pro raro, aliquando pro nullo ponitur, it is put for few,
sometime for none at all: as Psalm. 15. who shall rest in thy holy mountain?
there it signifies but few: and where the Apostle said v. 6. who shall ascend
into heaven, that is to bring Christ from thence, there it signifies none at
all: But here it is taken the first way.

3. Our report: the Hebrew word signifies, hearing, (...), which Ambrose and
Haymo, take for the doctrine, which the Apostles heard and learned of God: as
though the meaning should be this, who has believed those things which we have
heard of thee: but Chrysostom better refers it to that, which was the
Apostles preached, and others heard, quis credidit sermonibus nostris, who has
believed our sermons: so also Beza: the Syrian interpreter, voci nostrae, our
voice.

4. But whereas the Apostle thus brings in the Prophet speaking, for Isaias
says: this is not so to be understood, as though this were the cause of their
unbelief, because Isaias so foretold: Tolet here shows a double use of this
word ( enim) sometime it shows causam rei, the cause of the thing, sometime
only a cause of the speech: as if we should say, this man has committed
murder, for the witnesses have said it, this is not given as a reason of the
thing, but of the saying; Tolet annot. 10. the better answer is, that this
particle ( for) does not show the cause, but the consequence: for, not because
the Prophet so said, did they not believe: but because they believed not, the
Prophet so foretold, Mar.

Quest. 23. Whether all faith come by hearing.
1. Object. Instance may be given in infants, and those which are deaf and
dumb, how in them, can it be said faith comes by hearing? Ans. The Apostle
speaks of the usual and ordinary means, which God uses to beget faith in
them which are of years, and of perfect sense: the reason is otherwise in
those which are deprived of the benefit of hearing, either for want of years,
or by some other means, not by their fault: God in this case is not tied to
outward means, which he can abu^dantly supply by the inward work of his spirit.

Object. 2. Faith also is by miracles, and the sacraments also help to
confirm faith: therefore it is not by hearing only.

Ans. The working of miracles is never separated from the word, so neither are
the Sacraments ministered without the word, and therefore the one of these
excludes not the other: the preaching of the word is the principal means,
which is but seconded by the other, Faius.

Object. 3. Faith comes by hearing, then it will follow, that a man by
hearing of himself may attain unto faith; and yet we see that many which hard
the Apostles preach, were not converted to the faith.

Answ. The Apostle speaks of the outward ministry of the word, as it is
joined with the inward operation of the spirit: ex auditu est praeparatiue, ex
Deo effective, it is by way of preparation by hearing, but effectually from
God, Gorrhan: and here the Apostle speaks of the hearing of the word among
the faithful, in whom the grace of God works inwardly together with the
outward voice: Paul. Burgens. here addition. 1. confuteth at large their
opinion, which affirm, that fides est acquisita, that faith is altogether
procured outwardly, sine infusione, without the inward infusion of grace: and
he well shows out of Thomas, that two things are required unto faith, first
the propounding of such things, as are to be believed, then the assent
thereunto: and two things make this assent, the outward persuasion, by the
preaching of the word, and the inward and supernatural operation of the spirit.

Object. 4. S. Paul was instructed by revelation from Christ, therefore all
faith comes not by hearing.

Ans. The Apostle speaks here of the ordinary means, whereby faith is
engendered, not confining or limiting the spirit of God, but that by
extraordinary means, yea without any means at all, faith may be wrought.

Object. 5. If faith come by hearing, then it suffices to hear, without any
sifting or examining of that which we hear.

Ans. 1. Faith comes not by hearing of every word, but the word of God; and
that is the word of God, not which Christ only preached, but which the
Apostles also received from him, and which now is preached in the Church from
the mouth of the Apostles, as Origin here notes. 2. and the word must be
received without any curious disquisition; for there are two kind of
examinations, one is according to the judgment of the sensual and carnal
man, and so the word must not be examined, as the Scribes and Pharisees thus
examined the doctrine of Christ according to their own blind understanding,
and so rejected it; there is an examination according to the spirit, as the
brethren of Berea examined the Apostles preachings according to the Scriptures,
Act. 17.11. and of this kind of examination speaks Saint Paul, 1 Thessalonians.
5.21. try all things, and keep that which is good.

Quest. 24. Whether the Apostle mean the Jews or Gentiles: Have they not
heard, v. 18.
1. Some think that the Apostle goes about to prove, that the Jews had
heard the Gospel; if the remote parts of the world have heard, much more the
Jews: Chrysostom, so also Haymo: and he gives this reason, because Jerusalem
was situate in the mids of the earth, Ephesians. 5.5. This is Jerusalem, I have
set her in the mids of the nations, that are (...) about her: and he gives
four reasons thereof, wherefore Jerusalem was in the mids of the earth. 1.
because Israel only had the true knowledge of God, that other ^^ions by them
also might be provoked to the true worship. 2. and if they did keep the law of
God, that they might be had in honor of all nations, as in David and Salomons
time. 3. if they break the law of God, that they might be afflicted one every
side, as they were, 4. and because Christ was to be borne of that nation, that
the fame of his doctrine, and miracles might be the more easily dispersed
abroad: to this effect Haymo: so also Pet. Martyr, Gryneus, Beza, Iunius, do
understand this to be spoken of the Jews, but not in the same manner: Martyr
thinks, that it is a direct proof, that the Jews had heard the Gospel,
least they should excuse themselves that they had not heard: Gryneus thinks
the objection is to be framed thus, seeing faith comes by hearing, the Jews
not having ^^rth may seem not to have heard: Beza does infer an other sense,
as though the Jews should object thus: you say that the Gentiles are called to
the knowledge of God, and so have heard: why have not the Jews heard also? and
so the Apostle by way of concession, should grant that not only they, but all
the world has heard beside: Iunius does thus gather the objection, that the
Jews being charged, that they believed not the Gospel, might be somewhat
excused, because they had not heard: But this had been a superfluous objection
to doubt whether the Jews had heard or not of Christ, seeing all Christ's
miracles were wrought among them, there he was borne, lived, suffered, died,
and rose again: there the Gospel was first preached by the Apostles: so that
no doubt could be made thereof.

2. Wherefore, it is rather understood of the Gentiles; and it is a proof,
that the Gospel was preached unto them, by a prophetical testimony of the
Psalm: thus Calvin, Hyperius, Faius, Tolet.

3. Or rather it may indifferently be understood both of the Gentiles and
Jews, that none of them could plead ignorance, seeing that in some sort the
Gospel of Christ, had bin notified to all the world: Pareus.

Quest. 25. Whether that place of the 19. Psalm, their sound went through all
the earth, be rightly cited by the Apostle.
1. Concerning the words: the Septuagint, whom Saint Paul follows, have an
other word, then is in the Hebrew text, which says cavam, their line is gone
through the earth: the Septuagint read, their (...), sound: keeping the sense,
though not the word: to make it answer unto the next words following, and their
words unto the end of the world: and the Apostle retains that word sound,
having respect unto the present accomplishment of that prophecy in the
preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles to all the world: which was indeed a
line and rule of faith unto all: Osiand.

2. But a greater question is about the sense of that place, Psalm. 19.4. where
the Prophet David seems directly to speak of the heavens, how they do set
forth the glory of God, in such evident sort, that as with a loud voice they
proclaim the same to all the world: for the answer unto this doubt there are
diverse interpretations.

1. Some make the sense of that place allegorically, by the heavens
understanding the Apostles, by the sun, Christ; and so they will have the
Apostles and their preaching understood by an allegory: thus Augustine and
some other of the fathers, and Pet. Martyr consents with them: But we are not
to flee unto allegories, where the litterall sense will serve: and it is
evident that the Prophet in that place literally speaks of the material
heavens.

2. Some other think that the Apostle alludeth only unto that place, he
cites it not as a testimony: Martyr and Pareus, refuse not this
interpretation, though they insist not upon it: and Origin has the like
observation, upon the 6. to the Romans, obseruanda est consuetudo Apostoli,
etc. the custom of the Apostle must be observed, that not always when he
assumeth any thing out of the Scriptures, he assumeth the whole text, as it
lies, etc. But if the Apostle had only alluded unto that place, it had been
no sufficient proof of the matter in hand.

3. Some think that the Prophet in that place speaks indeed of the material
heavens, and the Apostle in the same sense alleges the Prophet, that it
should not seem so strange a thing for the Gentiles to have the Gospel
preached unto them, seeing that from the beginning he spoke unto them by the
knowledge of his creatures: Calvin, Hyperius, Faius: But then this allegation
had been impertinent: for the Apostle speaks of that hearing, which
begets faith: faith comes by hearing, and then it follows, have they not
heard: and this knowledge, which comes by the creatures, is rather by seeing,
then hearing.

4. Iunius parallel. 18. thinks, that although the Prophet in that place do
literally speak of the heavens, yet there is a secret comparison implied,
that if the line of the heavens do run over all the world, much more the
voice of the Gospel, whereby the glory of God is more lively set forth: and
that Saint Paul, the best interpreter of Scripture, opens and unfolds that
comparison there insinuated.

5. But there is no inconvenience, if we affirm, that the Prophet there
literally and historically speaks of the heavens, and prophetically of the
Apostles: not that one place of Scripture admits diverse sense, as Tolet
annot. 11. but it being admitted, that the Scripture has one whole sense, yet
there may be a diverse application, one sense including an other: As the sense
of this place, has an historical relation to the heavens, and yet it
contains a prophetical prediction of the preaching of the Apostles through
the world: Pareus, dub. 12.

Quest. 26. Whether the Gospel were preached to all the world in the Apostles
time.
1. Some are of opinion, that the Gospel was not preached by the Apostles, nor
in the Apostles times to all the world: Origin he urges this reason, hom. 28.
in Matthew. because many barbarous nations in his time had not heard of the
Gospel: as the Aethiopians, Germans, Sarmatians, Dacians, Scythians, and so
his opinion is, that prope consummatione^ seculi, etc. near to the end of the
world, the Gospel shall be preached to all the world, which was not preached
before: of the same mind is Augustine epistol. 80. ad Hesychium, that there
were many nations in Africa, to whom the Gospel was never preached, as was
easy to learn by those captives, which were brought from thence: so also
Anselme; likewise Caietan gives instance of those nations among the Indies,
which have been converted by the Spaniardes to the Christian faith: whose
countries were not known in the world before: in c. 24. Matthew. the same
instance is urged by Pererius disput. 4. Rhemist. Matthew. 24. sect. 4. in the
same opinion is Bellarmine, that the Gospel is not yet preached to the whole
world, but shall be before the coming of Christ, de Roman. pontif. lib. 3. c.
4.

Contra. 1. It is certain, that so many nations were not ignorant of the
Gospel in Origens time, for the Britanes were converted to the faith in the
Apostles time by Simon Zalotes, as Nicephorus says, and afterward, preachers
were sent in King Lucius days from Ele^therius Bishop of Rome, to confirm the
Christian faith, before Origens time; and not long after, there was at the
Council of Nice Bishops from Scythia and Petsia, which show, that they had
before that received the Christians faith. 2. Many countries might have
received the Gospel before, which in continuance of time, might be obscured,
and discontinued: as who knows whether they of India heard not of the Gospel
before? for it is held that Thomas preached unto them, which they acknowledge
to this day, whereupon he commonly is called Thomas of Iue: the service which
the Spaniardes have done, was to bring them in obedience to the Bishop of Rome,
and to corrupt them with Pseudochristianisme: As Augustine was sent into
England, who first brought them under the jurisdiction of Rome, but the
Christian faith they had received long before, but then much decayed, and in
many places abolished. 3. and further we may answer with Pet. Martyr, that
where Augustine with others of that time speak of so many nations, to the
which the Gospel had not been preached, the Gospel was not public receptum
and creditum, publicly received and believed, by the authority of the
Magistrate: for during the space of 300. years after Christ, there were few
Christian Magistrates.

4. And whereas that place is objected, Matthew. 24.14. The Gospel of the
kingdom shall be preached to all the world, etc. then shall the end come:
Chrysostom, Euthymius, Theophylact, Hilarie, upon that place do understand
that consummation of the overthrow and destruction of Jerusalem, before which
time the Gospel should be preached to all the world: see this argument further
answered, Synops. Papis. Centur. 3. err. 31.

2. An other opinion is, and the more probable, that the Gospel was preached in
the Apostles time to all the world: as Chrysostom, Hierom, Euthymius,
Theophylact, Ambrose, Hilarie, Lyranus, Haymo, do affirm, and of our new
writers, Martyr, Osiander, Pareus, with others: whose arguments are these.

1. Theophylact, and Oecumenius upon this place, thus infer, terrarum orbis
hos audivit, etc. the whole world did hear them, that is the Apostles: as here
the Apostle says, their sound went through the earth.

2. Chrysostom uses this reason, that if Saint Paul only preached the
Gospel from Jerusalem to Illiricum, and so to Spain, as he himself
testifies c. 15. v. 19.24. it is very like that all the Apostles being
dispersed, might, and did preach the Gospel to the known parts of the world.

3. Hilarie upon that place Matthew. 24.14. cited before, shows that before the
overthrow of Jerusalem by the Romans, the Gospel was preached in the vniersall
world.

4. Haymo and Lyranus urge that commission given by Christ unto his Apostles,
Act. 1. Ye shall be my witnesses in Jerusalem, Judea, Samaria, and unto the
ends of the earth, etc. and this is so much the more probable, because
Jerusalem was situate in the mids of the earth, from whence the Apostles were
dispersed, in quatuor mundi climata, into the four quarters of the world.

5. Pet. Martyr, and Pererius show by particular induction, in what several
countries the Apostles preached, out of Dorotheus, Eusebius, Hierome, Isidore:
S. Peter preached in Judea, Antioch, Galatia, Cappadocia, Pontus, S. Paul from
Jerusalem round about to Illiticum, at Rome, and in Spain, S. James the son
of Zebede in Judea, and Spain, S. John, in Judea, and Asia minor: S. Andrew in
Scythia, Epirus, Thracia, Achaia, the other James in Jerusalem: S. Phillip in
Scythia, and Phrygia, S. Bartholomew in the nearer India, and Armenia the
greater, S. Matthew in Ethiopia, S. Thomas among the Parthians, Medes,
Persians, Hyrcanians, Indians, Simon in Mesopotamia, Jude in Egypt: Matthias in
the inward parts of Ethiopia: Barnabas together with Paul in Syria, Cyprus, and
many regions of Asia, and Europe.

6. Add hereunto the evident testimonies of Saint Paul, Coloss. 1.6. The
Gospel is come unto you, as it is unto all the world: and v. 23. The Gospel
has been preached to every creature, which is under heaven: upon these
reasons and testimonies it appears, that the Gospel was preached in the
Apostles time to all the world.

But here diverse answears are framed to these reasons.

1. Augustine thinks, that where the Apostle says, the Gospel had been
preached, etc. the preterperfectense is used for the future: that is, it shall
be preached: so the ordinary gloss. locutus est praetaritive, he speaks in
the time past for the certainty of the Prophecy.

2. But Thomas taking this to be an insufficient answer, as indeed it is: for
the Apostle proves by this testimony, that all had heard already, not that
they should hear: therefore he uses here a distinction: the Gospel may be
said to be preached to the whole world three kind of ways: either so to be
preached, as the faith should be planted, and Churches founded: or so as it
might come to the knowledge of every one in particular: or the same only of
the Gospel might be dispersed over all the world: the last of these only he
thinks was done in the Apostles time, the first, not till afterward: the
third way is not necessity at all to be performed: But there was more then a
fame only of the Gospel spread abroad in the world in the Apostles time: for
the Apostle speaks of such a kind of hearing, as had been able to beget
faith: faith comes by hearing: but a fame only is not sufficient.

3. Faius thinks the whole earth is named, because the Gospel was preached to
the two great families of the world, the Jews and Gentiles.

4. Tolet thinks that the world is named by a figure, for the greater part of
the world: as it is said Act. 2.5. there were men dwelling at Jerusalem of
every nation under heaven: But neither of these answears do satisfy, because
the ends of the earth are named: and seeing that place of the Psalm is
historically understood of the heavens, which are patent and open to every part
of the earth, it being prophetically applied to the preaching of the Apostles,
must have as large a sense.

Therefore I insist upon the latter opinion, as the better grounded, that in
the Apostles time, the Gospel was preached to all the world: but because there
are many nations now found in India, and in other places, which seem never to
have heard of the Gospel, here certain cautions are to be admitted.

1. The word (...), tobel, signifies the habitable world: many countries may
be inhabited now and in great likelihood are, which were desolate then, and
after occupied: Pareus.

2. Ambrose in his commentary here says, vbi praesentia hominis praedicantis
deficit, ^^ Evangelij sonus and fama pervenit, where the presence of a preacher
was wanting, ^hether the sound and fame of the Gospel might come, as the fame
of the wonders, which were done in Egypt, came unto the knowledge of other
nations, as Rahab confesses to the spies, Josh. 2.

3. Add hereunto Hieromes couiecture upon the 24. of Matthew, who thinks
that in his time, there was not any nation, qua ignoravit nomen Christi, which
was ignorant of the name of Christ; and if there were any nation, which had not
a preacher of the Gospel, yet ex vicinis gentibus opinionem fidei, etc. yet it
could not choose but have some opinion of the faith from the next and near
nations: the like conceit has Caietan in his Commentary, by the ends of the
world, understanding externa regionis, the extreme parts of the region, from
whence the inward parts might receive the preaching of the Gospel.

4. Lyranus adds further, that though not by the Apostles themselves, yet by
their disciples, while the Apostles were yet living, the Gospel was preached,
as by S. Savinian and those which came with him, in France, and to the utmost
coasts of the Ocean: and so in other places of the world, other disciples sent
by the Apostles might preach, whether they themselves in person came not.

5. Pet. Martyr also has this caution, that whereas the fathers and ancient
writers do speak of diverse nations called to the knowledge of Christ: their
meaning is, that then the faith in such nations, was received publicly ex
magistratuum instituto, by the authority of the magistrate, which was not
seen in the Apostles times: when as the Magistrates were enemies to the
Christian faith.

6. Add hereunto that many nations, which then had the Gospel preached unto
them, for their unthankfulness were deprived of that benefit, and so fell to
Pagan idolatry again: as here in England after the Christened Brittans
succeeded the heathenish and idolatrous Saxons: Now all these cautels being
laid together, it may safely be affirmed, that the Gospel of Christ was
preached to the whole world in the Apostles time: so that the Lord shall not
need to send new Ambassadors and Apostles, as before, to preach the Gospel to
the world: and yet we deny not, but that toward the coming of Christ the
knowledge of the Gospel shall be reviued, and be more plentiful, then many
years before, by the industry of faithful and zealous pastors, which shall
beat down the superstitious idolatry of the new Romanists, as the Apostles
did the heathenish idolatry of the old Romanists: which thing we have seen
fulfilled in this age, beginning at the first preaching of Luther unto this
time.

7. And thus I conclude this point with that excellent observation of
Chrysostom, The Gospel to the world within the space of 20. or 30. years
that the Gospel of Christ was speedily published to the whole world, in the
space of 20. or 30. years: which cannot be said of any other sect or heresy
whatsouer, that it should in so short a time go over the world: But whereas
the Mahumetan profession may be here objected, that it dispersed it self into
many places in a short time: Pet. Martyr makes this answer: that they build
upon a foundation laid before, for they acknowledge God the creator of heaven
and earth: they believe the immortality of the soul, and the resurrection of
the body: and the errors which they hold, they either receive from the Jews,
or they are a relic of the Arrians, as in that they affirm Christ to be a
great Prophet, yet a creature: and this may be the reason, of the easy
proceeding and fast increasing of this sect: whereas the Gospel which the
Apostles preached was altogether contrary to the profession of the Heathen in
every point: But I think it may better be answered that neither the
Mahumetan, nor Popish sect, nor any other, was ever so generally received, as
the Gospel preached by the Apostles, not yet in so short a time: for Mahomets
religion was diverse hundred years in hatching, before it attained unto that
rule and dominion, which now it has: it is now about a thousand years, since
the first beginning thereof.

Quest. 28. How God provoked the Jews to envy by the Gentiles. v. 19.
1. Where the Apostle says, I demand, did not Israel know, etc. Concerning
the occasion of these words, 1. Chrysostom thinks this is an other proof,
that the Jews were not ignorant of the preaching of the Gospel, by their
emulation and envy conceived against the Gentiles: and so he applies both the
former interrogation, have they not heard, and this, to the Jews: so also
Martyr: likewise Beza, Gryneus, and Iunius lib. 2. paral. 19. supplying here
the word ( God:) has not Israel known God, do make this another objection
touching the Jews: that though they have heard of the Gospel, yet they might
be ignorant of God, that sent preachers unto them, and so by their ignorance
might be excused: but there was no doubt at all to be made, whether Israel knew
God, being the known worshippers of God. 2. Tolet thinks that all this
which follows is a continued proof of the calling of the Gentiles. 3. But I
prefer Origens exposition, that S. Paul spoke before of the Gentiles, and now
of the Jews: showing that they were inexcusable, and this thing, with it is
asked, whether they knew, is the preaching of the Gospel, and consequently the
vocation of the Gentiles, which they could not be ignorant of, as S. Paul
proo^eth by the contrary effects before prophesied, of their emulation and
envy against the Gentiles: thus Haymo, Osiander, Pareus, Piscator, Faius.

2. Did not Israel know, etc. The answer is here affirmative, yes, they did
know: how then says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 2.8. If they had known, they would
not have crucified the Lord of glory: we must answer here by a distinction,
that they had a literal and superficial knowledge, but they knew not this
mystery in truth: it was not vera and salutaris cognit^, a true and saving
knowledge.

3. I will provoke you to envy, etc. Not that God properly is the author of
envy and hatred: but thus to be understood. 1. occasionaliter, by way of
occasion: because God conferred his benefits upon the Gentiles, which angered
the Jews, as Act. 13.44. the Jews were full of envy, when they saw the
Gentiles to follow the Apostles, Haymo. 2. God is the author of this envy,
per accidens, accidentally: as the light of the Sun delights found and
perfect eyes, but it offends the weak and dim sight: so the light of the
Gospel offends the blind and perverse heart, Gryneus. 3. and the Lord is the
author of this envy and emulation, as it is a punishment, Mart. as the Lord
says in the same place, Deuteronomy. 32.21. They have moved me to jealousy with
that which is not God, and therefore I will move them to jealousy with those
which are no people. 4. and in respect of the end it is of God, that the Jews
by this emulation may in the end be provoked to believe in Christ: like as a
mother to bridle the insolency and wantonness of the child, will seem to cast
him off and adopt a stranger, that the child may have more grace, Chrysostom. or
the mother will give the child's meat to the dogs, which he plays with, that
he may learn to make more of it, Osiander.

4. But it will be here objected, that Moses in that place speaks of the
idolatry of the people, for the which the Lord would cast them off: but at
Christ's coming, they were not idolaters: M. Calvin answeareth that although
they committed not visible idolatry, yet they were guilty of a greater sin,
in that they refused the Lord of life. 2. and whereas the Jews worshipped God
with external rites and sacrifices, after their term and date was out, and
added many superstitious rites of their own: herein they were idolaters: for
as well an idol may be set up in the mind, as in a sensible image of wood or
stone, Mart.

5. The Gentiles are said not to be a nation. 1. not only in the opinion of
the Jews, which counted them as no people in respect of themselves: for even
our Blessed Savior calls them dogs, Matthew. 15.26. It is not good to take the
childrens bread, and give it unto dogs. 2. nor yet need we excuse this
term with Origin, that they are called no nati^^, because the believing
Gentiles were not vna gens, one nation, but a nation of nations. 3. but they
are so called, because the Gentiles, while they were strangers from God, as
they counted the true God for none, so the Lord held them as no people, being
without the knowledge and worship of God.

6. So here the Jews are charged with a treble fault: 1. envy and emulation.
2. then contempt, they held the Gentiles to be vile, and as no people. 3. they
conceived anger and wrath against them, Gorrhan.

Quest. 29. Of these words, Isaias is bold, etc. v. 20.
1. Whereas the Apostle before sunderly had alleged Scripture to prove the
vocation of the Gentiles, by the preaching of the Gospel unto them, and the
reiection of the Jews: this testimony which now he cites is bipartitum,
twofold: the former part shows the vocation of the Gentiles, the other the
obstinacy of the Jews and thereupon their reiection.

2. Isaias is said to be bold: that is, as M. Calvin following Chrysostom, he
does (...) loqui, speak openly, not covertly: but rather, he speaks
confidently, not fearing the persecutors which were set before him, as Origin
according to that saying of S. Stephen, Act. 7.52. Which of the Prophets have
not your fathers persecuted, etc. which showed before of the coming of the
Just.

3. Some do more particularly refer it to that kind of death, which Isay was
put unto in being cut asunder with a saw, Haymo, gloss. ordinar. Gorrhan. but
we need not descend to that particular: Origin here further observes well,
that it was not with the Prophets ^^ some think, nescubant quid dixerunt, that
they knew not what they said, but spoke as (...) beside themselves: for Isay
here understood what he said, and knew what trouble would ^^ rise upon this so
evident a prophecy of the vocation of the Gentiles: yet he will not (...) his
peace.

4. But touching the allegation of these words, some small difference there is
S. Paul neither exactely follows the Hebrewe text, nor yet the Septuagint, as
Erasmus observes, and as may appear unto him that will compare them together:
but he takes the sense: 1. the order is somewhat inverted, for Isay 65.1. the
first part of the sentence, I was found of them that sought me not, is there
the latter: and the latter here, I was made sacrifest to them that asked not
after me, is there the first. 2. The word in the Hebrewe which S. Paul
translateth, I was made (...), manifest, is there nidrashti, not, I was sought
for of them that asked not after me: for how can that be: but I caused them to
seek me, as Beza and Pagnine observe.

Quest. 30. Of these words, All the day have I stretched forth my hands, etc.
v. 21.
1. Concerning the reading of these words. 1. the Greek preposition (...), may
as well here signify, against, as Beza and Erasmus, as unto: for this is
spoken indeed not for or unto, but against Israel. 2. the word (...), the
Latin translator interprets, incredulous or not believing: rather,
disobedient and immorigerous, Beza: contentious, as the Syrian interpreter: for
the Hebrew word is sorer, which signifies the rebellious, Psalm. 68.6. 3. the
other word (...), gainsaying, as Origin observes, the Septuagint have, and not
the Hebrew: Calvin thinks that the Apostle expresses the Hebrew word (
sorer) by these two, rebellious, and gainesaying: so also Beza: But Iunius
parall. 19. thinks rather, that the Apostle does (...), compendiously, in one
word express the Prophets meaning, which is set forth in many words in that
place, Isa. 65.3. a rebellious people, which walks a way that is not good
after their own imaginations, a people that provoke me ever to my face, etc.
all this the Apostle comprehends in these two words, rebellious, and
gainsaying.

2. By all the day. 1. Origin understands literally the day, wherein Christ
did hang upon the cross, etc. and so a part is taken for the whole, gloss.
ordinar. but then it should not have been said, all the day. 2. Haymo
interprets it to be the whole time Dominicae predicationis, of the Lords
preaching, unto his passion. 3. But Oecumenius better takes it for all that
time, which went before, since they came out of Egypt: so also Gryneus with M.
Calvin and others understand, all that time, since the Lord begun to take
special care of this people: and thus the Prophets use to speak, as Ierem.
7.13. I rose up early to speak unto you, etc. but ye would not hear: toto
tempore legis Mosaicae, all the time of the law of Moses, Lyran.

3. I stretched out my hands. 1. not upon the cross, as Origin and Ambrose,
for Christ said before he suffered, that he would have gathered them together,
as the hen her chic^^us, but they would not, Martyr. 2. neither is thereby
only signified the miracles which Christ showed, and the benefits bestowed
upon them, as Haymo: and as Gorrhan by the extending the left hand, signifies
their protecting from evil, and by the right hand the colla^^^ of benefits. 3.
But hereby we understand generally all those means, which the Lord used, not
only by his benefits, but by his threatenings, promises, preaching of his word,
whereby he would have called them to repentance. Pareus.

4. Yet they were still a rebellious, and gainsaying people: rebellious in
heart, and gainsaying in their mouth: contrary to those two special works of
grace before spoken of, the (...) of the heart, and the confession of the
mouth, Pelican: so here three sins are set (...) in the people; their
ingratitude, that regarded not Gods mercy in calling them; (...) incredulity
in their rebellion, obstinacy in gainsaying: three virtues also are described
(...) servants of God the Prophets; their patience in suffering, signified by
the stretching out of their hands; their perseverance, all the day; the cause
for the which they suffered, against a rebellious, and gainsaying people.

4. Places of Doctrine.
1. Doct. A good intention makes not a good action.
v. 1. They have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge: Hence it is
evident, that make a good action it is not sufficient to have a kind of zeal
and good intention: for them believe: had been excused for putting Christ to
death, which they did of a blind zeal: (...) here the Apostle confesses that
they had zeal, but it was not according to knowledge, ^^ therefore it was a
false and erroneous zeal; such as they were ruled with, that should ^^^ke they
did God service in killing his servants, Ioh. 16.2.

Doct. 2. Of the kinds of prayer.
v. 1. My hearts desire: There is oration mentalis, vocalis, a mental and
vocali prayer, the one only in the mind, the other uttered by the voice: of
the first our Savior speaks, Matthew. 6.6. When thou prayest enter into thy
chamber: of the other v. 9. after this manner pray ye: And Saint Paul shows
them both in this place, that his hearts desire was, etc. he prays both with
his heart and voice: and the prayer of the heart is the more principal.

Doct. 3. How to discern true love and freindship.
v. 2. That they may be saved, etc. Herein Saint Paul's true affection appeared
toward his country men the Jews, in wishing their salvation: whatsoever one
friend wishes unto an other beside this, it is nothing: hence it is that Saint
Paul in all his Epistles begins his salutation with grace and peace: this
was Abraham's commendation, that he had a case to instruct his family,
children, and servants in the ways of God, Genesis 18.18.

Doct. 4. Of the consent between the law and the Gospel.
v. 4. Christ is the end of the law: So then herein both the law and the Gospel
agree, that both of them do aim at Christ: the law looks unto him as the
end, and the Gospel also requires obedience to the law: but Christ is covertly
insinuated in the law, but openly showed in the Gospel: the law leads
indirectly unto faith, and the Gospel as it were indirectly points at the
law: requyring the obedience thereof, not as a cause, but as a ^^^ie,
testimony, and consequent of justification: and so that is fulfilled, which S.
Paul says, Romans 3.31. do we then make the law of none effect through faith?
God forbid, yea we est (...) the law.

Doct. 5. Of the difference between the law and the Gospel.
v. 5. He that does these things, shall live thereby, etc. Hence may be
gathered there differences between the law, and the Gospel. 1. the law
commands things impossible, and not in man's power, as in every point to keep
and fulfill the law: the Gospel only requires faith and belief. 2. the law
works terror and perplexity of conscience, breeding doubts and questions in
the mind, who shall ascend to heaven to bring us th^^^er, who shall descend to
hell, to keep us from thence: But the Gospel brings comfort and peace of
conscience, and assurance of salvation. 3. the righteousness of the law is
grounded upon the law of Moses, but the justice of faith upon the Gospel, this
is the word of faith. v. 8.

Doct. 6. Of the diverse kinds of calling and sending to preach.
v. 18. How shall they preach, unless they be sent, etc. Though the Apostle
do here especially speak of the extraordinary calling, such as was this of
the Apostles, yet it is true of the ordinary calling of preachers, that none
must take upon them to preach, unless they be sent of God: which is either
immediately, as the Prophets were so called of God in the old Testament, or
mediately by the authority of the Church, or by them to whom it is committed:
which kind of mediate calling is not in every Church the same in respect of
some circumstances, which are left to the liberty of the Church, Pareus: but
yet the same end must be propounded, which is the edifying of the Church, and
none ought to be sent, which are not meet: for such are not sent of God, but
run uncalled, and unsent, and as intruders: But no man, as the Apostle says,
ought to take this honor upon him, but he that is called of God, Hebr. 5.4.

Here I cannot omit that observation of Faius: who thinks the sending of
Jonas to have been ordinary, from the company of the Prophets: and of the
Apostles by Christ, excepting Paul: whereas for the former the text says, that
Jonas fled from the presence of the Lord, that called him: and who were called
extraordinarily if the Apostles were not, both in respect of the caller, which
was Christ God in the flesh, and of their extraordinary and miraculous gifts.

Now the ordinary calling is in a Church already settled and constituted, the
extraordinary, when a Church is to be settled: and it is of two sorts: either
when there is no Church at all, as the Apostles were sent unto the Gentiles,
who were altogether strangers from God: or when the Church is wholly corrupted
with false doctrine and corrupt manners as the Prophets were raised up in
Israel, when they were fallen to idolatry: and no^^ in this last age, when
Christians under Antichrist were become idolaters, God has stirred up many
zealous preachers, as Hus, Hierome, Luther, Calvin, with other excellent
instruments.

Doct. 7. Of the peace which the Gospel brings.
v. 15. How beautiful are the feet of them, which bring glad tidings of
peace? Whereas without Christ God was offended with the world, and there was no
peace, but the earth was full of tribulation, 2. Chron. 15.4. God by Christ
reconciled the world to himself, and sent peace, according to the song of the
Angels at the birth of Christ: glory to God in heaven, and in the earth peace:
which peace is threefold: first toward God, in the assurance of the remission
of sins, Romans 5.1. peace of conscience, in that sin has no more power over
us to perplex and trouble our minds: and peace with our brethren: of these two
our Savior speaks, Matthew. 9.57. Have salt in your selves, have peace one
with an other: But whereas Christ says he came not to send peace, but debate,
Luke 12.51. that is to be understood of the peace of the world, which hates
the light, and with it the children of light can have no peace.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. Against inherent justice.
v. 3. They being ignorant of the righteousness of God, etc. Stapleton
Antidot. p. 601. contendeth, this place to be understood of inherent, not of
justice imputed: for that which is imputed (says he) is not given, neither
receives he any justice, to whom it is imputed only, but remains still
wicked in himself.

Contra. 1. The righteousness, which is inherent in a man, is the
righteousness of works, which the Apostle calls their own righteousness,
but the righteousness of God, is not the righteousness of works, but that
which is of faith: as the Apostle shows, v. 6. there he calls that the
righteousness of faith, which here he names the righteousness of God, but
this is no other then righteousness imputed: now faith is imputed for
righteousness without works, Romans 4.5, 6. thus then the argument is framed:
the righteousness of God is the righteousness of faith: this is proved, both
out of this place, v. 4. and c. 3.22. the righteousness of God by faith: but
the righteousness of faith is by imputation, c. 4.5, 6. therefore the
righteousness of God, is righteousness imputed.

2. That justice is not only given, which is actually conferred, but that also
which is accounted and imputed: as the debt which is freely pardoned is as
fully discharged, as if the debt were paid: and they which are justified by
righteousness imputed, remain not wicked, because they are counted righteous
in Christ, being justified by faith: and are sanctified in some measure, and
so are regenerate, and become new, being mortified unto sin: by which their
mortification and dying unto sin, they are not justified before God, but
only by faith in Christ.

Controv. 2. Against the works of preparation, which are done without faith.
v. 4. Christ is the end of the law: Here Chrysostom well notes that if
Christ be the end of the law, it follows, that, qui Christum non habet, etsi
legis iustitiam habere videatur, eam tamen non habeat, he which has not
Christ, though he seem to have the righteousness of the law, yet he has it
not, etc. without Christ then, and faith in him, there is no true
righteousness before God: for without faith it is impossible to please God,
Heb. 11.6. what is become then of the Popish works of preparation, which
should go before justification? as though a man having not faith, yet by his
works might prepare and make himself fit for justification following: for all
such works, which come before faith, and so are not sanctified in Christ, are
before God no better then sins.

Controv. 3. That it is impossible for any in this life to keep the law.
v. 5. The man that does these things shall live thereby: 1. Hence it is
evident, that no man can perform the law in every point: for the law
requires perfect obedience in all things: and as he that keeps it shall live
thereby, so he that fails in any part thereof, is under the curse of the
law, as S. Paul shows, Galat. 3.10.

2. If it be answered, that it is impossible to keep the law by the power
only of freewill, but by grace it is possible to be kept, S. John shows that
even the regenerate by grace are not without sin, 1. Ioh. 1.8. and
consequently they transgress the law: (...) sin is the transgression of the
law, 1. Ioh. 3.4.

3. And whereas Stapleton obiecteth, antid. p. 637. that then this should be a
ridiculous, deceitful, and idle promise, He that does these things shall live
thereby, if none were able to do them: and it were like as a father should
promise his son an inheritance, if he could get a kingdom, which were
impossible for him to do.

Contra. 1. Though the condition be impossible to us to be fulfilled, yet is it
possible in Christ, who has performed the perfect obedience of the law. 2.
and though it be not possible to keep the law perfectly, yet by grace we are
made able in some measure to keep the law, and the rest where we fail, is
supplied by the perfect obedience of Christ. 3. neither is the example like,
for the son is not bound by any duty to fulfill that condition: but we are
debtors unto God, for the keeping of the law: which if it be now impossible,
it is man's own fault, who in his creation was made righteous, and endued with
sufficient strength to keep the law: See further hereof, Synops. Centur. 4.
err. 63.

Contr. 4. Against the doubting of salvation.
v. 6. Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend, etc. 1. The Apostle shows
the contrary effects of the law and Gospel: they which depend upon the
righteousness of the law are continually in doubt, how they shall come to
heaven, and how they shall escape hell: but the righteousness of faith
remooueth all these doubts: because their faith is grounded upon the word of
God, which teaches them, that Christ ascended into heaven for them, and that
he died for them, they need none other to ascend to prepare them a way into
heaven, not to descend to suffer death, and deliver them from hell.

2. There is not then any question remaining in the faithful of their
salvation, either debitando, by doubting, how they shall go to heaven, or
trepidando, in being afraid of hell^ but because our faith is not here perfect
there may be some strife and wrestling in the soul between the assurance of
faith, and carnal infirmity: sometime the faithful may ask question,
luctando, in wrestling and striving against carnal distrust, saying, if God be
with us, who can be against us? but at the length faith prevayleth and
triumphs, resolving that with the Apostle, who shall separate us?

3. But here we must make a difference of fear: faith expels not all fear,
but only the slavish and servile fear of hell and damnation, joined with
distrust and torment of conscience: yet a filial fear and reverent awe of God
remains in the servants of God: which is chiefly for the time past, they
fear to offend so gracious a God, and merciful a father, they fear not for
the sins already committed, which they are assured are forgiues ^^ Christ.

4. And this assurance and firm persuasion of salvation the Apostle
insinuates afterward, where he speaks in the second person to every
faithful person, If thou shall confess with thy mouth, etc. thou shall be
saved: signifying thus much that every one examining himself by the belief
of his heart, and confession of his mouth, may undoubtedly conclude that he is
saved. This makes against the Popish uncertainty and doubting of salvation:
Whereof see more, Synops.

Controv. 5. Against unwritten traditions.
v. 8. This is the word of faith which we preach, etc. The Apostle here shows
that the Gospel which he preached was agreeable to the Scriptures, he preached
no other thing, then he here writes: and he writes nothing but was consonant
to the old Scriptures: as Irene^ thus testifies, per Apostolos Evangelium
pervenit ad nos, etc. by the Apostles the Gospel came unto us, which they then
preached, but afterward by the will of God, in the Scriptures they delivered,
fundamentum and columnam fidei nostra, the foundation and pillar of our faith,
etc. lib. 3. c. 1. The Romanists then may be ashamed to fly unto that vile and
base refuge of the old Manichees, to say, that the Apostles preached some
things, and committed other to writing: See Synops.

Controv. 6. Against freewill.
v. 8. The word is near thee, etc. Erasmus in his defense of freewill against
Luther, urges this place, to show the power and strength of freewill in
keeping the commandments: and he presses those other words of Moses, non est
suprate, it is not above thee, that is, beyond thy strength.

Contra. 1. But the Latin translator there fails in the rendering of the
right sense of the words: which are, is not hid from thee, not, which is not
above thee. 2. he speaks of the facility of the commandments, not by the
power of freewill, but by faith in Christ, who has fulfilled the law for us,
and by whose grace we are enabled in some good measure to keep the
commandments of God, which are not grievous unto us which are justified by
faith and sanctified by the spirit. 3. and if it be admitted, that Moses there
speaks of the law: his meaning only is, that the knowledge of the law, was
not hid from them, neither was it far off, that they had need fetch it from
heaven, or from the utmost parts of the Sea, it was present with them, and
continually in their mouth, being rehearsed by the Priests, and Levites: so
that nulla ignorantiae excusatio sit reliqua, their remained no excuse of
ignorance: thus Luther answeareth Erasmus: and Bellarmine also acknowledges,
that Moses there speaks, de facilitate non observandae, sed cognoscendae
legis, of the facility of knowing, not doing the law, lib. 5. de great. c. 6.

Controv. 7. Against Limbus Patrum, that Christ went not down thither to
deliver the Patriarchs.
v. 7. Say not, who shall descend into the deep: that is to bring Christ
again from the dead: the ordinary gloss would infer upon these words, that
Christ descended into Limbus to fetch the Fathers from thence: for he that
says, who has descended, in a manner denies, that none descended thither,
and so not the Patriarks, and consequently neither Christ, who descended not,
nisi pro illis liberandis, but to deliver them.

Contra. 1. But Lyranus refuses this interpretation upon these two reasons:
because it is neither agreeable to that place of Moses, Deuter. 30. which will
bear no such sense: nor yet unto the words following: where he expounds, the
descending into the deep, of the raising of Christ from the dead: v. 9. 2.
Some of our own expositors, do interpret this clause, descending into the
deep, thus, that Christ subierit infer^^ dolores, has undergone the very
dolours of hell for us, Calvin: Martyr expounds it of the place of hell: as
if one of curiosity should ask who should go down to hell to certify us,
that Christ has overcome hell and damnation for us. some understand it of the
grave, as Lyranus, Osiander: to say, who shall descend into the deep is all
one, as to deny, that Christ is risen from the dead: but Moses for the deep,
says ( Sea) which cannot properly be taken for the grave. Some think that by
going to heaven, and descending to the deep, are meant things of great
difficulty, and impossible, to show that the Gospel requires no such thing of
us, to go to heaven or hell: Faius: But beside this last, it may be added
further, that by the confession of the death of Christ we are consequently
delivered from the fear of descending to hell, that is, of being condemned:
because by Christ's death we are delivered from the fear of hell, so that he
which remains still fearful of hell, doubts of the truth of Christ's death
and resurrection: to this purpose Pareus: See before qu. 12.

Controv. 8. Whether the righteousness of faith, and the righteousness of the
law, be one and the same, or contrary the one to the other.
1. Stapleton affirms them to be the same, Antidot. p. 618. by these
arguments. 1. the law leads us to no other righteousness, but to the
righteousness of the law: but it leads also to faith in Christ: therefore
faith in Christ is that righteousness. 2. the end of the law is the
righteousness of the law, and Christ is the end of the law, therefore faith in
Christ is the end of of the law. 3. that which is perfect and imperfect, do
not differ in kind, as an infant, and a man of perfect age: the justice of the
law is imperfect, the justice of faith perfect, they then differ no otherwise.

Contra. 1. The law directly intends the justice of the law, and indirectly
it leads unto Christ: so it is false, that it leads and directs only to
the justice of the law: it leads us unto the righteousness of the law one
way, by the proper scope and intent thereof, and to Christ an other way,
indirectly, and by an accident, because when we see our weakness in performing
of the law, we are driven to seek unto Christ, that has kept the law for us.
2. the same answer serves for the next objection: Christ is the end of the
law, one way, as is said, and the righteousness of the law, an other. 3. they
differ rather as a thing perfect and imperfect of two diverse kinds, not as an
infant, and a man of years, but as reasonable and unreasonable creatures; they
agree only in general, they are both a kind of justice, and have one
efficient cause, God is the giver and worker of the one justice, and of the
other; but they differ in the several properties, the one is imputed, the
other inherent, and is by faith, the other by works.

2. Neither yet do these two kinds of righteousness differ, as contrary the
one to the other, as some think: 1. one good thing is not contrary to
another, but both the righteousness of the law, and of faith are good. 2.
neither does God command contrary things; but both the justice of the law, and
of faith are commanded. 3. and one contrary does expel an other: but the
righteousness of the law does necessarily follow and accompany faith, (though
not to be justified by it) as sanctification does accompany justification.

3. Neither do they differ only ratione, non re, not in the thing or indeed,
but in a certain respect, as Gryneus says they are vna specie, of one and the
same kind, and that the distinction and difference between them is not realis,
sed rationis, is not real, but rational: as the Peripaterike Philosophers do
make moral virtue, and universal justice one and the same, re and subiecto,
in the matter it self and subject, and to differ only, ratione in a certain
respect: for as it is considered as an habit of the word, it is called virtue,
but as it gives unto every one his own, it is justice: so (he thinks) these
two kinds of justice do differ, not in nature and substance, but only in a
certain respect and rational difference. But under correction of so worthy a
man, there is a greater difference then thus, between the the justice of the
law, and the justice of faith. 1. Gryneus himself confesses in the same
place, that they differ subiecto, in the subject: for the justice of faith, is
subiective, in Christ, by way of a subject, the justice of the law has man for
his subject: therefore they differ otherwise, then in a diverse respect. 2.
that which differs in form, matter, quality, subject, differs more, then
only in a certain respect. But the justice of the law, and of faith differ in
all these: 1. in form, the justice of the law says, do this, and thou shall
be saved; faith says, believe only, etc. 2. in matter they differ, the one
consists of works, the other of faith. 3. in quality, the one is imperfect,
the justice apprehended by faith is absolute and perfect. 4. in subject, the
justice of faith is imputed unto us, being inherent in Christ, the justice of
the law is inherent in man and not imputed.

4. Wherefore these two justices, 1. are neither one and the same, as
Stapleton. 2. nor contrary. 3. not differing only in a certain respect, as
Gryneus. 4. but they differ, as diverse species or kinds of the same gender;
they are both justice, but the one inherent, the other imputed, the one
consists in doing, the other in believing. Par. dub. 5. and Pet. Mar. will
have them differ, as in Logike, the difference, and property of a thing; the
difference is that which gives essence unto a thing, as Christ's justice
applied by faith makes our justification, the property, is that which
follows the nature of a thing; and so the justice of the law in our holiness
and sanctification does follow necessarily our justification by faith.

Controv. 9. Whether the righteousness of the law, and that which is by the
law, do differ.
Pererius disput. 2. makes three kinds of justice. 1. one is iustitia legis,
the justice of the law, or the law of justice, which is that justice, when God
by his grace does help us to fulfill the law. 2. the justice of faith is that,
which is given unto those, that believe in Christ. 3. iustitia ex lege, justice
by the law, is that which a man does of himself, without faith and grace,
only by the strength of freewill; and this is that justice, which the Apostle
here sets against the justice of faith. This distinction also has Stapleton
making the like difference between iustitia legis, and iustitia ex lege,
righteousness of the law, and righteousness by the law, and Bellarmine, as is
before alleged, qu. 29.

Contra. 1. As the righteousness of faith, and by faith, with Saint Paul are
one and the same, as Romans 4.11. it is said to be of faith, (...), and here v.
6. righteousness which is by faith, (...): so neither do the righteousness
of the law, and by the law differ: for both of them have the same definition:
he that does the law, shall live thereby: so that these terms of the law, by
the law, through the law, in the law, in the matter of justification are all
one and in effect the same: as that which he calls the righteousness (...),
of the law, Romans 8.4. the same is (...), by the law, c. 10.5. (...), through
the law, Gal. 2.21. (...), in the law, Gal. 10.11.

1. Concerning that distinction, it fails in one of the parts thereof: for
that which they call iustitiam ex lege, righteousness by the law, which a man
does without grace and faith only schooled by the law, and moved by the
terror thereof, that is no justice at all: for the law is holy and good, Romans
7.12. and the works thereof holy and good, but without faith and grace no man
can do any good thing: neither does Saint Paul dispute of any such imagined
justice, but even of those works of the law, which are done by men sanctified
by grace, as the Apostle gives instance in Abraham and David sanctified men,
Romans 4. who yet by the works of grace were not justified.

3. Indeed Augustine has such a distinction, between the righteousness, lib 3.
cont. 2. ep. Pelag c. 7.
legis, of the law, which is fulfilled in us by grace, and ex lege, by the law
which is that righteousness, which a man works by his own freewill: as is
before alleged, qu. 29. But Augustines meaning is not, that a man is
justified by either of these kinds of righteousness, therefore that
distinction, as he uses it, is impertinent to this purpose: for we affirm,
that the righteousness of the law, whereby they pretended to be justified, is
indifferently called, of the law, or by the law: and the Apostle herein makes
no difference.

4. And as for that exact righteousness which the law requires, which indeed
is that which is called iustitia legis, the righteousness of the law, it is no
otherwise fulfilled in us, then by faith in Christ, Romans 8.4. the faithful
also receive grace by the spirit of sanctification to keep the law in some
measure: but they are said rather to walk according to the law, and in Saint
John's phraise, (...), according to the commandments, then to fulfill or keep
the law and commandments.

Controv. 10. That Baptism does not give or confer grace.
v. 8. This is the word of faith, etc. The ordinary gloss out of Augustine
does infer hence, and out of that place, Ioh. 15.1. Ye are clean through
the word, etc. that it is not the water which saves in baptism, but the word:
for he says not, ye are clean because of baptism, but through the word:
detrahe vorbum, etc. take away the word, and what is water but water: accedat
verbum ad elementum, etc. let the word come to the element and it becomes a
Sacrament, vnde est ista tanta virtius aquae, etc. where is this great virtue
of the water, that it touches the body, and the heart is washed, nisi
faciente verbo, etc. but because the word works; not because it is rehearsed,
but believed, etc. this judgment of Augustine here cited in the glass is
agreeable to Saint Paul's doctrine, Ephesians. 5.26. cleansing it by the washing of
water through the word: the water then washes not of it self, but by the
word: then the element it selfe-confesseth not grace, as the Romanists hold:
See further, Synops. Centur. 2. err. 69.

Controv. 11. Against the dissembling of our faith and profession.
v. 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth, etc. It is then necessary to
confess the faith of Christ, which is believed in the heart, contrary to the
opinion of the Libertines, which renew the old error of the Priscillianists,
and Carpocratian heretics, which thought it lawful to dissemble their faith
before the Magistrate: so do the family of love, the Libertines of these
days: and such carnal Gospellers, which think it sure for them to go unto
the Popish Mass, and other superstitious rites, keeping their conscience to
themselves: they are the Nicodemites of these days: But the Apostle reprooueth
them all, requiring this as necessary unto salvation to confess Christ with
the mouth: And our Savior says, that who so is ashamed of him here, he will
be ashamed of him in his kingdom, Mark^^^ 38.

Controv. 12. That faith is not only in the understanding.
The Romanists (as namely Bellarmine) do affirm, that faith only has the
seat in the intellectual part: lib. 1. de. iustificat. c. 6. and so they hold
faith to be an act only of the understanding: Rhemist. annot. 2. Cor. 13.
sect. 1.

But the contrary is evident here: the Apostle says, with the heart man
believes, etc. now the heart is not the seat of understanding, but of the
affections: and yet the heart is taken according to the phrase of Scripture,
not for that vital part of the body, but for the soul and all the faculties
thereof: wherefore though knowledge and understanding be requisite unto faith,
yet the principal part thereof, is an assured confidence and belief which is
in the heart and affections, not in the brain only and understanding. See
further Centur. 4. err. 48.

Controv. 13. The Scriptures the only sufficient rule of faith.
v. 11. For the Scripture says, etc. S. Paul hither to has proved the whole
doctrine of says by him delivered by the testimony of Scripture: and Act.
26.22. he professes, that he taught none other things, then Moses and the
Prophets did: we are then only in matters of faith to have recourse unto the
Scriptures, not unto unwritten traditions, whether the Papists would send us,
for they are uncertain, mutable, variable, and therefore can be no rule of
faith.

And further, whereas the Apostle adds, the Scripture says, as before c.
9.17. hereby that cavil of the Jesuits is removed, which say that the
Scripture is mute and dumb, and cannot be a judge of controversies: but the
Apostle says, the Scripture speaks, that is, God speaks in the Scriptures,
and it speaks and proclaims the truth to every one; therefore it is not a
dumb but a speaking judge: and therefore is sufficient to determine all
controversies of religion, and matters of faith: See further Synos. Centur. 1.
err. 5.

Controv. 14. How the Apostle says, there is no difference between the Jew
and the Grecian. v. 12.
Object. The Apostle before gave the prioritie unto the Jews, c. 1.17. to the
Jew first, and also to the Grecian: how then does he say here, there is no
difference.

Ans. 1. We must distinguish the times: there was in the old Testament a
difference made, because the Lord then had made choice only of Israel, before
all the people in the world, but now under the kingdom of the Messiah, this
difference is taken away: Christ has broken down the wall of part^ing, and of
both made all one: so distingue tempora and concilaibis. Scripturas,
distinguish the times, and you shall reconcile the Scripture: Pareus.

2. Add hereunto, that because even at the first preaching of the Gospel, the
Jews had a preheminencie, and the Gospel was first offered unto them, the
distinction of times will not fully satisfy: the Jews were not preferred,
quoad bona gratia, in respect of spiritual grace, but quoad praerogativam, etc.
in respect of some prerogatives they had, which S. Paul shows what they were,
Romans 3.2. and c. 9.5.6. Gorrhan.

Controv. 15. Against the maintainers of Universal grace.
Object. Whereas the Apostle says, v. 12. rich unto all, he may seem to
favor their opinion, which hold, that God has universally and indifferently
decreed to show mercy unto all, and so in his own purpose he has not
rejected any.

Answ. We must understand the Apostle here not to speak absolute, absolutely
of all in general, but with these two qualifications: he speaks of all
distributive, by way of distribution, all both Jews and Gentiles: he is rich
to all not in particular, but of what nation or kindred whatsoever, Jew, or
Gentile: for that the Apostle takes upon him to prove, that not to the Jews
only, but to the Gentiles also the promises of mercy in Christ do belong:
secondly the Apostle names (all) limitate, with a certain limitation, unto
all that call upon him, that is, all believers, for they only call upon God,
that do believe in him.

Controv. 16. That faith justifies not by the act thereof, but only as it
apprehends Christ.
Whereas the Apostle says, v. 13. Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord
shall be sa^^^^, etc. Bellarmine would hence infer, that faith does not
justify, relative, by way of re^ation unto Christ, by believing in him, but in
seeking, asking, invocating, as here the Apostle says: lib. 1. de iustific. c.
17.

Contra. 1. The Apostle says not, neither can it be concluded out of his
words, that we are saved by calling upon God, but invocation is a sure note and
argument of salvation, because it is an evidence of their faith, whereby they
are justified and saved. 2. but faith justifies only passiuely, as it
apprehends Christ, not actively, in respect of the work and merit thereof:
for we are justified by the righteousness of God, by faith in Christ, Romans 3.22.
but the act and work of faith is a part of man's righteousness, not of Gods,
therefore so faith justifies not; but as it apprehends the righteousness of
God in Christ: See further Synops. Centur. 4. err. 53.

Controv. 17. That faith only justifies, not invocation.
Bellarmine out of this place, whosoever calls, etc. would confirm an other
of his errors, that faith pro part sua, for it part justifies, if other
things be not wantings for salvation is here ascribed to invocation: lib. 1. de
iustif. c. 12.

Contra. 1. The same answer may suffice: for here salvation is not ascribed
unto invocation, neither does the Apostle show, how, but who they are which
shall be saved, namely, they which call upon him, which is an act and effect of
faith: for without faith, there is no invocation: the argument then follows
not, they which call upon God shall be saved, therefore for their calling upon
God they shall be saved: for this were like, as if one should reason out of
these words of S. Paul, Act. 27.31. Except these abide in the ship, ye can
not be safe: all that did abide in the ship were safe, therefore because they
did abide in the ship, they were safe: for the ship brake, and some were
saved by swimming, some upon boards, and other pieces of the ship.

Controv. 18. Against the invocation of Saints.
v. 14. How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed, etc. This
place is strongly urged against the Popish invocation of Saints by our
Protestant writers, as Pareus, Faius, and others: for if we are to call upon
none, but in whom we must believe, and we are only to believe in God, Ioh.
14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me, it follows that God only must
be called upon.

The Rhemists in their annotation here answer by a distinction of belief: that
none can invoke Christ as their Lord, and Master, unless they believe him so
to be: but they may trust also in Saints, that they can help them, and so also
may believe in them, as their helpers: and this phrase (they say) to believe in
men, is found in Scripture, as Exodus 14.31. they believed in God, and in Moses,
for so it is in the Hebrew.

Contra. 1. Seeing the Scripture curses him that trusts, or puts any
confidence in man, Ierem. 17.5. how can Papists escape this curse, that are not
ashamed to profess their trust and confidence in man. 2. though that in the
Hebrew phrase the preposition ( beth) which signifies (in) be used, yet it is
no more, then is expressed in the Latin phrase in the dative case, and so the
Latin translator, well observes, crediderunt Deo and Mosi, they believed God,
and Moses: the meaning is no more then this, that they believed Moses as a true
Prophet of God, that it came to pass, as he had foretold. 3. and seeing all
our faith and confidence must be grounded upon the Scripture, but in the
Scripture men have no warrant to trust in Saints, that they can help them,
this is but a vain confidence. 4. Neither are there diverse kinds of a
religious belief and confidence: there is a civil kind of assurance, which is
the good persuasion, that one may have of another: but all our religious
belief must be only settled upon God. 5. And so to conclude, Augustine says
in Psalm. 64. non potest esse Deo grata oration, quam ipse non dictavit, etc.
that prayer cannot be acceptable to God, which he (that is Christ) has not
indicted: But Christ has not endited any prayer unto any but unto God only:
therefore that form of prayer is only acceptable to him: See further hereof
in D. Fulkes answer to the Rhemists upon this place.

Controv. 19. That we must pray with confidence and assurance.
Mr. Calvin also upon these words, how shall they call on him, in whom they
have not believed, etc. confuteth the opinion of the schoolemen^, qui se
dubitanter Deo offerunt, which doubtfully offer their prayers to God: and so
Bellarmine says, that it is not necessary for a man in his prayer to believe
and be persuaded that God will hear him. lib. 1. de ^onis operib. c. 9.

Contra. But the Apostle here requires an assured belief in him that prays:
and our Savior says, Whatsoever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye
shall have it, and it shall be don unto you, Mark. 11.24. See further Synops.
Centur. 4. err. 88.

Controv. 20. Against the vain pomp of the Pope of Rome in offering his feet
to be kissed.
v. 15. How beautiful are the feet, etc. This makes nothing at all to
countenance the pride of the Roman Antichrist, who has offered his feet to
be kissed of Kings and Emperors. 1. the Prophet first, and the Apostle
following him, means not any such particular gesture to be offered to the
feet, but by a figure is understood the reverence due to the person of those
which preached the Gospel: and this rather confounds the pride of the Pope
and his Cardinals, that ride in state on their trapped horses, whereas the
Apostles travailed on foot, preaching as they went: and therefore it is said,
how beautiful are the feet. 2. and this honor is only belonging to them
which preach the Gospel: but the Pope and his Cardinals are so far from
preaching the Gospel, that they by all means suppress it, and persecute with
sword and fire the professors of it: Martyr. See hereof more Synops. Centur. 2.
err. 29.

Controv. 21. Against humane traditions.
v. 17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, etc. Hence it
is evident, that nothing must be preached but the word of God, and that says
only is builded thereupon: all humane traditions must give place, and
whatsoever is urged beside the word of God: The Papists indeed, are not ashamed
to call their traditions, verbum Dei non scriptum, the word of God not written;
which is not far from blasphemy to make their own inventions, and traditions
equal with the word of God: which is not to be found, but only in the
Scriptures: for the word of God is certain, we know who is the author thereof,
it is consonant to it self, and remains for ever: but their traditions are
of obscure and uncertain beginning, sermon. de confess. fidei.
they are contrary to themselves, and are chaungeable: Basil has this notable
testimony concerning the authority of the Scriptures, calling it, the sin
of pride aut non admittere, etc. either not to admit the things written in the
Scriptures, or to add unto them: and this he confirms by that saying of S.
Paul, Gal. 3.15. Though it be but a man's covenant, when it is confirmed, yet no
man does abrogate it, or adds any thereto, etc. See further concerning
traditions, Synops. Centur. 1. Err. 13.

Controv. 22. That the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel have a lawful
calling, against Stapleton.
v. 15. How shall they preach unless they be sent, etc. Hereupon the
Romanists, as namely Stapleton Antidot. p. 684. and the Rhemists in their
annotations here, take occasion to charge the Protestant Ministers which
intrusion: because they have neither an extraordinary calling, because they
are not furnished with the power of miracles, nor yet ordinary from the Church.

Contra. 1. It is not true, that there is no extraordinary calling without the
gift of miracles, for we read of many Prophets, which were sent in times past,
and yet are not mentioned to have wrought any miracles. 2. The Preachers and
Protestant Ministers now, do enter by that ordinary calling, which is
established in those several Churches, where they are placed. 3. in the
beginning of the reformation of religion, diverse, which were stirred up to be
preachers of the gospel, had a calling, such as it was in their Popish Church,
as Luther, Pet. Martyr, with others. 4. But we insist rather upon this point,
that where either there is no Church, or the same corrupted, diverse are
extraordinarily raised up, and so sent of God (of which extraordinary sending
the Apostle speaks here) where no lawful calling is to be had: as learned D.
Fulk in his answer upon this point, shows out of Ruffinus, how diverse great
nations have been converted by lay men, and women: as a great nation of the
Indians, by Aedesius, and Frumentinus: the country of the Iberians, by a
captive woman: yea and further he adds, how in constituted Churches, lay men,
which were able, were permitted to teach the people, which was the defense of
Alexander B. of Jerusalem, Theoctistus of Caesaria against Demetrius B. of
Alexandria, for suffering Origin before he was ordained to teach in the Church:
how much more, where the Church is corrupted, may not lay persons be stirred up
extraordinarily to preach.

Controv. 23. That the Hebrew text is more authentical, then the vulgar Latin
translation.
v. 18. Whereas the Apostle says, their sound is gone through the earth,
according to the Septuagint: and so the latin translator reads: and yet in
the Hebrew text, Psalm. 19. the word is cavam, their line, hereupon, and by
occasion of the like places our adversaries do commend the vulgar latin, as
more authentical, and freer from corruption, then the Hebrew.

Contra. For answer hereunto: 1. some think, that the Septuagint, for kavam,
their line, might read kalam, their voice, which word is in the end of the
former verse, Paius: but then, as Pareus observes, the Septuagint would have
translated it (...), voice, as they did before, not (...), sound. 2. Beza
thinks they translated thus ( their sound) to make it answerable unto the
next clause, and their words into the end of the world. 3. and Pareus gesseth
that they might read (...), which signifies, aedificium cameratum, a valted
building, such as the frame of the heavens seems to be. 4. But I rather
think that the Apostle refuses not the Septuagint, whose translation was so
well known, because they retain the sense of the place, though they exactly
render not the words: for both in respect of the heavens, whereof the Psalmist
speaks, their line and workmanship, was as it were their voice, and in
respect of the Apostles their prophesies of their sound, and voice, was as a
line, and rule of doctrine to the Church: and these two the Prophet Isai
joins together, c. 28.10. precept upon precept, line upon line, where the
same word is used: and thus the precepts of the Apostles, was indeed a line
unto them, whom they taught. 5. But it were a very preposterous course to
prefer the translation before the original; as the rivers before the spring
and fountain: which is contrary to Augustines mind, lib. 2. de doctrine.
Christ. who would have the old Testament examined according to the Hebrew, and
the new according to the Greek original.

24. Controv. Against the works of preparation.
v. 20. I was found of them, that sought me not. In that the Gentiles were
called, when they sought not after God, neither enquired after him: it is
evident that they did not prepare a way by their moral works, or civil kind
of life, and thereby make themselves more fit and apt for their calling: for
they are called in the former verse, a foolish nation, altogether unwise unto
salvation: for it is not possible without faith to please God, Heb. 11.6. so
Chrysostom here confesses, in that the Lord says, I was made manifest to
them, that asked not after me, he shows, quod totum hoc Dei gratia
perfecerit, that Gods grace wrought all, etc. and yet afterward, forgetting
himself, he says, nequaquam omnium crant vacui, they were not void of all:
for in that they apprehended and acknowledged the things manifested unto them,
hoc de suo attulerunt, this they brought of their own, etc. whereas our
Savior Christ says, without me ye can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5. See more
hereof, Synops. Centur. 4. err. 75.

25. Controv. Against the Jews, that will not have the Prophet to speak of
them, in these words, I have stretched out my hands, etc.
Whereas the Prophet Isa, c. 65.2. as the Apostle here cites him, v. 21.
calls them a rebellious people: Pet. Martyr out of Munster shows how a
certain Rabbin among the Jews would not have this spoken of the Jews, but of
the Gentiles: and that which follows in the Prophet, how they sacrificed in
gardens, and burnt incense upon brickes, and remain among the graves, he
applies unto the Gentiles, professing themselves Christians, he means the
Papists, which have their altars, wherein they sacrifice, and do visit the
sepulchers of the dead, and worship their relics.

Contra. 1. It may be a shame unto those, which call themselves Christians to
give such offense to the Jews, as to pollute themselves with those things,
which the Prophets directly enueigh against: when shall we look to have the
Jews converted to the Christian faith, when they find idolatry and other
superstitions practiced among Christians, for the which their forefathers were
punished. 2. But yet they absurdly and ignorantly wrest this so evident a place
from themselves to the Gentiles: for first it is evident, that the Prophet
speaks of two kind of people; the one that asked not after God, and yet he
did declare himself unto them; the other, to whom he stretched forth his
hands continually, and called them unto him: the first must needs be the
Gentiles, for the Jews professed themselves worshippers of God, and asked
after him: therefore the other are the Jews: and this further appears,
because this is reckoned among one of their faults, they did eat swines flesh,
which neither was practiced among the then Pagan, nor now believing Gentiles.
3. Wherefore this rebuke must light upon the Jews: for they contemning the
Lords altar, did set up other altars in gardens to sacrifice upon, to their
idols: they did visit the graves and sepulchers, either to consult with the
dead, contrary to the law, Deuteronomy. 18. or else to adore their relics, as
Papists now do. 4. And it is apparent to all the world, how this prophecy is
fulfilled: God has revealed himself to the Gentiles, and the Jews are
blinded still.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Of the security and assurance of faith.
v. 6. Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven, etc. So long as a
man is under the terror of the law, his mind is continually perplexed and
troubled, doubting of heaven, how he shall come thither, and fearing hell who
shall deliver him from thence: but being justified by faith, and so at peace
with God, nothing does trouble us: we need not to say, who shall ascend to
heaven, to bring us thither, or descend to hell to redeem us thence, for
Christ has done both for us: in whom we are so sure of Gods love, that nothing
can separate us from it: as S. Paul shows by his own experiences, Romans
8.38.39. so long then as the mind is doubtful, perplexed, and wavering, it is
a sure sign, that such have not yet attained unto this justifying faith.

Observe. 2. Against pride and vaineglorie.
Chrysostom upon these words, v. 11. He that believes in him shall not be
ashamed: takes occasion to show the vain desire of humane praise: whereas it
is faith in Christ, that brings true praise, and delivers from shame and
confusion: I will abridge his moral upon this point.

1. First he describes this vanity, by the adjuncts thereof, quid illa
sumptuosius, quid difficilius, etc. what is more sumptuous, and more hard: as
to build goodly houses, to provide multitude of servants, great horse, to set
forth shows, to go in pomp, and all to get praise: what can be more costly?

2. By the event: it consumes not only money, but devorat animas, it
devoureth the soul, matter gehennae est inanis gloria, vainglory is the
mother of hell, and vehemently kindles the fire thereof.

3. By the difference between this passion, and all other: quae morte
finiuntur, which end by death: but this vain desire shows it self after
death, as in the immoderate cost bestowed in garnishing sepulchers: that they
which could not affoard one halfepennie to the poor while they lived,
morientes sumptuosam mensam vermibus praebeant, being dead to prepare a
sumptuous table for the worms.

4. By the condition and property of it: as there is no servitude, no not of
the Barbarians, which is more grievous, then the servitude of vainglory: it
commands most servile things: he which is ambitious refuses no labor nor
service, to further his insatiable appetite: so that there cannot be a greater
slave, then a vainglorious man.

5. The companions of vainglory, are envy, covetousness, adulteries: for
many one in his foolish braverie vaunteth himself, hanc and hanc ego decepi, I
have deceived this woman and that, and had my will of them.

6. Vainglory is an uncertain thing: though a man had ten thousand
commenders, they much differ not a graculis garrientibus, from so many cackling
iayes: for they will upon any occasion be as ready to dispraise.

7. Beside, that which a man desires to be praised, he soonest obtains by
contemning of praise: for men do not more wonder at any, then at him, qui non
laudari sustinet, which can not endure to be praised.

8. This study of vainglory is far unlike all other studies and
professions: in other arts men will make them their judges that have skill:
but the vainglorious man, puts himself upon the ignorant multitude: the
harlot is not so vain: for she contemns and despises many lovers; but the
man ambitious of praise, does fawn ever upon base and vile persons, for praise
and commendation.

Now Chrysostom in this manner proceeding to lay open the vanity of this
desire of praise, does also show the remedies against it.

1. There is a woe denounced to such, Luke 6.26. Woe be unto you, when all men
speak well of you: for so did their fathers to the false Prophets: evil men
are sooner commended of the world, then good.

2. We must set before us the everlasting praise of God, which will make us to
tread under foot the praise of men: like as they which delight in the
comeliness of the body, alia splendidior facies visa a prima separat, a more
beautiful face does turn a man's desire from the former: the servant looks
to his master, the scholar to his teacher, the labourer to his paymaster: but
he that desires the praise of men, looks not to God his master and rewarder:
Athleta in arena certans, in theatro probari cupit, the champion or combatant
striving in the sand and ground below, yet seeks to be approved in the
theater above: yet a vainglorious man, cum theatrum in coelo habet,
spectatores in terris colligit, when he has his theater in heaven, yet does
seek unto him spectators in earth.

3. We must consider the dignity and excellency of our calling, and say with
S. Paul, know ye not that we shall judge the Angels: and will thou then that
shall judge the Angels, be judged of vile and base persons here in earth?

4. We must set before our eyes, the examples of the Saints, that have
condemned the vainglory of this world: as Helias, when the King and nobles
and people were gathered together, and wondered at him: he sought not their
praise, but checked them, saying, how long halt ye between two opinions? 1.
King. 18.21. and when all Judea assembled unto John, be fawned not upon them,
but reproved them, O generation of vipers: to this purpose, Chrysostom.

Observe. 3. Against despair.
v. 12. He that is Lord over all, is rich unto all: From this place Oecumenius
collecteth a comfortable note: that seeing Christ is so desirous of our
salvation, vt suas divitias existimet esse, that he couneth it his riches, if
many be brought unto the faith: that no man should despair of salvation: And
that we should have a desire unto our salvation, which our Blessed Savior so
thirsts after: as he did, when he wept over Jerusalem, which he would have
gathered unto him, ^^ the hen does her chickens, but they would not, Matthew.
23.

Observe. 4. Against envy.
M. Calvin upon the same words, he is rich unto all, does thus collect, that
one should not envy another, as though they lost any thing by the graces
bestowed upon an other: for God is abundantly rich, eius opulentiam largitate
non minui, his bounty and riches is not diminished by his giving: God has
enough in store for all: it is therefore called the deepenes of his riches, c.
11.33. the bottom whereof can never be sounded, nor the fountain drawn dry.

5. Observe. Of the reverent respect, which should be had unto the Ministry,
and Ministers of the word.
v. 15. How beautiful are the feet: seeing the Ministers of the Gospel do
bring unto us the tidings of salvation, and of peace with God: they ought to be
more welcome unto us, then they which bring us news of any worldly treasure
whatsoever: and herein appears how earthly minded men of this world are, that
have no more regard unto those, who are the messengers of God for their souls
health: that whereas, in every profession the Ministers thereof are honored:
as the Pagans did highly esteem their idolatrous sacrificers; the Turks, their
Musulmen, which are their Priests; the Papists their Mass Priests: yet among
Protestants, their Ministers and Preachers, are of least regard, unless it be
among those few, that receive comfort by their ministry.

6. Observe. Against titulant Ministers, which have the name only, and not the
thing.
v. 15. How beautiful are their feet, which bring glad tidings of peace, etc.
It is required men of Ministers, that if they would be honored as Messengers,
they should bring the Message with them, that is, to preach good things unto
the people: this then makes for the reproof of idle or insufficient
ministers, that either can not, or will not preach to the people: where is now
their love unto Christ, seeing they feed not his flock: as Christ said unto
Peter, love thou me, feed my sheep, etc. Ioh. 21.

7. Observe. Of the necessity of the preaching of the word.
v. 17. Faith comes by hearing, etc. Where then there is no preaching of the
word of God, there can be no hearing: where no hearing, there no faith: this
shows the miserable state of those people, which want the ordinary ministry
and preaching of the word of God: how can they but fall into the ditch, that
either have no guides, or those but blind: for the Scripture says, where there
is no vision, there the people decay, Prou. 29.18. where are no Prophets
ordinary or extraordinary, there the people must perish: Chrysostom
compares the word of God, and the preaching thereof unto oil, and faith as
the lamp, without the word preached faith decays, as the lamp without oil
is extinguished: The consideration hereof should move Christian Magistrates
which are the chief pastors of the Lords inheritance, to provide, that the
people be every where taught: and the people themselves should be incited
chiefly to seek for the food of their souls.

CHAP. XI.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1. I say then, ( I demand. G.) has God cast away his people? God forbid:
( Let it not be. Gr.) for I also am an Israelite of the feed of Abraham, of
the tribe of Benjamin.

2 God has not cast away his people, which he knew before ( from the
beginning. S.) know ye not what the Scripture says of Elias, V. Be. B. G. (to
Elias. S. in Elias. L. the preposition is ((...), in) but it is taken as the
Hebrewe preposition (beth) is, to signify (de, of,) how he communeth with God
( cries. S. makes intercession. L. V. B. yet he does not pray against Israel,
but only communeth, (...),) against Israel, saying:

3 Lord, they have killed thy Prophets, and dug down thine altars: and I am
left alone, and they seek my life.

4 But what says the answer of God ( the divine answer. Gr. Be. L. it was
said unto him in revelation. S.) unto him? I have reserved ( left. Gr.) unto my
self seven thousand men, which have not bowed the knee ( and worshipped. S.
ad.) unto ( before. L. ad.) Baal: (that is, the image of Baal. V. Be.)

5 Even so then at this present time, is there a remnant ( a reservation. Be.)
according to the election of grace. ( of God. L. ad.)

6 And if it be of grace, it is no more of works, or else were grace no more
grace: but if it be of works, it is no more grace: or else work were no more
work: ( this clause is omitted in the vulgar latin.)

7 What then? Israel has not obtained, that he sought: but the election has
obtained it, and the rest have been hardened: B.G. (blinded. L.S.V.B.P. but
(...) properly signifies to harden, as Ioh. 12.40. he has blinded their eyes,
and hardened their hearts.)

8 According as it is written, God has given them the spirit of slumber, ( of
compunction, L.V.S.A.P. of commotion, S. of remorse, B. the word (...),
properly signifies comp^^ction: but because they which are in a deep slumber
can not feel though they be pricked, it signifies here rather slumber, the
cause being taken for the effect) eyes that they should not see, and ears
that they should not hear unto this day.

9 And David says, Let their table be made for a snare, and for a net, ( or
trappe, B.) and for a stumbling block, ( a scandale, Gr.) and for a recompense
( a retalion, Gr. a requital) unto them.

10 Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not, and bow down their back (
their thigh, S.) always.

11 I say then ( I demand, G.) have they stumbled, that they should fall? God
forbid: but thorough their fall ( sin, L.) salvation comes unto the
Gentiles, to provoke them to emulation, ( to follow them G.)

12 Wherefore if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the minishing
( condemnation, S.) of them, the riches of the Gentiles, how much more shall
their abundance be?

13 For I speak to you Gentiles, in as much, as I am the Apostle of the
Gentiles, I magnify my ministry: ( office, G.B.)

14 If by any means I might provoke unto emulation ( provoke, B. provoke to
follow, G. the word is (...), to provoke unto zeal or emulation) and might
save some of them.

15 For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what shall
the receiving be but life from the dead?

16 For if the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lump: and if the root be
holy, so are the branches.

17 And though some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild Olive
tree, wast graft in for them, and made partakar of the root and fatness of
the Olive tree;

18 Boast not against the branches: and if thou boast, thou bear not the
root, but the root thee.

19 Thou will say then, The branches are broken off, that I might be graft in.

20 Well: thorough unbelief they are broken off, and thou stand by faith:
be not high minded, but fear.

21 For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed, least he also
spare not thee.

22 Behold therefore the kindness ( benignity. B.S. bonni^fulnes. G. goodness. L.
(...)) and severity of God: toward them which have fallen, severity, but
toward thee kindness, if thou continue in his kindness, or else thou also shall be
cut off.

23 And they also if they abide not still in unbelief shall be graffed in: for
God is able to graffe them in again.

24 For if thou wast cut out of the wild olive tree by nature, and contrary (
beside, B.S.(...),) to nature wast graffed in a right olive tree ( good olive.
Gr.) how much more shall they which are by nature, be graffed into their own
Olive tree?

25 For I would not brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this secret (
mystery. Gr.) that ye should not be wise ( arrogant. B. G. A.) in your selves,
( in your own conceits, B.) that obstinacy ( blindness, L.V. see before v. 7.)
in part is come to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in.

26 And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, The deliverer shall
come out of Sion, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.

27 And this is my covenant ( testament. V.S.L.P. (...), signifies both, but
the first is fitter here) to them, when I shall take away their sins.

28 As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sakes, but as touching
the election they are beloved for their fathers sakes.

29 For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. ( such as he
cannot repent him of. B. V. God changes not in his gift. S.)

30 For even as ye in times past have not believed God, ( obeyed. Be. S. (...),
it signifies both, but the first is more proper here) yet have now obtained
mercy thorough their unbelief:

31 Even so now have they not believed, ( not obeyed, Be. have been
contumacious. S. see the former verse) by the mercy showed unto you, ( your
mercy. Gr.) that they also may obtain mercy, (not believed the mercy. B. A.
in the mercy. L. not believed because of your mercy. V.S. Beza refers it
to the latter clause, that by your mercy they might obtain mercy.

30 For God has shut up all in unbelief. ( contumacie, or disobedience,
S.B.(...). signifies both, the first rather here, for the Apostle still urges
the necessity of belief, as c. 9.32.) that he might have mercy on all.

33 O the deepenes of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God^ (
and of the wisdom and knowledge of God, L. see 32. quest.) how unsearchable (
incomprehensible, L.) are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

34 For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who was his counselor?

35 Or who has given unto him first, and he shall be recompensed?

36 For of him, and thorough him, ( in him, S.) and for him, are all things, to
him be glory for ever. Amen.

2. The Argument, Method, and Parts.
THe Apostle in this Chapter treats of the calling of the Gentiles, and of
the reiection of the Jews: yet so, as that he both exhorts the Gentiles not
to insult over the Jews, because they are rejected for a time: and to the
comfort of the Jews he shows, that they are neither totally, nor finally
rejected, but shall in the end be converted. Tehre are ^. parts of the
chapter: the first is doctrinall, showing, that the Jews are not totally
rejected, to v. 11. the second is exhortatorie, both to Jews and Gentiles, to
v. 33. the third is the conclusion. v. 33.

1. In the Doctrinall part, 1. he shows, that all the Jews are not rejected
by these reasons. 1. by his own example, that was a Jew. 2. by the
immutabilitie of Gods foreknowledge, v. 2. 3. by an argument a pari, taken from
the like in Elias time: the antecedent contains Elias complaint unto God, v.
3. and Gods answer to him, v. 4. the consequent shows the application: even
so now a remnant shall be saved, v. 5. as in Elias time: this is amplified by
setting forth the efficient cause, of their election, the grace of God, which
can not fall away, which is enlarged by the contrary, not of works, v. 6. 2.
Then the Apostle speaks of the part of the Jews rejected: which is
propounded by the contrary, v. 7. and proved by testimonies of Scripture, one
of Isay, v. 8. the other of the Prophet David, v. 9, 10.

2. In the exhortation, 1. he moves the Gentiles, that they should not insult
over the Jews, to v. 25. 2. he comfort the Jews by a prophetical
prediction of their conversion, to v. 33.

1. The sum of the Apostles exhortation is set forth, v. 18. that the
Gentiles (to whom he directs his speech, v. 13.) should not beast themselves,
nor be high minded, v. 20. or arrogant in themselves, v. 25. This exhortation
is strengthened by diverse arguments. 1. from a double end of the reiection of
the Jews, one to bring salvation to the Gentiles, the other, that the Jews
might emulate the example of the Gentiles: these two ends are propounded, v.
11. and then amplified, the first v. 12. by an argument from the less to the
greater: that if the world gained so much by the reiection of the Jews, much
more by their conversion: the other end is urged by showing the end of the
Apostles ministry among the Gentiles, which was to provoke the Jews to
emulation, to save some of them, v. 13, 14.

2. Argument from the hope of the conversion of the Jews, v. 15. which is
grounded upon the force of the Covenant, they are branches of an holy root, v.
16. therefore let not the Gentiles insult.

3. Arg. from the former state and condition of the Gentiles, they were as a
wild olive tree, v. 17.

4. Arg. the Gentiles should show themselves unthankful to insult against the
root, which did bear the branches, v. 18.

5. Arg. the Gentiles might be cast off themselves, therefore they were not to
boast: which he proves by an argument from the greater to the less: If God
spared not the natural branches, much less the unnatural, v. 19, 20, 21.

6. Arg. from the cause or original of the vocation of the Gentiles, the
bounty and mercy of God, therefore they were not to boast, v. 22.

7. Arg. from the hope of the conversion of the Jews, which was touched
before, v. 15. which is amplified, by the efficient, the power of God, and by
an argument from the less to the greater, v. 24.

The prophetical prediction of the conversion of the Jews for their comfort
follows: which is propounded v. 25. as before he showed, that the reiection
of the Jews was not total, so here he proves, that it shall not be final:
but that Israel shall be called again, 1. by two testimonies of the Prophet
Isai, v. 26, 27. 2. from the dignity of the Jews depending upon Gods grace
and election, which was infallible, v. 18, 19. 3. a pari, from the like, as the
Gentiles sometimes believed not, but were received to mercy, so the Jews then
believed, but should receive mercy, v. 30, 31. 4. from the end, God has shut
up all in unbelief, that all might taste of his mercy, v. 32. and ascribe
nothing to themselves.

3. The conclusion consists, 1. of an exclamation, with an admiration of Gods
wisdom and knowledge, as unsearchable: which is showed, 1. by the secrecy
thereof, not to be found out by a creature, v. 34. 2. by the bounty of God,
not provoked by any man's giving first unto him. 3. because God is the beginning
and end of all things. 2. then follows the Apostles vow and wish, that all
glory may be ascribed unto God, v. 36.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. Of the scope and intent of the Apostle in this chapter.
1. Whereas the Apostle had in the end of the former chapter showed out of
Isay, how the Jews for their obstinacy were rejected, and the Gentiles
called: now he shows in this chapter for the comfort of the Jews, that all
generally were not cast off, but only the unbelievers, Origin: and so least
that the Jews might have despaired, and some might also have objected, as
though hereby Gods promises to his people should have been made of no effect,
he shows this reiection of the Jews not to be general, Par. and this he
does, ne insultarent Gentiles, least the Gentiles might have insulted over the
Jews, gloss. ordin.

2. So then partly to minister consolation to the Jews, Bucer: partly to
repress the insolency of the Gentiles, the Apostle shows three things
concerning the reiection of the Jews: that it is not vniversalis, universal,
to v. 11. nor inutilitis, unprofitable, to v. 25. nor irrecuperabilis,
irrecouerable, from v. 25. to the end, Lyran.

3. And touching the first, that their fall is not general: he shows, first
that all are not rejected, as by his own example, then that some are assumed,
as seven thousand were in Elias days: and yet some rejected, v. 8.9. Gorrhan.

Quest. 2. Why the Apostle makes mention of the tribe of Benjamin, whereof he
was.
v. 1. I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of
Benjamin, etc. 1. Pet. Martyr thinks that Saint Paul would signify here,
that he was not obscurely borne, but of a noble tribe, even of Benjamin which
came not of any of Jacobs handmaides, but of Rachel his principal wife: and
out of the which Saul the first King of Israel was chosen. 2. Tolet gives a
contrary reason, that least Saint Paul's calling might be ascribed to the
dignity of his tribe, he shows he was of Benjamin, which was vltima and
minima, the last and least of all the tribes. 3. the interlin. gloss thinks
it is added, because mention is made next before, of the seed of Abraham, lest
he might be thought to be of Abraham, by Ismael: But this doubt was removed
before in that he says he was an Israelite. 4. Gorrhan gives this conjecture:
alludit genus operi sequeti, S. Paul's kindred and tribe is mentioned, as
agreeable to the work that followed: for as Rachel died in the birth of
Benjamin, so the Synagogue in the birth of Paul: and as Joseph's cup was found
in Beniamins sackes mouth, so the word of Christ in the mouth of Paul: and as
Jacob says of Benjamin, Genesis 49. that he is a wolf devouring the pray: so
Saint Paul spoiled the Jewish Synagogue, and brought many as a pray unto Christ.

5. But these collections are to curious: S. Paul only hereby shows that he
was a Jew by nation, not a Proselyte converted to the faith: by rehearsing
three of their principal Fathers, Israel, Abraham, Benjamin: Pareus, that his
kindred was so far off from being an hinderance to him, that he was chosen
to be praeco gratia, a preacher of grace: Bucer: and therefore all the Jews
were not rejected.

Quest. 3. How God is said not to cast off that people whom he knew before, v.
2.
1. Chrysostom takes here Gods foreknowledge for his prescience by the which
he did foresee the people whom he had chosen, aptum fore fidem recepturum, to
be apt and ready to receive the faith: But herein the Greeks erred in
attributing too much to man's freewill: and the contrary is evident out of the
Scripture, and reasons diduced from them, that Gods prescience was no cause,
why he elected the people of Israel. As 1. Deuteronomy. 7.7. the Lord says, he did
not set his love upon them or choose them, because they were more in number,
etc. he did of his mere love choose them, not for any respect unto any thing
in them. 2. how could he foresee any goodness in them, in whom naturally there
is nothing but evil. 3. and the Lord here says, v. 4. I have reserved seven
thousand, he ascribes it to their own will, but to his own grace, that they
were so reserved.

2. Some will have this understood comparatively, ipsum praesciuit ante Gentes,
God did foresee them to be his people before the Gentiles, so Oecumenius
understands it of the prioritie of the calling of the Jews before the
Gentiles: But as Beza well observes, the Apostle here speaks not of
vocation, but of the decree of eternal predestination.

3. Some interpret it thus: which he knew before, that is, had before enlarged
with many excellent benefits: but it is evident by the circumstance of the
place, that the Apostle speaks here of election before all time, not of the
collation of benefits in time, ex Tolet annot. 1.

4. Wherefore, we must understand, that Gods prescience is taken four ways:
1. either largely for his foresight, whereby he sees and knows all things
which are done in the world: as Peter says to our Savior, Ioh. 21.17. Lord
thou know all things: and this general prescience in God, belongs to his
understanding, rather then will, and is no cause of things: for all that God in
this sense knows, he decrees not. 2. Gods prescience is takes more
strictly, for his foreknowledge of those things which he decrees to be, both
of good, which he purposes to work, and of evil, which he purposes to
permit: and this prescience is practical, the former is only speculatiue. 3.
it is used yet in a more strict sense, as when it signifies the approbation
and acceptance of God in his eternal love: as Romans 8.29. Whom he knew before,
he predestinate: and so praenoscere is probare, to foreknow, is to approve, as
Origin says: and so Gods prescience differs from election, as the cause from
the effect: as it signifies election and predestination it self: and so
Augustine takes it here, praescivit, id est, praedestinavit, he foreknew, that
is, predestinate: so also Haymo, Lyranus: and so the meaning is, whom he knew
before, ab aeterno electum amplexus, whom he loved and embraced being elected
from the beginning: Beza: and here the word praecognoscendi, of foreknowing,
signifies beneplacitum, the good pleasure of God, whereby he chose them to be
his children, Calvin: for there is difference between these two words, (...),
to foresee, and (...), to foreknow: this signifies a foreknowledge with
approbation, in which sense, the Apostle says, 2. Tim. 19. The Lord knows,
who are his: the other is taken for a bare prescience and foresight, which is
not joined with such approbation.

Quest. 4. Of Elias complaint unto God concerning Israel.
1. S. Paul alleging the Scripture, as an interpreter, does not tie himself
strictly to so many words, nor to the same order: in the place which is here
cited, 1. King. 19. Elias says, they have killed thy Prophets ( with the
sword,) which clause is here omitted, and he says in the first place, and have
destroyed thine alters, which the Apostle rehearses in the second place:
likewise in these words, they seek my life ( to take it,) these last are
omitted: and the Lord in his answer in that place, makes mention of 7.
thousand which neither had bowed the knee to Baal, nor kissed him with his
mouth, which latter is here omitted also by the Apostle.

2. Chrysostom notes how the Apostle in great discretion brings in the
example of Elias, that great Prophet, qui omnibus erat in pretio, who was
highly esteemed of them all: whose authority they could not gainesay. And
Saint Paul by this example of Elias, does secretly meet with an objection:
because he had given instance only of himself before, they might have imputed
it to S. Paul, as an insolent part, as though the whole condition and state of
Israel rested in him only: whereunto he answeareth, that there might be many
more believing Israelites, though not known unto them, as in the days of
Elias.

3. How he makes request against Israel. 1. there are two kinds of request or
complaint against one, either in complaining of the faults or sins committed,
or in craving punishment and vengeance for the sin; some think that Elias
complained against them the latter way, as Leviben Gorson, thinks that the
fire, wind, and earthquake, which were sent before, did signify impitum Eliae,
the heat and earnestnes of Elias, that would have incensed the Lord to punish
his people: Pet. Martyr also consents, and would excuse it thus, the Prophet
was not angry with their persons, but would have their sins punished, and he
had the spirit of prophecy, whereby he knew that the Lord would punish them,
and so therein his prayers concur with Gods will: Lyranus thus helps the
matter, that he did it not zelo vindictae sed amore iustitiae, not with desire
of revenge, but in a zeal of justice: non vt punirentur, sed corrigerentur,
not that they should be so much punished, as corrected and amended, Gorrhan.
But herein Elias had been much unlike Moses that prayed for the people, and
Samuel which said, God forbid, that I should cease to pray for the people, 1.
Sam. 12. and our Savior, Matthew. 15. bids us to pray for our enemies. 2.
Therefore Beza to mitigate the matter, translateth the word (...), talked with
God, and thinks, he did only id simpliciter dicere, etc. rehearse that simply
without any other intent, which made against Israel: But S. Paul uses this
word in the other sense, which is to make request, as c. 8.16. the spirit is
said to make request for us, and v. 34. Christ makes request for us. 3.
Wherefore this was only a complaint of the great decaie of religion, and of
the great impiety of the people, Pareus. M. Calvin thinks that he did
imprecari interitum, wish their destruction: so also Gryneus, that beside the
complaint of the apostasy of Israel, there was tacita imprecatio, a secret
imprecation: but this I refused before: I therefore rather consent to them
which think that the Prophet only utters here his complaint unto God of the
general falling away of the people, Osiand. postulabat illius auxilium, etc.
he entreated his help against the rebellious people, Tolet annot. 2. Deum
interpellat iudicem, he calls God to be judge between them, Gorrhan: Pet.
Martyr observes that there are two kinds of expostulation with God, one when
as simply complaint is made of the iniquity of the times, and the sins of
the people, which it is lawful to do: the other when as men so expostulate
with God, as that they show their discontent, and do charge God, as it were
with negligence in the regiment of the world: but the Prophet here
expostulateth with God after the first manner.

4. They have broken down thine altars, etc. 1. These were not the altars of
the high places, for they are commended, which cast them down: 2. Nor yet the
altars, which Jeroboam set up for his golden calves; for they were not the
Lords altars. 3. Nor yet the altars in the temple at Jerusalem, for they were
not under the dominion of Israel, against whom Elia complains. 4. Pet. Martyr
thinks they were the altars, which had been erected by Abraham and other of
the Patriarchs, the memory whereof yet remained: but it is not like, that they
continued so long. 5. and to understand by these altars, by a figurative
speech, the true worship of God, as Faius, Gryneus, Pareus, it seems not to
be so proper. 6. Haymo thinks they were such altars, as the godly among the
ten tribes, Deo edificarunt, did build unto God, because they could not go
down to Jerusalem: but these could not be called Gods altars, which were built
by a private authority. 7. Therefore Osiander better understands the altars,
tuo iussa erecta, which had been erected at the Lords commandment, as by the
Prophets Samuel, Elias, who had the Lords extraordinary direction for the
erecting and building of altars.

5. And I am left alone: wherein Elias error appeared, both in complaining, as
though all the people were fallen away, and that he himself was left alone;
whereas the Lord had reserved to himself a great number, though they were not
known: Lyranus gives the reason, quia spiritus non semper tangit corda
Prophetarum, the spirit always moves not the hearts of the Prophets: as
Elisha says, 2. King. 4.27. Her spirit is vexed within her, and the Lord has
hid it from me.

6. But it will be objected, how Elias could say that none were left but
himself, when Obadiah had hid an hundred of them: the answer is, that Elias
might think, that they were all destroyed by Iezabel, from whom he also fled^
Faius, Pareus.

Quest. 5. Of Gods answer unto Elias.
1. Concerning the word here used (...). 1. though it properly signified the
oracle or answer of God given in the Tabernacle from the mercy fear, yet it
generally is taken for any divine answer or oracle given by God, Faius. 2. it
comes of the word (...), which either has a large signification, which is to
be named, or called, as Act. 11.26. the brethren of Antioch were first called
Christians: or it is taken more strictly, for a divine answer or direction
received from God, Beza. 3. which may be done diverse ways, either in dream,
as Matthew. 2.11. or by any other revelation, as Noah is said to be warned of
God, Heb. 11.7.

2. The Apostle does not repeat the whole answer of the Lord unto Elias in
that place, but so much only as was pertinent to his purpose: Elias made three
complaints: 1. of the cruel outrage of the idolaters in breaking down the
altars, and killing the Lords Prophets. 2. of the small number of true
worshippers, I am left alone. 3. and they fought his life also, to take it
away, that there should not be one Prophet left. To every one of these
complaints, the Lord makes answer, giving Elias a special remedy for each of
them: touching the first, he bids him to anoint Hasael King of Aram, that
should be revenged of the idolatrous Israelites: and for the third, he must
anoint Eliseus, to be Prophet in his place, that therein the Idolaters should
fail of their desire, thinking utterly to root out the Lords Prophets: and for
the second, the Lord puts the Prophet in comfort, that he had reserved many
thousand beside himself: and this part of Gods answer the Apostle only
alleges as sufficient for his purpose.

3. By seven thousand God would notify, multitudinem, a multitude, which he
had reserved to himself, Calvin: as other numbers are also used to be put, the
certain for uncertain: as the five wise and five foolish virgins, Matthew. 25.
and the rich man's five brethren, Luke 16. but the number of seven is usually
taken for the whole, as David says, seven times a day will I praise thee,
Haymo: But Origin is somewhat curious, who thinks the number of seven is
used, because the seventh, was the day of rest, to signify those which came
unto Christ, and by faith had rest in him: Gorrhan also descanteth in like
manner, how the number of seven, is mentioned, to signify the universality,
because all things were made in seven days, and of a thousand, to show their
perfection; because that is a perfect and absolute number.

4. Though the Lord only spoke of 7000. men, yet thereby are understood women,
and all other which continued in the true worship of God: the rest being
comprehended under the more worthy sex, Gryneus.

5. The word Baal signifies a Lord, or an husband, for so their Idols they
made their Lords, and did as it were espouse themselves unto them: and so the
superstitious Papists at this day do make the Saints and their images, their
Lords and patrons: But whereas in the original, there is added the article of
the feminine gender, (...) to Baal, it is evident that the word (...), imagini,
image, must be supplied, as Erasmus and Beza well observe. Wherein the Rhemists
do bewray their cavilling spirit, for taking here exception to our
translations; that insert the word, image: Tolet here well observes that
though Baal were a general name to all their idols, whereupon they were called
in the plural baalim, yet here it specially signifies the idol of the
Sodomites, which now the Israelites worshipped.

Quest. 6. Of the Apostles collection inferred out of this answer made to
Elias.
1. Even so then, etc. S. Paul makes his times in all things like unto those
days, wherein Elias thus complained. 1. both in the thing it self: for as
then Elias seemed to be alone in Israel that worshipped God, and yet there were
many true worshippers beside: so now it may be thought that I Paul only
believe in Christ: but God has a great remnant beside. 2. The Apostle makes
the similitude to agree even in the phrase also, and manner of speech: for
there the Lord says, (...), I have left, and here he calls them, (...), a
remnant: vt omnia faciat similia, to make all things alike, Calvin: and as here
the Apostle says, according to the election of grace, so there the Lord says,
I have reserved unto my self, which is as much in effect: for it was the work
of Gods election and grace, that they were so reserved.

2. A remnant. 1. The vulgar latin, and so Origens translator read, a remnant
is saved: but in the original it is only (and so Chrysostom and Theophylact
read) there is a remnant saved. 2. which remnant was not so small a number,
(though in respect of the unbelievers it was small) but it made many thousands:
as James said to Paul, Act. 21.20. Thou see brother, how many thousand Jews
there are, which believe. 3. They are called reliquiae, a remnant, not because
they seemed vile in respect of others, Gorrhan: but they were like rather unto
the wheat, quod eiectis paleis purius residet, which remains more pure, the
chafe being cast out: but rather in regard of the smalnes of their number: as
our B. Savior says, many are called, but few chosen.

3. According to the election of grace. 1. Here Origin in his wandering
speculation would make a difference between those which are called by grace,
which are they that believe in Christ, and those which are called by election
of grace, which beside faith, have good works, etc. as though a justifying
faith could be without works. 2. Chrysostom says that election is added to
show how God calls some of grace, but such as he foresaw, would believe: so
the Greek scholiast, indicat plurima^ partem gratiae fuisse, etc. he shows
that the greatest part was of grace: But the Apostle shows in the next verse,
that all is of grace, there is no place for works. 3. Therefore Haymo better
interprets, according to the election of grace, secundum praedestinationis
donum, according to the gift of predestination: and the interliniarie gloss,
per gratiam, qua electi sunt, by the grace whereby they were elected: and here
the Apostle uses an hebraisme, the election of grace, for gracious election,
Beza, Pareus.

Quest. 7. Of these words; If of grace, it is no more of works, etc.
1. Origin thinks, that the Apostle speaks of the ceremonial works of the
law, such as were circumcision, the sacrifices, and the like: But the Apostles
words are general, showing an opposition between grace and all works
whatsoever, whether legal, moral, natural.

2. Whereas that other clause, if of work, then not of grace, then work were
no more work, is omitted in the vulgar latin: Erasmus would justify that
omission by this reason, because it is not the Apostles question, whether work
be work, but he only affirms grace: Tolet also says this addition is
superfluous, because it is comprehended in the former.

Contra. 1. The Syrian translator, and the Greek expositors, Chrysostom,
Theophylact, Oecumenius, have this clause, though it be omitted in Origin, and
the Greek copies generally have it. 2. And it is agreeable to the Apostles
purpose, who to prove the election of grace, does show it by the contrary
antithesis and opposition: and his argument stands thus, it is either of
grace altogether, or of works altogether, but not of works altogether,
therefore of grace: the consequence of the proposition he proves by this
inconvenience, that if grace be joined with works, then work were no more
work: for if the reward be of grace, it is not by the merit of the work: and
the assumption and second part he proves by an other absurdity, for then
grace should be no more grace, for that which is given to the merit of the
work, is given of debt, not of favor, as before the Apostle reasoned, c. 4.4.
this clause then is neither impertinent, nor yet superfluous.

3. This place of the Apostle meets with diverse cauills. 1. The Greek
scholiast says, that we need no works to come unto Christ, sed sola voluntas,
and mentis intentio sat est, the will and intention only of the mind is
sufficient: But I ask, this will, and intention whether it is Gods work or
man's: if it be Gods work, as the Apostle says, that God works both the will
and the deed, Phil. 2.13. then is it of grace: if it be man's, then is it a
work: but all works are here excluded. 2. beside this, grace cannot be here
understood, to be a thing infused into and inherent in man, as the Romanists,
for then it were a work, Osiander: but grace is here conceived to be
subiective in Deo, in God as a subject, as work is ( subiective) in man as a
subject. 3. Ghorrans conceit here has no place, that a work may be said to
merit, and it shall be of grace, because it meriteth of grace: for the very
opposition between grace and work, one excluding the other, allows no such
permission. 4. work and grace may stand together but not as joint causes: but
works must follow grace, ^^ accepta gratia sit inanis, that the grace received
be not in vain, as Origin says: and though the reward follow works, yet the
merit of the work is not the cause, but the grace and favor of God, which has
appointed such a way and order, that the faithful, after they have wrought and
labored, should be rewarded: it is consecutio and ordo, a thing that
follows, and an order, which God has appointed, not any merit: Mar.

4. Though the Apostle especially entreat here of election, that it is of
grace, yet because the Apostles rule is general, ad totam salutis nostrae
rationem extendi debet, it must be extentended, to the whole manner and way of
salvation, Calvin: for as election is by grace, not by works, Romans 9.11. so
our calling is by grace, not by works, 2. Tim. 1.9. Who has called us with an
holy calling, not according to our works: our justification also is by faith
without works, Romans 3.24.28.

Quest. 8. How it is said, Israel obtained not that he sought, v. 7.
The doubt is moved, because our B. Savior says, Matthew. 7.7. ask and it
shall be given you, seek and you shall find, etc.

1. The answer is, there are two kinds of seeking God, a lawful, right, and
true seeking of God, wherein must be considered both the manner, which must be
faith, and the end which is to the glory of God: and the other seeking is not
right, which sayleth of either of these, as the Jews failed in both: for they
sought not righteousness by faith, c. 9.23. and therefore missed of that,
which they sought for: and beside they went about to establish their own
righteousness, and would not submit themselves to the righteousness of God,
c. 10. 3. that is, they sought their own praise, and glory, and not Gods, and
therefore it was no marvel if they failed of their desire.

2. Like unto those were they, which sought and followed Christ, Ioh. 6. but it
was to have their bellies filled, and fed by him: so Saint James says, c. 4.3.
You ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that you may consume it on
your lusts: in like manner the Prophet Hosea rebuked the old Israelites, They
shall go with their sheep and bullockes to seek the Lord, but they shall not
find him, because he has withdrawn himself from them, Hosh. 5.6.

3. Chrysostom somewhat otherwise, shows the reason why they obtained not
that they sought: Iudaeus sibi ipse repugnat, etc. the Jew is contrary to
himself, for they sought righteousness, and yet when it was offered them, they
rejected it: they looked for the Messiah, and yet, when he came they would none
of him: like as wanton children, that call for bread, and when it is given
them, they cast it away.

Quest. 9. Of these words, v. 8. As it is written God has given them the
spirit of slumber, whence it is taken.
1. Origin is of opinion, that these words can no where be found in the old
Scriptures: Ero hactenus invenire non potui, I could not find them out yet
(says he) and therefore he thinks, that the Apostle adds these words of
his own, and follows the sense of the Prophet, rather then the words: But if
it were so, the Apostle would not have set this sentence before, as it is
written; if it were not so written, as it is here alleged: Erasmus thinks
that Saint Paul delivers the sense of that place Isai. 6.9. as likewise he
does Act. 28.27. but in that place there is no mention made of the spirit of
slumber or compunction: some think that the Apostle cites not here any
particular place, but alludeth only unto the like places of the Prophet Isai:
as c. 19.14. The Lord has mingled among them the spirit of errors: ecclestic.
expos. but that place is spoken of the Egyptians, and therefore could not
properly be applied by Saint Paul to the Jews: therefore I subcribe rather to
Pareus, and Tolet, who think that this testimony is taken out of two places
of the Prophet Isai: the first c. 29.10. the Lord has covered you with a
spirit of slumber: the other part is found c. 6.9.

2. But there is some difference both between the translation of the
Septuagint and the Hebrew, and between Saint Paul's citation, and the
Septuagint, and between S. Paul's allegation and the original. 1. The
Septuagint in that place, Isai. 19.14. use the word (...), he has made them
drunk with the spirit of slumber: but in the Hebrew it is he has covered, of
the word, nasaph to hide or cover: the Apostle uses the word (...), he has
given: in the other place Isai. 6.9. the original uses the imperative mood:
make their hearts heavy, and shut their eyes: the Septuagint express it by
the active, applying it to the people, they have shut their eyes: and so does
S. Luke cite it, Act. 28.27. and Matthew. 13.16. but Saint Paul refers it unto
God, he has given, etc. as Ioh. 12.40. it is said he has blinded their eyes:
wherein the Apostle follows the sense of the Prophet: for as Pet. Martyr well
observes, quod Dei imperio fit, a Deo fieri dicitur, that which is done by the
commandment of God, is said to be done by God.

3. But there is some difference yet in the word tardemah, slumber, which the
Prophet uses, Isay 29.10. which the Septuagint translate (...), compunction:
here much ado is made about the signification of this word. 1. Some take the
signification of the word (...), which is to move, to drive, and so interpret
it spiritum commotionis, the spirit of commotion, perplexity: so the Syrian
interpreter, Anselme, Faius: but this should much differ from the Hebrew word
which signifies slumber: commotion, and rest, or slumber, are not one and the
same. 2. some do take the other sense of the word, compungo, to prick or
pierce: in which signification, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Oecumenius, by
compunction understand the settled obstinacy of the Jews: like as a thing
nailed to a post moves or stirs not: Haymo interprets it spiritum
invidentiae, the spirit of envy, whereby they were offended at the calling of
the Gentiles: there are two kind of compunctions, one is taken in the better
part, as Act. 2.37. they were pricked in their hearts to repentance, so also
the ordinar. gloss. and Lyranus, understand the envy of the Jews, to the
doctrine of Christ: but yet the reason appears not, why the Septuagint should
render the Hebrewe word tardemah, slumber, by a word signifying, pricking or
compunction. 3. Therefore some are of opinion, that the Greek word (...),
rather signifies soporem, slumber, as both Beza here, and Tolet annotat. 6.
allege out of Hesychius, who expounds it by an other Greek word (...),
rest, ease: and he seems to derive (...), of ^^^, the night, whereof comes
the word (...), to sleep: and of this his opinion that the Septuagint
translate this place by a word, signifying slumber, Tolet brings three
reasons: 1. because the Hebrew word tardemah, signifies a dead sleep or
slumber, which sometimes they render by the word (...) 1. Sam. 26.12. which is
a kind of stupiditie, senselesnes, or astonishment, which in effect is all one.
2. Psalm. 60.5. Thou have made us to drink the wine of giddines: there an other
word targelah, is used, of the like signification with tardemah, which is a
kind of giddines or drowsines, such as is in those, that slumber: which word
the Septuagint interpret (...), the word, which they use here. 3. the words
following, eyes that they should not see, and ears, that they should not
hear, do show the effects of slumber, or sleep. 4. But notwithstanding these
conjectures, seeing the word (...) signifies compunction, as not only the
Greek interpreters, Chrysostom, Origin, Theophylact, Oecumenius, who best
knew the proper signification of the Greek word, do interpret, but the
Scripture also thereto bears witness: as Act. 2.27. they are said to be
pricked in their hearts, (...), of the which word (...), compunction, is
derived: I think this word fittest to be retained, yet in sense it is all one,
as if he should have said the spirit of slumber: whereof Osiander gives this
reason, because they are as it were pricked and stirred, when they are called
to the Gospel, as they which are indeed a sleep are loath to be awaked: Pareus
adds that the effect is put for the cause, like as they which are fast a
sleep cannot with any stirring or pricking be awaked: But I rather think that
it is a metaphorical speech; because they which are pricked and so perplexed
with grief, have no sense of any other thing: as Cyprian says of some,
transpunctae mentis alienatione dementes, they being mad, and beside
themselves in their pricked and pierced soul, neglect to be cured, and to be
brought to repentance, etc. de orat. dom. so that the spirit of compunction, is
the same with a scared and cautherised conscience, whereof the Apostle
speaks, 1. Tim. 4.2. which is all one with a spiritual giddines, or slumber:
and this answeareth to the word before used, v. 7. (...), they were hardened:
like as the hand which has a hard skin drawn over, feels not the prick put
unto it.

4. It is called the spirit of slumber, or compunction, which Haymo
understands to be the mind filled with envy: but rather, as Gods spirit
works in us every good grace: so the evil spirit is the minister of wrath
in the reprobate, instigating and moving them continually unto evil:
whereupon they are called, the spirit of fornication, the spirit of
covetousness, and such like: As God sent such a spirit of giddines and
frenzy upon Saul, which did before and make him mad with envy and malice.

5. The last words, unto this day: Some will have a part of the Scripture here
cited by the Apostle, and so they refer us to that place, Deuteronomy. 29.4. The
Lord has not given you, ^^ heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to
hear unto this day: Tolet annot. 7. Faius. But there is great difference
between these two testimonies, the Lord has not given them eyes to see, which
are the words of Moses, and the Lord has given them eyes, that they should not
see, as here the Apostle cites the text: the first shows only the negation
and denial of a gift, the other expresses further a judgment of induration
or hardening: wherefore these words are no part of the testimony, but added by
the Apostle, and are to be joined with the last words in the 7. verse, the rest
have been hardened, (the words coming between being enclosed in a
parenthesis) unto this day; Beza, Pareus: as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 1.15.
Unto this day the veil is laid over their hearts.

6. Now whereas two exceptions may be made to the Apostles alleagation here:
the one that the Apostle seems not to prove directly that which he intended,
that the rest are hardened, the other, that his proof is but weak being
taken from a particular example of those times: hereunto we answer. 1. that
the Apostles proof is direct from the effect to the cause: if God in his
justice hardened them, then were they hardened: their own malice was the cause
of their hardening properly, and as we say per se, of it self: and the justice
of God, per accidens, accidentally. 2. his proof also as it is direct, so is
it forceable: for that place Isay. 6. contains a manifest prophecy of the
obstinacy of the Jews in the times of our Savior, as is evident by the
frequent application of it, in the Gospel, as Matthew. 13.14. Act. 28.26. and
say, that were not a special prophecy, yet because the rule of Gods justice
is certain and constant, and always like it self, the Lord finding greater
obstinacy among the Jews at the coming of his Son into the world their
before; was in like sort to exercise his justice: See further Iun. parall. 21.
lib. 2.

Quest. 10. How God is said to send the spirit of slumber, to give ears not to
hear, etc.
1. Their opinion here is refelled, that will have God no ways the cause of
hardening the heart, which is Pighius assertion, as he is here confuted at
large by Pet. Martyr, who in this manner objected. 1. that place of the Prophet
Isay is a prediction, therefore not the cause of hardening. Answ. It follows
not: for even that word which Isay preached, did provoke the Jews, and they
were thereby further hardened: and though every prediction be not a cause of
that which is to come, yet such predictions, as foretell of such things as the
Lord himself will work, as here the Prophet speaks of the hardening of the
heart, do not only show the thing but express the cause also.

2. Ob. Nemo cogitur ad peccandum, but no man is compelled to sin. Ans. We
must here distinguish between violentia and necessitas, violence and
necessity: true it is, that God forces and compels none to sin, yet they
cannot otherwise choose but sin, by reason of the corruption of nature, to the
which man has enthralled himself: in respect whereof it is impossible that
man should believe of himself, without the work of the spirit: as it is said,
Ioh. 12.39. they could not believe, etc.

3. Object. Pighius says, that by impossible, here we are to understand
difficile, that which is hard to be done: not that it was simply impossible
that they should believe, but it was an hard matter for them so to do. Answer.
Neither do we say that simply it is impossible in respect of the absolute
power of God, but ex hypothesi, by way of supposition, the blindness and
obstinacy of man's heart, being presupposed: and to say that a man may believe
of himself, though hardly, is the evasion of the old Pelagians: for of
himself, not only hardly, but not at all can a man believe; as our Savior
says, Without me ye can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5.

4. Object. Whereas that place by us is urged, Mark. 4.11. To you it is given
to know the mystery of the kingdom, but to them, etc. all things are done in
parables, that they seeing may see, and not discern, etc. to show, that God
has an hand and work in blinding of the eyes of the obstinate; Pighius will
have this word ( that) to show not the final, but efficient cause, because
they were blind, therefore Christ spoke in parables: they were not therefore
blinded the more, because he spoke in parables.

Answ. 1. Their blindness was not the cause of Christ's speaking in parables; for
that had been a reason rather, why Christ would have spoken more plainly unto
them, but because they were wilfully blind, he therefore spoke in parables,
that they might continue in their blindness still. 2. these words that, because,
do not always show the cause of a thing, sed causam notitiae, but the cause
of the knowledge or manifestation of a thing, which is by the effect; as Luke
7.47. our Blessed Savior says of the woman, many sins are forgiven her for
she loved much: by the effect of her great love, he does demonstrate the cause,
the forgiveness of her sins: so here Christ shows the cause of his
preaching in parables, by the effect, the hardening of their heart, and
blinding of their eyes. 4. and like hereunto is that place, where the Lord
says concerning Pharaoh, For this cause have I raised thee up, that I might
show my power in thee, Romans 9.17. that was the end of the raising up Pharaoh,
that God might get himself honor in his confusion: as this was the end of
Christ's preaching in parables, that the Jews might be confirmed in their
obstinacy, and hardness of heart.

5. Object. Whereas we also urge that place of Isay, 6.9. Make the heart of
this people fat, shut their eyes, etc. Pighius replyeth that God bids it to
be done, he is not said to do it: and in that he says, shut their eyes, it is
thus much in effect, praedica excaecandos, preach that their eyes shall be
blinded, etc.

Ans. 1. That which the Lord bids to be done, is held to be done by the Lord
himself, being done by his commandment. 2. and it is a very strange
construction, shut their eyes, that is, prophecy or preach, that their eyes
should be shut up: but thereby is signified, that by the word which he
preached, they should be occasioned to stumble, and their eyes should dazzle at
it; as bleare eyes at the brightness of the Sun. 3. and that God is the cause
of their hardening, aad blinding, is evidently expressed, Ioh. 12.40. he has
blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts.

6. Object. To this Pighius again replieth; that man in himself is the cause
of his hardening and blindness, yet the Scripture so speaks, as though God
blinded their eyes; and yet he does not: as when they which have tender eyes,
and are made more blind by looking upon the Sun, who will say that the
Sunne-beames are the cause of blindness, the fault is in the eyes. And both S.
Matthew, c. 13.10. and S. Luke, Act. 28.27. do otherwise cite that place, Isa.
6.9. the heart of this people is waxed fat, making no mention at all of God to
be the cause or worker of it.

Ans. 1. Does the Scripture so say, that God blinds the eyes, and is it not
so? this were to make the Scripture to speak one thing, and to mean an other.
2. that similitude makes directly against him: for though the first and
principal fault be in the eyes, yet accidentally the brightness of the Sin
does increase the blindness of the eyes: and so God in his justice more
hardens the hearts of the obstinate, which they first hardened by their own
perverseness and unbelief. 3. S. Matthew indeed and S. Luke do in that manner
cite that text, therein following the reading of the Septuagint: whereof diverse
reasons are yielded. 1. some think, that the Jews falsified the Scriptures,
and therefore the Septuagint, which translated them, before they were
corrupted, were rather followed: but Origin upon that place, Isa. 6. refuses
this conceit, because it is not like, that our Savior and the Apostles would
have left that fault untouched, if the Jews had falsified the Scriptures. 2.
Hierome in his Commentary also upon that place, reports an other opinion of
certain Ecclesiastical writers, who thought, that Saint Luke, because he was
more skillful in the Greek tongue, did rather follow the Septuagint: but this
reason is not sufficient for Saint Matthew, though it might seem probable for
the other. 3. some thought, that the Septuagint did so translate, that they
might decline that blasphemy, (as they thought) to make God the author of the
hardenesse of the heart: but Hierome takes away this, because in other places
the Septuagint are not afraid so to translate, as God hardened the heart of
Pharaoh. 4. Wherefore the Septuagint in their translation took that liberty,
not always to render the words, but the sense, and the Apostles follow them,
because their interpretation was then received and well known, and so it would
have given offense to the Gentiles, if it had been refused: and though neither
S. Matthew, nor S. Luke do directly make God the author, yet it is sufficient
that S. John in his Gospel so alleges that place: which small difference
between them teaches us, that we should compare one Scripture with an other,
and interpret one by an other: and thus much (if not too much) of their
opinion, that would utterly exclude God, from being any cause at all of the
hardening of the heart.

2. A second opinion is of them, which ascribe somewhat unto God herein, but
not much: as Chrysostom says, that this word, he gave, non operationem Dei,
sed concessionem significat, does not signify an operation of God, but a
concession only: so Theophylact, he gave, that is, permisit, he suffered them
to be hardened: likewise the enterlin. gloss. he gave them the spirit of
compunction, that is, permisit habere, he permitted them to have, etc. But to
do a thing, is more then to suffer: and it is a violent interpretation, to
give, that is, to suffer to be given: beside, he that suffers a thing to be
done which is in his power to hinder, is accessarie to the doing of it: so that
in allowing unto God permission only, they either will make God an idle
beholder, and no doer, or they will make him accessarie and consenting an
evil: Origin much better answeareth this question, how it may be said de bono
Deo, of the good God, that he should give Israel, eyes not to see, and ears
not to hear: vide ne haec ^igis sit retributio and merces incredulitatis: see
(says he) if this be not rather a reward of their incredulity: so hardness of
heart, as it is a punishment may well proceed from God, not as a sufferer and
permitter only, but as an agent and doer.

3. Some, as these do extenuate the power of to God too much, and so do
ascribe too much unto God, in making him the principal cause of hardening of
men's hearts, which must needs follow as the fruits and effects of their
reprobation, which God absolutely decreed, without any respect unto their
works: True it is, that they which hold the absolute decree of reprobation,
must needs make God a proper and principal cause of the hardening of the
heart, seeing their reprobation is the beginning and original of their
rebellion, obstinacy, and forsaking of God: but that God rejects none, but
for sin, nor decrees none to be damned, without relation to their sin, is
before at large handled: c. 9. contr. 10. whether I refer the reader: at this
time, that place of the Prophet, perditio tua ex te Israel, ^^y perdition is of
thy self, O Israel, only may suffice to clear God, from being either the
proper, or principal cause of hardness of heart.

4. Others do discharge God altogether, and make the devil only the author
and cause of the blindness of the heart, according to that saying, Whom the
Apostle means by the God of this world, 2. Cor. 4.4.
2. Cor. 4.4. in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds: this place
was much urged both by the Arrians, who would prove by this place, that Christ
is no other wise God, then as this name is given unto creatures in Scripture,
as here unto the devil; as also by the Manichees, who held that there were two
beginnings, and two Princes or Gods, one of good the other of evil.

Hereupon some of the fathers, to take away all advantage from these heretics,
as Hilarie, Augustine, Chrysostom. Ambrose, did expound this place of the true
God, making this the sense, in whom God has blinded the minds, that is, of
the infidels of this world. But 1. here the words are evidently transposed: for
in the original, thus the words stand, the God of this world. 2. And the
Arrians with the Manichees may be otherwise answered, then by declining the
right sense of this place: for though Satan be here understood, he is not said
simply to be God, but with an addition, God of the world, whereas Christ is
simply called God, Romans 9.5. Who is God over all, blessed for ever: and so are
the Arrians answered: And to the Manichees we say, that the devil is called
the God and Prince of the world, not as though the kingdom were divided with
him, but we grant, that a principality is committed unto him, yet as Gods
Minister, that he can go no further, then the Lord permits: and therefore
he is called, the evil spirit of the Lord, which came upon Saul, 1. Sam.
16.14. because the Lord uses him as his messenger, and minister of his
judgments. Yet this place being understood of Satan, makes not him the
only cause of the blindness and hardness of heart, though he be a principal
doer in it: for here the Apostle says, that God gave them the spirit of
slumber.

5. Nor yet is man only the cause of his own hardening and blindness, as the
ordinar. gloss. says, exc^^ati sunt, quia nolucrunt credere, they were blinded
because they would not believe: for their blindness was the cause of their
unbelief, as the Apostle here shows, that the Jews believed not, because
they were blinded, Mart. and Gorrhan here distinguishes well, that there are
two kinds of cecitie or blindness: there is caecitas culpa and poenae, a
blindness which is a fault, and a blindness which is a punishment: the first is
the cause of infidelity, and infidelity causes the second: that is, a man is
first blind, which is the cause he believes not, and then as a reward of their
infidelity, they are more blinded still: wherefore though the corruption of
man's heart be a cause of his own blindness and hardness of heart, yet there is
some other cause beside.

6. Wherefore to the hardening and blinding of the heart, these three concur,
man's own corruption, as the first and nearest cause, Satan as the instigator
and temper, God as a just Judge: the Scripture makes all these the causes: God
is said to harden Pharaohs heart: and Satan also blinds the minds of the
infidels, 2. Cor. 4.4. and Pharaoh hardened his own heart, Exodus 9.34. the
corruption of man's heart is as the coal, that sends forth sparks, Job. 5.7.
the devil blows and stirs the coals, and kindles the fire: God he
smites as it were on the anvile, and frames and disposes every thing to his
own will: so God has a stroke in the hardening of the heart, not by
permission only, neither in making a soft heart hard: but both in leaving man
being blind by nature, to his own will, and in withdrawing his grace, and
giving him over, as a just Judge, to the malice of Satan to be further
hardened: and so God is the author of the hardening of man's heart, not as it is
a sin, but as it is a punishment of sin: and thus, and no otherwise do
Protestants maintain, God to be an agent and worker in these actions: and
therefore that is a mere slander of Stapleton, that Calvin should hold, Deum
esse activam causam peccati, that God is the active cause of sin, Antid. p.
715. and the like slander is uttered by Becanus, p. 6. that the God of the
Calvinists is, author peccati, the author of sin: See more hereof, c. 9.
quest. 18.

11. Quest. Of the meaning of those words, Let their table be made a snare,
etc. v. 9.
1. Concerning the place here cited out of Psalm. 69. v. 22. Origin observes,
that the Apostle does not tie himself to so many words: for some he adds, as
(...), for a net or trappe, which neither the Hebrew, nor the Septuagint have:
and some he omitteth, as coram ipsis, before them: so also Erasmus: but Beza
observes, that this latter is not omitted, for unto them, is equivalent, to
before them: further, both Martyr, Beza, Pareus, Calvin, think, that the
Hebrew word lishlomius, signifies pacifica, their prosperous things, which the
Septuagint read, (...), for a retribution: as though the word were
leshillomi^^, retributions: but Iunius and Pagnine do there interpret the
world lishlomin^, retributions; because of the preposition lamed, being set
before, which signifies for a recompense, or retribution.

2. Now for the meaning of the words. 1. Origin by their table, understands
the Scriptures, which were a scandale unto them, in that they perverted them to
their own hurt: as where the Scriptures describe the Messiah to be a glorious
deliverer, which must be understood spiritually, they were offended, because
they looked for a temporal deliverance. 2. Haymo does understand by the table,
collatio verberum in mensa, their conferences together at the table, how to
take Christ: but in this sense their table was a snare to others, rather then
to themselves. 3. Lyranus does thus distinguish these three: their table
because a snare in perverting the Scriptures, and a trappe, when they were
taken by Titus and Vespasian, and a scandale, when to the infamy and opprobrie
of that nation, their nobles were put to torment, and shameful death, by the
Romans. 4. But the better interpretation is this: by the table, as Chrysostom
expounds, we understand, omnes illorum delicia, all things, wherein they
delighted; as their prosperity, their public state, their Temple. Calvin: the
having of the Scriptures, sacrifices, and such other spiritual or temporal
blessings, the Prophet prays that all may be turned to their hurt: and he
uses three similitudes; let them be a snare, as birds are taken, when they
think to find food, a trappe, as beasts are caught and entrapped in the net,
and a scandale, as that whereat men do stumble in their going, and running,
and fall.

3. For a recompense unto them. 1. The interlin. gloss understands the
retribution of eternal death. 2. Haymo and Lyranus have special reference to
Christ: that as they would have blotted out his name, so their name is
perished, as they killed him, so they were killed of the Romans. 3. but it
generally rather shows a retalion and recompense in their just punishment,
for all the wrongs and injuries which they had offered to the servants of God,
and specially to Christ himself, Pareus.

4. Let their eyes be darkened, and bow down their back. 1. Lyranus by the
darkening of the eyes, interprets the error of their understanding, and by
the bowing of their backs, the error of their will. 2. Gorrhan understands,
error in faith and manners. 3. deprime ^^eribus conscientiae, hold them down
with the burden of their conscience, Pellic. aeterna servitute opprime,
oppress them and keep them under with everlasting servitude: Melancthon
following Chrysostom and Theophylact. 4. But the general sense is better:
that they are deprived of all strength both inward and outward; for the back
or loins, (as it is in the Hebrewe) signifies the strength: so their eyes are
blinded, they are void of all understanding in spiritual things, and they are
likewise deprived of all grace and strength, both spiritual, they have no
endeavor or will, to that which is good, Genevens. Pareus: as also temporal,
their authority and government is taken from them, they live in perpetual
servitude, Gryneus.

Quest. 12. Whether it be lawful to use any imprecation, as David does here.
1. Origin seems to be of opinion, that it is not lawful: and therefore he
has here a strange interpretation: he thinks the Prophet prays not against
the Israelites, but for them, that their eyes might be darkened, ne videant
perversa, that they see not perverse things: as it had been happy for
Marcion, Basilides, and Valentinus, and other heretics, that they had not
seen those perverse errors, which they held: But seeing both that which goes
before, let their table be made a snare, etc. and that which follows, bow
down their back, are imprecations made against them, how can this coming
between be taken to be a prayer for them?

2. Augustine agreeing in the same opinion, that no imprecation is lawful, yet
follows an other imprecation: he thinks that the Prophet spoke this, non
optantis voto, sed spiritu providentis, not as with a desire of one that
wishes, but with the spirit of one foreseeing and foretelling what should
happen, lib. 1. de sermon. Dom. in monte: so Haymo, haec verba non optantis voto,
sed praedicentis officio dicuntur, these words are not uttered with a wishing
desire, but by way of prediction, etc. so also the ordinar. gloss. and these
reasons may be alleged against imprecations.

1. Our Blessed Savior bids us to pray for our enemies, Matthew. 5.46. S.
Paul also says, Romans 12.14. Bless them which persecute you, bless I say and
curse not, etc.

2. The example of our Savior is against imprecations, who prayed for his
enemies: he cursed them not.

3. Yet we have some foreign examples of such as refused to make imprecations,
as Ba^^^^ would not curse the people of Israel: and a certain woman Priest of
Athens could not be hired to curse Alcibiades, making this answer, that it was
her office to pray for other, not to curse them: much more should Christians
abstain from cursing.

3. Wherefore for the solution of this question, these distinctions must be
premised. 1. the cause must be considered: whether it be private, which
concerns ones person only, in which cause it is unlawful to curse: or
whether it be publik concerning the glory of God: wherein imprecations are
used: as S. Peter sentenced Ananias to death, Act. 5. and laid a curse upon S.
Magus, Act. 8. S. Paul cursed Elymas the sorcerer, Act. 13. or it may be a
private cause, yet joined with the glory of God: as Elisha cursed the children
which called him bald head, 1. King. 2. 2. The condition and calling of them,
which use imprecations must be considered, whether they do it of a private
affection, which is unlawful: or of a prophetical spirit, as the Prophets and
Apostles did; as it is said of Paul, that when he cursed Elymas, he was full of
the H. Ghost, Act. 13.9. herein they as Prophets do by their imprecation
inflict that punishment, which is appointed of God. 3. The things must be
considered, which are wished unto any by these imprecations: they are either
temporal, which may tend unto their amendment: as Ps. 89.16. fill their faces
with shame, that they may seek thy name: these imprecations are more
tolerable, which a man sometime wishes against himself, that he may be
afflicted with some cross, or other, rather then to fall into sin: or they
are eternal: but everlasting destruction cannot be denounced against any
without Gods special warrant.

4. The persons are to be distinguished, which are cursed: they are such of
whom there is hope of amendment: or such as are in a desperate state, and
professed enemies to God and godliness, against whom such imprecations do lie:
as S. John will not have us to pray for those whom we see to sin unto death,
1. epist. c. 5.

5. The manner and kind of imprecations must also be looked into, some are
extraordinary, whereunto men were directed by a prophetical and
extraordinary spirit: of the lawfulness of such imprecations, there is no
question: or ordinary, wherein these circumstances must be considered. 1. the
persons that curse, they must thereunto be called as the public Magistrate or
minister, and parents in their families. 2. the persons that are cursed must be
intractable and incorrigible, and refuse all wholesome admonition. 3. the
manner must be this, they must not curse absolutely, but with a condition, that
such may be converted, or confounded. 4. with what affection, not hating their
persons, but detesting their vices, against the which, they open their mouths
to curse.

Now in David's imprecation all the things before requited concurred, it was
Gods cause, he had a prophetical spirit, they were professed enemies to God:
the reasons before alleged do conclude only against private curses; in our
own cause, against persons not desperately evil, and without any special
direction.

Quest. 13. Of the end of the stumbling of the Jews, v. 11.
v. 11. Have they stumbled that they should fall, etc. 1. Chrysostom here
observes well the Apostles wisdom, that when he speaks of the execation
and reiection of the Jews, he alleges Scripture, least he might be thought
to speak of evil will: consolationem a seipso ponit, but the consolation he
brings in his own name, that his love toward them might appear; as here ye
shows a double end of their stumbling; one, that thereby salvation might
come unto the Gentiles, the other, that by the calling of the Gentiles, the
Jews again might be provoked and stirred up to believe in Christ: the first
end serves to beat down the pride and insolency of the Gentiles, the other,
to comfort the Jews, that they should not think their fall to be
irrecouerable.

2. Have they stumbled, etc. 1. The Latin translator adds, have they so
stumbled, that they should fall; which Tolet justifies and would have the
meaning to be this, nor that the end of the falling of the Jews should be the
calling of the Gentiles, but that their fall was not without recovery: and
Origin has the like observation, showing here the diverse kinds of falling:
some fall and never rise again, as Lucifer, who shall never, no not in the end
of the world be restoared: the fall of others is recouerable, as here the Jews
did not so stumble, vt ab omni legis observantia declinarent, to decline from
the whole observation of the law. 2. But Erasmus well observes, that here the
Apostle speaks not de magnitudine lapsus, sed de eventu, of the greatness of
their fall, but of the event; for the Apostle throughout this whole epistle does
exaggerate the sin of their incredulity; neither is this particle (so) in
the original, neither do the Greek expositors, Chrysostom. Theoph. Oecumen.
insert it. 3. yet this must be added further to Erasmus observation, that the
calling of the Gentiles, was not only the event, which followed the
incredulity of the Jews, but it was the end and scope, for the which God
suffered the Jews to fall: for this event must not be severed from the
providence of God. Beza, annot. 4. nor yet is this question so propounded, as
though the Jews did stumble and fall with any such intention to profit the
Gentiles, as Gryneus seems to note, no man that is in his right mind will
hurt himself; which the Jews should have done, if they of purpose had
stumbled to fall: But Photius observes, that the Jews, as much as in them
lay, did so stumble, vt corruerent, to fall altogether: nec sic affecti sunt,
etc. neither were they so affected, that any good should come thereby to
themselves, or others: sed Deus illorum casu, etc. but God used their fall both
for the salvation of the Gentiles, and their own emendation. 5. Theophylact
must here also be warily and advisedly read: the Jews are not so fallen, vt se
nequeant, quando velint, attollere, that they can not raise up themselves
again, when they will, etc. for this were, as though the Jews of purpose had
fallen, that the Gentiles might come in, and then they would return again:
neither is it in any man's power to return when he will: for ones conversion,
is as life from the dead, v. 13. as one can not raise himself from the dead,
so neither can he convert and turn unto God. 6. Haymo, and Augustine before
him, put in the word solum, only; that is, they have not stumble only to
fall, as though no good should come thereby: but God did not suffer them to
stumble at all to fall: God propounded not to himself their fall, as an end of
their stumble for God delights not in the destruction of any, but God
respected two singular good ends in the fall of the Jews, the vocation of the
Gentiles, and their own conversion. Pareus.

Quest. 14. How the stumbling and falling of the Jews, brought salvation to
the Gentiles.
v. 11. Through their fall salvation comes to the Gentiles. 1. the word
(...), is not well here translated delictum, as the Latin interpreter, which
Anselme interprets, peccatum, sin, and understands it of that special
sin of the Jews, in putting Christ to death: so also Gorrhan: but it here
signifies rather lapsum, their fall, as Erasmus well notes, to answer unto
the former question, have they stumbled that they should fall: so also Tolet
annot. 9.

2. But we must not think, that the fall of the Jews was properly the cause
of the calling of the Gentiles: but it was the occasion rather: for evil is
not of it self the cause of that which is good: but God by his power draws
good out of evil: for otherwise, as Lyranus alleges out of Augustine in his
Euchiridion: Deus non permitteret mala sieri, nisi inde eliceret mayor a bona,
God would never suffer evil to be, unless he did thereout draw greater good.
This is like, as Pet. Martyr resembles it, as there is a saying in
Philosophy, that the corruption of one thing, is the generation of an other,
not that it is the cause thereof: but the efficient having expelled one form,
does bring in an other: and as in a syllogism out of false and untrue
propositions, a true conclusion may be inferred, not by the force of the
premises, but of the syllogism, and form of reasoning: so Gods providence as
the chief efficient cause, does by occasion of that which is evil, bring
forth that which is good.

3. Anselme thinks, that the reiection of the Jews was the occasion of the
calling of the Gentiles, because thereupon followed their dispersion through
the world, and by that means, they brought the Scriptures to the Gentiles: But
this was an occasion rather, that after that the Jews had rejected the
preaching of the Apostles, they turned to the Gentiles: neither was there any
such necessity, that the one should be rejected, before the other could be
called: if it had so pleased God, they might have been called together: But
this consequence, that upon the rejecting of the Jews, the Gentiles were
called, depended both upon the will and pleasure of God, who had appointed it
should so be, Martyr: and upon the conuenience of the thing, the Jews were
high minded, and could not endure, that the Gentiles together with them should
be the people of God: but they were like the dog in the maunger, that would
neither eat himself, nor suffer the ox to eat; therefore it was requisite,
that their pride should be first abated, and they humbled, by seeing them, to
be called, to be a people, that were no people: so the question here is not,
what God could do, but what the Jews had done, and would do: by their good
will, neither they themselves would come, nor suffer the Gentiles to enter:
Pareus.

4. And though the Jews had not been rejected at all, The Gentiles should
have been called though the Jews had (...) been (...).
yet the Gentiles also should have been called, but in the second place: as
Chrysostom shows out of that place, Act. 13.46. vobis oportuit primum
annuntiari verbum, the word of God ought first to have bin preached unto you:
but now through their incredulity it came to pass, vt inverteretur hic ordo,
that this order was inuerted: so in the parable, Luke 14. after that they,
which were invited to the feast, refused, then the good man of the house says
unto his servant, exi cito, go forth quickly into the streets, etc. the
Gentiles then should have been called, though the Jews had not been
incredulous, but not so quickly.

Quest. 15. How the Jews were provoked to follow the Gentiles.
1. Whereas the word is, (...), which signifies properly to provoke to
emulation, the vulgar latin does not well translate, vt emulentur illos, to
imitate or emulate them, referring it to the Jews that they should emulate the
Gentiles, either imitande in imitating them, as Lyranus expounds, and before
him Photius, that says the Gentiles were examplaria, examples herein to the
Jews, or invidendo, in envying the faith and knowledge of the Gentiles:
Gorrhan.

2. Some refer it to the Gentiles: as Origin understands it of the faith of
the Gentiles, which should provoke the Jews to emulation: Anselme
understands it thus, that the Gentiles should imitate the Jews, that is such
as believed among them: but this is impertinent to the Apostles purpose: some,
as Chrysostom, Theodoret, Ambrose, do apply it to the Gentiles, that they
should provoke the Jews by their example to believe.

3. But it is better referred unto God, that he should provoke the Jews to
emulation by the example of the Gentiles, when they saw themselves the ancient
people of God to be neglected, and the Gentiles which were forelorne to be
received in, Martyr: But Tolet refuses this, and would have it referred either
to the Gentiles, or their faith, because no mention is made of God before, but
of the Gentiles, annot. 9. yet I prefer Pet. Martyrs reason, totum ad Deum
refortur, all is referred to God: and Pareus proves it by that place, Deuteronomy.
32.21. I will provoke you to emulation by a nation, that is no nation: But
Tolet observes well, that the word their used by Moses is in hiphil, of the
word kanah, which signifies to emulate or envy, and in hiphil, to cause to
emulate: and so the Apostle is to be translated here, as likewise. v. 14. If I
might by any means provoke them of my self: where the Latin interpreter so
reads also: and therefore he fails here, in translating, that they might
emulate them, whereas he should have said, to provoke them to emulation.

4. But it will be objected, that this is no commendable thing, by envy or
emulation to be brought to be believe: the answer is, that God simply
approoueth not such emulation or envy, but as he can use that which is evil
to good purposes, so by this emulation it pleases him to incite and stir up
the Jews to return unto him: like as the husband puts away his adulterous
wife, that she thereby may be provoked by a kind of emulation (left an other
should be received in her place) to seek to be reconciled, Pareus.

5. But here we must understand, that the better sort of the Jews shall be
provoked, not all, for the obstinate thereby are made worse, Martyr: and
further the Apostle must not be taken to speak of the Jews in particular: for
they which stumble and fell away, were not restored, but of the nature in
general: that though some were unbelievers, yet the whole nation was not cast
off; Calvin, Beza.

Quest. 16. What is meant by the diminishing of the Jews and their abundance,
v. 12.
1. Whereas the Apostle had showed, that the falling away of the Jews was an
occasion of the calling of the Gentiles: it might be objected, that the
conversion of the Jews might likewise be an occasion of the falling away of
the Gentiles: hereunto the Apostle answeareth negatiuely, and he confirms his
answer by an argument from the less to the greater: that if their empayring,
and diminishing, and poverty as it were, were the riches of the Gentiles, much
more their plentiful calling: for God can turn that which is evil to the
good of the Gentiles, much more that which is good.

2. By the riches of the world, we understand both the multitude of the
Gentiles, called to the knowledge of Christ, Pareus: and that wherewith they
were enriched, namely the knowledge of the Gospel, Genevens.

3. By the diminution, 1. Haymo, whom Lyranus and Gorrhan follow, understand
the Apostles, which were but few, and as the abiects of the people, yet they
enriched the Gentiles by their preaching: if the conversion of a few was so
profitable to the Jews, much more the conversion of the whole nation in the
end of the world: but the Apostle expounds the word (...), the ruin of the
Jews, which he used before, by this word (...), diminution: he means not
then, the conversion of a few, but the falling away of the Jews to a few. 2.
Wherefore these three words the Apostle uses, as of equipollent, and of one
signification, (...), their fall, (...), their diminution v. 12. and (...),
their reiection and casting off, Par. 3. and in that he says they are
diminished, he shows that they are not utterly perished: the imminution of a
thing, is not rei excisio, sed decisio, is not the clean cutting off, but an
impayring only, Par.

4. How much more their abundance, (...), fulness. 1. by this fulness is not
only understood (...), the multitude of the Jews, which shall be called, but
also excellency of the spiritual graces, wherewith the Jews, in their
general conversion toward the end of the world, shall be increased, Gryneus.
2. neither are we so to understand the fulness of the Jews, as though every one
in particular should be called, but as then most of them were averse from
Christ, so in the end most shall be converted, Martyr: as by the fulness of the
Gentiles, v. 22. is understood the general and universal calling of them, not
of every one in particular. 3. and this fulness is not to be understood so much
with a relation on to the Gentiles, as though their number should be more full,
by the conversion of the Jews, for their fulness must be first come in, before
the Jews be converted, v. 25. as with reference to the whole number of Christ's
Church: that although there is a fulness of the Gentiles without them, yet as
Origin says, plenitudo portionis Domini nondum dicitur completa, the fulness of
the Lords portion cannot be said to be complete, until the Jews also be
converted. 4. But it will be objected, how much more the fulness of the Jews
shall be profitable to the Gentiles, if more Gentiles shall not be called, by
the conversion of the Jews; which the Apostle seems to deny, v. 25. for the
fullness of the Gentiles must first enter: Pet. Martyr does understand it of
the confirmation of the faith of the Gentiles, who seeing the zeal of the
Jews, shall thereby be confirmed: so the ordinary gloss, their fulness being
converted, ditabit gentes doctrina and exemplo, shall enrich the Gentiles by
their doctrine and example: Osiander adds, the Church of God shall be
increased, gloriosa populi Iudaici accessione, by the glorious accession of the
Jewish people: Pareus goes further, the Gentiles also, by the fulness of the
Jews shall be provoked to emulation: some further accession shall be made even
to the number of the believing Gentiles: though in respect of their universal
calling, the fulness of the Gentiles shall be entered before. 5. So these
benefits shall accrue unto the Church of God by the conversion of the Jews. 1.
the consociation and joining together both of the Jews and Gentiles, the wall
of partition being taken away: Ephesians. 2.14. 2. the Church of God shall be
increased, when the children of Judah, and the children of Israel, shall be
gathered together to the Church, Hosh. 1.11. 3. The faith of the Gentiles shall
be greatly confirmed. 4. God shall receive greater glory, when his goodness,
and the verity of his promises shall be made manifest in the salvation both of
Jews and Gentiles: Gryneus.

Quest. 17. How it stands with Gods justice to cast off the Jews, that the
Gentiles might enter in.
Object. Seeing the Apostle says, that through the fall of the Jews salvation
came to the Gentiles; and their ruin is the riches of the world: God may seem
to deal hardly, in casting off his own people, to receive strangers: and
beside it seems contrary to that rule, evil must not be done, that good may
come thereof.

Ans. 1. It were indeed an hard thing to cast off some to receive others, if
they were cast off without their own fault, or if the Lord were tied by any
bond not to cast them off, or, if their casting off did not tend to their
further good: but it is otherwise here: for the Lord did not cast off the
Jews, but for their unbelief: and he is not bound to bestow or continue his
grace, he may confer it, and withdraw it, upon whom, and from whom he
please: and beside the reiection of the Jews, was for their more plentiful
calling afterward. 2. Neither was their rejecting simply the cause of the
calling of the Gentiles, but ex accidente, accidentally, as we say: it was
properly the punishment of their infidelity, and a demonstration of the
justice of God: but God, that can turn evil unto good, did use this as an
occasion to induce the Gentiles to believe.

18. Quest. Why the Apostle makes mention of his Apostleship, and how he is
said to magnify his office. v. 13.
1. For the occasion of these words. 1. Tolet thinks, that the Apostle gives
here occasion of his former speech, that the diminishing of the Jews, was the
riches of the Gentiles: which was by reason of his ministry, who was
appointed the Apostle of the Gentiles. 2. Chrysostom says, the Apostle
shows two reasons of his commendation of the Gentiles, both because he was
their Apostle, and to the end that by their praise the Jews might be
provoked. 3. Hyperius makes this a third reason of the calling of the Jews,
from the end of his office and ministry. 4. Lyranus will have the third part
of the chapter here to begin, that as he had showed before, that the falling
of the Jews was neither general unto, v. 11. nor unprofitable, v. 11.12. so
now he shows that it is not irrecouerable. 5. but the best coherence and
connection is this: that whereas he touched two ends of the reiection of the
Jews before, the salvation of the Gentiles, and the conversion in the end of
the Jews: this latter he confirms by the use and end of his ministry; and
he shows that he in the execution of his office, id meditari, to meditate or
propound to himself the same thing that God does, that is, in preaching to the
Gentiles, he intends the salvation of the Jews.

2. But whereas in the original the words are (...), which signify, in as
much as, the vulgar latin reads, quamdiu, as long as: and so Origin, who
gives a double sense: that it may either signify the time of this life, as
long as he is an Apostle here, insinuating that he should afterward in the next
life have the same dignity to be an Apostle: where in Origin falls into his
fantastical speculations of the next world, as though their should need any
ministry of the word or Apostleship there: or this quamdiu, so long, is all
one, as if he had said, sine fine, without end, as long as I live: but the word
is not taken here for quamdiu, how long, but for quatenus, in as much as: as
Matthew. 25.45. In as much as ye did it to one of the least of these, ye did it
unto me: where the vulgar latin also misseth, reading quamdiu, as long: And
most commonly, when these words (...), are referred to the time, the word
(...), time, is added, as 1. Cor. 7.39. and Galat. 4.1. Mar.

3. I magnify mine office. 1. Origin understands it of Saint Paul's
faithfulness in his ministry: he honors his Ministry, which ministers
well, he dishonereth it, qui negligenter and indigne ministrat, who ministers
negligently and unworthily: to which purpose the Apostle says, 1. Tim. 3.13.
that the deacons which have ministered well, get themselves a good degree, do
honor their ministry by their diligence, and shall be rewarded of God: but he
that ministers not well, malam sibi poenam conquirit, does get and procure his
own punishment: Origin seems to understand honoring both in life and
doctrine. 2. Vatablus expounds it of diligence in preaching. 3. Haymo of
adorning the Ministry with a good life. 4. Tolet refers it to the success
of S. Paul's preaching among the Gentiles, whom he had enriched. 5. But Saint
Paul herein places the honor of his Ministry, that he did so preach unto
the Gentiles, as he might also gain the Jews; so Ambrose, Anselme, Haymo in
his second exposition: because honos magistrorum est numerus auditorum, the
number of the scholars and auditors, is the honor of the master and teacher:
so also Pareus, Martyr, Osiander. 6. Lyranus and Gorrhan following the
ordinary gloss, thus interpret, addendo vltra debitum, etc. in adding beyond
his debt, in laboring for the conversion of the Jews: But Saint Paul in
saying, to provoke them of my flesh, confesses he stood endebted to them also
being his kindred after the flesh: though his special commission was to
preach to the Gentiles. This then was the honor of the Apostles ministry,
that by his preaching he might win both Gentiles and Jews, as he says. 1.
Cor. 9.19. I have made my self a servant to all men, that I might win the
more, to the Jews I became as a Jew, etc. that I might win the Jews, etc. I
am made all things to all men, that by all means I might save some.

4. That I may save some. 1. God is the efficient cause and author of
salvation, but because the Ministers are the instruments, they are also said to
save; as 1. Tim. 4.16. as in so doing thou shall save both thy self, and them
that hear thee. 2. The Apostle speaks of the saving of some, not of all,
because he knew the time of their universal calling was not yet come. 3. but
it will be objected, that seeing Saint Paul was called to be an Apostle of the
circumcision, and Saint Peter of the uncircumcision, he might seem to be an
intruder into an other man's lot in seeking the conversion of the Jews; the
answer is, that the Jews inhabiting the land of promise, their own country,
belonged unto Peter; but the Jews conuersing among the Gentiles, per accidens,
accidentally belonged to Saint Paul, whose office was to preach unto the
Gentiles, among whom the Jews were dispersed, Gorrhan.

Quest. 19. What the Apostle means by these words, v. 15. What shall the
receiving be, but life from the dead?
1. Origin understands it of the final resurrection: tunc erit assumptio
Israel, etc. then shall Israel be received, when the dead shall rise; so also
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Tolet, with others: the great benefit which
the conversion of the Jews shall bring unto the world, shall be the final
resurrection. 2. Ambrose interprets it of the spiritual resurrection by
being justified from sin. 3. Hyperius of the great joy, which shall be
conceived in the world for the conversion of the Jews, as though one did rise
from the dead. 4. Lyranus applies it to the zeal of those which were
converted to the faith of the Jews, who were more excellent then others, as
being furnished with the knowledge of the Scriptures; such were Paul,
Appollos, with others. 5. Faius understands it of the Gentiles, which by the
conversion of the Jews, should be revived being dead in their sins; but it
is evident by the next verse, that Saint Paul speaks of the conversion of the
Jews. 6. Beza in his annotat. refers it to the whole state of the Church,
for while the Jews remain yet in death, mundus nondum revixit, the world is
not yet wholly revived. 7. But this speech properly concerns the Jews, and
it is a metaphorical speech, to show that the Lord shall receive them again,
even as those, which are raised from the dead: Pareus. 8. Here I cannot omit
two other strange expositions, the one of Haymo, the other of Osiander: Haymo
by life from the dead, understands the Apostles who were received, and
quickened from among the Jews, that were as dead: but it is evident, that the
Apostle speaks of the receiving of the whole nation of the Jews, as in the
beginning of the verse, he makes mention of their casting off; Osiander
thinks that the Apostle uses here an argument ab absurdo, from an
inconvenience; to this effect: if God should only have cast off the Jews, to
receive the Gentiles, this were all one, as to give life unto one by the death
of another, which were absurd, and therefore the Jews were not cast off only
to make room for the Gentiles, but that they might be graffed in again: but
this interpretation does quite turn and change the Apostles sense: for the
Apostle proves here that the Jews shall again be received by an argument
from the less to the greater: that if the reiection of the Jews brought such
profit to the Gentiles, their assumption and receiving again much more: we
insist then upon the former sense.

Quest 20. What the Apostle means by the first fruits, and the whole lump,
the root, and the branches.
1. By the first fruits, Theophylact understands the leaven, but that is
improper: Hyperius, primitias frugum, the first fruits of the corn, but the
lump or mass then should not be answearable to it: Erasmus by the first fruits
understands the corn, by the lump the cakes which were made thereof tempered
with oil, which were offered, not the mass and lump of dow, which was
tempered with water: rather the first fruits were the cakes which were offered
up, and the mass is the whole lump of dow, which was sanctified by the
oblation of the first fruits according to the law, Lev. 23.14.17. and Number.
15.20. Haymo thinks that the first fruits was the first taste, which was taken
of the whole lump, being all of the same relish and savor: but the Apostle
speaks not simply of the first taste, but of the offering of the first fruits
according to the law: he uses two similitudes, one taken from the observation
of the law, concerning first fruits, the other from natural experience of the
root and the branches; Pareus.

2. Concerning the meaning of these words: some do make a difference between
the first fruits and the root, the mass and the branches: as Theodoret, the
first fruits interprets to be Christ, the root, the Patriarchs: Tolet by the
first understands the Apostles, which were as the first fruits, by the other
the Patriarchs: Some take them for the same: as Ambrose, Anselme, Lyranus,
Gorrhan, gloss ordinary, do take the first fruits and the root for the
Apostles and Disciples, that first believed of the Jews: But I agree rather
unto Chrysostomes exposition, who understands Abraham, Isack, and Jacob, with
the rest of the Patriarchs to be both the first fruits and the root: so
Martyr, Calvin, Pareus, Hyperius, with others.

3. Now this root, whereof the branches were the Israelites, is neither Adam,
for so the Jews had no more privilege then any other; and in Adam all are
sinners: nor yet conveniently is it interpreted to be Christ, as Origin: Ego
aliam radicem quae sancta sit nescio, nisi Dominum nostrum, I know no other
root that is holy, beside our Lord Jesus Christ: for v. 22. the Apostle
calls the Jews the natural branches of this root: but so cannot any be
called the natural branches of Christ: wherefore the Patriarchs are this
root, as Abraham, Isack, Jacob, not in respect of their persons, but of the
promise, which was made to them and their seed, Calvin: and so the Lord does
use to send the Israelites unto their faithful Progenitors, and to look to
their example, as Isai, 51.1. look unto the rock, whereout you were hewn,
meaning Abraham, as in the verse following direct mention is ^^de of Sara.

4. Thus then stands the Apostles argument: the holy nation can not be cast
off for ever: but the Jews are an holy nation, which he proves because they
are descended of holy parents, which he does illustrate by two similitudes; of
the first fruits, and root, which being holy make the lump and the branches
holy.

21. Quest. How the root can make the branches holy, seeing many branches did
degenerate, and by nature all are unholy branches.
Here many doubts are propounded together, which shall be answered in their
order.

1. Object. The Apostle before out of Isai, c. 10.21. showed how Israel is
called a rebellious and disobedient people, and yet now the Apostle says they
are holy.

Ans. The same Israel can not be said wholly in all the parts, and in respect
of the same time to be both holy and unholy; but diverse parts and times
considered, both may agree unto Israel: for the faithful and elect considered
in Israel, they were holy; but the rest were rebellious and unholy; like as if
one should reason thus: Englishmen are Papists, and Englishmen are Protestants,
therefore Papists nor Protestants, it follows not: for the proposition must
be understood, not of the whole nation but of diverse parts.

2. Object. But holiness is not propagated by nature: how then can the holy
root make the branches holy.

Ans. We must distinguish between the internal, inherent and personal
qualities, such are the habites of the mind, as wisdom, learning, piety,
faith, and such like, which are not conveyed by generation, and the external
privileges, which are given unto a stock and kindred, which do descend by
generation: as free men beget freemen, slaves beget slaves, Jews beget Jews,
and so Christians are borne of Christians: because the promise is made to the
faithful and their seed: the branches then are holy, because of the holy
root, not by an actual and inherent holiness, but by an outward prerogative of
grace grounded upon the promise of God made unto believing fathers and their
seed.

3. Object. Again it may be objected, that all men are impure by birth, as
David confesses, in sin has my mother conceived me, Psalm. 51. and who can
bring a clean thing out of that, which is unclean, Job. 14.4. how then can
the branches by natural propagation be holy of an holy root.

Ans. We must likewise make a difference between a general condition of
nature, as it is now corrupt in Adam, which is common to all, which are
descended of Adam, and the prerogative grace, which is not common to all, but
to those which are within the covenant: this prerogative of the covenant, and
the corruption of nature may stand together; the grace of regeneration
qualifieth the corruption of nature, but the grace of the covenant, neither
qualifieth nor takes it away, until the grace of regeneration beside be added
thereunto: like as one that is leprous may beget a leprous son, and yet
being free borne himself, his issue also shall be partaker of his freedom:
so the father being a Christian may beget his son in sin, and yet being
within the covenant, he shall have this privilege, to be made a member of the
visible Church: though a lively member he cannot be until he have attained to
the gift of regeneration.

4. Object. If the branches be holy, because they came of an holy root, then
consequently the branches, which came not of that root, cannot be holy, and
so the Gentiles should not be partakers of the fatnes of the olive, not
springing out of Abraham's holy root.

Ans. Though the Gentiles are not naturally descended by carnal generation of
that holy root, yet they are graft in by faith, and so also become branches;
and the Apostle in this place has this distinction, of natural branches, and
branches, that are graft in: the Gentiles then, though not the natural sons
of Abraham, yet ate his sons by faith, and so within the covenant, and are
made partakers thereby of all the privileges, which the natural branches
had, before they were cast off.

Quest. 21. How Abraham is said to be the root, to be graffed into, whereas we
are said to be graffed into Christ. c. 6.5.
1. Christ is as the head, the Church and parts thereof are his body, and
they which are planted into the body, are graffed also into the head: and so
there is no contradiction at all to be graffed into Christ the head, or into
the Church as the body, or into Abraham a principal member of the body: for
he is the root, but only by way of relation unto Christ: Pareus.

2. Abraham then is the holy root, but by the holiness of Christ: and he is the
root only, (...), by way of example: (...), effectually Christ is only the
root, and the vine, we the branches, Ioh. 15.1. Christ is the root simply of
all: Abraham only by way of relation to his offspring, which is descended of
him.

Quest. 22. What S. Paul means by the wild olive and by the graffing of it
in, v. 17.
1. For the coherence, hitherto the Apostle repressed the insulting of the
Gentiles against the Jews by two arguments taken from the two ends of their
reiection, the one the calling of the Gentiles, the other the planting in
again of the Jews, so now he urges a third reason taken from the former
condition of the Gentiles, which were as a wild olive, until they were planted
in.

2. Concerning the reading of the words, thou wast graft in (...), for them,
that is, in their place, as the Syrian interpreter translateth, but Erasmus
refuses this reading as ridiculous, and will have the preposition (...), in,
to be here redundant and superfluous: as the like phrases are used often in the
Hebrew, as percussus in gladio, smitten in the sword: and so he would have it
referred unto the olive, into the which they were planted: likewise some of our
own interpreters, read, insicus illis, graft into them, Bucer, Martyr: But the
other reading is the better, graft in for them, for it has relation to the
branches broken off, and as yet no mention is made of the right olive tree:
Lyranus, by in them, understands the branches yet standing, as the Apostles,
into whom the Gentiles were planted: but plants are not properly graffed into
the branches, but into the stock: therefore the better sense is, graft in for
them: in loco factorum, in the stead of the broken branches: so gloss
interlin. Gorrhan, Tolet: and of our writers, Beza, Faius, Pareus, Genevens.
or, among them: B.

3. Was graft in: the Apostle shows a threefold benefit bestowed upon the
Gentiles, first they were planted in stead of the incredulous Jews, which were
as branches broken off, then they are made partakers of the root, that is of
the faith of Abraham and the Patriarchs, Lyran. and made one Church with them;
and thereby they are partakers of the farms of the olive: which the ordinary
gloss understands of the Apostles, who received of the fatnes of the spirit
to convey it to the Gentiles: Gorrhan of the fatnes of charity: but rather
generally thereby is meant the doctrine and grace of Christ, Lyran. and all the
spiritual graces, which the Lord conferreth upon his Church; as the Prophet
David says, Psalm. 63.3. My soul shall be satisfied, as with marrow and
fatnes, etc. Pareus.

4. But it will be objected, that the Jews by nature, were a wild olive, as
well as the Gentiles: as Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 2.3. We were by nature the
children of wrath as well as others. Ans. True it is, that in respect of
original corruption there is no difference; but the Jews were the right
olive, because they were descended of believing parents, to whom the ^^^^ise
was made.

5. Ambrose here notes a difference between spiritual, and external
planting; as Origin also observes the same: husbandmen use to graffe good
plants into a sower stock, not four and wild plants into a good stock; but
here it is otherwise; the wild olive is planted into the true olive; And the
reason is this, the Apostle, res magis causis, quam causas rebus ^^^vit, did
apply the things unto his cause, not the cause to the things, from whence he
takes his similitude; Origin.

Quest. 23. Of the meaning of these words, Thou bear not the root, but the
root thee.
v. 18. Boast not thy self against the branches, etc. 1. This is the
consequent or conclusion inferred out of the former reason, that the Gentiles
considering their former state and condition, that they were the branches of a
wild olive, should not insult against other: which words beside this
conclusion, do include two secret reasons against this rejoicing. 1. Because
none ought to rejoice in themselves, but only in the Lord, 1. Cor. 1.31.
Gryneus. 2. Ambrose notes how it is a thing displeasing unto God, to rejoice
in the calamity and overthrow of others, and therefore the Gentiles should
offend God if they insulted over the Jews, because of their incredulity. Thou
bear not the root, but the root thee. 1. for the connection of these words,
because the Apostle passes from the branches to the root, against the which
the Gentiles rejoiced not: Chrysostom thinks, that the Apostle does it
because he would affoard unto the Jews vmbram solatij, a certain shadow of
comfort, and nothing else: and he thinks that in words only he seems to
allay their grief, not in deed: but far be it from us to think that the
Apostle should as it were double with his own nation, in so serious a matter,
having made so solemn a protestation before, c. 9.1, I speak the truth in
Christ, I lie not.

2. Gryneus makes this to be the coherence: the branches, which are graft in
should imitate the root: it lamenteth for the branches which are broken off,
and so should they which are planted in: but this rather is the reason of the
coherence: if they should insult against the branches, they should in a manner
also lift up themselves against the root which bore those branches, even
against Abraham the Parent of the Jews, Pareus.

3. This then is a new argument, that they ought not to insult against the
Jews the branches, for so consequently they should insult against the root it
self: which were either an absurd thing, that the branch should vaunt it
self against the root that bears it: or an uncomely thing to insult
against him, from whom thou have received so great benefits, as they being
graffed into the root, are made partakers of the fatnes thereof.

4. This root is said to bear the Gentiles, and not they the root: because
they had their conversion from the Jews, and not the Jews from them, Lyranus:
as our Bl. Savior says, Ioh. 4.22. salvation is of the Jews: the Jews might
receive the ground of Philosophy, and of other arts from the Gentiles, but
that is not the fatnes of the Olive, nor the sap of the root, which is faith
in Christ: which was the faith of Abraham rooted and grounded in Christ.

Quest. 24. Of those words, v. 22. if thou continue in his bountifulnes.
1. Chrysostom gives this sense, si ea feceris, if thou do those things
which are answearable to the divine goodness: non enim fide sola opus est, for
we have not need only of faith here, etc. But the Apostle speaks evidently
of the goodness of God, not of man; and so Osiander thereby understands
clementiam Dei, the clemency of God, if thou continue in the grace and favor
of God: the interlin. gloss thus expounds, si totum Des tribuas, if thou
ascribe all unto God: But here rather the cause is taken for the effect, as the
goodness of God, for faith which is wrought in us by the goodness and grace of
God: as afterward, v. 31. by mercy is understood faith given in Gods mercy:
and this to be the sense appears by the contrary, v. 23. If they abide not
still in unbelief.

2. If thou continue: This neither shows, that it is in man's power to
continue, for all is ascribed to the goodness and mercy of God: neither yet
can it be hence gathered, that the elect may fall away, and not continue: but
these conditional speeches are uttered, to work in the faithful a greater
care, and to stir them up, and take away from them all carnal security.

3. Or else thou also shall be cut off. 1. Origin here observes a difference
between the cutting off the Gentiles, and the breaking off the Jews, which is
less then to be cut off: whereby he does gather that the judgment of the
Gentiles, should be greater then of the Jews, if they did fall from the faith:
But Pet. Martyr rejects this collection upon this reason, because the sin
of the Jews rather in leaving of the faith seems to be greater, then of the
Gentiles, because they had received greater promises and blessings of God, then
the Gentiles: and so their sin being greater, they deserved also greater
punishment. 2. neither can it be inferted hereupon, because the Apostle says,
thou also shall be cut off, that they which are graft once into Christ, can
fall away: but we must consider 1. that the Apostle speaks not of the
standing or falling of any in particular, but he treats of the calling of the
Gentiles in general, as many famous Churches of the Gentiles under the Turk
are now quite fallen away and cut off, Pareus. 2. there is a difference between
the outward infition and graffing into the Church, and the decree of election,
Calvin, Beza: one may be cut off from the society of the visible Church, that
was never a true member thereof.

Qu. 25. Of the meaning of those words; v. 24. was graffed contrary to nature.
1. Concerning the coherence of these words: whereas the Apostle had said
immediately before, God is able to graffe them in, least this might seem no
firm argument, to reason from the power of God: he could graffe in the Jews
again, therefore he would: now the Apostle shows that God is as willing and
ready to do it, as he is able, because the natural branches are more easily
graffed in again, then they which were graft in against nature.

2. Praeter naturam, (...), beside or contrary to nature. 1. Some, as the
ordinary gloss out of Ambrose, and Haymo do understand it of the difference
between spiritual and natural planting; for in this the science which is
graft into the stock, yet follows it own kind, and bears not after the kind
of the stock; but they which are spiritually implanted into Christ, do bear
fruit in him according to the spirit: but this is not the Apostles meaning. 2.
nor yet beside nature, is understood of the corruption of man's nature,
contrary to which is the work of grace and spiritual ingraffing: for so both
Jews as well as Gentiles, are graffed in against their corrupt nature. 3. nor
yet is it the meaning, that beside nature, that is, contrary to their
idolatry and other superstitions, which were by use as natural unto them, the
Gentiles were graffed in, gloss. inter. for as they were graffed in beside
nature, so were the Jews according to nature, which could not be their
idolatry, which did break the^ off, and not graffe them in. 4. nor yet can
this be referred to freewill, as Origin, arbitrij libertas naturam fecerit
vnicuique, etc. the liberty or freedom of will does give every one his
nature, whether he be a right, or wild olive: for then one should be no more
graft in beside or according to nature, then an other, because they have the
same liberty of will by nature. 5. neither with Chrysostom, do we refer it
unto the nature and offspring of Abraham; as he says, the Gentile praeter
naturam Abrahae insuus, was graft in beside the nature of Abraham: for grace is
not naturally graft into any stock. 6. and yet more is understood, then
verisimile vel par, etc. it was more likely and reasonable, that the children
of holy Abraham should be holy, then of the profane Gentiles, as the Greek
scholiast. 7. here then the natural offspring of Abraham must be considered,
with a relation to the promises of God, which were made to Abraham and to his
seed: the Jews then were the natural branches, because naturally descended
of Abraham and the holy fathers: the Gentiles were graft beside nature, because
they were not descended of the fathers, to whom the promise was made, but were
received in by grace. Faius.

26. Quest. What mystery the Apostle here means, I would not have you
ignorant of this mystery, v. 25.
1. A mystery is taken two ways especially, either it signifies an external
thing, which betokens some internal and spiritual matter beside that which
is proposed to the sense: in which respect the Sacraments are called mysteries,
because they represent unto the inward man a spiritual matter insinuated by
the external and visible object: thus every Sacrament is a mystery, though
every mystery be not a Sacrament: as the conjunction between Christ and his
Church is called a mystery, Ephesians. 5.32. It also signifies some secret and hid
thing, which neither is apparent to the sense, neither can be comprehended by
reason: such a mystery is the incarnation of Christ: it is a thing
incomprehensible how the divine nature, which is infinite, should be joined in
the unity of one person with the fruit and created nature of man: likewise
the spiritual conjunction between Christ and his Church is a mystery: the
calling of the Gentiles was a great secret and mystery, Ephesians. 3.3. and here
the vocation and restoration of the Jews is also called a mystery.

2. And herein lies the mystery, which the Apostle here speaks of: 1. that
obstinacy is come upon Israel in part: for they were blinded and hardened, but
not all, only part of them, and that not for ever, but only for a time: for
so Ambrose applies those words, ex part, partly, to the time, which shall
determine the blindness of the Jews. 2. and then the fulness of the Gentiles
shall come in, while the Jews are hardened: this is another mystery. 3. but
the chief part of this mystery is, that in the end the whole nation of Israel
shall be saved.

3. And this is called a mystery, 1. that they should understand, nihil hic
temore aut casu ^^ri, that nothing is here done rashly or by chance, but by
the providence of God. 2. and to stay their curiosity, that they should not
strive to send out a reason of Gods doings. 3. and beside to express their
arrogancy, least they should insult over the Jews for a time rejected: least
you should be arrogant in your selves: insultendo lapsis, by insulting over
those which were fallen: Origin: though some give this sense, ne putetis vos
mysterium hoc ingenio ^^stro posse discutere, least you might think to
discuss this mystery by your own wit: gloss. interlin. But as Pet. Martyr
well notes, the word (...), wise, is inferred here rather to the affection,
then understanding in the first sense; that they should not immo^^ce gloriari,
rejoice immoderatly in their election and the reiection of the Jews: Hynerius.

4. But Origin is far wide, who makes this to be the mystery: that whereas
the Lord in the beginning divided the nations of the world among the Angels, he
took Israel to be his own portion, which the other angels envying, enticed
the Israelites to idolatry, and so the Gentiles came to be the Lords portion,
Israel being forsaken.

This strange speculation of Origin diuersely fails. 1. that conceit of his
that the nations were distributed among the Angels, is grounded upon the
erroneous translation of the Septuagint, Deuteronomy. 32.8. he appointed the borders
of the people according to the number of the Angels of God: whereas it is in
the Hebrewe, according to the number of the children of Israel. 2. Not evil
Angels but the good are appointed over nations to be ministering spirits for
their good. 3. Israel was so the Lords portion, as that yet his Angels also
watched over the^, (...) pitched their tents round about the^, as the sacred
histories do give plentiful testimonies.

Quest. 27. Whether toward the end of the world the whole nation of the Jews
shall be converted.
1. One opinion is, that by all Israel, where the Apostle infers, v. 26. and
so all Israel shall be saved, we are to understand, totum populum Dei, all the
people of God, consisting as well of the converted Gentiles as Jews: and that
the Apostles meaning only is, that even unto the end of the world, subinde
aliqui ex Iudaeis convertuntur, continually some of the Jews should be
converted: thus Melancthon, Calvin, Hyperius, Osiander: and that all Israel is
to be taken in that sense, both for the company of believing Gentiles, and
Jews, as the Apostle understands it, Galath. 6.16. Peace be upon you, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God: Theodoret is of opinion, and so also
Augustine epist. 59.

But in this sense, 1. the Apostle had uttered no great mystery, seeing in all
ages some of the Jewish nation have been and are still converted. 2. and
again the Apostle intends to minister some special consolation here to the
Jews, in the hope of their future conversion, which unless it were more
general, then in converting of some, as it was then, the whole nation should
have been deprived of a special comfort, Mart. Pareus. 3. and seeing in the
former verse, in these words, obstinacy is come partly upon Israel, this word
is taken in the litterall sense, for the nation and people of Israel, it were
hard to understand it in an other sense here. 4. and further the Apostle gives
this as a reason, why he brings in this mystery: that the Gentiles should
not insult over the Jews: therefore it had not been to his purpose, if he had
not opened some secret concerning the special calling of the Jews, Tolet
annot. 18.

2. Pererius produces Chrysostom and Thomas to be of opinion, that generally
all the Jews should be called in the end of the world: as Chrysostom, upon
the 12. verse of this chapter, showing what the fulness and plenitude of the
Jews says, vniuersi ad fidem accessuri sunt, all universally shall come unto
the faith: and Thomas also consents, non particulariter aliqut tantum
salvabuntur, etc. sed vniversaliter omnes, not only some particular men shall
be called as now, but universally all: to this opinion Scotus and Caietan,
seem to incline in their commentaries here: But Pererius seems to mistake
Chrysostomes opinion which was not that the universal nation of the Jews
should be called: for he says here no otherwise, but thus, and nunc multi
crediderunt, multique rur sus credituri sunt, both many have believed already,
and many again shall believe, etc. there shall be a more frequent calling of
the Jews, and greater number, then before: but that none of the Jews should
remain uncalled, it cannot be thought: like as when the fulness of the Gentiles
came in, yet many among them continued still in their unbelief.

3. Some do think that in the end of the world many of the Jews shall be
converted by the preaching of Henoch and Elias: Gregor. hom. 12. in Ezech.
Theodoret, Lyranus upon this place: Hyppolitus adds further, in that oration
of the end and consummation of the world, which goes under his name, that the
Jews at the first shall be most addicted to Antichrist, Gens Hebraeorum
potissimum chara erit Antichristo, the nation of the Hebrews shall be most
dear unto Antichrist: but these are but humane fancies, that Henoch and Elias
should come in their own persons to preach in the end of the world to the
Jews; that prophecy of the coming of Elias before the Messiah, was fulfilled
in the preaching of S. John Baptist; as our Blessed Savior expounds, Matthew.
11. and if the Jews should be so much addicted to Antichrist, expecting him
for their Messiah their conversion should be thereby so much the more hindered:
it is also unlike that the Jews, which are no idolaters to this day should
cleave unto Antichrist, that shall be, and now is a manifest idolater.

4. Wherefore leaving these uncertain conceits, the truth is this, that toward
the end of the world, before the coming of Christ, the nation of the Jews
shall be called, though not every one of that nation in particular; the
reasons of which opinion are these.

1. The testimonies here by S. Paul produced out of the Prophets must not be
understood only of some particular Jews, but of the whole multitude, that
ungodliness shall be turned away from Jacob, etc. and Origin fitly alleges
that prophecy, Hosh. 2.7. I will return to my first husband, for at that time
was I better then now.

2. This is the meaning of that prophetical vision, Rev. 7. how that there
were sealed ^^ the tribes of Israel an 144. thousand, which prophecy is
literally understood, and so Chry^. expounds it of the general conversio^
of the Jews: for they are distinguished from the other number of the nations,
that was sealed, v. 9. as Pareus well observes.

3. Beza and Gryneus do much urge the frequent numbers of the Jews in Asia
and Africa, who being dispersed among the Gentiles, yet remain a people
distinct by themselves, and are not mingled with the nations, where they
solourne: which is an evident argument, that they are thus preserved of God for
some special purpose.

4. Of this opinion also, that in the end of the world there shall be a
general calling of the Jews, are diverse of the fathers: as Chrysostom in the
place before alleged, and homil. 12. de verb. Dom. likewise Hilarious, lib.
11. de Trinit. and Origin here has this saying, If ^o this end, blindness came
upon Israel, that the fulness of the Gentiles might come in, sine dubio cum
ingressa fuerit plenitudo gentium, caecitas cessabit, without doubt, when the
fulness of the Gentiles is come in, then the blindness of the Jews shall cease,
etc.

But it will be thus objected against the universal calling of the Jews.

1. Object. It is not to be conceived, that all Israel should be so saved, as
that none of them should perish: therefore these words must not be taken in the
literal sense, All Israel shall be saved.

Ans. It is not necessary in these general speeches to understand every one
in particular: like as where the Scripture says, All flesh shall see the
salvation of God: and, all shall be taught of God: and, God will have all men
to be saved: these sayings must be restrained, ad vniversitatem definitam, to
the universality defined and determined of God, and not so enlarged, as to
comprehend all in general: Martyr: like as where the Apostle speaks of the
entering and coming in of the fulness of the Gentiles, yet many remained
uncalled: so not withstanding this general calling of the Jews, some may
continue in their unbelief still: thus Haymo well expounds, plenitudo haec
non ad numerum cunctorum pertinet, sed ad numerum a De^ praesinitum, this
fulness does not belong unto the number of all, but unto the number determined
of God.

2. Object. Our blessed Savior says, Luke 18.7. The Son of man, when he
comes, shall be find faith in the earth? if there shall be at Christ's coming
such scarcenes of faith, it is not like, that there shall be such a multitude
of believing Jews.

Ans. 1. Lyranus answeareth, that detecta falsitate Antichrist, when the
falsehood of Antichrist shall be detected, then the Jews shall be called: so
faith in his opinion shall fail under Antichrist, but it shall flourish
afterward, the Jews being called: but the failing of faith, which Christ our
blessed Savior speaks of, shall be at his coming, and as it were immediately
before it: therefore the calling of the Jews can not be after this failing.

2. Pet. Martyr thinks it may be thus, that after the calling of the Jews,
there may grow some carnal security again among them: but that is not like,
that the Jews being newly converted, should so soon decline and fall away
from their integrity: it is more like, they shall be most zealous: Lyranus
thinks, that they shall be so constant in the faith of Christ, that they
shall not refuse to die for the same.

3. Pareus gives this solution; that although there shall be in the end of
the world a multitude of believing Jews, yet their number shall be but small,
in respect of the unbelieving Gentiles. To this last solution, this further may
be added; that the failing of faith, which Christ prophesies of, must be
specially understood of the Gentiles, where Christ had been preached, and
believed upon: that even there, where it was most likely, that faith should
have been, none shall be found: for when the Jews shall be called, faith
shall wax very faint and cold among the Gentiles.

Thus have I showed, what is the most probable opinion concerning the calling
of the Jews: wherein, as we expect a more frequent and general vocation of
that nation, then hitherto has been seen, so yet we acknowledge a mystery
still, which can not fully be revealed, how, when, and in what number the Jews
shall be called, until we shall see the same performed: and so Origin
resolves well, quis autem sit iste omnis Israel, etc. but who this all Israel
is, and what shall be the fulness of the Gentiles, God only knows, and his
only Son, and they which are his friends, etc. Of this question, briefly
handled here, I remember, that some twenty years since I writ a special
Treatise, entitled, De universally Iudaeo^^^ vocatione, wherein, though in some
other points, as concerning Elias and Henochs corporal presence in heaven, I
have altered my former judgment, yet in this question of the Universal
calling of the Jews, I resolve still, as there I maintained, that the Apostles
prophetical prediction here can not otherwise be understood, then of their
general calling.

Quest. 28. Of the testimonies here cited by the Apostle, how they are
alleged, and whence.
1. Concerning the manner, the Apostle follows the Septuagint, which was then
the received translation, which he refuses not, while it retains the sense,
though the words precisely are not rendered. 1. in the original, Isay. 59.20.
the word is lecsion, which the Septuagint translate, (...), because of Sion, or
for Sions sake: but the preposition lamed, serves to a dative case, and so it
must be translated, a redeemer shall come to Sion: as Vatablus, Pagnine, and
Innius read: S. Paul reads (...), out of Zion, which Beza thinks may be
altered, (...), by the fault of the writer or copier out: but Tolet is bold to
affirm, against the received opinion of the best Hebricians, that the
preposition lamed, may their signify de, from, annot. 19. but that cannot be,
for it follows in the same place, vleshabhe, and to them, not (from them)
that return from iniquity, where the same preposition is used: Iunius
solution is best, that the Prophet respecting the time and instant of the
coming of the Messiah, says, to Zion: but S. Paul looking further unto such
things as followed the coming of Christ, and to the progress of the Gospel,
by way of interpretation says, the redeemer shall come out of Zion, that is,
out of his Church. 2. an other difference is, that the original has, and to
them that return from iniquity on Jacob: but the Apostle following the
Septuagint says, he shall turn iniquity from Jacob: Martyr thinks the
Septuagint might read, lasoub, to turn, for leshabe, to them that turn: but
such an oversight is not like to have been in those excellent interpreters:
Iunius lib. 2. perall. 23. says, that the Apostle in stead of Christ's coming,
names a benefit which followed his coming, which is the remission of sins:
but I think rather with Beza and Gryneus, that where the Prophet speaks of
the effect, which is turning away from sin, the Apostle rises higher to the
very cause, which is the taking away of sin: for none can turn away from
sin, unless they have first grace and remission of their sins ^ as the
Prophet says, Ierem. 31.18. Convert thou me, and I shall be converted. 3.
whereas in the next sentence, the Hebrewe word is berith, for a covenant, the
Septuagint render it by the word (...), a Testament: and so the vulgar Latin
interprets here, this shall be my Testament unto them: which reading Tolet
justifies, because the Apostle Heb. 9. so takes the Hebrew word berith, for a
Testament: Beza in his annotations here thinks, that where the Greek word
(...), signifies any kind of disposition, whether by Testament or other
covenant, the Apostle alludeth to the signification of the Greek rather then
of the Hebrew word. But I prefer rather Iunius judgment in c. 9. ad Hebr.
who thinks that the Hebrew word berith, signifies generally any disposition
of the will, as well by covenant, as by testament and so it is taken for both
according to the circumstance of the place: so berith may be derived of bara,
which signifies to decide or declare ones sentence: and so generally may
signify the disposition of the mind: which also is the proper signification of
the Greek word (...), as Erasmus ^ere observes: S. Paul in the 9. to the
Hebrews calls it a Testament, where is required the death of the Testator,
which was shadowed forth by the type of shedding and sprinkling of blood: but
here in the Prophet there being no such circumstance expressed, which
belongs to a Testament, it is better interpreted fadus, a covenant.

2. For the other point, whence these testimonies are alleged, there are
diverse opinions. 1. All agree that the former place is taken out of the 59. of
Isay, v. 20. and for the next, this shall be my covenant with them, when I take
away their sin: Calvin thinks it is taken from Jeremy, 31.33. This shall
be the covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel, etc. I will forgive
their iniquities. 2. Iunius says, these words, when I take away their sin,
are repeated out of the former verse, to confirm the Gentiles in the assured
expectation of the conversion of the Jews. 3. Tolet following Origin, thinks
that these words are added by the Apostle by way of declaration. 4. But the
more probable opinion is, that the Apostle joins two prophesies of Isay
together, as he did before, v. 8. and that the last words, when I take away
their sin, are cited out of the 27. c. of Isay v. 9. where the Septuagint
have these very words cited by the Prophet, (...), when I shall take away
their sins: the other words are found with some small alteration, in the 59.
c. of Isay, v. 20. and in the beginning of the 21. v. Pareus.

Quest. 29. Of these words, v. 28. As touching the Gospel, they are enemies for
your sakes, etc.
1. Chrysostom notes, that the Apostle does but verbis consolari, comfort the
Jews in word only, in saying, they are beloved for the fathers, because the
virtue of their Progenitors does not profit them, unless they believe
themselves: but the Apostle does both in word and deed minister consolation
unto them: and though they cannot be saved but by faith, yet this benefit they
have by the fathers, that they are within the covenant of grace, which was made
with their fathers and their seed: Tolet observes well, how Saint Paul
speaking of the enmity and casting off of the Jews, does mollify his speech:
saying, they are enemies for your sakes, that ye might be called, not
otherwise: and again he qualifieth it with reference unto their election, and
Progenitors, in which respect they are beloved.

2. As touching the Gospel they are enemies, etc. 1. Some do understand this
enmity to be against Paul and the Church, as if he should have said, they are
mine and your enemies, considering their hatred to the Gospel, but they are
beloved of me, their election considered; thus Theodoret, Chrysostom, Luther,
Osiander. 2. Origin, refers this enmity unto God: Israel in respect of the
Gospel, factus est inimicus Deo, is become an enemy unto God: so Origin, whom
Beza and Pareus follow. 3. Pet. Martyr does well join both together: though
principally they are understood to be enemies to God, and in an other respect
beloved of him: yet consequently they must be enemies to us: for Gods enemies
are our enemies, and as they are beloved of God, so also, we should wish well
unto them.

3. They are enemies, etc. they are beloved, etc. 1. Chrysostom, Theodoret,
seem to expound this of the same Jews, who while they continue in unbelief,
are enemies, but when they shall be converted to the faith, they shall be
beloved: but they which according to election are beloved of God, are never
enemies. 2. Origin much better, interprets the Apostle thus to speak of
diverse sorts of the Jews: they are enemies among them, which did spurn
against the Gospel: they beloved, which were that remnant, which belonged to
election: so also Calvin, Martyr, with others. 3. But Beza better understands
the Apostle to speak not of particular men, but of the whole nation, which at
that time seemed to be rejected because of their unbelief: but yet was not
utterly cast off in regard of their election, and promise made to their
fathers: like as it is called the same river that runs along, though it be
not of the same water, because of the perpetual succession: so it is the same
nation of the Jews, because of their lineal descent, though consisting of
diverse generations of unlike condition, Faius: So then these are not
contraries, the Israelites are enemies and so hated, and they are beloved; for
contraries must be taken (...), secundum idem, according to the same subject:
but here are diverse subjects: they are enemies in respect of those which
believe not, and beloved, that is, such as in time to come shall be converted
to the faith: again, contraries must be considered (...), ad idem, in one and
the same respect: and (...), in the same time: but the Jews are said to be
enemies, and yet beloved, both in diverse respects: for they are enemies for
the Gospel sake, which they spurn and kick against; they are beloved, in
regard of their election: and this must be understood also at diverse times:
for at that time present they were enemies, but in time to come, when they
should be called, they shall be beloved, Gryneus.

4. Beloved for the fathers sake: 1. not propter merita patrum, for the merit
of the Fathers, as Lyranus, it is Christ's merit only for the which the Lord
receives them to the faith. 2. neither, because when they are converted, the
Lord shall be put in remembrance of their fathers, as Ambrose, for God is not
oblivious, that he had need of a remembrancer. 3. not yet only is it said,
for the fathers sakes, because sequuntur patrum fidem, they do imitate and
follow the faith of their fathers: Origin, Haymo: for so the believing Gentiles
also did imitate the says of Abraham. 4. but the Apostles meaning is, they are
beloved, propter promissiones patribus factas, because of the promises made to
the Fathers: gloss. ^dmar. Tolet: because they are descended of those fathers,
to whom the Lord promised to be their God, and to their seed after them: Bucer:
which promise of God, the infidelity of some, cannot frustrate.

5. There are two reasons given, why they are enemies, one from the occasion
not given, but taken, namely the Gospel, which they refused, the other from the
end, for your sakes, that the Gentiles by their unbelief might enter in: there
are likewise two causes showed of their receiving to grace, their election with
God, which is immutable, and the covenant made with their Fathers.

Quest. 30. Of the meaning of these words, The gifts and calling of God are
without repentance, v. 24.
1. Erasmus interprets the word (...), impaenitibilia, or as Augustine
sometime renders the word, impaenitendo, things whereof he cannot repent him
of that gives them; But this were to make the gifts rather such, as cannot be
changed, then to make God unchangeable.

2. Ambrose has a strange interpretation, understanding this to be meant
only of those which are received by baptism, of whom such exact repentance is
not required: and Thomas also propounds this interpretation for one: But two
things make again this sense, both because here is relation unto God, that
repents not, not unto man: and they are gifts, which are not here reported
of, not sins, for which repentance is required of men: beside it is also
untrue, that men (if they be of years) are admitted to baptism without
repentance; the contrary is evident, Matthew. 3.8. where John Baptist exhorts
to repentance and amendment of life, those which came to be baptized, and so
does Saint Peter, Act. 2.38. repent and be baptized.

3. Stapleton and Pererius have found out here a new exposition, that God is
said not to repent him, not that the gifts once bestowed, cannot be taken away,
but because God has no cause to repent him, for that though his gifts be taken
from one, they with greater profit, are given to another: as the reiection of
the Jews, was the occasion of calling the Gentiles: but this strange
interpretation is very impertinent to the Apostles purpose, who intends by
this assertion, to prove the certainty of the calling of the Jews; see the
confutation hereof, Controv. 17. following.

4. For the better and more full explication of these words: this word
poenitere, to repent, is taken two ways: either properly, and so it signifies
a change of the mind and purpose; which wishes a thing undone, and not to be,
which is: and in this sense, God cannot repent him of any thing which he has
done; nor of any gifts bestowed, no not upon the wicked: for howsoever they
abuse them ungraciously, yet the Lord had reason to do as he did: he that
repents, either fails in his counsel, not foreseeing all things, or in his
power, not being able to effect what he intended: but God has no defect or
want, either in counsel or power: therefore properly he cannot repent: there
is an other use of this word, to repent, when it signifies a change, not in
him that wills and purposes, but in the thing willed, and so God is said to
repent, not that he changes, but they change and alter, upon whom the gifts
are conferred, and show themselves unworthy of them: so here is a figure
called a metonymie, when the effect is taken for the cause, repentance hers
signifies mutation and change, whereof repentance is the cause; and thus Haymo
well expounds, poenitentia pro mutatione accipitur, repentance is taken for a
change.

5. Neither are all the gifts of God without repentance, but such gifts as
depend upon election: neither is every vocation unchangeable, but only the
internal and spiritual: God had chosen Saul to be king of Israel, and
furnished him with excellent gifts: but they were only temporal: though he
had a temporal election, to the kingdom, yet it follows not that he was
eternally elected; for God had foreseen and so decreed, that Saul should not
continue in the kingdom, which was appointed unto David: Haymo then here well
expounds, sine mutatione sunt dona and vecatio Dei, etc. the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance, as he said before, whom he predestined
he called, etc. not in such gifts and calling, as it is said, Many are called,
but few chosen, etc. so the ordinar. and interlin. gloss do well interpret,
vocatio, id est electio, quae ab aeterno, the vocation, that is, election which
was from everlasting, is without repentance, that is, without change.

Quest. 31. Of the meaning of these words, v. 31. So now have they not believed
by your mercy.
1. For the application of the words: some read, so now have they not obeyed,
or, are become contumaces, stubborn, and contumacious: Beza, Syrian
interpreter, Gryneus, with others: but it is rather interpreted, have not
believed, as Martyr, the vulgar latin, and our English translation upon these
reasons. 1. the word (...), signifies both incredulity, and contumacie or
disobedience, being derived of the word (...), to persuade: now as well the
unbeliever, as the disobedient and stubborn is not persuaded.

2. The Apostle through this chapter makes unbelief the cause of the
rejecting of the Jews, v. 20. where though an other word (...), be used, yet
in the same sense. 3. the next verse is better read, God has shut up all under
unbelief, then under disobedience: as may appear by the like place, Gal.
3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the
faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to them that believe: where by sin
must be understood unbelief, as opposite unto faith and belief, afterward
mentioned. 4. Origin and Chrysostom do so interpret this place of the
incredulity both of Gentiles and Jews: the Apostle says, your mercy, not
actiuely, whereby they showed mercy, but passiuely, whereby they received
mercy, the cause is put for the effect, as before v. 22. the Apostle said, if
thou continue in his goodness, that is in faith, received by his goodness: the
Apostle says ( yours) propter efficientiam, because it was effectual toward
them, but afterward he says, that he might show mercy on all, propter
sufficientiam, because it is sufficient for all.

3. Now concerning the sense and meaning of the words, there are diverse
interpretations. 1. the vulgar latin reads, in vestrum miserecordiam, for
your mercy, whereupon some give this sense: they have not believed, vt vos
miserecordiam consequamini, that you may obtain mercy, Haymo, Osiander: but
Beza and Erasmus both refuse this, because as much in effect is said before in
the end of the former verse, you have obtained mercy through their unbelief:
but these particles, even as, even so, do show an opposition of the parts, not
a repetition. 2. Ambrose reads, in vestra miserecordia, in your mercy, that
is, at this time, wherein you have received mercy: so also Haymo: but beside
that there is no preposition in the original, but the word is put in the
dative case, which is with the Greeks used for the ablative: the Jews were
unbelievers, and rejected the Gospel, before it was preached unto the Gentiles,
and therefore it was not at the same time. 3. Erasmus reads, they have not
believed, per vestram miserecordiam, by your mercy: that is, the mercy showed
to the Gentiles was an occasion of the unbelief of the Jews: but Beza
rejects this also, upon these two reasons: both because the Jews were first
unbelievers, before mercy was showed to the Gentiles: therefore thereby they
were not hardened: and again, the mercy showed to the Gentiles shall provoke
the Jews to follow them, v. 11. they shall not then thereby be made further
off. 4. Wherefore Theophylact does come nearer to the Apostles sense then the
rest, who thinks there is here a traiection of the particle (...), that: so
whereas the words stand in this order in the original, by your mercy, that
they may obtain mercy, they must be placed thus, that by your mercy, they
may obtain mercy: the very like traiection of this very word, see 2. Cor.
2.4. (...), but my love that ye may know, for, but that you may know my love:
thus also Beza here; and Tolet annot. 23. adds this reason, why those words,
for your mercy, should not be joined with the former clause, so now have they
not believed, but with the latter, that they may also obtain mercy: that one
part of this comparison may answer another: as he said before, you have
received mercy through their unbelief: so now it follows, that they also
should receive mercy through your mercy: And Chrysostom shows the reason,
why it is said, that you should receive mercy, through their mercy, not
through their unbelief: because ye the Gentiles shall not be so saved, vt
quemadmodum Iudaei exire debeatis, that as the Jews, you should go out (or
fall away) again, sed vt illos manendo per aemulationem attrahatis, but that ye
may draw them on by continuing in the faith.

4. This then is the force of the Apostles argument. 1. There are three things
compared with three: the unbelief of the Gentiles with the unbelief of the
Jews, the mercy which the Gentiles received in time past, with the mercy
which the Jews shall receive: and then the occasions of both are set one
against the other, the occasion of the mercy showed to the Gentiles, was the
unbelief of the Jews: and occasion of mercy showed to the Jews, was mercy
extended to the Gentiles, by the which the Jews were provoked to emulation;
Par. 2. The argument is from the less to the greater: if the infidelity of
the Jews was the occasion of mercy to the Gentiles, much more the mercy
showed to the Gentiles shall be an occasion of showing mercy to the Jews: for
there is a greater force in that which is good, then in that which is evil,
Gryveus: and if the Gentiles which never believed were called to the says,
much more like is it that the Jews which had bin sometime believers, should
return to their former says. Tolet.

Quest. 31. How God has concluded, and shut up all in unbelief. v. 32.
1. Not that God, inijcerit ijs incredulitatem, did cast upon them
incredulity: hoc explodendum est, this conceit must he exploded of all:
Origin: God is no way the author of evil: Photius.

2. Nor yet is the Lord said to shut them up only permittendo, in suffering
them to be incredulous, Origin, gloss ordinary, Tolet, Gorrhan: for God is to
be considered here not as a patient only and sufferer, but as an agent in some
sort, and a just judge.

3. Chrysostom thus interprets, he shut up all, that is, demonstrauit
incredulos, he has showed them to be incredulous: in which sense the Apostle
says, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, etc. that is,
the law serves to reveal sin; as Saint Paul says, Romans 3.20. By the law
comes the knowledge of sin: But this is not all, for the judge does not
only declare and give sentence against the malefactor, and bring his offense
to light, but he also condemns him, and sees his sentence be executed upon
him.

3. Hierome in the Commentary under his name says, God has shut up all, non
vi sed ratione, not by force, but by good reason: which reason is thus
expressed by Oecumenius, vt alios per aliorum seruaret contentionem, that he
might save some, by the provocation of others: the ordinary gloss gives this
reason, vt gratia numeris esset gratissima, that the gift of grace might be
most acceptable, etc. when they are brought as it were out of prison unto
liberty. But although Gods judgments proceed with great reason and equity;
yet God does not evil, that good may come thereof: the reason and way then yet
appears not, how God is said to conclude all under sin.

4. Wherefore it remains, that God is said to shut up men in unbelief as in
a prison, in punishing them as a just judge with the fetters as it were and
gives of their own blindness and hardenes of heart: as it is said, c. 1.26. God
gave them up to vile affections: and c. 11.8. God has given them the spirit of
slumber: like as a judge does inflict imprisonment upon offenders, and
restraint of liberty: so men are kept in the prison of infidelity by the
justice of God, their sins so deserving: But here is the difference: civil
imprisonment is for sin, yet it is not sin: but spiritual imprisonment in
blindness and unbelief, is sin: and God after a wonderful and secret manner,
yet most justly does punish sin with sin: as Augustine says, Quis dicat
Achabum non peccasse credendo spiritui mendaci, etc. who can say that Ahab
sinnned not in believing the false spirit, and who will say that sin was not
the punishment of sin, venientem de iudicio Dei, proceeding from the
judgment of God: lib. 5. c. 3. contra Julian. And further here is great
difference between these two, for God to be author of shutting up under
unbelief, and of the shutting up of unbelief: the first God in his justice
causes, the other man is the cause of himself.

Quest. 32. Of the Apostles exclamation, v. 33. The deepenesse of the riches,
etc.
1. Touching the occasion of these words. 1. Origin thinks this to be it,
quia alterius malitiae opus alterum vertat in salutem, because he turned the
malice of one to the salvation of an other: as the ruin of the Jews was the
occasion of calling the Gentiles: so also Chrysostom, the Apostle wondreth
quod contraria contrarijs curaverit, because the Lord healed one contrary by
an other, the Gentiles became to be believers, by occasion of the unbelieving
Jews: but the generality of the Apostles words, speaking of the ways of God,
would not be restrained unto one particular. 2. Faius understands the whole
mystery of the Gospel, the which as S. Peter says, the Angels yet desire to
behold, but this is too general. 3. Augustine and Haymo, restrain it to this
particular, of the mystery in the vocation of the Gentiles and the reiection
of the Jews. 4. But beside this, it may be applied to the whole mystery of
predestination, how God resecteth some, and electeth others, wherein humane
reason must be silent: Gryneus, Calvin, Hyperius, Mart.

2. For the reading of the words. 1. Some do thus read, O the deepenesse of
the riches, of the wisdom, and knowledge of God: as the vulgar latin, making
wisdom and knowledge to depend of riches: but in this reading the Greek
conjunction (...), and, which is set between riches, and wisdom, is omitted:
Chrysostom inserting that word, thinks that these two words, depth, and
riches, are two names added to express the excellency of Gods wisdom and
knowledge: so also Beza, Gryneus, Faius, taking riches here for abundance:
likewise Pererius: Gorrhan would prove it by the like place, Coloss. 2.3. in
whom are hid the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: and so the Apostle says
here, the riches of the wisdom and knowledge. 2. But Origin refers this
deepenesse to all three, O the deepenes of the riches, and of the wisdom, and
of the knowledge of God: so also Theophylact, whom Erasmus and Tolet follow:
the reasons are these. 1. because as Erasmus observes, there is a comma or
distinction in all the copies, that he saw, between riches, and wisdom,
which shows, that one hangs not on an other. 2. Tolet adds that the
conjunction, ( and) between riches, and wisdom, does show them to be two
distinct things. 3. likewise the three clauses following, who has known his
mind, who was his counselor, who has given to him first, are answerable unto
these three, knowledge, wisdom, riches. 4. And else where these three are
distinguished: Ephesians. 2.17. The riches of his grace, etc. in all wisdom and
understanding. 5. This is most agreeable to the scope of the Apostle, who
immediately before made mention of the mercy of God, which here he
understands, by the depth of his riches: as Ephesians. 2.7. That he might show in
the ages to come, the exceeding riches of his grace.

Though either of these readings may indifferently be followed, and Haymo and
Pet. Martyr do propound both; yet the former seems to be the fitter, because
of that place Coloss. 2.3. where they are called the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, as here the riches: the Greek conjunction (...), signifies as well
both, as and: and where the Apostle says v. 35. who has given unto him first:
it is another reason to stay men's murmuring against God: as here he persuades
thereunto, by the unsearchable depth of Gods judgments: so there from Gods all
sufficiency that he gives freely to all, and none to him.

Quest. 33. How the judgments of God are said to be unsearchable. v. 33.
1. Some think that the Apostle expresses the same thing, by this
ingemination of words, understanding one and the same thing by the judgments
and ways of God: Calvin: but they are better distinguished: Haymo by the
judgments would have understood, Gods just proceedings both against Angels and
men, Jews and Gentiles, in electing some, and rejecting others: and by his
ways, his passage from the Gentiles to the Jews, and from the Jews to the
Gentiles; but they are better referred, the judgments to the decree and
purpose of God, which belonged to his knowledge, and the ways to the means,
whereby God executes and brings his purpose and counsel to pass; wherein
his wisdom is seem: as Gods counsel and judgment was to prefer Joseph
and exalt him above his brethren: the way was, in bringing this to effect, by
the selling of him into captivity by his brethren: Tolet, so also Martyr.

2. Where the word in the original is (...), which signifies, not to be
traced out, the vulgar latin reads, investigabiles, in a quite contrary
sense, to be paced, or traced out: which as Tolet coniectureth might be the
error of the writer, leaving out (in:) for he should have said, in
investigabiles, as Erasmus notes out of Hilarie lib. 8. de Trinit. who has
that word. But Chrysostom here well observes, whom Bucer follows, that
hereby, in that the judgments of God are said to be unsearchable, is
signified, quod non solum cognosci neq^^ant, sed nec quaeri, they can not only
be known, but they are not to be searched: so also Bucer well notes, that the
first word signifies, that inveneri non possunt, they can not be loved out of
us, and the other, quod pervestigari curiosius non debeant, they must not be
curiously sought out.

3. Origin also puts in this exception, that this must be understood of the
creature; that to them the judgments of God are unsearchable; the blessed
Trinity is excepted: for both the Son knows the father, and the holy
Spirit searches the hid things of God; but the creature of it self is not
able to find them out.

4. P. Martyr has an other exception, that this must be understood of the
secrets of God hid, and not revealed; but the will of God revealed in
Scripture, it is lawful for us to search, and we are commanded so to do, Ioh.
5.39.

5. Pareus also adds an other caution; that the judgments of God are
unsearchable of the creature of it self, but by the spirit of Christ they may
attain to the knowledge of them in part: as here the Apostle says, Who has
known the mind of the Lord: as he likewise says, 1. Cor. 2.16. Who has
known the mind of the Lord, that he might instruct him: and then it follows,
but we have the mind of Christ. In Christ then the will of God is revealed to
us; as it is said Ioh. 1.16. No man has seen God at any time, but the only
begotten Son has declared him, etc.

34. Quest. How those words must be understood, Of him, through him, and for
him are all things, etc.
1. The Arrians, as Theodoret here testifies, do understand all this to be
spoken only of God the father, to confirm their heresy, in making the Son
inferior to the father, and only as the instrument, not the efficient cause
of creation; but the Apostle else where directly says of Christ, by whom are
all things, and we by him, 1. Cor. 8.9. as here he says, of him, and through
him are all things.

2. Some do interpret all this of God the Son only, as Basil lib. de
spirit. and Ambrose lib. 4. de fide, c. 6. and whereas it may be objected, that
the father knows the mind of the Son, whereas the Apostle says, who has
known his mind: Basil answeareth, that the Apostle only thereby signifies
not all to be excluded, because the father knows the mind of the Son, but
only that few can attain to it: and whereas again it might be objected, if
this be understood only of the Son, that it can not be said of him, who has
given unto him first? because he received his essence of his father; Ambrose
answeareth, that the father gave unto the Son, but not first, for one is not
before the other. But, as was before observed out of Origin, the Trinity is
excepted here; the Apostle speaks only of the creatures, that none of them
know the mind of God, or first gave unto him: neither is this to be restrained
to the person of the Son, but must be understood of the Godhead in general,
whose ways are unsearchable.

3. Some do distinguish these three, and appropriate them to the three persons
of the Trinity, as of the father, through the Son, and in the holy Ghost all
things are said to be: so Origin upon this place, Gregor. homil. 16. in Ezekiel.
Hilar. lib. 8. de Trin. so also Haymo, gloss. interlin. Tolet, Gorrhan, Lyran.
but this seems to be too curious: for this phrase by whom, is as well given
unto the Father, 1. Cor. 1.9. as unto the Son.

4. Wherefore this clause, of whom, through whom, and for whom, etc. is
better referred to the whole Trinity, as Chrysostom. interprets, ipse fecit,
ipso conservat, he made, and he preserves all things: so also Augustine, as
the ordin. gloss cites him, shows how every one of these prepositions, of,
through, for, may be applied unto every one of the glorious persons of the
Trinity: and so all things are of God, as the first cause, by him, as the
preserver of all things, and in him, as the end and perfection, Thomas: so all
things are a seipso nullo alio movente, from himself, none other moving him,
per seipsum nullo alio adiuvante, by himself, none other helping, and propter
seipsum, only for himself, and for none other cause, for he made all things
for his own gloss, Calvin.

5. Whereas the vulgar Latin reads in the third place, in ipso, in him, in
the original the word is (...), in ipsum, for him: which shows that God is
the end and perfection of all, that all things were ordained for him, that is,
to set forth his glory; and so reads Chrysostom.

4. Places of Doctrine.
Doct. 1. Of Gods prescience, v. 2. God has not cast away his people, which he
knew before.
Concerning Gods prescience and foreknowledge. 1. It is a certain truth, that
there is in God from the beginning a prescience of all things in the world,
before they were, Act. 15.18. From the beginning of the world God knows all
his works. 2. There is in God a double kind of prescience, one is cognationis,
of knowledge only, and speculatiue, whereby he foreseeth only things that
shall be: or it is also approbationis, a prescience joined with approbation and
liking, which is also called practica, his practical prescience. 3. This
latter kind of prescience in God, which is joined with his will and approbation
is the cause of things, the other is not. 4. The prescience of God is certain
and infallible: for God is not as man, that he can lie or be deceived:
whatsoever he foreseeth shall be, shall certainly come to pass. 5. Gods
prescience does not impose a necessity upon such things, as fall out in the
world, but only in respect of the first cause, which is the infallible
knowledge of God: and so all things even those which seem to happen by
chance, are necessary necessitate infallibilitatis, by an infallible
necessity, in respect of Gods prescience, which cannot be deceived: but in
respect of the second causes every thing remains in it own nature: such
things, as have necessary causes, are foreseen of God, as necessary,
certain, and definite: such was the betraying of Christ by Judas, before so
decreed and determined of God, Act. 13. but such things, as are contingent and
casual, do so remain still in themselves, though in respect of Gods
foresight are necessary: as 1. Sam. 23.11. the Lord answeareth David, that if
he stayed still in Keilah, Saul would come down, and the Lord of the town
would deliver him into Saul's hands: this was a thing contingent, coniect^ all
only and probable: but in respect of Gods foreknowledge it was certain, that
David should not stay there, and so neither Saul would come down. 6. Gods
prescience and foreknowledge is thus distinguished from election and
predestination: either it signifies the general prescience and foreknowledge
of God of all things, both the good, which the Lord himself decreed to do, or
the evil which he decreed to permit, and so prescience differs from
election, as the whole from the part: for election is but a part of Gods
general prescience and providence: or Gods prescience and foreknowledge is
taken for election it self, and so it is all one with election: as here the
Apostle says, God has not cast away his people, whom he know before: and
thirdly, Gods foreknowledge signifies his love and approbation of those whom
he electeth, as S. Peter says, 1. epist. 1.2. Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God: and thus Gods foreknowledge differs from election, as
the cause from the effect: for the love, acceptance, and approbation of God, is
the cause of election.

Doct. 2. Gods general promises or threatenings must have a particular
application.
v. 1. I demand then, has God cast away his people? God forbid, etc. The
Apostle had in the end of the former chapter, alleged out of the Prophet a
general complaint against Israel, All the day long have I stretched out my
hand to a disobedient people: which menacing speech, though generally
propounded, yet the Apostle would not have generally understood of all the
people, for they were not all cast off, but only the perverse and obstinate:
So likewise the promises of God made unto Abraham and his seed, did not
concern all, but only those which were the true Israel, and children of the
promise, as the Apostle showed before, c. 9.7.8.

Doct. 3. Against the old Pagane names of days and months.
v. 4. Which have not bowed the knee to Baal, etc. In the place, 1. King. 19.
whence this is cited, it is added further, nor kissed him with their mouth:
whereupon Pet. Martyr observes, that they did neither honor Baal, with the
kisses of their mouth, nor yet in naming him with their lips; whereupon the
Lord says, he would not be called of the people, Baali, that is, my husband or
Lord, but ishi, mi vir, my man or husband: and the reason is added, For I will
take the name of Baalam out of their mouth, Hosh. 2. ^^. though the Lord were
indeed Baal, that is, the Lord and husband of his people, yet because they
gave that name to their idols, the Lord would none of it: and so Pet. Martyr
infers further, that he wondreth how those Pagan terms of the months, as
March so called of Mars, and of the days of the week, as moonday of the
moon, and twesday of Mars, which planets the beathen made their gods, were at
the first taken up of the Christians, which might better save been laid
down: though now there is no such danger, as in the beginning, when
Christians were newly converted from Pagan Idolatry.

Doct. 4. Of the grace of God, with the diverse kinds, properties, and effects
thereof.
v. 6. If it be of grace, etc. 1. The grace of God either signifies his free
love and mercy, which is called (...), or the gifts of grace, which are called
(...). 2. the grace, love, and favor of God in the first sense is either
eternal in his election, before the world was, or temporal in the actual
vocation of the elect: and this grace, is either praeve^^^^^, a preventing
grace, whereby he calls and converteth, as Psalm. 59.10. My merciful God will
prevent me: or it is subsequens gratia, subsequent or following grace, whereby
the Lord assisteth those which are called, as Augustine says, gratia praevenit
vt velimus, subsequi^^ ^^ frustra velimus, grace preuenteth us, that we may be
willing, and it follows us, that our will be not in vain. 3. the cause of
the grace of God, is his own mercy, the Apostle says here, v. 35. who has
given unto him first: the internal motive, is the free love of God: the
external impulsive and moving cause is the merit of Christ. 4. the effects of
the grace and favor of God, are either external, as election, predestination,
or such as are brought forth in time, as vocation, justification,
sanctification. 5. the graces in the second sense which are the gifts of the
spirit, are either salutis, the graces belonging to salvation, as knowledge,
faith, hope, or they are vocationis, such as appertain unto our vocation and
calling: which are either extraordinary, as were the miraculous and
prophetical gifts which the Prophets and Apostles had, or ordinary, as are
the knowledge of arts, the gift of utterance, and such like, which now are
attained unto by diligent labor and industry.

Doct. 5. Concerning good works, the quality and kinds thereof, the causes
and effects.
v. 6. But if of works, etc. 1. The works of men are either natural, as to
sleep, or civil, as to buy, to sell, which are indifferent, or they are
moral, which are either good or evil. 2. the efficient cause of good works is
first God moving by his spirit: then the will of man converted and prepared by
grace: the helping causes are instruction, exhortation, faithful endeavor,
prayer. 3. the matter of good works, is the internal and external act of the
will and mind, heart, and body: the form is the consent and agreement with
the law of God. 4. the effects of good works, are toward God, our obedience
which in Christ is pleasing and acceptable to him: in our selves, the fruits
and testimony of our faith: toward our brethren their edification, they are
stirred up by our good conversation to glorify God.

Doct. 6. We must compare the present state of the Church with the times past.
v. 5. Even so now at this present time: As S. Paul compared the estate of the
Church then present, with the times of Elias: so we are taught to comfort our
selves in the afflictions of the Church of God in these days, with looking
back into the times past: for God does after the same manner govern his
Church: So Origin well observes, sicut factum est sub Helsa, etc. as it was
under Helias, so it was in the coming of Christ, and in S. Paul's time, etc.
like as the small number of true professors was then no prejudice to the truth,
no more ought it to be now.

Doct. 7. Of the privilege of the seed of the faithful.
v. 16. If the first fruits be holy, so is the whole lump: like as the Jews,
which were descended of Abraham, were within the covenant, and so unto them
belonged circumcision the sign of the covenant, the paschal lamb, the Temple
and sacrifices, unto the which the seed of the Gentiles, which were not of
Abraham had no right: so now the seed and offspring of Christians, are counted
holy: unto them belongs baptism, and other Sacraments and rites of Christian
profession: for they are an holy seed, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 7.14. Else
were your children unclean, but now are they holy.

Doct. 8. How the Church or a righteous man is resembled to a tree.
v. 16. If the root be holy so are the branches, etc. 1. a just man is
resembled to a tree, 1. propter pedis, i. fidei immobilitatem, for the
stedfastnes of his foot, that is, his faith: v. 20. thou stand by faith. 2.
propter stipitis, i. spei erectionem, etc. for the erecting of the stalk or
truncke, which signifies hope: and therefore Job says, 19.10. he has
removed my hope like a tree. 3. the root is charity, Ephesians. 4. being rooted
and grounded in love. 4. The branches are his virtues, Hosh. 14.7. His branches
shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive tree. 5. the bloomes and
blossoms are his sweet manners. 6. the leaves his gracious words. 7. the
fruit good works. 8. the shadow of the tree is his mercy, Hosh. 14.7. They
that dwell under his shadow shall return, Gorrhan.

Doct. 9. The old Testament and the new one and the same in substance.
v. 18. Thou bear not the root but the root thee, etc. There was then the
same root both of the Jews and believing Gentiles: the same faith, the same
Mediator, the same substance, efficacy, and force of the Sacraments, though
the external rites and symboles were diverse, Martyr: so S. Paul, Ephesians. 4.
There is one body, one spirit, etc. one Lord, one faith, etc.

Doct. 10. Of Gods omnipotency.
v. 23. God is able to graffe them in again: The Apostle proves the return
and graffing in of the Jews, by the power of God: though simply and generally
this is no good argument: God can do it, therefore it shall be; yet here is a
sufficient reason, because there was no doubt of Gods will, seeing the Jews,
were his people of old: otherwise Gods power is not limited to his will: for he
can do more then he will: it is contrariwise with man: who wills many things
that he cannot effect, and so his will is larger then his power, Martyr.

Doct. 11. Christ proved to be God, by the remission of sins.
v. 27. This is my covenant, when I shall take away their sins, etc. This
shows Christ to be God, who only is able to forgive sins: men may remit
the punishment, that it be not inflicted, but the guilt of sin is only
purged by God: the keys are indeed committed to the Church in the preaching
of the word, but they are the instruments only whereby God forgiueth sins:
the Ministers are only the proclaymers of Gods will herein: they cannot remit
sins, but only ministerially as the instruments.

Doct. 12. Of the excellency of the knowledge of God.
v. 33. O the depth of the riches, of the wisdom, and knowledge of God, etc.
Gods knowledge is excellent, 1. for the largenes of it, in knowing all things.
2. the perfection of it, he knows all things perfitly. 3. the manner, he
needs no means of his knowledge but himself. 4. the celeritie of it, he
knows all things in a moment. 5. the certainty of it, it cannot be deceived.
6. the eternity, it was from the beginning. 7. the efficacy, it is the cause
of all things. 8. the secunditie of it, all things are lightened by his
knowledge.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. That none which are elected can finally fall away.
v. 2. Whereas the Apostle says, God has not cast away his people which he
knew before, etc. Hence it may be objected thus: God knew his people before,
that is, elected them unto salvation; but some of his people are cast off, as
the Apostle shows v. 7. the rest have been hardened, etc. therefore some
whom he knew before may be cast away.

Answ. 1. Whereas it is said, he knew his people before, it must be
understood, in sensit diviso non composito, in a divided sense, and
distributiuely, not in a compounded sense: for not the whole people of God were
so foreknowne, but only that selected part of the people, which belonged to
Gods election. 2. yet the universal nation was called externally to the
covenant, but then the Argument concludes not: for such as belong only to the
external and visible covenant, may fall away. 3. But that none of the elect
can fall away, it is evident by the Apostle here, v. 2. God has not cast away
his people whom he knew before, and v. 7. election has obtained it, and the
rest have been hardened: and v. 29. the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance, etc.

Controv. 2. Whether the complaint of Elias of the paucitie of true worshippers
be well applied by Protestants to the decay of religion under the Pope, at the
time of the first reformation.
1. Stapleton antidot. p. 783. takes these exceptions to this application. 1.
The nation of Israel was then no part of the Church, where Elias complains of
that paucitie, and smalnes of number. 2. and those 7000. reserved, were in
Judah, not in Israel. 3. neither can there be the like decay of religion in the
whole world, as to be brought to a few professors, as Wicliffe, Husse, Luther,
Calvin, as then, when the visible Church was tied unto the nation. 4. neither
were there 7000. of their mind, scarce 7. could be found.

Contra. 1. Israel as well as Judea, was a part of the Synagogue, though at
that time very corrupt, for otherwise the Prophets Elias, Elisha would not
have there preached. 2. these 7000. are understood to have been in Israel: for
otherwise the Prophet knew, that there were many in Judea, that professed the
true worship of God. 3. yea under the Gospel, religion may be driven into
corners, and be found only in a few that are known: it is, why should our
Savior say, Luke 18. Think ye, that the Son of man shall find faith in
the earth. 4. Not only seven, but many thousands more consented unto them, who
in the mids of Popery misliked their gross superstitions, though they were
not publicly known, as it may appear by those which entertained and received
the doctrine of Wickliffe in England, of Husse in Bohemia, Luther in Germany:
And beside many thousands there were in Grecia, Armenia, and other countries,
which never acknowledged the Pope of Rome. 5. so then this example
notwithstanding any thing, that can be objected, is fitly applied to show the
general decay of religion, and the paucitie of zealous professors, in those
last times of reformation, as it was in the days of Elias and Paul.

2. Our English Papists, the Rhemists also in their annotations here, do
object in like manner, that this place is impertinently alleged by
Protestants to show, that the Church of Christ, may sometime be secret and
unknown unto the world: for 1. at this time there were many known worshippers
of God in Judah, in so much that the soldiers alone were numbered to ten
hundred thousand, 2. Chron. 17.2. and yet the Church of Christ none rests
upon better promises, then it then did. 3. and it were an hard matter to
prove, that Luther had 7. thousand of his opinion, or seven, that were in all
points, of the same belief.

Contra. 1. They may as well say, that this place was impertinently alleged by
the Apostle to prove a remnant of grace unknown to the world: and though in
Judah, there was at this time a visible Church, yet because the Israelites also
belonged unto the covenant, and yet the Church was driven into corners among
them, by the same reason also in other places, the visible Church might decay:
and therefore this place is both pertinently alleged by the Apostle then, and
by Protestants now. 2. other times may be assigned, when the visible Church
both in Israel and Judah, was banished and driven into corners, as in the days
of idolatrous Ahaz, and of Ammon, Manasseh, when all Israel fell to idolatry:
what was become of the visible Church then? 3. Neither is there any such
promise in the new Testament, that the Church of Christ should always be
visible to the world: but the contrary, as Revel. 12. the woman, which
signifies the Church, is constrained to flee from the dragon into the
wilderness: and yet the Jews had as ample promises, for the continuance of the
Church among them, till the Messiah came, as the Church of God has now till
the second coming of Christ. 4. It is well known, that there were many
thousands of Luthers opinion, both then and before time, which were called by
the names of Weldenses, pauperes Lugduno, Leonistae, Lollardes, and opprobrious
names: as the Augronians in their supplication to the Duke of Savoy do
affirm: that they professed the religion of their ancestors for certain
hudnred years, Fox Martyrolog. p. 982.5. and that is but a simple evasion,
that in all points they were not of the same belief: it was sufficient that
they agreed in the chief points of their profession: and though they differed
in some small matters, yet that lets not, but that they may be counted of
the same profession: as there was difference between Anicetus and Polycarpus,
Ireneus and Victor, Chrysostom and Epiphanius, Hierome and Augustine,
Theodoret and Cyril, yet were they counted of the same Church: and in the
Popish Church, much difference there is in opinion, between the Scotists and
Thomists, Dominicans and Fransiscans, Jesuits and Priests, and yet I think
they hold them all very sound members of their Church.

Controv. 3. That works are excluded both from election and justification.
Whereas the Apostle says, v. 6. If it be of grace it is no more of works,
etc. Stapleton Antid. p. 706. thinks thus to avoid this place by a
distinction of the first and second grace: he says that the merit of works is
excluded from election to the first grace, in our vocation and calling, but not
from the second, in our sanctification and glorification, which may be merited.
The Rhemists also in their annotations here exclude the works of nature, but
not Christian works from the merit of salvation.

Contra. 1. The Apostles reason is general: taken from the opposition between
grace and works and merits: if of grace, then not of works, for then grace
were no more grace: whereupon this argument may be framed: the election of
grace excludes works: but the election unto the first and second grace, and
consequently unto glory is of grace, Ergo and so Haymo well expounds these
words: else grace were no more grace: si aliter salvi facti sunt, if they are
saved any other way, which cannot be but by grace, etc. to the property of
opposition between grace and works, remains as well in the election to the
second grace, as to the first; if grace be admitted, works are excluded, for
they cannot stand together.

2. And all kind of works are excluded from election: for good works are not
the cause, but the effect and fruits of election: as Haymo here shows out of
Saint Paul, Ephesians. 1.6. he has chosen us in him, that we should be holy, etc.

Controv. 4. Against freewill.
Chrysostom upon these words v. 4. I have reserved to my self, etc. grants
that God attulit potiorem partem, brought the better part: but they which were
called, brought their will, volentes sulvat, he saves those which are willing:
Tolet annot. 4. subscribeth unto Chrysostom herein, and refuses Augustine,
who ascribes all unto grace; and further he affirms that the nature of grace
is not taken away, though somewhat be presupposed in man, dum modo non sit
illud meritorium; so it be not held to be meritorious, or the cause of grace:
As when a Prince does propound ample rewards to all comers, though they that
come only have the rewards, yet their coming is no meritorious cause of
receiving the reward, but the grace and favor of the Prince: so God elected
some to be justified by faith, quos praevidit libero arbitrio concursuros, whom
he foresawe would concur with their freewill: to this purpose Tolet.

Contra. 1. Chrysostomes speech, that God saves only those which are willing,
if it be understood with these two cautions, that this willingness is wrought by
grace, and yet being so wrought, it is no cause of justification, may safely
be received: for true it is that none are saved against their will: But yet God
ex nolentibus volentes facit, of unwilling makes them willing; if Chrysostom
be otherwise understood, as ascribing here strength to man's freewill, it is a
great error.

2. And herein I prefer Augustines judgment, who well observes, de bon.
perseueran. c. 18. that the Lord here says not, relicti sunt mihi, they were
reserved for me, or they reserved themselves for me; but I have reserved, to
show that it was Gods grace, whereby some were reserved, and not the act of
their own will: Haymo also has the same note, he says not, relicti sunt, are
left, but I have left or reserved, that is, per gratiam reservani, I have
reserved by grace, gloss. interlin.

3. If any thing be presupposed in man as helping unto his calling, it hinders
and obscureth the work of grace: if it be but a preparation only, though not
meritorious: and it is directly against the Scripture, that a man has any will
to come to God of himself; as Ioh. 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the
father draw him: Romans 9.16. it is not in him that wills or runs, but in
God that shows mercy: Philip. 2.13. It is God that works in you both the
will and the deed: how then can man's will of it self, concur with the grace
of God: that example alleged is not like: for to come to receive the Princes
reward, is a civil thing, wherein man's will has some freedom, but in
spiritual actions it has no liberty at all, until it be freed by grace: as
our Blessed Savior says, Ioh. 8.36. if the Son shall make you free, then
are you free indeed.

Controv. 5. That universality and multItude is not always a note of the true
Church.
v. 4. I have reserved to my self seven thousand: Like as the paucitie and
fewenes of professors in Elias time was no prejudice to the truth, nor yet the
multitude of idolaters a proof that they were the Church: so neither is the
great number of nations, people, powers, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Monks,
an argument for the Papal Church: for in Noah's time, the visible Church was
contained in his family, and his Arc did bear the little bark of the Church
of God: and in Sodom only in Lots house was there an exercise of true piety:
yea our Savior, calls his a little flock; though therefore the Church of
Christ consisted of smaller numbers, then it does, which still increases, and
shall we trust more and more toward the coming of Christ, yet the smalnes of
the number, should be no matter of exception, as it was not either in the time
of Elias, or of our Blessed Savior, and his Apostles, when as a thousand to
one, were enemies to true godliness: see before Synops. Centur. 1. nr. 19.

Controv. 6. Of the sufficiency of Scripture, and of the right way to
interpret the same.
v. 8. According as it is written: By this often allegation of Scriptures, and
by collation of one with an other, as here the Apostle compares Isaias and
David together: we gather a double use of Scripture, the one, that all doctrine
of faith must be derived from thence; as throughout this epistle, the Apostle
for the proof of his doctrine only alleges the Scriptures: and therefore
our Blessed Savior faith, Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, etc. for they are
they which testify of we: Christ admits no other witness of him, and his
doctrine, but the Scriptures.

And in that the Apostle does illustrate and interpret one place of Scripture
by an other, we see that the Scripture is the best interpreter of it self; and
that which in one place is obseurely insinuated, otherwhere it may be found
more plainly and perspicuously expressed: See more hereof, Synops. Centur. 1.
err. 10.12.

Controv. 7. Against the Jews.
Chrysostom upon these words, bow down their backs always, v. 10. shows
how this prophecy is now verified in the perpetual desolation of the Jews:
for whereas the Israelites were 200. years in Egypt, God yet in his mercy
delivered them, though they there committed fornication, and were guilty of
diverse other sins: afterward being delivered, after the Lord had a long
time suffered and endured them with patience, at the length he punished them
with 70. years captivity: being delivered from thence, they were vexed under
Antiochus three years; but now more then three hundred years are past, and
yet they have not so much, as alicuius spei vmbram, the shadow of any hope,
when as they neither commit idolatry, nor some other sins, for the which
they were before punished: Whereupon it must needs follow, that the Jews to
this day are afflicted, for not believing in Christ. To this purpose
Chrysostom wrote more then a thousand years since: and so he then
prophetically expounded, that the Jews backs should for ever be bowed down
and kept under, until such time as they should universally be called: God open
their eyes at the length, that they seeing the cause why the wrath of God is
thus kindled against them may at the last with faith and repentance turn unto
him.

Controv. 8. Whether any of the true branches may be broken off.
v. 17. Though some of the branches be broken off, etc. It may seem then, that
some branches may be broken off, and so some of the elect perish. Answ. It
follows not, the branches may perish, therefore the elect. 1. That the elect
cannot possibly fall away is showed before, contr. 1. the Scripture says, they
that trust in Jehovah shall be as mount Sinai, which is not moved, but
stands fast for ever, Psalm. 125.1. not that the elect are so stable of
themselves, that they cannot be moved: for there is no creature but of it
self is mutable and subject to change: but the Lord vpholdeth such by his
grace, as it is said, Psalm. 37.24. Though the righteous fall be shall not be
cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand.

2. We must distinguish of the branches, some are true and right branches, and
they are the faithful and elect, which cannot be broken off, some are
counterfeit branches, which were never elected, and they may fall off: so
Christ shows, Ioh. 15. that the vine may have some unfruitful branches,
which are cast off, but the fruitful branches he never casts away: so the
Apostle, c. 9.7. does make a difference among the children of Abraham, all were
not his right children, that were of his seed.

Controv. 9. Against the heresy of Valentinus and Basilides, that held some
things to be evil, some good by nature.
Whereas S. Paul makes mention of the wild olive, and of the true olive, v.
17. Origin takes occasion to confute the heresy of the foresaid heretics and
their followers: whose assertion was this, that there were two natures of
souls, some were made good, and they should be saved, and never fall away,
some were evil, and they could not but perish.

1. Origin refelleth this heretical paradox, out of this place: for here some
branches of the olive tree were broken off, because of their unbelief, and so
of good became bad, and the branches of the wild olive were planted in, and so
of bad became good: this difference was not in the diversity of their nature:
and further he urges these words of our Blessed Savior, Math. 12.33. Either
make the tree evil, and the fruit evil, or make the tree good, and the fruit
good: whereupon he infers, vt ostenderet arborem bonam vel malam, non nasci,
sed fieri, to show that a tree is not borne good or evil, but is so made.

2. Thus far Origin proceeds well: but after going about to show the cause,
whence it comes, Origin confuteth one error by an other.
that some trees are good, some bad, he falls into other errors himself. 1.
ascribing this difference only to the power of free will: for these are his
words, vnusquisque ex arbitrij potestate aut bona oliva, aut oleafter
efficitur, every one by the power of free will is made either a true olive, or
a wild olive: which he proves by the example of the creatures, which are all
of one nature, but by certain accidental qualities bring forth diverse kinds,
as of trees, herbs, and such like: so there is one and the same nature of
reasonable creatures, the difference is out of the diverse motions of their free
will: and to this end he presses that saying of our blessed Savior, wake the
tree good, and his fruit good; as though it were in man's power to make himself
a good tree. 2. he adds, that whereas God so in his providence disposes,
that there are outward exhortations ministered, sometime to good sometime to
evil, it is in man's power obedire si velit, to obey if he will, him that
provokes him unto goodness, and if he will to despise him. 3. and to mend the
matter withal, he says further, that by this liberty of will, he that is
ramus oliuae, a branch of the right olive, may fall away to misbeleefe, and an
other that is but a wild olive, may convert unto the faith, and become a branch
of the true olive: Thus Origin plays the Philosopher, rather then the divine.

Contra. 1. The Apostle is contrary to Origin: for he says, v. 20. Thou
stand by faith: therefore not by free will: for faith is not of our selves,
it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. neither is the example of the creatures like,
for the diversity of their kinds proceeds of the several properties of
their different natures: whereas the difference between men is not from their
nature, but by the grace of God, which separateth them: 1. Cor. 4.7. Who
separateth thee, and what have thou, that thou have not received: and whereas
Christ says, facite, make ye: this word, as Pet. Martyr well shows, non
efficientiam, sed hypothesin significat, does signify not an efficiencie, but
a supposition: as if he should have said, you must thus think, and imagine
with your selves, that the tree must first be good, before it can bring forth
good fruit: and this to be the meaning, appears by the words following; how
can ye speak good things, when ye are evil.

2. Neither is it man's power, to give care unto wholesome doctrine, and obey it
if he will: for then why is it said of Lydia, Act. 16.14. whose heart God
opened, that she attended to the things that Paul spoke.

3. Neither is it possible for them that were true branches of the right olive
to be broken off: they were never truly graffed in, that are broken off, though
they so seemed: as they which are said to be blotted out of the book of life,
were never indeed there written at all, Rev. 17.8. and thus witnesses S.
John, 1. epist. 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if
they had been of us, they would have continued with us.

10. Controv. That there was the same spirit of faith, and the same spiritual
substance of the Sacraments, under the old Testament, and in the new.
v. 17. And made partaker of the root. P. Martyr does well observe out of
these words, so also Pareus, with others; that there was eadem substantia res
spiritus, etc. the same substance, matter, spirit, in both Testaments, though
their Sacraments in respect of the outward signs and ceremonies, were diverse:
for there was but one root of faith both of the Jews and Gentiles: we are not
planted into an other olive, but are made partakers of the fatnes of the same
olive tree: this is contrary to the doctrine of the Romanists, which deny
that the Sacraments of the old Testament had the same spiritual substance with
the Sacraments of the new. See further, Synops. Centur. 2. err. 97.

11. Controv. That the Scriptures are the judge of every one in particular.
Whereas Gretserus in the colloquie at Ratisbone, sess. 9. p. 111. denied
impudently that the Scripture judged him, because it no where said, Thou
Gretser, errest: and cried out with ^ blasphemous mouth, let the Scripture
judge me, indicet me spiritus, si potest: let the holy spirit judge me if he
can: Pareus out of this place taxes his ignorance and impudency: for the
Apostle speaks in particular, v. 20. Thou stand by faith, 21. take heed
he spare not thee: and in like manner the commandments were propounded in
particular, as speaking unto every one, Thou shall not, etc. and therefore the
Scriptures is not only a general judge, but in particular does confound all
such impudent gainsayers.

12. Controv. Against the Popist uncertainty and doubtfulnes of salvation.
v. 20. Thou stand by faith, be not high minded, but fear, etc. Stapleton
Antidot. p. 725. and Bellarmine likewise lib. 3. de iustificat. c. 12. do
infer upon this place, that faith brings no firm persuasion or certentie
of salvation, because, where fear is, there is no certentie, but doubtfulnes:
but faith is joined with fear, as here the Apostle shows, and where he
says, Philip. 2.12. work out your salvation with fear and trembling.

Ans. To remove this sophistical cavil, certain distinctions must here be
admitted. 1. first of faith. 2. then of those which have faith. 3. and of
fear. 4. of such as stand by faith. 5. of the diverse respects to be had in the
faithful. 1. Faith is taken diversely, as it sometime signifies the external
profession of faith, which the hypocrites may have, as Simon Magus, Act. 8.
sometime it is taken for the bare knowledge and apprehension of faith, as it is
comprehended in the articles of the faith: there is also faith of miracles; and
there is a true lively says, which is a sure persuasion, and firm
apprehension of the promises of grace in Christ. lib. 13. de Trin. cap. 2.
Augustine distinguishes between fides, quae creditur, the faith, which is
believed, which is only a knowledge of the things believed, and fides qua
creditur, faith whereby we believe: the first faith brings no certentie, but
the second does. 2. There are some which only in external profession are
counted among the believers, and have a temporary faith, as many hypocrites:
and of such the Apostle speaks here, be not high minded but fear: for the
true believers are so guided by Gods grace, that they shall not be carried away
with pride, that they need to fear finally to fall away.

But Stapleton here obiecteth, that the Apostle speaks only of true
believers, such as stand by says, but hypocrites do not stand by faith: and
again, the Apostle would not have said, well, but rather, that he had evil
spoken, if he meant such as had only a show of faith. Ans. Yes, such as did
communicate only in the external profession, might be said to stand by such
faith, as they had, not by a true faith and belief of the heart, but by an
outward confession of the faith with the mouth: And the Apostle might and did
say, well, that such were indeed graft in into the outward society of the
Church, in stead of the Jews, though they were not truly by faith graft into
Christ.

3. There are also two kinds of fear: there is a servile and slavish fear,
which indeed is full of doubtfulnes and perplexity; and there is a filial
fear, which is nothing else but a carefulnes to please God, and to take heed
not to offend; and this fear may be in the faithful: but the other can not
stand with faith.

4. And the Apostle speaks not here of the faithful in particular, for they
are without fear of falling finally: but generally of the whole body of the
believing Gentiles, concerning the which these three things might be feared. 1.
that all among them were not true believers, but many hypocrites might be
mingled among the rest. 2. though there is no fear of the universal Church,
that it can ever decay, yet particular Churches may fail; as where the seven
famous Churches of Asia sometime were, there is no visible Church now to be
seen. 3. we may be afraid of our posterity, least they should fall away from
the faith of their fathers: wherefore of the general body of a particular
Church it may be understood, thou also shall be cut off, v. 22. not of the
faithful in particular, who can not finally fall away.

5. A faithful man must be considered, as consisting both of a spiritual and
regenerate part, and of a carnal: then, as in respect of the goodness of God,
apprehended by faith, in our inward man we have assurance not to fall, yet the
flesh continually suggesteth doubtful thoughts, and our carnal infirmity
puts us in fear, which notwithstanding is subdued by the strength of faith:
like as when one is set in the top of an high tower, and looks downward,
he can not but fear, but yet considering the place where he stands, which
keeps him from falling, he recouereth himself, and overcomes his fear: so
faith does prevail against carnal infirmity, and makes us in the end to be
out of doubt of our salvation, Martyr: And thus those sophistical cauills are
sufficiently answered.

Now on the contrary side, that the faithful are sure of their perseverance
and continuance to the end, and so are without doubt and fear of salvation,
it is thus made manifest out of Scripture.

1. The gifts of God are without repentance, v. 31. but faith is the gift of
God, therefore, God repents him not, to whomsoever he gives faith: faith
then remains to the end: if it be said, that God repents him not, in
taking away faith, but man, in casting away faith; I answer, that none cast
away faith, but those that are forsaken of the grace of God; but the elect are
never forsaken totally or finally: Heb. 13.5. I will not fail thee, nor
forsake thee.

2. Gods love is immutable and unchangeable, Ierem. 31.3. with an everlasting
love have I loved thee: Ioh. 13.1. whom he loves, he loves to the end: but
they which are thus beloved of God can not fall, they are sure to persevere.

3. That which God vpholdeth, is sure to stand; but God vpholdeth the
faithful, 1. Pet. 1.5. They are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation: Psalm. 37.24. Though he fall, he shall not be cast off, for the Lord
puts under his hand.

4. The prayer of Christ is effectual, he is always heard of his father: but
he prays that his servants may be kept from evil, Ioh. 17.15. therefore they
are sure to be kept from evil, and to persevere to the end, as S. Paul says
confidently, 2. Tim. 4.18. The Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and
will preserve me to his heavenly kingdom.

5. Ephesians. 1.14. the Apostle says, Ye are sealed with the spirit of promise,
which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the
possession purchased, etc. if the spirit be an earnest, until we have
possession of our inheritance; then are the faithful sure to continue to the
end.

6. He that falls from faith, sins unto death: but the faithful are borne
of God, and can not sin unto death, because their seed remains in them, 1.
Ioh. 3.9. they therefore can not fall finally from the faith.

7. The Lord has promised, that the faithful shall not be tempted above that
they are able, but he will give an issue together with the temptation, 1. Cor.
10.13. therefore the faithful are sure, that their faith shall not be overcome
of temptation.

This doctrine of the perseverance of the faithful, as it is consonant to the
Scriptures, so it has the consent of authority.

August. de bon. persev. c. 12. thus writes, Ipse eos facit perseverare in
bono, qui fecit bonos, qui autem cadunt and pereunt, etc. he makes them to
persevere in goodness, that first made them good: but they which fall away and
perish, were never in the number of the predestinate.

Ambrose says, in Roman. 8.36. charitas Christi facit eos, quos amat,
inseperabiles, etc. the love of Christ makes those, whom he loves,
inseparable; that is, to persevere to the end.

Chrysostom says, in 1. Timoth. 1. fidei proprium est, etc. nunquam penitus
decidit, neque ^nino turbatur: this is proper unto faith, etc. it never
altogether fails, nor is wholly disturbed.

13. Controv. Against the Manichees and Marcionites.
v. 22. Behold the bountifulnes (or goodness) and severity of God: hence may be
refuted the wicked opinion and heresy of these forenamed heretics; who held
that there were two Gods, one good full of gentleness and mercy, the other
severe and cruel: this they made the author of the old Testament, and the
other of the new.

Contra. 1. But the Apostle here makes one and the same God, both bountiful
and full of goodness, and the same also severe. 2. and though severity and
mercy seem to be contrary, yet that is not in respect of the subject, for
the divine nature is not capable of contrary and repugnant qualities, but in
regard of the contrary effects, which are produced in contrary subjects: like
as the Magistrate is not contrary to himself, if he show mercy unto those
that are willing to be reformed, and be severe in punishing obstinate
offenders: as the Sun by the same heat works contrary effects in subjects
of a diverse and contrary disposition and quality; as it hardens the clay,
and mollifieth the wax.

14. Controv. Against the works of preparation.
v. 24. Were graffed in contrary to nature. Nature can not help any thing at
all to that, which is beside or against nature: like as the wild olive does not
prepare it self the better to be planted or graffed in to the right olive:
this then is an evident place to convince the Pelagians of these days the
Papists, whereby a man even before grace, may make himself more fit and
capable of grace: but this is contrary to that saying of our blessed Savior,
Ioh. 15.5. where he uses the like comparison, which the Apostle does here,
making himself the vine, and us the branches; without me ye can do nothing.

15. Controv. Against the erroneous opinion of Origin concerning the purgatory
of hell.
Origin treating here of these words, v. 26. he shall turn away ungodliness
from Jacob; shows how two ways men are purged from their sins: in this
life they are purged by the preching of the word, Ioh. 15.3. you are clean
through the word, that I have spoken onto you: in the next world, ignis
Gehennae incruciatibus purgabit, etc. the fire of hell shall purge those, whom
the Apostolical doctrine could not purge: verum haec ipsa purgatio, qua per
poenam ignis adhibetur, etc. but this purgation, which shall be made by fire,
how long it shall last, it he only knows, to whom the father has committed
all judgment, etc.

In this sentence of Origin diverse errors may be observed. 1. he appoints a
means beside the word of God and faith in Christ, for those which die in
unbelief, to be purged by: whereas the Scripture teaches, that Christ by
himself has purged our sins, Heb. 1.3. there is no other way. 2. he gives
a purging force unto hell fire, which is appointed for the punishment of the
wicked, not for their purgation and amendment: they are not as gold and
silver, which are purged by the fire, but as stubble, that is burn^ and
consumed. 3. he thinks that the flames of hell, shall not always burn, but
only for a time: whereas the Scripture makes hell fire everlasting, Matthew.
35.46. Those shall go into everlasting pain. If now the Papists will make
Origin one of their patrons of Purgatory, as he is one of the most ancient
that makes mention thereof, they must also subscribe unto these errors, which
I think they will be ashamed of: for to embrace his invention, and yet to
refuse his sense, is not reasonable.

16. Controv. Against the Papists, concerning the right use of the keys of the
Church.
v. 27. When I shall take away their sinnes] It is then peculiar and proper to
God only to forgive sins: the keys are indeed committed to the Church, not
as giving an absolute power of binding and loosing, as the Rhemists hold, that
the Priests of the Church of right do remit sins, Ioh. 20. sect. 3. but the
office of the Pastors and Ministers of the Church is to declare the will and
pleasure of God out of his word concerning the remission of sins, and so
accordingly to pronounce binding or loosing, as they see men to be penitent or
impenitent: for there are two keys in the Church, the one is the word of God,
whereby remission of sins is preached; as Matthew. 28.19. our blessed Savior
gives his Apostles commission to go preach and baptize, which was for
remission of sins: the other key is faith, which is in the hearer: Mark.
16.16. he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: there must be a
concurrence of these two keys together, or else there can be no remission of
sins, Mart. See further hereof Synops. Centur. 1. err. 71.

17. Controv. That the certentie and assurance of salvation is proved by this
saying of the Apostle, v. 29. The gifts and calling of God are without
repentance.
Staplet. Antidot. p. 750. and Pererius concurring with him, disput. 2. numer.
10. upon this chapter do thus object.

1. The Apostle speaks not here of the particular election of any, but of the
general vocation and adoption of a whole nation of the Jews: and this
Pererius urges as confessed by M. Calvin in his commentary: but this general
adopting of a nation, is mutable and changeable: for we see that where many
famous Churches were in time past, there is now no face of a Church to be seen.

2. The Lord is said not to repent him of his gifts and calling; not because
the gifts once bestowed upon the righteous, non queant amitti, can not be lost:
but because it repents not the Lord so to have bestowed them, Perer. for
though one do loose the crown, an other receives it: as here the ruin of
the Jews, was the salvation of the Gentiles.

Contra. 1. The argument follows not, because the Apostle speaks of a
general calling and adoption, therefore this sentence can not be applied unto
particular election: nay it follows more strongly; if the common adoption be
immutable, much more the particular vocation of the elect. 2. it is true, that
many visible Churches are now extinguished: but we must distinguish between
the external and internal calling: they which have the first without the
second, may fall away, but where the external and internal are joined
together, as they shall concur in the conversion of the Jews, there they are
unchangeable.

3. If that were the Apostles meaning, that God repents not of his gifts
bestowed upon any, because, if they refuse them, they may redound to the
benefit of others: this had bin very impertinent to the Apostles purpose, who
hereby intends to prove the vocation of the Jews; because the Lord had so
promised, and purposed, whereof he uses not to repent.

4. Wherefore I prefer herein the judgment of Tolet a more worthy man, both
for his judgment and dignity in the Papal Church, who thus interprets,
these gifts not to be repented of, quia quos Deus his semel prosequi decrevit,
non deserit; because whom God once decreed to bestow them upon, be forsakes
not: so likewise Lyranus expounds this place, the gifts and calling of God,
are without repentance, that is, sine mutabilitate, etc. without change or
mutabilitie, for with God there is no changing, etc. so also Haymo,
poenitentia^ pro mutatione accipitur, etc. repentance is taken in the Scripture
for change, as the Lord said to Samuel, It repents me, that I have made Saul
king, etc. igitur sine mutatione, etc. therefore without change are the gifts
and calling of God in those things, whereof we read before, whom he has
predestinate, he has called, etc. not in them of whom it is said, many be
called, few be chosen, etc.

18. Controv. Against election upon the foresight of works, and against merits.
Whereas the Apostle says, v. 35. who has given unto him first, Calvin urges
this place against merits: for if God should give salvation unto man for his
good works, homo prior daret bona opera Deo, etc. it would follow, that man
should first give good works unto God: likewise Beza proves by this place,
that election is not upon the foresight of faith or works, for then we should
give unto God first: Pet. Martyr also does apply this place both against
merits, and election by works.

But Pererius disput. 4. numer. 15. upon this chapter, charge Calvin and Beza
either with ignorance or malice, for this collection: and to make his matter
good, he brings in this distinction; that there is duplex salus hominis, a
twofold salvation of man; one is begun in this life, the other is perfected
in the next: the first is conferred only by the frank mercy and goodness of
God; the other is given upon respect of merits: and yet though life everlasting
be merited, man can not be said to give unto man first, quia prior Deus gratiam
dedit, etc. because God gave unto him grace first, whereby he might merit:
likewise he distinguishes of election; there is one election ad primam
gratiam, to the first grace, and that is without respect unto works; there is
an other election unto eternal life, and thereof causa est praevisio honorum
operum, the cause is the foresight of good works.

Contra. 1. If good works are the gift of God, and God must first give grace to
do good works: then can they not merit: for he that meriteth, must do it ex
proprio, of his own: if it be not his own, then he can not challenge any
merit: as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 4.7. what have thou, which thou have not
received: if thou have received it, why reioycest thou, as though thou had
not received it, etc. 2. though God give grace at the first, yet if man after
do bring merits, and then eternal life follows; he does give unto God first
in respect of the final reward, though not in respect of the precedent grace.
3. The Apostle acknowledges but one kind of predestination, whereupon vocation
follows, and then justification, and last of all glorification, Romans 8.30.
whence this argument may be framed; that predestination which is unto
salvation, is also unto glorification, but predestination unto vocation, which
is unto the first grace, is by our adversaries own confession without respect
of works, therefore so is the predestination unto glorification.

19. Controv. Against universal grace.
Whereas the Apostle says, v. 32. God has shut up all in unbelief, that he
might have mercy on all, etc. the Patrons of universal grace do thus reason
against particular election only of some: they, whom God has mercy on, are
elected, not damned, but God has mercy upon all, therefore all are elected,
and none decreed to be damned.

Ans. 1. That all are not elected, but only a certain number, and the rest
are rejected, it is evident out of the Scriptures, Romans 9.18. He has mercy on
whom he will, and whom he will, he hardens: therefore he has not mercy on
all: and Romans 11.7. Election has obtained it, and the rest have been
hardened: and again, many are called, few chosen: all then are not chosen: for
if God had elected all to salvation, and yet all not saved, it would argue
either a change in Gods will, or a want of power in God, that he can not bring
his purpose to effect; and that the goodness of his will should be overcome by
the malice of man's will: but none can resist the will of God, Romans 9.19.

2. Concerning the argument, first the proposition is not true: for there are
certain common mercies, which God may show even toward those that are excluded
from salvation: it is true only of those special mercies which belong unto
salvation, but those are not extended unto all.

3. Neither is the assumption true in their sense: God does not show mercy
indifferently upon all, in calling them to salvation: but this particle ( all)
must be understood here distributive, by way of distribution: by all, the
Apostle means both Jews and Gentiles, all kinds and sorts of men.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Ministers must not leave their calling.
v. 4. What says the answer of God. P. Martyr here notes, how the great
Prophet Elias herein showed his infirmity, that being wearied with the
incredulity and obstinacy of the people, he desired to die, and so would
shake off his calling: which infirmity the Lord here corrects in the
Prophet: whereby Ministers are taught, that they should not be dismayed and
discouraged to leave their places, notwithstanding the obstinacy of the
people, as long as there be any which will hear them. Theodoret lib. 2. c. 31.
makes mention of one Molitius, who did leave a certain Church in Armenia,
being offended with the frowardnes and disobedience of the people; who
afterward was chosen Bishop of Antioch, and for defending the orthodoxall faith
against the Arrians was banished: which might be thought to have happened unto
him as a chastisment from God, because he forsook his former charge: Martyr.

2. Observe. That we must wholly be addicted to the service of God.
v. 4. I have reserved unto my self seven thousand, etc. The faithful then
are separated from the world, and reserved unto God: wherein appears both the
love of God toward the elect, in sequestring them from the rest of the world,
and in his special protection of them; as also what our duty is again toward
God, to deuote our selves wholly to his service, seeing we are his, and not our
own: as the Apostle says, Romans 14.7. none of us lives to himself, neither
does any die to himself, etc.

3. Observe. Of our thankefulnes to be rendered to God for his election of grace,
both in our life and death, especially in the charitable disposing of our last
will and testament.
v. 5. There is a remnant thorough the election of grace. Chrysostom by
occasion of these words, and the next which follow, if it be of grace, it is no
more of works, falls into a vehement exhortation unto thankfulness to God
again, because when we could not be saved by works, dono Dei gratis salvati
sumus, we were saved by the frank gift of God: and this our thankfulness must
first be showed in our life: temporis commoditate, vt oportet, vtere, use the
opportunity of thy life and time, before death comes, when all opportunity
of working is taken away: nondum solutum est theatrum, sed adhuc in ipsa intro
stas cavea, etc. the stage or theater is not yet dissolved, but thou stand
yet in the lists, thou may play thy prices at the last. But if a man have
been forgetful of his duty, while he lived, yet there is a way to make some
part of amends at his death: and how is that? si Christum in testamento cum
baredibus tuis conscripseris: if thou in thy will appoint Christ among thine
heirs: for what excuse can thou have, if thou make not Christ coheire with
thy sons, seeing he makes thee his coheire in heaven: contribu^illi pecunias
tibi iam deinceps inutiles, etc. commit thy money to him, which is now like to
be unprofitable to thee, neither can thou any longer be master of it. And if
Christ be left coheire with thy sons, orphaniam illorum alleviabit, etc. the
will relieve their orphancie, and keep them from violence and wrong: how
miserable then are they, which having no children, parasitis potius and
adulatoribus sua distribuenda relinqunt, etc. do rather divide their goods to
parasites and flatterers, then to Christ: Consider how it is the mercy of God,
that gives thee time to dispose of thy estate, whereas many subitaneo raptu
decesseriut, are taken away by sudden death. Nay if thou will not make Christ
coheire with thy children, numera Dominum cum servis, yet count thy Lord among
thy servants: thou at thy death set thy servants free: free then Christ in
his members from famine, hunger, necessity: thus excellently Chrysostom
handles this matter of wills and testaments.

4. Observe. Against rash judgment.
v. 4. I have reserved seven thousand. Calvin here observes well, that like as
there were many true worshippers in Elias time, though he knew them not: so, ne
temere omnes adiudicemus diabolo, we should not rashly send all to the devil,
that are not known unto us, neither yet appear to be the servants of God: so
the Apostle, c. 14.4. who art thou, which condemnest an other man's servant, he
stands or falls to his own master.

5. Observe. All things fall out for the best unto the faithful, and to the
wicked all things are accursed.
v. 9. Let their table, he made a snare, etc. As unto the wicked, their
prosperity, here understood by the table, becomes a snare; so ot the godly,
things which are in themselves heavy and hard, are turned to be easy and
pleasant: the treachery of Joseph's brethren turned to his advancement: the
afflictions of the Israelites in Egypt, hastened their deliverance: even in the
wilderness the Lord spread a table for them: and so it falls out, as the
Apostle says, c. 8.28. All things work together for the best, to those which
love God, etc.

6. Observe. Not to envy at the prosperity of the wicked.
v. 9. Let their table be made a snare: this teaches us, not to be grieved,
when we see the wicked to flourish: for their prosperity will turn to their
ruin; as Pharaohs pride brought him to his destruction, while he followed the
Israelites in the red sea: see to this purpose the 73. Psalm, where the
Prophet David confesses his infirmity, how he fretted at the prosperity of
the wicked.

7. Observe. To take heed that the word of God be not a snare.
Origin further observes upon this text, how even the table of Gods word,
which men fit to hear, as at a table, is turned to a snare to those, which do
not hear it with understanding, and gather spiritual meat out of it: to
such, it is, as S. Paul says, the favor of death unto death, 2. Cor. 2.

8. Observe. How we may profit by the fall of others.
v. 11. To provoke them to follow them, etc. Like as by the fall of the Jews
salvation came unto the Gentiles; so by the sin of others we are admonished
to take heed unto our selves; to give warning unto others, and to take
occasion to reform and amend such as have offended: see Galat. 6.1.

9. Observe. How the Ministry is truly honored and magnified.
v. 13. I magnify mine office: The honor of the ministry consists not in
riches or pomp, which are but accidental things, but in the converting of
many unto Christ; as the Apostle says in the next verse, that I might save
some. It is peculiar unto God to save, but the Lord communicates this
excellency to the Ministers which are the instruments, to show the necessity
of preaching, and the reverence thereunto belonging.

10. Observe. How the faithful comfort themselves in the power of God.
v. 23. God is able to graffe them in again. Thus the children of God in all
their afflictions are taught to comfort themselves; that God is able to deliver
them: as our blessed Savior says, my Father is greater then all, and none are
able to take you out of my fathers hand, Ioh. 10.29.

11. Observe. How we should be affected toward the Jews.
v. 28. Beloved for the fathers sake. Beza well observes, that Christians
should not neglect or despise the Jews, but pray for their conversion, and
provoke them by their godly conversation: not by our superstitious vsages, and
corrupt manners to hinder their calling, for the which the Papists, and carnal
professors have much to answer to God.

12. Observe. The comfort of the faithful in the unchangeable gifts of grace.
v. 29. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. This is much for
our comfort, that our faith can not fail: for God repents him not of his
gifts: neither can the faithful loose their faith, which God by his spirit
preserves: as S. Peter says, 1. epist. 1. c. 5. which are kept by the power
of faith unto salvation.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THIS Commentary upon the second general part of the
Epistle contained in the five last Chapters, which concerns exhortation to
diverse Christian duties general and particular.

Wherein among other questions and controversies of great weight and moment,
these are specially handled: Of the diverse offices in the Church, c. 12. Of the
obedience wherein, and how far to be yielded to the Civil Magistrate, c. 13.
Of the use of things indifferent, c. 14. Whether S. Paul were ever in Spain,
as he purposed, c. 15. Whether S. Peter were ever at Rome, and fate as Bishop
there, c. 16.


Printed by CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1611.

REVERENDISSIMIS IN CHRISTO PATRIBVS ac Dominis, D. GEORGIO Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi, and D. LANCELETO Episcopo Eliensi, Dominis suis colendissimis,
salutem and pacem in Christo sempiternam.
D E Divo Paulo eiusque scriptis divinissimis, vestrae dignitati paucis mihi
praefari cogitanti, occurrit Ambrosianum iliud, quo vtrumque vestrum, sivestra
pace liceat, aeffari and compellare lubet: beati Petrus and Paulus inter
vniuersos Apostolos, and peculiari quadam praerogativa praecellunt, Sermon. 66.
verum intet ipsos quis cui praeponatur, incertum est: Ita and vos caeteris
vestri ordinis praelucetis omnibus, alter summae dignitatis ecclesiastice apud
nos accessione, alter eruditissimae fidei defensonis apud exteros laud:
Vtrique Paulo and Petro Ambrosius inter Apostolos primatum concedit: Commentar.
2d Galat. 2. ^^qui ^^r Ambros de primatu ordi^as non potestatis.
Paulos ( inquit) gratiam primatus sibi soli vendicat concessam a Deo, sicut
and soli Petro concessa est inter Apostolos: and vtrique vestrum omnes merito
palmam deferunt.

Sed Hieronymus hic mihi aurem vellit: vereor ne officium putetur ambitio, Ad
Salvinam.
and videamur sub occasion sermonis amicitias potentium quaerere: redeo ego ad
Paulum, illud (...), electionis vas, vt Christus ipse vocat, Act. 9.15.
lampadem ecclesiae, vt Chrysostom. doctorem and magistrum gentium, vt Hieronymus,
In 16 c. ad Romans (...) catalog, 1 a.d^sp^^ c. 16. De sanct ser 26.
sa^^ntem illum architectum, vt Ambrosius, nutritorem ecclesiae, vt Augustine.
Paulum cum Petro geminum lumen oculorum appellat Bernardus: Sed Chrysostomus
totus in tanti Apostoli lauds resoluitur: pulverem oris illius videre vellem,
per quod Christus locutus est, etc. immo non oris solum illius, In 16. c. ad
Romans moral. vlti^n.
sed and cordis pulverem videre vellem, quod si quis totius orbis cor dixerit,
etc. non peccaverit: adeo enim istud cor latum fuit vt vt in se susceperit
integras gentes: videre rurfus vellem pulverem manuum, quas cum tetigit vipera,
in rogu^u decidit, etc. vellem and oculorum pulverem videre, excaecatorum
primo, doinde ad orbis salutem respicientium: vellem and pedum illorum videre
pulterem, qui per orbem currentes non laborarunt, etc. and quid opus est
singula tecensere? vellem videre sepulchrum illud, quo recondita sunt arma illa
iustitiae, armalucis: Isto modo aureum illud Chrysostomi os, divinissimi
Apostoli dignis^^^ as lauds decantat.

Verum licet Paulus totus sit veluti sacratissimus omniu^ rerum pretiosarum
thesautus, and virtutum promptuariumquatuor tamen praecipue de eo praedicantur
admiratimedigna, conversio miraculosa, aedeficatio ecclesiae fructuosa,
diligentia laboriosa, pass^^oriosa. De conversione Pauli sic meditatur
Augustinus, De diverse. serum. 41.
Ananias baptizavit lu^^in, and fecit agnum: Saulus vinxit, Paulus vinctus est;
dum Saulus quaerit mi^^ere numerum Christianorum, ipse etiam ad numerum
accessit confessoru^. Zilum Apostoli, and docendi peritiam, sic describit
Chrysostomus: ad splendorem Apostolicorum verborum oculos aperiamus: lingua
siquidem illius supra solemn emicuit, doctrinaeque sermon supra reliquos omnes
exuberavit: sic Apostolus de se testatur, 1. Cor. 15.10.
gratia eius, quae in me collata est, no^ fuit inanis, sed amplius, quam illi
omnes, laboravi: Quam vero praestiterit diligentiam, and quanto labor in
Evangelio promulgando desudaverit, ipse etiam testis est, ita vta Jerusalem per
circuitum vsque ad Illyricum repleverim Evangelium Christi: vnde Chrysostomus,
virtute dilectionis vo^lantis instar factus, omnes circumvolitabat: de passione
vero sua and Martyrio sic vaticinatur: Philip. 2.17.
si immoler super sacrificium fidei, etc. sic enim Paulus sacrificij instar
gladio decollatus creditur: vt praeclare Augustinus: Petrus patitur crucem, De
sanct. ser. 28.
Paulus fentit pugionem: piscatorem suspendit hamus crucis, epist. 243.
persecutorem mucro minuit persecutoris: and vt Bernardus, alter amisso, alter
submisso in cruce capite, triumphum extulerunt.

Ex istis quatuor Pauli encomijs, duo vires nostras long superant, nec
conversionis modo illi adaequari, nec martyrij fortitudine illi pares esse
possumus: in duobus reliquis omnibus fidelibus pastoribus D. Pauli exemplum
praeponitur, vt eius in docendo fidelitatem, and in labor tolerantiam
imitemur: ad reliquas Apostoli imitationes, ( vt been Cyprianus) infirmi sumus:
Cyprian. de singularit. Clerie.
Atque vtrinque hoc vere Episcopalis muneris specimen, a vestra gravitate tam
docendi, quam scribendi exhibitum, libenter omnes agnoscimus, and alijs omnibus
Episcopis and Pastoribus vestro exemplo faeliciter praeitis: quid non audebunt
milites cum tales habeant duces? and nautae alacriter proculaubio incumbent
remis, cum ipsos navarchos and naucleros, non solum cohortatores, sed
cooperatores, and (...) habeant.

Sed vnum est prae caeteris, cap. 14.
in quo Paulus animum vere Apostolicum oftendit: Romanos de rebus aediaphoris
altercantes summo artificio ad pacem revocare studet: and vos pro vestra
pietate, Ecclesiae nostrae non dissimili dissidio laboranti, succurrite, and
veluti nutantibus and suo loco motis columnis, humeros supponite: Duo sunt que
nostram Ecclesiam bear possunt, pax externa, and domestica: illam nobis
attulit Serenissimus noster Rex, de quo vertus illud praedicari potest, quam
quod olim de Pericle suo iactabant Athenienses, (...).
quod nemo Atheniensium illius causa vestem atta^ vnqua induerit: alteram
vestra humanitas conciliabit: Melanthius inter Athenienses dicere solebat,
civitatem servari oratorum dissidijs: Sed Pastorum concordiares nostras
crescere facile intelligit vestra prudentia: quam vos promovere, and pro
authoritate vestra potestis, and pro pietate vultis: Isto modo, si non solum
Paulum admiremur, sed imitemur, Comment. in 16. ad Roman.
(vt suauiter suo more Chrysostomus) possumus hinc migrantes, and illum videre,
and ineffabilis ipsius gloriae participes esse, id quod nos omnes assequi
contingat gratia and benignitate Christi, cui gloria in secula.

Vestrae reverent iae obseruantissimus ANDREAS WILLET.

CHAP. XII.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
1. I beseech you therefore brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present (
give up B. G.) your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service ( of God. G. ad.)

2 And be ye not fashioned like to this world ( fashion not your selves. G.)
but be ye transformed. Be Gr. (not reformed. L. or changed. G.) the renewing of
your mind ( sense. L. rods, mind. Gr.) that ye may prove what the good, and
acceptable, and perfect will of God is.

3 For thorough the grace that is given unto me, I say to every one being
among you, that no man understand ( think. S. esteem of himself. V.B. be
ouerwise. L. Be. (...), signifies, to have an ouerweening opinion, as though
one knew more then indeed he knows) above that which is mere to
understand: but that he understand ( behave himself discreetly, B.) according
to sobriety, as God has dealt to every one the measure of faith.

4 For as in one body we have many members, but all members have not the same
office, ( action, (...), Gr.)

5 So we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one one another
members.

6 Seeing then that we have ( having then. Gr.) gifts, according to the grace
given unto us, diverse: whether prophecy, let us prophecy, according to the
proportion, Be. (portion. G.V. measure. B. reason. L. analogy. Gr.) of faith.

7 Or an office, ( or ministry, Gr.) let us be occupied in ministering: or he
that teaches, in teaching.

8 Or he that exhorts, in exhortation: he that distributeth, let him do it
with singlenes, B. ( simplicity, (...),) he that rules with diligence, he
that shows mercy with chearefulnes.

9 Let love be without dissimulation: abhor ( be abhorring or hating. Gr.)
evil, and cleave unto good.

10 Be lovingly affected with brotherly love one toward an other: in giving of
honor go one before an other.

11 Not slothful in endeavor: ( to do service, G. in business, B. (...), in
care, study, endeavor) seruent in the spirit, serving the Lord,

12 Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing ( instant, L.V. B.
but (...) signifies rather to continue with strength) in prayer,

13 Communicating, Gr. (distributing, G. B.) to the necessities ( or uses, Be.)
of the Saints: following hospitality. ( given to hospitality, G.B.)

14 Bless them, that persecute you: bless, I say, and curse not.

15 Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with those that weep.

16 Be like affectioned: G.B. (think the same thing, L.A. (...) is understood
here of the affection, rather then of the mind and judgment: see qu. 25.
following.) be not high minded: ( think not on high matters, Gr.) submitting
your selves ( consenting, L. A. applying your selves, V. cleaving unto, S.
making your selves equal, G.B. the word is (...), which properly signifies to
be carried away together) to them of the lower sort: be not wise in your selves.
( arrogant in your selves, V. (...), Gr.)

17 Recompense to no man evil for evil: provide ( procure, Be. G.B. the word
is (...), providing) things honest in the sight of all men.

18 If it be possible, as much as in you is, have peace ( live in peace, V.B.
(...), be peaceable, Gr.) with all men.

19 Avenge not your selves, dearly beloved, but give place unto wrath: for it
is written, Vengeance is mine: ( do not judge judgment to thy self, S.) I
will repay, says the Lord.

20 Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink:
for in so doing, thou shall heap coals of fire on his head.

21 Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. ( goodness, B.G.)

2. The Argument, method, and parts.
The Apostle having hitherto insisted upon the doctrinall points of faith, as
concerning justification, sanctification, predestination, and such other, now
comes to matter of use and exhortation. And in this chapter he exhorts 1.
generally to the service of God: 2. to the right use of gifts, and
administration of Ecclesiastical offices: 3. to the mutual duties of charity.

1. The service of God is set forth, 1. affirmatively, what we should do, and
why, v. 1. 2. negatiuely, what we should avoid and shun, and the reason
thereof, v. 2.

2. The exercising of the gifts and offices which God has distributed, is set
forth, 1. generally, that no man carry himself proudly in respect of his
gifts, v. 3. which is strengthened by these reasons, 1. from the efficient, God
is the author. 2. and they are given in a certain measure to every one, not
all to one, v. ^. 3. from the end, they are given for the good one of an
other: which is set forth by a similitude of the body, and the members
thereof. 2. particularly he touches the Ecclesiastical offices, which
concern either prophesying, or ministering, v. 6, 7. the prophetical function
is exercised either in teaching, v. 7. or exhorting, v. 8. the ministerial
office consists in the ordering of the goods of the Church, in ruling, or in
taking care for the poor, v. 8.

3. Then follows the particular exhortation to the several duties of
charity, as of love and following of good, v. 9. of brotherly kindness and
civility, v. 10. of cheerefulnes and zeal in Gods service, v. 11. of
constancy in tribulation, and continuance in prayer, v. 12. of distribution to
the poor, v. 13. of blessing persecutors, v. 14. of sympathy and like
affection in prosperity and adversity, v. 15. of concord, v. 16. of gentleness
and study of honesty, v. 17. of the desire of peace, v. 18. of refraining
from anger and revenge, v. 19. of beneficence toward our enemies, v. 20. of
strife against evil, v. 21.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. Why the Apostle uses entreatie, saying, I beseech you brethren, by
the mercies, v. 1.
1. Tolet gives two conjectures, why the Apostle, which by his authority
might command, entreats: the one is, because diverse precepts which he
delivers afterward, were the commandments of Christ, and he would not add
his commandment to Christ's: and the other is, because diverse things, he does
not enjoin as precepts, but only advises as counsels, and therefore he
commands not: but these are idle conjectures: as though all the Apostolical
precepts, were not also the precepts of Christ: neither are there any counsels
given in Scripture, but the same also are prescribed in some respect as binding
precepts: for we are commanded to love the Lord with all our strength, Luke
10.27. every part then of our duty and love toward God is commanded: but all
counsels of perfection, as they call them, tend unto the love of God.

2. Chrysostom thinks, that Paul beseeches them by the mercies of God,
quasi pud^re sussiundi volens, as when one brings in the benefits entreating,
he that has received the benefit can not be but ashamed: but the Apostle
intends not by shame, but by love and gentleness here to persuade.

3. Origin gives this reason, nihil proficit legis imperium, the commandment
of the law prevails not: showing this to be the difference between the law
which commands, and so do the Prophets, the interpreters of the law, they
use not to entreat: but it is peculiar to the Gospel to beseech and entreat: to
this purpose also Pet. Martyr: but this is not always so: for in the Gospel
and Apostolical writings, we shall find many precepts and straight charges.

4. Pet. Martyr further alleges, that as it is said in the Proverbs, The
poor man speaks by entreatie, but the rich answeareth roughly, Prove. ^8. so
the Apostles being as it were abiects, and of small account in the world, use
persuasions by entreatie: but S. Paul contrariwise there stands most upon his
Apostolic authority, where he was most despised: as Act. 13. where he
censureth Elymas the sorcerer.

5. But this was the Apostles reason, why he entreats that he might win
them rather by love: as he says to Philemon, v. 8. Though I be very bold in
Christ to command thee, yet for loves sake I rather beseech thee: and as Seneca
well says, generosus est animus hominis facilius ducitur, quam trahitur, the
mind of a man is generous, it is more easily lead, then drawn: and therefore
the Apostle entreats, rather then commands, the more easily by gentleness to
persuade them, Lyran. Par.

2. Quest. Why the Apostle adds, By the mercies.
By the mercies. 1. As the Apostle before had showed how the Gentiles had
received mercy of God, in that they were received to grace, while the Jews
the ancient people of God were rejected: so now he entreats them by that
mercy, which they had received. 2. and he beseeches them, per miserationes,
by the mercifulnes of God, rather then per misericordiam Dei, the mercy of
God: for this shows only the merciful inclination of God in himself, the
other betokens his actual compassion, extended to others, Tolet. 3. and the
Apostle uses the word in the plural number ( mercies,) to amplify and set
forth the manifold mercies of God, Beza: in our election, redemption by Christ,
justification, sanctification. 4. Origin here more curiously observes, that by
mercies Christ is to be understood, as God is called the father of mercies, 2.
Cor. 1.3. that is of Christ: as he is called the father of wisdom, and of
righteousness, because Christ is both the wisdom and righteousness, and so also
the mercy of God. 5. some have special relation here to Paul's Apostleship, to
the which he was in Gods mercy called, and appointed, gloss ordinar. Gorrhan:
but then the exhortation had not been so forceable, to move them by the
mercies showed to him: he rather urges the mercies, which they themselves had
received. 6. Lyranus understands the mercy of God, peccata relaxantem, which
remitted and released their sins: but the Apostle saying in the plural
mercies, understands not that mercy only, but all other mercies in Christ,
their election, vocation, justification by faith, etc. 7. And this is of all
other the most forcible motive by the mercies of God: per illas obsecro, per
quas salvati, I entreat you by those mercies, by the which ye are saved:
Chrysostom. who is so stony hearted, as not to be persuaded unto his duty by
the mercies of God, unto whom he owes himself, and whatsoever he has: as
mothers use to entreat their children by the womb that bare them, and the
pappes that gave them suck: which kind of persuasion is most effectual.

3. Quest. Of sacrifices in general, v. 1. upon these words, A living
sacrifice, etc.
1. Haymo here makes a question, why the law prescribes the sacrifices of
beasts and other creatures, if they were not acceptable unto God, and
available to the forgiveness of sins: and he gives two reasons hereof; both
because the Israelites were prone to idolatry, and therefore least they should
have sacrificed to idols, the Lord would rather that his creatures should in
that external manner be offered to himself; as also that thereby might be
shadowed forth the sacrifice of Christ, by whom we should obtain remission of
sins.

2. Ambrose likewise here moves this question, why God would have the
sacrifices, which were offered up, to be slain: whereupon he answeareth, that
it was so done for these two reasons, both that they which offered the sacrifice
might thereby see what they themselves had deserved, and that thereby also the
death of Christ might be shadowed forth.

3. But whereas they had two special kind of sacrifices in the law, (...), of
thanksgiving, and (...), for expiation and remission of sins: the Apostle
alludeth here only to their eucharisticall sacrifices, (for Christ's sacrifice
is only expiatorie for sin) which were of diverse sorts, according to things
which they offered, as either prayers, or first fruits, or some order of life,
as was the vow of the Nazarites, or some oblation: but here the Apostle has
reference to the last kind, in bringing some oblation, which should be
themselves.

4. Concerning the name of sacrifice: the Greek word is (...), which is
derived of (...), which signifies mactare, to slay a sacrifice: the Latin
word victima, and hostia, Haymo thinks to have this derivation: the first is
so called a vinciendo, of binding, because the sacrifices were first bound to
the altar: the other, ab ostio, because they were slain at the door of the
tabernacle: But he has two other derivations taken from the rites of the
Pagans: that was called hostia, which was offered up to their gods, when they
went against their enemies, that victima, which was offered up for the victory
obtained: and thus much Ovid insinuates in these verses, lib. 1. Fastor.

Victima, quae dextra cecidit victrice vocatur:
Hostibus a victis, hostia nomen habet, etc.
By the victors hand the victima does fall:
For foes subdued, they hostia it do call.
Quest. 4. The general observations of the sacrifice, which the Apostle here
requires.
1. Lyranus thinks that the Apostle here requires seven conditions or
properties in this spiritual sacrifice. 1. it must be voluntaria, of a free
and willing mind, present, or give up. 2. it must be in carne propria, in their
own flesh, not in an others, your bodies. 3. it must mortify concupiscence,
in that he calls it a sacrifice. 4. it must bring forth good works, and
therefore is called living. 5. it must be continual, therefore it is called
holy, that is, firm. 6. it must be been ordina^a, well ordered, and disposed
to no other end, then to the praise of God, and therefore he says, pleasing
unto God. 7. it must be discreta, done in discretion, and so he adds, which
is the reasonable service of God.

2. Tolet only observes three things here required in this spiritual
sacrifice, all which were seen in the external: there was the oblation, the
beast which was offered, and the slaying or sacrificing of it: so here the
Apostle says, exhibit or give up, there is the oblation: then the thing
offered is their bodies: and they must make it a sacrifice, not by slaying it,
but by mortifying their lusts.

3. Pererius observes four things in this sacrifice, which were observed in
the legal oblations. 1. the sacrifice must be entire and perfect without spot:
so here it must be a living sacrifice. 2. it was holy, and for ever separated
from profane and common uses: so it is here prescribed, to be holy. 3. The
sacrifice was consumed upon the altar, and so was a sweet savor unto God:
here it is said also, acceptable unto God. 4. they put to their sacrifices
salt, which signified spiritual understanding: and here it is added, which is
your reasonable service.

4. But Gorrhan more distinctly thus sets forth the parts and causes of this
spiritual sacrifice: we have 1. the efficient, in this word give up, it must
proceed from a true and sincere devotion. 2. then the material cause, your
bodies. 3. the form, it must be living, holy, reasonable. 4. then the end, it
must be to please God, acceptable unto God.

Quest. 5. Of the conditions of this spiritual sacrifice in particular.
1. The Apostle exhorts (...), to exhibit, present, give up themselves. 1.
herein alluding to the rite of the sacrifices, which were first exhibited and
presented unto God at the altar, Beza: this word is used of our blessed
Savior, how they brought him into the temple, and presented him before the
Lord, Luke 2.23. 2. we are said also to exhibit that, which was before
promised; and so we exhibit our selves unto God, by the holiness of life, to
whose service we were promised, and devoted in baptism, Erasm. 3. Chrysostom
further notes in this word, that we must so give up our selves, no more to be
our own, as they qui donant alijs bellicosos equos, etc. which do yield unto
others warlike horse for service, do challenge no more property in them: so
debemus membra nostra Deo, tanquam Imperatori, we do owe our members unto God,
as our Emperor, Theophyl. 4. and hereby is signified, that they should sponte
offerre, offer up willingly: as in the law they must offer all their offerings
with a willing heart, Gorrh. 5. and whereas it was peculiar unto the Priest to
offer external sacrifices, all Christians are admitted to offer this
spiritual sacrifice: as S. Peter says, Ye are an holy priesthood to offer up
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God thorough Jesus Christ, Tolet.

2. Your bodies. 1. by bodies he understands (by a synecdoche of a part for
the whole) whole man both body and soul: and by an other figure (called a
Metonimie) he puts the subject for the adiunct, the body for the affections
in the body, or which show themselves most in and by the body: so that the
body here non tam nomen naturae est, quam vitij, is not so much the name of
nature as of vice, Mart. as else where the Apostle says, Col. 3.5. mortify
your earthly members, Par. 2. we must then offer up unto God not our souls
only: and so as we have received both our bodies and souls from God, we must
render them unto him again: contrary to the opinion of the Platonists, who
held that the soul only came from God, the substance of the body from the
elements, the complexion from the celestial spheres, the affections from the
spirits: and therefore they thought it sufficient, if the mind only and soul
were rendered unto God: ex Martyro. 3. now our bodies two ways are offered to
God: one is, as Origin and Chrysostom here observe, by mortifying of the
carnal affections: as he which mortifieth pride, does sacrifice a bullock: he
which bridleth his anger, a ram: he which keeps under his lust, a goat:
Origin: so the Apostle says, 1. Corinthians. 9.27. I do chastise or tame my
body: the other way is, in making the body an instrument of every good work,
as Augustine observes lib. 10. de ciuit. c. 6. and so the Apostle exhorts,
Give your members servants to righteousness, Romans 6.19. 4. Lyranus adds
further, the Apostle says, your bodies, non a^iena, not the bodies of others,
against those which think to be saved by other men's repentance.

3. A living sacrifice. 1. which is added not to signify, that they should not
think to kill themselves, and so sacrifice their bodies, as Chrysostom,
Theodoret: for the Romans were no: so absurd, to collect any such thing out of
S. Paul's words. 2. nor yet says the Apostle living, to note a difference
between the sacrifices of the law, which were first killed, and then
sacrificed, and the sacrifices of living Christians, gloss. ordin. Tolet,
Osiand. Perer. 3. Neither is there a relation to the usage of the law, which
counts all dead things unclean, Hyper. it shows a difference rather from
the legal vsages. 4. neither as Caietan observes, does the Apostle by this
term distinguish this spiritual sacrifice from martyrdom, which was
performed by death: for as Tolet well observes, the Apostle exhorts
generally Christians, to sacrifice themselves in holy obedience unto God, which
not only, though principally is seen in Martyrdom, which none can undertake,
that have not first mortified their bodies with the affections thereof. 5. Pet.
Martyr by this living sacrifice understands a willing sacrifice, which is not
vi, sed ex animo, by force, but from the heart. 6. but it signifies more,
namely the spiritual life of the soul, which is by faith in Christ, Galat.
2.20. Mart. as Origin well observes, he calls it a living sacrifice, qua
Christum, id est vitam, in se gerit, which bears Christ the true life: as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.1. who has quickened us, etc. Gryneus: which life of the
soul is never idle, but continually brings forth good works: for idleness is
a kind of death of the soul, as Seneca passing by the house of one Vacia, who
lived in pleasure and idle, said, hic situs est Vacia, here lies Vacia, as
though it were rather his sepulcher, then his habitation: so also Haymo, he is
a living sacrifice, qui viuit virtutibus, moritur vitijs, who lives unto
virtue, and is dead unto sin: and Chrysostom upon this place shows at
large, how all the members must be mortified, that they may live unto the
service of God, neque offerri poteriroculus, etc. for neither can an eye he
offered that serves fornication, not an hand that oppresses, neque lingua
turpia loquens, not a tongue speaking filthy things, nor feet theatra
visitantes, that run to theaters and plays. But this outward conformity of
the members, is rather signified in the next word, holy.

4. Holy. 1. Which some think is added by way of distinction, from the legal
sacrifises, which being corporal were not holy, Greek. catena. 2. some note a
difference between the sacrifices of the Pagans, which were not holy, and of
Christians: they many times offered their bodies, suffering hunger, thirst, much
travel, but it was not to a right end, to the glory of the true God, and
therefore it was not an holy sacrifice: Tolet annot. 3. 3. some give this
sense, holy, that is, congruens praescripto divino, agreeable to the divine
prescript, as therefore Nadab and Abihu offended God, because they offered with
strange fire, not appointed by God, Gryneus: but this is too particular,
neither comprehends all the points of holiness. 4. Lyranus following
Vlptanus de verbor. significat. says, that is called sanctum, holy, which is
fixum and stabile, sure and permanent. 5. Pet. Martyr alleges two other
significations of this word, as out of Servius upon the 12. book of the
Aeneides, that sanctum is, quasi sanguine consecratum, as consecrate with
blood, and so this sacrifice of Christians is consecrate by the blood of
Christ: the other from Martianus in titul. de rerum division. that sanctum, is
derived of the herb called sanguina, which is the same with verbena, vervin,
which the Roman Ambassadors carried in their hands, and by that sign were
protected from the violence of their enemies: but neither of these
significations are so fit. 6. Wherefore sanctum, the Latin word, which
signifies holy, is the same that the Greek word (...), which is so termed,
as separate from all earthly and terrene quality, pure and purged from all
dross: the sacrifices of the law had these two parts of holiness: 1. they
must be without spot or blemish, then they were holy consecrate unto God, and
separate from all profane use: this specially was a type of the most holy and
perfect hig^^ Priest Christ Jesus: who was holy, harmeles, undefiled, separate
from sinners, Hebr. 7.2^. which properties must in some sort also be seen in
the spiritual sacrifices of Christians, as S. Peter says, as he which has
called you is holy, so be you holy in all manner of conversation: they
therefore which remain in their sins, and are therewith defiled, cannot
offer up an holy sacrifice to God, Pareus: to this purpose Origin, sanctum
dicit, etc. be calls it holy, wherein the spirit of God dwells: as the
Apostle says, Know ye not, that your bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost:
to the same purpose Haymo: so then as this sacrifice must be living, in respect
of the inward life of the soul, wherein it lives by faith unto God, so it is
holy in regard of the sanctity of the inward affections, and external actions
of the life.

5. Pleasing unto God, etc. 1. Some make this the third property of this
sacrifice, that it must be pleasing unto God: as Tolet shows how the
sacrifices of the Jews, were holy in themselves, yet not pleasing unto God,
when they were offered by such as were of an unclean life, and therefore the
Lord abhorred their sacrifices: so Origin interprets, pleasing unto God, that
is, separatum a vitijs, separate from sins: so also Haymo: Gryneus
understands it of the sacrifices offered by faith, whereby they are made
acceptable: so also Pareus, likewise Faius, they must be offered with a sincere
affection without all hypocrisy. 2. But I rather incline to their opinion,
which think that this is rather the effect, which follows upon the other
properties, that if they be living and holy sacrifices, they must needs be
pleasing also unto God, then a new property: so Calvin, Pet. Martyr: and
hereof these reasons may be alleged. 1. from the resemblance of the legal
sacrifices, which being offered according to the will of God, were accepted:
as when Noah offered a sacrifice, it is said, God smelled a savor of rest,
Genesis 8. this was not a property in the sacrifice, but an effect following. 2.
from the nature of that which is holy, to be accepted of God: as Martyr
alleges out of Plato in Euryphrone, who though he would not have this a
perfect definition of sanctity, to be accepted and loved of God, yet he
grants it to be an inseparable quality; that which is holy is always
accepted of him. 3. Because faith whereby this sacrifice is made acceptable to
God, is included in the former properties: for without faith it can neither be
living nor holy. 4. so S. Peter shows, that spiritual sacrifices are
acceptable to God through Christ, 1. epist. 2.5. and the Apostle to the
Hebrews says, c. 13.16. with such sacrifices God is pleased: it is the
sequel or effect of the sacrifice to be pleasing unto God, rather then the
property in the sacrifice: as Lyranus, Gorrhan, the interlinear. gloss.
refer it to the good intention, that all things should be referred to the
praise of God.

6. Which is your reasonable serving of God, etc. 1. Origin thinks the
Apostle calls it (...), reasonable serving: because it was such, as whereof a
reason might be rendered, which could not be given of the sacrifices of the
law, why they offered some kind of beasts rather then others; Anselme to the
same purpose, Men must so do their good works, as that they may give a reason
of them. 2. Tehodoret thinks this is added to show a difference between
these sacrifices of Christians, and those of the Jews of unreasonable beasts:
so also Erasmus, Osiander: here is indeed such a secret difference insinuated;
but yet more is meant, then that only. 3. Lyranus by reasonable understands
discretion, that which is discreet, temperate: as when one does sacrifice his
body by abstinence, it must not be out of measure, but in discretion, as that
he be not thereby made unfit for his calling: so also Caietan, Gorrhan, and
before them Thomas Aquinas: but this were too particular a restraint of this
description: for in this last part all is summed together, and included, before
required in this sacrifice: for these words are added by way of opposition;
this is your reasonable serving of God, namely, this your living and holy
sacrifice. 4. Wherefore by reasonable, the Apostle understands nothing, but
spiritual, as S. Peter expounds, 1. Pet. 2.5. and there he calls the word
of God, (...) the reasonable, that is, spiritual milk, v. 2. the reasonable
service of God, is that which is of the mind and spirit, for so will God be
worshipped in spirit and truth, Ioh. 4.23. so Chrysostom calls it
spiritualem cultum, spiritual service: that is, vt men's offeratur, the mind
should be offered to God, Haymo: this spiritual service consists of faith,
hope, charity, Vatablus, Gryneus, Bucer, Pareus: and Faius here well observes
a secret opposition between this reasonable service, and (...), will worship,
as S. Paul calls it, Coloss. 2.23. when men according to their own fancies
do invent a religion and service fitting their own humors: but that is the
reasonable service of God, which is agreeable to his will: as Basil in regul.
breviorib. interrog. 230. thus well interprets, Qui ea assidue facit, quae ex
Dei voluntate sunt, he which by reason and good counsel does those things
continually, which are agreeable to the will of God, he performs this
reasonable service, etc. Beza misliketh here this exposition of Baesil, but it
may very well be received, and is agreeable to the Apostles mind, as in the
next verse he says, that you may prove, what is the goodwill of God, etc. he
then does follow this reasonable service of God, that proves what Gods will
is, and conformeth himself thereunto.

Quest. 6. How we must not fashion our selves to this world, v. 2.
1. Concerning the occasion of these words: some think, that as the Apostle
spoke before of the sacrifice of the body, so now he shows how the mind
should be reformed, Lyran. Gorrhan, Tolet: but the Apostle speaking of the
reasonable service of God, v. 1. comprehends both the service of the soul
and body: therefore here rather the Apostle now more plainly expresses, that
which before he figuratively set down, Nyper. Martyr makes this the
connection, as the Apostle showed before, quid curandum, what was to be cared
for in this spiritual sacrifice, so here quid cauendum, what is to be taken
heed of: Beza makes it a second precept, that in the service of God, we should
not conform our selves to the opinion or fashions of the world: Gryneus makes
it a consectation, a consequent necessarily inferred upon the former
exhortation: But I insist upon the former sense: pianius explicat rationalem
cultum, the Apostle more plainly expresses this reasonable service, Par.

2. Fashion not your selves, or be not fashioned. 1. Chrysostom here observes
a diffeerence between (...), and (...), the figure of the world, to the which
we must not fashion our selves, which is tanquam scenica persona, as a person
counterfeited upon the stage, which is in show, not in truth, but afterward he
bids us be transformed in the mind: the forms has substance, whereas a
figure is no permanent or existent thing: but this distinction seems to be
too curious, neither is it perpetually observed: for Phil. 2.7. S. Paul
atributeth (...), figure, unto Christ, he was found in figure or shape as a
man. 2. But this is better observed, that the Apostle forbids us not, either
not to be in the world, nor to use the world, for neither of these are
possible, so long as we are in the world, but we must not fashion our selves to
be like unto the word. 3. for it is the property of the soul, to bear the
image of that thing to the which it turns it self, as we see in a glass: he
then fashioneth himself to this world, that does seek only or chiefly for
the things of the world, who follows the corruptions thereof with greedines:
and what the fashion of this world is, S. Peter shows, It is sufficient for
us that we have spent the time past of the life after the lust of the Gentiles,
walking in wantones, lusts, drunkenness, gluttony, and.

3. To this world. 1. Origin hereupon observes this difference, aliam esse
formam seculi praesentis, aliam futuri, that there is one form or fashion of
this present world, an other of the world to come: they which love things
present fashion themselves to this world, but they which set their minds on
spiritual and invisible things, do conform themselves to the world to come, 2.
by the world we understand not, as Haymo notes, the outward state and
condition of the world, as it consists of days, months, years, but men
carnal conversatione seculo deditos, which by their carnal conversation, ate
given to the world.

Quest. 7. Of our transforming by the newenes of mind.
1. Be ye transformed. 1. there is a transformation of the body, as Christ was
transformed in the mount: and our bodies shall be in the resurrection, Philip.
3.20. but here the Apostle speaks of the transformation of the mind. 2. and
it must be transformed not in the substance thereof, but only in the condition
and quality, Faius. 3. man was formed by his creation, deformed by sin,
reformed by grace, informed by the word, conformed and made like to Christ by
the spirit, transformed in the newenesse of the mind, Gorrhan.

2. By the newnes. 1. the oldnes of man is his sin and corruption of nature
derived from Adam: that is called newnes, which is wrought by grace, as faith,
hope, charity: hereof the one is called the old man, which is after Adam, the
other the new man, which is created a new by grace: this renouation is
sometime called the newenesse of life, Romans 6.4. from the effects, which show
themselves in the life: sometime the newness of the spirit, Romans 7.6. from the
author and efficient cause, which is the spirit; sometime, the newenes of the
mind, of the subject and place where this renouation begins. 2. Chrysostom
uses this fit resemblance; quod in adibus facimus subinde reformantes
inveteratum, ita in te ipso facias, that which we use to do in our houses,
repayring that which is decayed, the same do in thy self; thou art decayed
and waxed old by sin, be renewed by repentance, etc.

3. Of the mind. 1. not of the sense, as the vulgar Latin; whom Gorrhan
follows, understanding here the reforming of the affections; and hereupon
that common error was grounded, that sin had the seat and place in the
affections, whereas the very mind has need to be revived, as S. Paul says, be
renewed in the spirit of your mind. Ephesians. 4.23.
2. Faius here notes that a natural man (...), has but a soul and a body,
but a spiritual man has a spirit, soul, and body, as S. Paul says, I pray
God that your whole spirit, soul, and body, may be kept blameles, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. not that any new part is added to the soul in the regenerate:
but a new spiritual quality is wrought in it. 3. Haymo following Origin, by
the mind thinks the understanding to be signified, which must be exercised
in the Scriptures: but this is too particular: by the mind rather is
understood all the faculties of the soul, the intellectual part, and the will,
where this renouation must take beginning.

Quest. 8. Of these words, That ye may prove, what the good will of God is,
acceptable and perfect, etc. v. 2.
1. That ye. 1. which some think is put (...), to show the end of this
their renovation, Mart. Pareus. 2. Theodoret will have it the effect: and that
the Apostle shows cui rei conducat, etc. to what purpose this renovation of
the mind is profitable. 3. Chrysostom makes it to be the cause, sic
poteritis renouari, etc. by this means ye may be renewed, if ye learn what
Gods will is, so also Tolet annot. 6. 4. Gryneus makes it an adiunct and
property of renouation: for they which are not renewed, cannot understand what
the good will of God is: and Melanchton makes it a part of our renovation:
haec vera est, etc. this is the true renovation of the mind, to prefer the
will of God before our own, etc. and Beza makes it a part of the exhortation,
be ye transformed, etc. and do your endeavor to prove, what Gods will is,
etc. that like as they which fashion themselves to the world, follow the will
thereof, so you should transform your selves, by the newenes of your mind to
the will of God: and this sense is most agreeable: so this is added both as a
principal part and cause of our renovation, and it is a fruit also thereof, a
further degree of more perfect knowing the will of God: as our Savior says,
Ioh. 9.17. If any man do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it
be of God.

2. May prove, (...). 1. he neither means a curious probation, to try
whether a thing be so or not, for this were to doubt of the will of God,
whether it were good and perfect. 2. neither is it taken only for to search
and consider: for a man cannot be renewed at all, that has not already
searched out the good will of God. 3. not yet do we understand a bare
knowledge of the will of God: for many which are not regenerate do know Gods
will, and yet do it not, as the Apostle, c. 2. reproved the Jews for
teaching the law to others, and not knowing it themselves. 4. nor yet does it
signify only an experimental knowledge, as the interlinearie gloss. and
Lyranus, for he that is renewed cannot but have experience of the will of God.
5. but this probation signifies a discerning with judgment, of those things
which are good, as S. Paul says, Phil. 1.10. that ye may discern things that
are excellent: as he that has a perfect taste discerns of the goodness of
meats.

3. What is the good will of God, and acceptable, and perfect. 1. Concerning
the reading of these words: some will not have these epithets, good, perfect,
acceptable, to be joined unto the will of God, but to be referred to all the
cause before going, as to the offering up of their bodies a living service, not
to fashion themselves to this world, and to be renewed in the mind, all this is
good, acceptable, and perfect, so Augustine epist. 85. and Ambrose: some do
make it an absolute sentence by it self, adding the coniu^ction, and, and what
is good, acceptable, perfect, etc. Bucer: But the usual reading is the best,
which the vulgar Latin follows: to make these three epithets and attributes
of the will of God: thus also read Clemens lib. 2. stromat. Basil regul. brev.
resp. 276. Chrysostom. sermon. 12. Cyprian epist. 77.2. by the will of God, we
understand not here that faculty and power in God whereby he wills, but the
thing which he wills: in which sense, we say in the Lords prayer, thy will be
done, Matthew. 6. and Matthew 12.50. Whosoever does the will of my father, etc.

4. The good will, etc. 1. Origin here distinguishes between the will of God
simply so called, and his good and acceptable will: for it is the will of God
when he inflicteth punishment: but that is his good and acceptable will when he
does any thing in mercy. 2. Chrysostom also will have the old law to be the
good will of God, but the acceptable and perfect will of God, is his will
revealed in the new testament. 3. Basil regul. brev. 276. make three degrees of
things agreeable to Gods will: some good, some are better, some best of all,
which are called perfect: as Tolet gives this instance, to love our friend is
a good thing, to do well unto him is better, to love our enemy, is the best
and most perfect. 4. Anselme refers it to the three states incipientium,
proficientium, perfectorum, of beginners, of those that go forward, and of
such as are perfect: or to three conditions of life, of the married, the
continent, and virgins. 5. Lyranus understands the first, of bona natura, the
good things of nature, the second, of the good things of grace, the third, of
the good things appertaning to glory: But all these observations are curious,
neither to the Apostles mind: who does here commend unto us the will of God,
revealed in the old and new testament, as a perfect rule of all our actions:
which is called good, because the word of God prescribes nothing, but that
which is good; and it is acceptable, because nothing is pleasing unto God, but
that which he himself prescribes, and is agreeable to his will: this rule
also is perfect, because the word of God contains all things, which tend to
the perfection of the creature: so that all other helps are vain, idle, and
superfluous.

Quest. 9. What the Apostle understands by grace, I say by grace, etc.
1. Origin by grace understands virtutem sermonis, the virtue and power of
speech, which was given to the Apostle; one may speak eloquently and
learnedly, and yet not with grace to edify the hearers. 2. Ambrose
interprets grace, of the gift of wisdom given to the Apostle: this sense
Haymo also follows: as S. Peter gives this testimony of S. Paul how he
wrote according to the wisdom of God given unto him: but Chrysostom refuses
this: the Apostle says not, I say by the wisdom given unto me. 3. he
therefore as also Theodoret, understands the grace of the spirit. 4. but more
particularly the Apostle understands the special grace of his Apostleship,
which was committed unto him: in which sense the Apostle says, Romans 11.16.
Thorough the grace that is given me of God, that I should be the minister of
Jesus Christ: so here is a metonymie, the cause is put for the effect: and that
the Apostle ascribes his calling unto grace, he thereby both freeth himself
from all ambition, that he intrudeth not himself, as also presses his
Apostolic authority, that they might more readily obey, Mart. Calv.

I say: which some think to be an exposition of the former words, that now the
Apostle begins to show what the good and perfect will of God is, Tolet: but
the Apostle rather enters into a new matter, that as hitherto he had
generally exhorted to common duties, so now he descends to special, Mart.
and here dicere, to say, is taken for iubere, to command, Calvin: Gorrhan
takes it for prohibeo, I forbid: but there follow many precepts, as well as
prohibitions, to the which this preface of the Apostle has reference.

To every one among you: the Latin translator reads to all, but not so
fitly: for now the Apostle in saying to every one, speaks to all in
general, and to every one in particular: Origens observation here is somewhat
curious, all among you, that is, they which are in God, that is, the faithful,
for they only are said to be: the Apostle notes all indifferently, noble,
unnoble, high or low, which were among them, Chrysostom.

Quest. 10. What it is to understand above that which is meet to understand.
v. 3.
1. This word (...), to savor or understand, is sometime taken in the worst
part, as Matthew. 16.23. to savor the things which are of men, not the things
which are of God: sometime it is used in the better sense, as in this place, to
understand according to sobriety.

2. Here diverse interpretations are brought of this word (...), to understand
above or beyond that which is meet to be understood: and what it is to
understand according to sobriety. 1. Origin understands here the general
virtue of temperance, that a measure is to be kept in every virtue, as if a
man exceed in justice, he becomes cruel; if in fortitude, he is audacious
and rash: and thus a temper and measure must be kept in every action: but the
words following, as God has dealt to every one the measure of faith, etc. do
not favor this interpretation. 2. and Hierome likewise is more deceived, who
lib. 1. contra Iovinian. does apply this place to the commendation of
virginity: and so he reads here, sapere ad pudicitiam, to be wise unto
chastity: but the words following do overthrow this sense also.

3. Ireneus lib. 5. c. 20. does understand this place of the curious inquiry
and search after the mysteries of religion: so also Hilarie de Trinitat. l. 10.
Erasmus misliketh this sense, because he thinks the Apostle here speaks not
of the knowledge, but of that opinion which a man has of himself: but this
may very well be here comprehended, as a part of the Apostles meaning to
condemn curiosity: so Martyr, Pareus: this fault is committed, when men do
upon confidence of their own wit, seek out those things, quae investigari
sequeant, which cannot be sought out.

4. Tolet most approoueth Basils sense, regul. brev. respons. 264. then a man
does understand more then it meet, when he does leave his own calling, and se
ingerit rebus alienis, and does intermeddle with things belonging to other
callings: as Vzzia the king of Judah, that would have usurped the Priests
office: so that here the fault, called (...), which is to be a busie-bodie in
other men's matters, should be touched by the Apostle.

5. Chrysostom understands the Apostle to speak against the elation and
arrogancy of the mind, when men do arrogate all to themselves and detract
from others: this best likes Erasmus, Beza, Osiander: and this arrogancy is
of two sorts, when men do either arrogate to themselves that they have not, or
are proud of that which they have, Beza: this pride and self love has been
the mother of all heresies, when men not content with the simplicity of truth,
nor to keep in the beaten tract, have invented new doctrines, Haymo, Faius.

6. All these then may well be received: that exceeds the bounds of
sobriety, who either diueth curiously into Gods secrets, or is drunken with an
ouerweening conceit of himself: or intrudeth into other men's gifts and office:
which last seems to be most agreeable to that which follows: because every
man has received a certain measure of faith, a portion of gifts, wherewith he
must rest contented: by sobriety then as Chrysostom says, the Apostle
understands modesty, and he thus deriueth the word (...), sobriety, (...),
because such have their minds sound, and in a good temper: so he means the
soundnes of the mind, not of the body: for he that is arrogant, and has no
modesty, neque mente valere queat, has a distempered mind: and this as
Chrysostom shows, is worse, then for one to be naturally a fool, naturae
stulium fieri, nihil habet criminis, for one to be a fool by nature, is
without his fault, but for one through an ouerweening wit to exceed the bounds
of modesty and sobriety, venia private, it deserves no pardon.

Quest. 11. What is understood by the measure of faith.
v. 3. As God has dealt to every one the measure of faith, etc. 1. Concerning
the words. 1. the vulgar Latin adds, ( and) to every one, etc. which makes
the sentence imperfect. 2. Origin will have somewhat to be supplied, to make up
the sentence, custodiat, let him keep, as to every one, etc. so Pet. Martyr
concurring with him, would have somewhat supplied, as neque sibi plus arroget,
neither let him arrogate more to himself, etc. 3. Erasmus thinks the
sentence to be imperfect, and that the Apostle respected the sense rather then
the words, which stand thus in the original, to every one as God has
distributed: but here is an evident traiection of the particle (...), as, which
is put after to every one: which is familiar with the Apostle, as 1. Cor. 3.5.
to every one as God has given: so that the sense is full enough, without any
supply, as Beza well observes.

2. By faith. 1. Some understand justifying faith, faith working by love, which
faith is given not to all alike, but in measure to every one, gloss. interlin.
But Pet. Martyr refuses this, because many had these gifts and graces, which
had not justifying faith; as they which in the day of the Lord shall say, have
we not in thy name prophesied, and cast out devils, Matthew. 7. and yet shall be
refused? 2. Chrysostom takes this to be understood causally: as faith for the
gifts of faith, whereby miracles are wrought: so also Origin understands the
graces of the spirit obtained by faith. 3. Tolet by faith understands
fidelity, which every one must use in the exercising of his gift: but
fidelity is not the cause of the measure of graces, which are given freely. 4.
faith then here is both taken by a me^onymie, for the gifts and effects of
faith, as Mart. as also Beza, it comprehends by a Synecdoche, the knowledge
of Christ, whereof the habit of justifying faith is a fruit and effect, as
also the gifts and graces of the spirit, which were conferred upon the
faithful, Beza, Pareus: and so the Apostle here means no other thing by
faith, then the gifts and graces of the spirit conferred upon the faithful
that believed in Christ: neither justifying faith is excluded, not yet only
here included: the like saying to this the Apostle has, Ephesians. 4.7. To every
one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ: so
here by faith we are to understand the gifts of faith: either because faith is
the gift of God, by which other graces are obtained, as Chrysostom, doni causa
fides, faith is the cause of the gift: or because these gifts are given
habentibus fidem, to those which have faith, Haymo.

3. So here there are as many arguments, as words, to persuade unto a sober use
of the gifts received: dantis immensitas, the greatness of the giver, which is
God: dandi liberalitas, the liberality in giving: he has distributed
according to measure: doni excellentia, the excellency of the gift, which is
faith: generalitas suscipientium, the generality of the receivers of these
gifts: to every one, Gorrhan: because then God is the giver, and none has of
himself any thing: and there is a measure given, so much as is thought meet
for every one: and none are excluded, but every one has received some gift:
and the same no worldly or temporalll thing, but the spiritual gift of faith:
every one then should be contented with his gift, and not wax insolent
thereby against others.

Quest. 12. Of the similitude which the Apostle takes from the members of the
body.
v. 4. As we have many members, etc. 1. This similitude is frequent and
familiar with the Apostle, as 1. Cor. 12.12. Ephesians. 4.16. and it is very
effectual to persuade unto unity: in so much, that some of the heathen by the
light of nature, did press this as an argument unto concord, as Menenius in
Live. lib. 2. when the Senators of Rome and the people were at variance, did by
the resemblance of an humane body, and the harmony of the parts reduce them
to unity. 2. there are three kind of bodies: the natural, as the body of man
compact of many members and parts: an artificial body, as of a ship, which
has diverse parts joined together: a politic body, as of a city and
commonwealth, consisting of diverse particular bodies, Faius. 3. in this
similitude three things are observed, the unity of the body, it is but one,
the variety of the parts, they are many, and the diversity of the actions and
offices of the parts, Tolet.

4. Now this similitude drives at these three things. 1. to show, that as
every member has a several function, and one member has not received every
gift: so one in the Church should not intrude upon an others office: as the
teacher is the eye of the body, the distributer of alms, the hand, the
diligent hearer, the ear, the visiter of the sick and poor, the foot,
Origin: now one member must not usurp upon an others office. 2. yet one member
communicates unto the necessity of an other, as the eyes sees not for it
self only, but for the whole body: as the Apostle says, ye are one an
others members, Haymo. 3. Chrysostom well observes, non solum minus maioris
est membrum, the less is not only a member of the greater, but the greater
also is a member of the less, etc. and so by this means he that has great
gifts is taught not to contemn him that has less: but one to use their gifts
to the good and edifying of an other.

Quest. 13. Of the best reading of the 6. verse: seeing then we have gifts,
that are diverse, etc.
1. Whereas in the original the word is (...), having: so ^^to make the sense
full, will have it joined with the word (...), are, in the former verse,
because otherwise this sentence should be imperfect: and this verse hangs on
the former; wherein the Apostle prosequuteth the third part of the similitude,
touching the diversity of gifts: the other two of the unity of the body, and
variety of the members are expressed in the former verse, Erasmus; Faius: so
also Haymo supplyeth, habentes sumus, we are having: and in the other clauses
which follow, Origin will have supplied out of the third verse, sapiat ad
sobrietatem, let him be wise unto sobriety: as whether he have prophecy, let
him be wise unto sobriety in prophesying according to the analogy of faith,
and so in the rest: so also Haymo, Pareus.

2. Tolet will have nothing supplied at all, but the participle having, he
makes an he^^^isme, to be put, for we have: and in the other members and
parts, he thinks the action or exercise of the gift to be put in the first
place, and then the talent or gift it self: as whether believe prophecy
according to the analogy of faith, or, a ministration, in ministering: that is,
according to the grace and gift of ministering given unto him: but in this sense
the Apostles speech should only be a bare declaration, that such gifts and
administrations are in the Church, it should contain no exhortation to the
right use of such gifts, whereunto the Apostle evidently exhorts, as
appears by the 3. v. before, and the verses following: and further the phrase
of teaching, exhorting, show rather the exercise of the gift, the^ the gift it
self.

3. Some do only in the four first particulars, of prophecy, ministry,
doctrine, exhortation, supply to be wise unto sobriety, according to the
analogy of faith: showing the quantity and measure of the gift, ne quis se
efferret vltra mensura^ doni, that no man should exceed the measure of his
gift: in the other three, the quality and manner is expressed, how they should
exercise their gifts, as with simplicity, alacririe, etc. Rolloc: but this
distinction seems to be nice and curious: the Apostle in all these offices,
shows how they should behave themselves.

4. Other supplies are made: as thus, simus membrum alterius, let us be one an
others members, in prophesiyng, in teaching, exhorting, gloss. interlin. or
habet donum, he has the gift: he that teaches, has this gift to teach, he
that exhorts, has this gift to exhort, Vatablus: the Greek scholiast will
have supplied in them all, perseveret, let him persevere.

5. But 1. this verse cannot be joined with the former, because as Beza
observes, they are divided by a perfect distinction: though we deny not, but
that the Apostle may notwithstanding prosequute the third part of his
similitude: and though we read, habentes, having, the sense will be full enough
by supplying in every clause: these general words, sapiat, ad vocationem
attendat, let him be wise, or attend upon his office, Syrian interpret. or
incumbat, let him wait on his office, etc. Gualter, Osiand. or as Beza
supplyeth in the first, prophetemus, let us prophecy, and in the rest,
versemur, let us be occupied, or conversant: the difference in these supplies
is not great.

Quest. 14. Of the distinction of the offices, here named by the Apostle in
general.
1. Chrysostom thinks that the Apostle makes mention of prophesying,
teaching, exhorting, iterum idem docens, teaching the same thing again, least
they should be puffed up: but the word (...), sieve, whether, so often repeated,
shows a distinction of offices.

2. Some do take the four first named, prophecy, ministry, teaching,
exhorting, for four several offices in the Church: of Prophets, which have
the knowledge of secrets: of Priests, that minister the Sacraments, Doctors,
that teach, and Preachers, that exhort: Lyranus, Gorrhan: so likewise Rolloc
takes them for four distinct gifts: and these they say concern the
administation of spiritual things: the other three belong unto temporal:
Osiander also thinks, that by ministers are understood, such as in the
primitive Church had the administration of Sacraments committed unto them: but
it is not like, that the ministration of the Sacraments was divided from
teaching and exhorting; this were to make the Apostle a favorer of unpreaching
ministers.

3. Some take (...), the ministry generally, for any Ecclesiastical function:
as whether he be a Bishop, or Presbyter, Haymo: and sometime it is taken for
the calling of an Apostle, as Romans 11.13. I magnify my ministry, Gryneus: and
so Faius thinks, that it comprehends all the offices following, which
either belong to the doctrine or discipline of the Church: But if it were so
general, then the calling of the Prophets also should therein be comprehended,
which the Apostle set down before.

4. Some again do as much restrain this word ministry, taking it only for
the office of Deacons, who had the distribution of the alms of the Church: and
here they say, in general deacons are admonished to be diligent in their
office: but afterward, there is a particular precept given of simplicity and
singlenes of heart to be used in their ministry, Gualter: but this were to
make the Apostle commit a tautologie, that is, a needeles repetition of the
same thing.

5. Wherefore I rather approve their opinion, that think the Apostle first
sets down two general kinds of functions: the one concerning instruction,
which is here called prophecy, the other the administration of discipline,
which is also called the ministry: then he divides each of these into their
several parts: unto prophesying belongs doctrine and exhortation: unto
ministering these three offices, of the deacons in distributing, the Elders in
governing, and of widows and others which had the care and charge of the
sick: thus Martyr, Tolet, Beza, Pareus. And that these two prophecy, and
ministry, are the two general heads of these functions that follow, these
two reasons confirm it, first because the Apostle changes his phrase of
speech: after he had said, whether prophesying, etc. or an office, ( or
ministration:) then he proceeds, or he that teaches, or teaching, and so in
the rest, Beza: secondly, in other places of Scripture, these two, prophecy
and ministry, are so generally taken: as 1. Cor. 14.3. He that prophesies,
speaks to men to edifying, and to exhortation, and to comfort: here
prophesying is distinguished into doctrine which edifieth, and exhortation, to
the which also consolation belongs, as a special kind of exhortation:
likewise 1. Cor. 12.5. the Apostle says, there are diversities of
administrations, but the same Lord: here the word (...), ministry, is taken
generally for the several administrations, that are in the Chrch: and so here
generaliter dicitur, it is taken generally, though there be a special kind of
ministry so called also, Chrysostom.

15. Quest, What is to be understood by the proportion of analogy of faith, v.
6.
1. By the analogy of faith the Greek expositors understand faith, quae
sperat and credit, which hops and believes, Origin: and they thus interpret
the Apostle, that prophecy is given secundum mensuram fidei, according to the
measure of the faith of the receiver: tantum influit, quantum invenerit fidei
vasculum, it is so much infused, as it finds a capacity in the vessel of
faith, Chrysostom. Theophyl. so also Haymo, according to the reason of faith,
that is, provt fides meruit, as faith dererueth: but this is a corrupt gloss,
and contrary to the Apostle in this place; seeing we have gifts according to
the grace, that is given unto us: if they be of grace, then are they not
merited: and again, the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 12.11. that the spirit
distributeth to every one, as he will: then not as we will. Origin answeareth,
1. that as he will, may be referred to every one: that it is as God wills,
but he wills according to our will. 2. or it is in a man's endeavor to
obtain faith, but that it be given, ad id, quod expedit, to that which is
expedient it is of God; as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 12.7. the manifestation
of the spirit is given to every one to profit withal.

Contra. 1. It is very injurious to the divine majesty to tie Gods will unto
man's will; that God should not will any gift to be conferred upon any, unless
he first desired it: and further, many among the Corinthians desired the gift
of tongues, and yet had it not, for some causes best known unto God: graces
then were not bestowed, as they would themselves. 2. not only the use of the
gift is from God, to profit with, but the gift it self; 1. Cor. 12.6. God is
the same, which works all in all: and v. 11. all these things works the
same spirit.

1. Object. But it will be objected, that if these gifts be only of God, non
erit in culpa, etc. man is not in fault, if he do not prophecy, teach, or
exhort, etc. Origin answers, that because faith is partly in the will of man,
partly it is the gift of God, therefore the blame lies upon man, if he have
not faith. But we answer rather, that concerning special and particular gifts,
which belong unto these functions and offices, they which have them not, shall
not be charged for not using them: the servant that hid the talent was
reproved, because it was committed unto him; but if he had received no talent,
he had been blameless: but concerning such graces, as are common to all
believers, as faith, hope, charity, although it be not in their power to have
them, yet it is their fault, that they refuse them, and desire them not:
unbelievers then are condemned, not because they have not faith being in their
power, but because they refused the means off^red unto them, whereby faith
might have been wrought in them.

2. Object. But the Apostle saying, 1. Cor. 14.1. earnestly pursue spiritual
gifts, but rather that ye may prophecy, shows, that these gifts ex humana
industria pendent, do depend of humane industry, Tolet. This collection has
no ground; the Apostle says not, that it is in man's power to obtain these
gifts, sed ostendit, quod magis expetendum, but he shows only what gifts are
most to be desired, Martyr: though man must use his endeavor, and diligence,
which are the means, yet those spiritual gifts do only proceed from God as
the author.

Thus then it appears, that the proportion of faith, is not the measure of
ones faith, according to the which he obtains other graces.

2. Neither is yet this proportion or analogy of faith, the same with that
which is v. 3. called (...), the measure of faith, as Erasmus: and so thereby
should be signified, the proportion and measure of every ones gift, which he
should not exceed: this sense follows the Syrian interpreter, iuxta mensuram
fides suae, according to the measure of his faith: and so Pet. Martyr will have
says here to signify, that measure of knowledge, which every one has
received: so also Rolloc. but thus much the Apostle said before in this verse,
according to the grace given unto us: and a measure is one thing, an analogy
or proportion an other: the first is of one and the same thing that is
measured; the other is between two things proportioned, and compared together,
Pareus: and further, this clause then, according to the proportion and measure
of faith, should not only be joined unto prophesying, as it is, but it should
be required also in all the other gifts here named.

2. Much less was this analogy of faith, a rule without writing, according to
the which all the books of the new Testament were tried, as the Rhemists here
note in their corrupt gloss: for the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles
were the rule it self of faith, they were not ruled by any other direction:
for their doctrine is called the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians.
2.20.

4. Many do take this analogy of faith, to be axiomata prima religionis, the
first principles of Christian religion, Calvin: such as are contained in the
Symbol of the Apostles, which from the beginning even from the Apostles time
was appointed to be a rule of faith, though it be uncertain by whom it was
collected, Faius, Gualter, Beza: and so Tertullian. lib. de velandis virginib.
says of the Symbol, regula fidei est sola immobilis, etc. the rule of faith
is only immooueable. But as we deny not, but that there might be in the
Apostles time some such rule of faith, consisting of certain principles
collected out of the Scriptures; so because, this is but a conjecture, and
there is no certain ground thereof, it can not be precisely determined, that
this should be the rule of faith, here mentioned.

5. Therefore I consent rather unto Gryneus, that this analogy of faith, was
Scriptura sancta, the holy Scriptures: according to the rule whereof the
brethren of Berea examined the Apostles doctrine, Act. 17.11. and S. Paul
himself preached none other thing, then the Prophets and Moses had prophesied
of, Act. 26.22. According to this rule, were the false prophets of old time
discerned, if they persuaded unto idolatry contrary to the doctrine of the
law, Deuteronomy. 13.2. yet withal it is probable, that there were certain principal
heads of religion, which were collected out of the Scriptures, even in the
Apostles time (which is called the doctrine of beginnings, Heb. 6.1.) from the
which the Prophets and preachers were then not to swerve.

16. Quest. Of these several offices here rehearsed by the Apostle in
particular.
1. whether prophesying. 1. Haymo takes it for the prediction of things to
come; such a Prophet was Agabus: but this was an extraordinary gift, the
Apostle seems to speak of the ordinary functions of the Church. 2. some
understand it to be, noticia occultorum, the knowledge of secrets, Lyran.
Gorrhan.: but this was also extraordinary. 3. most take it for the gift to
understand, and interpret the Scriptures, Gualter, Osiander, Faius. 4. But it
signifies rather generally, whatsoever belonged to doctrine and exhortation,
Mart. and before him Origin, prophetia dicitur apud Paulum, etc. that is called
prophecy with S. Paul, when one speaks to edifying, exhortation, or comfort,
1. Cor. 14.3. so that this prophesying is the general faculty, to the which
doctrine and exhortation, afterward mentioned by the Apostle, do appertain:
so Beza, Pareus: see before, qu. 14.5.

2. By ministry, called (...), 1. neither generally are understood all
Ecclesiastical functions, even those, which are occupied in teaching, as
Faius. 2. nor yet that special office of Deacons, as Gualter. 3. nor the
office of such as ministered the Sacraments, Lyran. but thereby generally are
understood such offices, as concerned the discipline of the Church: specially
conversant about the body and temporal things, either to relieve their
poverty, which was the office of Deacons in the distribution of alms; or to
cherish them in sickness, which was the charge of widows, whose office S. Paul
describes, 1. Tim. 5. or to watch over their manners, which belonged unto the
spiritual governors.

3. He that teaches, be that exhorts, etc. 1. Chrysostom and Origin do in
a manner confound these two, saying, that exhortation est species doctrinae, is
a kind of doctrine. 2. Calvin will have them to be distinct offices: Whether
the offices of Pastors and Doctors ought necessarily and perpetually to be
distinguished in the Church.
they have great affinity, yet they remain still varia officia, diverse
offices. 3. Some will have them to be distinct gifts, but not diverse offices,
as Pelican seems to think. 4. I incline then to their opinion, that think
they are both distinct functions, and offices, and yet may be joined together
in one man: so P. Mart. sometime both these gifts, are granted to one man: sed
magna ex part dividuntur, but for the most part they are divided: to the same
purpose Olevian: for we see that some have the gift to teach that are cold in
exhorting, and contrariwise.

These positions then we will set down, concerning the gifts of teaching and
exhorting.

1. That they are two distinct and sundry gifts; against Chrysostom: for the
Apostle calls them (...), differing gifts.

2. Yet are they not, neither have been always distinct offices in the
Church: for the Apostles excelled both in teaching and exhorting: and yet the
Apostle joins them together, as both belonging to the prophetical and
pastoral office, 1. Cor. 14.3.

3. Yet it must be confessed, that there were also such distinct offices in the
primitive Church sometime, and that they did not always concur in use in one
and the same man: for the Apostle names Pastors and Doctors, as two distinct
offices, Ephesians. 4.11. for then they were distinguished, both to show the variety
of (...) gifts of the spirit, and because a great multitude of believers then
assembled together, which did occupy many ministers: there was not then a
division of several congregations and parishes as now: and yet where it shall
be thought meet, and the necessity of the Church so requires, these two
distinct offices of Doctors and Pastors may be retained; the one to be
exercised chiefly in laying down found doctrine, and confuting of errors; as
the Professors do in Schools, and the Catechists in parochial congregations:
the other to apply doctrine to the manners of the people, which specially is
the office of the Pastor: Pareus.

Object. But whereas the Apostle else where, 1. Cor. 14.3. makes three distinct
parts of prophesying, to edify, to exhort, and to comfort; how is it, that
here only two are named, teaching, and exhorting. Answ. Consolation is a kind
of exhortation, and so is also here comprehended: and the rather, because the
word (...), signifies as well to comfort, as exhort, Tolet. annot. 14. Faius.

4. He that distributeth, with simplicity, etc. Some do understand this
generally of the giving of alms; as Origin, Chrysostom, Lyran. Gorrhan: but
seeing the Apostle speaks here of the functions, and offices of the Church,
it is better understood of such which were called Deacons, who did distribute
the treasure of the Church to the necessity of the poor: such were those
seven chosen by the Apostles, Act. 6. these at the first disposed of the goods
which were given in common: for they sold what they had, and brought and laid
it at the Apostles feet, as we read of Ananias, Act. 5. afterward there were
collections and gatherings made for the Saints, 1. Cor. 16. the distribution
whereof was committed to the fidelity of these Deacons.

Now, where the Apostle says, in simplicity: 1. Chrysostom and Theophylact
interpret it, of giving largely and liberally. 2. Origin, that they should not
seek praise of men, or seek vain glory, and so get all the thanks to
themselves. 3. Hierome, or who else was the author of the commentary upon this
epistle, will have them to give in simplicity, which are not curious in
fishing and examining the poor, and so seek pretenses and excuses, that they
have no need. 4. Lyranus, he that gives propter Deum, only for Gods cause:
and seeks not to merit or satisfy for his sins, Osiander. 5. they must not
be morosi, froward, giving the poor evil words, Faius. 6. nor having respect
unto persons, Beza: or unfaithful, in turning the common alms to their own
commodity, as Judas did, Gualt. So here then simplicity, is set against vain
glory, couerousnes, morositie, malignitie, fraud, Pareus.

5. He that rules. 1. Some take these indifferently for temporal, or
Ecclesiastical governors, as Lyranus, quod pertinet ad praelatos and
principes, which belongs to Prelates and Princes: so also Gorrhan: but
concerning temporal and civil government, the Apostle treats thereof in the
next chapter: he only touches now ecclesiastical offices. 2. some take these
for such as watch over men's souls, and so seem to understand only the
Prelates of the Church; as Haymo, haec sollicitudo circa animas maxim esse
debet, this carfulness must chiefly be about souls. 3. Theophylact has a
strange interpretation, praesidere, etc. to be a President is, both by words,
and by the help of the body to succor the needy, etc. and he gives this
reason, because every one has not money: but this were a base kind of
presidencie. 4. the most of our new writers, do understand here certain
governors, which attended not doctrine, sed dabantur pastoribus adiutores, but
were given as helpers to the Pastors: whom Osiander calls Censores morum,
the censors of manners: Calvin, seniores, the Seniors or Elders: Gualter,
Senatum ecclesiasticum, the Ecclesiastical Senate: Faius out of Tertullian,
presidentes: whose office was jointly with the Pastors to see unto the
discipline of the Church. So they make two sorts of Elders, some that attended
the word, and discipline together; some the government only: which are called
by the Apostle governors, 1. Cor. 12.28. and whereof mention is made, 1. Tim.
5.17. Thus Beza, Martyr, Gryneus, Olevicie, Pareus, upon this place. 5. But
seeing they which labored in the word and doctrine were special men in the
regiment of the Church, 1. Tim. 3.17. they are not here to be excluded: for as
beside their employment in teaching and exhorting, they also were
Ecclesiastical rulers; this grace, to rule with diligence, was also necessary
for them: so Chrysostom here shows that there was a double kind of
presidencie, and praecipua, quae per doctrinam est, that was the chief, which
was by doctrine and exhortation: then that which was per pecunias, etc. by
money and other things.

With diligence. 1. The vulgar Latin reads, cum sollicitudine, with
carefulnes: such as was in the Apostle, 2. Cor. 11.28. sollicitudo omnium
ecclesiarum, etc. he had the care of all Churches: such a care Origin takes
this to be here commended: but Tolet observes well, that beside that there is
an other word there used (...), here the word is (...), the things themselves
differ: for the first signifies beside a care, a fear of future events, which
might be any hindrance to the business intended. 2. the word (...), answeareth
unto these two Latin words, studium, study, and diligentia, diligence: which
do thus differ: the first shows the desire of the mind, and a resolute
purpose to apply it self, and that with delight to the business in hand: but
diligence is seen in the opening in the executing of this purpose with speed,
and great endeavor: this (...), study, diligence, and endeavor, S. Paul
testifies to have been in Timothy, 2. Cor. 8.16.

6. He that shows mercy. 1. Some do understand this generally of all
Christians, that they should give chearefully: as Chrysostom will have it the
same with that precept, 2. Cor. 9.7. he that sows sparingly, shall reap
sparingly: Theodoret, Haymo: but the Apostle here speaks of the special
offices of the Church. 2. Lyranus restrains it only to the rich, hoc
pertinet ad potentes, this belongs to the able and mighty: but Chrysostom
shows by the example of the widow, that cast in two mites, that even the
poor may show mercy, and that cheerfully: potest quis and in paupertate
magno, and in divitijs pusillo animo esse, one may have a frank mind in
poverty, and a sparing mind in riches: for, not only with wealth, but with
words, and help of the body, are the poor to be relieved, etc. 3. Origin
thinks that this is the same with the former, he that distributeth, in
simplicitit: here only is the difference, vnum opus, sed non vnus affectus, it
is one and the same work, but not the same affection: for he that shows
mercy, does not only give, but he gives it with affection. 4. Theophylact
thus distinguishes them, he that gives, conferreth that which he received of
an other, he that shows mercy, sua tribust, gives his own. 5. Hugo does
thus sort them: the first must give in simplicity of heart, propter Deum,
because of God, before whom the intention of the heart must be right:
chearefulnes is required propter proximum, toward our neighbor. 5. But their
opinion is rather here to be approved, which in the first place take the
office of Deacons to be described, such as were elected by the Apostles, Act.
6. and here the office of such, as were assigned to have a care of strangers,
exiles, the sick, such were the widows, whom S. Paul would not have chosen
under 60. years, 1. Tim. 5. Thus Calvin, Beza, Martyr, Gualter, Faius, Pareus,
with others.

Now this showing of mercy: 1. some extend thus far, peccanti ignoscere,
oppresso subvenire, to forgive him that sins, and to relieve the oppressed,
gloss. ordinar. but these duties are general to all Christians, not incident
only to this office and function here described. 2. by showing mercy, Haymo
understands all the works of mercy, as to give meat to the hungry, drink
to the thirsty, lodging to the harbourlesse: but these also are general
duties. 3. such special works of mercy then are here understood, which
belonged to the curing and attending upon the sick, aged, impotent; strangers,
exiles, orphans, Pareus. 4. with chearefulnes of heart, gentleness in words,
pleasantnes of countenance: for all those are signified by hilaritie or
chearefulnes, Tolet: so Chrysostom. verbis, rebus, corpore, etc. in words,
deeds, yea with service of the body the poor must be helped.

with chearefulnes. Chearefulnes is required in heart, in words, in
countenance, every way. 1. in respect of God, he loves a cheerful giver, 1.
Cor. 9. Pareus. 2. in respect of the kingdom of heaven, which such hope for:
quis regnum accipiens maestus est, who receiving a kingdom is sorrowful,
Chrysostom. lucrum est alijs benefacere, etc. it is a gain to do well to
others, and every man rejoices in his own gain, Theodoret. 3. again, such
as were employed in these services, as old men, and widows, are naturally given
to morositie, and therefore they have need of this precept to dispose
themselves to chearefulnes, Pareus. 4. the work it self, which was to deal
with the diseased, sick, and feeble, was such as might breed loathsomnes, and
therefore the Apostle does hearten them, that they should not give over this
work of mercy thorough nicenes: that they should not disdain, with their
own hands, if need were, to handle their sores, and diseases, Tolet. 5. the
consideration of the common condition of mankind, that there is eadem omnium
sors, the same lot of all, that they are subject to the same diseases and
infirmities, this should move them in such works of mercy to be cheerful
and willing, Gualter. 6. ne moerorem addant moerori, that they should not add
grief unto grief: for the poor seeing them which attend them, to do it
unwillingly, would thereby be grieved the more: Mart. Beza.

17. Quest. Of the Christian affection of love, and the properties thereof.
The Apostle having hitherto touched certain special and particular duties
belonging unto Ecclesiastical offices, proceeds unto general, and first
concerning Christian brotherly love: which he shows how it should first
consist in the inward affection, and then in the outward act, v. 10. in giving
of honor, etc. Concerning the first: this love must be verus, true, without
simulation; then discretus, discreet, we must not love but hate, that which is
evil: thirdly, it must be firmus, firm, cleaving unto that which is good: and
it must be vniversalis, universal, common, without acception of persons, we
must be affectioned one toward an other, etc. Lyranus.

1. Let love be without dissimulation. 1. The Apostle begins with love,
which gives a relish and taste as it were to all other virtues: even faith
without charity is not right, 1. Cor. 13.2. it is the badge and cognizance,
whereby we are known to be the disciples of Christ, Ioh. 13.35. therefore the
Apostle first begins to show what this love is. 2. Origin understands this
love generally of the love of God, and our neighbor: but Chrysostom applies
it only to brotherly love, and so the precepts following show. 3. this love
must be without dissimulation: which Origin defines thus, when one loves
only God, and that which is pleasing to God: Chrysostom gives this rule,
when one loves an other, and does unto him, as unto himself: but S. John
gives a perfect description of this kind of love, 1. epist. 3.18. My little
children, let us not love in word or tongue, but in deed, and in truth: he
then loves without dissembling, that shows his love in act and in deed: so
S. Paul describes true charity, 1. Tim. 1.5. out of a pure heart, good
conscience, faith unfeigned: where are expressed the subject or place of this
love, a pure heart, the cause thereof is faith unfeigned, the perpetual
companion, or (...), the ioynt-worke is a good conscience: as the Apostle to
the Hebr. 10.22. let us draw near with a true heart in the assurance of faith,
sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience: Gryn. From this true and
sincere love these are far of. 1. they which do nourish hatred in their
heart, but color it with pretensed friendship, only watching an opportunity
of revenge: such was Cain toward Abel, and Ioab toward Abner. 2. they which
pretend friendship toward other, but only for hope of some gain and profit to
themselves: these are selfe-louers, and not lovers of others; as Felix
propounded favor unto S. Paul, but he hoped for some bribe, Act. 24. 3. they
also which profess love and obedience, but only for fear, as they which
observe those which are mighty and of authority, because they are afraid of
their greatness and power, do not love without dissimulation.

2. Hating that which is evil, or rather abhorring, etc. 1. Chrysostom
observes an emphasis in the Apostles phrase: he says not abstaining, but
prosequnting with hatred, and that vehemently, the word is (...): the
preposition (...) with the Apostle, adds always somewhat to the sense, as he
shows in diverse instances. 2. Haymo takes this for a general precept; that
we should hate the devil and his members: but it seems rather to belong to
the precept of love. 3. and in this sense some give this interpretation, that
they should in their love, abstain from all evil, hurt, deceit, malice, and
follow goodness, Calvin, Pelican: some think, that good and evil signify
here, that which is profitable, or unprofitable: and so he that loves, should
procure the good, not the hurt of him whom he loves, Pareus: but the meaning
rather is, that we should so love, as that we be not partakers with men in
their sins: neither should be withdrawn from God, but cleave to him, as the
only good: so Chrysostom says this is added, because there is dilectio in
malis, a love and friendship in evil things, as in them that are fellows in
robbers, etc. so Origin, qui proprium errantem videt and non corrigit, etc. he
that sees his brother erring, and corrects him not, he loves not in truth:
so Lyranus also, sic ametur natura, vt vitium odio habeatur, let nature be so
loved, as yet vice be hated: this sense follows Pet. Mart. some are so
foolish to think, that they love their brethren, cum illis consentiant ad
libidines, when they consent unto them to lust and other vices: to the same
purpose Gualter, dilectionis praetexiu non facienda m(...)la, evil things must
not be done under pretense of love.

3. Cleaving to that is good. 1. that is says Haymo, to God, who is the chief
good: but this is too general. 2. here we understand that which is morally
good, Gryn. which is agreeable unto the will of God, who is only good. 3. and
the meaning is, that we should so adhere unto that which is good, that no
respect of any friendship, or any thing whatsoever should draw us away from it.
3. Chrysostom notes a singular force in the word (...), cleaving, adhering:
the same word is used of the conjunction between man and wife, Matthew. 19.5.
showing the near conjunction that should be between us and goodness: and
Origin observes further, that as it is said in this phrase, he that cleaves
to God is one spirit, 1. Cor. 6. so we should cleave unto good; vt contingat
nobis vnum esse cum bono, that we may as it were be one with it. 4. Lyranus
thinks, that the firmenes and surenes of love, is hereby expressed: but
rather, it is a limitation of love, that we should so cleave unto that is good,
that no pretext of love should draw us from it.

4. Be affectioned one toward an other with brotherly love, etc. 1. Origin
understands this precept generally of the love, which we should bear unto
all; even the wicked are to be loved, for Christ died for such: but Chrysostom
better distinguishes thus; that when the Apostle speaks of such as are
without, he says, as much as in you lies, have peace with all men: quando
vero de domesticis, but speaking of our domesticalls, he commends brotherly
love, etc. 2. Gorrhan in one sense, will have this understood of the natural
love of brethren; that it should be pleasing unto us, to see brethren love
together: but this sense is too particular: and he follows herein the vulgar
Latin, which thus reads, charitatem fraternitatis, etc. affecting the love of
brethren: whereas it is in the ablative, charitate, with brotherly love be
affected, etc. 3. here the Apostle uses two emphaticall words of love, (...),
the love of brethren, and (...) natural affection, such as is between the
parents, and the children: whereby as Chrysostom observes, the Apostle
exhorts, ferventer diligere, to love seruently: for this natural affection
far exceeds other kinds of love: for when the parties, whom we love, do
degenerate to evil, we also withdraw our love; but natural affection
remains toward parents and children, though they be not such as we would:
again, we are willing to show our love to such, unasked, and though they show
no love again, but in other bonds of friendship, where there is no intercourse
of love, it is soon slaked, Martyr. 4. Chrysostom further observes well,
that where the Apostle says, be affectioned one toward an other, etc. that one
should not expect, till he be loved of an other; sed tu potius erga alium prior
diligendo prorue, but do thou first fall to love an other. 5. Now in that he
calls the love of Christians brotherly love, the reason hereof is, not only
that they have all one Creator, sed vnus est omnium credentium pater, but there
is one father of all believers, who in Christ are made the sons of God: vna
matter ecclesia, they have one common mother the Church, of the which they are
begotten: and ex eodem semine, of the same seed of the word, are they begotten
by the spirit, Gualt. as S. Peter thus persuades to brotherly love, 1. epist.
1.23. love brotherly without faining, etc. and fervently being borne a new not
of mortal, but of immortal seed, etc.

18. Quest. Of certain external offices of love, as in giving honor one to
an other, etc.
v. 10. In giving honor, go one before an other. 1. The Apostle takes away
the impediments of brotherly love: which is much hindered, when due reverence
and honor is not given unto those to whom it belongs: when men see they are
neglected and contemned, it breaks off love: as in the Apostles time the
Grecians murmured against the Hebrews, when they saw their widows neglected in
the daily ministering, Act. 6.1. whereas on the contrary, nihil tam facit
amicos, etc. nothing so much makes friends, as when one seeks in giving
honor to prevent an other, Chrysostom. 2. Honor is nothing else but a reverent
opinion (testified by decent outward signs) which we have of ones virtue,
dignity, or desert: so honor consists first of an inward, modest, and lowly
opinion, which one has of himself, preferring an other before him: Philip.
2.3. In meekenes of mind every one esteem other better then himself: then
this honor must be testified, by outward signs, as the reverent gesture of
the body, and by outward help, and relief, which the Apostle calls honor,
1. Tim. 5.17. and this honor is due unto men for three respects, of their
place and dignity, their virtue and excellent gifts, and their merit and
desert. 3. Now we must one prevent an other, in giving of honor: we must not
expect to be saluted first, and then to resalute again: and this honor here
spoken of, must not only be given by inferiors to superiors, but the
superiors also must have (...) respect unto the inferiors: and thus animo, in
mind, one may prevent an other in giving of honor, though he can not always
perform it opere, in outward act, because of his place, Tolet. 4. Now there
are three sorts of men, that fail in this duty; first they which are rude and
rusticall, and know not how to give unto every one his due; then the ambitious,
that only feeke their own honor; thirdly, such as by their evil manners do
disgrace themselves, and show themselves unworthy of all honor. 5. Here there
are two extremes to be avoided, the one is of (...). ambition, in hunting
after honor, as Absolon did by his dissembled courtesy: the other is (...),
the declining of all kind of honor, which is nothing else but rusticitie and
rudenes, such as was in Diogenes that Cynick: for if all seeking of honor were
unlawful, then neither by honest actions would men regard to be honored;
which kind of desire of honor the Apostle commends, 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. (...),
to contend as it were for honor to be quiet, and to do their own business:
Pareus.

v. 11. Not slothful to do service, etc. 1. Chrysostom, whom Theophylact
follows, do refer this to the particular precept of love; that we should
be ready, not to love in the inward affection only, but to stretch forth
manus adiutrices, our helping hands: so also Gualter thinks that here an
other impediment of love is removed, which is to seek excuses and delays,
dilectio non admittit moram, love admits no delays: likewise Pelican and
Calvin, that we should praeterita vtilitate nostra, etc. neglecting our own
profit, lend our help unto our brethren. 2. some yet more particularly
restrain it to the former precept of yielding honor one to an other, Oecumen.
so also Lyranus, we should not be slothful, praestando humilitatem, in showing
humility to our neighbors: likewise Erasmus does interpret it, sedulitatem
exhibendi officij, diligence in performing of our duty. 3. Origin
understands it of our love and duty toward God; we must not be slothfoll,
least any of us should hear from the Lord, serve male and piger, O thou evil
servant, and slow: so also Theodoret, Ambrose. 4. But it is better referred
generally to the sedulitie and industry, which every one should show in his
vocation and calling, both toward God, and our neighbor: so Haymo, velox ad
omne opus bonum, swift to every good work: this sense follow Martyr: here is
forbidden, tarditas inadeundis muneribus, slacknes in doing our duty: so also
Osiander, Pareus.

19. Quest. The duties and properties of our love toward God.
v. 11. Fervent in spirit. 1. some understand by the spirit, charity kindled
in the heart by the spirit, Tolet, Faius: and so interpret it of the duties of
love toward our brethren: but zeal and feruencie of spirit especially is seen
in matters toward God; his glory and honor is the object of our zeal, and
feruencie of spirit. 2. Lyranus by spirit, understands the mind and
affection, but refers it to the former precepts of love toward our brethren.
3. Origin interprets spirit, to be the holy spirit of God; we which live sub
lege spiritus, under the law of the spirit: and refers it wholly unto our
duty toward God; in fervore spiritus, calore fidei cuncta peragamus, let us
do all by the feruencie of the spirit, and heat of faith. 4. Basil makes the
object also of this feruencie, to be the doing of the will of God; but by the
feruencie of spirit, he understands, ardens studium, an ardent desire and
continual diligence to do the will of God, in the love of Christ; regul.
brev. resp. 259. 5. But whereas the spirit may be taken both ways, for the
holy spirit, and for the mind of man, Peter Martyr thinks that both here may
be understood; so also Oleviane, si spiritus Dei zelum in cordibus accenderit,
if the spirit of God do kindle zeal in our hearts: and that is Chrysostomes
meaning, when he says, si vtramque hanc flammam adeptus fueris, if thou have
obtained both these flames, etc. that is, the spirit of God inflaming the soul
with charity.

Serving the Lord: because there is great affinity between these two words in
the Greek tongue, (...), time, and (...), Lord; there are which prefer the
first reading. 1. Ambrose gives this sense, that men should apply themselves
wisely to the time, and not ^ashly and unadvisedly, without due respect of time
and place, every where, and upon every occasion to utter our conscience: thus
Paul served the time, when he circvmcised Timothy, but Titus he would not be
induced to circumcise: and Ambrose gives this reason, why he misliketh the
former reading; because, having delivered so many precepts before, wherein God
is served, it had been superfluous for the Apostle to add this: But Tolet
takes away this reason, because in those days of persecution, it was
necessary to exhort the brethren to cleave unto God, and to profess his
worship notwithstanding trouble and persecution: this sense of Ambrose
follows Calvin, that they must accommodare se tempori, accommodate themselves
to the time: and Pelican, sciat se attemperare omnibus hor^s, every one must
know how to temper himself for every season: so also Gualter, who expounds
this place by that, Eccles. 3. 1. that there is a time for all things. 2. Some
following the same reading, expound it of the occasion and opportunity, that
we ought to take to do good, Martyr. 3. Erasmus also gives this sense, that
we must bear patiently, si quid pro tempore acciderit, incommodi, if any thing
fall out for the time incommodiously. 4. Origin has an other interpretation,
that because the time is short they that have, should be as though they had
not: as the Apostle says in the same sense, Ephesians. 5. redeeming the time,
because the days are evil. But Beza gives this reason, why this reading can
not be received at all; because no such phrase is found in the Scripture, to
serve the time in any such sense: temporizers, and time-seruers rather are
reproved in Scripture, then commanded.

The other reading then is the better, which Chrysostom, Theophylact, Haymo
follow, the Syrian interpreter, Hierome, epist. ad Marce^. Lyranus, Beza,
Tolet, Olevian, Faius, Pareus, with others. And according to this reading, 1.
Chrysostom makes this to depend upon the former precepts, because what is
done toward our brother redoundeth to God, and he will reward it. 2. Pareus
thinks it concerns the masters and Lords of the world, that they should
consider that they have also a Lord in heaven; but this is too particular. 3.
Haymo makes it an absolute precept, that we should serve the Lord, not be
servants to vice, or our own pleasure. 4. Gryneus thinks this sentence
contains an opposition between the service of the Gentiles, which was
yielded unto idols, and the service of Christians which must be given unto God.
5. Faius takes it to contain a secret reason, why we should serve God,
because he is our Lord; and to the Lord belongs service. 6. Tolet thinks
that the Apostle had relation to those times, when the Christian says was
persecutoribus exposita, exposed to persecution: and therefore the Apostle
exhorts to the service of God, and frank profession thereof, notwithstanding
those troubles. 7. But I approve rather Beza his collection, which thinks
this is added to the former precepts of Christian charity, vt a monitis
Philosophorum distinguantur, to distinguish them from the precepts of
Philosophers, etc. the end whereof was vainglory: but these duties must be
performed by Christians to the glory of God: so Pareus, in omnibus Dei gloriam
spectemus, we should in every thing look unto Gods glory: so Lyranus, hoc
fiat principaliter propter Deum, this should be done principally for God.

20. Quest. Of the remedies against the calamities of this life, namely, hope,
patience, prayer.
v. 12. Rejoicing in hope.] Of hope and the nature thereof.
1. Chrysostom takes this to be added by the Apostle as an encouragement to
all the former duties, namely, the expectation of the reward; spes ad omnia
audentem facit, hope makes one bold to all things: Gorrhan follows this
sense. 2. Lyranus makes the coherence with the former precept of serving God,
because his service brings a reward with it: so also Tolet, spes confirmat
animas in obsequia Dei, hope confirms the mind in the obedience of God. 3.
Hugo has particular relation unto the precept of loving our enemies, which
none can do without hope of reward: but that precept follows afterward, v.
14. 4. But I consent rather unto them, which take this aphoris^^^ of the
Apostle to be de remedijs calamitatum, of the remedies against calamities,
which are these three following, hope, patience, prayer, Pareus: so also
Oleviane thinks that the Apostle here shows, quomodo superare deb^amus
obstacula, how we should overcome the obstacles and impediments.

In hope. Hope is nothing else, but a grace and faculty wrought in the mind by
the holy Ghost, whereby we hope in due time, for the accomplishment of that
salvation now begun, which we are assured of by faith: where in the nature of
hope, we consider the object of hope, then the quality and condition thereof.
1. The object in general of hope.: it is first difficile, hard, for that which
is easy and in man's power, is not hoped for, but presently enjoyed: yet it is
not impossible, for no man can hope for that which is impossible: and again,
spes est futurorum, hope is of things to come, Chrysostom: whereupon hope has
partly grief, because the full fruition of hope is deferred; partly joy,
because hope does certainly expect; and so makes the things, that are absent,
present: for unless they were in some sort present, hope could not bring forth
joy. 2. the proper object of hope is the kingdom of God, and everlasting life:
for the thing which we hope for, must be of great value, otherwise the hope
thereof should not be so joyous, whereas all earthly things, are vain and of
no value: and it must be also certain and permanent, whereas things of this
world, are transitory and casual. And though the principal object of our
hope be eternal life, yet here are not excluded from our hope, the good things
of this life, so far forth as they concern the glory of God, and the
furtherance of our salvation; as the Apostle says, Romans 8.32. who spared not
his own Son, etc. how shall be not then with him give us all good things
also. 3. This expectation of hope is certain; which has two grounds, the
promises of God in Christ, which are bound with an oath: which are two
immutable things, the promise and word of God, and his oath, it is impossible
God should lie, as the Apostle says, Hebr. 6.18. whereupon he calls our hope
the anker-hold of the soul: the other ground is the power and all-sufficiencie
of Christ, as the Apostle says, I know whom I have believed, etc. that he is
able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day: Olevian.
4. But here this doubt arises, that here hope is put before patience: for
first the Apostle says, rejoicing in hope, then, patient in tribulation: and
yet, Romans 5.4. it is said patience brings forth experience, and experience
hope. The answer is this, that this is seen in rebus maxim coniunctis, in
things of a near conjunction together, vt se mutuo inferant, that they
mutually beget themselves: as the clouds bring rain, and by the falling of the
rain by the raising of vapors clouds are engendered: so the Philosophers said,
that virtues sprang of good actions, and they again sprang of virtue: as
Chrysostom here says, that ex dilectione, out of love comes the exhibiting
of honor, and love again, ex illo accensus, is kindled and increased by it:
so hope in the order of nature first brings forth patience, and then patience
increases and confirms hope, Martyr: see the very like question of
probation, and patience, 5. Chap. quest. 5.

Patient in tribulation. 1. There are two kinds of afflictions and tribulations
in this life; Of patience.
ordinary, such as are the cares of the world, continual labor and travel,
diseases, sicknesses, which all were brought in by sin; extraordinary, as
persecution which is raised by the world against the children of God for the
truth sake: of this the Apostle speaks here; of tribulation illata a
persecutoribus, which is brought upon men by persecutors, Haymo. 2. This is a
second remedy against calamities, that if they do increase, then our hope
must confirm us patiently to bear them; as the Apostle says, Ye have need
of patience, etc. that ye might receive the promise, Hebr. 10.36. 3. And unto
patience these reasons should persuade us, 1. because tribulation is omnibus
bonis communis, common to all good men; Reasons moving unto patience.
as the Apostle says, no tentation ha^h taken you, but such as appertains to
man. 2. we must consider, that nothing falls out without Gods providence;
there is no affliction which he knows not; and therefore we should rest
contented with the good will and pleasure of our heavenly father, he wounds
and he heals again, Job 5.18. 3. likewise it must be remembered, that God is
just, and our sins have deserved whatsoever is laid upon us, and much more;
therefore the consideration of our sins, which justly procure Gods
judgments, should make us patient; as it is said, Psalm. 107. foolish men are
plagued for their offenses. 4. likewise the Lords mercy must be had in
remembrance, who punishes not according to the greatness of our sins; Lament.
3.22. It is the Lords mercy, that we are not consumed: he remembers his
mercy in judgment. 5. add hereunto, that like a father that chasteneth his
child, so the Lord lays not more upon his children then they can bear, he
gives an issue together with the tentation, 1. Cor. 10.13. 6. and lastly, the
Lord causes our afflictions to work our further good, in strengthening and
confirming our faith, in purging and refining us, as Job says, exibo sicut
aurum, I shall come forth tried like unto gold.

Continuing in prayer. 1. this is as Chrysostom calls it, alia armatura, Of
prayer.
an other armor or weapon, against affliction: wherein appears the
necessity of prayer, whereby is supplied by divine help, that which we cannot
of our selves attain unto: and the dignity of Gods children, that are
admitted continually to Gods presence, as it were a great favor, for a Prince
upon all occasions to suffer his subjects to come unto him: and further this
privilege prayer has, that although other helps may be denied unto us, yet
prayer can nothing hinder: the spirit of the faithful is free to have recourse
unto God. 2. In that the Apostle would have us continue in prayer, 1. it
favors not the fancy of the Euchites, and Psalliones, that did nothing else
but pray continually: for the business of our vocations must be also attended
upon: What it is to pray continually.
and if men should do nothing but pray continually, they must needs fall into
that fault of battalogie, that is, much babbling, which our Savior reprooueth
in prayer. 2. some understand it of instance and earnestnes in prayer: as the
vulgar Latin reads, orationi instantes, instant in prayer: so also Marloret,
frigide oramus, that we should not pray coldly: and so our Savior by praying
continually, understands not to faint in prayer, Luke 18.1. 3. Augustine,
whom Gualter follows, understands this place of continuing in prayer: of
the set hours of prayer every day, which should by no means be intermitted;
as D^^iel prayed thrice in a day. 4. Pelican understands that place, 2 Thessalonians. 5.17. pray (...), without ceasing, non de murmr oris, sed de syderio
cordis, not of the sound of the mouth, but the desire of the heart: so
Oleviane, placatus animus semper in Deum respicit, a mind at peace in it self,
always looks unto God. 5. Martyr refers it to the often occasions which
Christians have, quoties aliquid occurrit, as often as any thing offers it
self, either any thing which grieueth, or any thing to be asked, pray: and he
understands it of such prayers, quae tanquam ardentes faces taciuntur in
coelum, which as burning brands are cast up into heaven: so also Osiander,
semper habemus, etc. we always have somewhat either to ask for our selves, or
our brethren, or to give thanks for: I take of all the rest these two, that we
must be ready upon every occasion to turn us unto God by prayer, and when we
pray, to pray instantly and fervently.

3. But here the question will be asked, Why the Lord deferreth the requests of
his children.
why the Lord hears not our prayers presently, that we need not continue so
in prayer; and our Savior says, God (at the instance of the prayers of his
children) will avenge him quickly, Luke 18.8. The answer is, that God hears
quickly, and performs our requests quickly: as he is said to do a thing
quickly, that does it, quamprimum se offer at occasio, as soon as opportunity
serves: so that mora non est in Deo, sed in sensu nostro, the stay is not in
God, but in our sense, Martyr: like as a carver first finisheth one part of his
work, then an other, so God brings forth every thing in due time, Olevian:
and further by this means, when God deferreth our requests, our faith is
exercised and tried: and illustrius est, etc. the benefit is so much the
greater when it comes, Gualter: and further, we must pray continually,
because so is the will and pleasure of God; as the Apostle says, 1 Thessalonians.
5.17. Pray continually, in all things give thanks, for this is the will of God
in Christ Jesus: Olevian.

21. Quest. Of the communicating to the necessity of the Saints, and of
hospitality.
v. 13. Communicating to the necessity of the Saints, etc. 1. The word is
(...), uses, rather then necessities, as the vulgar Latin reads; and Erasmus,
least we should think, that they are not to be succored, but in extreme
necessity, Beza. Tolet answeareth, that yet the other word necessity, is
better retained, because all that want, are in necessity, annot. 23. but, the
word should be (...), if it were to be translated, necessities, as Erasmus
notes also. 2. And yet though we are commanded to minister to the uses of the
Saints, we must not give supply, delicijs, to their dainties, and bestow
superfluously upon them, Theophyl. as afterward in time of superstition,
liberality was turned into superfluitle. 3. Origin makes mention of an other
reading, as though the word should be (...), memories: which Ambrose follows,
and gives this sense, that we should remember the Saints, to imitate and
follow their life and godly example: but the usual reading is rather to be
received, and so Chrysostom, Theophylact, and the Syrian interpreter read. 4.
And where the Apostle says, communicating, Haymo following Origin observes,
that the Apostle says not, give, as it were of alms, but communicate:
honestiori vocabulo vsus est, the Apostle uses a fitter term, to show that
the Saints had as it were an interest in their goods: and beside, as Calvin
observes, this word shows, a communicating in affection; that they should
release them, Heb. 13.4.
as though they themselves suffered with them; as the Apostle says, remember
th^se that are in bonds, as if your selves were bound with the^: Chrysostom.
observes further upon this word (communicate,) quod plus accipiant, qua^
praestant, they receive more then they bestow: res ista negotiatio est, for
this matter is a kind of merchandise, the one co^municateth temporal things,
the other spiritual, making them partakers of their prayers. 5. But Tolets
gloss is here very corrupt, sit particeps meritorum, he that gives is
partaker of their merits, which the Saints have in their sufferings: for the
passions of the Saints merit not, though the Lord crown their sufferings in
mercy: the Apostle says, the afflictions or sufferings of this life, are not
worthy of the glory which shall be revealed, Romans 8. but God indeed shall
reward the works of charity exercised upon the Saints: in which sense our
Savior says, Luke 18. make ye friends of the unrighteous mammon, that when ye
want they may receive you into everlasting habitations: for although good works
are not the cause of everlasting life, yet they are a rule, according to the
which God will give everlasting life, Martyr. 6. Now the Apostle names the
Saints, which were the faithful redeemed by Christ's blood, and sanctified by
his spirit: showing that although charity should be extended to all, yet
specially we should prefer domesticos fidei, such as are of the household of
faith, Gualt. as the Apostle says, Gal. 6.10. and by this is signified, that
we should not exercise our charity on them only which are known unto us, but
even upon strangers, and all the godly, Osiand. as the Samaritane did show
mercy on him, that fell among the cues: and further, here we learn what the
duty is, which we should perform unto the Saints: not in caruing and painting
their images, when they are dead, but in succouring their necessities while
they live, Pareus. 7. So here there are three special motives unto this duty
of beneficence, compassio necessitatis, dilectio sanctitatis, liberalitas
communicationis, the compassion of necessity, the love of sanctity, and in
communicating liberality, Gorrhan.

Following, or pursuing hospitality. 1. Chrysostom observes, how the Apostle
in every one of these precepts uses emphaticall phrases: as he said before
continue in prayer, not, pray only: and community to the uses of the Saints,
not give: so here he says not, embrace hospitality, but pursue, follow it. 2.
in those days, the Apostles and other disciples went preaching from city to
city, and they had not their publica hospitia, common hospitals to receive
strangers, and therefore this exhortation was then most needful, Osiand. 3.
Origin observes, and so Haymo, that where he says, follow hospitality, he
would not, that we should only receive them, that come unto us, sed
requiramus, but we should seek them, and follow them, and urge them to come
home unto us, as Abraham and Lot did: the same note has Chrysostom, and
Martyr, Gualter: for the word (...), signifies to pursue, to apprehend one
that flees: and so the Saints, which otherwise of modesty would not offer
themselves, should be invited, and entreated, and followed after, Tolet. 4.
Gorrhan further notes in this word, that it signifies, that assidue, we
should continually practice hospitality: ^^ frequentia hospitum sit nobis
onerosa, that the frequencie of strangers should not be burdensome unto us. 5.
And seeing that hospitality was even commended among the heathen, who
worshipped Iuppiter (...), the God of hospitality, yet the Athenians made it a
capital offense not to show the way to a stranger; much more should it be
practiced among Christians: and the Apostle here does not exhort unto any base
service, for it is a princely and noble work to give hospitality: as it is
said of Titus the Emperor, that he was wont to say, that he had lost that day
wherein he had not conferred some benefit: the Israelites were moved unto
hospitality upon this reason, because they had bin sometime strangers: and we,
in regard of that, which may fall out hereafter, ought to be stirred up to this
duty: for who can promise any certentie of habitation to himself, or his
posterity after him, Mar.

21. Quest. How our enemies are to be blessed, Bless them that persecute you,
v. 14.
1. Lyranus makes this the connection of this precept with the former, that as
before he showed how charity should be expressed in affectu, in the affection,
v. 10. be affectioned: then ^^fectu, in the effect, in giving honor, etc. and
in distributing, and such like: now he declares how charity must appear and
show it self, in signo, in the external signs, as first in words: but I
rather approve Chrysostomes connection: the Apostle having prescribed the
duties that must be exercised toward our domesticalls, now teaches how we
should behave our selves toward them without: for he that first practices all
duties toward his friends, shall be better prepared how to use his enemies.

2. The Greek word is (...), benedicite, bless ye: which word is taken three
ways in Scripture; as either God is said to bless man, as he blessed the
house of Obed Edom, 2. Sam. 6. where the Atke was, and then to bless, is
aliquid muneris confer, to confer some gift, as Origin notes: God
blesses, when he makes one to prosper, and bestows some spiritual, or
temporal gift: or man is said to bless God, that is, to praise his name, and
give him thanks: or one man is said to bless an other: which is either to
speak well of him, or in wishing well unto him, as Jacob is said to have
blessed Ephraim and Manasses the sons of Joseph, that is, to have prayed for
their prosperity: and so it is taken here: Pererius adds a fourth
signification, when to bless by the contrary, signifies to curse, as when
Jobs wife ^^d him bless God, that is, curse him: but that ironicall use of the
word is impertinent here.

3. Further, it may be observed, that the Apostle choseth rather to say,
benedicitie, bless ye, then benefacite, do ye well, or been precamini, wish
well: for this last is not sufficient, unless we express our charity by some
outward sign: and the first is not always in our power: though we must do
well also to our enemies, when we may: but to bless and use good words, at all
times may be done, Tolet: and the Apostle in expressing the same thing by the
negative, bless and curse not, shows how hard a thing this is to do, and
therefore he does inculcate it again, and thereby he admonishes, that we
should be constant, still to bless, although they cease not to persecute us:
and not to bless in part, and curse in part, Tolet.

4. Neither does this precept only admonish us, vt been loquerentur, to speak
well of our enemies, as Erasmus reads: but in the repetition, so much is
insinuated, that we should not only abstain from cursing or evil speaking,
but wish unto them well, in praying for their conversation, Martyr, Beza.

5. Bucer denies, that here we are commanded to praise our enemies, non iubet,
vt laudemus, etc. he bids not that the persecutor should be praised, but
that we should pray for them, and admonish them with mild and gentle words: but
Pet. Martyr here shows, our enemy may be praised also: we must distinguish
between the evil that is in them, and the good gifts of God, which they have,
which we are not to obscure and extenuate, howsoever they are evil affected
toward us: as Paul did commend in Agrippa, his knowledge of the Prophets, Act.
26.27. and Aeschines, though Demosthenes were his enemy, yet commended unto
the Rhodians his eloquence in that bitter oration, which Demosthenes made
against him. This also is true, but it is not within the compass of the
Apostles precept here: which admonishes us, both with good words, and good
desires, to qualify the hatred of our enemies.

6. This lesson, which Paul teaches others, he practiced himself, 2. Cor.
4.13. we are evil spoken of, and yet we bless: and he himself had learned it
first of his and our Master our blessed Savior, Matthew. 5.34. Bless them that
curse you, pray for them that persecute you: wherein we see the perfection of
Christian precepts beyond the counsel of the wise heathen: Vespasianus thus
resolved, that it was not lawful to revile a Senator; but if he rayled first,
then one might revile him again, for by his railing he had deprived himself
of his Senators dignity. Now if it be not lawful to curse our enemy, much
less should men teuile any others, Martyr.

7. Here might be noted the opinion of Thomas Aquinas, who denies that this is
a precept, to pray in particular for our enemies, but a counsel only of
perfection: and that this binds no further as a precept, then that we exclude
not our enemies generally from our prayers, and to help them in the extreme
case of necessity: but this shall be handled among the Controversies.

22. Quest. Of the reasons which should move us to love our enemies.
Chrysostom produces these reasons. 1. praemi^rum procuratores sunt, etc.
they are procurers of our reward, which persecute us: for they are pronounced
blessed, that suffer for righteousness. 2. mul^um erga Christum amorem ostendit,
etc. it shows great love toward Christ, when we are content to endure
reproaches for his name: whereas it is a sign of small love, when men are
impatient against their persecutors. 3. adversaries stupifacies, etc. thou
shall astonish the enemy, when he sees thy patience, and thereby he will
know, that thou seek an other life, contemning all the troubles of this: and
sic a persecutione abstinebit, and so he will abstain from persecuting of
thee. 3. sunt materia pulcherrimarum virtutum etc. they are the matter and
occasion of most goodly virtues: for as the Apostle says, tribulation brings
forth patience, Romans 5.3. 4. S. James says, c. 1. Let patience have her
perfect work: so that unless we by patience hold out to the end, all is
nothing, our faith is imperfect, our hope imperfect: whatsoever we do is
imperfect, Martyr. 5. an other reason is, because God has even among our
persecutors, aliquos electos, some elect, which shall at the last be converted
unto him, Osiander. 6. Add hereunto, that we must acknowledge iust^m imperium
Dei, the right and sovereignty, which God has over us, so to dispose, that
our enemies should persecute us, which made the Prophet David patiently to
bear Shemei his reproachful words: it may be (says he) that God has bid
him curse David: we should then herein submit our selves to the will of God,
Gryneus. 7. and further, conscientia propriae infirmitatis, the conscience of
our own infirmity should moon us to patience, as the Preacher says, Eccles.
7.22.23. Give not thy heart to all the words that men speak, etc. for
oftentimes thine heart knows that thou also have cursed others, Gryneus. 8.
the excellency of this virtue should move us: that whereas it is an ordinary
thing to love our friends, hoc Philosophici viri est, even the Philosophers
could do that: it is a rare thing for one to love his enemies: istud angeli
est, such a man is an angel, Chrysostom. nay, which is more, herein we are not
only like to Angles, but unto Christ himself, who prayed for those that did
persecute him. 9. to conclude, the inheritance of blessing is ours if we
bless, but if we curse, ad nos non pertinebit benedictionis inberitas, the
inheritance of blessing shall not appertain unto us: See 1. Pet. 3.9. Pelican.

Quest. 23. Whether it be not lawful upon any occasion to pray against our
enemies.
It is evident, that both the Prophets sometime cursed their enemies, as Elisha
did the children that railed on him, 2. King. 2. and David says in the
Psalms, as he is alleged by S. Paul, c. 11.10. Let their eyes be darkened,
and bow down their back always: as likewise the Apostles, as S. Peter
cursed Simon Magus, thy money perish with thee: Act. 8. and S. Paul Elymas the
sorcerer, Act. 13.10. O full of all subtlety and mischief, the child of the
devil, etc. wherefore all imprecations are not Iawfull, wherein these cautions
must be observed.

1. Here the men of God, when they use imprecations and curses, non recipient
suam causam, aut suas iniurias, do not look unto their own cause, nor their
private injuries, but they consider how the glory of God is hindered by the
wicked: and in that regard, they pray against them, as David did against
Achitophel, yet he was most patient in his own particular, when Shemei reviled
him: so first the cause must be considered, it must not be private, but
public, Mart.

2. It must be considered, with what spirit they are moved, which use
imprecations: for the Prophets which used cursing, did it ex speciali
vocatione, and spiritus sancti ins^^^iu, by a special vocation, and the
instinct of the spirit, Osiand. and such curses, as Augustine says, non sunt
de malo voto imprecantis, sed de praescio spiritu denuntiantis, proceed not of
the evil desire of the curser, but of the foreseeing spirit of the denouncer,
lib. 16. contra Faustum, cap. 22.

3. They must be considered who are accursed: then the Prophets used to curse,
quando aliquos incurabiles, and deploratos esse vident, when they saw any to
be incurable and past all hope, Gualter: they cursed only those which were
professed enemies of God, and godliness.

4. Add hereunto the end, which one propounds to himself in his cursing,
it must not be done, livore vindictae, with desire of revenge, but zelo
iustitiae, with zeal of justice, Gorrhan: for like as iusta impiorum vltio,
etc. the just revenge of the wicked agrees unto God, who is charity it self,
so in the zeal of justice one may pray for the punishment of the wicked, and
not therein offend, not being pricked forward with a revengefull mind in
himself, but looking to Gods justice: as our Blessed Savior by himself
weepeth over Jerusalem, because they knew not the time of their visitation, at
idem cum agit cum partre: but when he has to deal with his father, then he
thanketh him, that he had revealed those things to babes, and hid them from the
wise and prudent, Matthew. 11.25. Olevian. So we of our own private inclination
should be ready to extend our love unto our enemies, but God must be loved
above all; and when we set before us his glory and justice, we may safely pray
for the remoouing of all impediments: These cautions observed, all imprecations
are not simply to be condemned: See this question handled before also, c. 11.
quest. 12.

Quest. ^2. Whether Saint Paul, in calling Ananias the high Priest painted
wall, Act. 23. observes his own precept here.
1. Oecumenius upon that place thinks that the high Priest was well enough
known unto S. Paul, but that he per quandam dispensationem simulasse
ignorantiam, by a certain dispensation did saine ignorance, which if it be
done in time and place, is not faulty at all: But this cannot stand with the
Apostles gravity, and integrity, to affirm that which was not true, for then
he should have been guilty of a lie.

2. Augustine has an other answer, lib. de sermon. Dom. c. 35. which Beda
follows, that Paul spoke figuratively: that Christ being come, the high
Priesthood of the law was abolished: as if he should have said, ego alium
agnosco sacerdotem, etc. I acknowledge an other high Priest, for whose name I
do bear these things, whom it is not lawful to curse. But this had been
likewise far from the Apostles simplicity: and howsoever he were not high
Priest, de iure, in right, yet he was de facto, in fact, at that time:
therefore this could not have excused him.

3. Augustine has an other answer: haec verba minus intelligentibus convitium
sonant, intelligentibus prophetiae est, these words to them that understand not
seem to be railing, but to those that rightly understand them they are a
prophecy, etc. so also Beda observes, because the Apostle does say in the
indicative mood, God shall strike thee, not in the optatiue, God strike thee:
so also Faius says, it is praedictio, non imprecatio, a prediction, not an
imprecation. But although these words, God will strike thee, are a prediction:
yet that other term, painted wall, may seem by S. Paul's answer to have
been not far from reviling: which some think Paul would have forborne, if
he had known him to be the high Priest.

4. Caietan thinks that S. Paul knew him not to be the high Priest, but yet
he could not be ignorant, that he was the judge at that time: yet it was
lawful for Paul by his Apostolic authority, to denounce the curse of God
against an unrighteous judge: but at that time it was not expedient: and
therefore he alleges the law, not to excuse his sin, sed ad excusandum
factum, but to excuse his fact, that he did it ignorantly: But it was not
lawefull by the law, for an Apostle or any other to revile the Judge: and the
Apostle in citing the law, makes himself subject to the law: and as it was
not expedient, so neither was it lawful for any to revile the judge.

5. Beza here has this answer. 1. he thinks that Ananias was not high Priest
at all under Felix, as he shows out of Josephus: but that one Ismael or
Josephus was high Priest: to whom Ananias left nothing but a bare title, but he
vsuped the office of the high Priest. 2. he says it was no imprecation, but a
denouncing of the punishment: as the Greek phrase shows, (...), it shall
come to pass that God will finite thee. 3. and whereas he calls him painted
wall: vehemens est oration, and aspera, a convitio tamen aliena, it is a
vehement speech and sharp, but yet far from railing: to this purpose M.
Beza, with whom I consent in the two latter parts of his answer, but I doubt
of the first: for it appears by their objection that stood by, revilest thou
the Lords high Priest? that Ananias, was at this time the high Priest.

6. Hierome as Erasmus here alleges him, grants that S. Paul here showed
some humane infirmity, neque came praestitisse mansuet udinem, neither did show
that mildnes, which Christ showed when he was smitten: and Erasmus yields,
that Paul here non caruit humanis affectibus, wanted not humane affections: as
he elsewhere complains of the prick of his flesh, and there was contention
between him and Bernabas. But we must not be so easily drawn, to charge so
holy an Apostle, with this infirmity of hasty choler and anger, who was most
patient.

7. Erasmus thinks that S. Paul might truly say he knew him not to be the
high Priest, because he showed himself not to be as an high Priest in this
action: sed re tyrannum, but a tyrant indeed. But this is too nice and
curious, for even a Tyrant is a magistrate, and so to be reverenced, though he
be an evil one.

8. Some think aright, that Paul indeed was ignorant that Ananias was high
Priest: and add further that if he had known he had so been, he would not
have used that sharp term of painted wall, Osiander, Pererius disput. 2.
numer. 9. But the Apostle knew that he was not only forbidden to rail upon
the Magistrate, but upon any whomsoever.

9. Some think that S. Paul is in this his vehement defense to be excused,
quia ab ea ^^^prudenter factum, because it was done of him ignorantly, Iun. in
parall. but though S. Paul's ignorance might excuse him, for reuiling the high
Priest: yet it had been a fault to have reviled any: by this means S. Paul
could not then be excused altogether by his ignorance.

10. For the full solution then of this question: these three positions are to
be admitted. 1. that S. Paul simply was ignorant, that Ananias was high Priest,
whereof Chrysostom gives two reasons: his long absence from Jerusalem, and
this tumultuous assembly, where no order was observed: add hereunto, that the
high Priest was changed every year, and S. Paul being persecuted for his
profession and preaching of Christ, had no leisure, nor lift to enquire who was
high Priest: and whereas it is objected, that the high Priest might have been
discerned by his place, apparel, and the reverence given unto him: Iunius
answeareth well, that the high Priest was not to wear his priestly robes out
of the temple: and it seems in this tumultuous assembly, the Tribune being
absent, who should have kept order, that they rather stood plano pede, on
plain foot, then sat in any order: and it seems also that either small
reverence was yielded at all in this disordered meeting, or that it was past,
before S. Paul came in.

2. Again, I grant with Augustine, Beda, Beza, that this was no imprecation,
but a prediction of Gods judgment upon this ambitious and unjust high Priest,
as is before showed.

3. Neither was that a reuiling term, to call him painted wall, but a
vehement and sharp obiurgation: as Christ rayled not when he denounced woe
unto the Scribes and Pharisees, or called Herod fox, Beza: and S. Paul, as
Cyprian observes, spoke thus roundly to show the disorder of that whole
assembly, and the wrong which he had received, lib. 1. cp. 3. And whereas it
will be objected, that S. Paul in his answer did confess he had railed,
(though it were not indeed convitium, sed libera obiurgatio, a reviling, but a
frank rebuking, as Erasmus says:) Beda well shows the reason, why S. Paul
so did, granting so much to the peoples importunity, that it was reuiling
which indeed was not, erudiens alios atque ergo eos qui in potestate sunt,
modestius conuersari monens, etc. therein iustructing others, and admonishing
them to carry themselves modestly toward them which are in authority: and
thus much of this question: See more thereof in the handling of that Scripture
Hexapl. ^^ Exodus 22.28. whence is produced this testimony by the Apostle: but
I insist upon this answer now resolved upon here.

Quest. 23. How we should rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them
that weep, v. 15.
1. Because one may forbear from cursing his enemies, and may in words wish
him well, and yet not do it of love: the Apostle proceeds to the very root
of love, which is in the affection of the heart, Chrysostom.

2. And whereas the former precept only concerned our enemies, this may be
practiced both toward our friends and our enemies, Tolet.

3. But Origin observes well, that we must understand this precept of the
Apostle, not of every kind of joy and grief, but in honest and lawful
things, as if any man rejoice in his honor, wealth, or such like, we are not
to rejoice with such: our Savior would not have his Apostles to rejoice,
because they had cast out devils, Luke 10. but if we see ab aliquo aliquod tale
opus geri, quod in coelo scribi dignum sit, etc. any such work to be done by
one, which is worthy to be written in heaven, as any work of justice, mercy,
or that one is converted from the error of his life, with such an one must we
rejoice: likewise we must not weep with those which lament their dead, and
flent damna temporalia, and weep for the loss of temporal things: but if any
man weep and lament for his sins, or such like, lachrymae tungenda sunt cum
talibus, we must join with such in tears, etc. to the same purpose also
Haymo, following Origens steps.

4. But they must be understood to speak comparatively: that they which
rejoice or mourn for temporal things only, or excessiuely: they must rather
be reproved, then by our joining with them in like affection, be fed still in
their humor: for this precept binds us, to rejoice in the outward prosperity
of the brethren, and mourn for their temporal losses also, but not so much as
for spiritual: so here we must distinguish of joy and grief: dolor ordinatus,
a moderate sorrow, as when one mourns for the loss of a friend, as a mother
for the death of her children: thus Christ wept in compassion with Marie
weeping for Lazarus: there is dolor inordinatus, an inordinate sorrow for
temporal things, when men lament too much for the loss of them; and in this
sense, we must correct their error, and yet comfort: them what we can, Pareus.

5. Chrysostom notes further: that the Apostle in the first place says,
rejoice with them that rejoice: because this is the harder precept: for nature
teaches many to show compassion in the misery of their brethren, who yet do
envy their prosperity: and again he observes, that the Apostle says not,
solve proximi calamitatem, take away thy neighbors calamity, for that always
is not in our power, but weep with him, this every one may do.

6. Now we ought thus mutually to be affected toward our brethren, 1. because
we are members of one mystical body. 2. nihil it a dilectionem conciliat,
nothing does so much beget love as to communicate with our brother in his joy
and grief, Chrysostom. 3. sic tristitiam alleuas, thus you lighten his
grief: livore teipsum liberas, and free your self from envy, Chrysostom. 4.
and it is every case to show compassion, considering if thou thy self be
tempted, Galat. 6.1. an other shall lend thee his tears in thine afflicton,
Martyr.

7. Three sorts of men fail in this precept. 1. they which have no feeling at
all of other men's myseries, as the rich man neglected Lazarus. 2. they which
go yet further, and rejoice in other men's afflictions, for the which the
Babylonians are reproved, for insulting against the people of God, in their
ruin, Isay. 47.3. they are yet worst of all, that add affliction to
affliction, and do pray upon those, which are in misery, as the Amalekites
laid wait for the Israelites in the wilderness, Gualter.

Quest. 24. What it is to be like affectioned one toward an other.
v. 16. Be like affectioned one toward an other: First there is some difference
in the translating of the words: secondly, in the coherence and sense: of the
first sort, 1. some do translate the word (...), sentientes, thinking the same
thing, vulg. Latin: and some do refer it to the understanding, as Anselme
does expound it by that place, 1. Cor. 1.10. that ye be of the same mind and
judgment: but there is an other word used (...), which indeed properly
signifies the intelligent part of the mind. 2. Chrysostom applies it to the
opinion, that one should have of an other, as if a poor man came in, fac vt
affectus te illi acromodes, see that thou apply thy self in affection unto
him, not thinking thy self to be greater, because thou art rich: magnum te
putas? do thou think thy self to be great? think him to be so too: do
thou take him to be mean and base? so also take thy self to be, and there
shall be no inequality: thus Chrysostom, and Erasmus to the like purpose: but
this rather is insinuated in the next words, be not high minded: to this
purpose also translateth the Syrian intepreter, that which ye think of your
selves, think of your brethren. 4. some do better thus read, eodem animo
affecti, etc. be like affected one toward another, Beza, Vatablus, Mart. and
these do understand it rather of the will and affection, then of the mind and
understanding: so Origin also, ita velimus proximo, ficut and nobis, let us
wish unto our neighbor as to our selves: Tolet also follows this sense: But
M. Beza will not have (...), translated alij in alios, one toward an other, but
inter vos mutuo, mutually among your selves: and to be the same with (...),
among your selves, c. 15.5. but this phrase is before used, v. 10. in this
very sense, one toward an other, and therefore it is most like to retain the
same sense here.

Secondly, touching the coherence. 1. Lyranus has reference unto the former
sentence rejoice with them, etc. that is, they should not only seem to
rejoice, and mourns, but they should do it from the heart without
dissimulation: so also Calvin thinks this precept co^prehendeth both the
other, and understands it of the mutual sympathy, which should be among
Christians, as fellow-feeling members: Tolet also and Gorrhan do so understand
it with Lyranus. 2. But it is better to make the sentence more general, that
we should wish unto others, as to our selves: as Origin expounds it by these
words of our blessed Savior, Matthew. 7. What you would that men should do unto
you, the same things do unto them: this sense follows Gryneus: and Olevian
does parallel it with that place, Phillip. 2.4. look not every man on his
own things, but every man on the things of others: so here the Apostle
generally exhorts unto concord, whether in the consent of the mind, or the
knitting of the affections together, in all their counsels and actions, Pareus:
as the Apostle using this very phrase, Phillip. 2.2. does subdiuide it into
the conjunction of their love and affection, and of mind and judgment: Be
like minded, having the same love, of one mind and judgment, etc.

Quest. 15. What it is to be high minded, and to be wise in our selves.
v. 16. Be not high minded. 1. Chrysostom thinks, that the Apostle does so
often inculcate these precepts of humility to the Romans, because they had
many provocations thereunto, in respect of the city, which then had the Empire
and rule of the world, and for other causes. 2. and this is the coherence of
these words with the former: that whereas he had moved them to mutual
concord, now he remooueth the two principallers, the one is pride, when a man
in an high conceit of his gifts, and despising others, ambitiously aspireth
unto great matters: and the other is arrogancy, when one in a self-love is
carried away with an ouerweening opinion of his wisdom, and other gifts. 3.
Tolet curiously distinguishes between the phrase here used, be not high
minded, and that c. 11.20. for there it is all one word, (says he) compounded
of two simple words, (...), be not high minded: but here there are two words
(...), minding high things: and in that place he refers it to the
understanding and conceit: as when one thinks better of himself then there
is cause, and here to the affection: But if the places be well compared, it may
appear, that in both places the Apostle speaks against ambitious aspiring,
joined with contempt and disdain of others: as there he would have the
Gentiles called to the faith, not to be lifted up in mind in respect of the
dejected Jews: unless we will make this difference, that there the Apostle
forbids any to have an haughty opinion and conceit: that is, as Calvin
interprets, altos gerere spiritus, to bear a lostie mind, and here he
prohibiteth, ambitiously to seek after high places, which is a fruit of the
haughtiness of mind: as M. Calvin calls it, ambitiose spirare, to aspire
ambitiously.

Submitting or applying your selves to the lowly. 1. Some take this to be
understood of the persons of low degree: and make this to be the sense, apply
your selves to the lowly, that is, i^ iliorum vilitatem descend, descend to
their baseness, Chrysostom. eorum consortium ne aspernare, despise not their
company: Vatabl. cum eis humiliter conuersando, in conuersing humbly with
them: the vulgar Latin reads, consentientes humilibus, consenting to the
humble: that is, says Origin, amare humiles, to love the humble: he consents
with the humble, quei cum humilibus se humiliat, which humbles himself, with
those that are humble, Haymo: humiliorum imitatores, imitators of those which
are humble, gloss. interlin. consenting to the humble, that is, in heart, and
not with the mouth only, gloss. ordin. Gorrhan: all these understand by the
humble, the lowely, referring it to their persons.

2. Some understand this word of the things rather then of the persons: and
take it in the neuter gender, that (...), to the humble, may answer unto
(...), the high things before spoken of, Calvin, Beza, Pareus: so also
Osiander, humilia curate, tractate, etc. respect and handle humble things:
likewise Tolet, let them embrace base things, quae vilea mundus reputat, which
the world counts base: And this sense is to be admitted, by reason of the
opposition of the words, though not only.

3. Faius says, non tam res ipsae, quam hominum affectus spectantur, not so
much the things themselves, as the affections of men are here considered: true
it is, that the object cannot be severed from the affection: but it is evident,
that the Apostle, by high and low things, means the object of pride and
humility.

4. Pet. Martyr comprehends, both base things, and base persons: that we
should apply our selves unto both: neither dispising the one, not refusing the
other, even mean and base ministeries and services to profit our brother, as
our B. Savior disdained not to wash his Apostles feere: and this is most
agreeable to the Apostles meaning: now the other word (...), is not well
translated by the Latin interpreter consentientes, consenting, it properly
signifies impetu quodam correpti, carried us it were with force: showing how
prone we ought to be to descend to low and base things: Beza renders it,
obsecundantes, submitting your selves, the Syrian interpreter adhaerentes,
cleaving: Vatablus, accomodantes, applying your selves: our English making your
selves equal, etc. gives the meaning, rather then the sense of the word.

Be not wise in your selves. 1. Chrysostom thus interprets it, ne putetis
vos sufficere vobis ipsis, think not that your are sufficient for your selves:
God has so made us, vt alter alterum opera iudigeat, that one stands in
need of an other: so also Theophylact understands it of those, which despise
the counsel of others: and yet Moses despised not the counsel of his father in
law. 2. Ambrose thinks they are said to be wise in themselves, which turn
their wsedome altogether to their own profit, and not to the good of others:
so also the interlin. gloss. and Gorrhan, ne prudentiam apud vos tantum
exerceatis, etc. exercise not your wisdom only for your selves, but for your
neighbors also. 3. Basil regul. brev. resp. 260. interprets those to be wise
to themselves, qui solam humanam prudentiam, etc. which only have humane
wisdom, and regard not the divine will and pleasure: such we call worldly
wise. 4. Haymo, he is wise in himself; who non authori sapientia deputat, etc.
does not ascribe unto the author of wisdom, that wisdom which he has. 5.
But all these are the effects of arrogancy; he which takes himself to be
wise, dispiseth the counsel of others, consulteth not with God, neither
ascribes the praise to him; here then the Apostle touches the very root and
beginning of pride, which is propriae prudentiae opinio, the opinion of a man's
own wisdom, Marlorat: so that here the Apostle remooueth an other let and
impediment of humility, which is arrogancy, and that is apud seipsum nimium
sapere, to be too wise in himself; such the Prophet Isay speaks against, we
unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight,
Isay. 5.21. Pareus: so Origin before them, hic cum arrogantia stultus est, etc.
qui suam stultitiam quasi sapientiam colit, he is arrogant and foolish, who
adoreth his own folishnesse, as if it were wisdom, etc. But here Lyranus
aduertiseth well, that prudence and wisdom is here not taken properly, but in
a certain similitude: for vera prudentia, non nisi in bonis, true wisdom and
prudence is only found in the good, it is craft not wisdom which the wicked
have. Now this arrogancy is the cause of all errors, which are of three sorts,
either errors in opinion and judgment, or in practice of religion, or in life
and conversation; for hereupon some have devised new doctrines, and strange
worship; not contenting themselves with the simplicity of Gods word; as though
they were wiser then God; and they give themselves ever unto gross sins in
their life, holding scorn to be admonished by others, Gualter.

Quest. 25. How evil is not to be recompensed for evil, v. 17.
1. Chrysostom notes the generality of the speech, recompense to no man,
whether believer or unbeliever; not to a believer, because he is thy brother,
not to an infidel and unbeliever, that thou may win him, Haymo. 2. Origin
observes, that reddere malum, to render evil, is a greater sin, quam
infer malum, then to offer evil at the first; for it may be that he did it
ignorantly, non sensisse malum, etc. that he perceived it not to be evil,
which he did, but he that recompenceth evil shows that he was not ignorant,
that it was evil. 3. this precept concerns only particular wrongs; it is
not extended to magistrates that render evil unto offenders, according to the
law, in Deuteronomy. an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: and yet punishment is
not evil, because it is opus iustitiae, a work of justice, Gorrhan, Martyr.
4. here that pharisaicall doctrine is reproved, that they were to hate their
enemies and love their friends. 5. and if it be a sin, to render evil for
evil, much more to recompense evil for good, the one is incident into our
humane corrupt nature, but the other is plain diabolical. 6. Calvin thinks,
that this precept is somewhat larger, then that which follows, avenge not
your selves: for in some cases evil may be rendered for evil, sine manifesta
vltione, without manifest revenge, as when one refuses to give entertainment
and succor to one in his need, and so the other to requite him, withdraws
his hand in his necessity; so also Gualt. but Martyr misliketh this; I cannot
see says he, how he which willingly does render evil for evil, does not
intend to take revenge; and the Apostle (he thinks) does inculcate the same
precept again, because it is so necessary; thus also Pareus: but this
difference between them may be soon taken away; for Calvin says only
without manifest revenge: there may be a revenge in all kind of retalion: but
in some the revenge is more manifest, then in other.

Quest. 26. How honest things are to be procured before all men.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, providing things honest, not only before God,
but before all men: but this clause not only before God, is not in the
original, Origin, Chrysostom, Theophylact, omit this clause, and the Syriake
interpreter; Tolet allows the vulgar Latin by the authority of Ambrose and
Basil, and because the Apostle so has, 2. Cor. 8.21. but Erasmus judgment is
better, which thinks, this part was added by the interpreter: neither does
this supplement agree with that which follows, before all men: which shows
that the opposition here is not between God and man, but man and man; and in
that other place, the Apostle says not, not only before God, but before the
Lord: and not before all men, but before men: the comparing then of that place,
is no reason to add that clause here.

2. Oecumenius will have this sentence to be referred to the former, that we
should be so far from rendering evil for evil, as contrariwise we should
procure things honest: but so the Apostles meaning should be too much
restrained, which is more general.

3. This precept is not to be understood only of things honest and lawful,
that we must ^^ke heed that we commit not any dishonest thing: but in things
otherwise lawful and indifferent, we must take heed of giving offense, Martyr.

4. Origin here moves this doubt, that this should seem to be contrary to
that sailing of the Apostle, If I should please men, I should not be the
servant of Christ, Gal. 1. he answers, that the Apostle says not here, that
we may please men: but let us do things honest before them, sieve placeant,
sieve non placeant, whether they please or not: to the same purpose P. Martyr:
the Apostle says not, seek to please men, but procure things honest, etc. for
as we must approve our conscience before God, so also, bona fama non
negligenda est, a good fame and name is not to be neglected.

5. Gorrhan here well observes sour sorts of men; some procure things honest
only before men, as hypocrites; some only before God, as they which are
simple, and not yet perfect; some neither before God, nor man, as notorious
offenders, and licentious persons; some before both, as they which have
integrity of conscience before God, and of life before men.

27. Quest. How we should have peace with all men.
1. Tolet takes this to be an other reason of the former precept, why we
should not render evil for evil, both because we must procure things honest;
and, we must maintain peace: Gorrhan thus divides these precepts; three things
the Apostle admonishes to be done concerning our enemies: first to do them
good, to bless them, v. 14. then to do them no hurt, to recompense none evil
for evil, v. 17. then, if they do us wrong, to bear it, and not to break
peace: but the Apostles sentence is more general, to have peace with all men,
as well enemies as others. 2. Erasmus would have this clause, if it may be, to
be joined with the former sentence, procure things honest before all men, if it
may be. But Beza well obserneth, that that precept is without limitation, or
condition: we must simply procure things honest: but peace only, if it may be.
3. Origin makes both these exceptions, if it may be, and as much as in you
lies, to have one and the same meaning: as much as in you lies, that is, quod
proposito vestro, and fidei vestrae convenit, as it may stand with your
profession and faith: for to have society with the evil, agrees not with
your faith. 4. Gorrhan, following the interlinearie gloss, thus expounds
these words, that which in you lies, that is, in pote^are vestra est, it is in
your power to have peace with all men: and so he thinks three things to be
here noted; the difficulty, if it may be; the possibility, that which in you
is; and the generality, with all men: but neither is it true, that it is in
our power to have peace with all men, for it is God that makes one to be like
minded to an other, Romans 15.5. and these two are contrary the one to the
other, if it may be, and yet, it is in your power. 5. Wherefore these two
exceptions, are thus better distinguished; if it may be: for in some cases, we
must have no peace at all with men, but reprove them; as quando de pietate
sermo est, when the question is of piety and religion: Origin touches an
other case, that we must not societatem habere cum malis, have any society
with the evil: when we see either the truth betrayed and oppugned by
heretics, or infidels, or God offended by men's evil life, we should not under
pretense of violating peace, be silent in such occasions. Now, where he says,
that which in you lies, that is added, because some are so contentious, that
they will have no peace: but yet we must do our endeavor, that there be no
fault in us: quae tui sunt officij praesta, do that which is thy part to do,
si ille pacem non servaverit, etc. tu voluntate sis amicus, if he will not have
peace with thee, yet be thou friendly and peaceable in thine own disposition:
Chrysostom. Origin adds this may be done, cum crimina oderi^^^ ^omines amant,
when they love the men, yet hare their vices, etc. peace is not broken ^^ them
in reproouing their vices, for therein they show, that they notwithstanding
love the men themselves.

28. Quest. How we should not avenge our selves, but leave it unto God.
v. 19. Avenge not your selves, etc. The vulgar Latin reads, defendentes,
defending: but the Greek word is (...), which is better translated,
vindicantes, auenging, as Chrysostomes interpreter; or vlciscentes, taking
revenge, as Origens interpreter: Pererius takes upon him here to justify the
vulgar Latin, and shows out of Nonius Marcellus, and Gellius, how the word
defendere, to defend, was in time past used, for vlcisci, to revenge, as we are
said ho^os defendere, to defend, that is, to keep off our enemies: But
howsoever this may be admitted, that some kind of defense is joined with
revenge; yet can he not show, these 2. words to be of the same sense: I prefer
Tolets judgment, defensio aliqua^do iusta est, defense is sometime just, but
all revenge is very unjust: and therefore he thinks, it should be
interpreted, revenge: Haymo takes the word defend, in the proper sense,
showing, that Christians being railed upon, should not defend themselves, but
by silence, as Christ did before Pila^^^ wherefore if this interpretation should
be admitted, it would be thought a thing unlawful, for any Christian to defend
himself: neither does the Latin interpreter keep the property of the word,
who els-where translateth another Greek word (...), defense, 2. Tim. 4.16.

2. Ambrose thinks, that not only private persons are here concluded, but
the public Magistrate also, si plus exigat, etc. if he take greater punishment
of the offender, then the cause requires: but the magistrate reuengeth not
himself but others. Now here men are forbidden only to avenge themselves: and
yet in this case even the magistrate auengeth himself, when under color of
his office, he in respect of some particular wrong, proceeds more rigorously
against an offender. 3. But the Apostle takes not away here all liberty to
use defense by the authority of the Magistrate: for both S. Paul himself
appealed unto Caesar, and the Magistrate is appointed of God for our wealth: yet
we must not go unto the Magistrate, animo vlciscendi, with a mind to seek
revenge. For these causes a Christian may safely crave the aid of the
Magistrate: 1. to discharge his duty in defending those from wrong, which are
under his care and charge. 2. to seek the amendment of the offender, and
wrongdoer, by moderate correction. 3. to take away such evil examples and
scandals among Christians, Martyr: but one must not use the benefit of the law,
to seek his own revenge; as S. Paul, when 40. Jews conspired against him,
sought the Magistrates help for his defense and deliverance, not for their
punishment, Gualt. so that nihilo plus excusationis habet, etc. he has no
better excuse, that seeks to the Magistrate, with a malevolent mind, then if
he sought to be revenged by himself, Calv. 4. The Apostle does not only stay
our hands and tongue here from revenge, sed, ne cor huiusmodi cupiditate
teneatur, but he forbids, least the heart should be tempted, with any such
desire, Calv. 5. But whereas our Savior proceeds yet further, and says,
Matthew. 5.39. Resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right
cheek, turn to him the other also: this must not be understood according to
the strict letter: as Augustine well interprets, that this precept is not
always to be observed, quantum ad executionem, in respect of the execution in
fact, sed quantum ad praeparationem animi, but in the preparation of the mind,
that we should always be armed with patience to suffer wrong: for neither did
our Savior, when he was smitten on the cheek turn the other, but mildly
reproved him that did the violence: to this purpose Aug. epist. ad Marc. This
then is to be done, when it may either profit our brother, or makes more for
the glory of God, and not otherwise, Martyr.

Beloued^ The Apostle uses this friendly compellation: 1. because these
things, which now he speaks of, were duriora, somewhat harsh and unpleasing;
therefore he thus insinuates himself, the better to persuade, Martyr: blanda
appellatione manum inijcit, vt nos retineat, etc. he does stay us as with his
hand, by this friendly word: for otherwise men are impatient in their
affections, Calv. 2. And least they might think, that he in thus reading, did
not counsel them for their profit, he calls them, beloved, Mart. 3. And
though the world hate such as were patient in suffering wrong, yet they were
beloved of God; and so also beloved of the Apostle, Tolet. 4. And in thus
saluting them, as beloved brethren, he puts them in mind of brotherly love,
which is much hindered by seeking of revenge.

Give place unto wrath. 1. some understand this of our own wrath, to give way
unto it, not to suffer it to break forth, sed apud nos ipsos concoquamus, but
to digest and allay it in our selves, Gualt. so also Vatablus, compescite eam,
stay your anger: but this phrase is used in a contrary sense, Ephesians. 4.27.
neither give place unto the devil: to give place unto wrath, were to give way
unto it, not to resist it. 2. others refer it to the anger and wrath of the
adversary, that does wrong: and so they give two expositions, give place, that
is, permittite vobis nocere, suffer them willingly to do you wrong and hurt:
or, fugite a loco ad locum, flee from place to place, and so give way unto
them, Haymo: and Basil also has both these expositions, regul. brev. resp.
244. Origin understanding it also of the wrath of him, that does the wrong,
gives an other sense, that if he that has received the wrong, avenge not
himself, quasi effuso, and argesto furore, etc. he having digested, and
allaied his fury, waxes milder. 3. But the better interpretation is, by
wrath, to understand the divine revenge or punishment: permit Deo, vt
adversarium tuum in ius vocet, suffer God to deal with thine adversary,
Chrysostom. so also Origin understands vindictam divinam, the divine revenge,
and that wrath, quam sibi the saurizat malis actibus, which he does treasure
unto himself, by his own lewd acts: this sense follows Calv. Mart. Osiand.
Par. Perer. and it is confirmed by the sentence following, cited out of Moses,
vengeance is mine, I will repay: the meaning is then, that we should commend
our cause unto God, and he will in due time take revenge.

4. Vengeance is mine, etc. 1. Concerning the reading of the words. 1. the
vulgar Latin puts the word in the accusative, vindictam, revenge: which
reading Pererius defends to be ancient, and to have been used both by
Tertull. l. 2. cont. Marc. and Hill. in Psalm. 118. yet he confesses, quod
lectio sit rectior, etc. that it is the better reading in the nominative. And
so it is in the Greek, and so reads Hier. epist. ad Ruffia. mihi vindicta,
to me revenge, that is, belongs. 2. now whereas in the original, Deuteronomy.
32.35. whence this testimony is cited, there is the conjunction, and, which is
here omitted by the Apostle: and there a verbal word is put, recompense is
mine, which here the Apostle expresses by the verb, I will repay: herein he
partly follows the Septuagint, who do interpret it so, (...), I will repay:
and partly he expresses the sense, not tying himself to the words: neither
does the omitting of the conjunction any thing alter the sense. 2. The Apostle
here secretly meets with an objection: for whereas he forbids all revenge,
it might be said, what then, shall injuries never be requited: yes, says the
Apostle, God in his good time shall take revenge, Tol. neither must the Apostle
be so understood, as though we should votis expetere, by our vows and desire
entreat God to be revenged of our enemies: but the Apostle here shows, that
we must not revenge our selves, for this were to take Gods office upon us: we
must therefore pray first, that God would convert our enemies, but if they
continue in their wickedness, then we leave them to Gods justice, Calv. and when
the righteous sees his desire upon his enemies, non tam delectatur poena, quam
dei iustitia, he is not so much delighted in his punishment, as in the justice
of God, gloss. ordinar. 3. Now then we must leave all revenge unto God: 1.
because he is the judge of all the earth, and it belongs unto him to punish,
Gualt. 2. he takes revenge citra vllam perturbatione^, without any passion, or
perturbation, which man can not do, Gryneus. 3. and it is God only, cui
propria est generalis omnium delictoru^ vindicta, to whom is proper the
general revenge of all wrongs; which man can not do, Tolet. 4. acerbius
vindicabit Deus, God will more sharply and severely take revenge then any man
can do: whereas if a man revenge his own cause, he must not expect the divine
revenge also, Theophyl.

29. Quest. Of doing good unto our enemies.
v. 20. If thine enemy hunger, etc. 1. This precept is fitly joined unto the
former, of not auenging our selves: for not only he which renders evil for
evil, reuengeth himself, but he also, which withdraws his helping hand: and
by feeding, and giving drink, we understand, omnia humanitatis officia, all
the offices of humanity: as where the Scripture says, God suffers the rain
to fall, and the Sun to shine upon the wicked, all other temporal gifts are
understood: and P. Martyr here observes out of the civil law, that if victus
testamento legatus sit, if maintenance of food be given unto any by will, it
includes apparel, habitation, lodging, medicine for sickness. 2. Further,
whereas we are commanded to feed him, this must be understood of the time of
necessity: we are not required to bid him home to our houses, Tolet: we must
succurrere necessitati, non indulgere voluptati, succor his necessitate, not
pamper his pleasure, Caietan: and we must then relieve him, when fittest
occasion is offered to us to take revenge: this precept has not place, when
our enemy is in prosperity and of power: for then men use to faune upon their
enemies, that they may do them no harm: but then there is use of this
precept, when our enemy is in necessity, and has need of our help: and
then must we afford our help willingly and liberally: for so the word (...),
signifies not simply to feed, but to do it liberally and plentifully, Tolet.
3. This is the most perfect work of charity, which is here prescribed; and so
most hard to flesh and blood: which made Julian to deride and scoff the
Christians, as fools and idiots, because he favored not those things, which
were of the spirit of God. August. lib. de sermon. Dom. c. 33. sets down
diverse degrees of duties to be practiced toward our enemies: 1. one is not to
butt, unless one be first provoked, but then he cares not if he do greater
hurt, then he received. 2. an other degree is velle tantum laedere, to do no
more hurt, then was done. 3. a higher degree is, velle minus laedere, to do
less hurt, then was received. 4. but yet he goes further, qui nihil vult
laedere, which will do no hurt at all, though he have received much. 5. he is
yet more perfect, who being wronged, yet is ready vt amplius laedatur, to
bear it, if he be more wronged and hurt. 6. but the perfectest point of all
is, quando laesus laedenti benefacit, when he who is hurt, does good unto him,
that hurt him. These three last duties are touched by the Apostle here; not to
revenge, to give place unto wrath, to be prepared with patience to bear still,
and to feed our enemy being hungry.

30. Quest. What it is to heap coals of fire upon the head of the enemy.
1. Chrysostom understands it of the punishment of our enemy, nihil adeo
incundum est, atque de inimico sumptum videre supplicium, nothing is so
pleasant, as to see punishment taken of our enemy: But this is against the
rule of charity, which S. Paul so much urges here, for any to take delight in
the punishment of his enemy.

2. Origin interprets it commissi poenitudinem, qua eum conscientia torquet,
the repentance of the fact committed, whereby as with a fire the conscience
tormenteth the enemy: so Augustine by coals of fire, understands vrentes
poenitentiae gemitus, the burning gripes of repentance, whereby the enemy
abateth his pride and malice, seeing how the evil which he offered, is
recompensed with good: lib. 3. de doctr. Christ. c. 16. so Hierome epist. ad
Hedib. qu. 1. and Eucherius, understand this place, that beneficijs cor inimici
emollitur, the heart of the enemy is mollified by these benefits: this sense
follows Gualter: and Osiander, that the enemy shall be pricked in
conscience, and descend into himself, and never be at rest till he be
reconciled: so also Piscator understands, confusionem conscientiae, the
confusion of conscience, which causes the enemy to leave off from his malice.

3. Haymo gives this sense, ardorem charitatis paries super caput, thou shall
kindle upon him seruent and burning charity: so also Lyranus, occasiones
accendendi ignis dilectionis, etc. thou shall give him occasion to kindle the
fire of love. This sense follows Martyr, adijciet stimulum, etc. thou shall
so prick his conscience, that he shall be stirred up to love thee: so Gorrhan,
Hugo, Emmanuel Sa, Vatablus, Pererius.

4. Some put both these last senses together; as M. Calvin, animus frangetur in
vtramque partem, etc. aut beneficiis emollietur, etc. the mind of the enemy
shall both ways be qualified, either it shall be mollified with the benefits;
or if he continue still in his malice, vretur testimonio conscientiae, he shall
be set on fire, with the testimony of his conscience: so also Olevian, Pareus:
and Tolet says, these benefits bestowed upon the enemy are called burning
coals, propter vehementiam doloris, etc. and propter ardorem charitatis, etc.
for the vehemency of grief which he conceiueth, and the feruencie of charity
whereby he is inflamed: to the like purpose also Erasmus in his annotations.

5. But that other interpretation seems more agreeable, to understand the
heaping of these coals of fire, of the heaping up of Gods judgments, and the
kindling of the divine wrath against such: as Theophylact, arbiter ero inimici
tui vindex, etc. will thou be revenged of thine enemy, confer some benefit
upon him, and so I will take more severe revenge for thy wrong, etc. and Origin
also touches this sense, poenas eorum in die^ iudicit cumulamus, we do heap
up their punishment against the day of judgment: of this sense these reasons
are given. Theophylact confirms it by the words before-going, give place unto
wrath, that is, divinae irae concedendum, we must give way unto the divine
wrath: and so here the Apostle shows, how the divine wrath shall take revenge
of such malicious and perverse adversaries: M. Beza refers us to that place
in the Prove. 25.22. from whence this testimony is cited; where Solomon by
burning coals, understands iram Dei alicuius capiti impendente^, the wrath
of God hanging over ones head: so also Iunius in his annotations here in the
Syrian translation, and Rollocus following him: for thus the words stand there,
Thou shall lay coals upon his head, and the Lord shall recompense thee: that
is, God shall punish thine enemy, and reward thee. Faius adds a third
reason; because it is usual in the Scripture, by coals of fire, to understand
some divine plague, and judgment: as Ps. 18.13.120.4.

But it is thus objected against this exposition: Haymo says, if one should
do well unto his enemy with that mind, to prepare for him greater punishment
in hell, non hoc iam est charitatis, this should be no charity in him: so also
P. Martyr, we must seek nothing else but their salvation: we must not do good
to an enemy with any such intent, to increase their punishment: likewise
Pererius has the same objection, est contra charitatem, etc. it is against
charity to do well unto our enemies, with that intent, vt gravius in malum
incidant, that they fall into a greater mischief.

Answ. In these words, thou shall heap coals, etc. the event of the thing
only is showed, not the intent and purpose of the doer: like as in the former
verse he bids them not to avenge themselves, but to give way unto the wrath
and justice of God: not that we must in forbearing our own revenge, pray unto
God with a reuengefull mind, for that were also a breach of charity: but that
we should so leave our cause unto God, as a just judge, who at due time will
take revenge, if there be no amendment in our enemy.

6. Wherefore the last exposition is most agreeable, by heaping of burning
coals, to understand the increasing of their punishment; but yet a secret
condition must be implied, that if they be not won by our charity, then
burning coals are heaped to their punishment. This conditional sense
follows Gryneus; thine enemy by thy beneficence, is either become better, or
so will he love thee again, or he is made worse, and then he hurts himself,
iram Dei in se concitando, by stirring up the anger of God against him: these
burning coals then are the wrath of God, which is the more kindled against
such unthankful persons, that are not won by the kindness and beneficence of
those, which have recompensed them good for evil.

31. Quest. Of these words, v. 21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil
with goodness.
1. The Apostle concludes this place concerning patience in not revenging our
selves of our enemies, with this excellent sentence: which contains a
dehortation from impatience, be not overcome of evil: and an exhortation to
patience, but overcome evil with goodness: and so as Origin observes,
contraria contrarijs perimuntur, one contrary destroieth an other, as every
thing is increased by the like: as fire waxes greater, if fire be added to it,
and the darkness of the night is increased by a cloudie sky: so evil is
augmented, when evil is added to it; as if evil be recompensed with evil: he
is overcome of evil, qui malis provocatus reddit malum, which being provoked
by evil, renders evil again: but he overcomes evil with goodness, that
having received evil, restituit bona, does restore good things, Origin.

2. Erasmus notes, that here good and evil, are not referred unto the good or
evil man; but thereby are understood, wrong, and beneficence, or patience:
this is true: but yet he that is impatient, and is overcome of evil, thereby
also becomes evil; as Haymo notes, similis efficeris, thou art made like
unto him that did the wrong, by not suffering of wrong: as it is said, Prove.
26.4. Answer not a fool in his foolishnes, least thou also be like him.

3. So this is an excellent persuasion to recompense evil with good, because
thereby we obtain the victory; as Chrysostom here notes, inimicum tuum
interroga, etc. ask thine enemy, when he is most grieved, when thou railest
being railed upon, or when thou laughest the rayler to scorn, he will answer
thee the last, etc. and so Ambrose says, lib. 1. de offic. c. 36. vindicare se
non esse actum fortitudinis, sed abiectionis and timiditatis, that for a man to
revenge himself, is no act of fortitude, but of cowardlines and timiditie: it
is a noble thing to overcome, but more noble to overcome evil, but most noble
of all to overcome evil with good, Gorrhan.

4. And as he overcomes, that renders good for evil, so he is overcome,
which recompenceth evil for evil: he only does not bring evil upon
himself, but a greater evil, then his enemy offered him: for that was but
malum poena, the evil of punishment, as it is called: but he by his impatience
and revenge, sibi infert malum culpa, does bring on him evil, that is sin,
Tolet: and so he is overcome of a threefold evil, of the evil which his
enemy put upon him, of the evil of his own passion and corrupt affection;
and Haymo adds the third, a diabolo, he is overcome of the devil.

5. Lyranus here observes, that always it is not good to sustain wrongs, as
when thereby datur andacia malefici malis, the evil take greater
encouragement, and boldness to do evil: and to this purpose he alleges
Gregory in his moralls, Quidam cum temporalia inobis bona subtrahant, sunt
tolerandi, etc. some are to be tolerated, when they take from us our
temporalls, some are to be stayed in charity, not so much, that they rob us
not of ours, quam ne non sita rapientes, seipsos pendant, etc. as, lest in
taking that which is not theirs, they destroy themselves, etc. But then we are
to show our patience, when by defending our selves, some great evil is like
against the honor of God.

6. P. Martyr also here moves this doubt; whereas we are here bid to overcome
evil with goodness; that is, to give our enemy meat and drink in his need:
what shall become of excommunicate persons, with whom we are charged not to
eat, 1. Cor. 5.11. and such as are enemies to the truth, whom we are not to
bid, God speed, 2. epist. Iam. The answer is, that we must not do any of
these things, comitatis aut familiaritatis causa, for familiarity or
acquaintance sake, but only to minister to their necessity; ne desimus
officio charitatis, that we be not behind in the duty of charity.

4. Places of Doctrine.
1. Doctr. To ascribe all unto Gods mercy and grace does not hinder
exhortations.
v. 1. I beseech you by the mercies of God, etc. Though S. Paul ascribe our
salvation to Gods mercy, as he said before, c. 9. It is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy: yet the
Apostle notwithstanding cease not to exhort: and the reason is, because our
salvation is not wrought without means, as preaching, admonition, exhortation,
and such like: and therefore these means may be used, and yet the foundation
of Gods mercy in saving us, shall remain unshaken, Martyr: M. Calvin says
further, nullis praeceptis pia men's sic ad obsequium Dei formatur, etc. a
devout mind is not by any precepts so much framed to the obedience of God, as
by a serious meditation of his mercy; as the Apostle says, Tit. 2.11. The
grace of God, etc. teaches us to deny ungodliness.

2. Doctr. Of the threefold will of God.
v. 2. What is the good will of God, acceptable and perfect. Paulus Burgens.
addit. 2, has this distinction of the will of God, which is taken here for
voluntas signi, his signified or revealed will, that is the will of God for the
thing willed: which is prohibitionis, praecepti, consilij, in forbidding,
commanding, or counselling: as if a man abstain from evil which is forbidden,
therein he does well: but if he do also the thing commanded, now he does also
that which is pleasing unto God: if further he proceed unto the counsels, then
he is perfect: as our Savior said, Matthew. 19.21. to the young man, If thou will be perfect, go and sell all thou have, etc. This distinction may be
admitted with this caution; if counsels be understood of things indifferent, as
for a man wholly to leave the world, and to give all or half to the poor, as
Zacheus did, and such like, not to merit thereby, but to show our obedience and
thankfulness to God: in such there must be needs acknowledged, a greater degree
of perfection.

3. Doctr. Against curious questionists.
v. 3. The Apostle forbids (...), to understand above or beyond that which
is meet to be understood: which may be urged against curious and unnecessary
questions of matters concerning religion: such it seems the Church was much
troubled with in S. Paul's time, in so much that in six several places in his
two Epistles to Timothy, he gives him charge touching such contentious
questions, and vain disputations, 1. Ep. 1.4. c. 4.7. c. 6.5.20. 2. Ep.
1.16.23. where he styleth such needless questions, with the term of old
wives fables, vain disputations, profane bablings, foolish and unlearned
questions. Much like was that curious and needless endeavor of the
schoole-Diuines in reducing all Divinity to intricate questions, and idle and
vain speculations: wherein I condemn not their commendable pains, in the
debating of doubtful points fit to be discussed, but in finding out new tricks
and devises, and excogitating distinctions to obscure and corrupt the truth.

4. Doctr. That no man must forsake his Ecclesiastical function, nor aspire
above his reach.
Pet. Martyr applies the former text against those, which in times past did
refuse, or forsake the Ecclesiastical functions, to the which, they were
called, who under pretense that they had not gifts sufficient, but indeed
either for fear of the troubles incident to those places, or for love of their
own ease, or pleasure, did draw their necks out of the collar: these he says,
non sapere vt oportet, they did not understand as they ought. But in these
days there is an other extreme, which is admitted, when men do presume
ambitiously unto places above their reach, and for the which they are in
respect of gifts unmeet: neither do these sapere vt oportet: they are not
wise unto sobtietie, neither do keep themselves within their line and
compass.

5. Doctr. That the holy Ghost is God.
v. 3. As God has dealt to every man, etc. That which here is ascribed unto
God is elsewhere said to be the work of the spirit, 1. Cor. 12.11. All these
things works the self same spirit, distributing to every one as he will:
seeing then it is God that distributeth these several gifts and graces, and it
is the Spirit that so distributeth them, it does necessarily follow, that the
Spirit is God.

6. Doctr. The Scriptures are the rule of faith, from the which we must not
swerve.
v. 6. Prophecy according to the analogy, or proportion of faith, etc. This
proportion or rule of faith, is to be taken only from the Scriptures; as our
Savior bids us search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39: to them, as the line of
truth, must we have recourse, in all our teaching and preaching, not one jot to
decline the same: as the Prophet Isai says, c. 8.20. to the law, to the
testimony: if they speak not according to this word, there is no truth in
them: so Hierome says, quod non discendit de monte Scripturarum eadem
facilitate contemnitur qua approbatur, that which flows not down from the
mountain of the Scriptures, is as easily refused as approved, etc. in c. 23.
Matthew.

Doct. 7. That Christian religion expels not humane affections, but only
directs them.
v. 9. Hate that which is evil, etc. A Christian may retain hatred, but it
must be exercised against that which is evil: it is not then as the Stoics
were of opinion, that in a wise man there are no passions or affections: there
are without question, but tempered, and qualified by grace: that like as in an
harp, when time and tune is applied, to the instrument consisting of wood, or
some such like thing, and strings, there is made pleasant harmony: so humane
affections ruled by grace do make a sweet consent.

Doct. 8. Of the order and degrees in the Church and commonwealth.
v. 10. In giving honor go one before another: Among Christians then, there
are which must give honor, and some are to be honored: Christ will have order
kept in his Church, God is not the author of confusion, 1. Cor. 14.33. the
inferiors must yield honor to the superiors: the scholars to the teachers,
the people to their pastor, they which are ruled to their governors: this
makes against the Anabaptisticall confusion, which takes away the civil
superiority of one above another.

Doct. 9. That the Church of God shall never want enemies to persecute it.
v. 14. Bless them which persecute you, etc. Then the godly shall never want
persecutors to exercise their patience: there are two things which the world
hates, unity and piety, and all persecutions in the world, are either for
the truth or godliness sake: wherefore seeing such is the lot of the Church of
God in this world, they must arm themselves with patience, as the Apostle
says, Heb. 10.36. You had need of patience, that after you have done the will
of God, ye might receive the promise.

Doct. 10. How, and wherein we should love our enemies.
v. 19. Avenge not your selves, etc. We must thus be affected toward our
enemies. 1. in loving them as Christ loved us, when yet we were enemies, Romans
5.10. 2. in procuring their conversion, as Ananias did Saul's, Act. 9. 3. in
praying for them, as Stephen did for the Jews. 4. in taking heed of giving
them offense: for which cause Jacob went away from Esau, Genesis 27. 5. in bearing
their wrongs, as the Apostles did, Act. 5. 6. in molifying them with gentle
words, as Abigail did David, 1. Sam. 25. 7. in ministering necessary things
unto them, as Elisha did to the army of the Syrians, 1. King. 6. 8. in showing
compassion in their miseries, as David mourned for Saul. 9. in receiving them
to mercy, when they return to grace, as Joseph did his brethren.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. Concerning the power of free will.
1. Wherea^ (...) Apostle in this 12. chapter begins to give precepts of
righteousness, and to exhort (...) holiness: hence the enemies to the garce of
God take occasion to establish their opinion concerning free will: that a man
assisted by Gods grace, is able to perform all these precepts: Stapletons
reasons are these, Antid. p. 777.

1. The precepts of the moral law, are agreeable to the law of nature, and
to the law of nations, therefore they have not such difficulty, but that they
may be kept.

2. All things are possible to the grace of God: which grace of God is had and
obtained by prayer.

3. God commands in vain, if his precepts cannot be performed: so also
Erasmus, praecepta frigent, si nihil tribuitur voluntari, the precepts are
cold, in diatrib. advers. Luther.
if nothng be yielded to the will of man, etc.

4. Either God is unjust, in commanding that which cannot be performed, or
imprudent in requiring such obedience, which he thought might be performed and
cannot.

5. And men herein have an excuse of their disobedience, because it is not in
their power to do that which they are bidden.

Contra. 1. The perfect obedience, which the law requires, far exceeds
that righteousness, which the Law of nature, and of nations exacteth: for
that only requires an external discipline: but the moral law prescribes a
perfect conformity of the creature with the Creator.

2. To the grace of God given in perfection nothing is hard and impossible: but
so is it not given to any in this life, but in a certain measure and degree:
the regenerate by grace are made able in some measure to keep Gods
commandments, but not perfectly.

3. Neither are the precepts of God in vain, though men are unable to keep
them: for there are diverse other ends: as the unregenerate are either thereby
stirred up and called, or are made inexcusable: the regenerate by such precepts
are raised up from negligence, and slothfulness, have a rule given them to
follow, and do see their own weakness, and are encouraged and provoked to
go on still unto perfection, to attain as near it, as they can.

4. God is neither unjust in so commanding: for the creature is bound to yield
perfect obedience to the Creator, and the creature both once had received
strength in the creation, which through wilful transgression was lost, and now
a way is showed by restoration in Christ, how the will of God may be
fulfilled: neither is God imprudent, for he is not deceived in those ends,
which he propounds to himself in giving such precepts unto men.

5. Man can have no excuse for his disobedience, seeing once he had received
strength to perform the Creators will, which was lost by man's willing
transgression: and because he seeks not to have his disobedience satisfied by
the perfect obedience of Christ, and so he contemns grace offered.

2. Now touching the doctrine of truth, concerning freewill: this we affirm,
that man by nature has no power or actiuitie at all unto that which is good,
but is altogether a servant to sin, and that without grace in Christ, no man
can choose and follow that which is good: this is evident by these texts of
Scripture, Genes. 6.5. all the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart are
only evil continually: if all are evil, and only, and continually, what
place or time is left here to that which is good in man's corrupt heart: Math.
7.18. a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit: it is against the nature of
things, for evil to bring forth good, or good evil: every thing brings
forth by nature, that which is like unto it: Romans 6.20. Ye were servants of
sin: Ephesians. 2.5. we were dead by our sins: servants are not freemen, neither
can the dead do any work of the living: no more can a man by nature do any
thing, that is good, 1. Cor. 2.14. the natural man perceives not the things
of the spirit of God: if he perceive not, nor know them, he cannot choose to
do them: for there is nothing in the election of the will, which is not first
in the conception of the understanding.

But it will be objected. 1. Then is not the will of man free, if it have not
power indifferently to good or evil.

Answ. The will of man is free from coaction and compulsion, but not from
necessity: for the determination of the will to one thing, takes not away the
liberty and freedom thereof: for the will of God by the perfection of nature,
is inclined only to that which is good, in the Angels by the perfection of
grace: and to evil the will is only inclined by the perverseness of the will,
either simply and unchangeably, as in reprobate Angels and men, or for a time,
and in some sort, though not simply, as in the unregenerate: yet in all these
the will works freely without any forcing.

2. Object. Though a man without grace can do no good thing, yet his will
assisted by grace is enabled to every good thing.

Answ. 1. That good thing which is wrought in the regenerate by the grace of
Christ, proceeds not at all from their own freewill: grace works, the will
is wrought upon: for Christ says, without me ye can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5. 2.
this grace works not perfitly in any in this life, but is begun only here:
for the Apostle says, if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us, 1. Ioh. 1.8. See further hereof, Synops. Centur. 4.
err. 42. to err. 45.

Controv. 2. Whether the Mass be a sacrifice properly so called.
The Romanists would prove it out of this place v. 1. because the Apostle
exhorts to give up our bodies a living (...), sacrifice. 1. hence they reason
thus: Christians have a sacrifice properly so called, which is the oblation of
some external and sensible thing unto God by the lawful Minister: but there
is no such external sacrifice to be found among Christian, saving the Mass:
it remains then that the Mass is that external sacrifice.

2. Every Priest must have a sacrifice to offer, but there is no other
sacrifice offered up by the Priests of the new testament, but the Mass: Ergo:
to this purpose Bellarm. lib. 1. de Miss. cap. 2. and 15.

Contra. 1. Christians need not any external sacrifice to offer unto God,
such as were the legal sacrifices of beasts: but they have a true sacrifice,
(though not to offer up daily themselves) which was once killed and sacrificed
upon the cross: which now is not daily to be offered up: but the memory of
that sacrifice is to be revived by the celebration of the Sacrament: as our
Savior says, this do in remembrance of me. And beside, this sacrifice once
offered for all, there are other sacrifices, not properly so called, but
metaphorically, such are the spiritual sacrifices of Christians, as is their
mortification, mentioned by the Apole here, v. 1. such are the sacrifices of
praise, Heb. 13.15. the sacrifice of alms, Philip. 4.17. and S. Paul calls
martyrdom, a sacrifice of faith, Philip. 2.17. other external sacrifice there
is none necessary for Christians to offer.

2. Every sacrificing Priesthood must have somewhat indeed to offer, but the
ministry of the Gospel is no such sacrificing Priesthood: that is a function
of the Popes devising, one of Antichrists creatures, to have power to make and
offer up Christ's body: the sacrificing Priesthood of the new Testament, is
appropriated and determined to, and in the person of Christ, neither does pass
unto any other: Priests to offer up spiritual sacrifices all Christians are
made in Christ, Revel. 1.6. and Ministers especially, who are by calling to
offer up the prayers of the congregation unto God, and to declare his will
again unto them.

3. But touching the Mass, it is no sacrifice at all: the Eucharist is a
Sacrament, therefore no sacrifice: for a Sacrament is a representation of a
thing absent, a sacrifice is an oblation of a thing present: the one is given
from God to us, the other offered by us unto God. 2. Christ did not sacrifice
himself in his last supper, but upon the cross: therefore neither is Christ
now sacrificed in the Eucharist. 3. where a sacrifice is, there is a change and
alteration of the thing sacrificed: but in the Eucharist, the bread and wine
remain visibly and sensibly unchanged: therefore no sacrifice.

Controv. 3. Of the difference between (...), and (...), worship, and service,
whether they signify two kinds of religious worships, the one peculiar to God,
the other to the creatures.
This is generally affirmed by the Romanists, that these two words do signify
two kinds of religious worships, the first proper unto God, the other
communicated to the creatures: their arguments are these.

1. The Scripture so uses these words, giving (...), worship unto God, and
(...), service unto the creatures.

2. For otherwise there should want a proper and peculiar name for the worship
due only unto God: for service is due to man, piety to parents; and other such
terms of reverence are imparted to the creatures: only (...), worship, is
left to signify that peculiar kind of service which is due unto God, or else
none.

3. Worship is due unto ones person, in respect of the excellency thereof: now
there are three kinds of excellenc^e, divine, humane, and the middle between
both, which is of the Angels and Saints, and ^o accordingly, there must be
three kinds of worship, divine, peculiar to God, civil or humane, due unto
men, and a middle kind of worship, due unto Saints: to this purpose, Thomas, 2.
quest. 103. art. 3.

Contra. 1. It is untrue, that the Scripture so distinguishes these two words,
making the one peculiar to God, the other to the creatures: for both (...),
service, is used to express the divine worship: as Deuteronomy. 13.4. Iud. 2.7. 1.
Sam. 7.3. c. 12.11. and in diverse o^^^ ^^^aces of the old Testament, likewise
in the new, Matt. 6.24. Luke 6.23. and we shall ^^^de the divine worship to be
oftener signified, by this word (...), service, then (...), worship: for as
Pareus has diligently observed, the first is found at the least 39. times in
the old and new testament ascribed unto God, the other about 30. times. And
as (...), service, is given unto God, so (...), worship or service, is given to
the creatures: for 10. times in the old Testament, as Pareus has summed the
places, it is said, thou shall not do in the Sabbath, (...), any servile work:
as Leuit. 23.7.8.21. Numb. 28.18. the other places may be supplied out of
Pareus. And whereas Bellarmine obiecteth, that in the new Testament, (...), is
only used for the divine worship: that is not so, for once in the new
testament, is it taken for the worship of the creatures, Romans 1.25. Neither do
these two words signify two kinds of religious worships, the one due only to
God, the other communicable to the creature: for, as the worship of idols under
the term of (...), is forbidden 34. times in the old testament, and once in
the new, as learned Pareus has collected: so is it forbidden under the other
term (...), 23. times in the old testament: See Pareus further, dub. 3. so
that both these when they are used for any religious worship, are not
communicable to any creatures, but only peculiar to God: as Augustine
confesses, qu. 34. in Exodus duliam deberi Deo tanquam Domino, latreiam tanquam
Deo, that service, is due unto God, as our Lord and Master, and worship, as our
God.

2. If the Greek tongue should want a peculiar word to express the divine
worship, it were no more innonvenient, then that both in the Hebrewe and Latin
tongue, the same defect is found: and yet there is a special word, (...), Gods
worship, which is used in Scripture, to signify the divine worship due unto
God only, Ioh. 9.31. 1. Timoth. 2.10.

3. Indeed civil worship is to be given according to the difference of
degrees, and excellency of the persons: but religious worship is to be given
only as the Lord has appointed it: and yet there are more distinctions of
excellency then these three: for even among the Angels, there are diverse
degrees, as of Arkeangels, Thrones, Dominions: and so by this rule, there
should be not only three, but many kinds of worship.

4. Now touching the thing it self, this we affirm, that there are only two
kind of worships, a religious, which sometime is called (...), worship,
sometime (...), service, and this is peculiat only unto God: there is beside a
civil adoration and service, which may be given to the creatures: some of our
reasons are these.

1. Samuel says unto the people, 1. Sam. 7.3. (...), serve him only: where
(...), religious service, is commanded due only to God: so that here they can
have no evasion, by that distinction of these two words, worship and service.

2. All worship of Angels is forbidden: Coloss. 2.17. the word is (...), which
is not by our adversaries own confession, a worship peculiar unto God: so
Revel. 22. the Angel forbids John to worship him, because he was his fellow
servant: where S. John's error was not, as Bellarmine suggesteth, because he
gave that kind of religious worship, unto an angel, which is proper to God
only; but because he did worship him simply, for he does not restrain him
from (...), the divine worship, but from all (...), all adoration, and humble
prostrating of himself.

3. All idololatricall worship is forbidden, but all religious adoration given
unto the creatures is such as tends to idolatry, because it ascribes unto
the creature that which is peculiar to the Creator, as to know the heart, to
be present every where, to have power to help, and such like: for they which
pray unto Angels and Saints, and prostrate them before their images, have this
opinion of them, that they are present to hear, and help them, which only
God can do: Ergo, such religious adoration is idolatrous: See further of this
question, Synops.

Controv. 4. Of the comparison between virginity and marriage.
The Rhemists in their annotation, 1. Cor. 7.31. do extol virginity in such
sort, that they do much disgrace marriage: for these are their words,
virginity has a grateful purity and sanctity of body and soul, which
marriage has not, etc. and for this cause they say that Priests are forbidden
marriage, That they may be clean and pure from all fleshly acts of copulation,
etc.

But this were to make marriage unclean, whereas it is not the matrimonial
act, but the lascivious and wanton mind, which abuses marriage, that brings
uncleanness with it: Origin is more equal, who upon these words, v. 1. give
up your bodies a living sacrifice ^^^^ly, etc. thus writes, quoniam videmus
nonnullos sanctorum, aliquas etiam Apostol^^ (...) buisse coniugium, etc.
because we see that certain of the Saints, and some of the Apostles were
married: we cannot understand the Apostle here to mean virgintie only, etc.
but that they which are in coniugijs positi, etc. placed in marriage, and by
consent for a time do give themselves to prayer, corpora sua exhibere posse
hostiam viuentem, etc. may exhibit their bodies a living sacrifice; if in
other things sancte agant and just, etc. they deal holily and justly, etc.
and concerning virgins he further says, that if they be polluted with pride,
or covetousness, or such like, they are not to be thought, ex sola virginitate
corporis, etc. by the only virginity of their bodies to offer up a living
sacrifice unto God, etc. Thus then there may be both purity and sanctity in
marriage, and as the Apostle says, an undefiled bed, Heb. 13.4. which the
Rhemists deny: and there may be pollution and uncleanness in virginity: See
further, Synops. Papis. Centur. 3. er. 97.

Controv. 5. The mind it self, and not the sensual part only has need of
renovation.
v. 2. Be changed by the renewing of your mind: this is against the position of
the Philosophers: as Aristotle affirms, Ethic. 1.13. that (...), reason always
persuades and moves unto the best things: the Romanists do iumpe with them
herein; who think the sensual part of the mind only to be corrupted.

But 1. the Apostle here shows that the very mind, and spiritual part of
the soul has need of renouation. 2. indeed in civil things and moral
duties, the reason may be a guide, but in divine and supernatural, it is blind
and erroneous. 3. and if it be here objected, that the Philosophers, as
Socrates, Plato, did many excellent things by the light of reason: I answer,
that yet in those things they failed of the true end: for they respected not
the honor and glory of God, but sought perfection by their own endeavor:
and herein they showed the error and corruption of their mind. 4. yea the
reason is so far off, from being a perfect guide, that even in the
regenerate, it has need still to be renewed, as in the Romans here, to whom
S. Paul writes: how much more in the unregenerate.

Controv. 6. Of the perfection of the Scriptures against traditions.
v. 2. To prove what the will of God is, acceptable, and perfect: this perfect
will of God, is no where else revealed but in the scriptures: if they contain a
perfect revelation of the will of God, then there need no other additaments;
what use then of humane traditions, such as many the Church of Rome is pestered
with, which have no warrant out of the Scripture: which being able to make the
man of God perfect to every good work, 2. Tim. 3.17. all other helps and
supplies, are superstitious and superfluous: See further hereof, Synops.
Centur. 1. err. 11.13.

Controv. 7. Against freewill.
v. 2. And be not fashioned, etc. Tolet hence collecteth, because the vulgar
Latin thus reads, nolite configurari, etc. have you no will to be conformed,
etc. that it is positum in arbitrio hominis, placed in the will of man, whether
thus to be fashioned, or not: whereas there is no such word in the original,
for (...), signifies be not fashioned, not be ye not willing to be fashioned:
and beside the very next words, be ye changed by the renewing of your mind,
do confute this opinion, and evidently show, that a man has no freewill of
himself unto that which is good: Indeed the Scriptures do use exhortations
to the regenerate, to show, that it must be the work of the spirit, to stir
them up to do those things whereunto they are exhorted: See further Synops.
Papis. Centur. 4. err. 46.

Controv. 8. Against the arrogancy of the Pope.
v. 3. According as God has dealt to every man, etc. Then every man has his
certime measure and stint of gifts: one has not received all: as the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 7.7. Every man has his proper gift of God, etc. Then that man
of pride here shows himself in his colors, who arrogateth to himself
authority over the whole Church: and boasts to have all knowledge locked up
in his breast: wherein he shows not himself to be a servant of Christ's: for
all his servants have received a portion and measure of gifts; one alone has
not all, Pareus.

Controv. 9. Against the superstitious orders of the Popish Clergy.
v. 7. Or he that teaches, on teaching, etc. Pet. Martyr and Gualter upon this
place do show, what was the oeconomie, ecclesiastical policy and discipline
of the Primitive Church: how first they had praesides doctrinae, the presidents
of doctrine, then they had assistants, the Seniors and Elders, qui disciplinam
publicam conservabant, which did preserve the public discipline: the next were
the deacons, which dispensed the treasure of the Church, unto whom were joined,
such as attended the sick: as in this place, the Apostle sets down five
offices of the Church, pastors and teachers, that attended the spiritual
edifying of the Church: then distributors, rulers, shewers of mercy, whose
care was for the external discipline: but now ne nomina^ quidem extant, etc.
not so much as the names remain of these functions, Martyr: or as Gualter,
praeter inauia nomina, etc. beside vain names and titles, nothing is left in
the Popish Church: but they substituted other orders, as Acoluthists,
exorcistes, doorekeepers, candlebearers, and such like: See more hereof,
Synops. Centur. 1. err. 69.

Controv. 10. The Pope not the head of the Church.
v. 5. We are one body in Christ: Beside that in this place the Church is said
to be the body of Christ, and so he consequently the head thereof: as S. Paul
calls directly, Ephesians. 1.22. Coloss. 1.18. and so this being a title
peculiar to Christ, to be head of the Church, no mortal man can arrogate it to
himself: it may be thus further showed. 1. the Apostles did not take upon them
to be heads of the Church: for S. Paul both here, and 1. Cor. 12. does reckon
himself in the number of the members. 2. the Church has not two heads, Christ
is one, the Pope cannot be another. 3. the head gives direction and influence
to the body, none of these offices can the Pope do unto the Church. 4. the
Church is not the spouse or body of the Pope, therefore he is not the head
thereof. 5. from Peter to Clemens 8. 200. Popes have died, but the head of the
Church dies not, for then the Church should die with it, 6. from Euaristus to
Pius 5. the Papal sea was vacant at times, 38. years, 8. months, and 29.
days, as Mercator casts it in his cronologie, then so long was the Church
without an head, if the Pope were the head. 7. there have been at one time 2.
and sometime three Popes, then should the Church have had so many heads, ex
Pareo.

Controv. 11. That to love our enemies is a precept, and commanded, not
counseled as indifferent.
v. 14. Bless them which persecute you, etc. The Romanists do hold, that a
man is not bound extra casum necessitatis, but in case of necessity to succor
his enemy, and to apply any particular prayer unto him, but only in general:
in case of necessity to do it, it is a precept, but otherwise, and in other
cases it is a counsel only: to this purpose Thomas 22. qu. 25. whom Pererius
follows, 2. disput. numer. 8. Tolet adds further, for a man to be ready in
mind, not only not to revenge himself, but to suffer more wrong, as to hold
his other cheek when he is smitten upon the one, is a precept, but in fact to
do it, is but a counsel only, annot. 30. in fine: and a precept and counsel
(they say) do thus differ: the first belongs to all Christians, and to leave
it undone is sin, the other is only for such as are perfect, which though to
leave undone be no sin, yet to do it, is of great merit.

Cont. 1. S. Paul's precept is here general, to bless our persecutors, there
is no case or time excepted: Christian charity must not be restrained nor
limited: who then sees not, but that this minsing and cutting of the
Apostolical precept, is against the rule of charity. 2. to be always ready
in mind, and in fact when occasion requires to keep patience toward our
enemy, is a precept and commanded: but according to the strict letter, to
turn the cheek to the enemy, when one is stricken, is neither precept nor
counsel: for our Blessed Savior being smitten on the one cheek did not
turn the other, who was most perfect in all his actions. 3. a difference
between precepts and counsels we grant, in respect of the matter and subject:
the one is of things necessary, the other of matters in their own nature
indifferent: such as that is, 1. Cor. 7.15. of bestowing ones virgin, but
otherwise they are both general and not to be omitted, and neither are
meritorious: See further Synops. Centur. 2. err. 84.

6. Moral observations.
Observe. 1. Of the necessity of good works and a godly life.
v. 1. I beseech you brethren, etc. S. Paul having hitherto in this epistle
laid down the doctrine of justification, and of other principal points of
Christian religion, now begins to exhort unto holiness, and to the showing
forth of the fruits of our regeneration: as here in this place he entreats
them to give up themselves and their bodies to the service of God: for this is
the end of our redemption and deliverance to serve the Lord, Luke 1.74. A.
Fulvius, when he had taken away his son from following Cataline, he killed
him, saying, non Catalina te genui sed patriae, I did not beget thee for
Cataline, but for the country: but it may be better said of us, that God has
not created us to serve the Devil, the world, or the flesh, but to serve him:
When Phillip King of Macedon, being somewhat pleasant, did dance and leap
among the poor captives, insulting over them, and vpbrayding their misery,
Demades said unto him in this manner, cum fortuna tibi Agamemnonis personam
imposuerit, uonne te pudet Thersitem agere, seeing fortune has put upon thee
the person of Agamemnon (that is of a King) art not thou ashamed to play
Thersites (who was a base, contemptible, and odious, railing companion:) so
when God has called us to this high dignity to be called his sons, and has
made us heirs of his kingdom, yea Kings in Christ, it is a shame for us, to
abase our selves to the vile condition of being servants unto sin.

Observe. 2. We must not conform our selves to the fashion of this world
v. 2. And be ye not fashioned, etc. Chrysostom observes well, that the
figure and fashion of this world is but a transitory thing: it is tanquam
persona scenica non consistens rerum substantia, as a person counterfetted upon
the stage, not a thing of any substance: and therefore it were a vain thing to
conform our selves to it: therefore the Apostle says, We should use this
world as if we used it not, for the fashion of this world goes away, 1. Cor.
7.31.

Observe. 3. Against curiosity.
v. 3. That no man understand above that, which is meet, etc. This makes
against those which are curious searchers and priers into Gods secrets,
neglecting those things, which are for their necessary knowledge and use:
Sirach gives good counsel, Ecclesiastic. 3.22. Seek not out the things that
are too hard for thee, etc. but what God has commanded, think upon that with
reverence, etc. Augustine says well, melius est dubitare de occultis, quam
litigare de incertis, etc. it is better to doubt of hid matters, then to
contend about uncertain. The Philosopher was worthily reproved of his maid,
who while he was vewing the stars fell into a pit, that was before him: such
are they, which seek after things to high above their reach, and let go
things more profitable.

Observe. 4. Against pride and vain glory.
v. 3. That every one understand according to sobriety. Chrysostom has here
an excellent moral against arrogancy, when men do attribute more to
themselves then there is cause, and are puffed up with pride. 1. he compares
the arrogant man to a very fool: for their speeches are alike vain, and
foolish: the proud man says, I will set my throne above the stars, Isay. 14.
I have gathered all the earth as one does gather eggs, Isai. 10.1^. what could
a very idiot and fool say more: saving that herein they differe, that fools
are pitied, because they are such by nature, not by their own fault, but a
proud man none has pity of: periter desipiunt cum illis, veniam tamen vt
illi, non merentur, they are unwise like the other, but they deserve not
pardon, as the other.

2. He that exceeds the measure of prudence, and is pust up in pride
becomes foolish: he is timorous, and rash, and subject to all infirmities
whatsoever: as Nabal of a proud man, became foolish, and afterward so faint
hearted, and timorous, that through fear he died: for like as corpus
intemperatum factum quibusvis est passionibus obnoxium, a body being
intemperate, and having lost the complexion, is subject to every passion; so
the mind having lost humility and prudence, is apt to every infirmity: and
like as the eye being blind, makes all the members blind, so is it with
arrogancy, that blinds the mind.

3. An arrogant man makes himself a monster: forsan tibi pennas
innascioptares, it may be thou would wish thou had feathers and wings: for
a proud man omnino volare conatur, endeavors as it were to fly in his mind,
and so becomes a very monster, a man with wings.

4. In the last passage, he compares a proud man not to ashes or dust, or
dirt, for they are to good; but they seem to me stupae accensae similes, to be
like unto tow set on fire: which is soon kindled, and soon extinct, and it
leaves nothing behind it: so is the mind of an arrogant man quickly inflamed,
and as soon quenched, and come to nothing: more casual then a spiders web,
and more light and vain then smoke.

5. Observe. Of hospitality.
v. 13. Giving your selves to hospitality. Chrysostom here has an other
worthy treatise concerning hospitality, against those which only do not
give, but afflict and grieve the poor, with reuiling words. 1. he speaks
against their curiosity, which sift and examine the poor narrowly, before
they will give him any thing: if Abraham had done so, he had missed of
entertaining the Angels, and so if thou curiosa scruteris pauperem, do
curiously sift a poor man, thou may sometime let slip a man approved of
God: but what if he be a lewd man of life, does not God suffer the sun to
shine upon such, and do not thou think him worthy of a morsel of bread: it
is extreme insolency, pro vno pane totam hominis miseri vitam curiose
inquirere, for a piece of bread to sift the whole life of a poor miserable
man: but what if he be thine enemy, yet remember, quod famulus illius es, qui
percutientem se curavit, etc. that thou art his servant, which cured him, that
smote him: yea Christ, os illud, quod mortem operatum erat, exosculatus est,
kissed that mouth, which wrought his death.

2. In the next passage Chrysostom shows how monstrous a thing it is, not
only to withdraw benevolence from the poor, but to persecute them with evil
language. 1. thou addest affliction to affliction, velut tempestatem
tempestati, as one tempest to an other: and him that flees unto the haven,
thou do drive back upon the rocks. 2. quomodo peccatorum tuorum veniam
petis, qui eum convitiaris, qui tibi nihil peccavit, etc. how can thou ask
pardon of thy sins, who railest on him, that has not sinned against thee? 3.
thou art herein more cruel then the saluage beast: for they only ravin, when
their hunger compels them, tu nemine cogente fratrem tuum devoras, mordes,
laceras, thou, no man compelling thee, do devour thy brother, bite him,
tear him, etc. 4. how do thou think to receive the holy oblation, qui
linguam humano sanguine rubefecisti, which have died thy tongue red with man's
blood. 5. they which feed not the poor are condemned, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: and what punishment,
think thou, shall they have, qui non solum non pasceunt, sed and
convitiantur, etc. which do not only not feed, but rail also and revile,
etc.

6. Observe. That no man should stand upon his own wit, but use the counsel
and advice of others.
v. 16. Be not wise in your selves: because every one sees not all, and the
most prudent may be sometime deceived, it is very expedient, that we should
give ear unto the counsel of others: we see that Rebeccahs advise unto Jacob,
corrected the oversight of Isaac, who partially would have given the blessing
unto Esau, refusing Jacob: Moses that wise lawgiuer hearkened to the counsel of
Hobab his father in law: and Naaman refused not the counsel of his poor
servant, who advised him to do as the Prophet had prescribed.

7. Observe. How to overcome our enemies with patience and lenity.
v. 20. Thou shall heap coals of fire, etc. that is, either thou shall win
him with thy benefits, as some interpret it, or, heap up a greater judgment
against him: And true it is, that oftentimes the malice of the enemy, which is
by violence and resisting more inflamed, is by lenity assuaged: as Saul's fury
toward David, was for the time much abated, when David spared him in the cave,
having cut off the lap of his garment, and an other time when he took from
him his spear, and pot of water, 1. Sam. 24.26. In foreign stories, even among
the heathen, memorable mention is made of Phocion that noble Athenian, who
being unworthily condemned to die, when he was about to drink the deadly
cup, being asked of his friends, what message he would send to his son;
answered, mando ei hoc, vt oblrviscatur potus huius, this I command him, that
he forget this drink, which the Athenians have appointed for me. Aelian. lib.
12.

The like Valerius Maximus lib. 4. c. 2. writes of Cicero, who defended
Gabinius in open judgment, who in his Consulship had expelled him the city:
likewise twice he pleaded for Vatinius, that showed himself a professed enemy
always to Cicero. Not unlike unto these is the example of Balduinus king of
Jerusalem, who having put the Arabian Saracens to flight, and taken great
spoils, in his return found upon the way a woman ready to travel of child,
wife unto a chief Prince of the Arabians, whom he had left behind, being
pursued, whom he covered with his own mantle, and appointed a woman to attend
upon her, and left with her two milch camels: This his kindness was not lost:
for afterward he being besieged by the Arabians, and put to a great straight,
was delivered by the means of that Captain, whose wife he had succored in
her extremity.

CHAP. XIII.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
1. Let every soul be subject to the higher (or supereminent) powers: for
there is no power but of God: and the powers that be, are ordained of God.

2 Whosoever therefore sets himself against the power, ( resists, B.G.L.
but there is an other word for that afterward) resists the ordinance of God:
and they that resist, shall receive to themselves condemnation. ( judgment, V.)

3 For rulers B. ( magistrates, G. Be. (...)) are not to be feared ( are not a
fear, Gr.) for good works, but for evil: will thou then not fear ( be
without fear, G.) the power? do well, so shall thou have praise of the same.

4 For he is the minister of God for thy good: ( wealth, B.G.) but if thou do
evil, fear: for he bears not the sword in vain: ( without cause, L. for
naught, G. (...)) for he is the minister of God, and revenger for wrath ( to
take vengeance, G.) on him, that does evil.

5 Wherefore it is necessary to be subject, not because of wrath only, but
also for conscience sake.

6 For, for this cause pay ye also tribute: for they are Gods ministers,
bending themselves ( serving, L.B. applying themselves, G. (...), with force
and strength applying: see. c. 12.12.) to the same purpose.

6 Give unto all men their duty: tribute, to whom ye owe tribute; custom, to
whom custom; fear to whom fear; honor, to whom honor.

8 Owe nothing to any man, but to love one an other: for he that loves an
other ( his neighbor, L.S.) has fulfilled the Law.

9 For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall
not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet: and if
there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended ( capitulated, Gr.
not restoared, L. fulfilled, S.) in this saying, namely B.Be. (in this, Gr.)
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

10 Charity does not evil to the neighbor: therefore is charity the
fulfilling of the Law.

11 And that considering ( knowing, Gr.) the season, that it is now time ( the
hour, Gr.) that we should be raised ( awake, B.) from sleeepe: for now is
salvation nearer us (better, then our salvation is nearer, L.B.G.) then when we
believed.

12 The night is past on, ( passed before, L. praecessit, but it is better
interpreted processit, is past on, Be.) and the day is approached: ( is
atiband, G. is come nigh, B.) let us therefore cast away the works of darkness,
and put on the armor of light, ( the habit which beseems the light, Be. ad.)

13 So that we walk honestly, as in the day, not in ryoting, Be. ( or
gluttony, G. in music, S.) or drunkenness, neither in chambring, and
wantonness, nor in strife, and envying:

14 But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no care ( make no persuasion,
Gr. B.) for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

2. The Argument, method, and parts.
IN this Chapter from the general exhortation to the offices of charity, the
Apostle comes unto particular duties, as unto the Magistrate, and then
falls again into the commendation of love, dehorting from gross vices, and
corruptions of life: so then of this chapter there are three parts, 1. the
first of duty to be exhibited to the magistrate, to v. 8. 2. of love in
general, v. 8, 9, 10. 3. the exhortation is extended from v. 11. to the end.

1. In the first the proposition is expressed, v. 1. every soul must be
subject to the magistrate: which is confirmed by diverse reasons: 1. from the
author or efficient cause, which is God, amplified by the contrary, that may
which resist magistrates, resist against the ordinance of God. 2. from the
effects, the punishment of those which disobey, v. 2. 3. from the double end
of magistracy or government, the praise of wel-doers, v. 3. and the punishment
of them that do evil, v. 4. 4. from the inconvenience that ensues, he that
disobeieth, violateth a good conscience: therefore for conscience sake we must
be subject, v. 5. 5. from a part to the whole: they pay tribute, therefore they
must yield obedience also in other things, v. 6. 6. ab aequo, from the equity
of it: we must pay unto all, that which is due, but subjection is due unto the
magistrate, as he proves by diverse particulars, v. 7. Ergo.

2. In the second part the Apostle exhorts unto mutual love. 1. from the
rule of equity, it is a common debt, which one owes unto an other. 2. from
the effects, it is the fulfilling of the law, v. 8. which he proves, 1. by a
particular induction, v. 9. 2. by remoouing of the contrary effects: love does
none evil unto our neighbor, therefore it is the fulfilling of the law.

3. Then the Apostle concludes with a general dehortation from certain
vices: which is joined with an exhortation to the contrary virtues. And the
same is either general urged by two arguments: 1. one taken from the state of
the regenerate, salvation is nearer now, then before, v. 11. 2. the other from
the circumstance of time, which is propounded figuratively; the night is past,
and the day is come, v. 12. Then the particular exhortation follows, v. 13.
with a dehortation from the contrary vices: and so he concludes again
generally concerning both, v. 14.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. Of the occasion, which moved the Apostle in this chapter to entreat
of the duty of subjects to the Magistrate.
1. Chrysostom. thinks, that the Apostle having treated in the former
chapter of patience, and not rendering evil for evil, does very oppotunely now
move obedience unto the Magistrate; multo enim magis illis, qui benefaciunt,
etc. for much more ought we to obey them, which deserve well of us; if we
should not be avenged of them, which do evil.

2. Beside he gives an other reason, that whereas the Christians had in those
days many troubles, tentations, and trialls, it was needless, van as
tentationes superaddere, to add vain idle tentations and occasions of
trouble, namely, in resisting the Magistrates.

3. Calvin thinks, that this precept was added especially, because of the
Jews, to whom it seemed a very unmeet thing, that progenies Abraha in
servitute maneret, that the progeny of Abraham should remain in servitude
under heathen governors: the same reason is touched by Peter Martyr.

4. Pareus adds, that S. Paul's doctrine concerning Christian liberty, as he
said before, c. 6. we are not under the law, but under grace, might have been
misconstrued, as though Christians should not be subject to civil laws: and
therefore he seasonably urges civil obedience.

5. Add hereunto, that the Christians were defamed, as enemies unto the
policy of Commonwealths, and civil Magistracy: which false surmise was the
cause of the persecuting of Christians, as Clemens Alexandrin. lib. 4. stromat.
therefore the Apostle to give satisfaction to the Gentiles, thus exhorts:
this moved Justinius Martyr, in his 2. apology unto Antonius the Emperor, to
clear the Christians by many arguments of this surmised imputation: Tolet.

6. And further, whereas the Apostle before had taught, that Christians should
not avenge themselves: some might have gathered thereupon, that it were not
lawful to use the defense of the Magistrate against wrongs: nay that it was
not lawful for the Magistrate to take revenge of evil doers, therefore the
Apostle very fitly falls into this discourse: Gualter.

7. And lastly, because the Magistrates were then infidels, least that the
faithful might take themselves free from the command of Infidels, as subjects
from their Magistrates, servants from their Masters, the Apostle does interlace
this treatise, Calvin, Gualter: for these and such like reasons does the
Apostle so inculcate this doctrine of civil obedience, as in this place, and
1. Tim. 12. Tit. 3.1. and S. Peter agrees, 1. Pet. 2.13.14.

Quest. 2. How every soul should be subject to the higher powers.
1. Every soul. 1. The soul is put, a part for the whole, by the figure
synecdoche, according to the phrase of Scripture: as Haymo gives instance of
that place Genesis 46. how Jacob went down to Egypt with 70. souls: and Act. 27.
there were 275. souls with Paul in the ship: as sometime the flesh, the other
part of man is taken for the whole: as all flesh shall see the salvation of the
Lord. 2. But Origens conceit is here somewhat curious, as Martyr and Erasmus
note, that it is not said, every spirit, but every soul, for the spiritual
man, which has renounced the world, has nothing wherein to be subject to the
superior powers: as the Apostle said, gold and silver have we none: he that
has none of these, no^ habet vnde subiaceat potestat ib. has nothing wherein
to be subject to the powers, etc. But even the Apostles themselves were
obedient unto them. 3. he says, every soul, quia debet esse voluntaria
subiectio, because this subjection must be voluntary, not only in body, but
in soul, Gorrhan. 4. and further by this is signified, that all mortal men,
none excepted, should be so subject; and therefore he says, every soul. 5.
Caietane yet notes further, that not only our bodies, and our substance, but
even our souls should be subject unto the secular powers, in ijs quae possunt
legitime imperare, in those things, wherein they may lawfully command.

Be subject. The word is (...), which signifies to be subordinate: where 1. is
insinuated the order of government, which whosoever resists, brings in
disorder and confusion. 2. and Chrysostom notes, that he says not, be
obedient, but be subject; which is a general word, comprehending all other
duties and services. 3. but this must be limited unto those things, which are
lawfully commanded: for otherwise, if they shall require any thing against the
glory of God, and our conscience, we must follow the example of the Apostles,
Act. 4. to obey God, rather then man, Gualt. so Haymo well observes, that as
man consists of body and soul, so he must inviolably in his soul, servare
fidem Deo, keep his faith unto God, and in his body serve the powers.

To the superior or chief powers. 1. The vulgar Latin reads, sublimiaribus,
higher powers: which Erasmus and Beza think not to be so fit, because the word
in the original is not in the imperative: and this would give occasion to some
to think, that obedience should be given only to the chief magistrate. But
they are called high in respect of the people, over whom they are set, not
compared among themselves: for not only the King as the chief, but other
inferior officers and ministers are to be obeyed; as S. Peter shows, 1.
epist. 2.3.14. 2. Caietane observes, that this word high, or excelling, is
added to exclude tyrants, who are not excelling Lords, and so he takes the
Apostle to speak de legitimis potestatb. of lawful powers: but I prefer the
ordinary gloss, which understands the Apostle of secular powers, sive
bonis, sive malis, whether good, or evil: and Peter Martyr observes well,
that here we must not inquire, quo iure, quave iniuria, by what right or wrong,
these powers obtained their authority: for the Romans by force, not by right,
were at this time Lords of the world: but the Magistrates for the present are
to be obeyed. 3. Chrysostom also notes well, that the Apostle speaks not of
the person of the governors, sed de ipsa re, but of the thing it self, of
their authority, and power: that howsoever they are unworthy of their
authority, which abuse it, yet the power, which they have, is to be obeyed. 4.
Lyranus, and Haymo before him, think this place to be understood of spiritual
governors, and Prelates, as well as secular and civil: but Chrysostom, and
Basil. lib. de constitut. Monach. c. 23. do better interpret this place of
civil governors: and Basils reason is, because the Apostle afterward makes
mention of tribute, which is due only to the secular power: And therefore
Calvine justly takes exception to the Romanists, which out of this place would
conclude, that obedience is to be given also to the Prelates of the Church.
Pererius here, disput. 1. numer. 3. opposes Basil unto Calvin, who should
think, that obedience to Prelates may be concluded out of this place: but
Basil in the place before alleged, directly shows, that the Apostle
speaks de potestatibus mundi, of the worldly, not of spiritual powers: only
he reasons from hence, from the less to the greater; that if such obedience
be to be given to temporal governors, quanto magis, etc. how much more to
spiritual; and then for proof hereof, he alleges that place, Heb. 13.17.
Obey those which have the oversight of you.

3. Quest. How the powers that be are said to be of God.
1. God in the beginning gave a threefold power unto man: first over himself:
God gave unto man freewill, whereby he should govern all his actions: then he
gave him power over the other creatures: and thirdly, he gave unto man power
over man, first in families, as unto the father over his children, to the
master over his servants, to the husband over his wife: then in the politic
regiment, of what kind soever it be, whether Monarchical, of one,
Aristocraticall, of many, and those the best, or Democraticall, which is the
popular state: all these had their beginning from God, some mediatly, some
immediately. Pareus.

But it will be asked, how and when this order of government, was first
instituted of God: the answer is, that God imprinted in man by nature, this
original light, to see the necessity of government, without the which there
would be no order: as we see, that the unreasonable creatures, as the silly
bees have their governor, the cranes also, and sheep: Chrysostom adds
further, marvel not, that God has appointed rule and government among men,
cum istud in corpore fecerit, seeing he has done the like in the body: for
some parts are made to direct and guide the rest: this natural instinct of
government the Lord estsoone confirmed by precept; as Genesis 9.6. Whosoever
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: which is not understood
of every one, for God is not the author of confusion, but of the Magistrate, by
whom the murder should be punished, Martyr.

3. Tolet here has a very good distinction, between potestas, vsus
potestatis, assumptio in potestatem, the power, the use of the power, and the
assuming of the power: for the power may be of God, when the abuse of the power
comes of the devil, and of man's own corruption: as Saul had his kingly
power from God, but he abused it unto cruelty: and the assuming of that power,
and the entering into it, is often unlawful; as Abimelech by cruelty aspired
the government, Judge. 9.

4. Beside, the same author observes well a difference between the Civil and
Ecclesiastical regiment: for the first is so from God, that yet the
institution thereof may be devised by man; as a king may in his kingdom
according to the necessity of the state, erect new officers and ministers, and
therefore it is called, the ordinance of man, 1. Pet. 2.13. but the spiritual
power is immediately instituted of God, and therefore the Apostle says, Ephesians.
4.11. He gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, etc. Thus
far Tolet goes well: but this that is well said, he corrupts with a dram
of his Popish dregs; that Christ gave this power to make Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical ministers to Peter, which power in successores eius amanavit,
etc. did issue forth to all his posterity: and so, says he, all
Ecclesiastical power did not immediately come from Christ, but only prima
potestas, the first power, out of the which the rest do slow; but so is it not
in the secular state.

Contra. 1. As though the other Apostles did not as well constitute Bishops,
Elders, and other officers, as well as Peter: the Deacons, Act. 7. were chosen
by the common consent of the Apostles: and Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders in
every Church, Act. 14.23. 2. it will be hard for him to prove the Pope to be
Peter's successor, and to succeed in his Apostolical power. 3. If the
original Ecclesiastical power only were immediately from Christ, so is it in
the secular also: for that originally has Gods immediate warrant, that there
should be rulers, and governors over the people: and so there should be no
difference at all in this behalf. 4. Wherefore we acknowledge this a true
difference between the Civil and Ecclesiastical state propounded by Tolet,
but again rejected, and disavowed by him; that every Ecclesiastical office
and ministry was immediately instituted by Christ, and his Apostles, though now
mediatly by the Church, men are assumed to these offices; but in the Civil
government, the institution only in general is from God, many particular
offices have been invented by men.

4. Quest. Whether every superior power be of God.
That every Magistracy and government is not of God, it may be thus objected.

1. The Lord says by his Prophet Hoshea, 8.4. they have set up Princes, but
not by me: they have made Princes, and I knew it not.

2. A tyrannical government is not of God, but many governments in the world
are tyrannical, as of the Turks and Mahometans.

3. Magistrates are created, and appointed by men, and S. Peter calls them
humane ordinances, 1. Pet. 2.13. therefore they are not all of God.

4. Satan is called the prince of the world, Ioh. 14.30. yea the god of the
world, 2. Cor. 4.4. and he takes upon him to distribute the kingdoms of the
world, Matthew. 4.9. therefore they are not of God.

5. And if every power were of God, then the supreme authority, which the
Pope challenges over the universal Church, should be of God.

Ans. First in general this distinction is to be premised, which may serve to
dissolve every particular objection: we must make a difference between the
power in it self considered, and the way of attaining unto that power, and the
use or manner of execution: the first is always of God, but not the second,
and the third, for when any by briberie, cruelty, or any other corrupt means,
attaineth unto any Magistracy, or if he abuse his power to the maintenance of
superstition, and to oppress the people of God, in neither of these respects,
is it said to be of God. Origin does thus illustrate this, by the similitude of
the parts of the body, as the sight and hearing, are natural faculties given
us of God, and yet men may abuse them ad impia and iniqua ministeria, to wicked
and ungodly services: Chrysostom shows this difference by the example of
marriage: carnal copulation lawfully used in marriage is of God, yet there may
be an unlawful cohabitation and copulation with women, which is not of God: so
in the Magistracy, we must distinguish between the institution and the abuse
thereof, the first is of God, so is not the other: now for a further answer in
particuliar we say,

1. To the first place objected out of Hoshea, diverse answears are made. 1.
Hierome thinks that the Prophet speaks of Saul, who was chosen errore
populi, non voluntate Domini, by the error of the people, not by the will of
God: but it is evident, that the Prophet in that place touches the
preposterous setting up of Jeroboam and his idolatry, as v. 5. Thy calfe O
Samaria did cast thee off. 2. Wherefore the better answer is, that concerning
the thing it self, the renting of the kingdom from Solomon, and giving of
ten tribes to Jeroboam, was the Lords own act, as the Prophet Ahiah says,
1. King. 11.31. but in respect of the circumstances, as the rebellion of the
people against their lawful king, and their falling away from his obedience,
without consulting with God, so was it not the Lords act, Pareus. 3. Pet.
Martyr says further, that he is said to have reigned but not by God, in
respect of the manner of his government, quia se non accomodavit ad scriptam
and patefactam Dei voluntatem, because he applied not himself to the written
and revealed will of God. 3. Faius puts both these answears together, that
Jeroboam and such other governors, are said to reign, but not by God, because
they invade the kingdom, praeter ordinem, etc. beside or contrary to the
order instituted of God, and sibi non Deo regnant, they reign for themselves,
not unto the honor and glory of God: yet the power it self which they have
is of God: to this purpose Gregory writes well, as he is alleged in the
ordinary gloss, tumoris elatio, non ordo potestatis in crimine est, potentiam
Deus distribuit, elationem potentiae malitia nostrae mentis invenit, the
swelling pride, not the orderly power is to be blamed, God gives the power,
but the proud usage of the power, the malice of man's mind has found out, etc.

2. Tyrannical government, as it is tyrannical is not of God, for that is
the fault and corruption of the governor: but the power it self of governing
is notwithstanding of God: riches gotten by usury, extortion, and other evil
means, cease not to be the gifts of God, and good in themselves, though they
are not good to them, which get them evil: so we must here discern between
the right which God has in such things, which always remains in God, and
his judgments, whereby he so distributeth such things, as the corruption of
man often concurreth in them, and the unjust usage or usurpation, or
acquisition, whereby such things, though good in themselves, yet are not good
unto such usurpers.

3. The second clauses exclude not the first: though diverse forms of
gouernements are found out by men, the first institution notwithstanding was
from God: as the fruits of the earth are brought forth by the industry and
labor of man, yet cease they not to be Gods gifts: so Ecclesiastical
functions, as of Apostles, Prophets, were at the first immediately appointed by
God: yet now also Pastors are of God, though called mediately by men. And S.
Peter calls the Magistracy an humane ordinance, both subiective, because man
is the subject thereof, by whom it is executed, and obiective, because humane
affairs are the object thereof, and (...), in respect of the end, because it
is for man's good: yet the original institution is of God.

4. Satan is called the Prince of the world, not simply as though he did what
he would, but because he is Gods minister in the world, and used for the
punishment of worldly men, and has so much power over men, as is granted unto
him: and he is called the God of the world; because he is so reputed of worldly
men: and Satan therein lied, in saying that the kingdoms of the world were
his to bestow.

5. The episcopal authority of the Bishop of Rome, so he were a right Bishop,
we deny not to be of God: but his challenge of universal dominion, is not
potestas, sed potestatis vl^^^, a power, but an abuse or disease of the power,
which he has not by Gods ordinance, but by his own ambition, the devils
instigation, and Gods sufferance and connivence, Pareus.

Quest. 5. How far evil governors have their power from God, whether by his
permission and sufferance only.
1. Pererius here taking occasion to slander the Protestants, that they should
hold, that Deus est vere author and effector quorumlibet peccatorum, God is the
very author and effector of any sins whatsoever; finds great fault with
Bucer for thus writing, that whosoever has any power whether he use it well or
evil, or come unto it by right or wrong, that it is undoubtedly true, eam
potestatem a Deo accepisse, that he received that power from God, etc.
whereupon he infers, that he which by manifect tyranny invaded the
government, Dei fuerit consilio and voluntate assumptus, was by the counsel
and will of God assumed and taken unto that government: and further he falls
into a great admiration, that they which deny obedience to Christ's Vicar, yet
do persuade obedience to be given to every Tyrant: to this purpose Pererius,
numer. 6. And consequently the opinion of the Romanists is, that evil
governors do rise up in the world, permittente Deo, God only so permitting,
Tolet annotat. 3.

Contra. 1. It is a mere slander, that Protestants lay any such imputation
upon God, as to make him the author of evil: nay the Romanists are rather
guilty hereof, that affirm God to be a permitter and sufferer of evil: for
he which suffers evil to be done, which he can hinder, must be accessarie
unto it: we say then, that God is neither an actor nor a permitter of evil, as
it is evil: his permission we grant, but such as is joined with his will, for
that which God would not have done in the world, cannot be done: but for the
more full explanation of this point, I refer the Reader to the 64. question
upon the 1. chapt. of this Epistle.

2. But that evil governors do not rule only by Gods permission is evident
out of Scripture, as it is here alleged by the ordinar. gloss: as Job.
34.30. qui facit regnare hypocritam, etc. which causes an hypocrite to reign
for the sins of the people, etc. as the vulgar Latin reads: and Hosh.
13.11. I gave a king in mine anger, etc. and hereupon the gloss infers,
datur improbis nocendi potestas, power to hurt is given to the wicked, that the
patience of good men might be proved, etc. and further it is added, per
potestatem diabolo datam, and Job probatus est, vt iustus appareret, and Petrus
tentatus est, ne de se presumeret, and Paulus colophizatus, ne se extolleret,
and Judas damnatus vt se suspenderet: by power given unto the Devil, both Job
was proved, to appear just, and Peter tempted, that he should not presume of
himself, and Paul buffeted, least he should extol himself, and Judas damned,
to hang himself, etc. here their own gloss is against them, which makes God
a giver of that power, which wicked governors abuse, This is then our
assertion, that evil governors rule not by Gods permission only: for in the
Scripture God is said to have raised and stirred up the Assyrians and
Babylonians: But therein Gods providence is seen, and such evil governors
are not sent without Gods secret will and ordinance, for the punishment of men's
sins: as Pet. Martyr, Deus arcana and efficaci voluntate voluit eos imperare,
God by his hid and the same effectual will would have them to rule: though
then they do not either attain unto the place of government, by lawful
means, and according to the rules of Gods revealed will, neither do rule
after the same, yet by his secret will and providence they are appointed
thereunto for the execution of Gods judgments, which are most just.

3. Neither is a Tyrant to be obeyed, if he command any thing contrary to the
word of God: such are the laws of the Pope, which maintain superstition and
idolatry: and though a Tyrant in his proper place of government is to be
obeyed, it follows not, the Pope should: for the one (though a tyrant)
bears sway in temporal things, wherein the conscience is not touched, and in
his proper seignorie, which he is advaunced unto: but the Pope does tyrannize
in spiritual things and over the conscience, and out of his own precinct and
jurisdiction: so that he commands as a Lord out of his own territory, where
no obedience is due: As for his supposed vicardome, it is but an idle fancy
and Popish dream.

Quest. 6. Why the Apostle says again, The powers that be, are ordained of
God.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, The things which are, are ordained of God, and
so Anselme, and the interlinear. gloss. wherein a double error is committed,
for the word powers, which is in the original, is omitted, and the word
ordinata, ordained, is put in the neuter, which in the Greek is in the
feminine, answearing unto powers: and beside, as Tolet well observes, annot.
4. these words would beget an erroneous sense: for all things that are, are not
ordained of God, as war, sickness, poverty: for then it were not lawful to
prevent any of these: for Gods ordinance must not be resisted.

2. Origin omitteth this clause altogether: and Erasmus coniectureth, that this
clause might be inserted by some interpreter, by way of explanation: but seeing
Chrysostom has it, and the Syrian interpreter, with other ancient copies,
this conceit cannot be admitted.

3. Neither yet is it a repetition of the same thing, which the Apostle set
down before, every power is of God, to show God to be author and founder of
these powers, as Oecum. for there had been here no great need or use of such
repetition.

4. Haymo thinks, that the Apostle in the second place understands iura
potestatum, the rights belonging to these powers: that not only the power it
self, but the right of governing is of God; but these two cannot well be
distinguished, the power and the right of the power: Beza thinks that in the
first place, the Apostle in general showed the dignity of the magistracy, in
the second, the distribution of the same dignity: because there are diverse
degrees of magistracy, to show, ipsis ^^fimis ordinibus, etc. that we are to
yield obedience to the lowest orders of government: but this was comprehended
in the former sentence, Every power is of God, that is, whether superior or
inferior, none are excluded.

5. Some do infer, because the Apostle says, They are ordained, etc. that
there is an order and certain degrees in government, some are superior to
others: Bonifacius 8. in the extravagant vnam sanctam: but it is evident by the
words following, where the power is called (...), the ordinance of God, that
this ordaining has reference unto Gods institution, not to the distinction and
order of degrees in the powers: But whereas Boniface in that place, upon this
supposed ground builds the pre-eminence of the Ecclesiastical power above
the Civil, and so would make the Pope the Lord peramount above all, the
vanity of this conceit shall be examined among the controversies following.

6. Theodoret by ordaining understands the divine providence: the ordinar.
gloss interprets, rationabiliter disposita, reasonably disposed: but more is
signified then so: for there are many things disposed of in the world by Gods
providence, which yet it is lawful to resist, as Tolet notes annot. 4.

7. Wherefore the emphasis or force of this sentence, lies in the word
ordained, which amplifieth that which the Apostle said before: that these
powers are not simply of God, as other things, but specially ordained, that is,
by special precept from God: there are other things of God, as famine, war,
sickness, poverty, but not ordained by precept and commandment: Thus Tolet,
likewise Faius: that by ordaining, is understood, praeceptum esse a Deo, that
it is commanded of God, that obedience should be yielded to magistrates: so
also before them both Hyperius: and three ways may these powers be said to be
ordained or ordered: first in respect of God, because thy are by him instituted
and appointed: secondly in regard of themselves, the Lord has set them
certain limits and bounds, whereby they should be ordered: thirdly in respect
of those which are to be ordered: God would have order among men, some to rule,
some to obey: like as in a camp there are some leaders and captains, others
are appointed to follow, and to be ranged in their ranks, as the soldiers,
Pareus.

Quest. 7. Of not resisting the power.
1. He that resists, the word is (...), which properly signifies disordered,
or counter-ordered, ordered against: which shows that all rebellion is a
disorder, (...), a very confusion, Pareus.

2. Diverse ways is the power resisted, either aperta vi, by open violence and
rebellion: or fraud, by deceit and craft, when the power is deceived and
misinformed, which is an ordinary thing in Princes Courts, Martyr: Tolet
adds a third, qui praecepta negligit, etc. he that neglects the precepts of
the Prince, and withholdeth duties, as to pay tribute, and such like, therein
shows himself contrary to Gods ordinance.

3. Chrysostom observes the phrase, that the Apostle says, not he which
obeys the Magistrate, therein submits himself to Gods ordinance, but by
the contrary, he that resists the power, resists Gods ordinance, to show,
that non gratiam sed debitum illis obediendo praestemus, etc. that we do not
show them a pleasure in obeying, but pay our debt: and further he infers,
that no man should think subiectionem turpem, that this subjection is vile,
seeing God has appointed it.

4. Origin here also notes, that we must not understand such powers as
persecute the faith: for in such a case it is better to obey God then man: and
the reason is, as Tolet observes, quia nemo debet potestati obedire contra
Deum, no man must obey the power against God, of whom the power is.

5. Gorrhan makes this objection: that if it be not lawful to resist any
power which is of God, then not the power of Satan: he answeareth that it does
not follow, because that is, potestas permissionis, non commissionis, a power
of permission not of commission: or rather it is not so much a power which the
devil exercises, as an abuse of power, and therefore we are to resist him:
And so concerning such powers, which command or allure to any thing which is
evil, Augustines rule must be followed, contemn potestatem timendo maiorem
potestatem, contemn the power, by fearing a greater power.

6. Pet. Martyr well observes here, that although it be not lawful to resist
the powers, by rising up, or practicing against them, yet one may make an
escape by fleeing away from the force of the magistrate: as David was let down
at a window out of his own house by his wife, and so escaped Saul's hands; and
so was Paul at Damascus, let down in a basket by a window, Whether it be
lawful for one unjustly imprisoned to break prison.
as 2. Cor. 11. but the case is otherwise, when one is apprehended, and
committed to prison, for then he thinks it not lawful for a man though
unjustly imprisoned, to break prison; because it is against the law, and
audaciam idem faciendi, etc. and it would minister boldness to malefactors to
commit the like: add hereunto, that thereby an other man's life is endaungered,
as the keeper upon the escape of his prisoners is like to be punished: and
further it were a betraying of their cause, to make a privy escape: this made
S. Paul, that though his bonds were loosed, and the prison doors opened, yet
he would not flee away: nay he refused to be sent away privily, when the
governors sent unto them to depart, Act. 16. yet every escape of the innocent
out of prison is not to be condemned, if it be not procured by some sinister
practice by themselves, as by fraud or violence, but by some other means, as
the voluntary connivence or negligence of the keeper, or some other way as it
were made by God: for so we read, that Peter escaped out of prison, the doors
being opened by the Angel before him, Act. 12. but this is not rashly to be
done for the aforesaid reasons, but upon good warrant, when God shall as it
were make a way for a man to set him free.

Quest. 8. What kind of judgment they procure to themselves, which resist the
magistrate.
1. Whereas the Greek word (...), signifies both condemnation, as Beza,
damnation, as the vulgar Latin: judgment, as the Syrian interpreter:
punishment, as Piscator: some take this to be understood not of eternal
punishment, but of the temporal inflicted by the Magistrate: when as the
powers being offended, do either punish rebels with death, or cast them into
prison, Haymo: so also Vatablus. 2. Lyranus contrariwise interprets it, de
aeterna morte, of everlasting death, not excluding also temporal punishment:
so also Martyr. 3. Some understand poenam, punishment generally, without
limitation, Olevian, Piscator, Iunius annot. 4. Some will have the punishment
in this life understood, whether inflicted by the Magistrate, or by God
himself, who will take revenge for the transgression of his own ordinance, as
is evident in the fearful punishment of rebellious Cote, Dathan, and Abiram,
Numb. 16. Pareus, Gualter: and so before them Chrysostom and Theophylact, cum
a Deo, tum ab hominibus poenas daturum, he shall endure punishment both from
God and men. 5. But all these are better joined together; that such as resist
the Magistrate are punished by the public laws, and God often takes revenge
also; beside they make themselves guilty of everlasting damnation, which is
due unto the transgression of Gods commandment, and the violating of his
ordinance, Faius. 6. Tolet has here this conceit by himself, it is said,
they shall receive judgment, because being not restrained by the Magistrate,
whom they stand not in awe of, they cast themselves into those sins, for the
which damnationem incurrunt, they incur damnation: but here the Apostle
speaks of that punishment which is due for the resisting of Gods ordinance.
7. Pareus here observes well these two things, that the purposes and
endeauours of such are frustrate, and beside they show their madness and
foolishnes, in being accessarie to their own punishment: for it is an unwise
part for one to procure his own hurt.

Quest. 9. How the Prince is not to be feared for good works, but for evil.
1. Concerning the words in the original they stand thus, Princes are not a
fear of good works, and so the vulgar Latin: that is, for good works, as
the Syrian interpreter puts it in the dative, bonis operibus, to good
works: so also Tertullian reads in scorpian: and Beza follows this sense,
and the meaning is, that they are not a terror, or to be feared, ratione boni
operis, by reason of the good work, Lyran. or his qui sunt boni operis, to
them which are of good works, Gorrhan: so before him Chrysostom, been
agentibus, to those which do well: good works are here to be understood, not
as Divines take them, for moral works, but for civil works agreeable to the
public laws, which are either against the divine law, whereof the Magistrate
ought to have special care, or against the positive constitution, Pareus.

2. Touching the occasion of these words: Tolet will have them to depend of the
former sentence, and to show the cause, why they which resist the powers, do
receive judgment to themselves, because they contemn the Magistrate, who is
ordained to restrain evil works: and so they without restraint fall into
evil, and so incur punishment: but the better coherence is, to make this an
other argument, to move obedience to the higher powers from the utility
thereof, as Chrysostom; or a duplici sine, from the twofold end of
magistracy, which is for the punishment of the evil, and praise of the good.

3. They which do good works, must fear the Magistrate still, but timore
reverentiae, non seruili, etc. with a reverent, not a servile fear, as the
malefactors do, which having a guilty conscience, are afraid of punishment,
to be inflicted by the Magistrate, Gorrhan.

Quest. 10. What it is to have praise of the power, v. 3.
1. Whereas often it falls out, that the Magistrate does punish the good, and
encourage the wicked, how then is this true, which the Apostle says, do well
and thou shall have the praise of the same: the answer is, that first we must
distinguish between the power it self and authority, which is ordained of
God, to these ends, for the reward of the good, and punishment of the evil,
and the abuse of this power: secondly, although governors abusing their power,
do offend in some particulars, yet in general more good comes by their
government, then hurt: as under cruel Nero, there was some execution of
justice, for Paul was preserved by the Roman captain from the conspiracy of
the Jews, and appealed unto Caesar, which was then Nero, and his appeal was
received.

2. It will be objected, that even under good Princes, where there is
punishment for offenders, yet the righteous receive not their reward. 1. Origin
thus understands these words, thou shall have praise of the same, etc. that
is, in the day of judgment, ex istis legibus landem habebis apud Deum, by
these laws thou shall have praise with God for keeping them, etc. but the
Apostle speaks not of having praise by the laws, but of the power, that is,
the Magistrate. 2. Augustine thinks it is one thing to be praised of the
power, that is, to be commended and rewarded by it, an other laudem habere ex
illa, to have praise of it, that is, exhibit se laud dignum, he shows
himself worthy of praise, whether he be actually praised or not of the power:
Tolet allows this sense, though he take the distinction between these
phrases to be somewhat curious: so also Haymo: but the Apostle speaks not
simply of having praise and commendation, but of having it from the Prince. 3.
the ordinar. gloss thus: thou shall have praise of the power, si iusta est
ipso laudante, if it be just it will praise thee, si iniusta, occasionem
prebente, if unjust, it will give thee occasion of praise: so also Gorrhan, it
shall praise thee, either causaliter, by being the cause of thy praise, or
occasionaliter, by being the occasion, etc. causa erit maigris coronae, it
shall be the cause of thy greater crown, gloss. interlin. laudaberis apud
Deum, thou shall be praised with God, Haymo: but the Apostle speaks of
receiving praise from the power: as Chrysostom and Theophylact well observe,
erit laudum tuarum praeco futurus, he shall be a setter forth of thy praise. 4.
Bucer thinks that the Apostle alludeth unto the custom of the Grecians and
Romans, among whom they which had done any notable exploit, were praised
publicly, or privately: but S. Paul speaks in general of the office of all
Magistrates whatsoever. 5. Pet. Martyr thinks, that it is no small part of
praise, absolvi in iudicio, to be absolved in judgment: as it was no small
praise to Cato, being so often accused still to be freed and absolved: it is
also a great praise for a man to be so innocent, that nothing can be objected
against him in judgment: as Fimbria being asked, what he could object unto
Scevola so innocent, and harmless a man, answered, quia telum toto suo
corpore non receperit, because he received not his weapon whole into his body:
but it is one thing to receive praise and reward, another to be freed only
from punishment. 6. Wherefore I take this to be the better answer, that first
the Apostle speaks here, of the power it self, and of the true end,
wherefore it was ordained, and not of the personal faults in those, that abuse
this power: for if the good be not rewarded, as well as the evil punished, it
is the fault of the governors: add hereunto, because it is not possible for a
Prince to reward all good subjects, that by praise we must understand, omnia
commoda and privilegi\%a, etc. all the privileges and commodities, which are
by the laws offered to good subjects: Pareus: they are praised, that is,
counted worthy, qui participent omnibus ijs bonis, etc. to be made partakers
of all those benefits and commodities, for the which commonwealths came first
together, Bullinger: as good subjects enjoy liberty, possession of their
lands, and goods, defense from wrong, and such like, and as occasion may serve,
may receive also praise and encouragement from the Magistrate.

Quest. 10. How the Magistrate is said to be Gods minister for our wealth or
good.
1. Some understand this only of the power to punish, loco Dei vindicat, he
takes revenge in Gods place, gloss. interlin. Lyranus. 2. Haymo gives these
two senses: he is Gods minister to defend thee from wrong: or for thy good,
that thou do no evil: but this expresses but one part of this ministering
power. 3. therefore Chrysostom better, voluntati Dei cooperatur, etc. he
works according to Gods will in punishing of the evil, and in rewarding the
good, and therefore he is called his minister: so also Theophylact, voluntati
Dei obsequitur, he obeys the will of God, as in commanding chastity, in
forbidding avarice and theft: like as the Lord is, so must the minister be: but
God loves the just and punishes the wicked, therefore so should the
magistrate do, that is Gods minister. 3. and generally they are Gods ministers,
1. because they are ordained of God. 2. they are as gods in earth, in respect
of their pre-eminence and authority over others. 3. in regard of their office,
because they do execute justice in the earth, in awarding rewards to the
righteous, and punishments to the wicked. 4. whereas the Prince is called
(...), the minister of God, which name and title also agrees to the spiritual
pastors, who are the ministers of God, yet they are ministers in a diverse
kind: both agree in their institution, which is from God, and in the general
end, which is to seek the good of Gods people, yet they differ both in the
object: for the pastors charge, is only about spiritual things, the Prince is
occupied also in caring for temporal: as also in the means: for the Prince by
his sword and coactiue power procures the good of his subjects: but the pastor
seeks it by the preaching of the word, the administration of the Sacraments
and discipline, and other spiritual means.

For thy good.] That which the Apostle called before, (...), praise, now he
names (...), good: which is either natural, moral, civil, or spiritual
good; the Magistrate procures all these: the natural good, as in preserving
the lives and bodies of his subjects: the moral good, in commanding virtue,
and punishing vice; the civil, in maintaining their goods and possessions;
their spiritual good, in setting forth and defending the true religion, Pareus.

11. Quest. How the Magistrate is said, not to bear the sword for naught, v. 4.
1. Lyranus does indifferently understand this of the material sword which the
civil power has, or of the Ecclesiastical: but the whole course of the
Apostles speech shows, that he speaks of the Civil power, to whom
tribute, and such other customs belong.

2. By the sword, he understands the power of exercising and drawing forth
the sword against offenders: and he alludeth to the custom of Princes, which
have the sword carried before them, and other ensigns of their authority.

3. There are three uses of the civil sword, the one is ad vindictam, to be
revenged of the evil: ad protectionem bonorum, for the protection of the good:
and, ad executionem iustitiae, for the execution of justice.

4. He bears not the sword, (...), in vain: that is, temere, rashly, Beza:
because he has his authority from God, nor, sine causa, the vulgar Latin,
without some certain cause or end, namely, the punishment of the evil.

5. And so he is called a revenger unto wrath. 1. which some understand of the
divine wrath, which is executed by the Magistrate: or to show the wrath of God
in time to come, Gorrh. Hug. 2. rather by wrath we understand the punishment it
self inflicted, which is an effect of wrath, Pareus, Tolet, Sa.

Quest. 12. Of the right use of the sword, both in time of peace and war.
1. Concerning the use of the sword in time of peace, three things are
requisite, 1. that there should be good laws enacted, and established. 2. that
there should be upright judgment according to those laws. 3. that of such
judgments once given, there should be just execution.

1. In the making of laws, three things must concur, the matter of the law,
the end and scope, and the extent. 1. for the matter, it must be agreeable to
the law of nature, and to the will of God: Princes must not make laws
according to their own mind, but such as may be consonant to the pure and
perfect will of God: hereupon it was, that the lawmakers among the Gentiles
would always ascribe the invention of their laws to some one of the gods, to
win more credit unto them: Why the Gentiles made the gods the authors of
their laws.
Zoroastres who gave laws to the Bactrianes and Persians, did make Oromazen,
whom they held to be a god, the author of his laws: Trismegistus among the
Egyptians, Mercurius: Minos among the Cretensians: Iuppiter Carundas among the
Carthaginians made Saturnus his author: Lycurgus among the Lacedaemonians,
Apollo: Solon and Draco among the Athenians, Minerva: Xamolpis among the
Scythians, Vesta: Numa among the Romans, the gods Egeria: and Mahomet
commended his Alcaron to the Arabians, under the name of Gabriel the Arkeangel:
But these were their fabulous conceits: we have indeed the book of God, a
perfect rule and line of all just laws: secondly, the end and scope of laws
must be to suppress vice and maintain virtue: the lawmaker must intend the
public good, and not his private gain: thirdly, for the extent of these
laws, they must include all: some must not be bound unto the laws, and others
free: and therefore it is dangerous to give privileges and immunities to some
persons, by virtue whereof they may without check and controlment transgress
the laws: Papintanus is worthy of honorable memory, who choose rather to
die, then to excuse the parricide of Antonius Bassianus the Emperor.

2. As good laws must first be made, What is to be required in judgment.
so judgment must be exercised according to those laws: that the just case
may be discerned from the false, and good men from the evil: Antishenes was
wont to say that those commonwealths were declining, wherein boni a malis nihil
differunt, good men did nothing differ from evil: Now in the process of
judgment these rules must be observed. 1. that the Judge be willing to admit
all complaints, and to take knowledge of all causes, and aggrevances: this was
the fault of Saul's government, that the oppressed could not have justice,
which made many that were aggreved to flock and have recourse unto David:
Absalom did not more insinuate himself into the hearts of the people, then in
showing his affability in hearing the griues, and complaints of them: In
foreign histories, Philip King of Macedon was killed by Pausanias, because he
rejected his suite to have justice against Attalus that had wronged him, and
after laughed him to scorn: and Demetrius of Macedon did much alienate the
hearts of his people, because he neglected their complaints, and would cast
their bills of supplication from the bridge of Axium into the river: secondly,
after diligent inquisition of the cause, there must be just judgment given,
without partiallitie, fear, favor, or any other sinister affection: see
Levit. 19.15. among the Thebanes a Judge was pictured blindfold, and without
hands, to signify that he neither should be lead by partial affection in
judgment, or corrupted with bribes: and the Athenians had a law, that causes
should be handled (...), without proems and prefaces to stir up affection.

3. After judgment must follow execution: Of the excellency of laws.
for otherwise the laws are in vain and judgment according to the laws, if
they be not put into execution: where these two things must be observed. 1.
that the execution be not too remiss: for it is profitable often for the
offender himself to be punished, thereby to be brought unto repentance: who
otherwise might continue in his sin; as the theife converted upon the cross
was prepared by that ignominious punishment unto repentance: and it is good for
the example and admonition of others, that punishment be inflicted upon the
offenders. 2. yet the punishment must not be hastened too much, or be too
severely adjudged, but with such moderation as that the party which suffers
be not in hazard of loosing both soul and body.

2. Concerning the use of the sword in warring, and waging of battle: How war
is to be enterprised.
1. it is out of doubt, that it is lawful for the Magistrate to take in hand
just and lawful war; for Abraham recovered Lot by force, from them which had
taken him captive: the Centurions faith is commended in the Gospel by our
Savior: and if it be the Magistrates office and part, to defend every
particular person from wrong, much more the whole people. 2. but war must be
enterprised not rashly, or suddenly, but with deliberation, and not without
weighty and urgent cause. 1. as when either the Magistrate is bound by some
league to help his confederates, as Joshua did the Gibeonites, 2. or when the
enemies offer to invade the country, they must by the Magistrates force be
kept off, as David often encountered the Philistims that assaulted Israel. 3.
and in the quarrel of religion and defense of the truth, the Magistrate may
fall to battle: as the other ten tribes had thought to have warred against
Ruben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh, for setting up an altar, fearing
that they had declined from the true worship of God, Josh. 22.

Quest. 13. How it is said, it is necessary to be subject, for conscience sake.
v. 5. Therefore it is necessary ye should be subject. 1. first some read, be
ye subject unto the necessity, diuinae dispositionis, of the divine ordinance,
and so put necessity in the dative, Gorrhan. 2. the vulgar Latin, which many
follow, put necessity in the ablative, necessitate subditi estote, be subject
of necessity: but both these readings are diverse from the original: where
the word is not (...), be ye subject, in the imperative, but (...), to be
subject, in the infinitive, as both Beza, and Erasmus well observe: so then the
best reading is, it is necessary to be subject. 3. which neither must be
understood of a compelling necessity, as the interlin. gloss. quasi ex
necessitate, as of necessity: because he cannot excutere iugum Principis,
shake off the yoke of the Prince: nor yet as Augustine, is it referred to the
necessity of this life: because we must necessarily use temporal things, as
long as we are in this world, which it is in the Magistrates power to deprive
us of: but we understand rather obligationem praecepti, the bond of the
precept, which is of necessity to be kept: so that it is not a free thing,
whether men will be subject or no, but it is necessary, both in respect of the
wrath and revenge of the power, and for conscience sake toward God: so in
effect here are three reasons couched together, why we should be subject to the
Magistrate in respect of God, it is his ordinance, of the Magistrate, because
of wrath and punishment, of our selves, that we wound not our conscience: the
first is honestum, honest, the second, vtile, profitable, the third,
delectabile, pleasant and delightful.

But also for conscience. 1. Ambrose refers this conscience, to the fear of
punishment in the world to come: that men should not obey only for fear of
present punishment, but because of the judgment to come. 2. Chrysostom
applies this to the conscience of the great benefits, which we receive by the
Magistrate, that he which is disobedient offends against his conscience in
being unthankful. 3. Lyranus understands it of the particular conscience,
which every man ought to have, debitum reddere, to render that which he owes
to an other. 4. Tolet interprets it of the conscience of other sins, which
they that are lawless and disobedient are apt to fall unto. 5. Hugo of the
conscience quae naturaliter dictat, etc. which naturally suggesteth unto a man,
that the superior is to be obeyed. 6. Erasmus of an others conscience, which is
offended by the evil example of the disobedience. 7. but here the conscience
of the divine precept must be understood, which to obey brings peace of
conscience, but to resist Gods ordinance, is a deadly sin, saucians
conscientiam, wounding the conscience, Pareus: so Haymo, propter conscientiam
mentis, for the conscience of the mind, which we must keep and preserve pure.

Quest. 14. Why tribute is to be paid, verse. 6.
For this cause: that is, as a testimony of your subjection you pay tribute:
some refer these words to the former sentence, v. 4. be is the Minister of
God, praepositi sunt a Deo, they are set over others by God, and therefore they
must pay tribute, Haymo: some thus expound for this, because they are
profitable for you, Hugo: but these words rather depend of the next before,
because of conscience: for the paying of tribute is a testimony of their
subjection, that they in their conscience acknowledge it to be due.

Pay ye tribute. 1. he says, praestatis, non datis, you pay, not you give, to
show that it is not given, but they repay it again, in their care which they
undertake for the commonwealth, gloss. or. 2. the word (...), tribute, is
derived of (...), to bear or bring in, quia infertur a subditis, because it is
brought by the subjects into the kings treasure, Pareus: or it signifies
properly portage money, which was paid for such commodities, as were brought
in: and so by one kind all the rest are understood, as there be diverse other
customs: as pedagia, which was paid for the passage on foot toward the mending
of the high ways: and guidogia, guide money for those that travailed, and such
like, Faius. 3. and the Apostle makes express mention of the paying of
tribute, taking it as a thing yielded and acknowledged of all, because it was
objected against the Christians, that they under pretense of religion would
free themselves from tribute, as Justinius shows, apolog. 2. ad Anton.

For they are Gods Ministers. 1. Two reasons are given of the lawfulnes of
paying tribute, both because it was a sign of their subjection, and as a
recompense to the magistrate, for his great pains undertaken in the defense
and government of the commonwealth. 2. the word here used is (...), ministers,
as the Magistrate before is called (...), a minister, which words are not only
used of sacred offices, as we see, but of civil: and therefore that it a false
observation of the massing Papists, Act. 13. v. 4. where by the use of the word
(...), to minister, they would prove, that the Apostles said Mass.

Applying themselves to the same end, etc. 1. the word (...), signifies more
then to serve, as the vulgar Latin reads, it betokens to continue, watch,
to take pains in any business, as c. 12.12. continuing or laboring,
perseuering, watching in prayer. 2. some refer these words to them that pay
tribute, that they serve to this end, Gorrhan: but it is evident that the
Apostle speaks of the Magistrates: that they watch over the people for this,
not to receive tribute, as some interpret, but it is referred to the whole
duty of the Magistrate rehearsed before, that he bears not the sword for
naught, that he is for the terror of the evil, and praise of well doers.

Quest. 15. Of the diverse kinds of tribute, and to whom they are due.
v. 7. Render therefore to all men, etc. 1. Chrysostom here observes well,
that the Apostle says, (...), render, not give, nihil enim gratuite dat, qui
hoc fecerit, for he does not give any thing freely, that does this: for it is
our duty to yield obedience in all these things here specified to the
Magistrate.

2. But Origin has here a strange allegory: by the powers, he understands
the ministering spirits, and by the tribute, vectigalia negatiationis in carne,
the payments due for our trading in the flesh to the spirits exacting it of us
by diverse tentations: but this dangerous kind of allegorizing peruerteth the
sense of the Scripture, and gives occasion of many errors.

3. Gorrhan calls the first two, custom and tribute, delictum temporale, the
temporal debt which is due unto superiors, the other he names debitu^
spirituale, the spiritual debt, which is either inward, fear, or outward,
honor: As though all outward honor and service were spiritual: the Apostle
speaks only of civil honor, which is to be yielded to the Magistrate, not
of spiritual and religious honor, which is only due to God.

4. The Apostle here names two kinds of payments, (...), tribute, and (...),
which is interpreted, custom. 1. Some do thus distinguish them, tribute is
that which solvitur domi, is paid at home: vectigal, custom, that which is
carried to the Lords house, gloss. ordin. Lyranus takes tribute for that which
was paid generally by a country or city in sign of their subjection: custom
that which is exacted of particular persons, as for traffike, merchandise:
Martyr, Pareus, take the first called (...), for the tribute paid out of men's
grounds or substance: and the custom due for commodities carried forth or
brought in: Beza takes the first for capitatio, poll money, when men are taxed
either by the poll, or accordding to their wealth: so the Syrian interpreter,
calls it argentum capitationis, head silver, and the latter for tribute due
out of their grounds, or for Merchandise, and such like: but the latter, rather
called (...), seems to be the poll money, which was paid viritim, man by man,
as appears Matthew. 17.25. it is called tribute, or census poll money: and the
other (...), was such tribute, as was due for commodities brought in, as the
etymon of the word shows: and the Latin word vectigal, is so called also a
vehendo, of carrying: when the fruits of their grounds were brought into the
city. And so with us there are two kind of payments, subsidies and tenths,
which are laid upon men according to their ability and substance, and then the
impost and custom which is due for merchandise, in the exporting of wares, or
bringing in of foreign commodities: but for the most part, these two words
(...), and (...), are confounded, and are indifferently taken for any kind of
tribute or payment made to the governors: yet to speak distinctly, there are
two kinds of tribute, which is either laid upon the persons, which is properly
called (...), poll money: or upon their substance, either mooueable, as their
goods, such as is merchandise, or immooueable as their lands; and this is
(...), tribute, impost, Faius.

5. Here the Apostle names four kind of duties, which are to be performed to
the Magistrates and their officers: as impost and custom to the customers,
tribute and subsidies to the collectors and threasurers, fear to the kings
officers and ministers, and honor to the person of the Magistrate himself.

6. Chrysostom and Theophylact here move this doubt, how the Apostle
enioyneth the subject to fear the Magistrate: and before he freeth good
subjects from it, and would have them only to fear, that do evil; he
answeareth by a distinction of fear: that fear which is ex mala conscientia,
of an evil conscience, good subjects are free from: but yet they have a kind
of fear, which is nothing else but a reverence of the Magistrate: Pet. Martyr
adds, that though a good man fears not the power for any thing, that is
done and past, yet he may fear, ne quid in posterum committat, that he commit
nothing in time to come: as Ambrose has the like distinction of fear, aliud
est timere quia peccasti, aliud timere ne pecces, ibi formido est de supplicio,
hic sollicitudo de praemio, it is one thing to fear because thou have sinned,
an other to fear least thou sin: there is fearfulness of the punishment,
here carefulnes of the reward.

7. Honor also is to be yielded to the Magistrate, which is nothing else but an
external signification of our inward reverent opinion, which we have of one
for his excellency and greatness: wherein these three things are considered,
the inward reverence, the outward gesture, the object, the excellency of the
person: between honor and glory this is the difference: honor is given
propter officij dignitatem, for the dignity of the place and office, glory
propter virtutem, because of his virtue: to a good magistrate both are due, to
an evil honor is to be showed for his place, though he deserve no glory, for
any virtue and a private person may be worthy of glory for his virtue, though
not of honor, which is the Magistrates due.

Quest. 16. The several duties summed together which are due to the Magistrate.
Gorrhan reduces them to these seven. 1. we owe unto the Magistrate
subjection, 1. Pet. 2.13. submit your selves. 2. honor, 1. Pet. 2.17. fear
God, honor the King. 3. fear, Prove. 24.21. Fear God, and the King. 4.
fidelity as in Ittai, that said to David, 2. Sam. 15.21. In what place my Lord
the King shall be, whether in death or life, even there will thy servant be. 5.
obedience, as the people said to Joshua, 1.17. as we obeyed Moses in all
things, so will we obey thee. 6. paying of tribute, Matthew. 22.21. Give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's. 7. prayer, 1. Tim. 2.2. The Apostle wills
supplications to be made for Kings.

Pareus observes that five things belong to the honoring of our superiors.
1. reverence, because of the divine ordinance. 2. love, because of their labor
and care in watching over us. 3. thankfulness for the benefits which we enjoy
under them. 4. obedience in all lawful things. 5. equity and charity, in
covering and extenuating the faults and infirmity s in governors.

Quest 17. How far the Magistrate is to be obeyed, and wherein not to be
obeyed.
It may seem, that in no wise it is lawful, to resist the Magistrate, but
that obedience must be absolutely yielded unto him, upon these reasons.

1. The ordinance of God is not to be resisted: evil Magistrates are the
ordinance of God therefore even the evil must be obeyed and not resisted.

2. S. Peter bids servants to obey their Masters, not only the good and
courteous, but even the froward. 1. Pet. 2.8. so likewise subjects must obey
their Magistrates.

3. It is not lawful to recompense evil for evil, Romans 12.17. therefore the
subject being oppressed is not to resist.

4. It is not lawful for a private person to use the sword, for it is said
only of the Magistrate, he bears not the sword in vain, but to resist the
Magistrate is to take the sword: Er.

Ans. 1. True it is, that the ordinance of God is not to be resisted, so it be
not against God: for like as the inferior Magistrate, to whom the Prince
commits the sword is not to use it against his Prince: so neither is the
Prince to be obeyed, using his authority against God, in comma^ding impious
and dishonest things: we must give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's and
unto God the things which are Gods, we may not give unto the Prince the things
which are Gods, that is, the conscience. And in this case the Apostles give us
a rule, to obey God rather then man, Act. 4.19. when obedience then is denied
in unjust and unlawful things, not the authority which is Gods ordinance, but
the abuse of the authority is gainsaid.

2. True it is that both evil Masters, and evil Magistrates are to be obeyed,
but with this limitation, that nothing be enjoined against the conscience: and
so much is employed by the words following, v. 19. This is thank worthy, if a
man for conscience toward God endure grief suffering wrongfully: so that when
any thing is commanded against the conscience; a man is to suffer rather: an so
the power is obeyed, not in doing, but in suffering.

3. To disobey unlawful commandments, is no requital of evil for evil, nor
yet for a man to use lawful defense: but if the subject should bear arms
against his Prince, and seek to assault his body or life, which is unlawful,
that were indeed to recompense evil for evil.

4. There are three degrees of not obeying an evil Magistrate, in not doing
that which is commanded, and here the subject uses not the sword at all, he
only refuses to do any thing against his conscience: in using his lawful
defense, against wrongs offered, tending to apparent impiety: here he takes
the sword no otherwise, then as the laws arm a private man to defend himself
in case of necessity against a theife and robber: the third is in assaulting
the Prince by force: which is a taking of the sword, and most unlawful.

Now on the other side, certain cases shall be propounded, wherein obedience
is to be denied to unjust Magistrates, and some kind of resistance to be used:
And here a distinction is to be made of subjects: some are either public
persons, and the same either Ecclesiastical, as the Pastors and ministers of
the Church: or civil, as inferior Magistrates, or more private persons:
according to this division, we are to see, how far each of these may proceed
in denying their obedience to the Magistrate commanding unjust things.

1. Concerning the Pastors of the Church, these propositions may be set down,
The Ministers of the Church are not to attempt any thing by the sword.
1. that they are not to attempt any thing at all by the sword, and outward
violence against the Magistrate: for it is forbidden, that a Bishop should be a
striker, 1. Tim. 3.3. Ambrose says, coactus repugnare non noui, potero flere,
potero gemere, aduersus arma, milites, lachrymae me^ erma sunt, being urged, I
know not how to resist, I can mourn, I can weep: against armed soldiers my
weapons are tears, orat. in Auxent, and in an other place, epist. 33. nogamus
Auguste, non pugnamus, we entreat O Sovereign, we fight not.

2. It is the duty of Pastors to admonish the Magistrates by the word of God,
Kings may be admonished of th^^^ faults, so it be done with reverence.
arguendo eorum notoriam impietatem, and ad officium iuxta verbum Dei and leges
faciendum cohortando, by reproouing their notorious impiety, and by exhorting
them to do their duty according to the word of God, and the laws; this
proposition which Pareus sets down may safely be received, and assented
unto, as agreeable to the word of God: for so Elias reproved Ahab to his face,
and John Baptist, Herod, telling him of his incest with his brothers wife. Thus
excellently Ambrose writes hereof to Theodosius, who had caused some thousands
of people to be put to the sword unjustly, an pudet te imperator facere, quod
Propheta David, etc. peccavi Domine, etc. noli ergo impatienter far
imperator, si tibi dicatur, (tu fecisti istud.) quod Davidi dictum est a
Propheta, etc. art thou ashamed O Emperor, to do that which the Prophet David
did (I have sinned Lord) do not then take it impatiently O Emperor, if it be
said unto thee, as Nathan said to David, thou have done this: epist. 28. ad
Theodos.

3. It is lawful for the Pastors of the Church to refuse to communicate holy
things unto impious and cruel Magistrates, Ministers of the Church (...) not
bound to (...) unicate holy things to Tyrants.
which will not be admonished nor reclaimed from their sins: as in such a
case they are not to be admitted unto the Sacraments, neither is the Pastor
bound to be a minister of holy things unto them: this is warranted by the
Scripture, Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye
your pearls before swine: 1. Tim. 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither
be partakers of other men's sins, keep thy self pure, but he which admits
any notorious sinner to the communion, is partaker of his sins.

Ambrose also to this effect says to Theodosius, offerre non audeo
sacrificium, si volueris assistere, I dare not offer the (spiritual)
sacrifice, if thou be present, epist. 28. he refused to communicate with the
Emperor being guilty of blood.

5. Pareus goes yet a step further, that the Bishops and Pastors may resist
unjust Magistrates, not only by admonishing, reproouing, and exhorting them:
but also contumaces de consensu Ecclesiae etiam Satanae tradendo, donec
rescipiscant, in delivering them up also unto Satan, with the consent of the
Church, such as are obstinate, till they repent: for this his assertion he
alleges these reasons. S. Paul says, 1. Tim. 5.20. Them that sin rebuke
openly, that the rest may fear. 2. Because the Pastors watch over men's souls,
and must give account for Heb. 13.17.
them, if any perish by their default. 3. Ambrose resisted Theodos. by the word.

But none of these reasons do prove, that Princes are to be excommunicate,
but only that they must be reproved, and showed their faults, which yet must
be done with reverent respect, not in such sort, as they should by taunting
speech, or malepart reprehensions be disgraced before their subjects: Ambrose
as is showed before, only withdrew his hand from ministering holy things to the
Emperor being guilty of innocent blood, neither by his peremptory sentence
did he cast him out of the Church, but persuaded him to repentance for his
sin, and to forbear.

Indeed the practice of the Roman Church is such, to make no great matter of
excommunicating Emperors and Kings, and to absolve the subjects from their
obedience: wherein the Pope evidently transgresses in these three points, in
exercising jurisdiction, where he has nothing to do, and in arrogating to
himself the sole authority of dispensing the keys of the Church, and in
denying ordinary duties and obedience to an excommunicate Prince.

And as touching the excommunicating of Magistrates by the censure of the
Church, I take it not to be so convenient to be done, neither have we any
direct precept or president in the Scripture to warrant it: But the contrary
rather.

1. Kings are not to be censured by excommunication.
If the ecclesiastical sword might be drawn forth against the Magistrates,
then the Civil also, and the Prince might as well be proceeded against in
Civil courts, to be sentenced for his offense, as in ecclesiastical: for
otherwise there should be less power in the Civil, then in the
Ecclesiastical state: but this were a very proposterous course, to appoint
superior judges to the Prince in his own kingdom.

2. David when he had committed these two great sins of murder and
adultery, confessed and said, tibi soli peccavi, against thee only have I
sinned: the reason whereof Ambrose yielded: quia rex erat, nullis ipse legibus
tenebatur, because he was a King, and was bound to no laws, apolog. David, c.
10. and Hierome also says, rex enim erat, alium non timebat, he was a King,
and feared no other, ad Eustoch: It seems then that David was free both from
Civil and Ecclesiastical censure: whereupon Ambrose infers generally of all
Kings: neque enim vllis ad paenam vocantur legibus toti imperij potestate, that
they cannot be drawn to punishment by any (humane) laws, being privileged
by their imperial powers.

3. Saint Paul wills prayers to be made for Kings, 1. Tim. 2.2. we must
bless them, not curse them, but to give them over to Satan, is to curse them;
Saint Paul when he had called Ananias painted wall, being admonished that he
was the high Priest, excused himself by his ignorance, alleging that text
Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people: so far
off was Saint Paul from excommunicating him, and giving him over unto Satan,
as he did Elymas the Sorcerer whom he called the child of the Devil, Act.
13.10. I hold it then the safer way, that the sentence of excommunication go
not forth upon any occasion against the supreme Magistrate, (howsoever the
inferior may be censured) it is sufficient, that the Minister discharge his
duty, in reproouing and exhorting, and in not consenting to any sin in the
Magistrate; as Ambrose said to the Emperor, malo mihi honorum esse tecum, quam
malorum consortium, I had rather be partaker with thee in good things, then in
evil, etc. He speaks of his silence and connivence in the Emperors sin, as
the words following show, ideo clementia tuae displicere debet sacerdotis
silentium, therefore the silence of the Priest (or Pastor) ought to dislike
your clemency.

4. But because, the Papal sea takes upon it to excommunicate Kings, wherein
I would have a perpetual difference between their synagogue, and the reformed
Churches; this shall be our last proposition here of this matter: that an
excommunicate Prince is notwithstanding to be obeyed by his subjects, neither
is it lawful for them by that color to withdraw their obedience.

1. The divine ordinance is to be obeyed in all lawful things, but all higher
powers are Gods ordinance, Princes excommunicate by the Pope are
notwithstanding to be obeyed of their subjects.
even when they stand excommunicate, they cease not not to be Magistrates: for
seeing they are ordained of God, by no humane constitution can they be
vnordained: but the Ecclesiastical censure of excommunicating kings, is only
an humane ordinance, not commanded nor warranted by the word: Ergo:

2. An excommunicate person is in the same degree with an heathen and Publican,
Mat. 18.17. but an heathen Magistrate is to be obeyed, for such were the
governors in S. Paul's time, to whom he wills subjection to be given, Romans
13.1.

3. Christian religion overthrows not the policy of Commonwealths, neither
is God the author of confusion: but if Princes excommunicate should be
disobeyed, great disorder and confusion should follow in the commonwealth: for
the canons forbid, palam vel secret loqui, to speak openly or secretly with
excommunicate persons, part. 2. c. 11. qu. 3. c. 1. or to go unto the house of
one that is excommunicate, ib id. c. 26. or to receive any that is
excommunicate into their house, c. 29. and they are decreed not to be
homicides, qui contra excommunicatos armantur, which take arms against
excommunicate persons, cause. 23. qu. 5. c. 27. and an excommunicate person non
audiendus in iudicio, must not be heard in judgment, decret. Gregor. lib. 1.
tit. 29. c. 21. Now who sees not, what confusion would be brought upon the
commonwealth, if the subjects might neither speak and confer with the king,
nor resort unto him, and that they might take arms against him standing
excommunicate.

4. No Ecclesiastical law can dispense and take away the civil and natural
law: as, for the son to do his duty to his father, the wife to her
husband, the servant to his Master, though they stand excommunicate: yea the
Popish decrees allow all these to do their service even unto excommunicate
persons: as thus stand the words of the canon: anathematis vinculo has
subtrahimus, videlicet vxores, liberos, seruos, ancellas, etc. we do release
from the bond of excommunication, wives, children, servants, maids, etc. which
did attend upon excommunicate persons, part. 2. c. 11. qu. 3. c. 103. If these
domestical inferiors may perform their duties to persons excommunicate, how
much more lawful is it for subjects to do the like to their Princes, because
the necessity of the state, so much the more requires it.

5. The Popes censure of excommunication is unjust and unlawful, and therefore
void by their own laws, as part. 2. c. 11. quest. 3. it is decreed iniustam
damnationem irritam, that an unjust damnation is of no force, c. 1.46. non est
petenda solutio, vbi inique fertur sententia, absolution is not to be craved,
where the sentence is unjustly laid, etc. to this purpose is the decree of
Gelasius B. of Rome there expressed.

Now the Popes excommunicating is unlawful for diverse reasons. 1. because he
is an incompetent judge, he excommunicateth Princes, who are not of his
jurisdiction: and the law is, cui denegatur executio, denegatur and sententiae
pronuntiatio, to whom the execution of the sentence is denied, the pronouncing
of the sentence is, etc. Cod. lib. 3. tit. 26. leg. 3. but the Pope out of his
precinct and jurisdiction, has no power to execute his sentence, Ergo, the
denouncing thereof belongs not unto him.

2. Their own canons hold, that qui inimici sunt, iudices esse non possunt,
they which are enemies can be no judges: Cause. 3. qu. 5. c. 15. but the Pope is
a professed enemy to kings whom he excommunicateth.

3. They are not held to be excommunicate, which are excommunicate by
heretics, c. 24. qu. 1. c. 36. but the Pope holds many heretical points of
doctrine, for proof hereof, see Synops. Papis. thoroughout.

4. It is not lawful for any to excommunicate in their own cause: See the
decree of Gregor. c. 23. qu. 4. c. 27. but this does the Pope.

5. Their law is: that no man should be excommunicate antequam causa probetur,
before the cause be proved, c. 2. qu. 1. c. 11. but how can the causes of
Princes he proved before an incompetent judge, where no man appears to
answer for them.

6. An excommunicate person cannot excommunicate, c. 24. qu. 11.4. but the Pope
stands excommunicate himself according to that decree of the Toletane
council, 12. c. 1. non erat ab anathematis sententia alienus, aut a divina
animadversionis vltione securus, quisquis contra salutem principis deinceps,
aut crexerit vocem, aut commouerit caedem, aue quamcunque quaesierit laedendi
vltionem, he shall not be free from the sentence of excommunication, or secure
from the revenge of the divine animadversion, whosoever hereafter, does either
lift up his voice against the safety of the Prince, or plotte to murder him,
or seek to be revenged by procuring any hurt unto him, etc. the like decree
see Toletan. 4.74. Toletan. 5.4. Toletan. 7.1. Now then because it is
apparently known, that the Pope practices against the safety and state of
Princes (not of his faction,) he stands excommunicate, and so his
excommunication is of no value.

6. If Kings ought not at all to be excommunicate, de iure, by the right of
their imperial authority, then de facto, if they chance in fact to be
excommunicate, obedience notwithstanding is to be yielded unto them: but the
first is true, as is partly showed before: and further appears by the reasons
sometime used by the College or Church, Leodievs. against the excommunication
of Paschalis the 2. in this manner; si quis vetus and novum Testamentum,
gestaque revoluerit, etc. If any man turn over the old and new Testament, and
the things done therein, he shall evidently find, quod aut minime aut difficile
possunt Reges and Imperatores excommunicari, that Kings and Emperors either not
at all, or very hardly are to be excommunicate, they may be admonished,
rebuked by discrete men: because those whom Christ the King of kings, has
appointed in his place in earth, damnandos and salvandos suo iudicio reliquit,
etc. he has reserved to be condemned or saved to his own judgment, etc. here
are two reasons of this assertion, the one taken from the authority of the old
and new Testament, wherein no such president is to be found, the other from the
eminency of the Princely estate, which Christ has reserved to his own
judgment: An other reason, which they urge, is this Paulus pro malis regibus
orari vult, etc. Paul will have evil Kings prayed for, that we may lead a
quiet life: esset apostolorum imitari Apostolum, it were Apostolic to imitate
the Apostle, etc. Kings must then be prayed for, and blessed, they must not be
anathematized and accursed.

How far the Civil state may proceed in resisting a Tyrant.
Here Pareus has this position: that the inferior Magistrates being subjects,
may defend themselves, the Commonwealth, and the Church, and the true says,
even by force of arms against a Tyrant, so these conditions be observed. 1.
When either the Prince degenerateth to a Tyrant, and makes hauock of all,
offering notorious wrongs against all law and equity to his subjects, and
forces them to Idolatry and false religion. 2. if that without such defense,
they cannot be safe, their lives, bodies, and consciences. 3. that under
pretense of such defense, they seek not their own revenge, with other
respects unto themselves: 4. that all things be done with moderation, not to
the vndoeing of the state, but the preservation of it: his reasons are these.

1. From the institution of God, and the end of the ordinance of Magistracy
which is, to be avenged of evil doers, and for the praise of the good: they
do not bear the sword for naught: the inferior Magistrates then having the
sword, may exercise their power, in restraining the tyranny of superior
governors: and for this cause inferior Magistrates are joined with the
superior, not only as helpers, but to moderate their licentious and outrageous
government: and therefore where they bridle the insolency of Tyrants, vtuntur
gladio per legitimam vocationem diuinitus sibi tradito, they use the sword
delivered unto them from God by a lawful vocation.

2. Like as a furious and mad man may be removed from the government, as
Nabuchadnezer was cast forth by public authority. Dan. 4.31. so a Tyrant also
who differs not from a mad and furious man.

3. They which have power to constitute the Magistrate, as where they enter by
election of the Senate, consent of the people, or by other electors appointed,
have power also to restrain their immoderate government.

4. This is confirmed by many commendable examples, out of sacred and foreign
stories: the people resisted Saul, that he should not put Jonathan his son to
death, 1. Sam. 14.45. the Israelites in the time of the Judges, often were
delivered by their Judges whom God raised up, from their oppressors: Athalias
was removed from her tyrannical government, 2. kin. 11. the Macchabees
defended themselves and their country against the rage and fury of the Syrian
Kings: the Romans expelled their vicious Kings: so did they depose their cruel
Emperors, as Nero, Maximinus: Traianus is commended for that saying, when he
gave the sword unto a chief officer: hoc pro me vtere, si iusta imperavero,
contra me, si iniusta, etc. use that for me: if I command just things, and
against me, if unjust: The Prince Electors removed Wencelaus, a man given to
idleness and luxurious life from the Empire, in his stead appointing Rupertus
the County of Palatine, one of the Electors: to this purpose Pareus.

But here certain differences are to be observed: for where either there is an
extraordinary calling, as in the time of the Judges, or where the kingdom is
usurped without any right, as by Athaliah, or where the land is oppressed by
foreign invaders, as in the time of the Macchabees: or where the government is
altogether Elective, as the Empire of Germany, in all these cases there is
less question of resistance to be made by the general consent of the states;
And yet where none of these concur, God forbid, that the Commonwealth and
Church should be left without remedy, the former conditions observed, when
either havoc is made of the Commonwelth, or of the Church and religion.

How far private men may be warranted, in denying obedience unto Tyrants.
Here Pareus has two propositions. 1. That it is not lawful for a private man
without a lawful calling, to take arms either before the danger to invade a
tyrant, or to defend themselves in the time of danger, or to revenge himself
after danger, if he may be defended by an ordinary power, etc. for unlawfully
to resist the power is to resist Gods ordinance, and one ought rather to die,
then to sin: and here that saying of the Lacedaemonians takes place, si
duriora morte imperetis, potius moriemur, if ye command things more heavy then
death, we will choose rather to die.

2. His other position is, That it is lawful for subjects, being mere
private men, if a Tyrant as a thief, and violater of chastity, do offer them
violence, and they neither can implore the ordinary power, nor by any other
means escape the danger, to defend themselves and theirs for the present
against a Tyrant, as against a private person, that makes an assault: for if
it should not be lawful to make such resistance in case of necessity, there
should be no remedy left against the furious outrage of Tyrants, which would
tend to the utter dissolution of humane society: and beside against whom
defense by the Magistrate is lawful, in case of necessity where that cannot
be had, a private defense is allowed: for then leges armant privatos, the laws
do arm private men, but it is lawful for the inferior Magistrates to defend
the private subjects, in cases before limited, against the fury and outrage of
Tyrants: Ergo etc. to this purpose Pareus.

But this last position of his must receive some further qualification: for if
a private man might lawfully defend himself, when any notorious wrong is
offered to him by a Tyrant, men in this case should be judges of their own
wrongs, and as their judgment is partial in their own case, so they would
take great liberty to defend themselves: wherefore these conditions must
further be here observed.

1. It must be considered, whether in these wrongs that are offered, the Tyrant
do transgress his own laws: if he do, then he is held to be but as
privatus grassator, a private assaulter, otherwise if the laws bear him out
in these wrongs, they are rather to suffer and endure, then use any resistance:
as the band of Christian soldiers, which were put to the sword for their
Christian faith, at the commandment of the cruel Emperor Maximianus resisted
not, but yielded themselves: Otto Phrinsigens. lib. 2. c. 45* because then the
laws of the Empire were for the maintenance of Idolatry: and a whole City of
Phrygia professing Christianity was destroyed and burnt with fire using no
resistance, Eusebius. lib. 8. c. 11.

2. The subject must wisely discern, whether he be forced to be an agent, or
patient in these wrongs: he is rather to die, then to be compelled to consent
to any evil: as a woman attempted by a Tyrant to adultery, should resist
rather unto death, then prostitute her body: but if they be patients only, and
are not forced to do any thing, or consent against their conscience the case
is otherwise.

3. It must be also waighed, wherein this wrong is offered, if it be only in
the goods and substance of the subject, no resistance is to be made: for the
goods of the subject are more lyeable to the command of the Magistrate, then
any thing beside, so Naboth refused to yield his inheritance and patrimony
unto Ahab, but without any resistance: but if a man's life be assaulted, or the
chastity of his wife, or the liberty and safety of his children, against all
color of law, nature teaches a man here to use defense.

4. Further the cause must be considered, for the which the subject is
assaulted, if it be a civil matter, resistance may more safely be used: but if
it be the cause of religion, therein they should rather show their patience in
suffering: as we read in the persecutions of the primitive Church of 20.
thousand Martyrs, that were burnt together in a Temple, without any resistance
at all, who for their number might have sustained the brunt of the adversaries:
but they willingly yielded themselves to the fire.

5. Likewise this discreet consideration must be used, whether there be not
hope to escape the danger without resistance, or whether by resisting, a way
may be opened of deliverance, or whether by their escaping, many of their
brethren shall not be brought into greater danger: for where any of these
things do happen, it is not safe to resist.

6. They must in such extremities so defend themselves, as that they use no
assault upon the person of their Prince, to put his life in danger: for
therein they manifestly transgress the public laws: it is one thing to use a
necessary defense, an other to make an assault: David though he stood upon his
own guard, and had a great band of men attending upon him, yet when Saul twice
fell into his hands, he spared to lay any violent hands upon him; with these
restraintes and limitations, some defense may be granted even unto private
subjects against Tyrants, otherwise it is dangerous, both in respect of their
conscience, in resisting the power, and for the evil example whereby other
seditious persons may be encourraged. Thus much of this question, how far
resistance may be made against the civil power: how far also and in what
manner the Tyranny of the Pope the Antichrist may be resisted, see among the
Controversies. contr. 3.

Quest. 18. How we should not owe any thing to any man, but to love one an
other.
1. Touching the occasion of these words; Augustine thinks that the duties
before membratim fusa, nunc ipso circuitu clauduntur, delivered by parts, now
are shut up together, de doctrine. Christian. 4. c. 20. Lyranus also thinks,
that here inferiors are taught, that they owe charity to their superiors: so
also Mr. Calvin thinks this precept of the Apostle, to be a confirmation of
his former doctrine of obedience to Magistrates, because violat charitatem,
etc. he does violate charity, who denies obedience. 2. Beza thinks that the
Apostle remooueth the impediment of obedience; because the want of charity is
cause of quarrels and suits; whereupon the Magistrate is constrained by his
authority to force men to render unto every one their own; and so by this
means, magistratus nomen invidio sum sit, it comes to pass, that the name
of the Magistrate is odious and envied. 3. Erasmus collecteth out of Ambrose,
but not rightly, as Beza here notes, that hitherto the Apostle showed what
duty was to be yielded to the heathen Magistrates, but now he teaches the
duty, which must be rendered to Christian Magistrates. 4. But the truth is,
the Apostle from special duties belonging to superiors, ascends higher to
treat of the general duty of love, which is common to all.

2. Owe nothing: there are two kinds of debts, there is a Civil debt, and a
Natural debt: the civil is either common to all, as the paying of tribute,
yielding of obedience must be performed by every one to the superiors: or
concerns only some particular persons, which are endebted by promise and
contract, or some other bond unto others: there is also a natural debt, either
peculiar and proper to some, as of the children to the parents, of scholars to
their Masters, wives to their husbands, or common to all, as is mutual love
here by the Apostle commended.

3. There are three kind of ways, whereby one may be a debtor to another,
either when he pays nothing of his debt, as if he owe an hundred shillings,
and pay none at all: or if he pay but part and not all, as but ten, and if he
pay the whole debt due at one time, but not at another: as if he should pay
every day a shilling, till the whole debt be paid, and he hold the payment one
day or two, but fail in the rest: the debt of charity, is not of either of
the first kinds, but of the third: a man shows charity once or twice, he is
bound to show it still: Tolet.

4. The debt of charity different from other debts in these three points: 1.
as Chrysostom says, it is such a debt, vt semper reddatur and semper
debeatur, that it both is always paid, and yet is always owing: not like
unto other debtes, which being paid, cease to be due: and so both redditur
cum impenditur, it is restored, when it is paid, and debetur, cum reddita
fuerit, and it is owing, when it is rendered, because it must be showed at all
times. 2. nec cum redditur, omittitur, charity is not lost from him, that
shows it: as money which is paid goes from him that pays it. 3. may
charity, reddendo multiplicatur, is multiplied by the paying of it, cum
redditur ab homine, crescit in homine, when it is rendered by a man, it
increases in man: gloss. ordinar. ex Augustine: so some things, when they are
communicated to many, minuuntur, non augentur, are diminished, not increased,
as money, and all terren things: some things are neither increased nor
diminished, when they are communicated, as the light, and the sound of a voice^
some things, non minuuntur, sed augentur, are not diminished, but increased, as
charity, and all spiritual things, Gorrhan.

5. Origens conceit is here very strange, who by debt understands sin,
vult ergo omne debitum peccati solvi, he would therefore every debt of sin to
be paid, and not to remain with us. But the Apostle speaks not of any such
spiritual debt, whereby we stand indebted to God, neither is it in our power
to pay that debt, but of outward debts and duties unto men.

19. Quest. How he that loves his brother fulfilleth the law.
1. He which loves his brother does not in every particular, and in act, keep
every part in the law: for one may love his brother, though in that instant he
do not perform all the acts of charity, as in feeding him, if he be hungry,
and such like: but yet he fulfilleth all these duties, virtute and potestate,
in possibility, and having an aptnes and power thereunto: both because
charity is the cause and beginning of all the duties, which as it moves him
to one duty, so it will stir him up to the rest, as also it is the end and
scope of the law, which is to maintain charity, and it is modus, the manner,
how the law should be observed: for whatsoever external duty one does, if it
be not in love, it is nothing, as S. Paul shows, 2. Cor. 13.2, 3.

2. But here a question is moved by Chrysostom, how the Apostle reduces all
the law unto this one precept of loving our neighbor, when our Savior Christ
in the Gospel speaks of two great precepts, the love of God, and of our
neighbor. 1. some think that the Apostle means the fulfilling of the
precepts of the second table, and so M. Calvin has one answer, the Apostle in
totam legem non respexit, has not respect to the whole law, but only to the
duties toward our neighbors. 2. Origin by this neighbor, understands
Christ: hunc proximum si diligamus, etc. if we love this neighbor, we fulfill
all the law: but this seems too curious. 3. but the better answer is, that
the one includes the other, as S. John says, How can one, that loves not his
brother, whom he sees, love God, whom he has not seen, 1. Ioh. 4.20. so
Chrysostom alleges those words of our Savior, Peter love thou me, feed
my sheep, etc. the love of God is seen then in the love of our brother: neque
Deus sine proximo, neque proximus sine Deo diligi potest, neither is God loved
without our brother, nor our brother without God. Haymo.

3. Now the Apostle rehearses not all the commandments, but only of the
second table, because he treats of those duties, which are to be performed
unto men: and by the keeping of the second table it is better discerned who
observe the law, then out of the first: and he omitteth the first precept of
the second table, because he intended not to rehearse them all, but supplieth
them in those general words, if there be any other commandment: neither does
he observe the same order, for he sets the seventh precept before the sixth,
because he purposed not to set down the precepts, neither all, nor in their
order, but only to give an instance in some of them.

20. Quest. How a man is to love his neighbor as himself.
1. Chrysostom thus expounds, non solum dilectionem requirit, sed etiam
vehementem, he does not only require love, but a vehement and earnest love:
that is, a man should love his neighbor, without dissimulation, earnestly,
heartily, as he loves himself.

2. And it comprehends more beside. 1. no man hates his own flesh, no more
ought be to hate his neighbor. 2. when any thing happens unto our selves
that is evil and grievous, we are sorry, and troubled, so should we be
affected toward our brethren in their griefs. 3. in our own faults we are
favorable, making the best of every thing, so we should not be rigidi,
austere, and too censorious in sifting the infirmities of our brethren. 4. in
loving of our selves, nunquam defatigamur, we are never wearied, so we should
hold out still to love our brethren. 5. we wish all good things to our selves,
so should we do to our neighbors.

3. But this must be understood of the natural self-love, which every man
bears toward himself, not of that vicious love, whereby men thorough the
corruption of their nature, and evil custom, are affected to their own
vices: so a man must not love himself unto that which is evil, for he that
sins hates his own soul: and therefore neither must one love his
neighbor, as he corruptly loves himself: but either, quia iustus, aut vt sit
iustus, a man loves himself, either because he is just, or that he may be
just, and so must he love his neighbor: gloss. ordinar.

4. Theophylact here observes, that the Gospel requires a more perfect love
then the Law does, namely, that one should lay down his life for his brethren:
but the Law bids us only to love an other as our selves: but the charity
which the law requires comprehends this also: for then a man loves an
other as himself, when he is ready to do that to an other, which he would
have done for himself, Math. 7.12. Now one would desire to be redeemed by an
others life, rather then his soul should perish: so let him be affected to an
other: A man is not bound to give his bodily life to redeem an others, for
then he should love him better then himself: but to give his bodily to deliver
an others soul from perishing, is but to love him, as himself; for so he
would wish his friend to do for him.

5. But this rule takes not away all inequality, difference, and degrees of
love: for though every one is to be loved as our selves, yet one is to be
loved before an other: our parents, children, and wives, are first to be
respected in the duties of charity, then strangers: for S. Paul's rule is, that
men must first show godliness toward their own house, 1. Tim. 5.4. the
quality of our love is here signified: that it should be simple, sincere,
unfeigned, not the quantity, or the degree of our love: all are to be loved as
our selves, that is, constantly, unfeignedly, heartily, and yet one may be
preferred before an other in our love.

Quest. 21. Who is understood by our neighbor.
1. Origin expounds this neighbor to be Christ, hinc ergo proximum si
diligamus, if then we love this neighbor, we shall fulfill the whole law: and
that Christ is our neighbor he proves by that parable of the Samaritane,
Luke 10. who took the man which was wounded by theiues, and laid him upon his
beast, and brought him to the inn, and gave two pence to the host to see unto
him: so Chirst, he took us up being wounded of our sins, and stripped and
left naked by Satan, iumento corporis sui supposuit, and laid us upon his
body to be borne, and brought us ad stabulum Ecclesiae, to the stable or fold
of his Church, and left the two pence of the old and new Testament, for the
expenses of our cure, and healing. And he proceeds further and shows how he
which loves Christ keeps all the commandments: for he whose delight is in
Christ, will not commit adultery, nor follow any other carnal pleasure,
because his delight is in Christ: neither will be steal from an other, who is
willing to leave all he has for Christ, etc. But Origens interpretation is too
curious: howsoever in that parable Christ may be understood by that good
Samaritane, though every point of the parable cannot fitly be allegorized, yet
it is evident, that the Apostle here by neighbor understands, our brother,
for he speaks of loving one an other.

2. Hugo Cardinal out of Augustine here moves a question, whether under this
name of neighbor, the Angels are comprehended; and he brings two solutions,
one is that the Angels are excluded, because the commandment speaks of
those, qui diligendi sunt ex charitate, Whether the law commands us to love
the Angels.
which are to be loved in charity: but our charity is not extended unto the
Angels: the other solution is, that seeing by neighbor every one is
understood, vel cui praebexdum est officium miserecordiae, vel a quo, either to
whom or from whom mercy and compassion is showed, then Angels may be well said
to be our neighbors, by whom we receive so great benefits: but the better
answer is, that our love toward those blessed spirits, is not comprehended in
the duties of the second table, the subject whereof is our brother, whom we
daily see, 1. Ioh. 4.20. neither can any one of the precepts, thou shall not
kill, thou shall not steal, be referred to the Angels in any sense: but like
as man is not commanded to love himself, which that nature teaches him: for
it follows necessarily if a man love his neighbor as himself, he must needs
love himself first: so the love of the holy angels, the ministers of God does
necessarily follow upon our loving of God, which though it be not commanded in
the first table, yet it follows necessarily upon it.

3. Wherefore by our neighbor we understand not, those which are so in
habitation, or with whom we have affinity, or from whom we have received any
benefit, sed omnium hominum intelligi opertet, we must understand every man in
general, quia nemo est quo cum sit operandum malum, because we ought not to
work evil with any, or to offer wrong unto any: gloss. ordinar. sufficiat
nobis quod homo sit, etc. let it suffice us that he is a man, and of one and
the same nature, who stands in need of our help: and there is none that
lives that may not stand in need of an others help, as Xerxes that great
King and commander of Persia, that brought so many hundred thousand men in
Grecia, was same to escape in a fishers boat.

Quest. 22. How salvation is said to be nearer, then when we believed.
1. Lyranus refers this time of belief, to the old Testament, when the
fathers believed only in Christ to come, but they saw nothing performed: so
also Erasmus, Tolet: but Beza refuses this, because S. Paul speaks specially
to the converted Gentiles among the Romans, and not to the Jews only, who
lived under the old Testament.

2. Some give this sense, salvation is nearer then when we believed, that is,
then a man would believe: there was such an open door of salvation made, as
one would hardly believe it, Hugo: but the words, we, when we believed: not any
other believed of us.

3. An other has this gloss, it is nearer, that is, magis debita per bona
opera, more due unto us by good works, then when we believed, having yet no
good works, Gorrhan: but a lively faith is never without works.

4. Chrysostom understands it of the end of the world, when the salvation
promised shall be accomplished: tempore peocedente futura secula proprius
accedunt, for as time wears, so the world to come draws nearer.

5. But the Apostle rather confert incrementa cum initijs fidei, compares the
increasing of faith with the beginning: and this is an other argument, which he
uses to stir us up to newnes of life: as before he moved by the
opportunity of time, that now we should awake from sin, as one when the day
is come rises up unto his work, so here he persuades ab vtili, from that
which is profitable: iam proprius acessimus ad metam, we are now come nearer
the mark, then when we began to believe, and therefore it behooves us to be
the more earnest: like as they which are set to run a race, the nearer they
come to the mark, the faster they run least any should outstrippe them: this
difference is made between a natural and violent motion, this is more speedy
in the beginning and it slacketh toward the end, but the natural is slow in
the beginning, and more quick and speedy toward the end: so the faithful
that are truly called, will still increase more and more.

Origin touches both these last expositions: there is, adventus lucis
generalis, and specialis, a general coming and approaching of this light,
which shall be at the coming of Christ, and this every day grows nearer: and
there is a particular coming of this light to every one: si Christus in cord
est, diem nobis facit, if Christ be in our heart, he brings day and light
with him.

Quest. 23. How the night is said to be past, the day at hand: of the literal
sense.
1. The night is past or well spent. The word is (...), which properly
signifies praecedo, provehor, to go forward, to proceed: and so read
Chrysostom, Theodoret: the vulgar Latin reads praecessit, is gone before:
so Cyprian in the same sense, transivit, is passed: and Hierome in c. 26.
Matthew. praeterijt, is gone over: but the other is the better reading, both
because of the proper signification of the word, and for that it follows, the
day is at hand, but if the night were all past, and not rather spent, and some
part thereof behind, the day should not be at hand only, but it should be
present: this Metaphor the Apostle uses, because there remains with us some
ignorance and darkness still, even after our calling, and we have not in this
life a perfect knowledge of Christ, neither is it full day with us, till the
next life.

2. By the works of darkness are understood the works of sin, both because
they proceed from darkness and ignorance of God, and they which follow them
delight in darkness, and hate the light, as also the end of such works is
everlasting darkness, and to be deprived for ever of the light of Gods kingdom.

3. We must cast them away. Which signifies, 1. that we should not defer our
repentance from dead works, like as he which awaketh when it is day does
hastily put from him his night garments. 2. as we must speedily put them off,
so cum detestatione, we must do it with a kind of hatred and detestation, as a
man casts from him with disdain that which he abhors. 3. and we must
procul abijcere, cast them far away from us, never to entertain them again.

4. We are bid to put on: which metaphor notes three things. 1. diligence,
like as he which puts on his garments or armor, does not only cloth or
arm one part of his body, but every one: so it is not enough to follow one
or two good works, but we must give our selves to every good work, as we
cloth every part of our body. 2. we must do it with delight, like as there
is comelines in clothing the body wherein we delight. 3. herein is expressed
conscience, that having put on these garments, or armor, we should not
suddenly put them off, as it is said, in the Cantic. 4.3. I have put off my
coat, how shall I put it on: so after we have put on our coat, so we should not
put it off.

5. The armor of light. 1. They are called armor in these two respects,
because they are defensiva, both defensive, we thereby resist the temptations
of Satan, having the brestplate of righteousness: and they are offensiva,
offensive, whereby we drive away also the tempter from us; such is the sword of
the spirit, whereby we quench all the fiery darts of Satan. 2. they are
called armor rather then garments, for we are not thereby covered in Gods
sight, as justified by our own righteousness, yet we are thereby defended from
Satan's assaults.

6. They are called the armor of light: because they proceed from the
knowledge of God, the true light of the soul: and they do shine and give
light before men, who seeing them do glorify God, Par. and they defend us
against the works of darkness, illuminate the soul, and bring us ad lucem
aeternam, to everlasting light, Lyranus.

Quest. 24. What time is understood by the day and night.
1. Chrysostom by the night seems to understand the time of this life, and
by the day, the resurrection, prope est resurrectio, the resurrection is at
hand: but, as Tolet well observes, that the day cannot be understood here of
the day of judgment: (as beside Chrysostom, other of the Fathers interpret
this place, as Athanas. 44. ad Antioch. qu. 90. August. epist. 80. ad Isich.)
for then the Apostles exhortation would be of small force, who moves to cast
off the works of darkness in respect of the time, because the day was come:
but if the day were not yet come, then the ground of this exhortation fails.

2. Anselme by the day, understands the time after this life, which is so
much the nearer as death approaches: so also the ordin. gloss. but when death
comes it is no time to work: here the Apostle exhorts to walk honestly
which is in the day: therefore this day must be in this life present.

3. Some do expound this night to be the time before the coming of Christ,
and the day the time of preaching the Gospel, when Christ the Sun of
righteousness did shine unto the world: so Lyranus, the night is past,
obscuritas figurarum legis, the darkness of the figures of the law: likewise
Erasmus, under the law, vmbra fuit magis quam res, there was a shadow rather
then the thing: Osiander also understands that time, quando nondum fuit
exhibitus Christus, when Christ was not yet exhibited to the world: so also
Faius: But as Beza notes, the Apostle in this sense should have had reference
only to the Jews, whereas he writes to the believing Gentiles among the
Romans, which were not acquainted with the figures of the law.

4. Wherefore with Pet. Martyr, Pareus, Beza, by night, rather we understand,
tempus ignorantiae and caecitatis, the time of blindness and ignorance, which
goes before regeneration: for till they were called to the knowledge of
Christ, they were in darkness, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were
sometime darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord, walk as children of
light: this day light as Martyr observes, if it be compared with our darkness
and ignorance in times past, it may be called the day, but in respect of the
life to come, it is but as the twilight, or break of the day, Martyr: so
whereas the Apostle says not, the night is past, but processit, it is well nie
spent, thereby he signifies the imperfection of the state present, because yet
there remains some darkness even in the regenerate: like as when we see
noctem properae ad diluculum, the night hasten to the dawning: and the
swallows begin to chatter, we one call up an other and say it is day:
Chrysostom, and Theophylact, yet makes the matter more plain: as allowing
12. hours to the night, and ten of them be spent, we say the night is
wearing away, and it is toward day, etc. so the gross darkness is past when
the light of faith and knowledge rises up in us: but yet it is but as the
dawning of the day in this life: Thus Origin follows this sense, as is
alleged before, si Christus in cord sit, etc. if Christ be in our hearts, he
makes it day.

Quest. 25. How we should walk honestly.
v. 13. So that we walk honestly. 1. Chrysostom. observes well, whom Theophyl.
follows, that whereas the Romans were much affected with the opinion of
glory, he persuades them, decoro and honesto, by that which was comely and
honest. 2. and further he says, that we walk, not walk ye, putting himself
in the number, that he might exhort the^ without envy. 3. that which he says
here in one word, (...), honestly, he elswher Tit. 2.12. thus distinguishes to
these three, to live soberly, righteously, and godly. 4. and he adds, as in
the day: like as a man will be ashamed to go naked or cladde with tottered and
ragged garments in the day: so this time of the light of faith requires us to
walk honestly.

Not in riot and drunkenness. 1. Some by these two understand, by the first
excess in meat, by the other excess in drink, Gorrhan: but Origin better
distinguishes them, by the first understanding, in honesta and luxuriosa
convivia, dishonest and riotous feasts, by the other drunkenness, which is a
companion of such feasts: such excessive feasts were used among the Egyptians,
where the manner was to have a dead man's scull brought in, in the mids of
their feasts, that they being put in mind of mortality, might more freely
spend the short time which they had in following of their pleasure. 2.
Chrysostom here notes also, bibere non prohibet, sed praeter mensuram bibere,
he forbids not to drink, but to drink beside measure.

Chambering and wantonness. 1. Gorrhan, and so Hugo, by the first understands
the sin of sloth, by the other fornication and uncleanness. 2. But Origin
takes these to be cubilia impuditiae, the chambers of wantonness: and thinks
here some reference to be made to the dens of beasts, because these filthy
sins are more agreeable to beasts, then men. 3. Chrysostom notes that the
Apostle forbids not all kind of bedding, and chambering, for the marriage
bed is undefiled, Heb. 13.4. non mulieribus commisceri, sed scortari, he
forbids not to company with women, but to follow whoredom.

Not in strife and envying. 1. As before he touched the sins of the flesh, so
now he forbids the vices of the mind, contention, emulation, Origin. 2.
these are joined to the other, as being the perpetual companions of
banqueting and drunkenness: as the wise man shows, that to such is woe,
sorrow, and strife, that follow wine, Prou. 23.29. 3. these two are the
fruits and effects of drunkenness, concupiscence and wrath, so that the
Apostle takes away the very occasions of these evil affections, Chrysostom. for
excess in meat and drink is the cause of wantonness, and of the sin of
uncleanness, and of strife and contention. 4. Haymo thinks that by strife, is
here understood the contention about questions of faith: rather such brawles
and contentions are here restrained, which follow upon excessive rioting and
drunkenness.

Quest. 28. How we must put on Christ.
1. The Apostle alters his phrase of speech: for whereas before he spoke of
the armor of light, now he uses an other metaphor of putting on a garment:
for our good works, though they may defend, and arm us against the assaults
of Satan, yet it is the righteousness only of Christ, that covers us as a
garment in the sight of God, Par.

2. How Christ is put on, it is diversely scanned. 1. Some make four ways of
the putting on of Christ, as the glass receives the image by impression, so
some put on Christ for a time, but it passes away as an image in a glass: as
the wool receives the die or color per assumptionem, by assuming the same:
as the example is as it were put on, per imitationem, by imitation: and the
iron takes the fire per penetrationem, by penetration: but all these do only
show the putting on of Christ unto sanctification, whereas he is put on also
unto justification. 2. some then make two puttings on of Christ, the one is by
faith in Christ, whereby we are justified: like as Adam was clothed with
skins of slain beasts, to signify our spiritual clothing by the death of
Christ: this sense follows Pet. Martyr, Pareus: the other by imitating of
Christ in holiness: as Origin says, that he which puts on all virtues
puts on Christ, qui haec omnia habet, habet Christum, he that has all these
things has Christ: but Chrysostom says better, he that has put on Christ,
omnem virtutem habet, has every virtue indeed: of the works of
sanctification, Beza understands this putting on of Christ, and Osiand.
likewise Tolet refers it to the imitation of Christ's virtues: but the better
sense is, to join them both together: it signifies more then imitation only,
as Chri^^tum fide apprehendere, to apprehend Christ by faith, and then by his
spirit to be made fit and ^ot unto every good work, Ca^. for the word putting
on, signifies not only partem aliqua^ ^rgumenti, some part only of the
covering, but the apparelling of the whole man, both inward and outward, Faius.

3. But seeing the Apostle says, that Christ is put on by baptism, and S.
Paul here speaks ^o them which were baptized, how then does he bid them now
put on Christ: the answer (...) that as August. says, some do put on Christ
ad sacramenti perceptionem, to the receiving of the sacrament only; some vsque
ad vitae sanctificationem, unto the sanctification of life, the Apostle
speaks here of the latter: for so Christ not once only in baptism but all
our life long is to be put on.

4. Gorrhan is here somewhat curious in distinguishing these three, put on the
Lord, which signifies power, Jesus, clemency, Christ, wisdom: the first is
seen in subduing sin with power, the second, clementer indulgendo, in gently
pardoning the penitent, the third, prudenter instruendo, in prudently
instructing the ignorant: But this I omit as too curious.

5. Chrysostom takes here occasion to show, how Christ is all things unto us:
as here he is our vesture and apparel: he is our way and life, our food, our
foundation, our spouse, our master, our friend, our brother, our advocate, our
habitatio^, as he says, he dwells in me, and I in him: yea he is our
suppliant, we pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled unto God, 1. Cor. 5.20.

Quest. 27. How the flesh is to be cared for.
v. 14. Take no care for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. 1. I will
omit here to note the elegancies which Erasmus observes in the Apostles
phrase, and style, how in the original the Apostles words do fall well to the
ear in the orderly compounding, and one part does answer an other, his
sentences are full of Metaphors, and there is (...), the like ending of the
words in the sound and pronouncing. 2. But I prefer Chrysostomes note, that
as the Apostle before did not forbid simply to drink, but to be drunken, nor
to marry, but to commit fornication, so here he simply restrains not all
care for the flesh, sed ad concupiscentias addidit, but he adds, not to
concupiscence: and as Origin says, in necessarijs cura habenda est, in
necessary things a care is to be had, sed non in delicijs, but not in pleasure
and delights: so that here is forbidden not necessitas sed superfluitas,
necessity but superfluity, Lyran. for, whereas the Apostle uses the Greek
word, (...), providence, care, providentia dici non potest, etc. it cannot be
called providence, which provides hell fire for the flesh, while it lives in
pleasure, Theophy. 3. This then shows the hypocrisy of those which place the
greatest part of their religion in macerating and pinching of their flesh, as
many superstitious friars do, of whom the Apostle speaks, Coloss. 2.23. that
they have it in no estimation, to satisfy the flesh: whereas S. Paul allows
Timothy to drink wine, for his often infirmities sake, 1. Tim. 5.23. Pareus.
4. Haymo well observes that the Apostle says not, ne cogitetis, that ye
think not, sed ne perficiatis, but that ye fulfill not the lusts of the flesh,
for not to think of them here, is impossible.

4. Places of Doctrine.
Doct. 1. That God is author of order, and so consequently of government.
v. 1. There is no power but of God. God is the author of order, the devil
brings in confusion: as in heaven and earth God has set all things in an
excellent order, so he would have order kept among men: that some should
command and rule, others be ruled and obey: that they should not be as fishes
and creeping things, that have no ruler, Habuc. 1.14.

Doct. 2. That it is lawful for the Magistrate to use the sword.
v. 4. He bears not the sword for naught. The Magistrate then may lawfully
use the sword both in time of peace to punish offenders even unto death, if the
quality of their offense deserve it: and in time of war to resist the common
enemy: yea not only in civil matters, may he punish offenders with the
sword, but in Ecclesiastical also, as heresy, blasphemy: for these also are
the works of the flesh, Galat. 5.20. and the Prince is to be feared for (all)
evil works, v. 3.

Doct. 3. That Magistrates must be obeyed not for fear, but for conscience
sake, v. 3.
This makes against those which think they have satisfied their duty if they
do outwardly perform their obedience, but the Apostle requires more, the
inward disposing of the mind and conscience to obedience: that if there were no
law to compel a man, yet his own conscience, and the fear of God, should
keep and hold him in awe and reverence of the Magistrate: as the Preacher
says, Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, Ec. 10.20.

Doct. 4. That tribute must be paid.
v. 7. Give to all men their duty, tribute to whom tribute, etc. It is then a
requisite and mere thing, that tribute should be paid unto the Prince. 1. as
a sign of subjection. 2. as a recompense of the great care and pains, which
the Magistrate takes in watching over his people. 3. as a support and supply
of the manifold charges, which the Prince is put unto in maintaining his
officers and Ministers, in founding and raising Churches, schools, hospitals,
in waging battle, and such like: our Blessed Savior refused not to pay poll
money to the officers, Matthew. 17.

Doct. 5. A Christian is bound to pay his debts.
v. 6. Owe nothing to any man, etc. Though charity require, that no extremity
should be used in rigorous exacting of debts, yet every one that is endebted,
ought to have a care of discharging his debts: as Christian religion does not
overthrow the general policies of states and commonwealths, so neither does
it dissolve private contracts, and covenants: the Prophet did by a miracle
bring up the axe that was fallen into the water, to restore it again to the
owner, of whom it was borrowed, 2. King. 6.5.

Doct. 6. That Christian religion takes not away the obedience of subjects.
This evidently appears out of the whole chapter, wherein the Apostle shows
four special bands of obedience. 1. the authority of God, who instituted
magistrates. 2. the fear and awe of conscience, which is more then the fear
of any humane laws. 3. the duty of charity, which is to yield unto every one
their own. 4. the purity of Evangelical doctrine, which forbids all vice,
and commands virtue.

Therefore the Romanists do cause the Gospel of Christ to be slaundered, so
much diminishing and empayring the authority of Magistrates, by exemption of
Ecclesiastical and other privileged persons.

But Tolet annot. 12. here tells us, that notwithstanding some persons are
exempted, The Magistrates authority is empayred, not confirmed by the
exemption of Ecclesiastical persons.
yet for all this the Ecclesiastical state, does confirm and corroborate the
secular obedience, as by the Magistrates authority, is diminished in some sort
the particular power of parents over their children, of Masters over their
servants: and yet also their authority is confirmed and strengthened by the
care and provision of the superior Magistrate: and so is the secular state
confirmed by the Eccesiasticall, though it seem in some respect to be empayred.

Contra. 1. The example is not alike, for the law commands obedience of
children to their parents, of servants to their Masters, it exempteth them not,
as they free Ecclesiastical persons altogether: yet in case the parent or
master may command any thing against the state: for then they are not to be
obeyed: neither is the civil Magistrate to require any thing against God. 2.
the Ecclesiastical state by preaching confirms obedience to the Prince: and
the Prince by his authority countenanceth the Ministers: but when as subjects
are so freed, that the Prince has no power over the^, it is a manifest
empairing of their authority.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. Whether the Pope and other Ecclesiastical persons, ought to be
subject to the Civil power.
This doctrine is agreeable to the rule of truth, the word of God, that all
persons as well Ecclesiastical as temporal, ought to be subject and obedient
to the Civil power, both touching their causes and persons: which is denied by
the Romanists: whose objections to prove the exemption and immunitie of both,
are these.

1. Object. The superior ought not to be subject to the inferior: but the
Ecclesiastical power is superious unto the Civil, as being occupied in a
more excellent matter about spiritual things: therefore it ought not to be
subject: and Bonifacius the 8 in the extravagant, which begins vnum sanctum,
infers as much out of this place, v. 1. the powers that be are ordained of
God, that there are degrees and order between the powers themselves, some are
superior to others.

Contra. 1. We grant, that wherein the Ecclesiastical function is superior,
as in the preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments, therein
it is not subject to the Civil power, to receive direction from them, but from
the word of God; but yet in other things, which appertain unto the bodily
life, and concern civil subjection, and obedience, they ought to be subject.
2. And yet even in things merely Ecclesiastical the Prince has a compulsiue
power, to see that the Ministers of the Church do their duties, and that they
preach no false doctrine, and to remove such as are scandalous, either by
doctrine or life. 3. there is no such matter of order or difference between
the powers themselves gathered out of this place: their ordaining has relation
to God, by whom they were instituted, not to any such distinction and order
among themselves.

2. Object. The Imperial constitutions do exempt Clergy men from the
judgment of secular Courts, Novel. 79.83.123.

Contra. 1. Then their immunities such as they are, they enjoy only by humane
privilege, not by divine right. 2. neither are they by the law exempted from
the civil power in criminal causes, but only in certain civil: for the
law says, omnes secundum leges vivant, etiamsi ad diuinam abmum pertineant,
let all live according to the laws, though they belong unto the house of God,
lib. 10. de mandat. princip. 3. though Princes of their munificence, granted
certain immunities and privileges to Clergy men, as to free them from
personal service, as to go to war, to watch, to ward, and such like: and
from base and servile works, as to dig, to plowe, to cart: as also from
extraordinary taxes and burdens: yet they are not for all this discharged of
their civil obedience: these freedoms were given them, that they might better
attend upon their Ecclesiastical function, not to the prejudice of the secular
power. 4. and although Princes should wholly exempt the Clergy from the Civil
power, the question is not, what they have done, but what they may do, for
Princes have not power, vt rescindant leges Dei, to cut off the laws of God,
which do subject all souls unto the higher powes, Mart. neither can Princes
free any from the natural and divine bond, to the which they are obliged: as
to exempt the child from the obedience of the father, and the wife from her
husband, and so consequently, the subject from the Prince, the servant from the
Master. 5. add hereunto that some of these privileges, which are thus urged,
are conficta, forged, some malis artibus extenta, extented by cunning, Gualter.

3. Object. It is not fit, that the sheep should judge the sheepeheard:
Princes are as sheep unto their ecclesiastical Pastors: therefore they ought
not to judge them.

Contra. 1. Princes are not to judge them concerning their doctrine, and the
word of God, in respect whereof, they are fed, and feed not: but in all other
civil things, the Magistrate is as a Pastor and sheepehead himself, and
therefore in these things he has a command over ecclesiastical persons.

4. Object. Ministers are the servants of the most high God, and chief king of
the world, therefore it is not fit, that a terrene governor should judge them.

Contra. The Prince also is the servant of God, and is in Gods place in earth
to judge other servants of God: like as a Prince makes some of his subjects,
to whom he commits his authority, judges of the rest.

5. Object. Tolet annot. 11. thus reasons from the authority which the
spiritual power has over men's persons and bodies, to free and exempt them, as
it shall make most for their souls health, toward the obtaining of everlasting
life. 1. Like as a king has power to take men's sons and daughters for his
service, and their vineyards and possessions, to give them to his servants, as
Samuel describes the office of a king, 1. Sam. 8. so much more has the
spiritual power authority to do it, toward the advancement of Gods kingdom.
2. our Savior, Matthew. 17.26. freeth the sons of kings, that is, omnes
credentes, all that believe, from paying of tribute, which notwithstanding was
paid, propter vitandum scandalum, to avoid scandal. 3. S. Paul had power to
retain and keep Onesimus from his master Philemons service, yet he did remit
somewhat of his power, that his Master might not seem to do it of necessity,
but willingly, Philem. 1.4.

Contra. 1. Popes are partial judges in their own case, and therefore it
skilleth not, what immunities they have given to the Clergy: and no man can
confer more power upon an other, then he has himself: seeing then that the
Pope himself is not exempted from the power of the Magistrate, he much less
can exempt others. 2. Samuel in that place describes not the office of a King,
what it ought to be, but what Princes should do for their will and pleasure:
and so the Pope herein takes upon him to tyrannize in the Church. 3. that
place is understood of the natural sons of Kings, who are free from tribute:
and so Christ being lineally descended of David, might have challenged that
privilege: thus beside our own interpreters, Pererius one of Tolets own
order, expounds that place, de naturalibus filijs, of the natural sons of
Kings, disput. 2. number. 12. for otherwise a great inconveniencie would follow,
that all Christians should be exempted and treed from paying of tribute. 4. S.
Paul had a special interest in Philemon, to command him, because, as
Theophylact well interprets, te in Christo genui, I have begotten thee in
Christ: this was his special case, this can not then be drawn to an ordinary
present and example: and again, this makes directly against the Papists, that
if S. Paul which had this Apostolic authority, would not keep Onesimus from
his master, without his consent, it is great boldness and presumption for the
Pope, who begets none unto the faith by preaching, as S. Paul did, and so
has no such interest in that behalf, neither is he an Apostle, to arrogate
that to himself, which S. Paul would not usurp.

Now, notwithstanding these objections, that Ecclesiastical persons, and
causes, (though in things merely Ecclesiastical, and proper to the
ministry, as are the preaching of the word, and the administration of the
Sacraments, they are to be ruled only by the word, and are not subject to men)
yet are in respect of their civil obedience, as they are citizens, and parts
of the Commonwealth, and in some sort, as ministers also, subject to the
censure and command of the civil Magistrate: some of our arguments are these.

1. The Kings of Judah exercised power over Ecclesiastical persons, both in
civil and criminal causes, and partly also Ecclesiastical: as David
appointed unto the Levites their courses; Solomon displaced Abiathar from the
Priesthood.

Bellarmine answers, that these Kings were also Prophets, and so God did
extraordinarily commit unto them some things, which belonged only unto the
Priests: lib. 1. de council. c. 20. Contra. Not only David and Solomon which
were Prophets, did exercise this power over Ecclesiastical persons and causes,
but the rest also of the succeeding godly kings of Judah: as Iehosaphat gave
commission to the Priests and Judges to abolish idolatry, Ioas reproved the
negligence of the Priests, Josias purged the land of idols, and put down the
Chemarims, and unlawful order of Priests.

2. The Apostles words are general, Let every soul be subject to the higher
power: therefore Ecclesiastical persons also.

Ans. 1. Origin by every soul understands, animalis homo, a natural man:
spiritual men then are exempted. Contra. 1. In the Hebrew phrase, every soul,
is taken for every person: therefore that distinction between the spirit and
the soul, proceeds from the ignorance of the Hebrew phrase. 2. Origin in
that place says, that he which has no silver or gold, or possessions, has
nothing to be subject for, but the Papal Clergy have all these, and in great
abundance: therefore even by Origens sentence for such things they ought to be
subject unto the Civil powers.

2. Ans. Bellarmine tells us, that the Apostle speaks generally of
obedience to be given as well to spiritual as temporal powers; and that the
meaning is, that every subject should yield obedience to his superior: and so
the Clergy should give obedience to the Pope, and the Laity to their Prince:
lib. 2. de Romans Pontif. c. 29. resp. ad argum. 3. Contr. 1. The Apostle
speaks here of that power, which has the sword, but the Ecclesiastical
state does not handle the sword: therefore the Apostle speaks only of
subjection to the Civil power, to whom the sword is committed. 2. and this
were to make a division and rent in kingdoms, if all that are therein should
not be subjects to the king of the country: as in France all the French should
not be in subjection to the French king, but the Clergy of France should be
subjects to the Pope: Martyr.

3. Ans. The Papal Clergy are bound by oath unto their Bishops, and they to
the Pope, and therefore without breach to their oath, they can not be subject
to temporal governors. Contr. Such oaths are contrary to the Apostles
precept, of obedience to be given to the Civil magistrate, and therefore pro
impijs and illicitis rescindi debent, they must be cut off and disanulled as
unlawful and impious: Gualter.

3. Argum. Our blessed Savior was himself subject not only privately unto
his parents, but publicly to the Magistrate, to whom he caused poll money to
be paid for himself and Peter, refusing to use that privilege, which he might
have challenged to himself, as being descended lineally of king David:
wherein he was an example unto us of obedience to be yielded unto Civil
governors: So also S. Paul following his masters steps was obedient to the
magistrate, and appealed unto Caesar, Act. 16.

4. Argum. This was the doctrine of the Church in the pure ages: as Chrysostom
upon this place says, Every soul should be subject, si Apostolus, si
Evangelista, si Propheta, sive quisquis tandem fueris, if thou art an Apostle,
or Evangelist, or whatsoever else. Bernard. epist. 42. thus infers upon this
place; si omnis anima, and vestra, quis vos excipit ab vniversitate, si quis
tentat excipere, conatur deripere, if every soul, then yours, who can except
you from this universality, he that attempteth to except you, goes about to
deceive you. Gregor. lib. 4. epist. 31. acknowledges Mauritius the Emperor
his Lord, etc.

5. To conclude, reason it self persuades thus much: that all the citizens,
as parts and members of the Commonwealth, should be subject to the head and
governor thereof: Ecclesiastical persons then, if they be citizens, and
members of the Commonwealth, must be in subjection to the Civil head, not
only decretiva, sed coactiva obligatione, not only to receive direction, but
by a coactiue bond, and obligation: for otherwise they are not parts and
members of the Civil body. See further hereof, Synops. Cent. 1. err. 98.100.

2. Controv. Whether the Pope have a spiritual power above Kings and Princes.
The Pope is not contented to exempt himself, and his Clergy from the command
of the Civil Magistrate, but he arrogateth unto himself a superior power to
be above Emperors, and Kings, Innocentius 3. decret. 1. titul. 33. de maiorit.
C. solitae, thus decrees; Imperium non praeest Sacerdotio, sed subest, the
Empire is not superior to the Priesthood, but under it: and Bonifacius 8.
extrav. de maiorit. C. vnam sanctam, decrees thus; that omnes Christi fideles
de necessitate salutis, etc. all the faithful of Christ upon necessity of
salvation, are subject to the Roman Bishop, qui vtrumque gladium habet, etc.
who has both swords, and judges all, and himself is judged of none: And in
the same place, he compares the Ecclesiastical and Civil power, to the two
great lights which God made, and there is as great difference between them, as
between the Sun and Moon.

Bellarmine, though in words he deny the Pope to have vllam temporalem
iurisdictionem direct, any temporal jurisdiction directly, yet he has power
indirecte, indirectly to dispose of temporal things, yea of Princes,
kingdoms, and dominions, in ordine ad bonum spirituale, as it serves for the
promoting of the spiritual good: and so in effect the Pope shall have absolute
power of temporal things, to dispose at his will and pleasure, as he sees to
make for the maintenance of his jurisdiction, which they understand to be this
spiritual good. Some and the chief of their arguments, for this unreasonable
opinion, are these.

1. The Pope has both the swords, the spiritual, and the material sword: as
the Apostles said, Luke 22. behold two swords, and Christ answered, it is
enough: he is therefore above the Civil power, which has but one sword.

Ans. 1. Bellarm. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. c. 7. disclaimeth this argument, and
shows that there is no such meaning in that place, by the two swords to
understand a double power of the Pope: but they were two material swords in
deed, which were showed unto Christ. 2. and this being but a devised
allegory not expressed in Scripture, is of no force to prove any doctrine.

2. Bonifacius further urges in the said place; that the Church is superior
to the Civil state, because they receive tithes of them.

Ans. 1. We grant that the Church, which gives spiritual things, and
receives temporal, is superior and more worthy in respect of the spiritual
things, which it gives, but it is not therefore superior in temporal
dominion. 2. neither were they in the law always superior, which received
tithes: for beside the tithes, which were given to the Levites, the rich also
reserved a tith for the poor, and strangers, Deuteronomy. 14.28. 3. and though this
be admitted, that the payment of the ceremonial tith was a sign of
subjection, as the Apostle reasons for the pre-eminence of Melchisedeck, Heb.
7.5. because that tith was given unto the Levites in the Lords right, who were
then a type and figure of Christ: yet now, all ceremonies being ceased, tithes
are given unto the Church, not in the name of the Leviticall tenths, but as the
salarie and stipend of the ministers, for their maintenance: so that now they
are no sign of such superiority: for the hire is given to the labourer, as
well by those that are superiors, as inferiors.

3. Argum. The Bishops do anoint kings at their inauguration, and do bless
them: but the less is blessed of the greater, Heb. 7. therefore the
Ecclesiastical state is greater.

Ans. 1. By this means, not the Pope only, but every Bishop, which does
anoint the Prince at his coronation, should be greater then the Prince. 2. he
that blesses by a Prophetical benediction, as did the Prophets and Priests,
which was by the special appointment of God, was greater: but every one that
ordinarily blesses is not greater: for the subjects use to bless their
Prince, in their usual acclamations: and this is but benedictio ritualis, a
kind of rituall, no real blessing, which is used in such inauguration, as an
external complement, and matter of solemnity, as so is the anointing, which
argues no more a superiority, then the receiving of the sword from the high
Marshall, and of the great seal from the Chancellor, as the use was in Princes
coronations.

4. Argum. The Lord said to Jeremy, chap. 1.10. I have set thee over nations
and kingdoms, to pull up and destroy: which Jeremy was not of the princely
race, but of the stock of the Priests: therefore the Ecclesiastical power is
above kings.

Ans. 1. The particular and extraordinary example of one Prophet, can be no
rule to the Pope. 2. and his power was spiritual, not in the actual deposing
of kings, but in prophesying of their ruin.

5. Argum. The Apostle says, 1. Cor. 2. that the spiritual man judges all
things, but he is judged of none: this spiritual man is the Pope, etc.

Ans. 1. The Apostle speaks not there of a spiritual man by calling or
profession, but of one illuminate by the spirit, and he is set against the
carnal and natural man: such a spiritual man being guided by the spirit, is
able to judge and discern all things, and he himself can not be judged of
those which are carnal. 2. such a spiritual man the Pope is not, but the man
of sin, who sauoureth not the things of the spirit of God, but of the flesh.

6. Argum. The power of binding and loosing is the greatest power in earth: but
this power was given unto Peter and his successors: therefore the Pope has the
greatest power in earth.

Ans. 1. The power of binding and loosing by the word of God, is the greatest
power in spiritual things, but not in temporal. 2. the Pope has not this
power, he binds not by the word, but by his bulls, book, bell, and candle.
3. if he had this power, he should not have it alone, for it was not given
only to Peter, but to all the Apostles, and their successors the Pastors of
the Church: to whom it is said, Matthew. 18. Whatsoever ye loose in earth, etc.

7. Argum. Bellarmine thus reasons. 1. the superior power may command the
inferior, therefore the Ecclesiastical being superior, may command the
Politic state. 2. and temporal things may be by the spiritual power
disposed, in ordine ad spirituale bonum, as they are in the way to further the
spiritual good. 3. If the Pope had not this power over the Temporal state,
the Church should not be perfect, neque sufficeret sibi ad suum finem, neither
should have sufficient means, to attain the end, which is eternal happiness.
4. And if the Pope had not power to depose kings, the Church should be
compelled to suffer an heretical, or infidel king, which is not to be
admitted.

Ans. 1. Every superior power, can not command the inferior, unless it be a
power cum imperio, joined with authority: it is not true, of such a power,
which consists only in a ministerial employment, as in teaching, exhorting,
comforting, and such like: so the Ecclesiastical, in respect of the matter,
wherein it is occupied, which is spiritual; but in respect of external power
and authority, it is not superior.

2. True it is, that temporal things ought to be referred unto the spiritual
end: but the spiritual Pastors, have no power to dispose of temporal things
to that end, but to direct the temporal power, to instruct and exhort, and
teach, how they should use their temporal things, for the setting forth of
Gods glory, the maintenance of the truth, and the ministry thereof: and if
they fail in this duty, they must leave the rest unto God: again, the
spiritual good, which the Pope intends, is his own greatness, and the
advancement of his Papal Sea, which is a mere worldly and temporal thing:
and further this power of directing temporal things to a spiritual end,
every faithful Pastor has, and the Pope has it not, because he preaches not.

3. The Church is perfect enough without any such power: for till a 1000.
years after Christ, when Popes began to usurp upon the temporal power, the
Church was sufficient, without any such usurpation, to attain the end
proposed unto the faithful: and had better direction unto salvation, then
under the Papal tyranny.

4. The Church is patiently to suffer the government, yea of an heretic, or
infidel: as Jeremy moves the people, to pray for the prosperity of
Nabucadnezzer, c. 29. Paul would have prayers and supplications made, even for
the heathen kings, yea for Nero then living and reigning: yea and the Church of
God more flourished in virtue and godliness, then afterward under Christian
governors: as Hierome witnesses in the life of Malchus, after the Church
began to have Christian Magistrates, facta est opibus mayor, virtutibus
minor, it became greater in wealth, but less in virtue. And if it were
necessary to have an evil Prince deposed, it follows not that this power
should be devolved to the Pope: it belongs to the states and Peers of the
land, where the laws do authorize them, to see unto such matters.

8. Argum. They urge examples, and bring forth presidents for this supreme
authority of the Papal Sea. 1. The high Priest cast out Vzziah out of the
temple when he would have usurped the Priests office; and Iehoida the high
Priest caused Athaliah to be slain.

2. Ambrose excommunicated Theodosius the Emperor.

3. Gregory the 2. excommunicated Leo the Emperor, and deprived him of his
tribute and revenewes; Zacharias deposed Childerik king of France, and set up
Pipinus in his place: Gregory 7. deposed Henry 4. Emperor: Innocentius 3.
deposed Otho 4. Innocentius 4. Frederick the 4. Clemens the 6. Lodovike the 4.

4. Leo the 3. translated the Empire from the Greeks to the Germans; and
Gregory the 5. made that order, that the Emperor should be chosen by 7.
Electors, which remains unto this day.

Ans. First in general, examples do not prove; specially such as are either
unlike, or forged, or such examples, as are unjust and unlawful; of one of
these sorts are all the examples produced.

1. The Priests did not cause Vzziah to go out of the Sanctuary, until the
leprosy appeared in him; and for that they had a direct commandment, not to
suffer a leprous person to enter into the Sanctuary: if the Pope could show
such a warrant for the deposing of kings, he should say somewhat to the
purpose: neither was Vzziah for all this deposed from his kingdom, but lived
apart by himself, and the kingdom was administered by Iotham his son, 2.
Chron. 26.21. The example also of Iehoida is much unlike: for he not as the
high Priest, but as the Tutor and protector of the young king, and with the advice and consent of the fathers of Israel, caused seditious Athaliah to be
slain: 2. Chron. 23.3.

2. Ambrose deposed not Theodosius, but suspended him from the Communion, till
he had given satisfaction to the Church: neither was he Bishop of Rome, but of
Millaine: if this example proved any thing, not the Pope only, but every
other Bishop might depose kings.

3. Touching all those examples alleged, they are unlawful, and unjust, and
the Pope began to discover himself to be Antichrist, in so abasing the
Imperial power, and taking upon him to dispose of kingdoms; as the Devil
challenged to be Lord of the world, and to give the kingdoms thereof to whom
he would: no better right has the Pope the eldest son of Satan to pull
down, and set up kings. And though in those blind and superstitious days,
when iniquity was strong, the Pope prevailed in his presumptuous enterprises,
yet he had not always the like success: Bonifacius 8. attempted to have
deposed Philippus the fair, king of France: Benedict the 13. would have done
the like to Charles the 6. Julius the 2. against Jews the 12. but their
presumptuous enterprises were frustrate. What Pius the 5. attempted against
Queen Elizabeth, and of late Paulus the 5. against the Venetian state, and
with what frivolous success, is evident to the world: all these examples are
unjust, because the Pope was Judge in his own cause, and resisted the lawful
powers, which are ordained of God.

4. Neither is it true, that Leo the 3. translated the Empire from the Greeks
to the Germans: for he could not confer that upon an other, which he never
had himself: the truth is, that Charles by force invaded the Empire of the
East: Aventinus shows the occasion: by reason that a woman then had the
government of the Empire at Constantinople, the Romans took an occasion to
nominate a new Emperor: and whereas Charles at that time, tenebat omnes
provincias, quae ad vrbem Romam pertinebant, did hold all the Provinces which
belonged to the city of Rome, Papa, Senatus, and populus Romanus illum
designabant Imperatorem, the Pope, Senate, and people of Rome, did appoint him
to be Emperor, etc. So then it was not the Popes act alone, but of the whole
Senate and people of Rome: neither was it there act simply, Carolus had made a
way before, having all the Roman Provinces in his possession.

As touching the supposed sanction and order for the electing of the Emperor:
neither was it the Popes sole act, but the Emperor Otho then brother german to
the Pope, established it: neither is that custom and order continued by the
Popes authority, but by virtue of the golden bull of Charles the 4. made ann.
1356. for neither Ferdinand, Maximilian, nor Rodolphus, now Emperor, received
their Imperial crown from the Pope: And some think that this constitution of
Electors was not begun by Gregory the 5. but before was brought in by Charles
the great, who appointed 4. Electors. ex Pareo.

Arguments against the Lordship per amount of the Pope above Kings and Princes.
1. Our blessed Savior does restrain his Apostles from all worldly
government, Matthew. 20.25. Luke 22.25. The kings of the nations have dominion
over them, etc. but it shall not be so with you, etc. If no Lordly dominion be
permitted them over others, much less over Princes.

Bellarmine answers, that he does not simply forbid them to bear rule, but
(...), to tyrannize, or bear unlawful rule. Contra. The word (...), and the
other compound, are used by the Evangelists in the same sense: the simple verb
S. Luke has, the compound, S. Matthew; therefore all kind of temporal rule is
simply forbidden them.

2. As our blessed Savior by precept restrains all worldly dominion in his
Apostles and their successors, so by his own example he confirms the same:
When he was asked concerning his kingdom, he answered, it was not of this
world, Ioh. 18.36. when he was desired by certain brethren to divide their
inheritance, he said, Who made me a Judge among you? Luke 12. when they sought
him to be a king, he fled into the mountain, Ioh. 6. of the which fact of our
blessed Savior, Tertullian thus writes, de Idolol. c. 18. quae noluit,
reiecit, quae reiecit, damnavit, in pompa diaboli deportavit, etc. what he
would not have, he rejected, what he rejected he condemned, and counted the
devils pomp, etc.

Bellarmine answers, that Christ took upon him only the person of an
Ecclesiastical, not of a temporal Prince. Contra. If Christ then assumed not
the person and office of a temporal Prince in earth, what warrant has the
Pope, who challenges to be Christ's Vicat in earth to arrogate more, then
Christ himself took upon him.

3. S. Peter allows not Pastors to be Lords over Gods heritage, 1. Pet. 5.3.
that is, the Church of God, over the which they are set: then much less ought
they to be Lords over kings and Princes, unto whom they should be subject.

4. S. Paul forbids the Pastors to encumber themselves with the affairs of
this world: as he says, 2. Tim. 2.3. No man that warreth, entangleth himself
with the affairs of this life: but for the Pope and his Bishops to domineere
in temporal things, were more then an entangling of them, it makes them mad
and drunken with worldly ambition: Ergo.

Bellarmine has here a very simple evasion, that by the affairs of this life,
the Apostle means business about victual. Contra. The soldiers did thus busy
themselves in providing victual, and S. Paul also labored with his hands for
his living: this then is not the encumbrance or entangling here spoken of.

5. This has been the consonant doctrine of the ancient Fathers, that the
Ecclesiastical Pastors should not arrogate to themselves any temporal or
civil Dominion.

Tertullian says, lib. de idol. c. 8. Christus gloriam seculi, sibi and suis
alienam esse iudicavit, Christ judged the glory of the world, not to be meet
for him or his.

Hilarie ad Auxent. Oro vos Episcopi, etc. anne aliquam sibi e palatio
assumpserunt dignitatem, I pray you Bishops, etc. did the Apostles assume unto
themselves any dignity of the palace, etc.

Chrysostom. hom. 42. in Joan. Christus fugit, vt ostenderet suum regnum nullis
secularibus rebus indigere, Christ fled, to show, that his kingdom needs no
secular matters.

Ambros. in 2. Timoth. 2.4. non convenit vnum duplicem habere professionem,
etc. it is not fit, that one man should have a double profession.

Bernard. de considerat. lib. 2. c. 4. The Apostles were forbidden to bear
rule: ergo tu vsur^ore audes, aut Dominus Apostolatum, aut Apostolicus
Dominatum, plane ab vtroque prohiberis, si vtrunque simul habere voles, perdes
vtrunque, etc. will thou usurp then, either a Lord to be an Apostle, or
Apostolic to be Lordly, thou art forbidden both, if thou will have both, thou
loosest both. See further of this Controv. Synops. Papism. Centur. 1. err. 51.

3. Controv. That the tyranny and idolatry of the Pope may be gainsaid, and
resisted.
In the deciding of this Controversy, three kind of persons must be
considered, the private, the public which are Ecclesiastical, as Pastors and
Ministers, and the public Civil, the Magistrate.

1. Concerning private persons. 1. they may and must resist the idolatrous
proceedings of the Pope, by denying their obedience: as when he commands and
enioyneth any thing in the service of God contrary to his word, or forces men
to subscribe and consent to his abominations: in this case the rule and
practice of the Apostles is to be followed; it is better to obey God then man,
Act. 4.19. 2. they may also escape by fleeing from the Popish tyrannical
persecutions, if they be not otherwise tied by the necessity of their calling:
for so our blessed Savior gave his Apostles liberty, if they were persecuted
in one city to flee unto an other. 3. but yet it is not lawful for private
men to use resistance by the sword and force of arms, where Popery is
maintained by the Civil authority: for this were to usurp upon the office of
the Magistrate: but where Popery is not countenanced by the civil power,
private men may use resistance.

2. Concerning the duty of Pastors and Ministers: it is their part to resist
the Popes tyranny, not by arms and the sword, which is not committed unto
them, but by the preaching of the Gospel, in setting forth the truth,
conuincing the gainsayers of error, and in exhorting the people to beware of
the false doctrine of Antichrist. 1. Pastors are the shepherds of the flock,
they must take heed unto it, to keep away the wolves, Act. 20.28. but the
Pope is a wolf, and seeks to devour Christ's sheep. 2. the preaching of the
word is that means, which God has appointed, to confound Antichrist with,
even with the spirit of his mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and the two witnesses, which
shall prophecy against Antichrist, are the faithful preachers, which should
restoare the light of the Gospel.

3. Touching the authority of Princes: It is their part and office, to resist
the Popes tyranny by the sword, in rooting out idolatry, weeding out his
Seminaries and seedes-men, and in restoaring true religion, and the Church of
God to her former integrity and liberty. 1. for so their calling is to be a
terror unto evil works, and a praise unto good: but the works of Antichrist,
are wicked and abominable. 2. Princes are commanded to render unto the whore,
as she had done to them, and to recompense her double, Revel. 18.6. this is
their warrant, the commandment of God. 3. and it is prophesied and foretold,
that the Princes shall hate the whore, and make her naked, devour her flesh,
and consume her with fire, Rev. 17.16. This prophecy shall not fall to the
ground; and Princes for their part must endeavor to make it good.

4. Controv. Whether the civil Magistrate has any power or authority in
matters of Religion.
Because there is a great question moved between the Romanists and us,
concerning the power of the Civil Magistrate in causes Ecclesiastical, and in
religious affairs, first of all it is necessary, that the state of the
question be considered: which shall be divided into certain propositions of
two sorts, first general touching the foundation and institution of Kings and
other superior Magistrates, and then more particular, of the execution of
their office.

1. There is in the Commonwealth, a superior authority, called architectonica,
as the framer and chief builder of the Commonwealth, to the which it belongs
to institute and ordain laws, and to see that justice be exercised according
to those laws: this being the supreme and highest authority, can not be in
subjects, and so not in the Ecclesiastical persons, but in the king only.

2. To this power, it belongs to provide for the good in general, that
belongs to the subjects, whether it be civil or spiritual: for the good of
the subjects is the intendment of the lawmaker.

3. Yet least this power should err in making of laws, it receives direction
for the civil laws, from the rule of equity and prudence, confirmed by
experience; for Ecclesiastical laws, from the word of God.

4. Under this supreme authority, there is the Civil, and Ecclesiastical
power: but not alike: the Civil is simply inferior unto it, altogether
depending of it, but the Ecclesiastical, though it be subject unto it, in
respect of the external policy, yet in respect of the object, which is
spiritual, the word of God, and of that direction, which it gives out of the
same to the magistrate, it is not simply inferior as the other.

4. This supreme architectonicall power, though properly it be civil in
respect of the object, acts, condition, and state thereof, yet in some sort it
is also an Ecclesiastical power, as it has oversight also of the Church.

5. This princely power, though it have the oversight and chief care of Church
and Commonwealth, as the chief steward, and disposer: yet it can not execute
all the offices and functions belonging to either: as some it can not excuse,
ob defectum facultatis, for want of faculty and skill, as to minister Physic,
to teach in schools: some, for the defect of dignity in the things
themselves, which being base are not incident into the majesty of the King,
as to dig, to plow, and such like: some, propter defectum iuris, for the
defect of lawful right and calling, as the Prince is not to preach the word,
to confer orders, to minister the Sacraments, because he is not thereunto
called nor appointed.

6. This supreme and Princely power, though it be incident both to the
Christians and Pagane magistrates, yet it is so much the more perfect in a
Christian government, in as much as both of himself, by the light of nature,
and in himself by direction from others in civil things, and by illumination
of Gods spirit within, and iustruction without in spiritual matters, he has
better understanding.

Now concerning the execution of this supreme and princely power, these
propositions are to be maintained, which are without any controversy.

1. Princes ought not only to take care about the affairs of the
Commonwealth, and to be altogether careless of religion, but even unto
Ecclesiastical affairs, and matters of religion, they ought to extend their
Princely care and watchfulnes. 1. the Prince is the minister of God for our
good: but the good of the subject, is not only civil and temporal, but
spiritual concerning religion. 2. even the heathen did ascribe unto their
kings a principal care even of religion: whereupon the Emperors of Rome were
styled, Pontifices maxi^i, the high Priests or Prelates: and Aristotle writes,
lib. 3. politic. c. 10. that the Lacedemonian kings, had the command of war,
and rei divinae cultum exercuisse, and did exercise divine worship, unless
they were such sacrifices, as were necessarily to be done by a Priest: that
therefore, which by a common consent of nations was given unto kings, ought not
to be denied to Christian Princes. 3. the care of religion otherwise concerns
the Prince, rather then private persons: these only are to wish well unto it,
and to accept of it, but the Prince ought to be an agent: without whose power
nothing can be effected publicly for the maintenance of religion.

2. It belongs to the Imperial power to maintain true religion, and to see
that no confused mixture of religions be admitted: for this is given as a
reason in the time of the Judges, why some followed idolatry and strange
worship, because there was no king in Israel, but every one did that which was
good in his own eyes, Judge. 17.4. if there had been then a king, they should
not have been suffered every one to follow their own fancies.

3. Christian Princes are by their laws and edicts to restrain all blasphemy,
idolatry, heresy, sacrilege, and such like: because Princes are to be feared
for evil works: their office is to restrain evil works whatsoever, such as
these are: and they are appointed to procure the good of their subjects, and
consequently to take out of the way all impediments, which may hinder their
good, such as these are: the Romanists grant thus much, that the Princes by
their laws should provide against heresy, but they will exclude the Prince
from all judgment of heresy, which must be in their opinion determined only
by the Church: but of this matter more shall be said afterward.

4. The Civil Magistrate is not to assume unto himself, or take upon him the
execution of any Ecclesiastical function, as to preach, to bind, or loose, to
minister the Sacraments: because they are not thereunto called, and without a
calling none are to intrude themselves into those ministerial functions, Hebr.
5. the examples of Jeroboam, who would have sacrificed, and his hand withered,
1. king. 13. and of Vzziah, who attempted to have offered incense, and was
therefore stricken with the leprosy, 2. Chron. 26. do teach kings to keep
themselves within the limits and bounds of their callings.

5. Neither has the Prince authority in matters of religion, concerning the
worship of God, and the doctrine of faith, to appoint, what it pleases him,
but he must therein be directed by the word of God: for this was the sin of
Jeroboam, that set up two golden calves of his own invention: and if it be not
lawful for the Ecclesiastical governors, whose special charge is about
religion, to bring in their own inventions, as Aaron sinned in setting up a
golden calfe, much less may the Civil powers presume that way. Three things
are signified under the name of religion, and religious matters. 1. the
doctrine of the Church. 2. the discipline and government in general, that
there should be Pastors and teachers in the Church: neither of these are to be
swaied by the Prince, but they are to be directed by the word. 3. but the
special oeconomie of the Church, as touching the number of the Pastors, and
who ought to be appointed thereunto, this appertains to the care and office
of the Magistrate.

6. Princes are bound, to have the ministers and Pastors of God in reverence,
because they are the Ambassadors of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.20. and to see them
sufficiently maintained: because the labourer is worthy of his hire, and it
concerns the spiritual good of these subjects, that sufficient Pastors
should be provided for them, to minister unto them spiritual food: and
besides, they must submit themselves to the doctrine, precepts, and
exhortations delivered by the Pastors out of Gods word: as David gave ear unto
Nathan, and suffered his reprehension: and our blessed Savior says, he that
hears you, hears me, etc. All these propositions are not at all
controverted between our adversaries the Papists, and us: thus then stands
the state of the question:

7. The office of the Prince is, as in Civil matters to provide all things
concerning the civil good of the subject, to see that right and equity be
maintained; so also to take care touching their spiritual good, that true
religion be continued and taught in the Church, according to the word of God:
unto the which care and charge belong these particulars.

1. The Prince in himself, and for his particular, is to take knowledge and to
understand true religion, to be able to discern it from error, and false
worship, and to this end to be exercised himself in the law and word of God,
Deuteronomy. 17.19.

2. Then it is his part, to cause to be set down a perfect form of religion
and Ecclesiastical government, squared out according to the line of truth, and
rule of Gods word, and by godly laws to establish the same: as Josias did, 2.
king. 23.3.

3. He must also see, that sufficient and able Pastors be provided for the
Church, which may instruct the people in the ways of God, as Iehosaphat did,
2. Chron. 19.8.

4. Further, the Princes care must be, to see that these Pastors do their
duty in preaching true and sound doctrine, and in administering discipline
uprightly: as David appointed the Levites their offices, 1. Chron. 16.

5. And the Prince is also to remove ignorant, erroneous, and delinquent
Pastors, and to see vice duly punished; as Solomon removed Abiathar from the
priesthood: to appoint Counsels and Synods to that end, for the redress of
enormous faults. The state of the question being thus propounded, we will
first see how it is impugned by our adversaries, and examine some of their
arguments.

1. Stapleton thus proves that the Prince has no power in Ecclesiastical
matters, Stapl. repetit. schol. contr. 2. qu. 5. art. 1.
because the sheep have no jurisdiction over the Pastor: but the Magistrate is
of the number of the sheep: Ergo.

Ans. 1. There is a double Ecclesiastical powers: one is properly and simply
so called, which consists merely in Ecclesiastical matters, as in preaching
the word, administering the discipline of the Church: this power belongs only
to Ecclesiastikes: there is an Ecclesiastical power improperly so called,
which is ciuilly exercised about Ecclesiastical persons and causes: and this
is in the Civil magistrate: so Constantine said, vos estis Episcopi in
ecclesia, ego extra ecclestam sum Episcopus a Deo constitutus, ye are Bishops
within the Church, I also without the Church, am a Bishop appointed of God:
Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 24. de vit. Constantin. 2. As Princes are sheep, to be
ordered and directed by the word of God, so they have an Ecclesiastical power:
but they are Pastors also in regard of their government, and the Ministers, as
subjects, and so sheep also under the magistrate: and thus Princes have an
Ecclesiastical power.

2. Argum. That which neither the Emperors would ever assume unto themselves,
nor the Church give unto them, no way belongs unto them: but to be Judges of
Ecclesiastical matters, neither they challenged, nor the other yielded: Ergo:
for proof of the precedent part, is alieadged how Theodosius the Emperor said,
illicitum esse Imperatorem se interserere ecclesiasticis tractatibus, that it
is not lawful for the Emperor to enterpose himself in Ecclesiastical
affairs: Cyril. tom. 4. epist. 17. Hilarious writ to Constantine the Emperor,
vt indices non vsurpent cognoscere causas Clericorum, etc. that the Judges
usurp not upon the^ to take cognizance of the causes of Clergy men, etc.
Ambrosius refused to dispute with Auxentius the heretic before Valentinian the
Emperor, of the orthodoxall faith, etc.

Ans. 1. It is untrue, that the Emperors assumed no such Ecclesiastical power
to themselves: for Constantinus both called together the Bishops to that great
assembly of the Nicene Council, prescribed them a rule of their conference to
decide all controversies by the Scriptures: and he himself sat among them,
and judged the causes with the rest, and did by his laws establish and command
to be obeyed the things there agreed upon, as Eusebius witnesses, lib. 3. c.
12. Theodosius must be understood to speak, of matters merely and absolutely
Ecclesiastical, as of the doctrine of faith, and therein the Civil power is
not to give rules of faith: so also must Hilarie be understood: if he mean
otherwise Chrysostomes judgment is to be preferred, who subiecteth even
Apostles, Prophets, Bishops, to the Civil power: that of Ambrose was a matter
of fact, and concludes not.

3. Argum. If Princes should make Ecclesiastical laws, the unity of faith
could not be kept, because in every several kingdom, there would be a
several religion.

Ans. 1. The argument follows not, for religion is not to depend upon the
opinion or will of the Prince, but it must be squared out by the word of God,
which Princes following, can not differ in the substance of religion, though
they may vary in some circumstances and external rites: but if Princes will
not be ruled by Gods word, but follow other directions, then they may frame
unto themselves diverse religions: so then it is not the fault of the power, but
the abuse thereof, and the personal fault of Princes, if by this means a
variety of religion be brought in. 2. neither, if this power be denied unto
kings, and the whole authority of Ecclesiastical laws were only in men of
the Church, if they refuse to be guided by the word, is this inconvenience
helped: for in Moses absence, the whole power being in Aarons hand, yet a
different worship, in setting up a golden calfe, from that which Moses
prescribed, was brought in. And whence has sprung the great innovation of
religion in Popery, from the purity of the ancient faith, but from this, that
the Bishops of Rome, excluding the authority of the Emperor first in the East,
and afterward in the West, have arrogated to themselves the sole authority in
matters Ecclesiastical?

4. Argum. Princes can not do the less, as preach the word, minister the
Sacraments, therefore not the greater to make Ecclesiastical laws.

Ans. 1. It follows not, for though duties merely Ecclesiastical can not be
executed by the Prince, because he is not thereunto called, yet external
jurisdiction he may exercise in the Church: neither are these duties as the
less and greater one to the other in the same kind: they are in diverse
respects both less and greater: the preaching of the word is greater in
respect of the spiritual power, and the Civil, in regard of the external
jurisdiction. 2. neither is it always true, he that can not do the less, can
not do the greater, where he is barred from the less, by some defect either
of right in being called thereunto, or otherwise the thing not beseeming: as
in the civil functions, it is not fit for the Prince to dig and dolve, and
yet he can do the greater, to make and ordain laws: so in the Church
affairs, he is not to preach, because he wants a calling thereunto.

5. Argum. They which can not judge infallibly of the sense of Gods word, can
have no Ecclesiastical power: Princes can not judge: Ergo.

Ans. 1. The proposition is not true: for neither can any Bishop judge
infallibly of the sense of Scripture, nor any else, since the time of the
Apostles. 2. but as the Pastors by prayer, conference, meditating upon the
Scriptures attain to a competent measure of understanding of the Scriptures,
sufficient to direct them: so by the same means, and by help of the learned,
the Prince also may be prepared to apply his iudiciarie power to the present
necessity of the Church. 3. And I pray you what infallibility of judgment
has been in the Popes, when as John the 23. was condemned in the Council of
Constance for his monstrous opinions: as that he should hold vitam aeternam non
esse, that there is no eternal life after this, and animam hominis cum corpore
mori, that the soul of man dies with the body, and that the body being
dead, shall not rise again: And seeing it has been often seen among them,
that the Pope has made boys and children Bishops, as Bernard complained in
his time, scholares pueri and impuberes adolescentes promoventur ad
ecclesiasticas dignitates, scholar boys, and beardlesse youths are promoted
to the dignities of the Church: epist. 41. what infallibility of judgment
then can they boast of in their Clergy?

6. Argum. Not the Princes and Civil magistrates shall give account for the
souls of the subjects, but the Pastors only, Hebr. 13.17. therefore they have
no Ecclesiastical power.

Ans. The argument follows not, Pastors must give account for men's souls if
they be lost by their default, therefore Magistrates shall not: for both shall
give account, though not in the same manner: the Pastors for seducing them by
false doctrine; the Magistrate, in tolerating a corrupt worship, or in making
impious laws for the maintenance of idolatry, as it is often objected
concerning Jeroboam that he made Israel to sin: And these and such like are
the Adversaries arguments against the Ecclesiastical power of the Magistrate.

Now on the contrary some arguments shall be propounded for the proof and
confirmation of the question.

1. Argum. The Magistrate is the minister of God for the good of the subject,
Romans 13.5. but this good is not only civil, but spiritual, therefore even in
spiritual things he must minister for their good: the Papists will have the
Prince to be their minister and servant indeed, that he should put in
execution the decrees of the Church, but decree nothing himself: but this were
to give no power at all unto magistrates, but as servants which are commanded to
do their masters will: the Prince has a ministering power in spiritual
things, not a ministering service.

2. Argum. Every soul must be subject to the higher power, therefore even the
Ecclesiastical state, and every person therein of what condition soever he be:
the Papists answer, that they must be subject, as they are citizens, and as
they enjoy possessions, but not as they are Ecclesiastical persons: But the
Apostles rule is general, every soul must be subject, in what things soever,
so that the power, which is of God, be not abused against God: true it is that
in things merely spiritual, touching faith and doctrine, they must not depend
upon the Civil power, but as he enioyneth precepts, according to the word: yet
in respect of the external policy of the Church, in giving order and
direction, in censuring and punishing offenders, and such like, even spiritual
persons are subject to the Civil power.

3. That the Prince has power even in Ecclesiastical matters, shall be
proved by these particulars. 1. that the cognizance and knowledge of religion
is required in the Prince. 2. that it belongs unto him by law to maintain
the truth, and to inhibit all false religion. 3. that he is to take order for
the Ministers and Pastors, that they do apply themselves faithfully to their
calling, and to censure them which are disorderly and exorbitant. 4. that it is
the Princes office, to appoint Synods, Counsels, national, general,
Provincial, concerning Ecclesiastical business.

1. The first is evident, Deuteronomy. 17.19. where the king is commanded to read in
the book of the law all the days of his life: so also Ioshu. 1.18.

2. Moses prescribed unto Israel a form of worship, Joshua caused the people
to be circumcised, Josh. 5. David disposed the ministerial offices of the
Tabernacle, and appointed the Levites and Priests their orders and courses, 1.
Chron. 23. Hezekiah pulled down the brazen serpent: Josias took away idols:
so did other Christian Emperors make Ecclesiastical laws: as the first law
Cunctus populus in the Code, is concerning the belief of the Trinity:
Martianus made a law against the Nestorians, and Eutychians: Justinian
inserteth diverse Ecclesiastical laws; as that the Letanie should not be said
by laymen, none of the Clergy being present: Novell. 123. c. 31. and that
Bishops and Presbyters should rehearse the prayers in an audible voice to the
understanding of the people: Novell. 137. c. 6. and diverse such like.

3. Solomon deposed Abiathar: Iehosaphat appointed the Levites to teach in the
cities, 2. Chron. 19. Constantinus the great, heard the controversy between
Donatus and Cecilianus, and judged it: Eusebius. lib. 10. c. 5. Theodosius
commanded the Nestorian Bishops to be deposed: leg. 2. C. de sum. Trinitat. he
appointed Nectorius to be Bishop of Constantinople: Socrat. lib. 5. c. 19.
Justinian deposes a Bishop that had a suspected woman in his house: Novel. 6.
c. 5. yea the Bishop of Rome was a long time together nominated and his
election confirmed by the Emperor: as Constantinus says to Liberius, Nos, quod
Christianus esses, te dignum iudicanimus Episcopatu vrbis nostrae: We because
thou art a Christian, have judged thee worthy to be Bishop of our city:
Theodor. lib. 2. c. 16.

4. David called together the Priests to bring home the Arc, 1. Chr. 13.7. so
did Ezekiah call an assembly of the Priests, 2. Chr. 29. and Josias, 2. king.
23. the first Nicene Council was summoned by Constantine the great: the 1.
Constantinopol. by Theodosius the elder: the 1. Ephesine by Theodosius the
younger: the Chalcedon Council by Martianus.

Justinian decrees, Archiepiscopum singulis annis synodos celebrare, etc. that
the Archbishop should every year celebrate Synods, and assemble the Bishops
together. Novell. 123. c. 10. and Novell. 137. c. 7. he commands the
Presidents of the Provinces, to see that the Metropolitans do assemble Synods.
If then Princes have made laws for the maintenance of true religion, and
against heresies, and have taken upon them to give order and direction for
Ecclesiastical offices, have deposed such as were unmeet and unworthy, and
called Counsels and Synods concerning Ecclesiastical matters, then can there
not be denied unto them a kind of Ecclesiastical power.

But Stapleton thus obiecteth against those forenamed Presidents, of the
Emperors and kings authority in Ecclesiastical matters.

1. Object. These instances do only show, that de facto, in fact and in deed
Princes meddled with Ecclesiastical affairs, not that de iure, of right, they
ought to have so done.

Ans. If only such presidents were brought out of Ecclesiastical stories, and
not out of the Scriptures, he should seem to say somewhat: but seeing the
Scriptures set forth examples of godly kings (who are commended in Gods book)
dealing in Ecclesiastical affairs, there is no question to be made of their
right in so doing.

2. Object. These Princes by such acts did only provide for the peace of the
Church ex zelo, of their zeal and piety, not imperio, by their imperial
power and authority.

Ans. That can not be said to be done of a pious zeal, which any usurps upon
them without an authority and calling: if these Princes did these things of
zeal, then also by a lawful calling and power, for otherwise it had not been
pleasing unto God, they intruding and usurping upon an others place and office.

3. Object. They did not make new Ecclesiastical laws, but only confirmed
and ratified such things, as were decreed in former Canons.

Ans. 1. True it is, that new articles concerning faith, neither Emperors nor
Bishops have authority to bring in, but such as are prescribed by the word. 2.
but yet new laws concerning faith, requiring obedience under certain
penalties, have been made by Emperors, not provided for before by Canons: and
concerning orders to be observed in Synods, and in the government
Ecclesiastical, diverse things have been enacted by the Imperial power, never
mentioned before in the ecclesiastical Canons. 3. and what if the Imperial
constitutions enjoin the same things concerning faith and doctrine, decreed
before by the Canons, this proves not that they executed only, what the
other prescribed: but both the powers the Ecclesiastical by Canons, the
Imperial by laws enforced the same rules of faith, which the word of God
prescribed. More who please to see of this controversy, I send him to learned
Pareus treatise, dub. 5. and to Synops. Papism. Cent. 1. err. 98. and err. 100.

5. Controv. Whether Ecclesiastical persons, as Bishops and others, may have
the temporal sword committed unto them.
The Romanists are herein very confident, who maintain, that the Pope is both
a temporal and a spiritual Prince, and so are some other of their chief
Prelates in Germany, which they think not only to be lawful, but very
expedient, and in these times necessary for the more peaceable government of
the Church.

By this means, they say, that Cities and Provinces are the better governed,
when the chief authority is committed to Ecclesiastical persons: and in
these days it is necessary, that men, which will not be won by the sword,
should be compelled by the sword.

Contra. But the contrary is evident, that no place is worse governed, but
where the Prelate is also a temporal Prince: and the reason is, because they
commit all unto officers, not being able, nor fit themselves to manage the
affairs of the state, and by this means much corruption grows. And as it is
necessary that the obstinate, that can not be persuaded by the word, should be
bridled by authority, so God has appointed to that end Magistrates, to whom
the sword is committed, and not to Ministers: and this is also seen by daily
experience, that no where more disorders are committed, then where Bishops have
the guiding of the Civil state: which shows, that God gives no blessing
unto such preposterous proceedings against his ordinance.

And that Ecclesiastical persons ought not to meddle with the sword, (though
from exercising of other parts of Civil justice, which are compatible, with
their calling, all and altogether are not to be excluded) appears by our
blessed Saviors lesson unto his Apostles, vos autem non sic, etc. it shall not
be so with you, as with the Princes and Lords among the Gentiles, Matthew. 20.25.
and the Apostle in this place, v. 5. says, that he bears not the sword in
vain: that is, the temporal power.

Here it will be answered, that Christ's example, and the Apostles are not to be
imitated in all things: for then neither should there be any magistrate among
Christians, because he took not that office upon him, neither should it be
lawful to have silver and gold, because Peter says, Act. 3. Gold and silver
have I none.

Ans. 1. Our Savior Christ forbids not all, to take Lordly authority upon
them, but only his Apostles: he forbids not all to be Civil magistrates,
but such as had the preaching of the word committed unto them. 2. neither do
we urge the Apostles examples only, but their precepts: that of Saint Peter's
not having gold or silver, was a matter of fact, not a precept: but that is a
precept, which Saint Peter gives unto Pastors, not to be Lords over Gods
heritage, 1. Pet. 5. 3. thus was it in Origens time, who writes thus, homil.
13. upon this chapter, omnia crimina, quae vindicari vult Deus, non per
antistites and principes ecclesiarum, sed per mundi iudices voluit vindicari,
all the faults which God would have punished, he would have so punished, not by
the rulers and chief governors of the Church, but by the Judges of the world,
etc.

Now though the use of the sword, How far the Ecclesiastical persons may
deal in civil matters.
which properly is seen in the power of life and death, be denied unto
Ministers, yet the tractation of all Civil causes is not forbidden, as in the
compounding of controversies, ending of strifes among neighbors, and if unto
some discreet men be committed a commanding power to restrain the evil,
there is no inconvenience: for so the Apostle would have the Corinthians to
end among themselves the controversies, that did rise, and not one to hail an
other before the Magistrate, 1. Cor. 6. but for such matters, they should be as
Magistrates to themselves, where, no question, the Minister and Pastor is not
excluded among others, but that he may and ought to have a chief hand, in the
carriage of such matters: and so Augustine expounds that place, in Psalm. 118.
concion. 24. When they bring (says he) their causes unto us, non audemus
dicere, etc. we dare not say, man who appointed me a judge among you?
constituit enim talibus causis Ecclesiasticos Apostolus cogniturus, in foro
prohibens litigare Christianos: for the Apostle has appointed ecclesiastical
persons to take cognizance of such causes, forbidding Christians to strive in
courts, etc. so it seems in those days, that godly Bishops and Pastors, were
employed in ending controversies and suits among the people: and further
Augustine has this excellent saying touching this matter, otium sanctum
quaerit charitas veritatis, negotium iustum suscipit necessitas charitatis,
quam sarcinam si nullus imponat, percipiendo vacandum est veritati, si autem
imponitur, suscipienda est propter charitatis necessitatem, etc. the love of
the truth desires an holy kind of ease and leisure, and the necessity of
charity undertakes just business: which burden if none impose, we must attend
the searching of the truth, but if it be imposed, it must be undertaken for the
necessity of charities sake: lib. 19. de civit. Dei, c. 19. In the which
saying of Augustine, I observe three things: 1. what causes were referred unto
Ecclesiastical persons, not criminal, but civil, not matters, which touched
the life, but controversies which violated charity. 2. how and upon what
occasion they dealt in such causes, they hunted not after them, neither sought
them, but they were brought unto them, they ambitiously intruded not themselves
into the Magistrates office. 3. with what moderation: they did only attend
such matters of necessity, and in such sort, as it hindered not their better
studies and searching of the truth, which excuses not them, which so
entermeddle in civil business, as they neglect their calling.

So then to conclude this point: there are some things, in the Civil and
Ecclesiastical power, that are compatible, some incompatible, and can not be
joined together: like as a civil Magistrate ought not to preach, or minister
the Sacraments; so neither can a Minister meddle with the sword: but some
things are compatible, as the civil power to maintain peace, extends it
self to the external policy of the Church ^ and so are helpers to the
Ecclesiastical state: so the Ministers may be assistants to the civil state,
to advise and direct them: See further hereof, Synops. Centur. 1. err. 52.

Controv. 6. Whether it be lawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate, and to
use the sword in time of peace and war.
v. 4. He bears not the sword in vain. Having hitherto out of this chapter
resisted diverse erroneous opinions of the Romanists, we have now occasion to
deal with the fantastical and brainesicke position of the Anabaptists, who
deny, that any Christian ought to take upon him to be a Magistrate or to use
the sword, in exercising civil justice at home, or military discipline
abroad: not much unlike was the saying of Iudus Gaulonita, of whom Josephus
makes mention, in the beginning of his 18. book, antiquit. Iudaic. who
affirmed, that the Jews were not bound, propter libertatem legis, by the
liberty of their law, to yield obedience to Caesar, or to any profane Prince,
etc. in the Council also of Vienna, was condemned a certain sect called
Beghardi, who held that a man might attain to that perfection, as that he was
not bound to the observation of any precepts, nor was subject to the obedience
of any: we will examine some of the Anabaptists reasons.

1. Argum. The Apostle says, that Christ made some Apostles, some Evangelists,
etc. Ephesians. 4. not that he made them Princes and rulers.

Ans. 1. Christ came not to invert or innovate the civil state, which was
instituted before, but to appoint a new order of teachers for the building of
his Church. 2. and the Apostle speaks there only of such Ministers as were
called to teach: those indeed he made not Princes: this lets not, but other
of his members, not called to teach, may be Rulers.

2. Argum. Christ forbids his Apostles to be Lords and Rulers, as the
heathen were: But with you it shall not be so, Math. 20. and this he says not
only to his Apostles, but to all, Mark. 13.27. That which I say unto you, I
say unto all, etc.

Answ. In that place, Matthew. 20. Christ forbids not all Christians Lordly
dominion, but only his Apostles, that were appointed to preach the word: that
there might be still a difference between the Civil and Ecclesiastical
power: but in the other place, our Savior speaks of spiritual
watchfulness, which concerns not only the Apostles, but all Christians, and
therefore speaks to all.

3. Argum. S. Paul forbids the Corinthians all strifes and controversies,
which do appertain unto the Magistrate, 1. Cor. 6.

Ans. The Apostle does not simply forbid all suites: but 1. before the heathen
judges. 2. among brethren. 3. for small causes, and trifling matters. 4. and
with a desire and mind to procure trouble one to an other: for otherwise S.
Paul had transgressed against his own rule, when he appealed unto Caesar.

4. Argum. Our Blessed Savior forbids to seek revenge, but if one smite us
on the one cheek to turn the other also, Matthew. 5.

Ans. All private revenge is forbidden: but the Magistrate is Gods minister,
and therefore as revenge belongs unto God, so the Magistrate in Gods place
may take revenge: and one may implore his help, as he may commit his cause to
God, so it be not done with a revengefull mind.

5. Argum. Our Savior bids us to love our enemies: but to wage battle with
them, and to put malefactors to death, is not to love them: Ergo.

Answ. We are bidden to love our enemies, not simply, but 1. as they are men.
2. as they are our enemies, that we should not attempt any thing against them
of a private grudge, or with a reuengefull mind. 3. and we must not seek
their destruction, but amendment: yet we are not to love our enemies: 1. as
they are evil, least we should love in them their vices, which God hates. 2.
as they are enemies of God and his Church. 3. and in forbearing to punish them,
to their own hurt and evil example of others: So the Magistrate may love the
malefactor, in seeking his amendment, and yet may punish his vice in him: so
the Prince may love his enemies, in seeking all means to win them, and yet
wage battle with them, as enemies to God and the commonwealth.

6. Argum. Christ forbids to judge, judge not, and ye shall not be judge:
Peter is bid to put up his sword: Christ refused to divide the inheritance,
and to condemn the adulteress: he says his kingdom is not of this world.

Answ. 1. Christ forbids all rash judgment and private censuring one of an
other, he speaks not of public judgment. 2. Peter, and in him all
Ecclesiastical persons, as also all private persons, are forbidden to use the
sword, because it is not committed to them. 3. Christ came not to be a Judge or
civil Magistrate, therefore he refused to deal in those civil causes: the
adulteress he condemned not, because the Pharisees accused her of hatred, and
he would not be an instrument of their malice. 4. though his kingdom be not of
this world, yet because it is in this world, of necessity we must use this
world, and the helps thereof for our present necessity, as we use meat, and
drink, plowing, sowing, and such like, though we must be as though we used it
not.

7. Arg. There is neither precept nor president in the new Testament for the
lawfulnes of war among Christians: Ergo, it is not lawful.

Answ. 1. It follows not, for Christ came to preach faith, not to give rules
of war, because they are sufficiently prescribed in the old law and
Testament, which Christ came not to dissolve. 2. the antecedent also is false,
for there are both precepts and presidents in the new Testament, as shall
follow now to be showed in the contrary arguments.

Contra. Now for the affirmative part, that it is lawful for a Christian to
bear the Magistrates office, and being a Magistrate to use the sword, both in
civil judgments and hostile war, these reasons are brought:

1. We have in the old Testament, both precepts for judicial matters, as Exodus
21.22.23. and touching war, Deuteronomy. c. 13. c. 20. c. 31. and presidents also
for both: Moses, Iosuah, David, Iehosophat, were both judges in deciding
controversies at home, and victorious captains against their enemies abroad.

But it will be objected concerning David, that God refused him, that he should
not build his temple, because he was a man of war and blood, 1. Chron 28.3.

Answ. David was not refused, Why the Lord would not have David to build him an
house.
as though God allowed not the wars which he fought against the enemies of
God: for he says the Lord taught him to fight, Psalm. 18.35. and 144.1. but for
these reasons: 1. because the Lord was yet to employ him in his wars, and he
should have no leisure to attend that work: Iunius annot. 2. Sam. 7.5. 2. or
because he had shed the innocent blood of Vrias, Pare. 3. add hereunto, the
Temple was a figure of Christ, whose kingdom should be peaceable, and
therefore that the shadow and the body might fully agree, the Lord would have
the material Temple a figure of the true Temple, to be builded by Solomon a
peaceable man.

But against all these precepts and presidents in the old Testament, the
Anabaptists will object with the old Manichees, that there is great difference
between the old and new Testament: that the God of the law was cruel and
bloody, but the father of Christ in the new is merciful and gentle:
therefore to stop such blasphemous mouths, and to show that herein the old
Testament and the new agree, as both written by one spirit, we have both
precepts, practice, and presidents, for all these in the new Testament.

For precepts of exercising Justice and Magistracy: S. Paul says, He (the
Magistrate) bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13.4. it is lawful then for a
Magistrate to use the sword: for the lawfulnes of war, John Baptist does not
bid the soldiers renounce their calling, but that they should do no wrong,
but be content with their wages, Luke. 3.

For practice: S. Paul appealed unto Caesar's judgment seat: therein allowing
the thrones and places of justice.

For presidents of magistracy: the ruler, John 4. believed with all his house,
and Sergius Paulus being converted, Act. 13. renounced not his Magistracy: of
captains, Cornelius the Centurion, was a man that feared God, and yet a
captain: so is the Centurion commended, Matthew. 8.

And after the Apostles times the Christians warred under the Emperors, being
yet Pagans and infidels against their enemies: as Justinius Martyr, in the end
of his 2. apology, makes mention of the epistle of Mar. Aurelius the Emperor
to the Senate of Rome, wherein he ascribes his victory against the Germans,
to the Christians in the camp, who when they were ready to perish for thirst,
prayed unto God, who sent them rain to comfort them, and thunder upon their
enemies.

Controv. 7. Whether law Civil and Ecclesiastical, do simply bind in
conscience.
Before I come to examine the arguments on both sides produced, certain
distinctions must be premised, for the better opening and understanding of the
question.

1. Some laws are just, which are agreeable unto the word of God, in
particular, or in general, and these do some way or other bind in conscience:
some are unjust, prescribing and commanding unlawful things, these do not
bind the conscience at all, but rather in keeping them, the conscience is
defiled.

2. Laws may bind in conscience either in general or particular: in general
some laws may bind, because obedience is commanded toward our governors in
all lawful things: and yet the same laws shall not bind in particular in
respect of the thing commanded.

3. Laws may bind in conscience, per se, of themselves, in respect of the
thing commanded, directly concerning the worship of God, or the duties of the
second table: or they may bind per accidens, accidentally, in respect of the
scandal that may follow.

4. Some laws that bind in conscience of themselves, do so bind, sub ratione
cultus divint, as a part of the divine worship, for all those works, which men
are bound in conscience to do, though they were commanded by no humane law,
belong to the service of God: some laws bind of themselves, but not by reason
of the divine worship, but in respect of some order or discipline prescribed to
that end.

5. Some laws do only inducere culpam ciuilem, make one guilty of a civil
offense, as to eat flesh upon days inhibited, or to wear apparel contrary
to the law: these civil offenses do not bind the conscience properly: or
they make one guilty of a moral offense, as when men are forbidden usury,
extortion, drunkenness, and such like: these do bind the conscience.

Now according to these distinctions, these propositions may be framed.

1. That the divine laws, by whomsoever enjoined, Magistrate, superior or
inferior, which concern either the duties of the first, or of the second
table, do bind in conscience simply of themselves, both in general and
particular.

2. Civil laws, which do determine of circumstances, necessary and
profitable toward the observation of the moral law: as the law that
forbids men to frequent alehouses, the better to prevent drunkenness: or to
wear any unlawful weapon to prevent bloodshed, do bind simply in conscience
at the least in general: because they are moral precepts directly tending to
the observation of the moral law: in such things we are bound in conscience
to obey.

3. Laws made concerning civil duties, which in themselves, not being
commanded are indifferent, as of the eating of flesh, keeping of watch, paying
of tribute, and such like, do not simply bind in conscience, neither in
general nor in particular, but accidentally only they do bind both in
general and particular, in regard of the contempt of authority and scandal
of our brethren.

4. Likewise Ecclesiastical laws, which do limit the circumstance of times
and place, concerning external order and vsages, which do help toward the
observation of the duties of the first table, and the exercise of religion: do
of themselves properly and simply bind in conscience, at the least in general,
because in such moral duties our obedience simply is required: such are the
public orders, of resorting duly unto divine service, of receiving the
sacraments, of paying tithes toward the maintenance of the Minister: of silence
in the church and not disturbing the Preacher, and such like.

5. Other orders of the Church, which do not so directly concern the service
of God, but are touching things indifferent in themselves, as of some gestures
to be used, rites and observations not offensive: they do not bind at all in
conscience, but only accidentally, in respect of the scandal, and offense
which may be given, and the breaking of order.

Now the position of the Romanists is, that laws both civil and
Ecclesiastical do bind simply in conscience, not only in respect of the
matter, that is commanded, being agreeable to the word of God, or of the
scandal and offense which may follow, but the thing though in it self it be
indifferent, yet binds the conscience, quia lege praecipitur, because it is
commanded by the law, though by the occasion thereof no offense follow,
Perer. disput. 2. numer. 8. and by the binding of the conscience, he says, is
understood mortal sin, which is committed in the omission of such things
commanded: their reasons are these.

1. S. Paul bids us to be subject, not only for wrath, but for conscience
sake, v. 5. therefore such laws bind in conscience.

Answ. This conscience is to be understood in general in respect of him, who
commands, who of conscience is to be obeyed as Gods Minister, not in respect
of the thing commanded, which is not always such as binds the conscience.

2. S. Paul wills obedience to be given unto those which are set over us,
Heb. 13.17. and our Savior faith, he that hears you, hears me.

Answ. Our Savior and the Apostle speak of obedience to be given in those
things which concern the doctrine of faith, and the salvation of our souls:
not of every observation and order of the Church.

3. Argum. The Apostles in their Synodall decree, did bind the conscience of
Christians, to abstain from strangled, and blood, and fornication, Act. 13.

Answ. 1. The former of these was no otherwise imposed upon the conscience,
then for the avoiding of offense: fornication is joined with the rest, not
because it was indeed as indifferent a thing, but it was so counted among the
heathen. 2. neither have the Pastors of the Church, that power and authority
to make laws to bind the conscience, as the Apostles had.

4. Argum. S. Paul wills that they which observed not his precepts, should be
shunned of all, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.

Answ. Because the Apostle urged nothing but the precepts of Christ, therefore
he requires obedience simply, and charge their conscience therewith.

But on the contrary, that all Civil and Ecclesiastical laws do not simply
and in themselves bind in conscience, but in regard of the offense, we show it
thus.

1. S. James says, c. 4.12. there is one lawgiuer, which is able to save and
to destroy: God only makes laws to bind the conscience.

2. If every law did bind the conscience, then by reason of such a multitude
of laws, which are impossible to be kept, men's consciences should be so snared
and entangled, as none should be free: and so with the Pharisees, they should
bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders,
Matthew. 23.3. and S. Paul speaks against such burdening with traditions, as
touch not, taste not, handle not, Coloss. 2.21.

3. Where the intendment of the law is not to bind the conscience, there if no
scandal follow, the omission of the thing commanded does not bind or pollute
the conscience: there may be a civil offense, but no moral or mortal sin:
but in diverse such laws, which are made for civil order, as in wearing of
cappes, providing of artillery, abstaining from flesh, and such like, the law
intends not to charge the conscience, but imposes a civil mulct only,
where such things are omitted: therefore such offending, if they pay the mulct
they satisfy the law: their conscience is free, where the omission proceeds
no^ of contempt, nor gives occasion of offense: beside an other way the
intention of the lawgiuer is kept, when the end and scope of the law is
observed, though strictly the letter of the law be not kept: as the eating of
flesh upon certain days is prohibited, for the benefit of the commonwealth,
that navigation and fishing by the utterance of such commodities may be
maintained: now if any eat flesh, Whether penll laws bind in conscience.
not upon any contempt of the law, but upon some other occurrent occasion, so
that the commonwealth be not thereby hindered, nor his brother offended, the
intention of the law is kept, though the letter of the law be transgressed:
and further in such penal laws which only concern external order, intentio
legislatoris non est obligare ad culpam, sed ad poenam, the intention of the
lawegiuer is not, to oblige or bind any to the guiltines of the offense, but to
the penalty: but in penal laws, which require the observation of any moral
law, it is otherwise; for there beside the incurring of the outward mulct, the
offender also transgresses the law of God.

Pererius then needed not here to have found such fault with Calvin's
distinction, between forum internum, the internal court of the conscience, and
the external court, which only binds unto the duties of civility, wherein
the conscience before God is free: for if upon every slip of a civil order,
being not done with contempt, the conscience should be burdened, what an
importable burden should be laid upon Christians, whose conscience by this
means thorough the multitude of laws should be continually entangled.

Now then to conclude this point. 1. Some laws being unjustly made, or
commanding any unlawful thing, do neither bind the conscience in general,
nor particular, neither in themselves, nor accidentally.

2. Some laws bind every way, in general, in particular, by themselves, and
accidentally, and sub ratione diumi cultus, as a part of Gods service: as all
laws enforcing obedience to the moral precepts which belong to the first or
second table.

3. Some laws do so bind in themselves, and not accidentally only, in respect
of the offense, and not only generally in regard of our obedience required to
the Magistrate in all lawful things, but in particular, in the very thing
commanded: yet not as a part of the divine worship, but sub ratione ordinis,
vel disciplinae ordinatae, etc. by reason of the order and discipline enjoined
toward the better performance of some duty toward God, or our neighbor: as
the law which binds men to come to Church, the better to serve God: and
politic laws that are made against deceit used in the making of clothes, and
other ways, to the hinderance of our brethren, which is against charity, and
such like.

4. Some laws do not bind in conscience at all in themselves, neither
generally not in particular, but only accidentally in regard of scandal and
offense which may be given by men's disobedience: as in such penal laws which
are made only for civil orders and vsages, where God is not dishonored, nor
charity violated: let there be no contempt of authorie, nor offense given,
though it be a breach of civil order, yet thereby the conscience is not
burdened before God. This I say, not to give any encouragement willingly to
transgress the public orders, for then they run into contempt of
authority, but I advise every man, as near as he can to conform himself to
the observation even of civil orders: but to this end, to help the
conscience of the weak, that they should not think in every such omission
their conscience to be charged before God: See further Synops. Centur. 1.
error. 49.

Controv. 8. Whether Ecclesiastical persons are exempted from tribute.
v. 7. Give to all men their duty, tribute to whom tribute, etc. This is an
evident place to convince the Romanists, who hold their Clergy together with
their possessions and goods to be freed and exempted from temporal taxes and
payments.

The old Popish opinion was, that they were freed by the law of God: but now
they challenge this immunitie only by the charter and privilege granted them
by Princes, Rhemist. Romans 13. annot. 5. Thomas Aquin. adds further, that
though they were at the first exempted by Princes, yet it is agreeable to the
law of nature. But if they only claim this exemption from the grant of
temporal Princes, why did then Alexan. the 6. (as Boniface the 8. has
inserted his decree in the sixth of his decretalls, lib. 3. titul. 23. c. 1.) by
his constitution provide, that secular powers should not presume to exact of
Ecclesiastical persons, toll money or other exactions, pro rebus vel
possessionibus, for their goods or possessions, which they had gotten, or
should get. We will now examine some of their reasons.

1. The lands of Pharaohs Priests were exempted from tribute, Genesis 47.22.
therefore the possessions of the Church should be free.

Answ. The lands of the Priests (whom Iunius takes rather for the Princes,
Courtiers of Pharaohs household, for the word cohen, signifies both a Prince
and a Priest,) were not so^d unto Pharaoh, as other lands were: for by reason
of the ordinary allowed them from the King, in the time of dearth, they were
constrained to sell their land for food, and so their possessions were free
from the fifth part, which other paid: they might notwithstanding be subject
and liable to other charges.

2. The King of Persia charged his officer to lay upon the Priests and Levites
no toll nor custom, Ezra 7.24.

Answ. The reason thereof was, for that the Priests had no possessions: as
likewise Caesar writes in his commentaries, that the Priests called Druidae
among the French, paid no tax money, nor custom at all, as other did: and the
reason was, because they possessed nothing, as Pliny witnesses, l. 16. c. 24.

Now on the contrary, that Clergy men, are bound as well as others, for their
persons, and lands, to pay tribute, and yield their subjection unto temporal
governors, it is evident by these reasons.

1. By the precept of Christ, give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's: he
spoke then to the Priests: and by his own example he refused not to pay poll
money, Matthew. 17. and he confessed to Pilate, John. 18. that he could have no
power against him, if it were not given him from above: he acknowledges
himself personally subject unto Pilate.

2. He which holds terrene things, is in reason to be subject to the terrene
and temporal power: Origin says, qui habet pecuniam, aut possessiones, aut
aliquid in seculo, audiat, etc. he which has money or possessions, or any
thing in the world, to him it is said, let every soul be subject, etc.

3. And S. Paul charge all subjects to pay tribute, because it is a duty to
the Magistrate, in respect of his care and vigilancie, who watches over the
subjects for their good.

Yet we deny not, but that Ecclesiastical persons may enjoy those privileges
and immunities, which have been granted them by Princes, whose liberty
therein is to be commended: so that they abuse them not to idleness and
wantonness, as sometimes the Abbyes in England did: See before controv. 1.
argum. 1. and Synops. Centur. 1. err. 99.

Controv. 9. Whether the fulfilling of the law be possible in this life.
v. 8. He that loves an other, has fulfilled the law. Hereupon our
adversaries the Romanists do infer, that the law may be fulfilled by love,
in this life: Rhemist. and Tolet, whereas we object, that no perfection can be
attained unto in this life, has this distinction, that there is great
difference between dilectionem in se perfectam, and eam, quae est in praecepto,
love which is perfect in it self, and love which is in the precept and
commanded: as if one bid a man run perfectly or swiftly, he means not, that
he should run so fast as an heart or hind, but so fast as a man may run: so
perfect charity in it self is not commanded, which can not be in this life,
but such charity, as a man in the state of grace, being thereby helped, may
attain unto.

And thus he reasons; if by love the law could not be fulfilled, S. Paul
would not have exhorted thereunto: for it were in vain to exhort unto that,
which cannot be done, an. 11.

Contra. 1. Touching the distinction, it is no ways to be admitted. 1. for as
God is, so is his commandment, he is perfect, therefore he commands that
which is perfect: the love then commanded in the law is a perfect love, and
not only according to the possibility of man's strength. 2. further, the
written moral law commands the same thing, which the natural law did,
which was infused into Adam in his creation: but that was perfect love and
charity, for he was created according to the image of God, in righteousness
and holiness. 3. and we are commanded to be perfect, as our heavenly father is
perfect, Matthew. 5. therefore not according to the possibility only of our
own strength. 4. neither is the instance brought in to the purpose: for, when
a man is bid to run perfectly, the meaning is, he should run as fast as a
perfect man may run, not one that is lame or halting: so man in the state of
his perfection might have fulfilled the law, though now he cannot, since his
nature has been lamed by sin, therefore by his own example, such charity
is commanded, as man before his fall, might have performed.

2. Now to the argument we answer: 1. that he indeed, that can love his
neighbor as he ought, may fulfill the law, but so none can love, Martyr: and
so to the same purpose Calvin, that the Apostle sub condition loquitur,
speaks as it were under condition, that is, if a man can so love his
neighbor, which condition no man can fulfill. 2. But because the Apostle uses
this as an argument to persuade unto love, because it is the fulfilling of the
law, we will grant that the Apostle speaks here of such a fulfilling, as is
possible, but that is not a perfect keeping of the law, which none can attain
unto, but as Beza says, non vnum praeceptum obijt, he that loves his brother
is not ready to keep one precept only, but all: so as Pareus well
distinguishes: he speaks of fulfilling the law, partibus, non gradibus, in
the parts, not in the degrees: as he which loves his brother, will show it in
all the parts of the law, he will neither steal, nor commit adultery, nor
do any other hurt unto him: but perfectly in the highest decree of charity,
no man can keep the law, for the Apostle says, In many things we offend all,
Iam. 3.11. then no man can perfectly fulfill the law in this life. 3. Gualter
here has an other answer, that the Apostle speaks not of the fulfilling of
the whole law, but only de externis officijs, of the external duties: yet he
insisteth not upon this answer: for the Apostle speaks of coveting, which is
no external thing, but acted in the heart: the best answer then is, that the
Apostle speaks not of an absolute or plenarie fulfilling of the law, which
is not in man's power, but of a total and general fulfilling and keeping of
every commandment: that love will not content it self, with doing of our
duty in one or two commandments, but in the rest also.

10. Controv. Against the Marcionites, which denied the moral precepts to be
now in force, but to be ceased.
The Marcionites, as Origin shows, dialog. 2. against them, would prove from
hence, that the old law, even in respect of the moral precepts, was ceased,
because it is here said, love is the fulfilling of the law.

Contra. But Origin answeareth well, that charity is an epitome, or sum of
the law: but the epitome or sum takes not away the things, which are therein
contained: nay rather the contrary follows, because charity is the
fulfilling of the moral law, and charity always remains, therefore also
the moral law continues still, and is not abrogated, though the ceremonies be
ceased; neither are the iudicialls necessarily now enforced.

11. Controv. Against justification by the works of the law.
v. 10. Love is the fulfilling of the law. From this place Stapleton infers,
that the keeping of the law is our justice; and that by the works of charity
we are justified: and thus he reasons; The keeping of the law is justice, but
he that loves his brother, keeps the law, Ergo: to this purpose Stapl.
Antidot. p. 973.

Contr. 1. The proposition is true if it be understood of the perfect keeping
of the law: for if any in all points, could keep the law, he should thereby be
justified: as S. Paul alleges out of the law, Romans 10.5. He that does these
things, shall live thereby. 2. but so no man is able to fulfill the law: in
some measure the faithful guided by grace, do perform the precepts of the
law, but perfectly in all points, they can not keep it: for then they might be
without sin: for sin is the transgression of the law, 1. Ioh. 3.4. and
whosoever transgresses the law, sins: but no man is in this world without
sin: as the same Apostle says, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, 1. Ioh. 1.8.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Of the office of the Magistrate in encouraging the good, and
punishing the evil.
v. 3. Princes are not to be feared for good works, but for evil, etc. This
ought to teach Magistrates, that they should not abuse their authority in
afflicting the good, and sparing the evil, as Iezabel did, who maintained
idolatry, sorcerie, and adultery in Israel, 2. king. 4.22. but persecuted the
true Prophets: but they must use their authority, to fear the evil, and to
be patrons to the good: as the Apostle here says, they must be feared for
evil works, and not for good.

2. Observe. That Magistrates should procure the common good, and exercise true
judgment.
v. 4. He is the minister of God for thy wealth, or good. Here are two
excellent parts of the Magistrates office described: first because he is Gods
minister, he must consider, that the judgment is the Lords, and therefore they
ought to deal uprightly, as Iehosaphac charged his judges and officers, 2.
Chron. 19.6. Take heed what ye do, for ye execute not the judgments of man,
but of the Lord, etc. and further, the magistrate must propound to himself the
good of the people, not seek his private gain: for he is ordained for their
wealth: for this is the difference between a good governor, and an oppressor,
that the one studieth to profit the Commonwealth, the other seeks by laying
heavy burdens upon the people to enrich himself.

3. Observe. How the Magistrate may comfort himself in his government.
Whereas many cares and troubles are incident into the office of the
Magistrate, many dangers imminent, and conspiracies intended: he is herein to
comfort himself, that he is Gods minister, and therefore he need not to
doubt, but that God will assist his own ordinance: for it were impossible if
the Lord did not guard and defend them, that Princes could escape such perils,
as they are subject unto: that saying then must animate and comfort them, Touch
not mine Anointed, etc. 1. Chron. 16.22.

4. Observe. Of the vigilant care and painful office of the Magistrate.
v. 6. Applying themselves to the same end: this shows, that the Magistrate
is called not to a place of pleasure and ease, but of labor and care: they
must endeavor and apply themselves to this end, that is, to seek and
procure the good of their subjects: they watch when others sleep, and take
care, when their subjects are secure: this well perceived the King that said,
if one knew the cares that belong unto the crown, and diadem, they would not
take it up, though it lay in the dirt before them. This should teach men not
ambitiously to aspire to places of such labor and care, and others to pay
tribute and other duties willingly unto their Magistrates, as a recompense in
part of their pains.

6. Observe. Of the commendation of Christian love.
v. 10. Love does none evil, etc. it is the fulfilling of the law, etc.
Chrysostom here has a good moral of love: vtramque virtutem habet dilectio,
love has a double virtue, it both makes us abstain from evil, and it
brings honorum operationem, the working of good things: it is the fulfilling
of the law: nay further, it does not only show us what we should do, but
helps us also to do our duties prescribed in the law more easily: and
beside, this love toward our neighbor, does also show our love toward God, and
assures us of his love again: in love among men it is otherwise: for love is
impatient of fellowship, it is full of jealousy, if one love the party whom
an other loves, repugnabit amator, the lover will be against it: but God,
dignatur te amoris sui communione, vouchsafes thee to be partaker of his love,
etc. he loves those, that love them, whom he loves.

7. Observe. Against backesliders.
v. 11. Now is salvation nearer, etc. S. Paul uses this as a reason to stir
us up to zeal and carefulnes, because still we come nearer unto the work:
like as they which run in a race, the nearer they approach unto the goal,
the faster they run: therefore they are very preposterous, careless, and
disordered, which in the end of their race do slack their pace: for while
they stay and rest themselves, an other outstrippeth them, and wins the
price: therefore, as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 9.14. So run, that ye may
obtain: we must then hold out unto the end, and not give over our running, if
we will obtain the crown.

8. Observe. Against careless hearers of Gods word.
v. 11. It is now time, that we should arise from sleep, etc. Chrysostom
applies this against careless hearers, who though they are awake in body,
yet are a sleep in their souls: and all things which they hear, are as a
dream unto them: tell me, says he, what Prophet, what Apostle, deque quibus
rebus lectus fit, and of what matters was he read, sed non potes, but thou
can not tell me: wherefore to such be this spoken, it is time to arise from
sleep, etc.

9. Observe. Against riotous feasts.
v. 13. Not in banketting, and drunkenness, etc. Here Chrysostom also takes
occasion to enueigh against symposia (...), companions feasts: when men feasted
by turns, or every one sent his cost, and when they met together, and did glut
themselves with meats and drinks, and carnal pleasures: if this be a pleasure
and delight, ostende mihi voluptatem illam vesperi, show me thy pleasure at
night, but thou can not: I forbid not, says he thus speaking, all kind of
meetings sed ne quid praeter decorum agatur, that nothing be done uncomely, but
use to sing psalms, pro illiberalibus canticis, in stead of dishonest songs:
sic Christus mensae vestrae aderit, etc. so Christ will be at your table, and
shall bless your meeting, and your banquet, and so shall you follow the rule of
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever you do
else, do all to the glory of God.

10. Observe. Against chambring and fornication.
v. 13. Not in chambering and wantonness: from these riotous feasts and bankets
proceed vagrant and filthy lusts: and so men leaving as it were the pure and
clear fountain, do run ad immundi cani cloucam, to a filthy puddle, and
sink: caenum namque scorti corpus esse, etc. that the body of a strumpet is a
very puddle and sink, I appeal unto thy self: after that thou have wallowed
thy self in this mire, do thou not think thy self impure and unclean? 2.
Chrysostom proceeds further to show the loathsomnes of this sin; quid
seminas, quod metere non licet, etc. why do thou sow, where thou would not
reap? for the very fruit and offspring would make thee ashamed. 3. puero
magnam facis iniuriam, etc. thou do great wrong unto the child, that shall
be borne, who by thy means is counted a bastard and base borne. 4. and thou
thy self shall be ignominious, non solum in vita, not only in thy life, but
after they death: sive ex scorto sit, sive ex ancilla, whether thou have a
child by an harlot, or by thy maid. 5. beside, thou make her not only an
harlot, but after a murderer: nam non solum, quod natum est occidit, sed and
ne nascatur prohibet, for she only kills not that, which is borne, but
hinders it that it be not borne: and sic generationis promptuarium,
promptuarium facis occisionis, and so thou make the receptacle of generation,
the shop and forge of occision and murder. 6. hinc sunt and idololatriae,
etc. hence also proceeded idolatries: for many procure enchantments, and
drinks, and other sorceries, that they may be believed. 7. Many other evils
also spring from hence: venena parantur, etc. often poison is prepared for the
wise, that has the wrong, and other lyings in wait, or at the least,
quotidiana bella, continual war and strife: and the legitimate children are
hardly used, and much wronged: to this purpose Chrysostom excellently.

11. Observe. How we ought to imitate Christ, in the not satisfying of the flesh.
v. 14. Put on the Lord Jesus, etc. and take no care for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts thereof: for if a man should give himself to satisfy the desire of
his flesh, he should but procure his own further torment, and never be at
rest: ipsae quippe concupiscentiae alias graviores pari^^t, for concupiscence
does still beget concupiscence: as he, that is always thirsty, as they which
have the dropsy, though they have whole rivers by them, can never quench their
thirst, so is it with them that follow the lust of the flesh, it will never be
satisfied.

Thus far Chrysostom proceeds well, but he seems in the rest to be
somewhat too strict and austere: for he would have a man only to use things
for necessity, as to eat only to satisfy hunger, and to seek garments
only to cover the flesh: non est vestibus ornan^^ c^r^, ne ornatu illam
perdas, etc. the flesh is not to be adorned and set forth with raiment, Whether
Christ be to be imitated in all his works.
least thou destroy it by those ornaments, etc. and to this purpose he shows
how we should put on Christ, by imitating his austere life, and to do as he
did: he had not a place, wherein to put his head: do thou likewise: if he were
at any time to take meat, panibus hordeacis vsus est, he used barley bread: if
he were to travel, he did not ride on horseback, sed venerbus pedestris, etc.
but took his journey on foot: if he were to sleep, he made his pillow in the
end of his ship: if he were to sit down, in faeno, etc. he sat down upon
the grass, etc.

But our blessed Savior is not to be imitated in all things which he did, as
namely in these two, 1. in his divine works, as in fasting forty days and
nights, in walking upon the sea, and such like: for these miraculous works are
beyond our power. 2. in his particular and personal acts, as in that he
possessed nothing, refused to be a Judge, washed his Apostles feet, and in
those before named: for these things became his person, as he was the Messiah,
to show that his kingdom was nothing at all of this world: but in his general
virtues, as his humility, mercy, love, holiness, and such like, we must set
before us the most holy example of our blessed Savior: as he says himself,
Learn of me, for I am humble and meek, Matthew. 11.29.

And concerning the thing it self: it is lawful to take care of the flesh,
not only for necessity, but also for moderate pleasure and delight: as it is
said, Psalm. 104.15. That wine makes a cheerful heart, and oil causes the
face to shine: and as much is insinuated here by the Apostle, that we should
not take care for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: every other care
then is lawful, so it be not to pamper the flesh in wantonness, and carnal
delight: meats may be used not only for necessity, but with some kind of
pleasure; and apparel may be used as well for ornament, and comelines, as to
cover our nakedness, so that excess be taken heed of in the one, and pride in
the other.

CHAP. XIIII.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1. Him that is weak in the faith, receive unto you, but not for
controversies of disputation, ( doubtfulnes of disputation, B. in the
disceptation of thoughts. L. for to judge disputations, V. be not divided in
your cogitations. S. but the word (...), here rather signifies, a disceptation
or controversy, and (...), an outward dispute, rather the^ an inward discourse
of the mind.)

2 One believes that he may eat of all things: and an other which is weak,
eats herbs.

3 Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and let not him which
eats not, judge him ( condemn him, G. Be.) that eats: for God has
received him.

4 Who art thou, that iudgest ( condemnest, B.G. (...) judging, Gr.) an other
man's servant? he stands or falls to his own master: yea he shall be
established: for God is able to make him stand, (or establish him, Be.)

5 This man esteems ( judges, L.S. Gr.) one day above an other day, and an
other esteems every day alike: let every man be fully persuaded G.B. Be. (or
be certain, V.S. abound. L. the word is (...), which is to be fully persuaded)
in his mind.

6 He that regards (or cares for, B.) the day, ( thinks of the day. S.
esteems. B. observes. G. judges. V. (...) that sets his mind on the
day. Gr.) regards it to the Lord: and he that regards not the day,
regards it not to the Lord: ( this clause the vulgar Latin omitteth) He that
eats, eats to the Lord: for he gives God thanks: and he that eats not,
eats not to the Lord, and gives God thanks.

7 For none of us lives to himself, neither does any die to himself.

8 For whether ( if, B. (...), whether, Gr.) we live, we live unto the Lord: or
whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether therefore we live or die, we are
the Lords.

9 For to this end Christ both died, and rose again, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the dead, and quick.

10 But why do thou judge ( condemn, B.G.) thy brother? or why do thou
despise ( set at naught, Be. B. Gr.) thy brother? for we shall all be presented
( stand. L.S. appear. G. (...), be presented) before the tribunal ( judgment
seat, B.G.) of Christ.

11 For it is written, I live, says the Lord, that ( because, L.V. and B.G.
surely. Be. but (...) signifies that: it is the form of an oath: God
swears, as he lives that) every knee shall bow unto me, and every tongue
shall confess unto God.

12 So then every one of us shall give account of himself unto God.

13 Let us not therefore judge one an other any more: but use your judgment in
this rather Be. G. (judge this rather, Gr.) that no man put a stumbling block,
or an occasion to fall, before ( to. Gr.) his brother. ( not an occasion to
fall, and a stumbling block: see qu. 23.2.)

14 I know, and am persuaded through the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean ( common, (...), Gr. L.V.) of it self: (not by him. L.) but unto him
that thinks Be. ( judges. B.G.) any thing to be unclean, to him it is
unclean.

15 But if thy brother be grieved for the meat, now walk not thou
charitably: ( according to charity, Gr.) destroy not him with thy meat, for
whom Christ died.

16 Let not your (not our, L.S.) commodity G. (your Good, Gr.) be evil spoken
of, ( blasphemed, Gr.)

17 For the kingdom of God, is not meat, nor drink, but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

18 For whosoever in these things serves Christ, is pleasing ( acceptable, G.)
to God, and approved ( commended, B. accepted, Be. (...), Gr. appointed or
allowed) to men.

19 Let us then follow those things which concern peace, and the edifying one
of an other.

20 Destroy not the work of God for meats sake: all things in deed are pure:
but it is evil for the man, which eats with offense.

21 It is good, neither to eat flesh, not to drink wine, nor any thing,
whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak.

22 Have thou faith? have it with thy self before God: blessed is he, that
judges not ( condemns not. Be. G.) himself, in that thing, which he
allows.

23 For he that doubts, ( discerns. L. judges. V. makes conscience. B. is
divided. S. (...), Gr. doubting.) is condemned, if he eat, because he eats
not of faith: and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

2. The Argument, method, and parts.
IN this chapter the Apostle shows the use of indifferent things, whereabout
there was contention between the believing Gentiles, and the converted of the
Jews: there are two parts. 1. the Apostle teaches how the strong and weak
should behave themselves one toward an other, and uses jointly arguments of
persuasion to them both, to v. 13. then he deals with them apart, with the
strong, to v. 22. then with the weak, v. 22, 23.

1. In the first part the case is propounded in two particular instances, the
first v. 2, 3. concerning the eating, or not eating of herbs: wherein he
exhorts them to mutual concord, not one to judge or condemn an other: 1.
from their state or condition, they are of Gods family, v. 3. and no man is to
judge an others servant, the reason whereof is rendered; he stands or falls
to his own master, v. 4. 2. from the power of God, who is able to make them
stand, and will most surely establish them, v. 4. therefore they must not be
condemned or despaired of. The second instance is of observing, or not
observing days: which is propounded with an admonition, that nothing should be
done without a full persuasion: then the reasons unto brotherly concord follow.
1. from the end, because both the obseruer and not obseruer, do it to Gods
glory: which he proves by the adiunct, their giving of thanks, v. 6.

2. Argum. From the whole to the part: none of us live or die to himself, v.
7. therefore the particular actions must be referred not to our selves, but to
the glory of God: the antecedent is proved, that we live not or die unto our
selves, but unto the Lord, v. 8. from the end of Christ's death, and
resurrection, v. 9.

3. Argum. It belongs unto Christ to judge, who is made Lord of all, v. 11.
and every one must give account unto him, v. 10. therefore one must not judge
an other, and so take Christ's office upon them.

2. The Apostle now comes to deal with such as are strong in faith, and
shows how they should behave themselves toward the weak: that they should
give them no occasion of stumbling or being offended.

This caution is first explaned, by a distinction: that although meats are not
unclean in themselves, yet to him that so judges, they are unclean, and he
is thereby offended, v. 14. then follow the reasons.

1. He that grieueth his brother, walks not charitably, 15. 2. he destroieth
him, as much as in him lies, for whom Christ died, 15. 3. causes their
liberty to be evil spoken of, 16. 4. from the property and condition of
Christ's kingdom, which consists not in meat and drink, but in righteousness
and peace, 17. which he proves by the effects, they which serve Christ,
therein please God. 5. ab vtili, from the commodity ensuing: they must follow
those things, which concern peace, 18. 6. from the inconvenience feared, they
shall destroy their brothers faith, which is Gods work, 20. then he
concludes, that it is not good to eat or drink, or to do any thing, to
cause the brother to stumble ^^, v. 21.

3. Lastly, he gives a rule unto the weak, not to do any thing with doubting
or against their conscience, for therein they should condemn themselves: which
he proves by the contrary effects with their causes, he which does not any
thing against his judgment is blessed, because he has faith in himself:
therefore he which eats against his conscience is condemned, because he has
no faith: and whatsoever is not faith, and a sure persuasion, is sin.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. Who are the weak in faith, and how they are to be received.
1. Chrysostom shows the occasion of the Apostles discourse in this chapter
to be this: that whereas there were certain believing Jews among the
Christian Gentiles, and especially at Rome, which being converted to the
faith, yet would not be suddenly weaned from the ceremonies of the law, as in
abstaining from some kinds of meats, in observing of festival days, between
whom and the other Christians there was some dislike, who being better
instructed, held all the ceremonies of the law to be abrogated: the Apostle
fearing, least by the too great forwardnes of the more perfect in judgment,
the weaker sort might be offended, and caused vt prorsus ex fide defuerint, to
fall away quite from the faith, he therefore persuades such to bear with the
weak in such things, not to offend, nor grieve them, etc. And as in the former
chapter he taught inferiors how to carry themselves toward their superiors; so
here contrariwise he gives a rule to the more perfect, as superiors in faith,
how they should behave themselves toward them which were weak: Lyranus.

2. Chrysostom also well observes, how the Apostle wisely tempereth his
speech: for he speaks unto those which are strong, occulte vero infirmos
increpat, and yet secretly he taxes them which are weak: for in that he
calls them weak, he shows, that they were sick: and in saying, receive
them, he, shows that they have need to be cured: But yet the Apostle neither
blames those which were perfect, as though they did evil, least he might have
confirmed the weak in their error, neither does he commend them, as though
they did well, least he might have made them more forward in accusing the
weak, sed commensur atam increpationem instituit, but he tempereth his rebuke,
speaking to the one, and yet finding fault with the other.

3. The weak in faith. 1. Origin makes here a difference, between the strong
in faith, the weak in faith, and the infidel: which Haymo explaneth thus; he
is weak in faith, qui in aliquae part fidei dubitat, who doubts in some
part of faith, who believes not perfectly as he should: he is an infidel, qui
ex toto, etc. who doubts altogether: he is strong in faith, qui nihil
dubitat, doubts nothing at all. 2. and yet to speak more distinctly, there
is a double kind of strength and weakness, one is concerning faith and doctrine,
the other touching life, and manners: about faith some are weak, or strong,
either totally, or in part: they are totally strong, which are throughout
confirmed in the faith, as was Abraham, of whom it is said before, c. 4. He
was not weak in faith: and such he calls perfect, Philip, 1.15. they are
strong in part, whose judgment is settled in some special point of doctrine,
wherein others doubt, as here the believing Romans were strong, and well
persuaded in the use of Christian liberty: again, some are totally weak in
faith, as they which are newly converted from Paganism, and not well
instructed ^ some weak in part, as the Jews, which here thought, that with a
good conscience they might not eat of all kind of meats: some likewise are
strong in matters touching manners, who are perfectly regenerate in respect of
others whom the Apostle calls spiritual, Gal. 6.1. some may fail in their
life, in some particular act, and so are weak, such the Apostle calls
carnal. 3. so then there is great difference between a weak faith, and a
false faith: for faith, though it be weak may justify, so can not a false
faith. But it will be objected, that it should seem that the faith of these
Christian Jews, was not a right faith, because they believed not all, that was
to be believed, Difference between a weak faith, and a false faith.
namely, that the ceremonies of the law were abrogated: to this I answer, that
where this happens, that something is not believed, which appertains to
faith, if it be vitio credentis, by the fault of him which should believe, as
not yielding himself in humility to be taught by the word of God, this is so
right faith: but if the reason be this, that the matter proposed to be
believed, be not sufficiently explaned, so that for want of knowledge and
judgment, rather then of an obstinate mind, it be not believed, such a faith,
though yet weak, yet may it be a true faith; where there is a willingness and
readiness upon better instruction to be otherwise persuaded: Mart. or here by
faith we may understand the persuasion of the use of things indifferent, by a
synecdoche, the whole being taken for a part, as Piscator observes: and so
such weakness shall be no impediment at all to justifying faith.

Receive him: 1. the word is (...), which signifies to receive affectu
charitatis, with a charitable affection, as Haymo: and it differs from the
word (...), used Act. 20.35. which is properly to support, to hold or life up
one that is falling, Beza. 2. so this word signifies three things; that they
should take such an one unto them, not cast them off, or separate themselves:
then they must patienter tolerare, patiently bear with him, and by further
instruction seek to restoare him, as S. Paul advises, Gal. 6.1.

2. Quest. What is meant by controversies of disputations.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, as the Rhemists also translate, not in
disputations of cogitations: but the word is (...), which signifies not
cogitations, but disputations: Erasmus reads, ad diiudicationes, etc. for the
judging of the thoughts: so Augustine in the exposition of this Epistle gives
this sense, that they should not take upon them to judge the thoughts of the
weak: so also Lyranus, gloss. interlin. Gorrh. for God only judges the
thoughts: Tolet also by the thoughts understands their secret opinions, which
they held touching things indifferent, which he would not have controverted but
the word, as is said before, signifies disputations, not thoughts: and Beza
well translateth. certaminae disputationum, for controversies of disputation:
whereby the weak might be entangled more rather then edified. 2. he forbids
not all questions, which may be moved about matters of faith: for there are
profitable questions, which tend to the discussing of doubts, and make for
edifying: but all vain ianglings and brabbles which breed contention rather
then serve for instruction must be avoided, such as these were about the eating
of meats, observing of days: such the Apostle calls foolish and unlearned
questions, 2. Tim. 2.23.

This place then does nothing at all favor the opinion of the Mahumetanes,
which can endure no disputations at all: Tertullian has a good saying,
suspecta est doctrina, quae vult occult, that doctrine is to be suspected,
which would be hid: and our Bl. Savior disputed with the Pharisees, so did S.
Paul, Apollos, and Aquila with the Jews, Act. 28.

Quest. 3. Why he is called weak, that eats herbs.
1. Origin upon these two reasons, because the law prescribes nothing
concerning the eating of herb, only, and least the Apostle should seem to be
gulae and gurgitis magister, a teacher of gluttony, persuading his disciples
to eat, he will have the Apostle here to speak, de cibo verbi Dei, of the
food or meat of Gods word: they which are perfect are able to eat of all,
that is, to search the mysteries of Scriptures, but the weak eat only of
herbs, that is, are capable only of easy doctrines.

But though elsewhere S. Paul compare the higher doctrines to strong meat, and
the first principles and rudiments to milk, 1. Cor. 3. yet here he speaks of
the difference of meats, as it appears by his other instance, v. 6. of the
observing of days: and S. Paul here exhotteth not to eat, but only shows
what some did: and by eating of all, is not understood greedy or insatiable
eating, but of all kinds of meats: though the law spoke nothing of eating of
herbs, yet some other reason may be given, why these did eat herbs, as shall
be presently declared.

2. Some do read here in the imperative mood, he that is weak, let him eat
herbs, as the vulgar Latin, which some follow: and so in this sense, it might
seem to be spoken of such as were weak in body, that they which were not
able to eat flesh, should feed of herbs, and lighter meats: but in the
original the word is in the indicative, eats, and so it best answeareth unto
the other part, one believes that he may eat of all things: and Beza to take
away this scruple, supplyeth out of the former verse, the word ( faith,) the
weak in faith.

3. Some apply this unto the weak in manners, who propter casum libidinis,
etc. because of their inclination to lust, do eat herbs and other dry
meats, which do not so much pamper the flesh: Gorrhan following the ordinary
gloss which takes this sense from Hierome, and Haymo, also makes mention of
it: but the supplying of the words, in the faith, out of the first verse, do
take away this scruple likewise, that the Apostle speaks not of the weak in
manners, but in faith and judgment.

4. Neither yet because the Apostle says before, one believes, etc. by the
weak are we to understand, one that believes not: for every error of the says
tends not to heresy or infidelity: it is one thing to err, an other to be
an heretic: two things must concur to make an heretic: he must pertinaciter
errare, err not of ignorance, and infirmity, but of obstinacy and wilfulnes,
and in fundamentis fidet, in the fundamental doctrines of faith: Phillip had
the one, he erred in a fundamental point in the person of Christ, calling him
the son of Joseph, John. 1.45. but he did it of ignorance: but these which
did eat herbs, making difference of meats, did neither err wilfully, not yet
in a matter fundamental.

5. Ambrose upon this place thinks, that they did eat herbs only, thinking
it unlawful to eat any flesh at all: but we do not find, that any among the
Christians in those days did hold it unlawful to eat all kind of flesh.

6. Augustine takes this to be the reason, why they did eat herbs, because
some meats set forth in the shambles to be sold, were offered unto idols, and
least they might eat of things offered to idols unawares, they did think it
more safe to eat no flesh at all, but only herbs: But this reason is not
general, for they might have killed flesh at home of their own provision,
which was free from any such suspicion or danger, of being offered to idols.

7. Anselme gives this reason, because they knew, that some meats were
clean, some unclean, which could not be so easily discerned in the eating, as
likewise the diverse kinds of fishes, and fowls, whereof some were clean,
some unclean by the law, they therefore to be sure, abstained from all: so
also Gualter, Martyr. But seeing the Jews before their conversion, abstained
only from the kinds forbidden, not from all flesh, why should they after their
conversion use less liberty?

8. Chrysostom yields this reason, ne notarentur a Christianis, least they
should have been noted and observed of Christians, if they should have only
abstained from swines flesh, and other forbidden meats, they thought it better
to betake themselves only to the eating of herbs, vt non legalis observatio,
sed iciunium magis videretur, that it might be thought rather a kind of fasting
and abstinence, then a legal observation: thus also Pareus: but it seems
that they were not ashamed to be counted obseruers of the law, because they
charged others, which did not observe this difference of meats, as
transgressors of the law.

9. Wherefore I take rather, that this is the Apostles meaning, not that any
did in those times altogether abstain from all kind of meats, and thought it
lawful only to eat herbs: but that where other choice of meat was not, they
had rather eat of herbs, then either of meats offered to idols, or forbidden
by the law, Tolet: so Faius, malebat, etc. he had rather eat herbs, then of
such kind of flesh: likewise Piscator: yet Chrysostom and Augustines sense,
are not much to be misliked.

Quest. 4. Whether any things be indifferent in their nature, as being neither
good, nor evil of themselves.
The occasion of this question is out of the 3. verse, where the Apostle makes
the difference of meats as a thing in it self indifferent, and would not have
him that did eat and make no difference, to despise him that did, not him,
that did not eat, and made a difference to judge him, that did eat: here then
this in general would be considered, whether any thing in it own nature, is
neither good, nor evil, as neither commanded by the law of God, nor forbidden,
but left indifferent between both.

1. That nothing is indifferent, it may be thus objected. 1. between good and
evil, there is no mean, but every action is either good or evil, agreeable,
or not agreeable unto the law of God. 2. every thing is done of faith, or
without faith: if of faith, it is good, if without, it is evil, therefore
there is no indifferent thing, but it is either good or evil.

Answ. Some things are simply good, or evil in their own nature, and of
themselves: as the things which are commanded by the law of God, are simply
good, the things forbidden, are simply evil: some things are neither good nor
evil in their own nature, but yet in respect of the intention, end, and
mind of the doer, though indifferent in themselves, they may not be
indifferent: by this distinction the objections proposed are easily answered.

1. Every action is good or evil, not in it self, but in regard of the
intention or end, as to eat, or not to eat flesh, of it self is neither
good nor evil: but not to eat it, as thinking flesh to be unholy, or to merit
by it, is evil: and so likewise to eat it uncharitably with offense of the
weak.

2. So to do a thing of faith, or not of faith, respects the intention and
persuasion of the doer, not the thing it self in it own nature.

Now on the contrary side, that some things are indifferent in their own
nature, neither good nor evil, it is thus proved.

1. The things which God has neither forbidden nor commanded, he has left
free and indifferent: but some things are such, as upon certain days to eat
or not to eat flesh, is neither commanded, nor inhibited, therefore in it own
nature, it is a thing indifferent.

2. Those things which neither commend us to God, nor yet do displease God,
are indifferent: but some things are such: as meat does not commend us unto
God, as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 8.8.

3. Those things which neither help to, nor hinder us from salvation, are
indifferent, but such are meat, drink, apparel, v. 17. of this chapter, Ergo.

Quest. 5. How the Apostle makes the eating or not eating of flesh, and the
observing of days, indifferent, which elsewhere he condemns.
The occasion of this question arises out of the 4.5.6. verses where the
Apostle seems to make these things indifferent: yet he condemns the
observation of days, Galat. 4.10. Ye observe months, times, and years: and
he reprooueth Peter, Gal. 2. because he abstained from certain meats: and 2.
Tim. 4 he calls it a doctrine of devils.

Answ. 1. Tolet would thus reconcile these places: that these things were
indifferent till the Church had determined otherwise, at that time, nondum erat
per Ecclesiam declaratum, etc. it was not declared by the Church, what they
should do in this case, annot. 1. in fine. But this was not all the reason:
for the Apostles in their preaching did not cease to teach the people, that the
ceremonies of Moses law were abrogated, as is evident, Act. 21.21. S. Paul was
so known to teach the people, that they were no longer to keep the custom of
Moses law: and further, after that the Apostles had made a decree of these
things, that they should only abstain from strangled and blood, Act. 15. yet
S. Paul circumcised Timothy, Act. 16. and he was shorn as a votarie, Act. 21.

2. Lyranus otherwise answeareth, that until the passion of Christ, all the
ceremonies of Moses law were in force, but post publicationem Evangelij, after
the publication of the Gospel, the observation of them was mortifera,
damnable, for that was as it were to deny Christ to be come, but tempore
intermedio, in the time between these, it was lawful to observe them. This is
very true, that for a time, the Apostles suffered the Jews converted to the
faith, to retain some ceremonies of the law, least they might at the first
have been discouraged from receiving the Gospel: and Augustine does fitly
resemble the abrogating of the ceremonies, unto the decent burial of humane
bodies, which are not as soon as they are dead cast forth as stinking carions,
but are brought decently to the sepulcher: so the ceremonies, which were
instituted of God, were not at once to be cast off, as though there were no
difference between them, and humane inventions, but they must have a time,
after their death, as it were in Christ's death, to be brought honorably to the
grave, but whosoever should reviue them afterward, he should not be pius
deductor funeris, August. epist. 19. ad Hieron.
sed impius sepultura violator, a devout solemnizer of the funeral, but a
profane raker in the grave, and violater of the sepulture.

3. Add hereunto: that to the Galatians, the Apostle does not so much reprove
them for observing those ceremonies, as that they did keep them opinione
necessitatis, with an opinion of necessity: neither was S. Peter reproved of
S. Paul simply for the forbearing of some meats, which he might have done to
avoid scandal and offense: but because by his example he constrained the
Gentiles to do the like: and in that place, the Apostle speaks not of
abstinencie, but of the precept of abstinencie, from meats, and marriage, which
should be brought in by wicked heretics, the Manichees, Tations, and other,
which condemned them, as things evil in themselves: But these Jews among the
Romans, had no such opinion of these things, as necessary to salvation: or
the time was not yet come, for the general laying down of these ceremonies.

Quest. 6. Whom the Apostle speaks of, the Jew, or Gentile, saying, God has
received him, etc.
1. Chrysostom thinks that this must be understood of the converted Gentile,
that the believing Jew should not condemn him as a transgressor of the law:
but where he says, who art thou, which iudgest an others servant? this he
thinks the Apostle says, ad sanum and robustum conversus, turning himself
to the sound and strong: so also Haymo. But Tolet well refuses this mixed
interpretation upon these reasons, because the speech is still continued, as
being uttered of one and the same, and for that before to judge, was given
unto the weaker part, the Jew that did not eat, that he should not judge him,
that eats.

2. Tolet inclines to the contrary, the first part, God has received him, he
thinks rather to be spoken of the converted Jew, God has received him,
though yet but weak: the other part, who art thou that iudgest, of the
converted Gentile, because the Apostle spoke of the Jew in the same phrase
before, let not him that eats not, judge, etc. but by the same reason, of the
continuance of the Apostles speech, it should seem that the Apostle means
still the same parties, that one should not judge an other.

3. Some think that the Apostle speaks all this to the believing, Jew
concerning the converted Gentile, that God had received him, and he was an
others servant, and God would establish him: so Lyranus, Tolet, Piscator,
Martyr: But seeing that the Apostle called him that did not eat, the weaker,
as one that had a tender conscience, and thought it unlawful to eat of
certain meats: it is rather said of the weaker, God shall establish him, then
of the stronger.

4. M. Beza seems to understand all this to be spoken to the stronger, of and
concerning the weak and newely converted, that though he were weak, yet God
was able to confirm and strengthen him.

5. But I prefer their judgment, which understand these words, God has
received him, indifferently, both of him that eats, and him that eats not,
so gloss. interlin. Calvin, Hyperius, Osiander: pertinet ratio ad vtrumque, the
reason belongs to them both, vtrique servi communis Domini, they are both
servants of one and the same Lord, Pareus: though the last words in the 4. v.
he shall be established, may seem more specially to be spoken concerning the
weak, that God may and will strengthen him: and that these reasons serve to
persuade both the strong and weak not to be preposterous one in judging an
other, it may appear both by the Apostles proposition, v. 3. wherein he
exhorts the strong not to contemn the weak, nor the weak to judge the
strong: and the Apostles words, God has received him, and they are an others
servants, and they stand or fall to their own Master, are generally true of
all believers, as well the strong as the weak: and thus also interprets
Origin, nam and imperitior, etc. for both the unskillful, thinks the more
perfect and profound to fall, if he conceive any thing, which he is not capable
of, and the other think the same of the unskillful or ignorant, etc. so these
words, he stands or falls, he refers indifferently to the opinion, which
the strong or weak have one of an other.

Quest. 7. Whether it be not lawful at all for one to judge an other.
v. 4. Who art thou, which iudgest an other man's servant. 1. this is not
understood of public judgments, either Civil and politic, or
Ecclesiastical: for in these cases men do not so much judge, as God by them:
for the Judges and Magistrates are Gods Ministers, Martyr. 2. neither is all
kind of judging taken from private men: which is either of men's persons, or
their facts: of men's persons we cannot give sentence: no man knows without
special revelation, who is saved and condemned: but every one stands or
falls to his own Master. 3. and concerning men's works, they are of two
sorts, they are either apparently good or evil, of these one may judge, what
the work is, and what he is for the present that does them, for Christ has
given us a rule, By their fruits you shall know them, Matthew. 7. we may judge
him a good tree, that brings forth good fruits, and him a badde tree, that
brings forth evil. 4. but the Apostle speaks here of judging our brother
in matters indifferent, the use whereof is neither forbidden in the word of
God, nor commanded: in such things we ought not rashly to judge one an other.
5. Neither is this so spoken, as though one should be careless what his
brother did: for the Apostle forbids not the mutual offices and duties of
charity in exhorting one another, but rash and precipitate judgment, whereby
one takes upon him to censure and condemn an other.

Quest. 8. What it is to stand or fall to his own Master.
1. Origin thinks the Apostle speaks this, secundum sensum eius qui
increpabat, according to his sense, which reprooueth an other: for both the
weak and the strong do think one an other falls or stands according to
that which they themselves are persuaded of, but the Apostle saying afterward,
God is able to make him stand, speaks of standing and falling indeed in
respect of God, not of their own opinion only.

2. Some by falling understand, sinning, by standing not sinning, Bucer: but
the Apostle speaks not of works simply good and evil, wherein men stand or
fall, but actions in themselves indifferent.

3. Pet. Martyr thus interprets, damnum seu commodum, etc. the loss or
commodity in their standing, or not standing, redoundeth unto God their
Master, it is nothing to thee: but God is nothing advantaged by men's standing,
nor suffers loss by their falling.

4. The ordinar. gloss. refers it to the judgment of the heart and
conscience, de incognito cord servi, etc. of the unknown heart of the
servant, and with what conscience he eats or not eats, it belongs only
unto God to judge.

5. But properly by standing or falling to God, is meant, that it appertains
only to God, to approve, or disprooue, to be pleased, or to be displeased
with the fact: man therefore is not to entermeddle with judging in such
matters, which are left unto Gods judgment: he best can examine, and so allow
and disallowe them, which eat or eat not: so that the Apostle speaks as it
were by way of supposition, that if he stand or fall, it is nothing unto thee,
he stands or falls unto God: and though he seem not yet to stand, that is,
firmo gradu consistere, to have any firm sooting, or to be settled in
judgment, making difference of meats, yet God in his good time may establish
him, and make him to stand.

6. Where he says, to his own master, this is not to be taken (...), by way
of distinction, as though he were their proper and peculiar Master only, and
not of others also, as the Jews accused Christ, because he made God his
father, that is, proper and peculiar unto him, John. 5.18. but it is spoken
(...), by way of emphasis, God is their Master, who has received them: though
God be the Master of other faithful also, yet they are servants to none other,
but unto God, and to be discerned by his judgment.

Quest. 9. Of the meaning of these words, God is able to make him stand, v. 4.
1. This may seem to be no good argument taken from the power of God: he is
able to make them stand, therefore they shall stand: unto this objection, 1.
one answer is, that the Apostle speaks only of a possibility, he may
stand, or fall, he may stand because God may make him stand: for dubia sunt in
meliorem partem interpretanda^, things doubtful must be interpreted in the
better part, Gorrhan: but the Apostle speaks definitely and certainly, he
shall stand. 2. Some are ready to take advantage of this argument, God can,
therefore he will: as the Papists, which so reason for the carnal presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament: but it always follows not, for God can do
many things, which he does not, nor will do. 3. Some think that this is
added, least sibi stare arroget, one might arrogate his standing to himself,
gloss. interlin. and to show a difference between this master, and other
worldly masters, who may command their servants many things, but can give them
no power to do them, as this Master can, Tolet: but yet this doubt is not to
be so removed. 4. Chrysostom thinks no more to be signified then this, ante
iustam temporis maturitatem, etc. that the weak should not be sharply dealt
withal, till we have wayed a just time, wherein they may be confirmed, for God
is able to do it: but more is signified then so, the Apostle pronounces they
shall stand. 5. Wherefore the best answer of all is, that Gods power is here
to be considered, as joined with his will: Calvin thinks this to be more
scripturae, by the manner and custom of Scripture, which joins Gods will and
power together: Gryneus gives this reason, because the Apostle speaks of
such as were weak, and sinned not of ignorance, but were willing to be
instructed, and such God would not cast off: But not only in this general
meaning, does will and power of God concur together: but directly so much is
insinuated by the Apostles own words: for concerning the readiness of Gods
will, he had said before, v. 3. God has received him, therefore his will was
not to be doubted of: so then as God was willing, he was also able: the like
see, c. 11.23. where the Apostle also proves the calling of the Jews by an
argument taken from the power of God, God was able to graffe them in again:
for it was not to be doubted that God was willing, seeing the Jews were of the
fathers, to whom God made so ample promises: and in the same chapter, v. 29. he
says, The gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

6. But it follows not, because God is able to make them stand, that
therefore they shall stand to the end. 1. it is one thing, to be established
in some one particular, and an other to stand unto the end, Par. 2. and here
the Apostle only shows, that in charity been speremus, we should hope well
of our brethren, that they shall continue, Calv. we cannot pronounce
certainly, that they shall so continue indeed.

Quest. 10. What it is to esteem one day above an other, v. 5.
1. Some do apply this difference of days unto abstinence from certain kind
of meats upon one day, rather then an other: some make choice of days to fast
in, an other omnem diem, i. continuum vitae tempus exigit in abstinentta, does
think rather to spend every day, that is, all the time of his life in
fasting: Origin: so also Chrysostom, Ambrose, Anselme, the ordinar. interlin.
gloss. as Haymo gives a particular instance, how some abstained from eating of
flesh, the 2.4.6. day, and did eat flesh, the 3.5. and 7. day: some abstained
all their life, as Monks, and Heremites: But it is not like, neither do we
find, that any in those times did bind themselves to a continual abstinence
all their life.

2. Theodoret retaining the same sense, applies it only to the Jews
converted to the faith, who did some of them abstain from the eating of swines
flesh, and other meats forbidden by the law, only at certain times, some did
refrain altogether: But it is not like that they which made conscience of
eating such meats, would at any time eat thereof, seeing they did it in
respect of the law, which generally forbad the use of such meats.

3. Haymo makes mention of an other interpretation: by the day understanding
the Scripture, which illuminateth the soul, as the day brings light: so he
esteems one day above an other, who is able to penetrate and search into some
places of Scripture, and not into other: but he esteems every day alike, who
is conversant indifferently in every place of Scripture: But this allegorizing
of Scripture is not every where to be admitted, and in this place it is very
impertinent.

4. Augustine in his exposition of this epistle, has a strange interpretation,
he esteems one day before an other, that discerns of men according to the
time, as if a man to day bring forth good fruits, he judges him a good man:
but if he change, and the next day do evil works, he takes him to be so
according to the day or time, as he finds him: but he that judges every day
alike is God, who knows qualis quisque omni die futurus sit, what every one
is like to be at all times, every day: But the words following are against this
sense, v. 6. He which observes the day, observes it to the Lord: it is not
then the Lord himself, that observes the day, for he observes it to the Lord.

5. Neither can this be understood of the observation of the festiualls which
were kept by the heathen: for they were Satanicall, and to be abhorred: they
therefore which were converted from gentilisme, were utterly to relinquish them.

6. Tolet and Faius, will have it understood of the abstinence from certain
meats and drinks, which the Jews were bound unto upon certain days; as
they did eat no unleavened bread for 7. days together in the time of the
Pasch: and they which had taken upon them the vow of Nazarites for a time,
(for some were Nazarites during their whole life,) did abstain from wine and
strong drink: but this is not the meaning of the Apostle: for he speaks not
here of preferring one meat before an other, but one day before an other.

7. Wherefore I prefer Hieromes interpretation, lib. 2. contra Iovinian. who
thinks that the Apostle speaks of the observation of the Judicial feasts,
which they which were newely converted to the Christian faith, could not at the
first neglect: such were the Judicial Sabbath, the feast of the new moon, of
the Pasch, Pentecost, feast of tabernacles: thus also Pet. Martyr, Calvin,
Beza, Osiander, Gryneus, Gualter, understand the Apostle to speak de ferijs
Iudaeorum, of the feasts of the Jews: who in that they were addicted yet to
the legal rites, infirmitatis erat, it was their infirmity: but in that they
would not do any thing, which they judged in their conscience unlawful,
pietatis erat, it was their piety: Herein the Apostle bears with their
weakness for a time: but afterward when the Gospel was published, they which
did retain still the Judicial feasts as necessary, were counted
schismatikes, if not among the heretics: such were the Ebionites, who kept
both the Lords day with the Christians, and the old Sabbath with the Jews: and
so do the Ethiopians to this day.

Quest. 11. Of the meaning of those words: Let every one be fully persuaded in
his mind, v. 5.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, Let every one abound in his own sense, which
the Libertines so understand, as that every man should be left unto himself
for the choice of his religion: and Hierome is somewhat bold defending by this
place the superstition of some women, which did offer wax candles at the
graves of the Martyrs: quicunque accendunt ceras, etc. whosoever light wax
candles, they shall receive a reward according to their faith, as the Apostle
says, Let every one abound in their own sense: But Chrysostom directly
affirms, non erit ad quaevis rapiendum, that this saying of the Apostle must
not be wrested to every thing: quando enim de dogmatis illi sermo est, etc.
for when he speaks of points of doctrine, he says, If any preach unto you
otherwise then ye have received, though he be an Angel, let him be accursed:
and beside, the word which the Apostle uses (...), signifies not to abound,
but to be fully persuaded.

2. Others following the same reading, will have it understood of things
indifferent, that every one should be left to himself, Gorrhan: and Ambrose
to the same purpose reads, consilio suo remittatur, let him be left to his
own counsel. But no not in indifferent things should a man be left to
himself: for that is directly forbidden, For every man to do that, which
seems good in his own eyes, Deuteronomy. 12.8. Beza: and all will worship, and
voluntary service is forbidden by the Apostle, Coloss. 2.23. Gualter: and this
would bring in an horrible confusion, for every man even in things indifferent
to follow his own mind, not respecting the scandal and offense of others,
nor public order and decency.

3. Haymo gives this sense: those things which one understands, adimpleat
abundando bonis operibus, let him fulfill by abounding in good works: as
Cyprian though he had some several opinions, yet abounded in charity: and to
this purpose Hugo explaneth this similitude: like as water when it abounds,
exit extra alveum suum, does run out of the chanel: so the understanding and
inward sense abounds, quando egreditur ad dirigendum operationes, when it
goes forth to direct the works: But as is showed before, that the original
word, signifies not to abound.

4. Augustine thus interprets, let every one judge, quantum humano
intellectui concessum est, so far as humane judgment can reach, and not
exceed further: But here the question is not, how men should behave themselves
toward God, but toward their brethren.

5. Hugo refers it to the intention, no man knows with what intention his
brother does this or that: every man abounds in his own sense, quando bona
intention facit, etc. when he does that which he does with a good intention:
But it is not a good intention that makes a good action.

6. Not much unlike is Lyranus sense, dimittatur propriae conscientiae, let him
be left to his own conscience: and so Chrysostom, vnicuique sua men's
satisfaciat, let every one satisfy his own mind: that no man do any thing
with a doubtful conscience: as Beza well observes, it is not enough for a
man, not to do against his conscience, but his conscience must be informed by
the word of God.

7. Wherefore the meaning is, that every one should be fully persuaded in his
own mind, that that which he does, non pugnet cum verbo Dei, be not against
the word of God, Pareus: and per obedientiam fidei in solius Dei verbum
respiciant, and by the obedience of faith let them only look unto the word of
God, Gualter: so also Calvin, Beza.

1. Ob. But how can contrary acts be pleasing unto God: that both he which
observes the day, and he which observes it not, should be certainly
persuaded.

Answ. In things which are directly forbidden to do, or not to do a thing,
cannot both please God: yet in things indifferent, both the doing and the
omitting of a thing, may both be acceptable to God: so it be with a full
persuasion.

2. Object. But how can one have a full persuasion of his act in things
indifferent, which are neither forbidden nor yet commanded in the word. Ans. It
suffices in general, that he be persuaded and assured both of his person,
that thorough Christ he is accepted of God, and of the act it self, that it is
not displeasing unto God, while he follows the general rules, seeking the
edifying of his brethren, and having respect unto order and decency.

3. Object. But it seems unfit, that the Apostle should require a firm
resolution, and persuasion of those which were weak. Answ. The Apostle saying,
Let every one be fully persuaded in his mind, both speaks to the strong,
that thereby they should be further stirred up to proceed in their firm
resolution, and to the weak, that they should grow unto such a firm
persuasion, and so of weak become strong, Pareus: so also Gorrhan very well,
in melius continuo proficiendo, by profiting daily and growing toward
perfection.

8. Tolet has an other interpretation: let every one abound in his own
sense, persuasinis suae terminos non transgrediatur, let him not exceed the
bounds of his own persuasion: let every one be contented with own his
persuasion, and not pry into an others doings: but the Apostle as is before
showed, rather gives a rule how a man should inform his own conscience: as
the Syrian interpreter well gives the sense, in cognitione animae suae certus
esto, let him be certain in the knowledge of his own mind.

Quest. 12. What it is to observe, or to take care of the day unto the Lord:
first of the words and order.
1. The vulgar Latin, reads only the affirmative part of the sentence, qui
sapit diem, he which is wise for the day, is wise to the Lord: but omitteth the
negative part, qui non sapit, vel curat diem, he which sauoureth not, or cares
not for the day, cares not for it to the Lord: which clause though it be
omitted by Origens interpreter, and Ambrose likewise, and Augustine has it
not, yet the ancient Greek copies, which Chrysostom, Theod. Oecum. follow,
have both the clauses, and so the Syrian interpreter reads: Erasmus would
excuse the omission of this part, and help it thus, that he may be said,
sapere diem, to be wise for the day, that makes every day alike, and he also,
which makes difference between day and day: and so both are comprehended in
one clause: but seeing in the next sentence he makes mention of eating or not
eating, it seems better, that here also both should be touched by the
Apostle, the observing and not observing of the day: and Pet. Martyr gives
another reason, that if the Apostle should not have spoken also of the not
observing of the day, that it is done also to the Lord: plus videretur infirmis
tribuere, he should seem to give more unto the weak, which observed the day,
then unto the strong, which did not.

2. Erasmus here observes, how the Apostle sometime speaks of the strong in
the first place, sometime of the weak: as v. 3. let him that eats, he first
mentions the strong, but v. 5. one esteems a day, etc. he begins first
with the weak: but again, v. 6. he that eats, etc. he does give the first
place to the strong: hereof two reasons may be given, either from the manner of
the Apostles speech, wherein he would observe an order and decorum: he still
begins with the affirmative part, as v. 3. he that eats, and v. 6. he that
observes, and then sets down the negative part, as opposite thereunto: the
other reason is from the matter: he would not still give the prioritie to the
strong, that the weak should not take themselves too much abased.

Quest. 13. Of the sense and meaning of the former words, He that observes,
etc. observes it to the Lord.
1. Augustine whom Anselme follows retaining the former sense, he which
observes the day, that is, is content only, to judge present things, does
usurp nothing that belongs unto God, as to take upon him to judge of the
time to come: see this interpretation refused before, quest. 10.4.

2. Haymo thus interprets, he that judges no day, that is, limiteth not unto
a sinner any time, but thinks he may return and have forgiveness upon any
day, cum Deo concordat, agrees or consents herein with God, who repelleth
not a sinner at what time soever he return unto him: but this is not the
Apostles meaning, who speaks of the legal observation of days, as is showed
before, qu. 10.

3. Some will have this to be the meaning: Domini est iudicium, etc. it
belongs unto God to judge, both him that observes, and him that observes
not: as he said before, he stands or falls to his own master, v. 4. Beza,
Faius: to the same purpose also Tolet: but the other part of the verse, he that
eats, eats to the Lord, and gives God thanks, shows that in the same
sense it is taken here, to seek to please God: and so Origin joins gratias
agit, he gives thanks, to both these clauses, of observing the day, and of
eating.

4. Some give this sense, he observes it to the Lord, that is, pleases God,
and therein sins not, Osiander: approbatur Deo, it is approved of God,
Calvin: But this is rather the Apostles conclusion, that both of them are
acceptable to God in observing or not observing: which he proves here from
their end and intention: they do it for the Lords honor.

5. So then, this phrase, to the Lord, shows rather their mind and
intention, and the end, which they propose to themselves: they do it, propter
Dominum, for the Lord: Chrysostom. ad honorem divinum, for Gods honor:
Lyranus, Pareus: a Deo pendet, he depends of God, Mart. so that both the
strong observed not the day to the Lord, because they were persuaded by the
liberty of the Gospel all days to be alike: and they which observed the day
thought therein they pleased God, because such observation of days was
commanded by the law, which to observe, they thought to be pleasing and
acceptable unto God; wherein notwithstanding they erred, but of ignorance and
not of malice, as likewise in for bearing some meats.

Quest. 14. How he that eats not, is said to give thanks.
1. I omit Origens allegorical sense, he that eats all things, that is,
vniversorum intelligentiam capiat, has the understanding of all; gives God
thanks: and he which eats not all things, non habet omnem scientiam, has
not the knowledge of all, yet gives thanks for that knowledge which he has:
But it is evident, that the Apostle speaks of the eating of meats, as v. 2.3.

2. Chrysostom thinks that the Apostle does secretly tax the Iudaizing
Christian, who as long as he is addicted to the law, cannot render grace or
thanks unto God: for the Apostle says, Ye which are justified by the Law,
are fallen from grace, Gal. 5. But I cannot see, how this should be understood
to the disgrace of the believing Jew, seeing he says as well the eating
Gentile, as the not eating Jew do both give thanks: and the Apostle in the
other place, speaks of grace in an other sense, of that which we receive of
God, here of grace or thanks given unto God.

3. Calvin thinks that all this must be pronounced in the imperative mood,
as let him observe the day to the Lord, let him eat, or not eat to the Lord,
let him give thanks: and so he does not so much show, quid faciant, what they
do, as quid facere debeant, what they ought to do: But the Apostle rather
proves by this reason, taken from the end, that we ought not to judge an
other in these things, seeing both do propound to themselves, the glory of God.

4. Ambrose thinks that the Apostle speaks of fasting and perpetual
abstinence: and so he that eats not, gives thanks, as Origin interprets,
pro fructu continentiae, for his continency, that he can refrain: but the
Apostle has relation only to the meats which were counted unclean by the
law, from the which some for conscience of the law abstained: therefore it is
not that which they give thanks for.

5. Haymo thinks, that as he which eats gives thanks, pro liberate
vescendi, for his liberty given him to eat all things: so the Jew gives
thanks for his abstinence, and pro notitia per legem, and for his knowledge by
the law from what meats he should refrain: but the giving of thanks is
referred rather to the benefit of eating.

6. Wherefore as he which eats all things, without any scruple of conscience,
gives God thanks, pro pastu largiore, for his more plentiful feeding: so he
which eats only of some things, yea of herbs, gives thanks also, pro
victu ^enuiore, for his food, though but slender: as the wiseman prefers a
dinner of green herbs with love, and eaten in the fear of God, before a
stalled ox with hatred, Prou. 15.17.

7. But it will be objected, that this seems not to be a good argument, he
that eats gives God thanks, therefore he eats to the Lord: for one may
give God thanks, even when he eats and drinks to gluttony and drunkenness:
the answer is, that he which eats does well, ex part cibi, on the behalf
of the meat: which is sanctified by giving of thanks, as the Apostle says, 1.
Tim. 4.8. that every creature is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer:
But if any do exceed in eating and drinking, the fault is not in the meat,
as though he did eat any unclean thing, but in the person that eats.

Quest. 15. Whether S. Paul's defense (that he which does or omitteth any thing
in matters of religion, does, or not does it unto God) be perpetual.
Here are diverse necessary points to be considered for the solution of this
question: for if this doctrine of S. Paul were universal and general, that
one should not regard what an other does, but every man should be left unto
himself, and that it were not lawful to censure any ones doings, then many
wicked persons should go uncontrolled, and do what they lift: wherefore these
considerations are here necessary. 1. of what things the Apostle entreats.
2. and of what manner of judgment. 3. of what persons he speaks. 4. in what
time. 5. in what manner these things were done. 6. and to what end.

1. Concerning the things, he speaks not of things in their own nature good
or evil, directly forbidden or commanded: but of things indifferent in
themselves, and such as sometime were commanded in the law, as abstinence from
some kind of meat, observing of days: so Chrysostom well notes, sed cum de
dogmatis illi sermo est, etc. but when the Apostle speaks of points of
doctrine, he is in an other tune: whosoever shall teach otherwise, etc. is
accursed, Galat. 10.

2. The judgment, and judging one of an other, which the Apostle speaks
against, is not so much the judgment of the thing, which may be done with
charitable moderation, as of the person, whom we must not take upon us to
censure and condemn in such things, Beza.

3. The Apostle speaks not of obstinate and refractorie persons, for to such
S. Paul would not have given place at all: for though he caused Timothy to be
circumcised, for fear of offending the weak, Act. 16.1. yet would he not
circumcise Titus, least he should have yielded to the obstinate and perverse in
judgment, Galat. 2.3. so Chrysostom says, novella erat adbuc Romanorum
fides, the faith of the Romans was but yet young: and neophytorum in gratiam
ista disserit, he disputes thus for their sakes which were newely planted in.

4. The time also must be considered, nondum tempus erat, it was not yet time,
Chrysostom: so we are to distinguish of three times, the one under the law,
when all these things were necessary to be observed and kept of the Jews, an
other under the Gospel published to the world, when all Judicial rites were as
unlawful: then there was tempus intermedium, a time between both, when after
Christ was ascended, the commonwealth of the Israelites was yet standing, and
Evangelium tanquam in cunabulis, the Gospel was as in the cradle, it was
requisite, that some thing should be yielded to the infirmity of the Jews for
a while.

5. The manner was this: these things were observed, sine opinione necessitatis
and meriti, without opinion of necessity or merit, Osi. and Calv. well
distinguishes here between, obseruatio, the observation it self, and opinio,
the opinion conceived thereof, which is superstitious: the other the Apostle
tolerateth for a time in the weak, in respect of their infirmity: but in the
epistle to the Colossians c. 2. Gal. c. 4. c. 5. he condemns them which
retained the ceremonies of the law with an opinion of necessity: for Christ
should profit them nothing, Gal. ^.^. which were so superstitiously addicted to
the legal rites and ceremonies.

6. The end also makes a great difference: for these eating or not eating,
discerning meats, or not discerning, did both to the glory of God: but they
which either sought their own glory: as among the Galathians, that sought to
get disciples unto them, c. 4.17. and to make a fair show in the flesh, c.
6.2. were not at all to be borne with: so likewise the Popish festivals which
are dedicated unto the honor of Saints, and not of God, are not within the
compass of the Apostles rule here, Gualter.

Quest. 16. Of the coherence of these words, none of us lives to himself, v.
7. etc.
1. Chrysostom thinks that this saying is applied only to the weak, that
it is impossible that God should contemn them, but that in convenient time,
ista correcturus sit, he will amend those things and confirm them, because
they live, and die unto him: and so there should be reference to the 4. ver.
God is able to make him stand.

2. Some will have it a confirmation of the former verse, why all our actions,
should be directed to the glory of God, because he is our Lord and Master:
Hyper. Martyr.

3. Tolet makes it an other reason of that saying, v. 5. that every one
should abound in his own conscience, and not examine an others doings.

4. Gualter will have it to be a reason taken from the general end of man, he
was created unto the glory of God, and his we are, therefore all our actions
must be referred to his glory: and then he adds, non haerendum in cibis,
that we should not insist in meats, but seek whether in our meats, or in any
thing else to please God.

5. But it is rather a new argument, to prove the thing in question, that one
should not judge or condemn an other, because they are the Lords servants: and
so it answeareth to the 4. v. he stands or falls to his own Master: Beza,
Gryneus, Faius: and so he gives the same reason of the second instance,
concerning the observing or not observing of days, as he did of the other
particular before, touching eating or not eating.

Quest. 17. How we are said to live unto the Lord.
1. Origin understands it of the spiritual life unto righteousness, and death
unto sin: so we live unto God, because novitas vitae, etc. Christo reputatur,
the newnes of life is imputed unto Christ, it is not of our selves: and a
Christo sumit mortis exemplum, every one from Christ takes his example of
dying, who died first unto sin: But in this sense to live and die, should be
in effect the same, for the death of sin, is the life of righteousness:
whereas the Apostle makes a distribution of these two, whether we live, or
die, etc. and both of the dead, and the quick.

2. Chrysostom understands the Apostle to speak of everlasting life and
death, vitam nostram divitias, and mortem damnum existimat, he counts our
life riches, and our death loss unto himself: But seeing that Chrysostom
confesses, that in the next words, whether we live, or die, we are the Lords,
that a morte fidei, ad mortem naturalem periransit, he paseth from the death of
faith, to speak of the natural death: the Apostle must be so understood to
speak of the natural life before: for this argument thus hangs together
either we live and die unto God, or unto our selves, not unto our selves,
therefore unto God.

3. There is also a civil life, and that of two kinds, either it is taken in
the good part, as a man is said to live unto himself, that is, sui iuris, is a
freeman, not at the command of an other: or in the evil, as they are said to
live unto themselves, which live privately and separated from the society of
others, as single men, solitary persons, the covetous, which both live unto
themselves, not seeking the profit of any, and die unto themselves, none have
any loss by their death: they have neither wives nor children to care for: but
the Apostle means not any such civil kind of life: he speaks of the
natural life and death, taken after an Evangelicall sense, to live, and die
unto the glory of God.

4. Haymo in one sense would have this especially to be understood of Martyrs.
which do live and die unto God: who is glorified by their life and death: but
the Apostle speaks generally of all the faithful, and not of Martyrs only:
as Revel. 13.14. they are said to die in the Lord, which die in the faith of
Christ.

5. Wherefore first it is agreed, that the Apostle speaks of the natural
life and death: and then in this sense, to live unto God, comprehends these
four things. 1. to acknowledge God to be our Lord, and that we are not our
own. 2. and therefore we must seek to do Gods will, and not our own. 3. as
we begin with Gods will, so must we end with his glory, making it the scope
of our whole life, and the actions thereof. 4. and in all our troubles and
afflictions, we must put our trust in God, and rely upon his care, as one that
care (...) us: likewise to die unto the Lord, is 1. to acknowledge, that as we
received our life from him so death comes not without his sending. 2. to take
therefore patiently diseases, and death it self, as sent of God. 3. as in our
life, so in our death, to glorify God, and not to do any thing whereby he
might be dishonored. 4. to have good hope and confidence in our death, that
God will raise us up to life again.

Quest. 18. How Christ by his dying and rising again, is said to be Lord both
of the dead and quick.
1. The Apostle makes mention of the death of Christ, his resurrection, and
life: by the first acquisivit dominium, he purchased this dominion, by the
second, occupavit, he took possession of this dominion.

2. And although Christ had purchased this dominion in his death, yet he had
not the exercise of this dominion, until he was risen again: for it is one
thing Dominium esse, to be a Lord, an other dominari, to hane rule; the one is,
per potestatem, by his power, the other per potestatis exercitionem, by the
exercising of this power: for by death was Christ's soul separated from his
body, which till they were united again, he could not exercise his dominion
perfectly as man, Tolet: and then a thing is said to be, when it is made
manifest: by his resurrection his power and conquest over death was made
known: and so the interlinear. gloss. well interprets, vt dominari
intelligatur, that he might be known to bear rule.

3. And the Apostle speaks not here 1. of that dominion which Christ has as
God, for that he had before, and should have exercised still, though he had not
died. 2. nor yet as Origin here resolves, is mention made of his death and
life, because Christ was an example of obedience unto us, how to live unto
righteousness and die unto sin, and therefore he is Lord of both: for this
sauoureth too much of Pelagianisme, to make Christ an example only by the
imitation whereof, we should learn to be mortified. 3. neither yet is his
death mentioned, to show this dominion to be merited, for Christ merited not
at all for himself, as shall be showed among the controversies, contr. 8. 4.
but only that dominion is signified, which Christ purchased, in redeeming us
by death, as man: As God he had an universal dominion, but as man he has a
particular dominion and right over us, as his inheritance purchased by his
blood.

4. Over the dead, and the quick. 1. Origin understands the spiritual life
and death: but the Apostle speaks of the natural, as Christ truly died and
rose again. 2. the dead are set before the quick, to show Christ's universal
dominion, not only over the then living, but even over the dead also that had
been living before, Pareus. 3. and he mentions the living, least it might be
thought, that the judgment only in the world to come of the dead, was
committed unto Christ; and not of the living here, Gorrhan, Hugo. 4. and
whereas our Blessed Savior says, Matthew. 22. That he is not the God of the
dead, and the Apostle here says, that he might be Lord of the dead and quick:
they are not contrary the one to the other: for in the one place, they are
said to be dead according to the Sadduces sense, that had no being at all, but
were utterly perished and extinct both in body and soul, of such the Lord is
not God: for he is not a God of that which is not, Martyr: as he is not their
God, as they are dead, but as he purposes to raise them to life again: but
here by the dead the Apostle understands them, that are alive in soul though
dead in body. 5. Chrysostom adds that the Apostle here, Iudaizantem
pudefacit, does shame him, that did Iudaize: that seeing Christ had done so
great things, in dying and rising again for them, they should not be so
unthankful, vt ad legem recurrerent, as to run unto the law again.

Quest. 13. Of the tribunal seat of Christ, what it is, and of other
circumstances of the day of judgment.
Here Origin has a witty discourse of the day of judgment, and the manner
thereof: wherein some things he says well, and he misseth as his manner is in
other: the sum is this, which shall be reduced to these three heads, which
are confusedly there handled, and shuffled together. 1. who shall judge. 2. in
what manner. 3. who shall be judged.

1. Christ shall be the Judge, as here it is called the tribunal seat of God:
and whereas to the Corinth. 2. ep. 5.10. it is named the throne or tribunal
seat of Christ, thence is it gathered, that there is the same tribunal of
Christ, and God, as Christ says in the Gospel, all which the father has, is
mine: but if any think there is any difference to be made between these two,
it may be this: the name of Christ properly, est indicium verbi in carne
positi, signifies the word placed in our flesh: that then is the tribunal
seat of Christ, wherein he sits, till he have put down all his enemies
under his feet, and perfectly reconciled the world, and gathered together all
that shall be converted, then shall he deliver up the kingdom to his father,
and then shall it be the tribunal seat of God, etc. But here Origin somewhat
misseth: for beside that in both places it is called, the tribunal of Christ,
this tribunal of Christ, is the seat of judgment, wherein Christ shall sit
and judge in the last day, not as God only, but as God, and man: and after
this judgment finished, though Christ shall not reign in that manner, as now
he does, because all his enemies shall be subdued, yet he shall have a
celestial kingdom still, and the same to continue for ever, though not to be
administered in that manner, as it is now in his Church.

2. Touching the manner: here an allusion is made unto the tribunal seats of
terrene judges, who sit aloft in their throne, ne lateant conspectui, etc. that
nothing be hid from their sight, either touching the punishment of the guilty,
and clearing of the innocent: so nothing shall be hid unto that supreme Judge
in that day: but all things shall be manifested unto him, even the secrets of
the conscience, not only unto God, but vniuersae creatura rationabili, to
every reasonable creature: the Angels shall read the book of conscience, which
then shall be unfolded: atque ita criminum nostrorum in quibus nunc vnum saltem
testem pati confundimur, etc. and so of our sins, whereof we are now ashamed
to have our witness, we shall then have the innumerable companies of Angels
witnesses, etc. This is true, that there is nothing now so hid and secret, even
the thoughts of our hearts, which shall not then be made manifest, for God
shall discover men's secret thoughts, and acts: but the Angels shall not then
read the books of the conscience of themselves, as knowers of the heart, but
first discovered and unfolded by Christ.

3. Origin also in the same place touching those which shall be judged, moves
this doubt, how every one is said to be judged according to their works, 2.
Cor. 5.10. seeing there is no man but has both good works and bad: to this
doubt he supposes two answears. 1. that some may be imagined to be so good,
that no evil be found in them, some so evil that no good has place in them:
but this he refuses, for neither is any so perfectly good, nor yet so
absolutely evil, no not Judas, that is void of all goodness. 2. and to say,
that one and the same man shall go to paradise for his good works, and to
hell for his evil, is more unreasonable. 3. so then he concludes and
insisteth upon this answer, that there is no good accounted in them, vbi
praeponderant mala, in whom the evil things do weigh down in number, nor yet
any evil in them, in quibus praeponderant bona; in whom the good things are
more in weight and number: but this is no sufficient answer neither: for even
in the Saints, their sins are more in number then their good works: as Job
says, If God should call him to account, he was not able to answer him one
thing of a thousand, Job. 9.2. 4. wherefore, God shall judge men according to
their works, not the quantity and number of them, but the quality, whether
the good things which they do, proceed from aliuely faith: and the evil
which they commit, be done rather of infirmity and weakness, then of wilfulnes
and obstinacy: and wherein they fail, if they are restored by repentance,
which is the most special work of faith.

Quest. 20. Whether the saying of the Prophet alleged, v. 11. be rightly
cited by the Apostle.
There appears a twofold difference between the Prophets words as they do
stand in the prophecy, and as they are here cited by the Apostle, both as
touching the words and sense.

1. Isay says, 45.23. I have sworn by my self: but here the Apostle, I live
says the Lord: but this in effect is all one, for whereas the Prophet says,
God has sworn, the Apostle sets down the form of Gods oath, who because
he has not a greater to swear by, swears by himself, and whereas the
Apostle says, every tongue shall swear by me, the Apostle following the
Septuagint says, every tongue shall confess, which is a consequent of the
other, for he that swears confesses God, and calls him to witness, and to
be a judge against him that swears falsely.

2. Concerning the sense: that which is there generally spoken of God, is here
particularly applied unto Christ: for beside that the glory which is due unto
the Godhead, belongs unto the person of Christ, as being one God with his
father: these reasons may be given of the particular application of this place
unto Christ. 1. because the Apostle makes special mention of his person, and
upon this occasion, that which is common to him with the father and the holy
Ghost, is specially applied to Christ. 2. because that Christ seemed by his
death to be abased, this is inserted, to show, that there was no imminution or
decrease by that his humiliation, and abasing in his humane nature of his
divine glory at all. 3. because mention is here made of judgment, which is
committed to Christ, this place is specially applied to him, who is appointed
to be judge of the world: see Iunius further, parallel. 25. lib. 2.

21. Quest. When this prophecy shall be fulfilled, that every tongue shall
confess unto God, v. 11.
1. Haymo understands it only of the elect, not of the wicked, for the
praise of God becomes not their mouth: but the Apostle by this Scripture
proves that which he said before, we shall all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ: this then is spoken generally of all.

2. Gorrhan, following the interlin. gloss, refers it to the inward
conscience, which is one and the same in every one: and so he observes three
things here in this great Judge; his eternity, ( I live,) his general power,
every knee shall bow, and his infallibility for knowledge, the very conscience
shall confess him: but it is evident that the Apostle speaks not only of
the internal, but of the external confession; because the Prophet says,
whence this sentence is taken, every tongue shall swear.

3. Some think this is a prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles, that then
every tongue should confess, Bullin. but the Apostle speaks not of all sorts
and kinds of men in general, but of every one in particular: as it follows
in the next verse, Every one of us shall give account for himself.

4. Wherefore, although this prophecy is in part fulfilled in this life, for
both the faithful do publicly profess the name of Christ in the world now,
and even the wicked are many times forced to acknowledge Gods justice; yet it
shall not fully be accomplished until Christ come in the clouds, when all
flesh shall appear before Christ, and even the wicked in that day, will they,
nill they, shall be forced to acknowledge Christ to be their Judge, when they
shall wish the hills to fall and cover them from his presence, Revel. 6. so
then although we see not all things now subdued to Christ, Hebr. 2.8. yet when
the last enemy is destroyed, which is death, then all things shall be subdued
unto him, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to his father, 1. Cor.
15.27, 28.

22. Quest. Whether every one shall give account for himself, and appear
before Christ's judgment seat, v. 12.
1. Object. Pastors which are set over men's souls, shall give account for
them, Heb. 13.17. therefore not every one for himself. Ans. It follows not,
for some shall give account both for themselves, and others, as Pastors, some
for themselves only, as every particular person: and the Pastor shall not
answer for others, as in their place, and as they are their own proper faults,
for so they shall answer for them, every one for himself; but for their
negligence, and want of care, whereby they suffered their sheep and flock to
miscarrie.

2. Object. The faithful shall not be judged at all: Ioh. 3.18. He that
believes in him, shall not be judged. Ans. There is iudicium condemnationis, a
judgment of condemnation, and so only they which believe not shall be judged,
which either had no faith at all, or lost that which they had; and there is
iudicium retributionis, a judgment of retribution, and so all generally shall
be judged, the righteous unto life, and the wicked unto condemnation, Lyran.
but in that place rather the meaning is, he that believes, shall not be
condemned.

3. Object. The Psalmist says, The wicked shall not stand in judgment, Psalm.
1. then every one shall not give account at that day. Hugo here answers by
this distinction, that there is iudicium condemnationis, a judgment of
condemnation, and iudicium disputationis, a judgment of scanning and
disceptation: the unbelievers understood there by the wicked, shall stand in
the first judgment, not in the second: there iniquity is so notorious, that
it need no scanning or discussing: but those which were believers, and yet
were evil livers, shall have the other judgment, they shall be sifted, and
their sins examined. But this is no sufficient answer. 1. for in the day of
judgment, all those which shall be condemned, shall have their sins objected
against them, their own consciences accusing them, as is set forth in that
form of judicial proceeding described by our blessed Savior, Matthew. 25. all
the goats at the left hand, shall have their sins laid unto their charge. 2.
neither is the scanning and discussing of their sins properly a judgment,
but an evidence and preparing unto judgment, when the definitive sentence is
given. 3. in that place of the Psalm, by not standing up in judgment, is not
meant, their not appearing, but the manner, that they shall not stand forth
with boldness, as the faithful shall, but with heavy and cast-downe
countenance, wishing that any thing might hide them from the presence of him
which sits upon the throne, Revel. 6.16. whereas the righteous shall stand
forth boldly, as the Prophet says, Isa. 8.18. Behold, here am I, and the
children which thou have given me.

23. Quest. Of scandals and offenses, the occasion and diverse kinds thereof, v.
13.
1. Chrysostom thinks that the Apostle, saying, let no man put a stumbling
block, or occasion of falling before his brother, does admonish hereby both
the strong and the weak, for as the one might be offended with an others
eating, so the other with his not eating: but the weak properly are said to be
offended, not the strong.

2. Some take these for both one, offense, (...), and scandale, (...): as
Origin thinks it is so called, when any thing is found in the way, whereat
pedes offenduntur, etc. the feet of the walkers do stumble or are offended:
so the Syrian interpreter uses here but one word to express both: some take
the first to be the greater; as an offense they will have to be the occasion
culpae mortalis, of a mortal, or deadly sin, the scandal venialis, of a
less or venial sin, Gorrhan. M. Beza inclines to this opinion, taking the
first to be the worst: so the Geneva translation interprets the first, an
occasion to fall, the latter, a stumbling block: but this difference rather
may be made, that an offense is, as when one impiugit sed non corruit,
stumbleth, but falls not: a scandal is, cum impingit cum ruina, when one
stumbleth and falls: so the less offense is, when one is grieved and
troubled, but not altogether discouraged: the greater, called a scandal, when
one is so offended, that he falls away quite from the faith, Pareus, Tolet:
but yet this difference is not perpetual: these words are for the most part
confounded in use, and one taken for an other.

3. A scandal or offense is seen in things good, or evil, or indifferent: in
good things none are offended but the wicked, as Tertullian says. res bonae
neminem scandalizant nisi malam mentem, good things do scandalize none but
such minds as are evil; as the Pharisees were offended at Christ's works; such
a scandal is to be contemned; neither are good things to be omitted because of
such scandals: in evil things men are offended, when as they are encouraged by
the evil examples of others to do the like; and these offenses are in any
wise to be avoided; in things indifferent, if any be offended of ignorance and
infirmity, as in the eating of meats, we must forbear, and not give offense,
as the Apostle says here, but if of malice and wilfulnes they are offended,
such offenses are not to be regarded.

4. And there are three kind of persons, that may be offended, the good and
faithful, the evil, and the weak between both; the good are offended and
grieved when they see evil committed, the evil are offended at good things,
the weak at the use of things indifferent; the first and the third offenses we
must shun, as S. Paul says, Give none offense, neither to the Jew, nor the
Grecian, nor to the Church of God, 1. Cor. 10.32. that is, neither to the weak
nor to the strong.

5. There are two kind of scandals, there is datum vel acceptum, given, or
taken and not given; offense is given, when either a word or deed, good or
evil, or a thing indifferent, but unseasonably used, is so committed and done,
that an other is thereby made worse; of such offenses it is said, Woe unto him
by whom offenses comes: an offense taken, and not given, is when any thing
in it self good, or indifferent being used tempestively and in season,
turns to the evil of him, which by his own fault is thereby made worse;
these kind of offenses need not trouble us; the first is called scandalum
activum, an active scandal, the other passivum, passive.

6. Here Lyranus puts the question, how far spiritual things and
temporal are to be left and dismissed for fear of scandal; and thus he
determines; things spiritual, are either such as are simply necessary to
salvation, which to omit were deadly sin, and such things must not in any
case be omitted; as to preach the Gospel, to exercise our faith by good works:
some spiritual things are not so necessary of themselves, but are used as
helps; which may be omitted to avoid offense, if it be ex ignorantia, of
ignorance, not of malice; as Augustine puts the case, of forbearing to use
Ecclesiastical discipline, when tenait in periculum schismatis, it tends to
danger of a schism: so temporal things, are either our own, and so they must
give place to scandal and offense, if it be of ignorance; or they are not our
own, but committed to our trust, which trust we must not deceive, though it be
with the scandal and offense of others.

7. Pererius knitteth together these three distinctions before severally
handled. 1. of the thing wherein offense is given, which is either good, and
therein we are to contemn all scandal and offense: or evil in deed, or in
show and appearance, as in the indiscreet use of things indifferent, and in
these we must be careful not to offend. 2. of the persons, to whom offense is
given, who are either men separated and divided from the Church, as heretics,
to whom we must give no way at all, in the use of things indifferent, or they
are the weak, who for a time are tolerated and borne with in the Church, and
these must not be offended. 3. of the manner of offense, or scandal: which is
either ex malicia, of malice, when one will not be persuaded, but continues
wilful and obstinate, or it is ex ignorantia, of ignorance, and it is called
scandalum pusillorum, the scandal of the little ones: and they must not be
contemned, as our blessed Savior says, Matthew. 18.10. See that ye despise not
one of these little ones.

24. Quest. Of the occasion of these words, v. 14. I know and am persuaded,
etc. and of the meaning thereof.
1. For the occasion. 1. Chrysostom thinks, that as hitherto the Apostle
seemed to find fault with the strong, which judged their weak brethren, now he
begins to instruct the conscience of the weak: but it appears by the
words following, v. 15. that the Apostle still exhorts the strong not to give
any occasion of offense to the weak; and so Lyranus well observes, that as
hitherto he moved them not to contemn their brethren, so now not to
scandalize or offend them. 2. Gorrhan thinks the Apostle does here expound
himself, why before v. 13. he bid them to give no occasion of stumbling or
falling: not that the eating of meat is evil in it self, but because of the
opinion of the weak. 3. But the Apostle rather meets here with an objection,
which might be made in the person of the strong, that he was for his part well
persuaded in Christ, that nothing was of it self unclean, howsoever it might
be to others: the Apostle granting all this, yet will have the stronger to
forbear eating, least they might grieve the tender conscience of the weak
brethren.

2. I know and am persuaded, etc. The word is (...), I am assured, certain, or
persuaded: Pererius here takes occasion to show, that this word in Scripture
does not always signify certitudinem fidei divinae, a divine certentie of
faith, sed probabilem perswasionem, but a probable persuasion: as the Apostle
says of the Hebrews, c. 6.9. We have persuaded our selves better things of
you: and in this epistle, c. 13.14. I am persuaded of you that ye are full of
goodness: S. Paul did not thus believe of others, fide divina, by a divine
faith, etc. thus Perer. disput. 1. numer. 1.

Contra. 1. Though it might be admitted, that S. Paul by revelation of the
spirit might know and discern what was in others: as he would pronounce of
some, that their names were written in the book of life, Philip. 4.3. 2. yet
will we not insist upon this, but deny the argument rather, that because this
word, I am persuaded, sometime signifies a coniecturall and probable
persuasion only, that it should therefore so be taken always: for though we
can not have a coniecturall hope and persuasion of an others salvation, as
being grounded upon an opinion only; yet one may attain to a certain
persuasion of his own state, such as grounded upon knowledge: as here the
Apostle joins both together, I know, and am persuaded: and it is the same,
which before was expressed by the word (...) to be fully assured and persuaded,
v. 5.

3. Thorough the Lord Jesus. 1. some refer these words to the sentence
following, that thorough, or in the Lord Jesus nothing is unclean in it self:
because Christ by his coming has abrogated the ceremonies of Moses law, who
made some meats clean, some unclean, Martyr, Bullinger: but neither by Moses
law were any meats counted unclean in themselves, that is, by their nature,
therefore this clause is better joined with the former words, I know and am
persuaded by the Lord Jesus: so Chrysostom, ab illo doctiu, as taught of him:
non est humanae cogitationis ista sententia, this that I say is not an humane
thought, but I am taught it by Christ.

4. Nothing common: so the word (...) signifies. 1. Origin thinks, that
meats were called common and unclean, because men did eat them, whose mind
being polluted with many sins, and made the habitation of many unclean
spirits, was made common, and so the meats were defiled, and made common. 2.
but Haymo says that those meats were called common, quibus gentes communiter
vtebantur, which were commonly used by the Gentiles, being prohibited to the
Jews by the law: as vessels which were consecrated to the use of the Temple
were holy, other were common and profane: and the reason of that appellation,
profanum, profane, is this, as if it were perro fanum, that is, far off from
the use of the temple. So then common, is as much as to say unclean, as it is
interpreted, Act. 10.14.

5. Nothing is common by it self. 1. The vulgar Latin reads, per ipsum, by
him, that is Christ: and two senses are made of it; either post adventum, after
his coming, for he took away the legal difference of meats, and other
ceremonies, Tolet, Perer. or by him in the creation, because all things which
were created, seemed good, Lyran. Gorrhan. but although Ambrose do follow this
sense, that by the benefit of Christ, no meat is now unclean, yet this
reading is not agreeable to the original; the word is (...), by it self, with
an aspiration, not (...), himself. 2. wherefore the Greek interpreters do
better read, per se, by it self; as Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Origin
gives this sense, by it self, that is, natura sui, by it nature: the Apostles
meaning is, that no kind of meat by it self was unclean in the nature
thereof: against the opinion of the Manichees, that simply condemned meats, as
evil by their nature and creation.

25. Quest. How nothing is said to be unclean of it self, v. 14.
1. Nothing of it self, in the nature thereof, as it was created of God, is
unclean, which was the wicked heresy of the Manichees, who abstained from
eating of flesh, eggs, milk, wine, because they said it was fell principis
tenebrorum, the gall of the Prince of darkness: August. lib. de haeres. and
their wicked assertion further was, quod carnes diabolus operetur faeculenta
materia mali, that the devil made flesh of the stinking matter of evil: and
so they blasphemed the Creator himself, to whom every thing seemed good which
he made: see Aug. lib. 30. cont. Manich. c. 5.6.

2. Neither are meats unclean, as wicked Marcion held, that they which did
eat things that had life, were guilty, tanquam qui comedunt animas, as if they
did eat and devour souls: haeres. 42. those heretics two ways did think
flesh in it self unclean, because they were made of an evil matter by the
devil, and in respect of the life and soul which was in them, which they
imagined likewise to be devoured.

3. Neither yet is it to be denied, but that some meats are unclean and
hurtful, physice, naturally, as unfit for the nourishment of the body, as are
all kind of venomous things, but not ethice, morally; as though it were sin
to eat meat, as a thing unclean of it self.

4. Yet though meat be not thus unclean of it self, and in it own nature;
yet it may be said to be unclean in respect of man. 1. generally by reason of
man's fall, which brought a curse upon the creatures: from the which uncleanness
it is purified and sanctified by the word of God and prayer, as the Apostle
says, 1. Tim. 4.8. 2. there is beside a particular uncleanness in respect of
him, who abuses meats to riot and excess, in which sense the Apostle says,
To the defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure, Tit. 1.15. so Origin says,
videndum est, non solum quali, sed quanto cibo, and quo in tempore, etc. we
must see, not only what manner of meat, but how much, and in what time we do
eat: for by this means, those things which were clean in themselves, were
unclean unto the defiled and unbelievers. 3. some meats were counted unclean
by the law, which difference continued as long as Moses law as in force, but
now it is taken away by the liberty of the Gospel. 4. and a thing is counted
unclean in respect of the opinion of the use: that to him, that thinks any
thing unclean, to him it is unclean, as here the Apostle says: which must be
understood, as long as he remains in that opinion.

26. Quest. Of the legal difference of meats, why it was commanded.
There were diverse ends of that legal prohibition, and restraint. 1. it was
partly civil, that by this means God might invre his people to obedience,
Ambros. 2. and partly moral, to teach them temperance, who otherwise were a
stiffnecked people, and too much addicted to their appetite, Chrysostom. 3. it
was also physical and natural, that for the avoiding of diseases, whereunto
they were much subject in that climate, which might proceed of the variety of
unwholesome meats, and for the better preservation of their health, they were
commanded to make this difference. 4. there was a ceremonial end, that the
Jews by this their abstinence and choice of meats might be discerned from the
profane Gentiles, who made no such difference. 5. and beside there was a
mystical use, that by this legal difference of clean meats and unclean,
they might be put in mind of their spiritual cleannes in body and soul: so
Augustine says, that the Jews abstained from some meats, non cibos damnandi,
sed significandi gratia, not for the condemning of meats, but for
signification sake. 6. now after that the law was abrogated, there was still
retained some difference of meats, as the Apostle enjoined the newly converted
Gentiles to abstain from strangled and blood, to retain concord and peace
between the converted Gentiles and Jews, which abhorred such meats, as were
forbidden by the law: but this prohibition continued only for a time, until
the Gospel was more publicly received, and the believing Jews better
confirmed. 7. but meats are not refrained, but only propter corporis
castigationem, for the chastising and taming of the flesh.

27. Quest. Of the manner how meats are sanctified and made clean.
Because the Apostle here speaks of meats how they are clean, how unclean,
Origin does parallel this place with that, 1. Tim. 4.5. It is sanctified by the
word of God, and prayer.

1. The Rhemists think, that this is not understood of the vulgar and common
benediction of meats and drinks, but of sanctifying and applying them to an
higher use, even for spiritual benefits: annot. 11. as they have their
hallowed bread, water, salt, and such things, which they use in the service of
God. But 1. it is evident that the Apostle speaks there of the sanctifying of
meats for our ordinary use, and receiving of them. 2. and seeing the word of
God is requisite unto sanctification, such hallowing of creatures, having no
warrant in the word, is but a superstitious invention.

2. Neither is it to be thought, that the meats thus sanctified, have a kind
of inherent holiness infused into them, which seems to have been the opinion
of Origin, who compares the sanctifying of them, unto the napkins and
partlets, which were taken from Saint Paul's body, tantum sanctificationis
acceperunt, etc. they received such sanctification, as that being applied to
the sick, they healed their diseases. But 1. there is great difference to be
made between an ordinary sanctifying of a thing to a continual and
perpetual use, as of meats and drinks, and of an extraordinary sanctifying
by miracle, as was in these partlets: it was an extraordinary work at that
time for the confirmation of their faith. 2. neither was this virtue in these
napkins, but in S. Paul, who had that gift to work miracles both present, and
absent: as when Elisha smote and divided the waters with Elias mantle, the
virtue was not in the garment, for then he needed not to have smitten but once,
but he calls for the God of Elias: so it is said there, Act. 19. that God
wrought no small miracles by the hands of Paul: it was Paul then that wrought
them, not the napkins.

3. Nor yet is this sanctification understood of the reading of certain
lessons out of the Scriptures in the time of eating, as some think, Perer.
numer. 5. which indeed is a commendable use: see August. epist. 109. and
Basil. epist. 9. ad Gregor. much less is this to sanctify meats, conceptis
ex verbo det sententijs, etc. to pronounce and conceive a certain form of
words and sentences out of Scripture, even the bread and meat: Bulling. as the
Papists hold that with speaking five words over the bread and wine in the
Eucharist, they can make the body of Christ: for it is not the sound or
syllables of the word pronounced, that sanctify, but faith which is grounded
upon the word: non quod dicitur, sed quod creditur, not that which is said,
but that which is believed, sanctifies: and so Origin well observes here, per
orationem non cuiuscunque sanctificantur, etc. they are not sanctified by the
prayer of every one, but of them which lift up pure hands without wrath and
doubting, which prayed in faith.

4. Some by sanctifying understand the preserving of the meat from the power
of the devil, qui solebat se cibis, odoribus, saporibus, immiscere, which was
wont to insinuate himself, and creep as it were into the meats, smells, and
tastes: as Augustine shows, lib. 4. de civit. dei. c. 15. and Gregor. lib. 1.
dialog. c. 4. tells of a certain Nun, which was possessed with a devil,
by eating of Iettice not blessed: thus Pererius numer. 6. and Gorrhan following
the interlin. gloss, ne diabolus per eum noceat, least the devil hurt by the
meats: and hereupon the Papists use to sign their meats with the sign of
the cross, to chase away the devil from their meats: for other kind of
giving thanks among them is but sieldome and slenderly used. But as I deny
not, but that some times the devil may have that power, where it pleases God
so to permit, to enter into men's bodies by meats as without, which was more
usually seen in those first ages of the Church, while the gift of miracles yet
continued: yet this is not usual, for then the greater part of the world,
which receive their meat without such thanksgiving, should be possessed of the
devil: the Apostle then means not any such sanctifying: much less by the
sign of the cross, which is but a toy to chase away the devil: who is no
otherwise overcome, then by resisting him by faith. In deed thus the devil
may work by meats, to tempt men by the abuse thereof to drunkenness, and lust,
which his tentations are prevented, by the sober and godly use of the creatures
received with thanksgiving.

5. And by the word with Lyranus to understand Christ, the word of God
incarnate, who sanctifies efficiendo, by effecting, and working, as prayer
does impetrando, by obtaining, it is somewhat hard: for Christ himself, when
he brake bread, gave thanks, himself being this word: the word here then
signifies not Christ: but it must be understood in that sense, as our Savior
says, Man lives not by bread, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God, Matthew. 4.4. that is, by the power and blessing of God giving
strength unto the creature to nourish.

6. Neither by this sanctifying word, do we understand sermonem, qui est in
gratiarum action, the speech which is used in giving of thanks, as the Greek
scholia interpreter: for giving of thanks is a kind of prayer: but the word and
prayer are here two distinct things: and prayer goes before meat, and giving
of thanks after, it should not therefore be set before prayer, as here the
Apostle says, by the word and prayer.

7. By the word of God then we understand, consilium and institutum Dei, the
counsel, will, and institution of God, Bulling. which comprehends these
four things: 1. knowledge, that in the beginning God created all things for
man's use, and that nothing is of it self unclean. 2. faith to believe, that
we are of the number of the faithful, to whom the liberty of using the
creatures of God with a good conscience is restoared in Christ once lost in
Adam: Beza, annot. 1. Timoth. 4.5. 3. judgment, that although sometime in the
law there was a difference between clean and unclean meats, yet now under
the Gospel it is pronounced, omnia pura puris, all things to be pure to the
pure: Bulling. 4. the commandment of Christ, ex cuius mandato panem
quotidianum petimus, by whose appointment we do ask our daily bread, as we
are taught in the Lords prayer: and thus much by the way of this question.

28. Quest. Why ones opinion and judgment makes that unclean, which is not:
and whether an erroneous custom binds.
v. 14. To him that judges any thing unclean, to him it is unclean. 1. The
reason hereof is, because the goodness or badnes of an action, is esteemed by
the will and affection of the doer: now he which thinks a thing to be evil,
and yet does it, it shows, that such an one, has deliberatam peccandi
voluntatem, a deliberate mind and purpose to sin.

2. But here certain considerations are to be admitted, how and in what things
the judgment of the conscience polluteth the action. 1. the mind and opinion
does not simply change and alter the nature of the thing, as though that should
in deed be evil and unclean, which one thinks so to be: but it is only
unclean to him that so thinks, not unto an other, that so thinks not. 2.
an erroneous conscience does not bind, ad faciendum secundum eam, sed non
contra eam, to do according unto it, but not to do any thing against it. 3.
the will must be esteemed, non ex iudicio sequenti, sed praecedenti, not by the
judgment subsequent, but precedent: as if a man think it sin to eat flesh,
and yet eats it, and afterward his judgment is better informed, that it is
not sin so to eat; yet for all this, he sinned before in that action,
because he was not then so resolved.

4. Thus the case stands in things indifferent, that he sins against his
conscience who uses that as lawful and indifferent, which he for the time
takes to be unlawful: but it is otherwise in things that are simply in
themselves unlawful, as the breach of any moral law: as if a man should be so
blinded, as to think it lawful to steal, here his conscience is ouerruled by
the word of God, unless he be ignorant of the law of God, as few or none are,
for the law of nature teaches the same things: in this case, unless there be
palpable ignorance, a man's conscience being contrary to the revealed will and
law of God binds not.

3. But thus it will be objected on the contrary: error and falsitie is not to
take place and prevail before the truth, therefore an erroneous conscience
should not bind. Ans. 1. It simply binds not, but for a time, until the
truth be fully known. 2. and error and falsitie binds not, sed quia creditur
veritas, because it is apprehended and believed as a truth. Further it will be
objected; If it be sin for a man to go against his conscience in a thing
indifferent, then he will be driven into this perplexity, that whether he do
against his conscience or not, he sins: for if one should be persuaded, that
it is not lawful to eat flesh, he sins because he is in error, though it
be of infirmity, and if he should eat, being otherwise persuaded in his
mind, he should sin likewise in going against his conscience. Ans. 1. Here
is no absolute necessity of any such perplexity, but only an hypotheticall
necessity, this error of the conscience being presupposed: but it is not
simply necessary, that he should sin the one way, or the other, because he
may cast off and leave his error. 2. and though there be an error committed
both ways, yet it is less to sin of infirmity, and error of judgment,
then wittingly offend, as he does, which violateth his conscience.

29. Quest. How our brother is said to be grieved, and to be lost, and
destroyed, v. 15.
v. 15. If thy brother be grieved, etc. 1. The Apostle in this verse uses two
effectual reasons, to move the stronger not to offend the weak: the first is
taken from the duty of charity, which will not hurt, or grieve an other, as
one member does foster and cherish, not hurt an other. 2. he says grieved,
which is less, then to be scandalized: if the less be against charity, then
that which is greater, much more. 3. the brother is grieved diverse ways. 1.
Oecumenius thinks he is grieved for the sharp admonition and reprehension of
the strong. 2. or because seeing others to cate, he by their example, least he
should be blamed, is induced to do the like, and afterward grieueth at it,
Pareus. 3. or he is grieved, being by this means made to stagger, and to
doubt of the truth of the Catholic faith. 4. or he is grieved, thinking him to
be a transgressor of the law, that eats: Lyranus.

4. And whereas he says, he walks not according to charity, minus dicit,
plus significat, he expresses the less, but in deed means more, for he
walks against charity.

2. Why do thou destroy him with thy meat, etc. Here is an other reason,
taken from the danger which is incurred by our weak brother, as much as in us
lies, we cause him to perish, for whom Christ died, that he should not
perish: this reason is thus amplified by Chrysostom; Christ refused not death
for him, thou, ne cibos contemnis, wilt not for thy brothers cause, neglect thy
meat: Christ died for his enemy, thou will not do this for thy brother:
Christ died for all, non luchraturus omnes, though he should not gain all,
quod suum est adimplevit, yet he did that, which belonged unto him: thou may
with thy meat, win thy brother, and yet wilt not forbear: atque hoc cum sit
ipse Dominus, and Christ did this being Lord of all, thou do not this small
matter being but his brother and fellowseruant.

30. Quest. Whether any in deed can perish for whom Christ died.
This doubt arises by reason of the Apostles words, Destroy not him with thy
meat, for whom Christ died, as though any could perish that Christ died for.

1. Some do think that one may perish in deed for whom Christ died, dum
fidem amittat, qua cum vulnerata conscientia stare non potest, etc. while he
loses his faith, which can not stand with a wounded conscience, and so
perish: Osiander therein consenting with other of the Lutherans: Chrysostom
seems in this place to incline to the same opinion, Christus, tamet si non
esset omnes luchraturus, nihilominus pro omnibus mortuus est, quod suum erat
adimplens, etc. Christ, though he was not to gain all unto him, yet he died
for all, fulfilling that which was his part to do, etc.

Contra. But the contrary is evident, that they for whom Christ died in the
counsel of God, can not possibly perish. 1. For of all that is given to
Christ, he loses nothing, Ioh. 6.39. but they are given to Christ, for whom
he dies: and they are of Christ's sheep, whom none can take out of his hands,
Ioh. 10.28. 2. neither can their faith, which do truly believe in Christ
perish, because they are sustained by Christ, as he says of Peter, I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: neither can the conscience of the
faithful be so wounded or wasted, totally and finally, but that faith, though
during that time obscured, as in David, when he sinned against Vriah, be not
wholly extinguished. 3. Chrysostom may be understood to speak of the
sufficiency of Christ's death, that he died sufficiently for all, which we
acknowledge, not of the efficacy, that he died effectually for all, for he
says, he was not to gain all: and Augustine consents, Electorum si quisquam
perit, fallitur Deus, etc. if any of the Elect perish, God is deceived, but
none of them does perish, quia non fallitur Deus, because God is not deceived:
lib. de corrupt. and great. c. 7.

2. Some by perishing, here understand nothing, but to be offended, and
scandalized, and take this to be an argument from a comparison, that one should
not pluris facere escam, quam fratris salutem, set more by meat then his
brothers salvation, which is hindered by the offense given unto him: and this
argument is enforced by showing the price and value of our brother, for whom
Christ died: if Christ gave his life to redeem him, much more should we give a
piece of flesh to help to save him, Beza annot. to the same purpose Ambrose,
ex cuius morte, quantum valeat fratris salus, cognoscitur, by whose death it
appears, how much the salvation of our brother is set by: So Haymo by
perishing, understands offending, and scandalizing: but to destroy is more,
then to offend: and to perish or be destroyed, (as the Apostle uses this word
in the passive, (...), 1. Cor. 8.11.) is more then to be offended: the Greek
Scholiast interprets, ne a fide eijcias, least thou cast him out from the
faith: and then he which leaves the faith, must needs perish. And like as to
offend or cause our brother to stumble, is more then to griue him; so to
destroy him, is more then to offend, or cause him to stumble: for thus the
Apostle proceeds by degrees.

3. An other sense is, that he is occasio ruinae, the occasion of the ruin of
his brother, Lyranus, Tolet: he does destroy him dando occasionem, by giving
occasion that he be scandalized, Haymo: so Hugo, do not destroy, ne sis
occasio perditionis, be not an occasion of his perdition: so simply he does not
cause him to perish, but as much as in him lies: this sense is not to be
misliked.

4. But yet to make it more full, this may be added further, that the Apostle
speaks not exactly and precisely of those, whom in deed Christ died for,
but of such, as in our charitable opinion, are held to be of that number: omnes
fidem Christi profitentes pro redemptis habet charitas Christiana, all that
profess the faith of Christ, Christian charity holds to be in the number of
those which are redeemed, Pareus: who joins both these last solutions
together; so likewise Piscator: so also is that other place of the Apostle to
be understood, 1. Cor. 8.11. And thorough thy knowledge, shall the weak
brother perish for whom Christ died: which in the same place the Apostle
calls sinning against Christ: and they which offend their brethren do two
ways sin against Christ; directly, in making frustrate, as much as in them
lies the death of Christ, opus, quod morte eius absolvit, destruunt, they
overthrow the work, which Christ finished by his death; and indirectly, quia
corpus eius and membra percutiunt, they wound and smite the body and members
of Christ, which redoundeth unto Christ himself, Chrysostom.

5. Let this further be noted, that Ambrose takes this to be spoken unto the
weak, that he should not scrupulum inijcere, cast a scruple in the mind of
him, that eats all things, and cause him to doubt. But Chrysostom and
Theodoret do better understand it as spoken to the strong, that he by his
eating should not cause the weak to stumble, and so fall and perish: and this
is more agreeable to the Apostles words, destroy not by thy meat: now he which
eats, destroieth with his meat, not he, which eats not: and again, the
weak were more in danger to be offended, and so to fall away from the faith,
then the strong.

31. Quest. What is meant by the good, or commodity, which they must not cause
to be blasphemed, verse. 16.
1. Cause not your commodity, your good, etc. This is diversely skanned. 1.
Chrysostom understands either the Christian faith, and hope of eternal
reward, or charitas bonum vestrum dilectio, etc. this good of yours is love,
brotherly charity, etc.

2. Origin interprets, bonum nomen, your good name, or fame; so also Lyranus:
and Origin has beside an other exposition, bonum est spiritualiter legem
intelligere, it is a good thing to understand the law spiritually: to decline
the wicked opinions of heretics, as unclean meats.

3. Ambrose understands opera bona, good works, quae obfuscantur, etc. which
are obscured by one small slip or error.

4. Anselme takes this good or commodity, to be ipsam manducationem, the
eating it self, which is good and lawful; so Gorrhan, Hugo.

5. Some understand the doctrine of the Gospel in general: and God himself,
who is called the good of his people; as Hosh. 8.3. Israel has forsaken the
good, that is, God himself, Pare. so Osiander does interpret this good to be
the Gospel.

6. But it is better understood of Christian liberty, which they have received
by Christ from the bondage and ceremonies of the law, whereby they know it to
be lawful to eat any kind of meat: thus the Greek Scholiast, Haymo, Thomas,
Martyr, Vatablus, Calvin, Tolet, Gualter, Piscator, Faius, and most of our new
writers: and this is so expounded by S. Paul himself, 1. Cor. 10.29. Why
should my liberty be condemned for an other man's conscience? and this
Evangelical liberty is called our good for these two reasons, both because it
is peculiar to Christians, and thereby the dignity and excellency of their
calling appears, that are freed from the ceremonies of the law.

2. To be blasphemed. 1. Chrysostom understands this only of those, which
are without: when thou contendest about meats, and make a schism in the
Church, facis, vt qui foris sunt, blasphement, thou causest them which are
without to blaspheme: P. Martyr specially understands, maledicta infirmorum,
the railing of those which are weak: so also Beza: but it is better referred
to them both, the weak are occasioned to condemn this liberty, as
contumelious to God himself, and they which are without, speak evil of the
Christian faith, as being the occasion of contentions. 2. Now for the manner
of this blasphemy, 1. Origin understands it of the doctrine it self, for
they which are offended will think, that Christians are of this faith and
belief, that they think none can be saved, nisi qui suillis vescitur
carnibus, but him that eats swines flesh. 2. the Greek Sholiast refers it
to their persons, the weak will think, eos ventri inservire, that they do
eat of things to serve the belly. 3. Haymo thinks that the weak blaspheme,
cum rogamus eos comedere, etc. when we compel them to eat that which they
abhor. 4. But this rather is the blasphemy, the weak hold such to be
transgressores, transgressors of the law, Lyran. and cry out by the Gospel,
rescindi voluntatem Dei, that Gods will and law is violated, Beza: augent
licentia^ vulgi, and they make the common sort more licentious: Melanct.

32. 32. Quest. How the kingdom of God is not said to be meat and drink, v.
17.
1. Origin by this kingdom understands the life to come, haec aliena sunt ab
illa conversatione futura, these things, meat and drink, shall be of no use
in our conversation in heaven: so also Anselme: so he thinks, that the
Apostle speaks both of the kingdom of glory to come, and of those things
whereof that kingdom shall consist: righteousness and peace, ipse erunt nobis
cibus, they shall be our meat there: so also Haymo, it is a folly to contend
or dispute about those things, quae in regno coelorum non erunt necessaria,
which shall not be necessary in the kingdom of heaven.

2. Chrysostom by the kingdom, understands also regnum coelorum, the
kingdom of heaven: but the other he refers to this life, meat and drink
non sunt in regnum caelorum introducentia, are not the things, that must bring
us to heaven: they are not causa regnandi, the cause of our reigning, Hugo,
Gorrhan. But Peter Martyr says, this is aliena interpretatio, an
interpretation not agreeable to the Apostles mind: for he makes not those
things which follow, righteousness, peace, joy, the causes of salvation: for
Christ only is the cause.

3. Some by the kingdom, understand the Christians themselves, in whom the
spirit of God reigns not by the use of meats and drinks, but in that they
follow righteousness and peace: Vatablus.

4. But here better we understand, regnum gratiae, the kingdom of grace,
whereby Christ rules in our hearts by his spirit: Par. via ad regnum, the way
unto the kingdom, Sa: this kingdom of God, is gratia qua Deo reconciliamur,
the grace whereby we are reconciled unto God, Tolet: the meaning then is, that
this kingdom of grace consists not in these external things, as in meats
and drinks, God is not thereby worshipped: neither does the observation of such
things make us acceptable unto God, 1. Cor. 8.8.

5. Augustine epist. 86. makes mention of one Vibicus, who by this text would
prove, that Christians were to fast upon the saturday, which was the Jews
Sabbath; because the kingdom of God is not meat and drink: but Augustine
there answeareth, then at other times, as upon the Lords day, and when else, we
fast not, non pertineamus ad regnum Dei, belike we should not belong unto the
kingdom of God: the Apostle then excludes not the use of meats and drinks
simply, but the placing of religion in them.

6. But it will be objected; is not a man bound to eat and drink, to sustain
nature, for otherwise, he should be guilty of his own death? and is it not
acceptable unto God, to fast from meats for the subiugation of the flesh? how
then do not these things belong to the kingdom and service of God? Answ.
Meats and drinks of themselves belong not to the kingdom of God, which is
spiritual; but as they are referred, and do help toward the spiritual good:
as they may be an object of our patience in the want of them, and of our
temperance, in using them soberly, when they abound: but then not the use of
the things themselves, but our obedience to the ordinance of God, in using them
for our necessity, and refraining as occasion serves, does commend us unto
God.

33. Quest. Of righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.
1. But righteousness: now the Apostle shows, wherein the kingdom of God
consists; he reckons not up all those spiritual things, wherein the
kingdom of God stands, but gives instance in some for the rest, Hyper.
Here, 1. Chrysostom by justice, or righteousness understands, vita virtutis
studio commendata, a life studious of virtue. 2. Haymo, the justice of the next
life, where one shall not hurt an other. 3. some that particular justice, which
is to give every man his own, Gorrh. Perer. 4. some the justice obtained by
the death of Christ, and given unto those which believe, Piscator. 5. but it
both comprehends the justice of faith, and the fruits thereof in our
regeneration, Martyr, Pare. so Lyranus, iustitiam per fidem formatam, justice
formed by faith.

2. Peace. 1. Haymo understands the perfect peace, which the Elect shall have
with God, and his Angels in the next world. 2. Chrysostom, pacificus convictus
cum fratre, peaceable living with our brethren. 3. but beside the external
peace, it signifies the inward peace of conscience between God and us, which
is a special fruit of justification by faith: Romans 5.1. being justified by
faith, we are at peace with God.

3. And joy. 1. Haymo expounds it to be ineffabile gaudium ex visione Dei,
the unspeakable joy by the sight of God in the next life. 2. some, gaudium de
fraterna pace, the joy that springs of brotherly peace, gloss. ordinar. 3.
gaudium de bonis spiritus sancti, joy arising of the gifts of the spirit in
receiving them thankfully, Hugo. 4. some refer it to the manner how the
works of justice should be done, that is, prompte, chearefully, readily,
Perer. numer. 17. 5. But this joy is taken generally for the spiritual joy,
which the faithful have in God, which arises partly of the expectation and
hope of the reward to come, and of the present feeling of Gods favor in Christ
in the remission of sins, Mart. and this joy makes the faithful to be
joyous in tribulation; as the Apostle says, Iam. 1. Count at exceeding joy,
when ye fall into diverse tentations: this joy proceeds partly ex spe futuri
praemiij, out of the hope of the reward to come, partly ex dilectione Dei, out
of the love of God: for that which one loves, he rejoices and delights in,
Tolet.

4. The Apostle adds, in the holy Ghost. 1. to show the author and efficient
cause of those graces, which is the spirit of God: as S. Paul says, Galat.
5.22. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace: Pareus. 2. as also to show a
difference between civil and worldly joy, and spiritual: for concerning
worldly joy, our blessed Savior faith, Woe unto you that now laugh, for ye
shall wail and lament, Luke 6.25. but of the other joy he says, Your joy
shall no man take from you. 3. he shows also the form and manner of these
good things, that they are spiritual, not carnal, as consisting in meat, and
drink, and such outward things.

Quest. 34. Of these words, he which in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, etc. v. 18.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, he which serves in this, that is, in the
spirit, as Origin and Ambrose interpret: but in the original, it is (...), in
these things, and so translateth the Syrian interpreter: and so also the sense
is better: to show that the kingdom of God consists in righteousness,
peace, and joy, because they which are exercised in these things, are pleasing
unto God, and they which please God shall enter into his kingdom: the like
saying the Apostle has, 1. Tim. 4.8. bodily exercise profits little, but
godliness is profitable to all things, etc.

2. In these things: that is, in righteousness, peace, and joy, better then by
these things, as Beza, Martyr, Erasmus: for he shows the manner how we serve
Christ, not the cause, Pareus.

3. Serves: the word is (...), serving, so that we see that distinction
between (...), worship, and (...), service, not to be perpetual, the first
whereof the Papists take for that adoration which is peculiar to God, the other
to be that, which may be yielded unto Saints.

4. Here is no place for merit, for the Apostle speaks not here of external
works, but of internal wrought in us by the spirit: and so Lyranus well
interprets, he that serves interius in mente, inwardly in his mind:
therefore that is but a corrupt gloss of Gorrha^, he that pleases God,
meretur regnum aeternum, meriteth eternal life: for he pleases God, not by
his own merit, but because he serves Christ; as Origin well says, qui
servit Christo, in quo complacuit Deus, placet Deo, he which serves Christ, in
whom God is well pleased, pleases God.

5. Is accepted of men. 1. That is but a curious distinction, which the
ordinary gloss has: he pleases God, secundum gaudium, in respect of his
joy, for God loves a cherefull giver: and is accepted of men, in respect of
justice and peace: but in all these rather he that serves Christ, is approved
both of God and men. 2. de syncero iudicio loquitur, he speaks of the sincere
judgment of the godly, that will approve the faithful servants of Christ in
these things, though the world hate them, Calvin: yea even the wicked and
profane, testimonium fecerit, shall sometime give testimony of the godly. 3.
mark the order, first he pleases God, and then is approved of men, for he
that is approved of men, is not always pleasing unto God. 4. so then as the
servants of Christ are not to seek the approbation of men, so neither must
they contemn it: as the Apostle said before, Romans 12.17. pronouncing things
honest in the sight of all men.

Quest. 35. How we ought to follow peace and those things, which concern
edifying, v. 19.
1. These two, seeking of peace and edifying, ought to be the two chief orders
of every action: charity seeks peace, and edifying is by faith: Gryneus.

2. As before he spoke principally of the inward and spiritual peace, so now
he moves unto ecclesiastical and external peace, which yssueth out of the
other: and to use those means whereby this peace may be furthered, as
patience, forbearance, charity, the contratie whereof breed dissentions and
discord.

3. We must follow this peace, that is, seek it earnestly, and with ardent
desire: Origin notes here, that where as peace by men's contentions, is chased
away, fugitans consectanda est, she must be followed fleeing away, and as it
were be called back again.

4. But it suffices not to follow peace, but edifying also: for there is a
peace which edifieth not: as to have peace with the wicked and superstitious,
is not to edify but destroy the faith: therefore truth and peace must be
joined together, as the Prophet says, Zachar. 8.19. Love truth and peace.

5. This phrase of edifying is familiar with S. Paul: the Church of God is as a
spiritual house, and the Temple of God, consisting of living stones, 1. Pet.
2.5. every one then must bring somewhat toward the building and repairing of
this house: and though the Pastors and teachers are the principal and chief
builders, yet every one must by his good example seek to edify an other.

6. Peace and love must go before, whereby these lively stones must be joined,
and as it were cemented together, before they can be put to the building of
this spiritual house.

36. Quest. What the Apostle means, by the work of God, v. 21.
1. Destroy not the work of God. Chrysostom interprets this to be salutem
fratris, the salvation of our brother: Origin, adificium charitatis, the
building of charity: Haymo, man himself, as he consists of a soul and
body: Hugo, the grace of God: the interlin. gloss, which Gorrhan follows,
faith and other virtues: but this work of God in our brother is faith, as our
Savior says, Ioh. 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye believe: Par. Mart.
Tolet: this faith in our weak brother, though it be imperfect, is Gods work,
which we must nourish, and not seek to extinguish: as it is said of our
blessed Savior, that he should not quench the smoking flax.

2. But this must be understood de inconsulto conatu, of their unadvised
endeavor, who as much as in them lies seek to destroy Gods work, not de
effectu, of the effect, for the work of God can not be destroyed, Gryn.

3. And whereas he says, destroy not Gods work for meats sake, it follows
not but that meat is also Gods work and creature: but yet man's salvation is a
greater work, man was not made for meat, but meat for man, as Ambrose says:
or he opposes Gods work, and man's work, which is to eat or not to eat
flesh, Gorrhan: or he speaks not of the nature of meat, sed de scandoloso
vsu, but of the scandalous use: Pareus.

37. Quest. In what sense the Apostle says, It is good neither to eat flesh,
nor drink wine, etc. v. 21.
1. It is good: he speaks not of that kind of abstinence which is from
surfeting and drunkenness, or whereby the body is tamed, and the mind made
apter unto good things, for this is simply good: but this abstinence, is only
from meats, to avoid offense, and so it is good only not to eat, with this
condition, if thy brother be offended, Mart. and the Apostle speaks
comparatively, it is good, that is better, not to eat in this case, Bucer.

2. He gives instance of meats and wine, which are not simply necessary unto
man's life: for it is possible to live without them: but a necessarijs and non
suspectis, from necessary food, and not suspected, we must not abstain,
though our brother should be offended: as if one should take offense at our
eating of bread; without it a man can not live. But there are some things,
though not necessary simply to maintain life, yet for the preservation of
health, as some must needs drink wine, as S. Paul counseled Timothy to
drink a little wine for his healths sake: in this case a man ought to forbear
for a time, with a little detriment of his health, for our brothers salvation
is to be preferred before the health of the body: but if he that is offended
will not be persuaded, then he is no longer to be counted weak, but obstinate,
and in this case we are not bound to forbear.

3. But it will be further objected, what if our weak brother will not be
persuaded, but continues still in the same mind, is a man bound to abstain
from those things for ever? No, he is not: for now his infirmitio is turned to
obstinacy: for in this case our blessed Savior regarded not the scandal of
the Pharisees, which were offended at him, because they were wilfully blind.
And whereas S. Paul says, he would not eat flesh as long as the world
stands, rather then he would offend his brother, 1. Cor. 8.3. he must be
understood to speak with a condition, si opus erat, if it were needful for
him so to do, and if his brothers infirmity did still occasion it: and he
speaks of the preparation of his mind, that he is ready, if there be no
other let, to abstain for ever.

4. Hierome in diverse places, epist. ad Furi. ad Salv. ad Eustach. urges this
place to prove the abstinence of professed virgins, and other into Monastical
life, because the Apostle here says, it is good, not to eat flesh, etc. as
though it were evil to eat: but the Apostle simply forbids not to eat
flesh, or drink wine, but with this condition, if it be done with offense. And
Origens judgment here is to be prefered, who makes eating or not eating, to
be a thing of it self neither good nor evil, but indifferent: and his reason
is, potest non manducare carnem malus homo, an evil man may not eat flesh,
nor drink wine, which he shows to have been the use of certain heretics.
But in two cases, meats which are by nature clean, become unclean in use:
one is, si quis per offensionem manducat, if one eat with the offense of his
brother; the other is, si quis existimat, etc. if any think the meat which he
eats to be unclean: these two cases excepted, it is neither good nor evil to
eat, but a thing indifferent: and as the Apostle says, it is good not to eat,
if the brother be offended: so also it is good to eat and drink, si in hoc
aedif^^^tur frater, if thy brother be edified hereby.

5. Whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak, etc. 1. the
Greek scholiast notes, that the Apostle using this variety of words, does
secretly tax those that are weak: for it is incident to them that are blind
to stumble, and to the careless to trippe and fall, and to the sick to be weak.

2. Some take these three to signify the same thing, Martyr, Pareus, and so
the Syriake interpreter does render them all by one word offenditur, is
offended: others do distinguish them thus, Lyranus, he stumbleth, which eats
against his conscience, he is offended or scandalized, that sees an other to
eat, taking him therein to be a transgressor, he is made weak, dubitando de
veritate catholicae fidei, doubting of the verity of the catholic faith: the
interlinear. gloss, makes these three to differ in degree one from an other,
to stumble, is when there is cause or danger of damnation: to be scandalized,
is to be grieved: to be made weak, is quando dubitet et si non offenditur,
when he doubts though he be not offended: so M. Calvin also distinguishes
them, to be weak, is, cum trepidatio aliqua conscientiae inijcitur, when some
doubtfulnesse is cast into the mind: to be offended, when the conscience
grauiori perturbatione concutitur, is smitten with a greater perturbation: and
he is said to stumble, qui alienatur a studio religionis, who is alienated from
the care of religion: to the same purpose also Gualter: But it has been
showed before, that to be scandalized and offended, is more then to trippe and
stumble, and therefore I rather approve this difference, which makes the
first of these the lesser, and the second the greater: as the ordinar. gloss.
says, he stumbleth, who is troubled and knows not what to hold: or he which
falls not away, but breaks out into blasphemies, Tolet. he is scandalized,
qui a certa side discedit, which departs from the right faith. gloss. ordin.
Tolet, so also Gorrhan, and Hugo out of Guillebertus, he stumbleth, qui tardus
credit, that hereby is more slow to believe, he is scandalized that perishes:
Faius likewise makes this difference, to stumble is when some hurt follows,
to be scandalized, is when one is stayed in the way tanquam remora interiecta,
as if some thing were cast in the way; as when one does not only trippe or
stumble, but falls flat down: to be made weak, is haesitare in fide, to
waver and be doubtful in matters of faith.

3. So the Apostle shows diverse degrees of offense, the first is to be made
weak, which before he called to be grieved, v. 15. then he stumbleth and is
offended, which Saint Paul calls the wounding of the weak conscience, 1.
Cor. 8.9. and the third degree is to be scandalized, that is, to fall away
quite, which the Apostle called before, to be destroyed, v. 15. and to perish,
1. Cor. 8.11. by these steps and degrees men are admonished, when they see
the weak brother to begin to be grieved, to leave off before his conscience
come to be wounded, and he altogether to fall away.

Quest. 38. Whether it be sufficient for one to have his faith before God, v.
22.
1. Have thou faith? or without an interrogation, thou have faith. 1. for the
coherence, this is answer to the third objection that might be made: the first
is, v. 20. all things are pure, why then may not one eat that which is pure:
the Apostle answeareth, that though in themselves all meats are pure, yet it
is evil to eat with offense: the second objection, how can it be evil to
eat that which is clean; the Apostle makes the same answer, it is evil to
eat with offense: Pareus makes these two objections the same, but Tolet does
make them two, the one arising out of the answer to the former: and now the
third objection might be thus framed by the stronger, I have faith and
knowledge, that it is lawful to use any meats, why then should I not exercise
and make known my faith by my practice; the Apostle answeareth, that in this
case it shall suffice to approve his faith unto God, and not to make open
ostentation thereof.

2. Have it with thy self before God. 1. iactantiam resecat, ne magis in
ostentatione sit quod credimus, quam in virtute, he cutteth off boasting, least
that which we believe, should seem more to consist in ostentation, then in
power: Origin to the same purpose: Chysost. he seems vanae gloria arguere,
etc. to accuse the more perfect of vain glory. 2. and here an other secret
objection is met withal, shall my faith then lie hid? no, it is known unto
God, Par. 3. or thus it might be objected, shall I then change or leave my
faith and conscience in this thing? no, I wish thee not so to do, but comfort
thy self therein before God, Tolet. 4. or thus, what do I gain then by my
faith, if I may not show it? yes, nihil deerit fidei tuae, thou loosest by
this means nothing of thy faith, for God sees thy heart, and knows thy
faith, Gorrh. 5. and thus again, I have faith, why then may I not use it? yes,
use it, but according to his will that gave it, use it as before God without
offense unto thy brother, so will God have it used, gloss. ordin.

3. But will some say, then by this rule of the Apostle, a man may conceal his
faith in time of persecution, and it may be lawful to be present at Mass, and
other idolatrous service, so that a man have faith in his heart toward God.
Answ. 1. No, this follows not, for this were contrary to the saying of the
Apostle, Romans 10.10. with the heart man believes unto righteousness, etc. and
with the mouth he confesses unto salvation. 2. Chrysostom says, that the
Apostle speaks not of that faith, quae ad dogmata pertinet, which belongs
unto doctrine: that is as Haymo explaineth, not of the faith of the Trinity,
and other things necessary to salvation, but de rebus medijs, of things
indifferent: and this faith that is, knowledge and persuasion of using
indifferent things, is not always, and in unseasonable time to be uttered, but
to be showed, as it may tend to the edifying, not the offending of our brother,
Martyr.

Quest. 39. How many things are to be avoided in the use and eating of meats.
Because the Apostle in one case, namely of offense, shows how it is evil to
eat meats, it shall not be amiss to show in other cases what is to be
observed, and how diversely men may offend in the eating of meats: and this is
done three ways in general. 1. in respect of the persons that eat. 2. of the
meats themselves. 3. in regard of others.

1. The persons that eat may thus offend. 1. if they be too curious in
preparing meats to please the taste; and therefore our Savior says, Matthew. 6.
be not careful what you should eat. 2. if they eat not the labors of their
own hands, but that which is gotten by oppression and other evil means:
therefore it is said, Psalm. 128. 2. When thou eatest the labor of thine hands,
thou shall be blessed. 3. in feeding unsatiably and greedily, Iud. 12. without
all fear feeding themselves. 4. in distempering themselves with meats and
drinks, Isay 5.11. woe unto them, that continue until night, till the wine
inflame them. 5. in the unthankful receiving, giving themselves to carnal
joy and pleasure, 1. Cor. 10. they eat and drank and rose up to play, etc. 6.
in untimely eating and drinking, Isay, 5.11. they rise up early to follow
drunkenness.

2. About the meats these faults may be committed. 1. concerning the quality,
if they covet such meats, which may provoke and stir them up to lust:
therefore the three wise children are commended that did feed of pulse, Dan.
1. 2. in the quantity and superfluity of meats and drinks, Ephesians. 5.18. be
not drunk with wine, wherein is excess.

3. In respect of others there may be error. 1. either in keeping company with
the riotous, whereby one may be enticed: Prou. 1.15. my Son walk not thou in
the way with them. 2. and in giving offense unto others by our eating, which
thing the Apostle touches here.

Quest. 40. What it is for one not to condemn himself in that which he
allows.
The Apostle sets down three aphorisms and rules concerning the use of
things indifferent, the first is set down, v. 22. Blessed is he, that
condemns not himself in that which he allows, which is diversely
interpreted.

1. Origin expounds it of those, which do purpose with themselves to do some
good thing, as to live chastely, yet processu temporis, in process of time,
they are overcome, and do otherwise: but the Apostle speaks of one and the
same instant, wherein one in his judgment condemns, and in his practice
allows the same thing.

2. Cyprian lib. de singular. Clemen. understands the Apostle to speak of
diverse, he which allows and prayseth in an other, that which he reprooueth
in himself: but it is evident, that the Apostle speaks of condemning and
allowing in the same person.

3. Theodoret expounds it by the verse following, he that doubts is
condemned, he that discerns not or judges the meat, which he allows in
eating: But the Apostle speaks of judging or condemning himself, not the
meat, and this is a diverse aphorism from that which follows, as shall
appear.

4. Augustine gives this sense, qui non facit se damnabilem, etc. which makes
not himself to be condemned of others, or of God, for eating with offense: so
also Gorrhan: qui condemnabilem se non reddit nocendo alijs, which condemns
not himself in hurting others, this sense also follows Pareus, but the
Apostle speaks of ones condemning himself, not of being condemned by others.

5. Some take this word to judge, in a contrary sense, qui non iudicat se
recto facere, which judges not himself to do well in eating with offense,
Tolet. but this word, (...), to judge, is taken to condemn thoroughout this
chapter, as verse 3.4.10.

6. Wherefore Ambrose exposition is best, qui quod facit, non iudicat apud se
non esse faciendum, who judges not in himself that not to be done which he
does: so Chrysostom; si conscientia te non reprehenderet, if thy conscience
reprehend thee not^ so Pet. Martyr, when any, dum examinat non condemnat, when
he examineth that, which he allows in doing, does not in judgment condemn
it, as when one eating with offense of his brother, should therein judge
himself that he does not well: And here it must be observed, that S. Paul
speaks not of all: for as Chrysostom says, there are many that do not
judge themselves, tamet si vehementer dilinquant, although they do much
offend: it must then be understood of the faithful and believers, and such as
examine their conscience.

7. And further, this should seem strange, that a man should in one and the
same act, both judge himself and allow also the thing he does: how can a
contrary disposition be at the same time in a man? yes, in respect of diverse
places: the approbation is not in the judgment, but in respect of the
external act, and the inward judgment of the conscience, is against it.

Quest. 41. Why he that doubts is condemned.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, qui discernit, he that discerns, that is,
clean meats from unclean, so likewise Origens interpreter: and this sense
follow Lyranus, the interlenearie gloss. Gorrhan, Tolet, and all generally on
that side: But the better reading is, he that doubts, for so the word (...)
signifies, as Matthew. 21.21. if ye have faith and doubt not, where the vulgar
Latin so translateth, si non haesitaveritis, if ye doubt not: and so the
Syrian interpreter, qui divisus est, he that is divided, that is doubtful in
his mind: and Chrysostom follows this sense, I allow him, qui cum nulla
haesitatione vescitur, who feeds without any doubting.

2. Some think, that this sentence and the former are opposed as contrary, he
is blessed which does not judge or condemn himself, in that which he
allows, and he is condemned, qui dubitans aliquid facit, which does any thing
doubting, Faius: But I rather think with Pareus, that this is an other
aphorism, or rule, and specially concerns the weak; that have no faith,
that is a firm and sure persuasion grounded upon the word, but did eat meats
with a doubtful conscience: but in the former verse he spoke unto the strong,
that have faith: he is blessed, which does not condemn himself in using his
liberty to, and with the offense of others: so these two rules differ thus in
degree, it is more for one to condemn himself, then to do a thing
doubtfully: it is not sufficient for a man, that his conscience do not
directly condemn him, in that which he does, but he must also take heed, that
he do it not doubtfully.

3. The reason is added, why such an one eating with a doubtful mind,
sins, because he does it not of faith: which Chrysostom understands of
the conscience, non mundam esse credidit, he did not believe it was clean and
lawful meat: and yet he did eat it, and so did it not of faith, but contra
conscientiam, against his conscience, Lyranus, Gorrhan: so also Pet. Martyr,
quia secus credat quam faciat, because he believes otherwise then he does: but
as Tolet well observes, non est fides, sed error, this opinion in makng
difference of meats, is no faith, but error, therefore an erroneous
conscience, cannot be said to be faith: that before he called faith the
knowledge of Gods word, that all meats are clean, and therefore he sins,
because his mind is not settled, and well persuaded out of Gods word, that he
does please God in eating, and yet eats, Pareus.

4. But here it will be objected, why he that believes all meats to be alike,
may lawefully eat them, or not eat them: but he which makes difference of
meats, and so believes not, may lawfully abstain, yet he cannot with a good
conscience eat: the reason of this difference is, because he that makes
conscience of meats, if he do eat, sins against his conscience, but he
that by the word is taught to make no difference of meats, though he abstain,
does not against his conscience, for he refraineth not from meats, as though
he held them to be unclean, but for offense sake.

5. It will be objected again, what if one be offended with him that is not
persuaded of the indifferency of meats, because he eats not, may not he
without sin eat, though it be against his conscience, rather then to offend
his brother? to this the answer is, that offenses are given to the weak, not
to the strong: he is the stronger and more perfect, that eats of all alike,
he is the weaker, that makes difference of meats: therefore this case was not
likely to fall out, that the weaker by not eating should offend the strong:
Tolet here has an other answer, that if this case should fall out, for the
weaker to offend the strong by his not eating, he should rather eat then
offend his brother, for a positive law, such as was that of making difference
of meats, must give place to the natural law, which is, not to offend our
brother: But this is no good answer, for if there were such necessity, that a
man must either offend against his own conscience, or his brothers: it were of
the two evils the less to grieve his brothers conscience, then his own: And
the law positive is to give place in right unto the law of nature, where the
conscience is so persuaded: but where the conscience is not resolved, the law
of nature will, that a man have rather respect to himself, then an other: and
to tender his own conscience, before an others.

6. Thus the Apostle has given us three rules in the use of things
indifferent, and of all other: first, that a man's conscience condemn not
himself in his action: secondly, though the conscience directly condemn him
not, yet he must proceed further, that he cast no doubts: thirdly, and yet it
suffices not to cast no doubts, but he must labor to have his conscience
settled and grounded upon faith, which is a certain knowledge with a firm
assurance and persuasion out of the word of God, of the lawfulnes of that
thing, which is to be done, that therein he pleases God.

Quest. 42. Of the right meaning of these words, whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin.
1. Thomas delivers this for one exposition, in his commentary upon this
place, that ex fide, of faith, is all one, as if he had said contra fidem,
against the faith: but not that only which is against the faith, but
whatsoever is without faith, is unpleasing to God, as the Apostle says, Heb.
11.6. without faith it is impossible to please God.

2. Caietan expounds this saying not of all things in general, but of such
quae debent procedere ex fide, which ought to proceed of faith, and so it is
true, that such things, if they be not of faith, and yet ought to proceed of
faith, are sin: the good moral works then of the heathen are not therefore
to be condemned, as sin, because they were not of faith, for they proceeded
only from the right use of reason, though there be no faith: but in this
place, the Apostle treats of such actions as should proceed of faith, as is
the ciscerning of meats clean and unclean, this directly belonged unto
faith, concerning the use of Christian liberty. Contra. 1. If by faith, and to
proceed of faith, Caietan understand only points of doctrine, which belong
unto the faith, then it skilleth not for all other matters, which concern
manners, good life, whether they be of faith or no: which were very absurd. 2.
neither can there be any right use of reason in this our corrupt nature without
faith. 3. and touching the doctrine of faith, Chrysostom thinks, that the
Apostle does not in this chapter intend any such thing: he excludes dogmata
fidei, the doctrines and principles of faith: for they must be openly
confessed, it suffices not to have that faith only in our conscience before
God, as the Apostle says of this faith, touching the use of indifferent
things, whereof he entreateh, v. 12. Have thou faith? have it with thy self
before God.

3. Pererius beside reckons up three other interpretations. 1. as some think
the Apostle speaks comparatively, what soever is not of faith is sin in
respect of such works, as proceed of faith, not simply. 2. or sin may be
taken for the same, as non placens, not pleasing, acceptable, or availeable
with God. 3. and further, this sentence need not to be taken generally, as
though it were universally true, sed vt plurimum, and maxima ex part, but for
the most part. But all these are men's fancies, and uncertain glosses. 1.
although one sin may be greater then an other, yet can it not be showed, that
any thing is called by the name of sin, which is not so simply: for sin is
defined to be the transgression of the law, 1. Ioh. 1.6. whosoever sins,
transgresses the law; this is not then only comparatively, but simply sin.
2. we grant, that these two, sin, and not to be pleasing to God, may be
converted: whatsoever pleases not God, is sinful, and whatsoever is
sinful, is not pleasing unto God: for whatsoever is not in Christ, in whom
only God is well pleased, cannot be pleasing unto him: and nothing does
separate us, and make us not pleasing unto God, but sin, Isay. 50.1. for your
iniquities are ye sold. 3. the third interpretation, gives the Apostle the
plain lie, he says, whatsoever, or ((...),) all that is not of faith, is
sin: but they say, not so, for not all, but the most part is so.

4. But the general received interpretation among the Romanists is this,
whatsoever is not of faith, that is, contra proprium dictamen conscientiae,
against the proper suggestion of the conscience, Tolet: contra conscientiam,
against the conscience, gloss interlin. reclamante conscientia, his conscience
gainsaying, Perer. yea though it be erraus conscientia, an erring conscience,
Eman. Sa. so they take faith, not for that, whereby we believe in Christ, but
for that whereby one believes any thing to be lawful, that is, his
conscience: Piscator comes somewhat near this exposition, quicquid fit
dubitante conscientia, whatsoever is done with a doubtful conscience, is sin.

Contra. 1. But faith cannot be here taken for the conscience. 1. the Apostle
said before, have faith in thy self, that is, in thy conscience, faith then is
an other thing beside the conscience. 2. the weak have conscience, 1. Cor.
10.29. but they have not faith touching this thing, for of the strong only the
Apostle said before, thou have faith, v. 22. 3. error non est fides, error is
non faith, but the conscience is oftentimes erroneous, this was Tolets own
reason before. 4. fides non nititur hominum opinionibus, etc. faith is not
grounded upon men's opinions, but upon the undoubted word of God, Osiand. 5.
Origin says, that fides haereticorum non est fides, the faith of heretics is
no faith, but credulity rather, yet they have a conscience.

2. And if this sense were admitted: it follows strongly, that if that be
sin which is not done with the particular faith of the conscience, much more
is that sin, which is not of that general Christian faith, whose object is
Christ.

5. Wherefore by faith, we understand not every persuasion of the mind, and
conscience, but that which is grounded upon the word of God, firmam animi
certitudinem quae ex Dei veritate concepta sit, an undoubted certainty of the
mind, conceived out of the truth of God, Calvin: non quidvis fidei nomine
censeri debet, sed quod Scripturis conform, not every thing must be counted
for faith, but that which is agreeable to the Scriptures, Bucer: when we
believe talia verbo Dei requiri, and Deo placere, that such things are required
in the word of God, and are pleasing unto him, Martyr: the reason is, because
vbi verbum Dei non est, nec fides, where there is no word of God, there is no
faith, Faius.

6. Haymo does restrain this general speech, only to the eating of meats,
whatsoever belongs to eating, if it be not eaten with this faith, that every
thing is clean, that is treated of God, is eaten with sin: But this is
rather a general rule, both for this kind of actions, and all other, agreeable
to that saying, Hebr. 11.6. without faith it is impossible to please God.

4. Places of Doctrine.
Doct. 1. That always in the Church, are to be found as some strong, so others
weak in faith.
v. 1. Him that is weak in faith. This is the condition of the Church of God,
that as in a family, some are children, some of riper age, so there are in the
same, some that are but weakelings in the faith, some of more perfect growth:
the reason of which difference is both in respect of the caller: God calls
not all at one time, neither gives unto all a like measure of gifts, and of
them which are called, all do not use a like diligence in the exercising of
their gifts; and so it comes to pass, that some are weak, some strong. This
difference S. Paul, shows to have been among the Galathians, c. 6.1. If any
be prevented by any fault, ye which are spiritual restore^, etc. there were
some among them subject to infirmities, some, that were spiritual: this
shows the fantastical error of such, as require perfection in the Church,
and every member thereof, and can brook no imperfections.

Doct. 2. Not to contend about indifferent things.
v. 3. He that eats, let him not contemn him, that eats not.^ S. Paul
would not have them to be so earnest one in judging an other concerning the use
of things indifferent: which has been the cause of great contentions in the
Church: as great stirs were raised by Victar B. of Rome about the use of
leauened and unleavened bread, as Eusebius testifies, lib. 5. c. 14. hereupon
sprang the sects in Saxony of the adiophorists, and Flacians: Pareus here also
gives instance of the English, and Scottish Churches: Anglicas quoque and
Scoticas Ecclesias simile certamen de rebus adiophoris in hanc vsque diem
exercet, the like strife about things indifferent, does trouble the English and
Scottish Churches to this day, etc. But S. Paul concerning all these things
gives a rule afterward, v. 17. the kingdom of God is not meat and drink,
(nor any such external thing) but righteousness, etc.

Doct. 3. The best works of the heathen sinful.
v. 5. Let every one be fully persuaded in his mind, etc. Hence it is
evident, that Christians doing things forbidden, and leaving things commanded,
because they are not herein persuaded, do therein sin: likewise the works
of the heathen, wherein they did that which was commanded, yet were sinful,
because they wanted this persuasion: Aristides exercising justice, did that
which was commanded: Alexander abstaining from violating the chastity of
Darius wife and daughters, did shun that which was prohibited: yet both of
them sinned, having not this full persuasion and assurance of faith, that
therein they pleased God: these their goodly and glorious works, were but
speciosa peccata, goodly sins, non ex substantia operis, sed vitio operantis,
not by the substance of the work, but the fault of the worker.

Doct. 4. That all things must be referred to Gods glory as the chief end.
v. 6. He that eats, eats to the Lord, etc. As God gave beginning to all
things, so he is the chief and last end of all: the heathen said, that we were
borne, not for our selves only but partly for our friends, partly for our
country, partly for God: but the Scriptures teach us, that all things must be
referred wholly unto Gods glory: our friends and country are to be respected,
but for Gods cause, as it shall make most and best for his glory: so the
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do,
do all to the glory of God.

Doct. 5. Of the general extent and efficacy of Christ's death in the old and
new Testament.
v. 9. That he might be Lord of the dead and quick. The dead are named first,
to show, that even those which lived under the Law and before, though then
dead, did belong unto the kingdom and dominion of Christ, as also they which
then lived, or should remain in the earth unto the end of the world: they all
then make but one Church, one mystical body, as Gregory says, lib. 41.
epist. 38. sancti ante legem, sancti sub lege, sancti sub gratia omnes hi
corpus Domini sunt constitutere, the Saints before the law, under the law,
and under grace, do all make the body of Christ: he is the Lamb of God, that
takes away the sins of the world, Ioh. 1.29. of all that believe in him from
the beginning of the world to the end thereof.

Doct. 6. Christ's divinity proved.
v. 18. All tongues shall confess unto God. This prophecy of Isay c. 45.23.
being applied by S. Paul unto Christ, does evidently show, that he is God:
because every knee shall bow unto him, and every tongue shall confess him to
be God: adoration and praise, which do belong only unto God, are given unto
Christ: and in that place the Prophet yet speaks more evidently, am not I the
Lord, and there is no God beside me? And here where the Apostle said, v. 10. we
must all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, v. 12. he says, We must
give account unto God: the tribunal seat then of Christ, is the tribunal of
God.

Doct. 7. Of the authority of the Scriptures.
v. 11. For it is written, etc. The Apostle speaking of our appearing before
the judgment seat of Christ, does not affirm it only but proves it by the
Scriptures: teaching us thereby, that the Scriptures, and written word of God,
are the only rule and line of our faith: and that nothing ought to be imposed
upon the Church, as a matter of belief, but that which is warranted from
thence: the Scriptures are able to make the man of God perfect, 2. Tim. 3.17.
he then that seeks any doctrine beside that which is taught in the Scriptures
as not content with that which is perfect, would add further that which is
superfluous, idle, and unnecessary.

Doct. 8. That no kind of meat is unclean in it self.
v. 14. I know, etc. that there is nothing unclean in it self, etc. All kind
of meats then, which are appointed for the food, and nourishment of man's body,
are in themselves lawful and clean, being received with giving of thanks:
And if they be lawful and clean, the restraint of them by any prohibition for
religion and holiness sake, is superstitions, and inclining to Iudaisme. It is
the mind only, and opinion, that polluteth and defiles meats: so the
superstition of Papists in making conscience of some kind of meats, is so
far from making them more holy, and acceptable unto God, that they thereby
defile and pollute the good creatures of God: they should therefore remember
that charge, which was given unto Peter from heaven, Act. 10.15. What God has
cleansed, pollute thou not.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. Whether to abstain from certain meats, be an act of religion,
and a part of Gods worship, or a thing in it self indifferent.
The latter is affirmed and maintained by Protestants, the other is stiffly
defended by the Romanists: but that the state of the question may better
appear, first the diverse kinds of fasting and abstinence are to be considered.

1. There is a natural abstinence, which is only from such meats, as agree
not with the stomach, and are enemies to the health of the body.

2. A moral abstinence is from such meats and drinks, as a man finds to
distemper him, and to disturb his memory and other faculties of his mind, as
the drinking of wine and strong drink.

3. A civil and politic abstinence is to refrain eating of flesh some
certain days for the maintenance of navigation and the utterance of fish, and
for sparing the breed of cattle, as the Lenton fast is now kept in England.

4. There was beside these a Judicial fast, which was of two sorts, either a
total and general abstinence, as from swines flesh and other meats counted
unclean by the law: or an abstinence for a time, which was either general of
the whole nation, as to abstain from eating of unleavened bread for seven
days in the feast of the Passover: or particular of some professed persons,
as of them which had taken upon them the vow of the Nazarites, which was
neither to take wine, nor any strange drink: See the law of the Nazarites,
Numb. 6.

5. Beside these there was an heretical fast, and abstinence, of such as
abstained from certain meats, counting them evil, and unclean in
themselves: which was the opinion of the Manichees and Tatiane heretics: which
kind of impious abstinence the Apostle speaks against, 1. Tim. 4.

6. Add unto this the superstitious abstinence of the Papists, which make the
fasting and refraining from fleshmeates, upon the fifth and sixth day of the
week and in the time of L^u^, to be a necessary part of Gods worship, and a
thing meritorious, and satisfactorie. This is the abstinence, that now is in
question.

7. Yet a religious fast we acknowledge, which is when upon some days
appointed by the Church, publicly, or when any are disposed privately to fast,
the more fervently to give themselves unto prayer: which the Apostle speaks
of, 1. Cor. 7.5. But this is done without any opinion of merit, or holiness in
the act it self, but as it helps and confe^^eth to a spiritual end, the
more earnest invocation of God, and humble supplication before him.

8. There was also a scrupulous kind of abstinence in the primitive Church,
when some Christians did abstain of conscience from eating things which were
consecrate to Idols: of the which S. Paul entreats 1. Cor 8.10.

Now the fast and abstinence, which is controverted between us and the
Papists, is the superstitious fast, before the 6. whose opinion is this, that
to abstain from flesh and other kinds of meats in the time of lent, and upon
other days of restraint, is a necessary part of the divine worship,
meritorious and satisfactorie: habet meritum and satisfactionem apud Deum, it
meriteth, and satisfies before God, etc. Tolet in his annotations here: and
the precept of fasting, obligat sub peccato mortali, binds under the danger
of mortal sin: we will examine some of their reasons.

Argum. 1. The Apostles by their synodicall decree provided, that they should
abstain from certain meats, as strangled and blood.

Ans. 1. The Pastors of the Church have not now the same power and authority
to make Canons to bind the conscience, which the Apostle had, who were guided
by the immediate direction of the spirit. 2. they did not enjoin abstinence
from flesh-meate, eggs, milk, and such like, as the Romanists do, but only
from such meats, as were forbidden by the law. 3. neither did they enjoin
this abstinence as a part of the divine worship, for then it should bind still,
but only for a time to avoid offense, in respect of the Jews newly converted.

Argum. 2. Those things which the Church commands, are necessarily to be kept
and observed: for our Savior says, he that hears you, hears me, etc. But
such is the Ecclesiastical law and precept of fasting: Ergo, etc.

Ans. 1. Not every thing the Church commands, is to be observed as a part of
Gods worship, but those things only, which the Church propounds by the
warrant, and authority of Gods word, and so is our Blessed Savior to be
understood: otherwise whosoever preaches any other Gospel, or any thing
contrary thereunto, is to be held accursed. 2. neither are we to regard what
the false and Antichristian Church now commands, no more then our B. Savior,
and his Apostles did hold themselves bound to the superstitious decrees of the
Pharisees.

Argum. 3. The law of fasting, is a tradition Apostolical, therefore
necessary to be oserued, and kept.

Ans. We grant that the free use of fasting, to be joined as an help unto
prayer, was taken from the Apostles: but not this necessary kind of fasting
tied unto certain days, which may thus appear. 1. Eusebius lib. 5. c. 24.
shows the liberty and variety of fasting in the Church, and makes mention
how Irenaeus reproved Victor Bishop of Rome, for excommunicating the East
Churches, for observing an other kind of form in celebrating of the Pasch, and
in fasting. 2. Sozomen. lib. 7. c. 19. declares how at Rome they fasted only
three weeks before the Pasch, in Greecia six: and Telesphorus in his decretall
ordained the fast of seven whole weeks: it was not then an Apostolic
tradition. 3. Chrysostom. hom. 47. in Matthew, denies the Lenton fast to have
been instituted by Christ: non dicit ieiunium suum esse imitandum, etc. he
says not his fasting is to be imitated, though he might have propounded his
forty days fast: but he says, Learn of me, for I am humble and meek, etc.

Argum. 4. In the new Testament there is no other abstinence from meats
forbidden, but the legal and Judicial.

Ans. 1. The argument follows not, it is not forbidden, therefore it is a
part of the divine worship: the contrary is inferred, therefore it is no part
of the divine worship, being neither commanded, nor forbidden: for all
necessary parts of the worship of God is prescribed in the word: if then it
were not forbidden, it should remain free, and therefore is not to be imposed
as a necessary thing. 2. the antecedent is false, for not only the Jewish
abstinence, but all other superstitious kinds of fasting and abstinence are
forbidden: Coloss. 2. 1. Tim. 4. and if such abstinence, as was sometime
commanded by the law, by the liberty of the Gospel be taken away, much more
such, as is the mere invention of man.

5. Argum. The taming and mortifying of the flesh is a necessary thing, but
abstinence from flesh does help to the taming, and subduing of the flesh:
Ergo, etc.

Ans. 1. The continual mortifying of the flesh is a necessary thing, which is
to be practiced all the life long: but to tame and subdue the flesh for a time,
as in fasting certain days, is but a superstitious and hypocritical
mortification, which is reproved by the Prophet, Isai. 58.5. Is it such a
fast, that I have chosen that a man should afflict his soul for a day, and to
bow down his head as a bulrush, etc. 2. neither by such Popish abstinence is
the flesh ^amed, when they abstain from fleshmeate, and eat of other
confected meats, as of marmaled, and sucker, and such like things, and drink
wine, which do more inflame, and instigate the flesh, then the eating of
flesh-meates: Thomas answer is ridiculous, that flesh does increase the humors
of the body, which are of long continuance, wine does but nourish the spirits,
which do soon pass away: for the Physicians will refute him, who affirm,
that as meat does engender the solid nutriment of the body, so drink does
increase the liquide nutriment, which in effect is all one.

Arg. 6. The abstinence of the Rechabites by the commandment of their father
pleased God in so doing, as a part of his worship: much more abstinence which
is enjoined by our mother the Church.

Ans. 1. The argument follows not, for there is great difference between the
abstinence of the Rechabites, and the ceremonial abstinence: 1. in the matter,
that was not from flesh, eggs, and such like, but from wine, tillage, dwelling
in cities. 2. in the form: they abstained all their life time, and with a
liberty, in time of necessity, for in Ieremies time, they dwelt in Jerusalem,
because of the war, Ierem. 35.11. 3. and further, by the law the parents
might either confirm or disanull the vows of their children, Number. 30. but now
under the Gospel such legal rites are ceased.

2. The antecedent is false, for they did not keep their fathers precept, as
an act of religion, but for some politic and moral respects: as they are
forbidden inhabiting in cities, least they might be corrupted with the vices
thereof, and were commanded to dwell in tents, to put them in mind, that they
were strangers being descended of the Kenites: these and such other arguments
are produced by Bellarmine lib. 4. de verb. Dei. c. 3. lib. 2. de bonis operib.
c. 71. c. 11.

Now on the contrary, against such superstitious abstinence, urged by the
Papists as a necessary part of Gods service, and the same meritorious, some of
our arguments are these.

1. Argum. The Apostle says, c. 14.17. The kingdom of heaven is not meat nor
drink: and Heb. 13.9. It is good to have the heart established with grace, and
not with meats, which have not profited them, that have bin occupied therein:
therefore to be occupied in abstinence from meats, is a thing indifferent, not
in it self meritorious, or a part of Gods worship.

2. Argum. That which God has purified and made clean, no man must pollute,
Act. 20.15. but he which for religion and conscience sake makes meats
unlawful, which God has made clean, does pollute them: Ergo.

3. Arg. All will worship is no part of Gods service; but the choice of meats,
touch not, taste not, handle not, is a voluntary and will worship, Coloss.
2.21.23. therefore no part of Gods service: Bellarmine answeareth, that the
Apostle does not speak against all ecclesiastical abstinence, but only the
Judicial or the Philosophical abstinence, which was practiced among the
heathen. Contra. The Apostles reason is general against all choice of meats,
and other humane inventions, which are according to the doctrines of men, v.
22. but this ecclesiastical and Popish canonical fast, is an humane invention
merely, and according to the doctrines of men, therefore even against such
speaks the Apostle.

4. Argu. Our Blessed Savior says, that which enters in by the mouth
defiles not the man, Matthew. 15.17. therefore flesh at all times eaten and
entering in by the mouth is lawful in it self, because it defiles not, so it
be done without scandale and offense: our Blessed Savior gives a general
rule as well against Pharisaicall traditions, as all other invented by man,
that the conscience before God is not defiled with the breach thereof.

5. Argu. The doctrine of Devils is no part of the divine worship: but the
forbidding of meats is the doctrine of Devils, 1. Tim. 4.3. Ergo. Bellarmine
tells us, that the Apostle there notes such heretics, as the Manichees,
Tatians, Eucratites, which condemned flesh, as evil, and so did dishonor the
Creator. Contra. The Apostle only notes not those heretics, but even the
Papists, which should forbid meats, for he prophecieth of the latter times:
and not only they which simply condemn meats, but do place an holiness in
merit in some meats, rather then others, are these forbidders of meats: and
how do not they condemn meats, which think men to be polluted by them, and
do rather choose to cast them away, then to eat them upon forbidden days?

6. Argu. That which infringeth Christian liberty, and brings us to more
then a Jewish bondage, it is no part of Gods worship under the new Testament,
but such is this canonical abstinence: for whereas the Jews were enjoined
abstinence but once in the year, the tenth of the seventh month, Levit.
23.17. the Papists do enjoin abstinence, (beside twice or oftener every week)
the tenth part of the year in lent for religion: see further of this
controversy Synops. Centur. 4. err. 94.10.97.

Controv. 2. That faith is not only an assenting of the will, but an act also
of the understanding, and it is joined with knowledge.
v. 2. One believes that he may ea^e, etc. Bellarmine agreeing with others of
that side, will have faith to be, assensum non notitiam, an assenting only of
the will, not a knowledge: lib. 1. de iustificat. c. 5. and therefore they say
to believe is nothing else but to give assent unto the doctrine of the Church,
although one understand not what it is.

But the Apostle shows the contrary: for here he that believes, that he
might tear of things, did know it to be lawful, assented thereunto, and was
fully persuaded: as the Apostle expounds himself afterward, v. 14. I know,
and am persuaded, that nothing is unclean of it self: so then to believing
belongs as well a knowledge, as an assenting and persuasion.

There is a general faith, as to believe the word of God, and the heavenly
doctrine therein contained, unto the which three things are required, a
knowledge, and assenting, and a full persuasion: to the which these three are
opposite, ignoratio, negatio, dubitatio, ignorance, denial, or not assenting,
and doubtfulnes.

There is a special and particular faith, which is an assurance of remission
of sins in Christ, which is that which we call justifying faith: and beside
those three things before concurring in a general faith, there is required in
justifying faith confidence beside and firm assurance, contrary whereunto is
diffidence and distrust. See more hereof Synops. Centur. 4. err. 49.

3. Controv. That it is necessary, that festival days should be observed
among Christians.
v. 6. He that observes the day, observes it to the Lord. This condemns the
ancient error of the Petrobusianes, of whom mention is made, lib. 3. de vita
Bernard. c. 5. whom the Anabaptists in these days follow, who deny, that
Christians should observe any festivals at all: their reasons are these.

1. The Galatians are reproved by S. Paul for observing of days, Gal. 4.

2. The Apostle says, Col. 2.15. Let no man judge you, etc. in a part of an
holy day.

3. It is against Christian liberty to be tied unto the observation of days:
Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the liberty, wherein Christ has made us free.

4. The Sabbath of a Christian ought to be perpetual, etc.

Ans. 1. The Apostle reprooueth them for their superstitious observing of
days, such as then the Jews practiced, and now the Papists: but to observe
such holy days, as God has appointed, such as the Sabbath is: and others for
order and policy, not for religion sake, is not within the Apostles
reprehension.

2. The Apostle speaks of the Jewish festivals, wherein they did clogge their
consciences, and one judged an other: not of the Lords day, which is of Christ's
appointing, or of other festivals for order and policy, not as a part of the
service of God, to bind the conscience.

3. Christian liberty is infringed by the superstitious observation of days;
but not otherwise.

4. The perpetual Sabbath of Christians, is the spiritual cessation from
sin, not the external Sabbath, which can not continually be observed.

Contra. Now on the other side, that it is necessary for Christians to observe
some festival days, we reason thus.

1. It is one of the moral precepts, to remember to keep holy the Sabbath,
which though in particular, concerning the prescript of the day, it do not
bind Christians, yet the morality of it remains still, that some days
should be appointed for the worship of God, and for public instruction.

2. God is not the author of confusion, but of peace: and all things must be
done decently and orderly in the Church, 1. Cor. 14.33.40. but if there should
be no days appointed for the public service of God, there would be a great
confusion: for thus the calling also of ministers should be removed, if no
time were allowed for the exercise of their public ministry, and so the
people should be as sheep without a shepherd.

3. If no such days of rest were allowed Christians, their case should be much
inferior under the Gospel, to the condition of the Jews under the Law, both
for their bodies, having no days of refreshing and rest, and their souls,
having no time of instruction, as the Jews had both.

4. Controv. Whether any festival days are to be observed as in themselves
holier, then other.
This is the opinion of the modern Papists, as Bellarmine sets down this
proposition, dies festi vere sunt alijs sanctiores, etc. that festival days
are in themselves more holy then others: de cult. sanctor. lib. 3. c. 10. And
the Apostle seems here to make it as a thing indifferent to observe a day, or
not to observe it.

Contra. 1. The Apostle approoueth not this difference of days, which was
still retained of some coming from Iudaisme, for he counted it an infirmity
in them, and so calls them weak, v. 1. he only bears with their
infirmity herein for a time, till they should be better confirmed: therefore
this is no warrant for men to make difference of days.

2. This observation of days, in preferring one before an other as more holy,
is condemned by the Apostle, Gal. 4.10. Coloss. 2.15. for both the Jews
offended herein, who made a legal difference between day and day, and the
Gentiles counted some dismal and unfortunate days, some otherwise.

3. If one day were more holy then an other, it must be either in the nature of
the day, or by institution divine or humane: but the Popish festiuals are
neither holy in nature, for the Planets by their motion and influence make no
difference, nor yet by institution from God are they made more holy: for they
are not of Gods appointing: and by humane institution one day can not be made
holier then other: for it belongs only to the Creator to sanctify the
creature.

4. Then, like as the external elements, as water in baptism, bread and wine
in the Eucharist, are not more holy in their nature, but in respect of the
present use, which being finished, they return to their first use again; so
holy days are counted sacred in respect of the holy use only: as Hierome
says, non quod celebrior sit dies illa, qua convenimus, sed etc. not that the
day wherein we meet, is more excellent, but on what day soever we meet, ex
conspectu mutuo mayor laetitia oriatur, by the mutual sight one of an other
greater joy is caused: in 4. ad Galatas. See further Synops. Centur. 2. err. 63.

5. Controv. That festival days ought not to be consecrated to the honor of
Saints.
The Romanists hold the contrary, reasoning thus for their opinion.

1. Argum. God is honored in his Saints, the festivals therefore which are
instituted to the honor of the Saints, are referred to and determined in God.

Ans. 1. No will worship tends to the honor of God, but the odoration of
Saints is a will worship, therefore God can not thereby receive honor. 2. God
rather is thereby dishonored: for they give the honor due unto God unto
creatures, inuocating the name of Saints, saying, O S. Peter, S. Paul hear us.

2. Argum. The memory of the Saints is to be honored: but festivals are
dedicated to the memory of Saints: Ergo.

Ans. 1. Popish festivals are not dedicated only to the memory of Saints, but
to their worship, which is idolatry. 2. and the Saints may better be
remembered, then by erecting holy days in their names, namely, by imitating of
their godly zeal, and setting before our eyes their good example: see Hebr.
13.7.

3. Argum. These festivals of the Saints have been received and confirmed by
long custom, and therefore are not to be rejected.

Ans. Cyrpian says, epist. ad Pompeium, writing against the epistle of
Stephanus Bishop of Rome, consuetudo sine veritate vetustas erroris est,
custom without truth, is but the oldnes of error.

Our arguments for the contrary part, that no festivals are to be consecrated
to the honor of Saints, are these, and such like.

1. All religious worship is due unto God only: him only shall thou serve,
Matthew. 4. but to dedicate days unto the honor of any, is a religious worship:
Ergo. Augustine says, honoramus sanctos charitate, non servitute, we honor
Saints with charity, not service. de vera relig. c. 55.

2. Argum. Festival days, are not only for the rest of the body, but for
the sanctifying of the soul: but this is only Gods work: therefore to him
only the right of festival days belongs.

3. In the old Testament, there were no holy days consecrated to the
Patriarks, as Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, nor to any of the Prophets, therefore
neither ought any be so dedicated in the New.

4. Christians are not to imitate Pagans in the rites of religion: but, in
dedicating days unto Saints, they imitate the Pagans apparently: for so the
Pagans did consecrate feasts to their inferior gods, as the Saturnals to
Saturn, the Bacchinals, to Bacchus, and such other: and herein Papists do
follow their example, changing only the names: and this was done by the
authority of one of their own Popes, Greg. l. 9. ep. 71. festa Paganorum
sensim esse etc. the Pagan feasts are by little and little to be changed into
Christian feasts, and some things must be done to the similitude of theirs,
that they may more easily be brought to the Christian faith, etc.

6. Controv. Whether all the festivalls of Christians are alike arbitrarie to
be altered and changed, as shall seem good to the Church.
Herein not only the Papists are our adversaries, but some of our own writers
seem to incline unto this opinion.

The Papists affirm, that the Sabbath is but an Apostolical tradition, and
that it was charged from the last day of the week to the first, by the
authority of the Church: Rhemist. whereupon it will follow, that the Church
may alter it by the same authority, if it shall so seem good, unto an other
day.

Learned Pareus has also this position, dub. 4. hypoth. 3. feriae
Christianorum quantum ad genus sunt necessariae, vt tamen quantum ad speciem
maneant liberae, etc. the holy days of Christians, though they be necessary
in general, yet in particular are free, that they may be changed and
transferred if there be cause, from one day to an other, etc. and he seems to
account the dominicall day, inter res medias, among things indifferent. hypoth.
4.

But I prefer herein the judgment of that excellent divine D. Fulke, who
concerning other festiuals of Christ and the holy Ghost, thinks that they may
be changed, as the Church shall see cause, from certain days, unto other
occurrent times and occasions, or from the days now observed to other, as
things in themselves indifferent: but concerning the Lords day, he writes in
these words, But to change the Lords day, and to keep it on monday, twesday,
or any other day, the Church has none authority: for it is not a matter of
indifferency, but a necessary prescription of Christ himself delivered to us
by his Apostles. annot. Revel. c. 1. sect. 7.

The reason hereof is, 1. because we find that in the Apostles time, the first
day of the week was appointed to be the Lords day, Act. 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.2.
Revel. 1.10. who being directed by the spirit of God, no doubt but herein also
they followed either the express commandment of Christ, or the special
direction of the spirit. 2. because there can not come the like reason of the
altering of the Lords day, while the world endures, as was in the first
change, namely for the commemoration of Christ's resurrection. 3. the Sabbath
could not be changed but by the same authority, whereby it was first
instituted, which was by God himself.

Wherefore to conclude this point, the festiuals of Christians may be divided
into three sorts: 1. some are of necessity to be kept, and bind in conscience,
as the Lords only. 2. other festiuals, though not so necessary, yet are
convenient to be retained, and can not be removed without great scandal, as
the feasts of the Nativitie, Circumcision, Annuntiation, Ascension of Christ,
and of the coming of the holy Ghost. 3. some are merely arbitrarie in the
Church, as all other festiuals of the Apostles. See further hereof, Synops.
Centur. 2. err. 87. and Hexapl. in Genes. c. 2.

7. Conntrov. Against Purgatory.
v. 8. Whether we live, or die, we are the Lords: hence may be confuted the
Popish opinion of purgatory: for they which are the Lords, are already purged
by the blood of Christ, and need no other purgation by fire: if they be not
purged, they are not the Lords, for no unclean thing can come into his sight:
so the Spirit says, Blessed are they which die in the Lord, they rest from
their labors, Revel. 14.13. all that die in the faith of Jesus, die in the
Lord: if they die in the Lord, they rest from their labors: but they which are
in purgatory, are in labor and sorrow still. See further Synops. Centur. 2.
err. 11.

8. Controv. Whether Christ by his obedience and suffering merited for himself
eternal glory and dominion.
1. It is the opinion of the Schoolmen, that as Christ merited by his death
for his members redemption from death and sin, so by his perfect obedience,
and most holy passion, he merited both to himself and his members the
glorifying of his body, and the manifestation of his Godhead: to this purpose
Lombard. lib. 3. distinct. 18. and some of our Protestant writers seem to
incline to this opinion, as Pet. Martyr.

1. Pet. Martyr would prove so much out of this place, v. 9. Christ therefore
died, and rose again, etc. that he might be Lord of the quick and dead:
whereupon he infers thus; which dominion, though God might have conferred
upon him (gratis) freely, yet meritis eius dare maluit, he did choose to give
it rather for his merits.

Answ. Though I reverence the judgment of this learned writer, whose worthy
commentaries upon the Scriptures, are not inferior to any of our new writers,
yet herein upon better reason I must dissent from him. The argument follows
not, Christ therefore died, etc. therefore by his death he merited. 1. like as
this is no good reason, the Martyrs die to the end to set forth Gods glory,
Ergo, they merit the setting forth of his glory: that indeed is the end and
consequent, the other is not the meriting cause, but precedent only. 2. Christ
died then to that end, because this was the way and order appointed of God,
whereby he should come to exercise his dominion.

2. Lombard in the place before recited, urges that place, Philip. 2.7.8. he
became obedient to the death of the cross, etc. wherefore God has exalted
him: here the exaltation of Christ, is the reward of his humiliation, and this
the meriting cause of the other.

Answ. 1. This word (...), therefore, does not always signify the cause or
merit, but the order also and sequel of a thing: as Genes. 22.16. Because thou
have done this thing, etc. I will exceedingly bless thee, etc. and all the
nations of the earth shall be blessed in thee: unless any will think, that
Abraham by that one act of obedience, in being ready to sacrifice his son,
merited to be the father of Christ according to the flesh, in whom all the
earth should be blessed: see the like Heb. 1.9. Because thou have loved
righteousness, etc. God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows, etc. but the deity, or to be deified, cannot be merited.

2. The Apostle then in this place shows the order of the passion, and
glorification of Christ, as Luke 24. Ought not Christ to have suffered these
things, and so to enter into his glory? likewise S. Peter, 1. ep. c. 1.11.
joins together the sufferings of Christ, and the glory which should follow.

3. The Rhemists urge that place, Heb. 29. We see Jesus, for the passion of of
his death, crowned with glory and honor.

Answ. The words are displaced, which in the original stand in this order, We
see Jesus a little lower then the Angels, by the passion of his death, crowned
with glory and honor, etc. so that these words by the passion of his death,
must be joined with the former clause, made a little less then the Angels, not
with the latter, crowned with honor, etc.

2. An other opinion is, that everlasting glory, was gratuitum donum, a free
gift conferred upon Christ, not merited, as Pareus collecteth by the word,
(...), he gave him as of free gift, a name above all names, etc. Phil. 2.9.

Answ. 1. The word (...), does not always signify to give freely, as the wife
is said in profane authors (...), to gratify her husband in yielding the use
of her body, which yet is her duty to perform. 2. and it were better to say,
that Christ received his glory of merit, then by grace and favor; to show a
difference between Christ and his members, for we receive all by grace, Christ
not by grace, but as his due received his glory. 3. and for the further
explanation of that place, Philip. 1.9. 1. some think that Christ only
merited the glory of his body, for his soul was glorified ab ipso instanti
incarnationis, from the very instant of his incarnation, Lyranus. 2. some
think that he merited only manifestationem, the manifestation of his glory,
which he had before, secundum rem, indeed; so also Lyranus. 3. Augustine
understands this gift to be given, per gratiam vniens, non adoptans, by the
grace of union not of adoption. 4. Ambrose interprets it, de naturali
donatione ab aeterno, of the natural donation from all beginning, as Christ is
the Son of God, post crucem manifestatur, quod a patre, cum generatur
accepit, after his passion, that is manifested, which he received of his father
in his generation. I join two of these expositions together, that the glory
which was due unto Christ's humanity in respect of his union, was not now first
conferred after his passion, but then manifested: which manifestation was not
merited, but did fall out in that order, as God had appointed, as due unto
Christ's humanity by reason of that union.

3. This then is our opinion, that Christ did not merit any thing, for, or to
himself, but all which he wrought and purchased was for us, as may appear by
these reasons.

1. To what end Christ was borne, died, and suffered, to the same he rose
again, and was glorified: but he was borne and died, not for himself, but for
us, Isay. 9.6. to us a child is borne: and he was not offered for his own
sins, Heb. 7.27. which he had not: therefore neither received he glory for
himself but for us: to this purpose, Ambrose de fide resurrection. c. 24. si
nobis non resurrexit, vtique non resurrexit, qui cur sibi resurgeret, non
habebat, if he did not rise for us, he did not rise at all, for he had no cause
to rise for himself.

But that saying of Ambrose will be objected upon that place to the Philipians,
2. quid and quantum humilitas mercatur, hic ostenditur, what and how much his
humility merited, here it is showed. Answ. The fathers do use this word
merere, to merit, in a large sense: it signifies, impetrare, obtinere, ^o
obtain a thing, or posse, contingere, to be able, to fall out: as Ambrose
says, epistola meruit pervenire in manus tuas, the epistle merited to come to
your hands, that is, might, or obtained to come: But he is otherwise absolutely
of judgment that no works can truly or properly merit at Gods hand: as de
vocat. gent. lib. 1. c. 5. Ambrose or Prosper thus writes, nulla possunt tam
praeclara opera existere, quibus hoc, quod gratis tribuitur, per retributionis
iudicium habeatur, there can be no such excellent works, whereby that should
be had by way of retribution and recompense, which is freely given: for so the
redemption by Christ's blood, vilesceret, should wax vile, and be of small
worth.

2. M. Calvin adds this reason, Christi gratiam obfuscat, it would much
obscure the grace of Christ, if he had done any of these things which belong
unto our redemption for himself, and not wholly and altogether for us.

3. And further it would follow diuinos honores mereri posse, that divine
honor may be merited: for this honor to have every knee to bow, is due unto
the Godhead, Isa. 45.23.

4. That glory which was due unto Christ before in respect of the union of his
natures, was not merited by his passion: but this glory and exaltation of
Christ was so due: as our B. Savior says, Job. 17.5. now glorify me thou
father with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the
world was: See further hereof in D. Fulkes answer to the Rhemists, Philip. 2.
sect. 1. and Synops. Centur. 4. err. 30.

Controv. 9. Of bowing the knee to the name of Jesus, whether it be necessarily
inferred out of this place, ver. 11. and Philip. 2.10.
Though we do not simply condemn the bowing at the name of Jesus, if it be
used only, vt ritus indifferens, as an indifferent rite and gesture, Pareus:
yet if it be commanded, as a necessary part of external worship, and
commanded by precept, it is superstitious: as it is prescribed and practiced in
Popery: which may appear by this, that they bow the knee at the name of
Jesus, rather then at the name of Christ, or of God the father, and the holy
Ghost.

And whereas the Apostle speaks of bowing the knee at the name of Jesus, it
is not literally to be taken: for by the name of Jesus, is not signified the
name written, or pronounced, (for this was the error of Osiander, as Beza
observes. 2. Philip. 9. which confounded the name Jesus with Iehova) but the
power and Majesty of Christ, as this word name is used by the Apostle, Ephesians.
1.21. Christ is set at the right hand of God, far above all principalities,
and every name that is named, etc. Neither is the bowing of the knee here
taken literally, as Origin shows in this place: quod non est carnaliter
accipiendum, vt putemus coelestia, genu flectere, etc. sed genu flectere,
subiecta esse cuncta, and culius Dei obedire declarat, which is not to be taken
carnally, that we should think the heavenly things to bow the knees, as the
Sun, and Moon, stars, and Angels, etc. but to bow the knee, declares all
things to be subject unto God, and to be obedient to his worship, etc. It
seems then, that in Origens time, this gesture of bowing the knee at the name
of Jesus was not taken up, therefore it is to be held no necessary thing, nor
prescribed by commandment: See further Synops. Papism. Centur. 2. er. 51.

Controv. 10. That Christ is proved to be God by this saying of the Prophet
cited, v. 11. as I live, every knee shall how unto me: against the blasphemy
of Georgius Eniedinus.
From this place thus it is inferred and concluded concerning the deity of
Christ: he to whom every knee boweth, is very God, Isay 45.23. but unto
Christ every knee shall bow, Romans 14.11. Philip. 2.10. Ergo, he is God.

Georgius Eniedmus a blasphemous Samosatenian heretic, takes two exceptions
to this argument. 1. he denies the assumption, that the knee is bowed unto
Christ: for one may sit in the tribunal seat, and yet the knee may be bowed
unto an other, even to God himself, who shall judge in that day, Romans 2.16. 2.
he distinguishes of the proposition, which is true only of him, to whom
worship is given, and the knee bowed, ratione essentiae, in respect of his
essence, but now the knee is bowed to Christ, not in respect of his essence,
but of his dignity, as unto the ordinary Judge, not as unto the chief Prince.

Contra. 1. The Apostle shows directly, that the knee is bowed unto Christ as
the Judge, because he had proved before, that he was Lord both of quick and
dead, to whom else then should the knee be bowed, but unto the Lord and Judge?
The Father shall judge by his Son, to whom he has committed all judgment,
John. 5.22. and yet Christ judges also by his own power: for there is but one
Godhead, and one power of both: therefore it follows not, God the Father
judges, therefore not the Son.

2. Christ is worshipped not only in respect of his office and dignity of
judging, but in the unity of essence with his father, as he says, Ioh. 5.19.
Whatsoever things the father does, the Son does the same: and v. 26. As the
father has life in himself, so he has given unto the Son, to have life in
him: but what is the life of God else, then the essence of God? Christ then is
by nature and essence the same with the father, and so is one God to be
worshipped, and adored with him: and whereas it is said, the Father has given
him, etc. this must be understood, not de dono gratia, sed communicatione
naturae, not of the gift of grace, but of communication by nature, so that for
the Father to give unto the Son, is all one as to say, Pater genuit filium,
the father has begot the Son from everlasting.

And that Christ is one God with the father by identitie of essence, may
appear, by the accusation of the Jews, that he being a man made himself
God, Ioh. 10.33. they did not challenge him, as if he would be some secundarie
Judge or Prince, but equal unto God: which is there justified and maintained
by our Savior: See Pareus further hereof, dub. 8.

Controv. 11. That moral works, which are done without faith are sin, how
soever outwardly they appear good.
1. The Romanists for the most part do hold the contrary, that a natural man
only directed by the use of his reason and understanding, may do some things
morally good, which have not the nature of sin: their arguments, some of them
are these.

1. S. Paul says, c. 2.14. that the Gentiles do by nature the things
contained in the law, they then therein sinned not.

2. Our Savior did not mislike those civil offices, which were performed by
the Pharisees, in loving those which loved them, Matthew. 5.46.

3. A man is a reasonable creature, and this were against his nature, non posse
facere aliquid secundum rectam rationem, not to do any thing according to the
right use of reason: for even God has given this facility to every natural
thing, to attain unto the natural end thereof: much more unto man.

4. Gregor. homil. de Diuit. and Lazar. upon these words of Abraham unto the
rich man, thou have received good things in thy life: indicatur and dives iste
boni aliquid habnisse, propter quod in hac vita acceperit bona, etc. hereby it
is showed, that the rich man had some good thing, for the which he received
good things in this life, and Lazarus had some evil thing, that was purged in
his life, etc. hereupon Pererius infers, that there is no man so evil, but
he has some good thing in him, which is temporally rewarded in this life:
therefore all that the wicked and infidels do, is not sin: To this purpose
Pererius disput. 5. in 14. c.

Contra. 1. We deny not, but that the wiser sort of the Gentiles might do
some external works agreeable to the law in outward appearance, but they
were far from the perfection and internal obedience required by the law,
and therefore could not be void of sin.

2. Those civil duties of rendering love for love, which belong unto common
civility, as they are not simply condemned: yet our Savior in requiring
greater perfection in his disciples, shows that those duties were spotted
with Pharisaicall leaven, and were not approved in Gods sight, as good works.

3. If man had kept that perfection, wherein he was created, he might have
been sufficiently directed by the rule of reason: but now his reason is not
right, it is corrupted and obscured by sin, and therefore can give him no
direction to that which is truly and properly good: as other creatures know
naturally what is good for their life, so man by nature knows what is
naturally good for himself: but it follows not, that he should therefore by
nature do any thing morally good.

4. That saying of Gregory being allowed, it is not to the purpose: for that
rich man might have some knowledge of God, whereby he might be directed, beside
the help of nature: and yet it follows not, that every one, which enjoys
the temporal things of this life, should be temporally rewarded for his good
parts: for we see that many in this world, which have least parts of moral and
civil goodness, have a better earthly portion, then those in whom more
goodness appears: And yet further, this temporal recompense, only shows,
that their acts are not truly good, and in the sight of God, for then they
should not only have a temporal, but an eternal reward.

Now on the other side, it shall be proved, that all the actions of infidels
and wicked persons, that have no ture faith, what goodly show soever they make
in the world, are no better before God, then sinful works.

1. Our blessed Savior says, Matthew. 7. an evil tree cannot bring forth good
fruit: but they which have no faith, are evil trees, Ergo.

2. Likewise, Ioh. 13. our Savior says, without me ye can do nothing,
therefore without faith, no good thing can be wrought.

3. And in this place, the Apostle says, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

4. Further, no work can be accepted of God, unless the person that works
it be first accepted: but none can please God without any faith, Heb. 11.6.
Again Augustine says, finibus, non officijs virtutes a vitijs discernendae
sunt, virtues must be discerned from vices, by the ends, not by the offices
and actions: but the infidels do nothing to a right end.

5. Augustine in many places condemns the works of infidels, how good soever
they appear, as in Psalm. 21. Let no man account any work good before faith:
vbi fides non erat, bonum opus non erit, bonum enim opus intentio facit,
intentionem fides derigit, etc. for where no faith is, there is no good work:
an intention makes a good work, and the intention is directed by faith.

Pererius to these arguments by certain distinctions. 1. that no infidel,
ratione infidelitatis, as his works proceed from his infidelity, can do any
good thing, but he has bona naturae, some good things by nature, by the which
he may do some things that are good.

2. Or some things are simply good, and worthy of eternal life, and are
acceptable to God, such good things cannot be done without faith: but
notwithstanding, some moral good things may.

3. Or it is so said, that the works of infidels are sin, because vt
plurimum, for the most part they are such, not all.

4. And there is a double kind of intention: a general, and particular, though
the general intention be evil, yet in some particular action, an infidel may
have a good intention, as to give alms in mere commiseration: and though they
look not unto God, as the supernatural end, yet they may be by nature guided
to make God the natural end of their actions, as by nature they know there is
a God.

5. And sine generali concursu, without Gods general assistance man indeed
can do nothing, either naturally or morally good, but Gods special assistance
is only required unto those works, which are acceptable to God, and worthy
of life eternal.

Contra. 1. We grant that by natural helps man may do things naturally
good, but no virtuous action can proceed from an infidel, because all his
actions savor of infidelity.

2. No not the best works of the faithful, are in themselves meritorious and
worthy of eternal life, because they are imperfect, they are crowned of grace
not for merit: neither is there any work truly good, but it is thorough
Christ acceptable unto God, that is good: if it be not pleasing unto God, it is
not good.

3. Not only some but all the works of infidels are sinful: for whatsoever
is not of faith is sin, the sentence is general.

4. It is not enough to have a particular intention, but it must aim at the
general end of all, which is the glory of God: and though by nature men are
taught, that there is a God, yet can not they refer their actions to him, as
the general end without faith.

5. This general concurrence is not sufficient to bring forth a good work:
but special grace in Christ the Mediator is necessary: so our blessed Savior
says, without me (that is, the Mediator and Savior of the world not
considered only as the Creator) you can do nothing. Now concerning this
question, that the works of infidels are sin: these things may further be
remembered. 1. that among the ancient writers, Origin and Augustine are
directly of opinion, that an infidel can do no good work, as Origin says,
speaking of infidels and heretics, videndum est, ne forte si aliquid boni
operis apud illos geri videatur, quia non sit ex fide, convertatur in peccatum,
it is to be considered, if that, whatsoever good work seem to be done among
them, because it is not of faith, it be turned into sin: Augustines opinion
is showed before: And though Pererius take upon him by certain querkes to
shift off Augustines testimonies, yet Tolet ingeniously confesses, that both
Origin and Augustine so affirm, annot. 15.

2. The Romanists themselves are here divided in opinion: for Gregorius
Ariminens. Capreolus, Catharinus, with other of that side, are confuted by
Pererius for thus affirming with the Protestants, Perer. 4. disput. ad. 8.

3. Yet do we not say, as the Rhemists charge us here, annot. 4. that it was
sin in the heathen, to honor their parents, to releeve the poor, to do
justly: the actions in the substance thereof were not sin, but in respect of
the manner and circumstances, because they were not directed to a tight end.

4. Concerning the meaning of this place, which we urge against the Romanists,
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: how it is expounded by the Papists, and
their exposition refelled: See before quest. 36. and of this whole question,
see cap. 2. quest. 27. and controv. 9.

6. Moral observations.
Observe. 1. That we ought to bear with the weak.
v. 1. Him that is weak in the faith receive. Like as in a family, the
greater do tender the children and young ones, so Christians should cherish
and foster the weak and younglings in faith: not to be rash or harsh censurers
of them, but to bear with them in the spirit of meekness: as the Apostle
says, c. 15.1. We which are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak.

Observe. 2. Not to be austere in censuring our brethren.
v. 3. For God has received him. Our weak brother, though he have many
infirmities, we are not to reject, seeing God has received him: this makes
against those, which upon every slip and infirmity are ready to censure
their brethren, as reprobates and cast-awayes: but charity would have us hope
the best of the salvation of our brethren, and to think of them
notwithstanding some infirmities as received of God, and such as for whom
Christ died, v. 15.

Observe. 3. Of giving thanks for meat.
v. 6. He that eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks, etc. This
shows what was the use of Christians in those days, to give thanks before
their receiving of meat: so it was the godly custom in Samuels time, for the
people not to eat in their solemn feasts and sacrifices, till Samuel came, and
blessed the sacrifice and meat, 1. Sam. 9.13. This holy use was continued by
our blessed Savior, Matthew. 26.27. and S. Paul exhorts, that whether we eat,
or drink, or whatsoever we do else, we should do all to the glory of God, 1.
Cor. 10.31.

Observe. 4. The consolation of the faithful both in life and death.
v. 8. Whether we live, we live unto the Lord, whether we die, etc. As this
teaches us to put away all security, while we live, and to frame our lives
unto Gods glory, for as Chrysostom says, liberi non sumus, Dominum habemus,
we are not our own men, we have a Lord and Master, whom we must serve: so in
our death the Lord watches over us: that although the world, and all that
therein is, do forsake us, yet he that lives unto the Lord, shall die also
unto the Lord, and live for ever with him: as they are pronounced blessed which
die in the Lord, Rev. 14.13.

Observe. 5. That every one must give account unto God: and that all shall be
judged, v. 12.
Chrysostom has here an excellent moral, to show that all the wicked and
ungodly shall be punished. 1. Seeing by daily experience it is confirmed, that
many wicked ones are punished in this life, as were the old world, and the
Sodomites, what equity can there be in it, vt qui eadem pariter peccarunt,
easdem poenas non luant, that they which committed the same sins, should not
suffer the same punishment, non omnes hic punit vt alijs poenitentiae spatium
tribuat, etc. he punishes not all here to give space of repentance unto
others: neither are all punished only there, ne plerisque causa detur illius
negandi providentiam, least some might take occasion to deny Gods providence.
2. But it will be said, how can God punish for ever, seeing we sinned here but
a short time: do we not see that in the course of humane justice, he that
committed* murder but once, and it was quickly done, is perpetually condemned
to the mines: and we read of a man that was lame, and had the palsy thirty
eight years, which punishment was for his sins, for Christ said unto him,
sin no more: in like manner it is just with God to punish the temporal and
momentanie act of sin eternally. 3. And how is not the sinner worthy of
punishment, being so often admonished, and threatened before, and having so
easy a way showed him unto life: the Publican said but only, God be merciful
unto me a sinner, quid hic sudoris, quid laboris, what great labor and pains
was it to do this. 4. And if there were no hell to punish the wicked, neither
should the devil be punished, and it should fare alike with the good and bad,
stabit cum Nerone Paulus, Nero shall be as good a man as Paul. 5. And think
thou then there is no hell, quis daemonum hoc asseret? is there any of the
devils that will say so, nay, they confessed there was an hell, crying out to
Christ, come thou to torment us before our time: how then do thou not
tremble to deny that which the devil confesses? 6. even among the
Barbarians, that have no knowledge of God, the Judges and Magistrates bonos
honorant, malos puniunt, do honor the good, and punish the evil: and shall
not God much more? to this purpose Chrysostom.

Observe. 6. Of the term of the day of judgment, and what use we should make
of it.
v. 10. We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. Therefore
every one ought to be exceeding careful in this life, how he walks, and to
watch over his thoughts, words, and works, that he may appear in that day
with joy: S. Paul says to the same purpose, 2. Cor. 5.10. we must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, etc. and then he inserteth v. 11. knowing
the terror of the Lord, we persuade, etc. the terror then of this day, ought to
persuade us to walk circu^spectly: Origin here well says, quisuam est qui se
ata decipiat, etc. who is there that will so much deceive himself, vt ad
iudicium Christi, and ad tribunal cognitionis cius se non putet venturum, who
thinks, he shall not come unto the judgment of Christ, and to his throne of
knowledge, etc.

Observe. 7. How dangerous a thing it is to give offense.
v. 13. Judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, etc. Chrysostom
says well, tu, si reliquis perditionis causa fueris, graviora patieris, etc.
thou, if thou shall be the cause of other men's perdition, shall be worse
punished, then they which are by thee subverted: as the serpent was more
punished then the woman, and the woman more then the man: and Iezabel maiores
poenas dedit, and Iezabel had a greater punishment then Ahab, because she did
instigate, and set on the king, and was the cause of his ruin, in taking away
Naboths vineyard: we must then take heed of offenses, that we scandalize not
the Gentiles and Grecians by our evil life: for thus will they object: how
shall I know that God has commanded easy and possible things, cum tu ex
progenitoribus Christianos, etc. seeing thou being a Christian from thy
progenitors, and brought up in a good religion, yet do nothing that belongs
thereunto: thou perhaps wilt say, yet I will show thee those which do these
things, namely, monachos eremum incolentes, the Monks which inhabit the
wilderness. But Christ said, luceat lux vestra coram hominibus, non coram
montibus, let your light shine before men, not before the mountains: and yet
saying thus non illis detraho, aut montes occupant, etc. I do not disgrace
those which inhabit the mountains, but I am sorry for those which dwell in
cities, that they only can find virtue among the other: hortor itaque vt
philosophiam ex montibus in vrbes reducamus, I exhort therefore that we may
bring again Philosophy from the mountains into cities, vt civitates sint
verae civitates, that cities may be right cities indeed.

Observe. 8. Of the dignity, and excellency of the calling of Christians.
v. 15. For whom Christ died: the Apostle said before, v. 8. Whether we live or
die, we are the Lords: for he has bought us with a price, even in dying, and
giving himself a ransom for us: it is a great honor in the world to be the
servant of a great and mighty king: the Queen of Ethiopia judged Salomons
servants happy, that attended upon so wise a King: the Carthaginian
ambassadors returning from Rome said, se vidisse tot reges, quot senatores,
that they had seen as many kings as senators: But much more glorious is the
condition of the faithful, whom Christ has purchased to be his servants: and
indeed not servants, but freemen, yea so many kings: for in him we are made
Kings and Priests, Revel. 1.6.

Observe. 9. Of true praise and commendation
v. 18. Pleases God, and is commended of men. First, we must seek to please
God, and to be praised of him, and then the praise of men will follow: but he
that first seeks to please men, cannot please Christ, as the Apostle says,
Galat. 1.10. If I seek to please men, I should not be the servant of Christ:
he that is praised of men first, is most like to be dispraised of God: as our
Blessed Savior says, Luke 6.26. Woe unto you when men shall praise you, so
did your fathers to the false Prophets: And again, the Apostle says, 2. Cor.
10.18. he that commends himself is not allowed, but whom the Lord commends.

Observe. 10. That nothing is to be done with a doubtful mind, or of ignorance.
v. 23. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: Chrysostom here has a good
moral touching this point, that no man should plead simplicie or ignorance in
his doings. 1. he distinguishes of ignorance: if thou art ignorant of those
things, which cannot be known, praeter culpam erit, it is without thy fault,
but ignorance through negligence, such as the Jews had, excuses not.

2. An in modico orbis angulo, etc. the things belonging to salvation were not
done only in Palestina, in a corner of the world: but the Lord by his Prophet
says, they all shall know me from the greatest to the least, non vides rem
istam loqui, do thou not see the thing it self to speak.

3. But thou will say this knowledge is not to be exacted, of a poor simple
husbandman, or Barbarian: yes, why not? for how can thou call him simple,
that is wise enough in worldly matters: if he be wronged he can tell how to
resist, if violence be offered, he will defend himself, and in other matters he
can provide for himself: how then is he simple?

4. Tell me, whom think thou to be more simple, those which live now, or
which lived in Abraham's time: surely thou will say they which lived then: yet
Abraham barbarus in medio barbarorum educatus, etc. barbarian brought up among
barbarians having no teacher, his father being an idolater, yet had the
knowledge of God: to this purpose, Chryso. to show that ignorance can excuse
none, but every one is bound to examine all his actions, that they proceed of
faith.

CHAP. XV.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
1 We which are strong ought to bear the infirmities ( frailnes. B.) of the
weak, and not to please our selves. ( not to stand in our own conceits. B.).

2 Therefore let every one please his neghbour unto good, Be. L. Gr. ( rather
then in that is good. B. G. S.) to edification.

3 For Christ would not please himself, but as it is written: the rebukes of
them, which rebuke thee, fell upon me.

4 For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written before for our
learning, that thorough patience and comfort of the Scriptures, we might have
hope.

5 Now the God of patience and consolation give you, that ye he like minded (
like affected. Be. thinks the same thing, V. S. (...), to mind the same
thing.) one toward an other, according to Christ Jesus.

6 That ye with one mind, and one mouth may praise God, even the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

7 Wherefore receive ye one an other, as Christ received us to the glory of
God.

8. Now I say that Jesus Christ, was a Minister of the circumcision for the
truth of God, to confirm the promises of the fathers.

9 And that the Gentiles might glorify God, ( let the Gentiles praise God, G.)
for his mercy, as it is written: For this cause I will confess thee among the
Gentiles, and sing unto thy name.

10 And again he says, rejoice ye Gentiles with his people.

11 And again, praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles, and laud ye him all people
together.

12 And again, Esaias says, there shall be a root of less, and he that
shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust.

13 Now the God of hope fill you with all joy, and peace in believing, that ye
may abound in hope, ( be rich in hope. B.) thorough the power of the holy Ghost.

14 And I my self also am persuaded of you my brethren, that ye are also full
of goodness, ( love. L.) and are able ( willing. V.) to admonish one an other.

15 Nevertheless brethren, I have somewhat more boldly, after a sort ( in
part. Gr.) written unto you, as one, that puts you in remembrance, through
the grace that is given me of God.

16 That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ toward the Gentiles,
ministering ( sanctifying. L. (...). Gr. which signifies, serving or ministering
in holy things) the Gospel of God, that the offering ( oblation) of the
Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the holy Ghost.

17 I have therefore whereof I may rejoice in Christ Jesus, in those things
which pertain to God.

18 For I dare not speak of any thing ( I cannot endure to speak of any thing.
Be. see qu. 23.) which Christ has not wrought by me for the obedience of the
Gentiles, in word and deed.

19 With the power of signs and wonders, by the power of the spirit of God, (
of the holy Ghost. L.) so that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum,
I have ( replenished. L. or) fully preached. B. ( fulfilled the Gospel. Gr.
fulfilled the preaching of the Gospel. S. or the office of preaching. Be.
caused to abound. G.) the Gospel of Christ.

20 So putting my self forward ( endeavoring. V. contending. A. enforcing my
self. B. G. ambitiously seeking (...), Gr. B.) to preach the Gospel not where
Christ was named, least I should have built on an others foundation.

21 But as it is written, to whom he was not spoken of, they shall see him, and
they that heard not, shall understand.

22 Therefore also have I been often let to come unto you.

23 But now having no more place, ( no more to do. B.) in these quarters (
climates. Gr.) and having been desirous to come unto you many years ago:

24 When I shall take my journey into Spain, I will come to you: for I trust
as I pass by, ( in my journey. G. B.) to see you, and to be brought on my way,
thitherward by you, after I have been somewhat filled with you, (that is, your
company. G. Be.)

25 But now go I to Jerusalem to Minister to the Saints.

26 For it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia, to make a certain common
gathering, B. ( a distribution. G. (...), a communion or communication. Gr.)
for the poor Saints, which are at Jerusalem.

27 It has pleased them indeed, and their debtors are they: for if the
Gentiles have partaked of their spiritual things, they ought also in carnal
things to minister unto them.

28 When I have therefore performed this, and have sealed them this fruit, I
will go by you into Spain.

29 And I am sure when I come unto you, I shall come with the ( in the. Gr.)
abundance of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ. ( blessing of Christ. L.)

30 Also brethren I beseech you by our Lord Jesus Christ, and for the love of
the spirit, that you would strive with me ( help me. B. L.) by prayers to God
for me.

31 That I may be delivered from the unbelievers, L. B. V. ( the disobedient,
G. B. S. the word (...), signifies both: the first rather, for he that
believes not, is disobedient, but disobdience has not always infidelity
accompaning it) in Judea, and that my service which I have to do at
Jerusalem, may be accepted of the Saints.

32 That I may come unto you with joy by the will of God, and may with you be
refreshed.

33 Now the Lord of peace be with you all, Amen.

2. The Argument, method, and parts.
THe Apostle in this chapter, 1. finisheth his former exhortation to the strong
to bear with them that are weak, to verse. 14. 2. the peroration or conclusion
of the epistle follows.

1. The sum of the exhortation is propounded v. 1. then it is confirmed, 1.
from the end, wherefore men have received their gifts, which is not to please,
or seek themselves, but one to seek to edify an other. 2. an other argument
is taken from the example of Christ: and it is framed thus: we must be like
minded unto Christ, v. 5. and the end is expressed v. 6. But Christ did not
seek or please himself, which is proved first by a testimony of Scripture
v. 3. which is amplified by showing the use of the Scripture in general, which
is for our learning v. 4. secondly he shows that Christ was not for himself
but for us, by a distribution, because he both was a Minister of circumcision
to the Jews v. 8. and he ministered also to the Gentiles, that they might
praise God for his mercy, as he proves by 4. testimonies. v. 10.11.12. and
then he concludes his exhortation with an hearty desire and wish, v. 13.

2. In the peroration: 1. he excuses his writing unto them v. 14. to v. 22.
which he does 1. by the end of his writing, which was not to teach them, whom
he knew already to be full of all goodness v. 14. but to admonish them v. 15.
2. by his office, which was to preach the Gospel unto the Gentiles, and
therefore unto them: the antecedent, namely his office and Apostleship he
sets forth, 1. by the end, to offer the Gentiles by their conversion unto
God v. 16. 2. from the efficacy of his Apostleship, in making the Gentiles
obedient in word and deed v. 18. this efficacy he amplifieth, 1. by the
efficient, the grace of Christ, v. 17. 2. the helping causes, signs and
wonders v. 19. 3. by the circumstance of the place, he had preached from
Jerusalem to Illyricum, v. 14. 4. from the difficulty, he had preached Christ,
where they had not so much as heard of him v. 20. which he does illustrate by
the saying of Isaias 52.2. he makes promise of his coming unto them, which
has been hitherto let: and he gives these reasons, 1. because he had
filled all those places with his preaching already. 2. and from his desire v.
23. 3. from the opportunity of his journey into Spain v. 24. 4. then he
preventeth and answeareth an objection, why he cannot ye^ come, because he went
to carry the benevolence of Macedonia, and Achaia, to the poor Saints in
Jerusalem: which their benevolence he commends and sets forth by the
efficient cause, their voluntary contribution v. 26.2. ab aequo, from the rule
of equity, they were their debtors in carnal things, seeing they had received
their spiritual, v. 27. so he concludes, that when he had finished this
service he would come unto them, v. 28. 5. he adds another reason, ab vtili,
from their profit, he doubts not, but he shall come unto them with abundance
of blessing, and therefore he will hasten his coming.

3. Then he requesteth them to pray for him v. 30. showing what they should
pray for; namely two things, to be delivered from the incredulous and
refractorie Jews, and that his service may be accepted of the Saints v. 31.
and why. 1. from the end, that he may come with joy unto them, 2. because of
his reciprocal prayer, in praying for them. v. 33.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. Of the argument and scope of this chapter in general.
1. Some think that the Apostle does prosequute the same argument, which was
handled in the former chapter, touching the use of things indifferent, which
concerned Christian liberty, as Haymo, Tolet, Martyr.

2. Some make this difference, that in the former chapter, the Apostle showed
how the strong should behave themselves toward the weak, in declinatione mali,
in the declining of evil, that is, avoiding of offense: now he teaches them
how to carry themselves, in operatione boni, in the working of that which is
good, in seeking the edifying one of an other Lyranus, Gorrhan: But that the
Apostle did also before, c. 14.19. let us follow these ^ things, etc. whereby
one may edify an other.

3. But the order and coherence rather is this, the Apostle transfert ad
thesin, does draw unto a general doctrine, the particular rule before
prescribed, how the weak should be respected, in the observation of days, and
difference of meats: that not only in those things, but in all other the like
infirmities, the stronger should support the weak, Pareus: so also Gualter,
doctrinam generaliorem subucit de Christiana lenitate. he now supplyeth a more
general doctrine concerning Christian lenity: so also Osiand.

Quest. 2. Whom, and wherein the strong should support the weak.
1. We which are strong. 1. Chrysostom observes well how the Apostle allureth
the strong, and speaks lovingly unto them: not only in calling them strong,
but in suum ordinem eos collocavit, he places them in his own order, and this
he does, because he had seemed before somewhat sharply to take them up, for
using their Christian liberty so freely without respect had unto their weak
brethren. 2. the strong (...), or mighty, are not here only those, which were
instructed concerning the indifferent use of all meats, as Haymo: but such as
were before edocti, more fully taught and instructed in matters of faith, Par.
and such also as were purioris vitae, more perfect and pure in life, Origin:
for the Apostle speaks generally of all infirmities of the brethren touching
doctrine, or manners.

2. Ought to bear. 1. we ought debemus, non donamus, it is our duty so to
do, not a gift, Chrysostom. 2. to bear (...), is not only to tolerate and
support their infirmities, sed in se suscipere vt curant, but to take them in
hand to cure them, Bulling: erigere, non contemnere, to raise them up, not to
despise or contemn them, gloss. interlin. it is a metaphor taken from the
fashion of building, where the pillars do carry the weight and burden of the
house: as the faithful are called pillars, Revel. 3.17. and as it is said,
that Solomon laid great stones to make the foundation of the temple, to
support the rest, 1. King. 5.17. Hugo: or it may be taken from the frame and
constitution of a man's body, where the sinews and bones are made to bear up
the flesh, and other tender parts, Lyran.

3. The infirmities of the weak. 1. The Apostle uses two words, he says, not
the weak, but the infirmities of the weak, vt ad maiorem commiserationem
alliciat, to draw them to greater commiseration: Theophyl. 2. it is a metaphor
taken from children or sick persons, which are weak, and impotent, and there
is no man, but will be ready to pity and help such. 3. these infirmities are
not only concerning the difference of meats, as Haymo, but the Apostle
means others also, qui alio infirmitatis genere lab^rant, which are troubled
with any other kind of infirmity, as if one be given to anger, to railing, and
such like: Chrysostom. 4. but the Apostle speaks of infirmities only, non hic
agitur de sceleribus, he entreats not of great offenses, as of theft, murder,
and such like: for these are not to be borne with at all: Osiand. he means
not then vitia ^perta, manifest sins, which are directly against the word:
but only of slippes in life and doctrine which proceed of ignorance and common
infirmity. 5. These then are the infirmities here mentioned, either concerning
spiritual things, or temporal: the spiritual concern either says, as
ignorance, error, not being fundamental, or manners, as are the slippes and
failing in life and conversation, which overthrow not good manners: in
temporal things, there are diverse kind of infirmities; 1. as in the state and
condition, as the rich must support the necessities of the poor. 2. or in
respect of the sex, the husband must bear with the wife, as the weaker
vessel. 3. or of the body, such are the infirmities of sickness, and old age,
wherein the weak are also to be supported. But the two first kinds of
infirmities touching faith, and manners, are specially here understood, and
intended by the Apostle: though it may be extended also to corporal
necessities; as Origin infers, he that is richer in substance, onus
pauperioris portet, let him bear the burden of the poor: so also Chrysostom.
si dives fueris, etc. if thou be rich, please not thy self, but the poor.

Quest. 3. Of the reasons why the weak should be supported.
1. Christ supporteth and bears our infirmities: no man is so perfect, qui
non in aliquo apud Deum inveniatur infirmus, which is not in some one thing or
other week before God, and had need to be supported of Christ: we therefore,
as Christ has borne the infirmities of us all, so we should one bear an
others infirmities, Origin.

2. Thou art strong, repende Deo mercedem qui te talem fecit, show thy
thankefulnes to God, who has made thee strong: and thus shall thou do it, if
thou do correct the infirmity of the weak, Chrysostom.

3. Si condescenderis nihil damniferes, if thou condescend to the weak, thou
shall suffer no loss: but if thou condescend not, the other is in great
danger: it is no loss to thee, but again to him, therefore bear with him,
Chrysostom.

4. Illi non possunt se ad nos erigere, they cannot rise up to us, therefore we
should condescend, and apply our selves to them, gloss. interlin.

5. Nullus est, qui non in se habeat aliquid, etc. there is none, that has not
somewhat himself to be supported: and therefore the Apostle says, Galat. 6.
Bear one another burden, Gorrhan: therefore he that is strong, wherein he is
strong, must bear with the weak, that wherein he is weak he may be supported
likewise of his brother.

6. The Apostle also persuades hereunto by his own example, counting himself
among the number, we which are strong, who will think scorn to bear with the
weak, unto whom S. Paul so great an Apostle vouchsafes to condescend, Gualter.

7. This is the end why God has given unto some greater gifts, and more
strength, then unto others, that by their strength they might support the
weak, Pareus.

8. And hereunto we are persuaded both iure naturae, by the law of nature,
which moves and stirs up men to help and succor the weak: and iure
divino, by the law of God which prescribes, that if our enemies ass should
lie down under his burden, we should help him up, Deuteronomy. 22.4. how much more
ought we to show this compassion to our weak brother?

Quest. 4. How the Apostle here counts himself among the strong, else where
maintaining himself among the weak.
The occasion of this doubt, is moved by Origin out of that place, 1. Cor. 9.
v. 22. to the weak I became as weak, how then does the Apostle here call
himself strong: and beside he seems to praise himself contrary to the
saying of the wiseman, Prou. 27.2. Let thy neighbor praise thee, and not thine
own mouth, etc.

Answ. 1. Origin answeareth to the first doubt, that the Apostle in that place
does not say he is weak, sed fieri infirmum, but that he was made or became
weak: for if he had been weak, he could not be made weak: so then there the
Apostle does but show the practice of that which he prescribes here, namely,
to condescend unto the infirmity of the weak, and so to become weak like
unto them, in supporting of their infirmities. 2. Neither does the Apostle here
praise himself, non pro laud propria, sed pro rerum consequentia, he does not
call himself strong for his own praise, but because the matter in hand so
required: for if the Apostle in modesty had forborne to count himself among
the strong, who would have presumed of himself, to be so strong, as to take
upon him to bear others infirmities, Origin: this then the Apostle does, vt ad
suum exemplum excitaret, to stir them up, to follow his example, that they
should support the infirmities of the weak, as he did, Mar.

Quest. 5. What it is not to please our selves but our neighbor, v. 1.2.
1. Haymo understands this of that particular instance, of making no
difference of meats: that the stronger would not please himself, either in
eating of all meats in the presence of the weak, or in persuading him to do
the like: but this sense is too much restrained: for the Apostle speaks
generally of all infirmities both touching faith and manners, as is showed
before q. 2.3.

2. Chrysostom seems to interpret it of giving content, and satisfying the
desire of the weak, as the rich man should not please himself in not giving,
sed placeas pauperi, but please the poor, but this is not all the meaning: for
the poor are often froward and importunate, and in some cases are not to be
pleased and contented with giving.

3. Origin thinks this to be pleasing: when the life is without reproof, and
irreprehensible, vt ex eo proficiant omnes, that others might profit by it, but
this sense is likewise particular: in necessary duties, we are so to please in
well doing: but there is an other kind of pleasing, that is, not offending in
things indifferent.

4. Sometime for one to please himself, is to seek his own glory: as Herod
pleased himself, when the people gave applause unto him Act. 12. but it is not
so taken here: Bez.

5. Not to please our selves, but to please our brother, is here, not nostro
iure vti, to use our own liberty without respect unto our brother: Pellic.
but satisfacere, to content, satisfy, obsecundare morem gerere, acco^modare,
to apply and accomodate our selves to our brother: Vatablus, Erasmus: not to
seek that, quod nobis prosit, which is profitable for us, but quid conducat
fratri, what is beneficial to our brother: Ambrose, Martyr: not to attend
only that, which pleases our selves, neglecto proximo, with neglect and
contempt of our brother, Pareus: as many are peremptory in using their
liberty, having no respect at all unto their brethren, whether they be
offended or not: thus the Apostle elsewhere himself expounds what it is to
please men, 1. Corin. 10.33. even as I please all men in all things, not
seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they might be saved.

Quest. 6. How far and wherein we must please our neighbors.
v. 2. Let every one please his neighbor in that which is good to edifying,
etc. yet S. Paul elsewhere says, If I should please men, I should not be the
servant of Christ.

To remove this doubt, three things must be considered. 1. who are to be
pleased. 2. wherein. 3. to what end.

1. If I should please men, that is, incredulis and infidelibus Iudaeis, the
incredulous Jews and infidels, I should not please Christ: for if S. Paul
would have pleased such, he should have brought men and women bound to
Jerusalem, when he was sent to Damascus, Origin: but we must seek to please
the brethren and believers, and such as are weak.

2. Neither must we please men in things, that are evil: as Origin well
observes, si quis nos aliquid exigit agere contra iustitiam, if any man would
have us do any thing against justice and holiness, therein we should not
please him, cum ergo been agimus, and been docemus, placemus proximo, when we
teach well, and do well, we please our neighbor, etc. herein then appears
the vanity and impiety of Popish indulgencies, and dispensations, which do
often give license and liberty even in such things, as are against the word of
God directly: as in dispensing with unlawful marriages, within the prohibited
degrees, and such like.

3. Now the end which men must propound in pleasing their neighbors, is in
seeking the good, and furthering their salvation, non vt laudem quaerant, not
to seek their own praise, that men may profit by their good example, Origin:
1. so the Apostle says, for good, that is, to his profit and benefit, as the
Apostle uses the same phrase, Romans 8.28. all things work together for the
good or best: some do read, in that which is good, but the words are in the
original (...), to good, Beza. 2. and the Apostle adds, to edification,
because as Theophylact observes, that which is good, si minus fit opportune,
if it be not done in fit time and place, tends to destruction, then
edification. 3. this term of edifying is familiar with S. Paul, for the
faithful are as lively stones which go to the building of Gods spiritual
house: he then that offends his brother, and so remooueth stones fit for Gods
building, destroys Gods house, and him will God destroy, 1. Cor. 2.^7. Gods
house is destroyed, not only by pulling of it down, but also by not building
of it up. 4. and two ways are our brethren edified, either by winning of them
unto Christ, or being come unto Christ, when they do still increase and go
forward in faith. 5. But the weak must not be so supported, vt indulgentia
largiore infirmos dissolvat, that the strong do make them more dissolute by
their indulgence, but so long, till either vitium corrigit, he amend his fault,
vel non proficit in peius, or if he be not much amended, yet he become not
worse, Origin: but si infirmitas eorum degeneret in pertinaciam, if their
infirmity degenerate into stubbornenes, we must support them no longer: as the
Jews or Papists, are not now to be counted weak, and to be borne with in
their superstitious observation of meats and days, for now they err of
obstinacy, not of infirmity. Par.

Quest. 7. How Christ is said not to have pleased himself.
1. Haymo inserteth by way of explanation, he pleased not himself, but his
father: so also Lyranus, and the ordinar. gloss. do expound it by that place,
Ioh. 6. I came not to do mine own will, but of him that sent me: but then the
Apostle had not applied this to purpose, which is by the example of Christ, to
please and not offend our weak brother.

2. Neither by not pleasing himself, must be understood, the not liking or
approouing of that which he did: for so Christ always pleased himself, and so
must we also please our selves, in approouing our actions done in faith: but
the meaning is, non servivit suis commodis, he sought not his own profit: quod
nostrum erat respiciens, suum neglexit, respecting our good, he neglected his
own, Chrysostom. he sought not his own glory, but suffered reproach and
infamy to promote man's salvation.

3. Origin understands this of Christ's not pleasing himself, of his abasing
himself, that whereas he thought it no robbery to be equal unto God his
father, made himself of no reputation: Chrysostom adds further, that he
only abated not himself to become man, sed and convitijs impetitus est, he
was raised upon, and reviled: but this not pleasing, is better referred to
Christ's whole life, and death; that he refused no shame or ignominy while he
sought to further the work of man's salvation: for he not only took upon him
the form of a servant, being Lord of all; but being most holy, vouchsafed to
eat with Publicans and sinners: and being most chaste, yet suffered a woman
that had been most infamous to wash his feet: and being most innocent, was
put to death with theefes and murderers, and wicked persons: Martyr.

4. But the meaning is not, he pleased not himself, as though he did not with
his will undertake the work of our redemption, for he did it most willingly out
of his exceeding great love unto mankind, and he laid down his life of
himself: but he spared not his body, nor his name and fame for us, so that he
might accomplish our salvation.

Quest. 8. To what purpose the Apostle alleges this saying out of the
Psalm: the rebukes of them that rebuke thee, etc.
1. This testimony is alleged out of Psalm. 69.9. where David not only as a
member of Christ's Church complains of the wrongs, which he sustained for Gods
cause, but as a type and figure of Christ, and in his person he shows, how
being innocent and harmless, yet he was oppressed and slaundered as a vile
and wicked person: and that David speaks in the person of Christ, is evident
by the former part of the verse: the zeal of thine house, has devoured me,
which is directly applied unto our Savior, Ioh. 2. and in the 5. verse he
says, I restored those things, which I took not: which is a manifest
prophecy of Christ, that he suffered not for his own but for the offenses of
others.

2. Now whereas the Apostles speech seems to be imperfect: but, as it is
written: where either, we may supply with Beza, Christ pleased not himself,
but others, as it is written, or with Erasmus and Iunius in his annotations
here, the contrary is to be supplied: he pleased not himself, but displeased,
or neglected himself, as v. 21. following, the contrary must be supplied:
But, as it is written, that is, as he said before, he preached not where Christ
was named, but where he was not named, as it is written.

3. Now for the meaning of the words, what rebukes those were, which fell upon
Christ, it is diversely scanned. 1. Origin understands these rebukes, which
Christ sustained, because he did eat with Publicanes and sinners: and when the
woman wiped his feet with her tears, they said, if he had been a Prophet he
would surely have known what manner of woman this was, that touched him being
a sinner: Haymo gives instance of that rebuke, when they called Christ a
Samaritane, and that he had a devil: and these are said to be the rebuks of
them that rebuke God, because he that rebuked Christ the son, rebuked the
Father also that sent him: so Origin, Lyranus: but in this sense, he should
have said rather, the rebukes of them, that rebuke me, fall upon thee. 2.
Chrysostom understanding the rebukes uttered upon the cross, If thou be the
Son of God, save thy self, and he proves more, says Chrysostom, then he
promised, that not only Christ was rayled upon, but his Father also in him:
but this was not to the Apostles purpose, to show how God was blasphemed in
Christ. 3. the Greek scholiast divides the time, that the blasphemies which
were in the old Testament uttered against God, were now cast at his Son in
the New, to show, quod nihil novi contigit, that no new thing had happened: but
neither has the Apostle any such purpose to show the continual custom of the
wicked in blaspheming God, and his Christ. 4. the ordinary gloss
understands it of the reputation of the word of Christ: Iudaei dixerunt me
peccare in te, the Jews say, that I sin against thee, in saying, I come to
do thy will, but they sin against thee, in not receiving me: and so the
sins of those that sin against God fell upon Christ, quia occisus est ab
eis tanquam blasphemus, because they put him to death as a blasphemer, they
being the blasphemers themselves: but the Apostle shows not what befell
Christ in the opinion and reputation of the world, but verily and indeed. 5.
the interlinearie gloss thus interprets, the blasphemies etc. fell upon me,
that is, fuerunt causa oppressionis mei, were the cause of mine oppression, as
because that Christ in his zeal cast out of the Temple those which profaned
it with buying and selling, and so blasphemed God, and polluted his Sanctuary,
therefore they hated Christ, and persecuted him to death: so also Gorrhan
interprets this falling upon Christ, of the curse of his oppression and
persecution: but this had not been neither to the Apostles purpose, who
intends not to show the cause of Christ's suffering, but the manner and
example of his patience: 6. M. Calvin gives these two sense, they grieve me
no less, the blasphemies against thee, quam si ego author extitissem, then if
I had been the author of them: or, non secus affectus fuit, etc. he was as
much affected and moved at the blasphemies against his Father, as if they had
been against him: But the Apostles intendment is not to show the great zeal
of Christ toward his Father, but his merciful suffering, and forbearance used
toward men: 7. Beza understands this place of Christ's bearing of the
reproaches and other wrongs of his enemies: nihil non pertulit, etc. there was
nothing, which he suffered not, to bring his enemies unto God: so Faius by
contumelies and opprobies here thinks by the figure Synecdoche (when a part
is put for the whole) omnes perpessiones, all Christ's sufferings to be
understood, which he willingly endured, and notwithstanding the contumelies of
the wicked, he omitted nothing belonging to salvation, but prayed for his
persecutors, etc. This was most true, yet the reason appears not, why mention
is made, of the falling of the blasphemies against God upon Christ: 8.
Wherefore Pet. Mar. insisteth upon this sense, quicquid in te contumeliae
iacitur, quod sit omnibus omnium hominum peccatis, etc. what contumely soever
was cast at God, which is by all men's sins whatsoever, I am willing to suffer
for in my death: so also Vatablus: tibi satisfeci, etc. I satisfied thee, for
the reproaches wherewith they reviled thee: 9. These two last senses I think
best with Pareus to join together, that Christ is set forth, as an admirable
example of patience, who did not only bear patiently the reproaches and
blasphemies of his enemies, and whereas they cursed him, he blessed, and prayed
for them: but he also satisfied the wrath of God, not only for the
blasphemers, but all other sinners, not only of the Jews, but of all other
whatsoever, that should believe in him: so two ways we are here to behold
Christ, per antecedens, by the antecedent, and that which goes before, and is
already done and past, namely as our Redeemer, who has suffered and satisfied
for all our blasphemies and other sins: as also per conseques, by the
consequent, or that, which follows after, we must look unto him, as our
guide and captain, which goes before us in his blessed example of patience,
and all other virtues.

Quest. 9. Why the Apostle says, Whatsoever is written, is written for our
learning.
1. Chrysostom makes this the connection: that like as in the old Testament it
is declared how they blasphemed God the Father, so in the new they should rail
upon, and blaspheme the Son: and so those things are written, ne nos illos
imitemur, that we should not imitate them herein: But it is evident by the
words following, that through patience and consolation of the Scriptures, we
might have hope, that these things are written for our imitation: as
Theophylact says, these things are written, vt ea sectemur, that we should
follow them.

2. Lyranus, does understand such things, as are written of Christ, to be
written ad nostram vtilitatem, for our profit, cuius vita, vitae nostrae and
morum est disciplina, whose life is the rule and discipline of our life, and
manners, gloss interlin. but not only the things written of Christ, but
whatsoever else is in the Scriptures written is for our instruction.

3. Some think that the Apostle has not reference only to the former
Scripture cited out of the Psalm, but unto all other allegations in this whole
epistle, and therefore thus infers: but it is evident that the Apostle here
gives a reason of the place immediately cited before.

4. This then is the coherence: least any should think, that the Apostle had
not fitly alleged the former text: he shows the general use of the
Scriptures: that there is nothing idly or superfluously written: but
whatsoever in this or any other place is expressed, is for our learning: as the
Apostle says elsewhere, 2. Tim, 3.16. Mar. Bucer. Par.

Quest. 10. How, whatsoever is written, is written for our learning.
1. Whatsoever is written, wherein there is manifest difference between humane
writings, and divine; for here is nothing superfluous, but every part thereof
is for our instruction; whereas in the other, there are many idle things, and
unprofitable parts: Martyr.

2. A fore time: although this be specially understood of the old Testament,
because as yet the Apostolical writings were not extant; yet it is true also
of every part of the new Testament; quia spiritus semper sui similis, because
the spirit is always like it self; and therefore the new Testament being
written by the same spirit, is profitable to the same ends, Calvin: how this
place makes against the old Marcionites, that condemned the old Testament, and
against the new Libertines, which leave the Scriptures, and cleave unto
revelations, see among the Controversies following, Controv. 2.

For our learning. 1. The Scripture teaches an other manner of learning, then
the Philosophers writings, which are profitable for the obtaining of humane
science, whereof also there is some necessary use, but here that doctrine is
set forth which teaches the way unto eternal life, Ioh. 17.3. 2. here are
four profitable uses of the Scripture delivered; claritas intelligentiae, the
clearenes of understanding by doctrine, soliditas tolerantiae, the soliditie of
patience, the third is suavitas internae laetitiae, the sweetness of inward joy
by consolation, the fourth securitas obtinendae gloriae, the security of
obtaining glory by hope, Lyran. 3. neither are here rehearsed all the
profitable parts of the Scripture, but he touches the principal end, which
is to confirm us in the hope of eternal life, Calvin: for the Scripture is
profitable to work in us every good grace whatsoever. 4. Origin here
observes, that he which reads the Scriptures only, can not attain unto
these profitable uses, sed qui credit and intelligit, but he which believes,
and understands them.

That thorough patience and consolation. 1. As the doctrine of the Scripture is
the foundation of the other fruits, that are reaped out of the Scripture; yet
the end of doctrine is not knowledge, but the practice of life, unto the which
these three belong, patience, consolation, hope. 2. patience is not to be
broken or vanquished with adversity, consolation is to receive comfort by Gods
promises, whereby we are assured of his gracious assistance, and of an happy
end, and both these do confirm our hope: hope brings forth patience and
consolation, as the immediate daughter of faith, and it is again mutually
confirmed, and increased by them. 3. and thus do the Scriptures work in us
these three, patience, consolation, hope, by examples patience, by the promises
consolation, and by the proposed reward of eternal life, hope: and yet more
generally the Scripture by four means especially works these things in us:
1. by the event, when as de facto, the Scriptures do thus reward the diligent
readers of them with these heavenly graces. 2. by the examples of the patience
and comfort of our blessed Savior, and his Apostles, and other holy men, which
they had: whereby we trust, being the members of Christ's body, to be
partakers of the same grace. 3. by the doctrine of Scripture, which teaches
us, that our afflictions fall not out by chance, but by Gods providence, that
they are not as punishments to the children of God, but as probations, and
trialls, that God will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength, and such
like. 4. and by the promises of Gods assistance, and of eternal life.

4. Here is a difference between Christian patience, which is always joined
with hope, and that of the Philosophers, which had no hope of the reward.

11. Quest. Of the Apostles prayer, v. 5. The God of patience and consolation,
etc.
1. Origin thinks, that he calls the Lord the God of patience, etc. quia
Deus cum his est, etc. because God is with them, that have the virtue of
patience, as he is called the God of justice, because he is with them, that
keep justice: but Haymo better, he is so called, quia ipse tribuit patientiam,
and in illorum cordibus habitat, because he both gives patience, and dwells
also in their hearts, etc. for if Origens sense only should be received, it
would be presupposed, that first there must be patience, and then God is
induced by their patience to dwell with them.

2. Here the Apostle does attribute the same effects unto God, patience and
consolation, which before he gave unto the Scriptures, but in a diverse manner:
for God is in deed the author of them, sed verbo, vt instrumento vtitur, but
he uses the word, as his instrument to work them: as Theophylact says, Deum
cum sacris Scripturis vna largiri, etc. that God together with, and by the
Scriptures does give patience and consolation, etc. But God is the author and
giver of patience: Philip. 1.29. To you it is given, for Christ, not only to
believe, etc. but also to suffer: and of consolation, 2. Cor. 4. which
comfort us in all our tribulations.

3. And S. Paul having showed before the use of the Scripture, now thereunto
joins prayer, thereby signifying, cum Scripturis, nobis opus esse precibus,
that together with the Scriptures, we had need of prayer, that God would
assist us, Oecumen. for if in other things a man can do nothing without Gods
assistante, much less can he profit by the reading of Scripture without Gods
direction: Origin, whom Haymo follows, observes, that this was more then
ordinary prayer: Paul after the manner of the Prophets and Patriarks, whose
blessings upon their children are repeated in the Scripture, benedictiones
tribuit Romany, does give this benediction to the Romans.

4. S. Paul wishes that they be of one mind among themselves: where he
touches all the causes of this concord: the author and efficient cause, God,
the material, to be like minded, the formal, according to Christ, the final
cause, in the next verse, that they may withone voice praise God.

(...), idem sapere, to think the same thing. 1. which some refer only to
the affection, that every one idipsum de altero sentiat, do think the same
thing of an other, Theoph. vt sit idem sensus, quod est charitatis, that there
be the same sense and opinion, which is the part of charity, Pelican: so also
Beza, that ye be mutually affected with one mind: and Tolet gives this
reason, because it is added, one toward an other, which shows it must be
referred rather to the affection then understanding. 2. Chrysostom applies it
to the care, which one should have of an others good, vt quod pro se quisque
curat, etc. that what every one is careful of for himself, he should therein
take care for an other. 3. Lyranus gives this sense, mecum desiderantes, etc.
that ye should be like minded unto me in wishing one an others profit. 4.
Pareus understands, consensum in fide, a mutual consent in faith, that they
be of one judgment and opinion concerning the use of indifferent things, and
other matters in question. 5. But I rather with Haymo refer it both to the
consenting in judgment, and concord in affection, vt vnum sentiatis de fide,
spe, and charitate, that they be of one sense and judgment concerning faith,
hope, and charity.

5. But the Apostle seems to wish a thing impossible, that there should be
such a general consent in judgment, seeing that all men have not the same
gifts, and S. Paul says, there must be heresies, 1. Cor. 11.19. Ans. 1. Though
God suffer heresies to be, which are raised by Satan's malice against the truth;
yet among the true members of the Church, there may and ought to be, one
judgment in the truth. 2. and though some difference in matters indifferent
may be found in the true Church of Christ; yet this lets not, but that in
the chief articles of faith, and in fundamental points, there should be an
agreement, and consent.

6. The Apostle adding, according to Jesus Christ, shows a difference of
concord: alia quaedam dilectio est, there is an other kind of love, then in
Christ: and Origin well says, posset fieri, vt in malitia aliqui vnanimiter
consentirent, and vnum saperent in peius: it may be, that some in malice may
consent with one mind, and be of one judgment to the worse, etc.

12. Quest. Of the end of concord, which is to glorify God the father of our
Lord Jesus.
1. The end of our concord is to glorify God: and this concord consists
both of the consent in heart and mind, and in the agreement in outward
profession, which the Apostle here joins together; that with one mind, and
one mouth ye may glorify God: as S. Paul puts them together, Romans 10.10.
with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth he
confesses to salvation.

2. He says not, vt cantu and boatu in templis glorificetis Deum, that you
glorify God with roaring and singing in Churches, as they do in Popery, for
there is a consent only of voice without any agreement in heart: Pelican.

3. And seeing God is only glorified, where there is concord; it shows that
by discord Gods glory is hindered, both in themselves, because their prayers
unto God want their due effect, and in others, which by their dissentions take
occasion to blaspheme, and speak evil of God.

4. The Apostle adds, God, and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. 1.
He is the father of Christ both as he is God, in his eternal generation, and
as man in his generation in time, as he was borne of the virgin Marie, but he
is Christ's God, only as he is man: Haymo. 2. this clause is added by way of
limitation, to distinguish the true God from the false gods of the heathen, and
by way of explanation, that they must worship one God, not as in the old
Testament, when as the doctrine of the Trinity was not yet manifested, but now
as the father of Christ: so they must glorify one God, not according to the
prescript rule of the law, but after the rule of the Gospel: Tolet. 3. and
hereby we are given to understand, that God can not otherwise be glorified,
then as the father of Jesus Christ, for without him nothing is acceptable unto
God.

13. Quest. Of the meaning of the 7. v. Receive ye one an other, as Christ
received us, etc.
1. By receiving, the Apostle understands bearing, helping one an other,
judging charitably one of an other, both the strong not to despise the weak,
nor the weak to judge or think hardly of the strong.

2. As Christ, etc. This note of similitude as, shows not an equality in
like degree, but the quality of the thing, that it be done in truth and
sincerity: as Ioh. 17. Christ says, that they may be one, as we are one, etc.
there may be a likeness in the quality and manner, though a difference remain
in the proportion and degree: and therefore Socinus cavil is soon answered,
that Christ did not satisfy for us by his death, because we are here willed to
receive one an other, as he received us: but we in receiving one an other do
not satisfy one for an other: for Christ has received us, in a far more
excellent manner, then we can one receive an other.

3. As Christ received us: not only in taking our nature upon him, Lyran. but
in bearing our sins, and in offering himself unto death for us: Origin
restrains it to this particular point in question, concerning meats, that we
should judge none to be unclean, and therefore to be refused; as Christ
refused not us for the uncleanness of sin: but the sense is more general: and
the Apostle has special reference to the unity between Gentiles and Jews,
that one should receive an other, seeing Christ made no difference between
them, but died for both.

4. To the glory of God. 1. Chrysostom and Theophylact do join this with
the former clause, that we should one receive an other to the glory of God:
but Origin better coupleth it with the latter part, as Christ received us, etc.
Calvin, Tolet, join it unto both clauses, but it agrees better with the
latter, Beza. 2. Martyr understands it of the glory of God, which Christ
propounded to himself in receiving us: Origin of the effect which follows,
that we being received by Christ, should by our life glorify God: but it is
better, understood of the glory of God, cuius nos facit participes, whereof he
makes us partakers, Pareus: he has received us, vt nos faceret immortales, to
make us likewise immortal: gloss. interlin. 3. and herein the Apostle shows
the excellency of that benefit, which we receive by Christ: he received us
being enemies, much more should we receive our brethren: he received us to
everlasting glory, much more should we receive our brethren unto concord and
peace: so this our receiving one of an other, is nothing to the greatness of
this benefit in Christ, who has received us to a far more excellent state,
then we can one receive an other.

14. Quest. How Christ is said to have been the Minister of circumcision, v. 8.
1. Origin understands this of the circumcision, which Christ took in his
flesh, vt nosceretur ex semine Abrahae veniens, etc. that it might be known,
that he came of the seed of Abraham, to whom the promise was made, that in
his seed all the nations of the world should be blessed: and beside the
Apostle insinuates hereby, that the Gentiles should not judge the Jews for
observing the ceremonies of the law, seeing Christ was in his flesh made the
minister of circumcision. Chrysostom following the same sense, gives an other
reason, why Christ was circumcised, vt totam legem impleret, that he might
fulfill the whole law for us, and so appease his fathers wrath, and deliver us
from the curse of the law: But in this sense Christ can not properly be said
actiuely to be the minister of circumcision, which was rather ministered to him,
when he was circumcised.

2. Origin has an other sense, understanding it of spiritual circumcision,
which is in the heart, according to that saying of S. Paul, Romans 2.29. the
circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter: and Haymo
following this sense, applies it to the spiritual circumcision, which
concurreth with baptism: of the which S. Paul speaks, Colos. 2.11. In whom
also ye are circumcised, with circumcision made without hands, by putting off
the sinful body of the flesh, etc. in that ye are buried with him through
baptism: thus also Iunius in his parall. But this spiritual circumcision, is
not peculiar to the Jews, but common also to the believing Gentiles: whereas
the Apostle speaks here of the prioritie and prerogative of the Jews.

3. Haymo has also an other interpretation, that Christ is said to be the
minister of circumcision, because before the time of his incarnation, he being
the word of his father, did minister circumcision to the Israelites, eam dando
and praecipiendo, by giving, and commanding it unto them to be observed: this
sense Faius misliketh not, lex ipsa per Christum in monte data est, the law was
given by Christ in the mount. But it is evident, that the Apostle speaks here
of Christ come in the flesh, to confirm the promises made to the fathers.

4. Wherefore by circumcision here, the circumcised Jews are understood, by
the figure called a metonymie, the adiunct being taken for the subject: as c.
4.12. Abraham is called the father of the circumcision: and Gal. 2.8. Peter is
said to have the Apostleship of the circumcision: and yet withal it shows
that Christ did submit himself to the whole law, and to the ceremonies
thereof; as Gal. 4.4. he is said to be made under the law: thus Calvin, Martyr,
Beza, Gualter, Lyran, Tolet, Pareus, with many other expositors: and this sense
best agrees with the Apostles purpose, who proves that distributiuely, and
in parts, which before he affirmed, how Christ had received all to the glory
of the father: which first he shows to have been performed in Christ's own
person to the Jews, and afterward to the Gentiles: this then is the meaning of
the words.

The Minister. 1. which shows the great humility of Christ, that he refused
no ministry nor service, to do good to his nation: as he says himself in
the Gospel, that he came not to be ministered, but to minister: and in the same
sense, S. Paul says, Phil. 1. that he took upon him the form of a servant.
2. and this ministry consisted not only in his preaching, though therein he
watched with all diligence, but in all other ministeries in the flesh, his
incarnation, passion, resurrection, because he came to fulfill the promises
made to the fathers. 3. and he specially labored, and ministered in preaching
the word: teaching us wherein the ministry of the word consists, not in a
bare naked title, or in ceremonies, solemnities, processions, as the Papal
priesthood and ministry is chiefly busied in such things; but in teaching,
and exhorting, wherein our blessed Savior labored most faithfully: and
thereunto watched by three means especially, prayer unto God, holiness of life,
and by the power of miracles.

Of the circumcision: that is, of the circumcised Jews: to whom he both
preached himself, saying, he was sent only to the lost sheep of Israel: and
also gave a charge to his Apostles, and disciples, only to preach to the
Jews, not to the Gentiles: and though Christ preached also in the coasts of
the Samaritans, yet that was not usual, but only by the way, and somewhat
extraordinarily, to make a way for the calling of the Gentiles: for otherwise,
his chiefest abode was in Iewrie.

For the truth of God, etc. 1. that is, that God might appear to be true in
his promises made unto the fathers concerning the Messiah, whom he promised to
send: so it was not for any merit in the Jews, that Christ was first sent unto
them, but that the promises of God might be fulfilled. 2. yet in a diverse
manner: he preached to the Jews in his own person, to the Gentiles by his
Apostles: the Jews had promises made to the fathers, which were to be
performed, quasi ex debito, as it were of debt, not in regard of the Jews, to
whom God was not endebted, but of the truth of God, with whom it is just to
perform that which he promised, Lyran. but the Gentiles were called of Gods
mercy only without any such promise, which though it were made de gentibus,
of and concerning the Gentiles and their vocation, yet it was not made
gentibus, to the Gentiles, as the promises were made to the fathers, Pareus.

Thus our blessed Savior is set forth unto us, vt minister humilis, as an
humble minister, magister vtilis, a profitable master; because it is added, for
the truth: and amicus stabilis, a stable and faithful friend, to confirm the
promises, Gorrhan.

15. Quest. Of the vocation and calling of the Gentiles, why it is said to be
of mercy, and of the Jews, in truth.
v. 9. And let the Gentiles praise God, etc. This naming and mentioning of the
Gentiles shows that the other part must be understood of the Jews, that
Christ was first a minister unto them: Iunius in his parallels thinks, that
Christ was a Minister of the spiritual circumcision spoken of by S. Paul,
Coloss. 2.11. both unto Jews and Gentiles, and that S. Paul does not
expressly speak of the Jews, though first he show how Christ received them,
because partly that needed no proof, as the assumption of the Gentiles did,
and partly it may be understood, by the other part of the distribution
concerning the Gentiles: but it is better, as is showed in the former question,
by circumcision to understand the circumcised nation of the Jews, and so both
parts of the distribution are made more evident.

For his mercy: It was Gods mercy also to make those gracious promises to the
Jews: but because no promise was made to the Gentiles, but concerning them:
neither are the promises concerning them so frequent in the Prophets, as those
made to the Jews: therefore the Apostle does unto the Jews ascribe the
verity of Gods promises, and to the Gentiles mercy: so Hierome well observes
this difference upon these words, Psalm. 85.11. Mercy and truth are met:
Iudaeis repromissum est, quod veniet Salvator, nobis ex Gentibus, non est
repromissum, etc. It was promised to the Jews, that the Savior should come,
but to us of the Gentiles it was not promised, therefore it was mercy only in
the people of the Gentiles, and truth in the people of the Jews, because that
came which was promised, etc. so the Apostle excludes the Gentiles from the
promises, they were strangers from the covenant of promise: and this
difference Gualter well observes in that place, Micah. c. 7.20. Thou will
perform thy truth to Jacob, and thy mercy to Abraham: it was mercy, in
making the first gracious truth and grant to Abraham, and to his seed, and
then truth, in performing the promises to Jacob, made to his father Abraham.

Yet these two, truth and mercy, are not so to be distinguished, as the one
should be without the other: for the calling of the Jews, as it was in truth,
so was it of mercy: and the vocation of the Gentiles, as it was of mercy, so
also in truth: for the truth of the Prophesies, and predictions made concerning
the Gentiles, was to take place: but mercy is ascribed to the Gentiles, quia
magis apparet in conuersione Gentium, because it appeared more in the
conversion of the Gentiles, to whom no promises were made at all: Gorrhan: This
is usual in the Apostles distributions, only to distinguish the parts
according to diverse degrees of more or less, not that one member altogether
excludes the other, as specially appears in these two places, c. 4.25.
Christ died for our sins, and rose again for our justification: and c.
10.10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth he
confesses to salvation.

Thus the Jews and Gentiles are made equal in their calling, and assuming to
Christ, both being so assumed of mercy, that all envy and dissension might
be taken away, and both of them provoked to praise God for his mercy.

Quest. 16. Of the places of Scripture, produced by the Apostle to prove the
calling of the Gentiles. v. 9.10.11.12.
v. 9. I will confess thee among the Gentiles: 1. This cannot be understood of
the person of David, for he made this song a little before his death, as
appears 2. Sam. 22. when God had delivered him from all his enemies; he could
not then in his own person set forth the praise of God among the Gentiles in
his grave. 2. Iunius in his parallels, thinks that David speaks this of
himself, but under the person of Christ, that he in him, which should come of
his seed, as one of his faithful members, should set forth the praises of God
among the Gentiles: as Levi is said Heb. 7. to have been tithed in Abraham. 3.
Pet. Mar. understands the body of Christ, the Church of God, in whose person
David speaks: 4. rather David speaks here in the person of Christ, who in
his members does continually set forth the praises of God among the Gentiles:
filius Dei laudat patrem per ora and opera Gentium, the Son praises the
Father by the mouths and works of the Gentiles: Haymo: and because facit
confiteri, he makes them confess unto the praise of God. 5. so first here the
consequent is proved by the antecedent: because God cannot be praised, nisi in
caetu sidelium, but in the congregation of the faithful, Calvin: the Gentiles
cannot please God, unless they first should become the people of God: and then
the force of the argument lies in this prediction and promise made by David,
which must be fulfilled: but David promises that the Gentiles, when they are
called, shall praise God, therefore they shall be called.

v. 10. Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people: 1. some think this place to be
taken out of Psalem 67.5. Let the people praise thee O God, etc. Calvin,
Gualter: but there the other words, with thy people, are not found: Thomas, as
Erasmus observes well, will have it cited out of the 25. of Isay: but it is
evident to be found Deuter. 32.43. Ye nations praise his people, or rejoice
with his people. 2. But the Jews will object, that the Apostle does not cite
that place aright: for the words in the Hebrew are, praise ye nations his
people, not with his people, or, and his people. Answ. This place must either
be read thus, praise ye Gentiles his people, or ye Gentiles his people praise
him, or ye Gentiles with his people, etc. the first is not so fit, for Moses in
that song does reprove the people of Israel, and threatens, that for their
disobedience they shall be cast off, v. 21. I will move them to jealousy with
those, which are no people: and therefore it is not like, that Moses would bid
the Gentiles praise the people, whom he had dispraised himself, Iun. and yet
this reading being admitted, the Gentiles could not praise the people of God,
but they must praise their God also, and God could they not praise and honor,
unless they were first called to the knowledge of his name: the second reading
does manifestly make the Gentiles the people of God, as it were excluding the
Jews: therefore the third is fittest, joining both Gentiles and Jews together
in the praising of God: the Apostle adds the word (...), with, for better
explanation, following the Septuagint. 3. Again, whereas the Jews object,
that the people of God in the Scriptures, are sometime expressed by the name of
goi, a nation, as Isa. 1.4. a sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity:
We answer, that so it can not be here, because the nations are called to
rejoice with the people of God, where the nations are manifestly distinguished
from the people of God: and though the word goi, in the singular, a nation, do
sometime signify the Jews, yet in the plural, goijm, nations, it signifies
the Gentiles. 4. And herein lies the force of this argument. 1. the consequent
is proved by the antecedent; by their joy, is inferred their partaking of the
grace and knowledge of God, for the which they joy, Par. 2. and further hereby
is signified, that they shall be associate to the people of God, and be joined
with them in the service of God, Faius. 3. nay by their zeal of Gods glory,
and earnest rejoicing, they shall provoke the Jews to emulation, Martyr. 4.
and beside, hereby is insinuated the mercy, which the Gentiles shall receive:
for the more free the benefit is, the greater cause there is of rejoicing:
Tolet.

v. 11. Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and magnify him all ye people, Psalm.
127.1. 1. Haymo in the first place understands the nations, in the second the
people of Gods that they should rejoice de salute fratrum, for the salvation of
their brethren: quia aux^^ Deus numerum plebis, because God has increased the
number of his people, by adding to the Gentiles: gloss interlin. and Gorrhan
yields this reason, because a people is defined to be rationabilis hominum
caetus iuris consensu, and vtilitatis communione sociaetus, a reasonable
company of men consociate together by the consent of a law, and community of
profit, and such were the Jews, etc. But such also were the Gentiles, that had
their laws and common societies: therefore it is not necessary to make here
this distinction. 2. It suffices that this note of universality all,
comprehends both Jews and Gentiles, that they should praise God for his
mercy and truth, in extending his loving kindness to the Gentiles, and in
performing his promises made unto the Fathers: Calvin: 3. and herein consists
the force of the argument, the Gentiles are willed by the Prophet to praise
God, which they could not do without the knowledge of God: at non frustra
iubentur, but they are not willed or commanded to praise God in vain:
therefore they should praise God, and consequently should obtain mercy, for
the which God is to be praised. 4. Chrysostom gives two reasons, why the
Apostle here alleges so many testimonies to prove the vocation of the
Gentiles, and to suppress the insolency of the Jews, not to despise the
Gentiles, videns ab omnibus illos Prophetis vocari, seeing they were called and
named by all the Prophets: the other, to teach the Gentiles modesty and
humility, seeing they were called only of grace and mercy.

v. 12. There shall be a root of Iesse, etc. this testimony is cited out of
the Prophecy of Isai. c. 11.10. but somewhat diversely from the original, for
both as Origin observes some things are omitted, which the Prophet has, as in
the beginning of the verse, these words, in that day, and in the end, his rest
shall be glorious, which words were not necessary to the Apostles purpose: and
beside in the rest, he follows the translation of the Septuagint, as he does
usually, as Origin notes, but when either minus necessaria videbuntur, the
things interpreted by the Septuagint, seem to be not greatly necessary, or
when sensibus Scripturae vti vult magis, quam verbis interpretum, he follows
the sense of the Scripture, rather then the words of the interpreters: so in
these two cases the Apostle leaves the Septuagint, when either they add any
thing superfluously, not in the original, or do leave the sense of the
Scripture. 2. But in this place S. Paul refuses not the interpretation of the
Septuagint, because they retain the sense, though they read not the words:
whereas the original reads, he shall stand up, as a sign to the people, the
Septuagint render, he shall rise up to reign over the Gentiles: in the same
sense, quia sub vexillo principis agat populus, because the people do gather
under the ensign of the Prince, Beza, Erasmus: and whereas in the Hebrew text
it is said, they shall seek unto him, the Septuagint read, they shall must in
him: sperant qui concurrunt ad aliquem, for they hope, which run unto any to
ask, Eras. and no man seeks that, de cuius inventione desperet, of the
finding whereof he doubts. 3. A root of Iesse. 1. Origin interprets this
name to signify, est mihi, he is unto me, which he makes to be the name of
Christ, and to signify his eternity, as the Lord said to Moses, I am has
sent thee, Exodus 3. but in the original the proper name is Ishai, which
signifies, vir meus, my man or husband, which the Greeks turn into the name
Iesse. 2. Haymo gives this for one sense, that Christ is this root of Iesse,
that he which in respect of his humanity came of the stock of Iesse, he was
in respect of his divinity, creator and radix Iesse, the creator and root of
Iesse himself: this sense follows Gualter, that this root of Iesse was
Christ himself, the root, foundation, and cause of all the favors, which God
bestowed upon that family: but Iesse rather is the root and stock himself,
and Christ as a graffe should grow out of his root, as the Prophet himself
shows, c. 11.1. or to speak more directly, Iesse was as the root, David as
the tree out of that root, Marie as a branch of that tree, and Christ as a
budde of that branch, Haymo. 4. and it is called a root, because then that
family was obscure, when Christ sprang up out of it, as the root of the tree
lies hid in the earth: and Iesse is named rather then David, because the
kingdom of David was then ceased, only the family of Iesse still remained.

17. Quest. Of the Apostles prayer, v. 13. The God of hope fill you with all
joy and peace, etc.
The God of peace. 1. Origin notes that the Apostle by occasion of the next
words before, in him shall the Gentiles hope, says here, the God of hope: if
it had been said before, in whom the Gentiles shall believe, he would have
said here, the God of faith, or belief: thus the Apostle does infer one
thing out of an other, that the whole epistle may seem to be linked together
with a golden chain: so before v. 4. having said, that by patience and
consolation of the Scriptures we might have hope, he adds in the next verse,
the God of patience and consolation give you, that ye be like minded, etc. 2.
He is called the God of hope, both obiective, because he is the only object of
our hope, as 1. Tim. 6.17. rich men are charged not to put their trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living God; and effective, because God only is
the author and worker of hope in us: 1. Pet. 1.4. which has begotten us to a
lively hope, etc.

Fill you with all joy, and peace. 1. Origin moves a question, how the
Apostle should wish unto them all joy, seeing he himself did know but in part,
and prophecy in part: and he makes this answer, that then a man is filled
with all peace, si in plenitudine crediderit Trinitatis, when he believes in
the fullness of the Trinity, being by faith in Christ's blood, reconciled to
God the father, and joined to the holy Ghost, being purged from his sins. 2.
but by all joy and peace, the Apostle means rather, solid and perfect joy,
which always remains: it can never be taken from them, it endures all
times: as the Apostle says, Philip. 4.4. Rejoice always in the Lord, and
again I say rejoice. 3. and here the Apostle aliudeth to that former saying,
c. 14.17. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, joy,
and peace: and so here he wishes the same things, true joy, which arises of a
conscience justified by faith, and peace both in their own conscience, and
with their brethren that there be no longer any variance or dissension among
them: and then he adds, in believing: 1. whereby he signifies the
righteousness of faith, which is the cause of the other two, joy and peace. 2.
some understand it otherwise, gaudium de suscepta fide, joy for the faith
received, Tolet. 3. Haymo thus, vt credentes, etc. sius pacifici, that
believing in Christ, who has reconciled us, ye may be at peace among your
selves: but the first sense is the best: to show that faith is vinculum
concordiae, the bond of peace, Calvin. 4. so here he wishes these three
graces, joy in our selves, peace toward our brethren, and faith toward God:
with these three the mind is filled; gaudio concupiscibilis, pace irascibilis,
fide rationalis, the concupiscible or desiring faculty of the mind with joy,
the irascible, angry, or incensing faculty with peace, the reasonable with
faith, Gorrhan.

That ye may abound in hope. 1. He simply does not wish unto them hope, but to
abound in hope: that like as if one abound in treasure, he may draw out thence
for all occasions; so this abounding hope serves for all necessity. 2. some
by this abounding in hope, understand the hoping for of all things needful
both for the body and soul, as if a Christian do want money wherewith to
maintain himself, iubetur sperare, he is bid to trust in God; and though he
see nothing in himself but sin, yet he is bid also to hope for salvation,
Pelican, but it rather signifies the certentie of hope, de vita aeterna
habenda, of having, and enjoying eternal life, gloss. ordin. 3. and this is
put after joy and peace in faith, because where the peace of conscience
justified by faith is not, there is no hope, but plain desperation: for faith
is the ground of things hoped for, Hebr. 11.1. and hope is put in the last
place, because it is tanquam signaculum, as the seal of all other Christian
virtues, which makes sure our salvation, Par.

Through the power of the holy Ghost, etc. 1. Chrysostomes gloss is here to be
taken heed of, that the Apostle says not simply, by the holy Ghost, sed si
simul, and quae nostra sunt attulerimus, but if we bring somewhat of our own,
as if we believe, and abound in good works, that we shall draw unto us the
spirit: if we have good works, we shall, also have the spirit, and if we have
the spirit, we shall also have good works, that is, increase, and go forward
in them: to this purpose Chrysostom: as though we could do any good works at
all without the spirit: as the Apostle says, Every good giving, etc. comes
down from the father of lights, Iam. 1.17. 2. The vulgar Latin reads, in
the virtue of the holy Ghost: which the ordinary gloss interprets, in
fortitudine bona operationis, that ye abound in the strength of good works,
which are wrought by the spirit. Lyranus understands by abounding, cumulum
meritorum, the heap of merits, which are principally the work of the spirit.
Tolet interprets this abounding in the virtue of the spirit, of increasing in
the graces and gifts of the spirit: but in the original, though the words are
(...), in the virtue, yet there is no coniuuction, as the Latin reads, in the
hope, and in the virtue: but this, that ye abound in hope, in the virtue, etc.
which is better interpreted by the virtue, or power of the holy Ghost, as the
Syrian interpreter reads it; so also Vatablus, giving this annotation upon
it; which hope concipitur in nobis per potentiam, etc. is conceived in us by
the power of the holy Ghost: so also Origin, if he which believes, virtute,
spiritus sancti munitur, be armed by the strength of the spirit, he is sure to
have the fullness of joy and peace; likewise Haymo, though he read, in virtute,
in virtue, as Origin does, yet he interprets it per virtutem, by the virtue
and power: the same sense follows Chrysostom, erit bec ex spiritu sancto,
this is of the spirit: and Theophylact, spes ista a spiritu sancto stabilitur,
this hope is established by the spirit: thus also Beza, Martyr, Pareus,
Osiander: some by this virtue of the spirit, understand charity, which is
shed abroad in our hearts by the spirit: but faith not charity, is the
means to work this peace and joy in us. 3. So every way here is fulness; in
the giver, the God of hope fill you; in the gift, with all joy; in the end,
that you may abound; in the manner, by the power of the holy Ghost, Gorrh.

18. Quest. Why the Apostle does thus insinuate himself, that he was persuaded
of the Romans, that they had such excellent gifts.
v. 14. I am persuaded. 1. Two reasons may be yielded, why the Apostle gives
this singular commendation of the Romans; one is, as Chrysostom says, quia
sermonem multis locis asperiorem fererat, etc. because he had in diverse places
spoken sharply unto them, he now uses this insinuation, to qualify his former
asperitie, least they might think, that he thought them all to be very rude
and simple: an other is, as the ordinary gloss supplieth out of Ambrose, per
hanc laudem provocat ad meliora, by this praising of them, he provoke and
stirs them up more unto goodness. 2. he is persuaded himself, he says not,
audivi, I have heard it of others, but he himself knew these things to be in
them, by their fruits: there are two kinds of persuasion, one is an infallible
persuasion, which the faithful have of themselves, the other is a probable
persuasion, which they have of others. 3. and he says, I my self, as it were
making them equal unto himself: that he had not all knowledge, but that they
also therein abounded. 4. and thus the Apostle wisely as he began with their
commendation, that their faith was published thoroughout the world, c. 1.8. so
he ends with the same: and so like a wise Orator, as he first insinuated
himself into their affection, so he leaves with their good will and liking.

2. The things, which he commends them for, are 1. goodness, (...), which the
Latin translation reads, dilection, love, as though he had read (...), as
Erasmus observes, but as Beza acknowledges, no such Greek word is to be
found: so they which follow the Latin interpreter, as Lyran. Gorrhan, Tolet,
understand it of goodness, gentleness, a good charitable opinion, which one has
of an other: but it rather signifies as Chrysostom notes, vniversalem
virtutem, an universal virtue, a general goodness, including the other also.
2. The next gift wherein they abounded, was all knowledge: which must be
restrained to matters of faith, as Lyranus notes: for other curious and
unnecessary knowledge the Apostle would not commend them: this the Apostle
adds, because their good inclination in themselves was not sufficient, if
they had not knowledge to use it. 3. then follows the third, that they were
able one to admonish an other: he acknowledges them to be todidem Magistros,
so many Masters, that had not need to be taught, but were able to instruct and
admonish one an other: so these two things are required in him, that should
admonish an other, knowledge, that he be not ignorant, what and whereof to
admonish them, and goodness, that he be not culpable in himself, in that,
wherein he would admonish an other: for he that is the instructor of an other,
must edify him, verbo and exemplo, by the word of knowledge, and example of
life.

Quest. 19. Whether Saint Paul do truly give this commendation unto the
Romans.
This doubt is moved, both because the Apostle in the former chapter had found
fault with the Romans, that some of them were weak in faith, and judged the
rest in the eating of meats, and they which were stronger in judgment
despised them, which were weak: as also because none in this life can attain
unto such perfection, to be filled with all knowledge and goodness, as he says
also of the Corinthians, that they were made rich in him in all kind of speech,
and all kind of knowledge, 1. Cor. 1.5. seeing the Apostle confesses of
himself, 1. Cor. 13.9. We know in part, and prophecy in part.

Ans. 1. To the first part of this objection, the answer is, that although
there were some weak and ignorant among the Romans, and not sufficiently
instructed concerning the use of Christian liberty: yet there were others
which indeed were well grounded in knowledge, and excelled in goodness, and of
these the Apostle gives this testimony: as the ordinary gloss well
observes, in that the Apostle says, that ye are able to admonish an other:
where, admonet perfectiores de correctione minorum, he admonishes those, which
are perfect, of the correcting and instructing of the weaker sort. 2. To the
second part Origin makes this answer: that Saint Paul and others like unto
him, ad comparationem caeterorum perfecti dicuntur, are said to be perfect in
comparison of others: ad illam vero perfectionem, quae in coelestibus est
ordinibus, etc. but in respect of that perfection, which is among the heavenly
orders, no man can be said here to be perfect: So where Saint Paul says, Phil.
3. 12. Not as though I were atteined unto it, or were already perfect: ad
illam apicem caelestis perfectionis, etc. he writes thus looking unto that
high point of celestial perfection: but where afterward in the same place,
verse. 15. he says, let us therefore, as many as are perfect, be thus minded,
ad humanae tantum perfectionis respicit gradum, he has respect only to the
degree of humane perfection.

Origin further does illustrate this thing in this manner: sicut in puerilibus
studijs, etc. like as in the learning of children, in respect of those which
are newly entered, Magister ipse literarius appellatur perfectus, the Master
that teaches the letters, and to read, is called perfect; yet he is not so
perfect, as he which teaches grammar, nor the Grammarian so perfect as the
Rhetorician, nor he as the Philosopher: so there are degrees of perfection in
humane knowledge, yet there is no comparison to the celestial.

And that the Apostle speaks of such perfection of knowledge, as may be
attained unto among men, not of an absolute perfection, is evident by his own
words, speaking of admonishing one an other: he means then such a perfection,
as yet has need of mutual admonition, Par. dub. 4.

20. Quest. Why the Apostle says, I have written boldly after a sort. v. 15.
I have written somewhat boldly. 1. Chrysostom here observes the wisdom of
the Apostle, that does thus qualify and temper his speech, by this humane and
courteous concession: both in regard of the condition of the Romans, who were
more famous, by reason of the Imperial seat at Rome, then other Christians,
and therefore he does thus pacify them: and beside, it is the Apostles use in
other of his Epistles, to allay his sharp reprehensions with mild, and
hopeful words: as to the Hebrews, 6.9. We are persuaded better things of you
(beloved,) though we thus speak: so to the Galatians, after he had sharply
rebuked them, c. 3. O ye foolist Galatians, who has bewitched you? etc. he
says, c. 5.10. I have trust in you through the Lord, that ye will be none
otherwise minded. 2. This liberty and boldness, which the Apostle uses, the
Greek Scholiast refers to the calling of the Apostle, that he made bold
with his office, in sparing and forbearing them: as if he should have said,
maiora and plura, vt cui doctrina concredita sit, scribere debeo, I ought to
write more things and greater, as unto whom the doctrine is committed, but I
spare you: but Chrysostom better refers it to the Apostles former
admonition, that therein he made bold with the Romans, rather then with his
office. 3. This boldness Erasmus understands of the Apostles round
admonitions, discovering the idolatry of the Romans, and other abominations,
c. 1. Martyr rather of the former speeches uttered in the former chapter,
touching the question about the use of things indifferent: but Pareus better
joins both together: for speaking against chambring and wantonness, c. 13. he
seems to have relation to the inordinate life of Nero then being Emperor,
and of others among the Romans: and he spoke beside somewhat roundly to the
brethren before: as c. 11. Be not high minded, but fear: c. 12. be not wise in
your selves: c. 14. destroy not the work of God for meats sake: and such like.

In part: (...). 1. which Origin understands of the things, which Paul wrote
of, that he knew much more, then he thought meet to write. 2. the
interlinearie gloss thus expounds, ex part perfectorum, on the behalf of
those which are perfect. 3. Lyranus, ex part, i. breviter, succincte, in part,
that is, briefly, succinctly. 4. Gorrhan, ex part ecclesiae, on the behalf of
the Church, nor of mine own. 5. ex part, i. minus perfect, in part, that is,
not perfectly, and yet I was bold in respect of mine Apostleship, Hugo: this
sense is worst of all: for the Apostles writings proceeding from the spirit of
God, are in no respect imperfect: this gloss the Romanists embrace, who make
the Scripture imperfect, which error see further confuted among the
controversies, Contr. 9. 6. Wherefore this, in part, must be joined with the
former word, boldly, not with (...), I have written: and it signifies no more,
but paulo audacius, as Chrysostom, and the Syrian interpreter, or
aliquantulum, Erasmus, Vatablus, aliquatenus, Beza, somewhat boldly.

As one, that puts you in remembrance] 1. The Apostle having by a voluntary
concession confessed he had boldly and freely written; yet justifies this his
liberty of speech, both by the manner thereof, he did it only by way of
putting them in mind of that which they knew, not as one, which took upon him
to teach the ignorant: as also by the warrant of his calling, that to this end
he had received grace. 2. This commonefaction or putting in mind, Haymo
refers to some things, which he had written in some other epistles: P.
Martyr (misliking Ambrose sense, monere dixit, non docere, he said to put them
in mind, not to teach them: for those things one may be put in mind of, which
otherwise he knows, but for the present remembers not) he thinks, that S.
Paul here shows that it was his office, both to admonish them, touching their
manners, and conversation, as also as a Pastor to instruct them: but I think
rather with Chrysostom, that S. Paul does by this term qualify his office;
as if he should have said, modicum quid admonens, putting you in mind a
little: he speaks unto them tanquam amicis and aequalibus, as to his friends
and equals: as before c. 1.12. he thus in humility condescendeth unto them, I
long to see you, that I might bestow upon you some spiritual gift: and then he
qualifieth this speech, adding, that I might be comforted together with you,
thorough our mutual faith, etc. thus also M. Calvin, he denies, that he
usurps the part of a teacher, but of an admonisher, which is to put the^ in
mind of things, which otherwise are not unknown: so Osiand. Gualter, Pareus,
with others, and before them, Lyranus, non vos aliquid ignotum docens, not
teaching you any thing unknown, but putting you in mind of that which you
knew already in habit.

Thorough the grace. 1. this is the other argument, whereby he qualifieth his
boldness of writing, from the authority of his calling: and thus every where
the Apostles speech favors of humility: he says first, I have boldly
written, then, in part, and, as putting you in remembrance only, neque his
contentus, and not content with this, he adds further, thorough the grace,
etc. as if he should have said, non ego in vos exurgo, it is not I that do thus
rise against you, God has commanded me. 2. By grace here some understand
gratiam Apostolatus, the grace of his Apostleship, Lyranus: his calling and
office, Tolet, Gorrhan: Chrysostom refers it to the manner of his calling,
which was ex gratia, of grace, non mets meritis, not by my merits: Haymo
understands the excellency of his gifts, which he received more then any of
the Apostles: but rather, whereas elsewhere, the Apostle names both grace and
Apostleship, c. 1.4. the grace both of his conversion, and to be called an
Apostle; here by grace he expresses both, that he was received to mercy and
grace in his conversion, and then put into Christ's service, being called to be
an Apostle, 1. Tim. 1.12.13. Gualter thinks that it is called a grace, in
respect of others, to whom it was a grace of God to have such an Apostle sent
unto them: but I take the former sense, with Pareus.

Quest. 21. Of S. Paul's description of the Ministry of the Gospel.
1. v. 16. That I should be the Minister. The Apostle here shows both the
authority of his Apostleship, and the execution thereof: in the authority he
expresses four things, the author, God, that had given him that grace, the
Minister, Paul, the end, to be the Minister of Christ, and for whom, toward
the Gentiles: then for the execution, there is set forth the thing it self,
the divulgation of the Gospel, the profit thereof, the oblation of the
Gentiles, and the author and efficient thereof, the holy Ghost.

2. The Minister. (...), which signifies a public Minister, and is before
given unto the Magistrate, c. 13.6. but here the Apostle shows what manner of
Minister he is, ministering in the Gospel, as it follows in the next words:
and Chrysostom well notes, that the Apostleship was not conferred, upon the
Apostle as a place of honor, but of labor and service, to have care of
others, to bring them unto God.

3. Ministering the Gospel. 1. the vulgar Latin reads, sanctifying the
Gospel, which they interpret, sanctum esse ostendens, showing it to be holy,
and that the Gentiles must be sanctified by it; Lyran. gloss. interlin. Tolet.
2 but the word is (...), which signifies operari sacris, to minister and give
attendance of holy things: which Chrysostomes interpreter renders sancte
administrans, ministering in the holy service of the Gospel: Augustine reads
as Erasmus notes, consecrans, consecrating the Gospel: as if he should have
said, ipsum mihi sacerdotium est praedicare Evangelium, this is my Priesthood
to preach the Gospel, Chrysostom. because the Jews and Gentiles both boasted of
their external Priesthood and sacrifices, the Apostle shows, that his
ministry was far more excellent, being not occupied in sacrificing of
beasts, but in offering up living men to be an holy sacrifice unto God by their
obedience. 3. and this is fitly alleged, for the Apostles purpose, that as no
man vitio vertit sacerdoti, etc. does seem to blame the Priest, in seeking to
offer an undefiled sacrifice unto God, so they should not think much, if by
his admonitions he fought to offer them an holy sacrifice to God, machaera mea
evangelium, for the Gospel was as his knife, whereby he slayed and prepared
this spiritual sacrifice to offer it unto God.

4. That the oblation or offering up of the Gentiles. 1. Not, oblatio, quam
offerunt Gentes, the oblation, which the Gentiles offer up by faith, should be
accepted, as Lyranus. 2. but vt ipsae gentes offerantur, that the Gentiles
themselves be offered up by me: tanquam manipuli messis meae, as an handful of
my harvest, Hugo: ipsa Gentilitas, that Gentilisme it self may be sanctified
by my ministry, Gorrhan: Calv. Pareus. 3. Chrysostom and Theophylact do
observe, that the Apostle does use this as an argument, ne eum dedignentur
habere sacerdotem, not to disdain to acknowledge him for their spiritual
Priest, to whom all the Gentiles were committed, and consequently the Romans.

5. Sanctified by the holy Ghost. 1. Not by the observation of the law, but by
the power of the holy Ghost, Origin, qui sanctificationis fons est, who is the
fountain of our sanctification. 2. as the sacrifices of the law, had their
legal and external purifyings, so this oblation has a spiritual
sanctification by the spirit, which consists of the inward operation wrought
of the spirit, Calv. and fide etiam donantur, they are endued with faith,
without the which nothing is acceptable unto God, Pellic. 3. this is not added
by the Apostle, as though we were acceptable unto God, because of our
sanctity, but this our sanctification, is an oblation acceptable to God
thorough Christ.

Quest. 22. Of the Apostles boasting or rejoicing, and the manner thereof.
v. 17. I have therefore wherein to rejoice. 1. the Apostle having before much
abased, and as it were cast down himself, now erigit sermonem, ne
contemptibilis videatur, he does now erect and advance his style, least he
might seem contemptible, Chrysostom. and least he might have seemed to usurp
and intrude upon the Romans, in writing unto them, he shows how he had to
rejoice in respect of his labors and travails among other of the Gentiles
also, Martyr: and because there wanted not some every where that depraved the
Apostle, and disgraced his ministry, he now by certain glorious effects
begins to extol his office, and to confirm his authority.

To rejoice, or I have matter of glory, or rejoicing. 1. Haymo understands
it of everlasting glory, habeo gloriam praeparatam, I have glory prepared
with God. 2. Lyranus interprets this glory, to be authoritatem officij, the
authority of his office which he had from Christ. 3. the interlin. gloss.
meritum dignum gloria, his merit worthy of glory: and whereas that place may
be objected, c. 8.18. the afflictions or sufferings of this life, are not
(condigna,) condign or worthy of the glory which shall be showed: Gorrhan
thus distinguishes that they are not, condign, secundum equiparantiam,
according to an equality, yet they are digna, worthy, quoad sufficientiam
meriti, in respect of the sufficiency of the merit: But this is an idle
distinction, for the Greek word there used is (...) worthy, there is no such
difference in that word between dignity and condignitie: and there can be no
merit, where there is not an equality, and like value and proportion Between
the merit and the thing merited: and further this gloss here is contrary to
the Apostle, who ascribes all unto Christ, as Chrysostom well expounds,
glorior non in meipso, sed in gratia Dei, I do not boast in my self, but in
the grace of Christ. 4. The Apostle then shows wherein he might rejoice and
commend his ministry, in respect of the glorious effects, and notable
success thereof: but this his rejoicing, least he might seem to commend
himself, is two ways qualified: first for the manner, he rejoices thorough
Christ, acknowledging all this to proceed from his grace, in solo Christo est
vera gloriatio apud Deum, in Christ only is true glorying, and rejoicing with
God: and without Christ, to rejoice in God, is as if a man should think se
habere gloriam apud Deum sine iustitia, sine sapientia, etc. that he could have
glory with God without justice, wisdom, truth: all which Christ is unto us:
secondly, for the matter, he says, in those things which pertain to God, that
is, not in riches, honor, the wisdom of the world, as Origin expounds, but
in matters concerning religion and worship of God, wherein his ministry and
office consisted: as the Apostle describes the office of a Priest, He is
appointed for men in things pertaining unto God, Hebr. 5.1.

Quest. 23. Of the meaning of these words, I dare not speak of any thing, etc.
v. 18.
I dare not speak. 1. Ambrose gives this sense, as though the Apostle should
say, he could not rehearse any thing belonging unto the preaching of the Gospel
which Christ had not wrought in him: indigere non habet aliquid divinae
virtutis, quod sibi non sit praestitum a Deo, he stood not in need of the
divine help in any thing which was not abundantly supplied by God: this sense
follows Beza, and interprets non sustinuerim, etc. I cannot endure to
speak of any thing, which Christ has not wrought, etc. that is, Christ has
wrought so abundantly every way by me, that I can speak nothing else: and he
gives this reason, because, if it be translated, I dare not: it should
signify, that he had a will to speak of other things, but not power: But 1.
the Apostles intendment is not to show, that he had no lack in any thing of
the divine assistance, which notwithstanding was true, but only to prove that
which he said before, that he had wherein to rejoice in Christ: so that the
emphasis or force of his speech lies not in these words, I dare not speak,
but in these, which Christ has not wrought by me. 2. and the Greek text is,
(...), any of those things, which, etc. not (...), any thing which, as M. Beza
would have it; and so as Erasmus observes, the original text will not bear
Ambrose exposition. 3. and this word, I dare not, is used by the Apostle in the
same sense elsewhere, as 2. Cor. 10.12. we dare not make our selves of those
which praise themselves: which shows not a will in him wanting power: but se
religione prohiberi, he made a religion and conscience of it, Gualter: he
neither would, nor could speak otherwise.

2. Lyranus thinks that here is an opposition against the false Apostles,
that S. Paul's preaching was not as theirs, in word only, and not in power: but
the Apostles purpose is to prove that, which he had propounded, that he would
glory only in Christ.

3. Some think that S. Paul preventeth an objection, ne quis existimaret,
least any should think, that he did glory, plus quam veritas facti exigebat,
more then the truth of the thing required: the Apostle shows that what he
glories in, was truly effected, Tolet: but the force lies not in the word
wrought, as shall be showed after^ard.

4. Origin places the force in this word by me, as it has relation unto
others, quae loquor, non sunt alieni operis verba, what I speak are not the
reports of other men's labors: and this sense Erasmus approoueth as best
agreeable to that which follows, v. 20. that he did not build upon an others
foundation: but still this fitteth not the Apostles purpose here, who intends
only to show, how he had wherein to glory in Christ, not comparing himself
to others.

5. Chrysostom in an other sense interprets these words by me, of his own
works, omnia Dei esse ostendit, nihil suijpsius, he shows that all was of
God, and nothing of himself: so Pet. Martyr, nolle de (...) rebus gloriari, he
will not boast of his own doings: nequid de seipso dicere ausit, that he dare
not speak any thing of himself, whereof Christ was not author.

6. Theophylact puts both these last senses together, non insolens praedico
quod ipse non gesserim, quin potius nil ipse confeci, I do not insolently
publish, that which I have not done my self, or rather, it is not I that have
done it, but God using me as the instrument.

7. As this last sense is not much to be misliked: yet the greatest emphasis
lies in Christ, what Christ has not wrought by me: for the Apostles purpose
is not so much to show by what instrument Christ wrought, as by him, not by
others, by him assisted by grace, not working of himself: as who it was that
wrought all things in him, namely Christ.

So then as in the former verse he showed in whom he gloried, namely in Christ,
and in what, or for what, things belonging to God: so now he proceeds to
prove both these: first who it was that wrought in him, Christ, and then what
things he wrought by him, as it follows in the next verse, Pareus.

Quest. 24. Of the things which Christ wrought by S. Paul, as signs, wonders,
how they differ, v. 19.
In word and deed, etc. These words must not be joined, with the obedience of
the Gentiles, but with the former words, which Christ has not wrought by me,
etc. in word, and deed. 1. the latter Chrysostom understands of S. Paul's
conversation, that both by his doctrine and life he converted the Gentiles. 2.
the most by deeds, understand his miracles, as Origin, opere signorum, by the
work of signs: Haymo, factis miraculorum, by the deeds of miracles: so also
Lyranus, Tolet, and of our writers, Martyr, Osiander, Hyperius, with others:
but the Apostle speaks of signs and wonders afterward. 3. Gualter
understands, by deed, indefessam industriam, assiduos labores, his never
wearied industry, his continual labors, his travails, imprisonment, and
other afflictions, for the preaching of the Gospel. 4. Pareus better
comprehends both: as by word, are understood, not only his public
preachings, but his private exhortations also, and his epistles and writings,
so by the deed or fact, both are signified, his great labors and trauails, as
also his example of godly life: Pet. Martyr refuses this sense, because these
labors were common to the Apostle with others: so was also his preaching: but
these notwithstanding were more excellent in the Apostles then in others, and
therefore are fitly alleged by him, as arguments of his Apostleship.

v. 19. With the power of signs and wonders, etc. 1. Some take signs to be
the general word, for all these things here rehearsed by the Apostle: as the
first sign they make to be his excellent gift of teaching: the second, the
holy actions of his life, the third, his miracles, the fourth, the power of the
holy Ghost, Hyperius: but the Apostle joining signs and wonders together, does
evidently distinguish them from word and deed, before mentioned. 2. Origin thus
distinguishes signs and wonders: the signs are, wherein, beside some
wondrous thing done, aliquid futuurm ostenditur, somewhat to come is signified,
but prodigia, wonders, wherein mirabile tantum aliquid, only some wondrous
thing is showed: but he confesses that always this distinction holds not,
and that in Scripture sometime o^^ is taken for an other. 3. Haymo somewhat
differs here from Origin, a sign he thinks to contain both quiddam
mirabile, and quiddam futuri, some strange thing, and it shows also somewhat
to come: but a wonder he takes to be that, wherein only something is showed,
that is to come: and therefore he thinks they are called prodigia, as if one
should say, porrodigia, or porrodicentia, telling things a far off: Hugo
Cardinal gives an other notation of the word, as if it should be said, procul
a digito, far off from the finger, such a thing as was never seen. 4.
Lyranus, gloss. interlin. Gorrhan understand signs, to be minima miracula, the
less miracles, and wonders to be maiora, the greater, and so to differ only in
degree. 5. Tolet takes those to be signs, which though they are
supernaturally done, yet may be done also in some sort by natural means, as
the healing of sickenesses and infirmities: but wonders do altogether exceed
the power and work of nature, as is the raising of the dead, the healing of
them that are borne blind: so also Faius. 6. But howsoever there may be some
difference in other places between signs and wonders, yet here they are taken
for one and the same, namely the great works, which were done by the Apostles:
as Haymo confesses: for all the miracles which the Apostles wrought, were
signs, quibus veritas praedicationis probabatur, whereby the truth of their
preaching was confirmed, Martyr: they were also wonders, for the strangenes of
the ^orke, which drew men into admiration.

By the power of the spirit of God, etc. 1. which is added, to show a
difference between true and false miracles, which as they differ in the end,
the one being to confirm the truth, the other to deceive, so they have
diverse beginnings: for the true miracles are wrought by the spirit of God, the
false by the working of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. 2. Origin also observes an
excellency between the miracles of S. Paul, and the other Apostles, who
converted many nations unto God, and the miracles of Moses and Aaron, who did
convert thereby very few of the Egyptians. 3. and whereas these things are
said here to be done by the power of the spirit, which elsewhere are ascribed
unto God, Heb. 2.4. God bearing witness by signs: and Mark. 16.17. in my name (
says Christ) they shall cast out devils, therein manifestly is proved the
divinity of Christ, and the holy Ghost, and the unity of essence of the
Blessed Trinity. 4. the word (...), power, virtue, is taken here two ways, in
the first place, with the power of signs, it signifies the efficacy of the
signs, which they wrought in the heart of those which were converted, in the
latter, by the power of the spirit, is signified, the efficient cause of this
efficacy, namely the power of the spirit, Beza.

Quest. 25. Of S. Paul's labors in preaching the gospel from Jerusalem unto
Illyricum.
1. v. 19. So that from Jerusalem. 1. S. Paul sets forth the effects of his
ministry and Apostleship, first extensive, showing the extent thereof, from
Jerusalem to Illyricum, then intensive, intensiuely, he preached, where none
other had preached before, ver. 20. Lyranus.

2. Bucer whom Tolet traceth step by step, (though he conceal his name) does
here diligently set forth the places of S. Paul's peregrination, and travel in
preaching the Gospel: Paul being converted going from Jerusalem to Damascus,
from thence went to Arabia, and after three years, returned to Damascus, and
from thence to Jerusalem, Galat. 1.17.18. from Jerusalem he went to Cesarea,
and so to Tarsus, Act. 29.30. from Tarsus, Barnabas brought Paul to Antioch,
Act. 11. and from thence to Jerusalem, to carry relief to the Jews, Act.
11.30. from Jerusalem, they returned to Antioch, Act. 12.25. c. 13.1. from
Antioch he and Barnabas were sent forth by the Church by the direction of the
spirit, and went to Sele^cia, then to Cyprus, and to some cities of Pamphylia,
and so to an other Antioch in Pisidia, Act. 13. and thorough certain parts of
Lycaonia, and then returned to Antioch, from whence they had been commended by
the Church, Act. 14.26. from Antioch they were sent to Jerusalem about the
question of circumcision, and returned to Antioch with the Apostles decree,
Act. 15.30. thence he returned and went thorough Syria, and Cilicia, visiting
the Churches: then he went through Phrygia, Galatia, and Mysia, then to Troas,
wherein he was by a vision, leaving Asia, called into Macedonia, and so came
into the parts of Europe: first to Philippi in Macedonia, Act. 16. then to
Thessalonica, and from thence to Athens, Act. 17. and then to Corinth: thence
to Ephesus, and going to visit the Church in Galatia and Phrygia, Act. 18.23.
he returned to Ephesus, Act. 14. from Ephesus he returned into Macedonia, and
Grecia, Act. 20.1.2. and from Philippi in Macedonia to Troas, and Miletum, Act.
20. and thence by Tyrus and Cesarea, and other cities, he came to Jerusalem,
where he was taken and put in bonds, Act. 21. And thus S. Paul preached as he
says from Jerusalem, in all the regions round about Attica, Beotia, Achaia,
Epirus, even unto Illyricum.

2. And round about, (...), and in a circuit. 1. which Chrysostom
understands backward and forward, not only the cities on this side
Jerusalem, sed quae retro sunt colliges, but thou shall gather also the cities
behind, as the Saracens, Persians, Armenians, and other Barbarians. 2. some do
understand it, that the Apostle went not on preaching recta linea, by a right
and straight line, which being extended from Jerusalem, to Stridon a town in
Illyricum, where Hierome was borne, would contain 350. Germane miles, (which
make thrice so many English miles, more then a thousand,) but he visited the
coasts of the regions in Asia minor, as he went and so fetched a compass by
Cilicia, Cappadocia, Pysidia, Bithinia, Pontus, Mysia, Macedonia, Pareus. 3.
and this circuit also may signify, that he went in and out, going and
returning unto the same cities, as he visited Jerusalem, Antioch, Philippi,
Ephesus, diverse times, as is showed before in the particular description.

3. Unto Illyricum. 1. Which country Haymo says, is finis Asiae, principium
Europae, the end of Asia, and beginning of Europe: Lyranus says, it is in
fine Graeciae, in the end and utmost part of Greece, bordering upon the Sea,
whereupon it is called Illyricum mare, the Illyrian Sea: the Greek scholiast,
and Theophylact, say it was the same country that is called Bulgaria: Osiander
takes ti for the lower Pannonia where is the river Danubius: Pareus thinks
it is the country now called Sclavonia, bordering upon Hungaria, Pelican. 2.
But we must not suppose that S. Paul's labors here ended, for he returned back
again from those parts near unto Illyricum, and took infinite pains and
travail beside in preaching the Gospel. 3. and whereas he makes these two,
Jerusalem and Illyricum the bounds and limits of his travail, we must not
think that he preached no further, then as it were from the river Iordane to
Danubius, for he preached also beyond Jerusalem in the parts of Syria and
Arabia; some think that he begins at Jerusalem, because he went from thence
first to Damascus, Faius: but at such time as he went first from Jerusalem, he
was not then converted: but he names Jerusalem, whether he returned from these
remote parts, and because from thence began after his return, and so went
forward preaching in the regions of Asia the less, and Europe.

4. I have replenished the Gospel. 1. That is, plene praedicauerim, I have
perfectly and fully preached the Gospel, gloss. interlin. Gorrhan: non
perfunctorie praedicavit, he preached not slightly, Mart. perfect tradidit
omnia, he perfectly delivered all points of doctrine, Gualter: but he shows
here only the largenes and extent of his preaching, not the perfection of his
doctrine. 2. Beza does understand it of fulfilling his office in preaching the
Gospel; but to make up this sense many words must be supplied. 3. There are in
this speech three figures used, the first a Synedoche, he takes Jerusalem and
Illyricum the country for the people, the subject for the adiunct, by a
synecdoche, Pareus: then, in that he says he has replenished the Gospel,
there is a figure called hypallage, which is the putting of one word in an
others case, as to say, I have filled the Gospel with them, for, I have filled
them with the Gospel, Iun. annot. as when it is said, trade rati ventos, give
the winds to the ship, for give the ship to the winds: the third figure is a
metaphor, taken from the nets and fishing: that as when the nets are filled
with fish, so the Apostle had filled the preaching of the Gospel, which was as
the net with the abundance of believing Gentiles, Tolet annot. 11.

5. So thus the Apostle abridgeth his infinite labors and travailes in the
Gospel: as in the former part of this verse, acervus miraculorum percurrit, he
ran over an heap of miracles, saying, in the power of signs and wonders, so
here he comprehends infinitas vrbes, an infinite company of cities, and
people where he had preached: and this propter ipsos loquitur, he speaks for
their cause, to commend his Apostleship unto the Romans, that he might have
some fruit among them, as among other of the Gentiles, as he says, c. 1.13.
Chrysostom.

Quest. 26. Why the Apostle would not build upon an others foundation, v. 20.
that is, preach where Christ had been preached already.
1. Origin makes this the cause, ne alieni operis gloriam surripere conaretur,
least he should go about to steal away the glory of an others work: But
this is not all the reason: for then he should never have preached in any
place, where an other had preached before, and so neither in Judea. 2.
Chrysostom gives this reason, least that he might seem to have challenged
the reward of other men's labors, merces laborum, qui ab alijs desudati sunt
aliena erat a Paulo, the reward of the labors, wherein others had sweat, did
not belong vnPaul: But there was no fear, that S. Paul entering into other men's
labors, should take away their reward: for God knows how to recompense both
unto the first and second labourer, unto each man his due reward. 3. Ambrose,
whom the ordinar. gloss follows, thinks the Apostle did preach, where
Christ had not been heard of, to prevent the false Apostles, and so he would
not build upon their foundation, which was not rightly laid: but it is evident,
that S. Paul speaks of the true preaching, where Christ was named. 4. some
think the Apostle did it, ne videretur laborem fugere, least he should seem
to shun labor and seek his own ease, if he had preached only where Christ
had been preached before, Osiander: but this is not all. 5. neither does the
Apostle commend his Apostleship only by the difficulty of the work: because
it was an harder enterprise, first to plant the Gospel, where nothing reigned
but idolatry, as at Athens, and Ephesus: Thus Pareus, Tolet. 6. And others do
think, the Apostle thus speaks, to show his zeal and holy ambition, in
seeking to propagate the Gospel of Christ, where he was not yet known, Bucer.
7. But the Apostle herein does prove his Apostleship, to whom this was
peculiar, not to succeed in other men's labors: that the Romans might hereby
understand illustrem esse propria nota Apostolatus, that he was commended by
the proper and peculiar note of the Apostleship, Martyr: and so in effect S.
Paul uses this argument: it is peculiar and proper to the Apostles to preach
unto them, where Christ is not known: but that have I done, therefore you are
not to make any doubt of mine Apostleshippe, Gualter: so then, the Apostle
alleges three reasons in all, why he preached unto those which had not yet
heard of Christ. 1. because therein consisted the office of an Apostle
properly. 2. and least he might seem to arrogate unto himself, that should
belong unto an other, to put his sickle as it were into an others harvest. 3.
and to fulfill the prophecy of Isay, which he cites in the next verse, that
they should see Christ, to whom he had not been spoken of: which place is
taken out of the 52. of Isay v. 14. where the Prophet evidently speaks of the
calling of the Gentiles, Kings shall shut their mouths at him, that is, shall
not gainesay the preaching of the Gospel, but willingly receive it: then
follow these words here rehearsed by the Apostle, That which had not been told
them, shall they see, and that which they had not heard, shall they understand.

Quest. 27. Whether this place of the Prophet be fitly alleged by the Apostle.
There can be no doubt made hereof. 1. the argument there handled by the
Prophet concerning the preaching of Christ unto the Gentiles, how that Christ
should sprinkle many nations, agrees with the Apostles purpose here: only
that which is generally propounded by the Prophet, the Apostle in particular
applies to himself, not as the sole, but as a principal instrument of this
preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles.

2. The Apostle adds (of him,) to whom it was not spoken of him, which words
the Prophet has not, both because he shows this Prophecy to be accomplished
in the preaching of Christ: and he abridgeth compendiously that prophecy,
which foretells two things, who should be preached, namely Christ, and to
whom, to the Gentiles, who had not heard of him before, both which the Apostle
here joins together: and this is the cause of this small alteration, that
whereas the Prophet speaks of the thing, that which had not been told them,
shall they see, the Apostle turns to the person, to whom it was told
concerning him: Iunius in his parallels.

3. Further it must be observed, that the Apostle for brevity sake leaves the
contrary part to be supplied, he preached, not where Christ was named, but
where he was not named, which must be understood, as may be gathered by the
allegation of this prophecy: the like see before, v. 3.

4. They are said to see him, who was not spoken of, that is, to see Christ in
the preaching of the Gospel, whom they had not seen in the flesh, as the Jews
had: for in the lively preaching of the Gospel Christ is described, as though
with their eyes they had seen him crucified, as S. Paul speaks Galat. 4.1.
and they which heard not shall understand, that is, which had not the law nor
the Prophers, they shall now hear the preaching of the Apostles, and
understand, that is, believe.

Quest. 28. How Saint Paul is not contrary to Christ, which says of his
Apostles, that they entered into others laborers, Ioh. 4.38.
1. The Apostle denying, that he had built upon an others foundation, is not
therein contrary to Christ, Ioh. 4.38. I have sent you to reap that, wherein
you bestowed no labor, other men labored, and ye are entered into their
labors: for the Apostle denies not, that he builded upon the foundation of
the Prophets but acknowledges and confesses it, Ephesians. 2.20. of whom our
Savior speaks in this place: that the Prophets laid the first foundation,
and sowed the first seed of that doctrine, which afterward was more fully
preached by the Apostles: but he compares himself with the rest of the
Apostles, that they had not preached first in those places, where he planted
the Gospel.

2. And whereas it will be objected, that Saint Paul did write unto the
Hebrews, that were converted before, and here to the Romans, that were
already instructed in the ways of Christ: the answer is: 1. that there is
difference between the writing of Epistles and preaching: S. Paul might by his
holy Epistles water that which an other had planted, and yet preach only, and
thereby lay the first foundations, where Christ had not been heard of. 2.
neither must the Apostle be understood to speak so generally, as though he had
preached in no other places, but where Christ had not been preached before,
but cheefely and for the most part.

Quest. 29. Of the Apostles let, and of his purpose to visit the Romans.
As hitherto Saint Paul in his peroration beginning in the 14. v. excuses his
boldness in writing: so here he excuses his not coming, showing his great
desire thereunto.

v. 22. I have been often let. 1. The Apostle had diverse lettes and
impediments to hinder him from preaching, where he intended: sometimes he was
forbidden by the Spirit, as Act. 16.17. sometime he was let by Satan and
his ministers, as by the adversaries the Jews. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16.17. Ambrose
adds a third reason, he stayed sometime, vt excluderet falsa commenta
pseudapostolorum, to exclude and remove the vain fictions of the false
Apostles: but here the Apostle shows an other cause beside all these,
fundandi ecclesias occupatione detentus, he was detained by the imploiment in
founding of Churches, Origin: and so as Chrysostom notes, he expresses the
cause of his stay, which he concealed before, in the beginning of the epistle,
Romans 1.13. 2. the word (...), some understand as well of the many impediments,
as of the many times, wherein he was hindered, Faius: but the latter is more
agreeable, as Chrysostom expounds, and so he said c. 1.13. that (...),
oftentimes he had been purposed to come, but was let hitherto.

v. 23. But now seeing I have no more place: he by these two reasons puts
them in mind of his speedy coming: 1. because he had now no occasion to stay
in those parts, to plant new Churches: for though all were not converted, yet
he had ordained Pastors in every City to build further upon his foundation:
Lyran. 2. where he says in those quarters, (...), climates, it is not taken
strictly, according to the Astronomical account, which makes a climate, to be
a space of the earth between two parellels extended from the equator to the
pole, in which space the day is lengthened by half an hour, which climates
Ptolome numbreth to be 15. the new Astronomers make 24. for in this sense the
Apostle had gone over only two climates preaching the Gospel: but it is here
taken in a larger sense, for these regions: Origin restrains it to Achaia,
where Corinthus was, from whence he thinks this epistle was dated. 3. The
other reason is his ancient and long desire many years of coming unto them:
which desire, it seems the Apostle had at the least 10. years before: for he
wrote this epistle about the 20. year of his conversion, and the 55. of
Christ: and long before that the Romans had received the faith, about the 3.
year of Claudius, when the second persecution was begun by Herod, at such
time, as James was killed, and Peter imprisoned, which was in the 10. year of
the Apostles conversion, and the 45. of Christ: Pareus: But long before this
the Romans had received the faith, for Andronicus and Iunia, whom S. Paul
saluteth Romans 16.7. were in Christ before Paul was converted, which was in the
2. year after the passion of Christ, and the 10. of Tiborius reign, about
ten years before the 3. of Claudius: so that if Paul had this desire, to go
to Rome so soon, as he heard of their faith, he had it above ten years,
nearer twenty: see qu. 29. upon the 1. Chapter.

Quest. 30. Whether Saint Paul in person preached in Spain, as here he
intends, v. 24.
There are here two famous opinions, the one varying from the other. 1. Many of
the ancient Fathers do think, that as Saint Paul at this time purposed, so
he went and preached in Spain: as Dorotheus in synops. patriarch. and
Apostolor. Paul beginning his preaching at Jerusalem, etc. vsque ad Italiani
and Hispaniam praedicando progressus est, went forward in preaching, even unto
Italy and Spain: Cyrill. cateches. 17. in Hispaniam vsque promptitudinem
praedicationis extendit, he extended the readiness of his preaching even unto
Spain: Chrysostom. homil. 76. in Matthew. videas eam ab Hyerosolymis vsque ad
Hispanias currentem, thou may see him coming forth from Jerusalem even unto
Spain: so also in some places Hierome, as in 11. c. of Isay: ad Italiam and
Hispanias alienigenorum portatus est nauibus, he was carried into Italy and
Spain, in strangers ships: so also Theodoret in c. 4.2. epist. ad Timoth.
Paul upon his appeal, being sent by Festus to Rome, his defense being heard
was set free, and in Hispaniam profectus est, and went into Spain, Grego. lib.
32. c. 22. affirms the same, that Paul went into Spain, Paulus cum nunc
Iudaeam, nunc Corinthum, nunc Hispanias peteret, quid se aliud, quam aquilam
esse demonstrabat, Paul sometime going to Judea, and to Corinthus, sometime to
Spain, what did he else show himself to be, then an eagle? so also Anselme
upon the 16. chapter of this Epistle, nec falsum loquitur Paulus, qui se in
Hispaniam profecturum pollicetur, neither did Saint Paul speak false, when he
promised to go into Spain, etc. imitans solis cursum ab Orient ad
Occidentem, imitating the course of the Sun from the East to the West.

Tolet, beside the testimony of these Fathers, uses two reasons, to show that
it was very probable, that Paul according to his purpose here visited Spain.
1. First because being delivered from his imprisonment in Rome, where he
continued two years in custody, he being set at liberty, in the 6. year of
Nero, in those eight years space, before his martyrdom at Rome, which was in
the 14. year of Nero, might perform his promise here made, of going into
Spain. 2. the Apostle, veluti spiritu prophetico, etc. as with a prophetical
spirit foretells his iourneying into Spain, it was then undoubtedly
fulfilled: Tolet ann. 15.

Contra. 1. It is very probable, that S. Paul was delivered after his first
imprisonment, as has been showed before, 12. general quest. upon this whole
Epistle: but then he returned to visit the East Churches, as he oftentimes
promised in his Epistles sent unto them from Rome, as to the Philipp. 2.24. I
trust in the Lord, that I my self also shall come shortly: to Philemon, v. 23.
prepare me lodging, for I trust through your prayers to be given unto you,
etc. 2. neither does S. Paul here make an absolute promise, or speak
prophetically: but says only, when I shall take my journey into Spain, I
will come to you: and Erasmus thinks, that the words here used (...), may be
translated, vt si, that if, or, as the Ecclesiastical expositor, siquando, if
at any time I go into Spain, etc. And that this was no prophetical speech,
appears further, because he says, I trust to see you, and to be brought on
my way thitherward by you: but this was not done, when Saint Paul came to Rome,
for there being detained in hold for two years together, he could not be so
accompanied by them, having not his liberty, for he purposed then not to stay
at Rome, but only to see them in his passage, after that I have been somewhat
filled with your company: This his purpose then failing in some part, was not
prophetical, for then it should have been performed in every point: and
failing in one part, might also in the rest, so that Saint Paul thus spoke,
humana tantum ratione and coniectura, non impulsu spiritus, by humane
conjecture and reason, not by the impulsion and moving of the spirit: Martyr.

2. The other opinion is, which I hold more probable, that Saint Paul was
hindered of his purpose, and did not visit Spain at all.

1. Hierome speaks hereof uncertainly, as writing against Helvidius he
says, that it cannot be concluded that Paul went into Spain, because he so
purposed, cum varijs de causis impederi potuerit, seeing he might by diverse
causes and means be hindered: and upon the 3. to the Ephesians he says,
Paulus vel ad Hispanias perrexit, vel ire disposuit, Paul either went into
Spain, or disposed to go.

2. But Gelasius, as he is cited by Gratian, Cause. 22. qu. 2. c. 5. affirms
directly that Paul performed not, what he promised concerning his going into
Spain; Cum ad Hispaniam se promisisset iturum, dispositione divina maioribus
occupatus ex causis implere non potuit, quod promisit: when he had promised to
go into Spain, being occupied in greater assures, God so disposing, he would
not fulfill, what he promised: Pererius disput. 2. number. 5. would thus shift off
Gelasius authority: 1. that he says not, that Paul never went into Spain,
but not at that time, when he purposed. 2. and this was no decree belonging to
the faith, but only the sentence of the Pope, tanquam particularis Doctoris,
as of some particular Doctor.

Contra. 1. He says simply that Paul did not perform what he had promised, he
speaks not of any time: neither did Saint Paul set any time, when he would
come. 2. the sentence of one of their Popes, though but as a private and
particular Doctor (howsoever we do esteem it) in their valuation should
counteruaile the private opinion of any Doctor beside: but this was not the
Popes private sentence, it is inserted into the decrees, and so a rule of their
Canon law. 3. and not only Gelasius, but Innocentius ad Decentium, an other of
their Popes is in the same mind, neminem excepto Petro Hispanos, etc. that no
man except Peter only did teach Spain, or other Provinces of the West.

Pererius answeareth, that Paul did not teach in Spain in such sort, as that
by him the nation was converted, Churches planted, Pastors and Bishops
constituted: for in those things they received direction from Peter at Rome:
neither did S. Paul continue there so long a time, to do these things, being
either called thence by other weighty affairs of the Church, or not finding
that success of his labors, which he expected, he would not spend his labor
in vain: yet this follows not, but that Paul was in Spain, though he
continued not there so long, for the foresaid purposes.

Contra. 1. Although we produce not this testimony, as approouing every part
thereof: for it is more unlike, that Peter preached in Spain being the
Apostle of the circumcision, then Paul, to whom the Apostleship over the
uncircumcision was committed: yet it may serve to prove that which is
intended, that Paul is denied to have been in Spain. 2. Innocentius words are
general; that none beside Peter, taught in Spain: if Paul taught not there,
he was not there: for he went, if at all, to teach. 3. and how is it like, that
S. Paul should preach there, and none converted, no Church planted, no Pastors
elected: would S. Paul take so long a journey, to the utmost coasts of the
West, to do nothing? and is it like, that he going thither by the direction of
the Spirit, went to no purpose? And how comes it to pass, that their best
Catholics being now in Spain, he will lay such an imputation upon it, that
it was then worse, then all other countries, and more hardly subdued to the
faith: these are but weak and simple conjectures. Other answers Pererius has
beside, but not worth the while to answer, specially in a matter of no greater
moment. 4. Beside these testimonies, Thomas Aquine in his commentary here, is
of the same mind, that Paul was not in Spain: and Dominicus Sotus himself a
Spaniard, yet thinks, that Paul preached not there: though it had been a
great honor to that nation, to have so noble a founder, yet he is not partial
in seeking the credit of his country by a thing unlikely and improbable: Sotus
reasons, I confess are but weak: that S. Paul was two years in custody at
Rome, and then he could not be permitted to visit Spain, and in the end of
those two years, he was put to death under Nero: and because no mention is
made of S. Paul's journey into Spain in the Acts of the Apostles: for after
those two years of imprisonment at Rome, Paul was set at liberty, and
suffered not till 8. years after in the 14. year of Nero. Neither does S.
Luke set down all the Acts of S. Paul, but only such, as he did before he was
brought to Rome upon his appeal. 5. Now other probable conjectures shall be
alleged of this opinion, that S. Paul never was in Spain.

1. I omit Pet. Martyrs reason, that S. Paul hoped also, se vinculis
liberandum, etc. that he should be delivered from his bonds at Rome, but it did
not so fall out: and being there in captivity still, he could not visit
Spain: for it is more probable, that S. Paul was delivered out of his first
captivity at Rome, as has been showed before, qu. 12. general.

2. Gualters conjecture also has no great certentie, toties praepeditus
praeter animi voluntatem, etc. that Paul being so often hindered beside his
will and purpose, might be hindered now also.

3. I rather thus reason with M. Calvin, the best evidence for S. Paul's being
in Spain is out of this place: for else where I find no such purpose of the
Apostle: but this text proves it not: de spe enim tantum loquitur, for he
speaks only of his hope, wherein he might be deceived, as other faithful
men often are in their hopes.

But the best reason, against S. Paul's going into Spain is this: if ever he
were there, then either at his first coming to Rome, or at his second: but in
neither: if in his first, then either at his arrival there, after he had seen
and visited the brethren: but that was not, for he was kept two years in bonds
under the custody of a soldier, Act. 28. or after the two years expired, when
he was set at liberty: but then he returned to visit the East Churches, as he
signified he would in diverse of his Epistles written from Rome: and it is not
like, that he went first into Spain, and then back again into Grecia and
Asia, for these are East from Rome, Spain lies toward the West. Neither at
his second coming to Rome is it like he went into Spain, for then he was
again apprehended by Nero, and there suffered his glorious martyrdom: it is
very probable, that in his second coming to Rome he intended to fulfill this
his promise, and to be accompanied by the brethren of Rome thitherward, but
that he was intercepted at Rome, and so the Lord thought good to crown him
with the glory of martyrdom. But about this matter, being no point of faith,
it is needless to contend much.

31. Quest. Of the meaning of the 24. verse.
v. 24. When I shall take my journey. The Greek words (...), some translate
quandocunque whenever, as Origens and Chrysostomes translator, and the Greek
Scholiast: the Ecclesiastical expositor, si quando, if at any time: Pareus,
quod si, but if: Erasmus, vt si, that if: in all these readings, S. Paul should
speak vncertenly, and doubtfully of his coming into Spain: the Latin
interpreter reads, cum, when, so Beza, quando, when, and so (...), is taken
1. Cor. 11.34. Other things will I set in order, when I come.

Into Spain. 1. Erasmus thinks, that the Grecians following S. Paul,
fraudant Hispaniam prima syllaba, do curtall the first syllable, calling it
(...), for Hispania: but other nations beside so use to call it, as the
Germans, Spanica, the Italians Spagnia, and so in English we call it Spain.
2. The reason, why he purposes to go into Spain, 1. Gorrhan thinks to be
this, because it was tributarie to the Romans, 1. Machab. 8.3. and therefore it
would be acceptable to them, Tolet. 2. Ambrose, quia pseudapostolos
praeoccupare festinat, he would make have, to forestall the false-apostles,
that every where attempted to creep in. 3. but Lyranus better touches the
cause, that as S. Paul had preached in the East, ita desiderabat hoc facere in
occidente, so he desires to do the like in the West where Spain was: and
nihil adhuc in Hispanos collatum est, and it should seem, that nothing yet had
bin bestowed upon the Spaniards, Mart. the gospel had not yet bin preached unto
the^.

I will come to you, etc. 1. Lyranus thinks, that S. Paul had such an earnest
desire to see Rome, quia erat civitas capitanca, because it was the captain or
chief city of the whole world. 2. but the reason was, because of the report
of their great faith, published over the world, that he might be mutually
comforted with them, Romans 1.12. 3. and he took this to be a fit occasion to
visit them, when he went into Spain, for that his journey could not be
conveniently undertaken by land, for then he was to go a great circuit about
thorough Dalmatia, Hungaria, Germany, France: but the speediest and nearest
passage was by sea, and so he might visit Rome by the way.

I trust: he is not sure, but hops well: thus he writes for two reasons. 1.
in respect of the divine providence, which orders and directs all things;
because all times are in Gods hand: ex me nihil possum, I can do nothing of my
self. 2. and the other reason was in respect of the second causes; because he
knew not how his navigation should fall out, whether he might be carried by a
straight cut, by the Ionian and African Sea directly unto Gades in Spain, or
to strike up, fetching a bought or compass by the Sicilian and Tyrrhene Sea to
Rome.

To see you in my journey, etc. 1. He says he will see them in the way, ne
istud eos inflaret, least this might puff them up, that he had expressed his
great desire to see them, observa quomodo illos constringat, observe how he
does hold them in, saying, when I go into Spain: so he both is willing to
show his love and desire unto them, as also to stay them, ne nimium glorientur,
that they glory not therein too much, Chrysostom. 2. Origin further notes,
least that the Romans might think, that he would see them only in transitu,
as he passed by, intending his journey to an other place, and visiting them
only by the way, he adds; after I have been somewhat filled with you: that
until such time, as they were mutually filled and satisfied one with an other,
he intended not to leave them. 3. Lyranus thinks that Paul intended not to
stay long in Rome, but to visit them in the way; because Peter with his
disciples was at this time in Rome, and sic non erat eius praedicatio ibitam
necessaria, etc. and so his preaching should not be there so necessary, as in
Spain. But Peter was not at this time in Rome, for then it is not like that S.
Paul would have left him out in his salutation, c. 16. 4. Haymo observes,
following Origin, that S. Paul moderatius praesentiam suam pollicitus, does
more sparingly promise his presence: because we do with greater desire receive
those things, quae cito metuimus auferenda, which we are afraid will be soon
taken from us, and we use to neglect such things, quae nos diutius retenturos
credimus, which we hope to hold longer.

And to be brought in my way thitherward by you, etc. 1. Chrysostom notes,
that hereby the Apostle excuses his former speech, that he intended only to
see them in his passage: for they should be his witnesses, that not by any
contempt or neglect of them, sed ipse necessitate tractus transcurram, but that
being so drawn by necessity I pass thorough. 2. S. Paul requesteth this of
them, as the fittest guides for him in his journey, for the Romans were well
known in those cities and places, by the which he should pass into Spain,
(as being Lords of that country, Lyran.) and sic aditus facilior pateret, and
so a better way should be made for his preaching, Martyr. 3. And hereby the
Apostle signifies, quantum sibi de illis promittat, how much he does promise
himself of them, to insinuate himself the better into their love: for the
more trust one sees to be reposed in him, the more he takes himself to be
bound, Calvin. 4. he desires not to be lead by them in any pompous manner, but
that they by the way might receive some profit by S. Paul's company, and
thereby the better edify themselves, and others at their return, Par. 5.
neither does the Apostle herein seem to arrogate any thing to himself, in
requiring this duty; seeing he brought unto them, omnium spiritualium honorum
fructum, the fruit of all spiritual good things: and this might be easily
performed by them, and that to their singular profit.

After I have been in part filled with you. 1. parentis hoc potius est, quam
praeceptoris, this indulgent affection is of a father, rather then a teacher,
Oecumen. 2. to be filled in part. some understand, ex part vestri, in that
part of you, which was at variance, but is now reconciled, Hugo: some refer
it to the time, ex part temporis, a little time, gloss interlin. Chrysostom
thinks it is so said, because he could never be fully satisfied with their
company: but it signifies no more, then aliquantulum, to be somewhat filled,
according to the shortness of the time of his abode, as it is taken before, v.
15. Par. 3. and thus morationem suam in ipsorum arbitrio collocat, the time of
his stay he permits to their judgment: not to depart till they be mutually
satisfied, Origin.

33. Quest. Of Paul's journey to Jerusalem, wherefore he takes it in hand, v.
25.
1. Because the Apostle had before signified his great desire, which he had to
see the Romans, and now there was no let in those parts, because he had
preached the Gospel to all those countries, ne put aretur veluti irridere eos,
etc. least he might seem to mock them, because he came not yet unto them: he
shows the cause of his stay, which was to carry to the Saints at Jerusalem
certain collections from the Gentiles, Chrysostom. and the Apostle uses a
participle of the present tense, (...), ministering, to show that this business
should not stay him long, it was even now in hand, Erasmus.

2. But it will be objected, that the Apostle should not have preferred the
ministration of alms before the preaching of the Gospel, which he intended in
Spain: as the Apostles themselves resolved, that it was not meet, that they
should leave the word, and minister unto tables, Act. 6. To this objection it
is diuersely answered. 1. generally it is not fit to leave the preaching of
the word to distribute alms, but in casu, and ad tempus, in some case, and for
a time, Gorrhan. 2. duo commoda sunt anteferenda, etc. two commodities together
are to be preferred before one: now the Apostle went to Jerusalem to distribute
alms, yet withal he purposed to preach unto the brethren, and to confirm
their faith. 3. and beside the Churches of the Grecians who were moved by S.
Paul unto this contribution, committed the same to his fidelity, so that this
office was as it were imposed upon him by them, Par. 4. add hereunto, that it
was a part of his Apostolic office: for when the Apostles appointed him to
preach to the uncircumcision, they charged him to remember the pore, Gal. 2.10.
S. Paul therefore was careful to execute this charge committed unto him, Mart.

3. To minister. 1. The word (...), ministering, though generally it signify
any office of the ministry, yet here it is taken more specially, for that
function, which was peculiar to the Deacons in distributing of alms, Beza. 2.
Origin infers hereupon, that this epistle to the Romans was written after
the first and second to the Corinthians, because the alms and collection,
whereunto he moves the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 9.4. by the example of the
Macedonians, was now ready.

4. To the Saints. 1. Ambrose thinks, that these were they, which had
renounced all wordly things, and totus se dederunt obsequijs divinis, and gave
themselves wholly to the service of God, to give an example of perfection unto
other believers: so also Lyranus. 2. Haymo thinks, they were such as had
impoverished themselves, by laying their goods at the Apostles feet, and
bringing all in common: as we read Act. 4. 3. but these Saints rather at
Jerusalem, were in great necessity for these two causes especially; both in
regard of the great famine, which was over all the world under Claudius Caesar,
but cheefely in Judea, which was a dry country, specially that part which was
toward Arabia Petraea, and beside they were in the time of persecution spoiled
and stripped of their goods: as the Apostle says, Heb. 10.34. Ye suffered
with joy the spoiling of your goods: according as Isay prophesied 59.15. he
that refrayneth from evil, makes himself a pray. 4. those Saints have a
double commendation, as Chrysostom notes, a virtute and paupertate, from
their virtue, they are Saints, and from their poverty, they are called in the
next verse, the poor Saints. 5. Origin observes well, that they are called
Saints, not because they were at Jerusalem, but quos non locus, sed conversatio
sancta, and fidei perfectio, such whom not the place, but the perfection of
faith and their holy conversation made spiritual. 6. Haymo says, that some
Doctors delivered this, that Saint Paul gat such liberal contributions from
the Gentiles, for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, that sometime he sent them,
tres, aut quinque modios argenti, three or five bushels of silver: but whence
he has that report, he shows not.

Quest. 34. Of the collection gathered among the Gentiles for the Jews, and
the reasons thereof.
1. It has pleased them of Macedonia, etc. Origin here observes, subtiliter
and verecunde dum Corinthios laudat, hortatur Romanos, modestly and cunningly,
while he praises the Corinthians, he exhorts the Romans, that they should
contribute likewise: and Chrysostom adds, that the Apostle does not directly
stir them up by the example of the Macedonians and Corinthians, putassent id
contumeliose fieri, the Romans would have scorned it, being the Lords of the
world: as he provokes the Corinthians by the forwardnes of the Macedonians, 2.
Cor. 8. yet he wisely insinuates as much.

2. In that it is said, it pleased them, their alacrity and cheerefulnes is
expressed: he extorted it not from them, but they willingly conferred it: as he
writes to the 2. Corinthians. 9. that God loves a cheerful giver: the vulgar
latin reads, probaverunt, they allowed or approved this collection, tanquam
rem honestum, as an honest thing: not only their will was unto it, but their
judgment and approbation, the word is (...), they pleased, or it seemed good
unto them.

3. To make some distribution: the word is (...), communication. 1. Origin
notes this difference, that in spiritualibus communionem posuit, in carnalibus
ministerium, he places communication in spiritual things, and ministry in
carnal: for spiritual things, non tam debentur, quam commodantur, are not so
much owing, as lent, but carnal ex debito exiguntur, are exacted of due debt:
but this difference is not perpetual: for here a communication is said to be
in carnal things. 2. Theophylact gives this reason, why it is called a
communication: quia in communem vtilitatem caedit tam praebentis, quam
accipientis, it is to the common benefit both of the giver, and receiver. 3.
Mr. Calvin thinks it contains a reason of this collection, quia propter
corporis vnitatem, etc. because there ought to be one common and mutual
regard, in respect of the unity of the body, which is all one in Christ. 4.
some think that it is the same, with (...), a collection, which word Saint
Paul uses, 1. Cor. 16. when every one did viritim in commune confer, did
contribute something in common: Pareus, Gorrhan, Faius. 5. but I prefer the
reason rendered by the Greek scholiast, why it is called a communication,
because of the mutual exchange and intercourse between them, ipsi pecunias,
sancti intercessionem apud Deum contribuerunt, they contributed money, and the
Saints their prayers and intercession unto God: so it is called a
communication, because it was mutual, the one gave carnal, the other
spiritual things, as is showed in the verse following: so the Apostle calls
it, a communicating concerning the matter of giving and receiving, Phil. 4.15.
6. Chrysostom further notes that the Apostle says not, alms, but
communication, somewhat to extenuate it, in respect of the Saints, to whom it
was a kind of debt: and he says, a certain, or some communication, in respect
of the Romans, ne videatur Romany avaritiam exprobrare, least he should seem
to vpbraide the Romans with covetousness: Theophylact.

Quest. 35. How the Gentiles are said to be debtors to the Jews.
1. Their debtors are they, etc. 1. not the poor are debtors to the rich, quia
tenentur pro ijs orare, because they are bound to pray for them: Hugo. 2. nor
debtors only in respect of God, a quo misecordiam pectant, of whom they look
for mercy, gloss. interl. 3. not yet only in general, because the rich
debent vsum necessariorum, do owe the use of necessary things unto the poor:
as the wise man says, Prove. 3.27. withhold not good from the owners thereof.
4. but the Gentiles are said to be debtors, because they had received
spiritual things from the Jews, as the Apostle expounds afterward.

2. There are two kind of debts, one is ex debito necessitatis, by a debt of
necessity, and so the people are bound to give of their temporalls unto their
Pastors and Ministers; and there is debitum honestatis, a debt of honesty, and
so the rich are bound to give unto the poor, Hugo Card. but this distinction
rather is to be received: there is debitum civil, a civil debt, and so the
people pay carnal things for spiritual, and debitum natural, a natural debt
or equity, and so for a benefit received every one is bound to show the like
again, Gorrhan, Par.

3. If the Gentiles be made partakers of their spiritual things, etc. 1. The
spiritual things of the Jews are these, as Chrysostom observes, ex ipsis
est Christus, ex ipsis sunt Apostoli, Prophetae, etc. of them was Christ, of
them came the Apostles, and Prophets: from them came the Gospel. 2. Origin has
here an excursion, running out to a mystical and allegorical sense: by the
Saints at Jerusalem, he understands those which are spiritual, by the
Gentiles, those which are yet imperfect: in whom, the flesh must spiritualibus
ministrare praeceptis, minister and be obedient unto the spiritual precepts:
and not lascivire in carnalibus, wax wanton still in carnal things: but this
is far from the Apostles meaning.

4. Chrysostom observes an emphasis in every word, as he says the Gentiles
ought to minister, as they, quiregibus tributa persolvunt, which use to pay
tribute unto kings; the word (...), signifies properly to execute some public
ministry: and it is sometimes referred to spiritual offices: it is here used
to signify, that this office of the Gentiles in communicating to the
necessities of the Saints, was both publicum and sacrum, public and sacred, it
was as a sacrifice unto God, Calv. Beza: And whereas the Apostle says, their
spiritual things, but not their carnal: Chrysostom shows the reason of
this difference, because carnalia sunt omnium communia, things carnal are
common to all.

Quest. 36. In what manner alms ought to be given.
Diverse necessary considerations touching the distribution of alms may be
observed out of the 28. and 27. verses. 1. whereas they of Macedonia and
Achaia, did minister unto the necessity of the Saints of Jerusalem, which was
far distant and remote from those countries of Grecia: therein we have an
example, not only to stretch forth our hand, to the needy, that are among our
selves, but to extend our liberality to other churches abroad, that are in
want and necessity. 2. whereas it seemed good unto them, therein appears
their chearefulnes and willingness, that they gave of a willing and ready
mind, as S. Paul exhorts the Corinthians, 2. epist. c. 9.3. 3. they did
communicate unto the Saints: for though we must do good to all, yet specially
we are bound to do it to the household of faith. 4. and in that the Apostle
says, ye are debtors, he shows that they were bound hereunto, by the common
bond of charity, and Christianity: that although in respect of any civil
bond, they were free, and their alms was an offering of their freewill and
frank mind: yet in charity before God, they were bound thereunto.

Quest. 37. What the Apostle means, by sealing of the fruit, v. 28.
When I have sealed unto them. 1. the vulgar Latin reads, have assigned, so
Lyran. Haymo, but the Greek word (...), signifies rather, consignans vel
obsignans, sealing, confirming, then assigning, and setting over. 2. Origin
understands it of that seal quo imago Dei exprimitur, whereby the image of
God is expressed, that he which gives, give in simplicity of heart, seeking
no praise of men: for then, opus suum signaculo divinae imaginis signat, he
does seal his work with the sign of the divine image. 3. some take it
literally, cum sub sigillo cuiusque ecclesiae ostendero, etc. when I have
showed under the seal of every Church, how much every one has sent, gloss.
interlin. Hugo. 4. Erasmus refers it to the Macedonians, it should be unto
them, tanquam thesaurus in tuto reconditus, as a treasure surely laid up: so
also before him Chrysostom and Theophylact, in aerarium regium condam, I will
lay it up as in the kings treasury. 5. the Greek scholiast thus, in coelis
repositurus, he will lay it up as it were in heaven. 6. But the Apostle uses
only a metaphorical speech, taken from those which use to seal the treasure,
or letters committed unto them: the Apostle says no more but this, after I
have faithfully delivered unto them, this collection committed unto me: so
Calvin, Mart. Pareus, with others.

This fruit. Alms and other works of mercy, are called a fruit in three
respects. 1. in regard of the efficient cause, which is first the spirit, as
good works are called the fruits of the spirit, Galat. 5.22. then of faith and
charity, they are the fruits. 2. in respect of the object, upon whom such
works of mercy are showed and exercised, they are fructus pietatis, a fruit
of their piety, when God stirs up the hearts of others to supply their
necessities, which depend upon God. 3. in respect of the giver and worker, they
are fruits, as Chrysostom observes, lucrum acquirere contributeres, that the
giuers of alms do purchase gain unto themselves, for God will reward them,
and recompense their benignity.

Quest. 38. What the Apostle means by the abundance of the blessing of the
Gospel of Christ, v. 29.
1. Some by this benediction or blessing understand, the plentiful alms and
contribution which the Apostle should find among the Romans: for so he
calls their beneficence, (...), blessing, 2. Cor. 9.5. Erasmus. 2.
Chrysostom and Theophylact mislike not this sense, poteris pro benedictione
eleemosynam intelligere, you may understand for blessing, alms, etc. but they
add further, this abundance of blessing to be, vniuersa bona, all good
things, digna benedictione. i. laud, worthy of blessing, that is, praise: so
they understand blessing, of the praise and commendation, which their virtues
were worthy of, not actiuely, of the blessing which the Apostle should
confer upon them: so also the Greek scholiast: I shall find you omnibus
bonis ornatos, furnished with all good things. M. Calvin also follows this
sense, that the Apostle at his coming should rejoice, quod spiritualibus
Euangelij divitijs affluerent, that they abounded in all spiritual riches of
the Gospel: But it is evident by the text it self, that the Apostle, saying, I
shall come in the abundance of blessing, that it shows rather what the
Apostle shall bring with him, then what he should there find.

3. Some referring it to S. Paul, do understand this abundance of blessing,
of the gift and power of miracles, whereby the Apostle should come furnished,
to confirm the Gospel among them: Ambrose: so also Hugo, miracula multa mihi
dabit facere inter vos, God shall give me power to work many miracles among
you: but in this sense, this blessing, should be too much restrained.

4. Theodoret applies it to the many troubles and afflictions, out of the
which the Lord had delivered Paul, and so abundantly blessed them: but he
speaks of such blessing as he should receive to bestow upon them: as Origin
well says, and venieutis gratia, and suscipientium merita pariter designantur,
both the great grace of the commer, and the worthiness of the receiver is
expressed.

5. So then, the Apostles meaning is, that he should so come, vt benedictione
Evangelij impleam, that I shall fill you with the blessing of the Gospel,
Oecum. that he should come in abundantia honorum spiritualiuos, in the
abundance of spiritual grace, Lyran. he should afferre copiam spiritualium
honorum, bring then abundance of spiritual things, Martyr: he hops adventum
suum fore frugiferum, that his coming unto them shall be fruitful: Beza and
Haymo well expound it by that place, c. 1.11. I long to see you, that I might
bestow upon you some spiritual gift.

6. Origin here further observes, that the Apostle spoke thus by the spirit,
and by the gift of prophecy, supra hominem namque est haec scire de futuris,
for it is above man's teach to know concerning things to come, that he should
not only come unto them, but come in the abundance of blessing: And indeed,
the Apostles going to Rome, was revealed by the spirit; as S. Luke testifies,
Act. 19.20. that he purposed by the spirit, after he had bin at Jerusalem, to
see Rome also: but his other purpose of going into Spain was not by divine
revelation, but humane disposition: and therefore it is probable he failed in
the one, as has been showed before, though not in the other.

Quest. 39. Of the Apostles request, that they would join in prayer with him.
v. 30. I beseech you by our Lord Jesus, etc. 1. It appears how much the
Apostle was troubled in spirit, using this vehement obtestation, as to entreat
them by the Lord Jesus, and by the holy spirit: not that the Apostle was so
careful for his life, but because Ecclesia periculum in eo agisciebat, he
knew nothing could happen unto him, without great danger of the Church. 2. the
force of this obtestation lies herein, that if they did not pray for him, it
would redound much to the dishonor of Christ, and of the holy Ghost: for ^o
entreat one by a thing, is to insinuate, that the thing which is most dear
unto them, will thereby receive hurt, or be wronged, if he prevail not in his
request, Pareus: or he entreats them by the end, which he propounded, it was
the cause of Christ, which they ought to further by their prayers, and the by
efficacy of charity, whereby they were bound to perform this duty toward
him, Tolet: and in effect, be charge them by the love of Christ, wrought in
them by the holy Ghost, to join in prayer with him: as if he should have said,
si in eum creditis, if ye believe in him, if there be in you any charity,
gloss. interlin. as the Apostle, Phillip. 2.1. more at large uses the like
obtestation, if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy, fulfill my joy: so
that he presses and urges them three ways by this vehement obtestation: both
in respect of their love unto Christ, whom they should seem to neglect, in
respect of the Apostle, to whom they were bound in charity, and in regard of
themselves, who should be found, not to have those graces of the spirit in
truth, not bringing forth the fruit of them.

2. For the love of the spirit. 1. Chrysostom observes, that the Apostle
naming Christ, and the spirit, and not the father, does insinuate, that we
should not be troubled when in like manner, he names the Father and the Son
without the spirit, or the father alone: because non semper eodem modo ponit
sanctam Trinitatem, he does not always in one and the same manner set down
the Trinity. 2. Chrysostom, further takes the love of the spirit actiuely,
for the love whereby the spirit has loved us: for as the Father and the Son
loved the world, so likewise the holy Ghost: but rather that love and
conjunction is here signified, which is wrought by the holy Ghost in the
members of Christ: Martyr will have the love of the spirit, to be taken, for
the spirit of love, as c. 9.31. the law of righteousness, is put for the
righteousness of the law: but this inversion of the words is not here
necessary.

3. To strive with me by prayers. 1. certamen vocat ferventem orationem, he
calls a fervent prayer a strife, he would have them pray for him earnestly.
2. and they must pray with feeling and compassion, for they which pray, eorum
in se recipient personam, etc. do as it were take their person upon them, for
whom they pray, Calvin: and make their case their own. 3. and hereby is
signified, that maximum praesidium fidelis oration, that a faithful prayer is
the chiefest defense against the spiritual adversaries, Bucer. 4. Origin
observes further, that the Apostle uses this word of striving together in
prayer, because of the resistance of the spiritual adversary, obsistunt enim
daemones in oratione, etc. for the evil spirits do resist in prayer, first
that one be not found, such as the Apostle speaks, to lift up pure hands
without wrath: and if one do obtain so much as to pray without wrath, vix est
vt effugiat esse sine disceptatione, t. sine superfluis cogitationibus, yet
that will hardly escape him, to pray without doubting, that is, without vain
and idle cogitations: for you shall hardly find one, cui oranti aliquid inanis
cogitationis non occurrat, etc. who in his prayer thinks not of some vain
thing.

Quest. 40. Of the things which S. Paul would have them pray for.
He wills them to pray for these two reasons, first that he may be delivered
from the unbelievers in Judea. 1. S. Paul did know by the revelation of the
spirit, that many troubles should be raised against him in Judea, by the
adversaries of the Gospel, as he says, Act. 20.23. The holy Ghost witnesses
that in every city bonds and afflictions abide me: and although they
persecuted all the Apostles, yet they had a special spite at Paul, as being
the most earnest impugner of the ceremonies of the law: and like as they served
Christ his master, who after he had done all good to the Jews, was put to
death at Jerusalem, so he looked to be served: hereby he shows how necessary
it was, that they should make request for his deliverance, seeing he was to go
among so many wolves, magis feras rabidas quam homine^, rather so many savage
beasts then men. 2. he says not, pray vt hos impugnem, and superem, that I may
vanquish and overcome them, but only be delivered from them, not be hindered
by them in his course, Theophyl. 3. and this he prays, non quod pati metuat,
not that he was afraid to suffer, but that his course might not be hindered,
in performing that service to the Saints, and in accomplishing his desire to
see the Romans, Origin: for otherwise S. Paul was ready in himself, not
only to be bound, but to die at Jerusalem, Act. 21.13. 4. Neither was S. Paul
heard altogether in this desire: for though he escaped death at Jerusalem,
which was conspired by the Jews, yet he was not delivered out of bonds: so God
hears the requests of his Saints in temporal things, so far forth, as it
shall be for his glory, Pareus.

And that my service may be accepted of the Saints: this is the second thing
that he would have them pray for. 1. As S. Paul feared the practices of the
incredulous Jews, so he doubted the sinister suspicions which might be
conceived of him even among the brethren, which were zealous of the law, least
his service herein should not be acceptable unto them. 2. Some understand it
otherwise, that it may be acceptable, that is, sufficiens, sufficient to
relieve their necessities, Gorrhan: some, that my service acceptabile fiat apud
Deum, may be acceptable unto God, Greek, scholiast. Lyran. but the first sense
is the fittest, that his service be not prejudiced by the sinister opinions
which might be conceived of him: as James says unto him, Act. 21.21. Thou
see brother, how many Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous
of the law, and they are informed of thee, that thou teach all the Jews,
which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses: unto such the Apostle prays,
that his service might be welcome and accepted.

Quest. 41. Of the fruits of the prayer of the Romans for S. Paul.
Here follow two effects of their prayer: The first in respect of themselves,
that I may come unto you with joy. 1. Chrysostom here notes, that as the
Apostle begun his epistle, wishing that he might have a prosperous journey to
come unto them, c. 1.11. so he concludes. 2. it was for their profit, that he
should come unto them, an effect of the first part of their prayer, that he
might be delivered, and that he might come unto them with joy, a fruit of the
other part, that his service might be accepted of the Saints, for otherwise he
should come with heavy cheer. 3. he adds, by the will of God, which
condition he inferteth, c. 1.11. both to free himself from the suspicion of
inconstancy, if it should fall out otherwise, and to this end, that if Gods
will were otherwise that he should not come with such joy, as indeed he did
not, (in respect of his outward bonds) they might more patiently bear it.

The other effect and fruit is common to the Apostle with them, that I may be
refreshed with you. 1. where Chrysostom notes the modesty of S. Paul, he
says not to teach and instruct you, but to be comforted. 2. Haymo observes in
the word to be refreshed, that he desires refrigerium, refreshing, qui calore
solis vritur, who is burnt with the heat of the Sun, as they which strive or
fight: so the Apostle had labored in fighting against the profane
Philosophers, unbelieving Jews, gainsaying heretics, and now he desires
ease and refreshing: some refer it to the grief and vexation, which the
Apostle had by reason of the mutual conflicts and contentions among the
Romans, as he says elsewhere, Who is offended and I burn not: from the which
he should find ease and refreshing in their mutual concord, Gorrhan: but
Theophylact better understands it, of the general comfort, which they should
have one by an other: you in me ob doctrinam, for the spiritual doctrine which
you shall receive, and I in you, ob auctam fidem, for your faith increased:
Origin adds, non corporalem requiem quaerit Paulus, Paul seeks not
corporal rest, but the spiritual comfort and rest in God.

Quest. 42. Of the Apostles salutation, The God of peace, etc.
1. As the Apostle began his epistle with the salutation of peace, so he
ends the same, as his manner is, consuevit auditoribus been precari, he is
accustomed to wish well unto his auditors after he has instructed them.

2. He says, the God of peace, giving such titles unto God as best fit the
present argument: as he said before, v. 5. the God of patience and consolation:
and v. 13. the God of hope: so now, the God of peace: he means Christ Jesus,
whom he calls the Lord of peace, 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. who has left the
inheritance of peace unto his Church.

3. And he is called the God of peace, both passively, that they may find
peace with God, and have God at peace with them, and actiuely, that God would
preserve them in peace and unity among themselves.

4. He simply wishes not unto them peace, but true peace, even the peace of
God, qui pax est vera, who is the true peace: that till he come, or whether he
come or not, the God of peace may be with them.

5. And he wishes unto them peace, both in general, that they may be
replenished with all spiritual benediction, and in particular, in respect of
those divisions and dissentions which were among them.

4. Places of Doctrine.
Doct. 1. That Christ's holy example must be imitated of Christians.
v. 3. For Christ also would not please himself, etc. As here the Apostle
propounds the most holy example of our Blessed Savior herein to be followed,
that we should one seek the good of an other: so every where the Apostles do
press the example of their and our Master to be imitated in all other holy
duties: as thereby we are exhorted to beneficence, 2. Cor. 8.9. to mutual
forgiving one an other, Ephesians. 4.32. to love, Ephesians. 5.23. to humility and
modesty, Philip. 2.5. to constancy in our profession, 1. Tim. 6.13. 2. Tim.
2.8. to faithfulness in our calling, Heb. 3.7. to patience under the cross,
Heb. 12.2. to meekenes, 1. Pet. 2.21. and 3.18. so that we find that saying to
be most true, omnis Christi actio, nostra instructio, every action of Christ is
our instruction.

Doct. 2. Of the manifold use and profit of the Scriptures.
v. 4. That we through patience and consolation of the Scriptures might have
hope, etc. Like unto this place is that, 2. Tim. 3.16. where the Apostle makes
a fowrefold use of the Scriptures, it is profitable to teach, to improoue, to
correct, and instruct in righteousness: the first two concern doctrine, the
teaching of the truth, and the convincing of error, the other two belong unto
manners, the correcting of vice, and the instruction and edifying unto holiness,
so here the Apostle expresses four benefits that come by the Scriptures,
doctrine, patience, consolation, hope: so Tertullian speaking of the manifold
use of the Scriptures, coimus ad literarum divinarum commemorationem, etc. we
run together to the rehearsing of the divine Scriptures, as the condition of
the present times does give us occasion to remember them, certe fidem sanctis
vocibus pascimus, spem erigimus, fiduciam figimus, disciplinam praeceptorum
inculcationibus densamus, truly we do nourish our faith with holy sayings,
erect our hope, fasten our trust, strengthen discipline by inculcating the
precepts.

Doct. 3. The promises made unto the Fathers in the old Testament were
spiritual.
v. 8. Christ was the Minister of circumcision, etc. to confirm the promises
made to the Fathers: Then were not these promises only or chiefly of
temporal things, but under them were shadowed spiritual: for Christ did not
by his coming restore unto the Jews any outward temporal blessings: for at
his coming they had other Lords to rule them, the Romans were their
governors: and immediately after our Blessed Saviors death, their country,
commonwealth, and city were destroyed: The promises then made to the fathers
as to Abraham, concerning his seed, and to David, for the continuance of the
kingdom in his line, and the rest, were spiritual, and by the Messiah
spiritually to be performed: and so, all the promises of God in him, were yea,
and Amen: as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 2.20. This may be observed against those,
which think the books of the old Testament to be superfluous and
unnecessary, as containing nothing but terrene and temporal promises.

Doct. 4. Of the divine nature and power of Christ.
v. 12. He shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, and in him shall the
Gentiles trust, etc. The Prophet in these words ascribes divine power unto
Christ: for he is not visible in the world, and yet he shall reign among the
nations: yea they shall trust in him: then he consequently must be able both to
hear and help them: God only must be trusted in, and be believed upon: as
our Savior himself says, Ioh. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

Doct. 5. That Christians in this life are kept under hope, they have not full
fruition of that which they hope for.
In him shall the Gentiles hope or trust: We then in this world live only by
hope: as the Apostle says, Romans 8.24. We are saved by hope: hope that is
seen, is not hope: non ergo in praesenti seculo faelicitatas nostra quaeri
debet, our happiness the^ is not to be sought in this life, Gualter: but we hope
for things which are not seen: which hope of ours is supported by faith, and
our faith preserved and vpheld by the spirit, who is the earnest of our
salvation.

Doct. 6. The holy Ghost proved to be God.
v. 13. That ye may abound in hope thorough the power of the holy Ghost: In
that God is said to fill them with joy, thorough the power of the holy Ghost:
it follows evidently that the holy Ghost is God: for the God of hope works
hope in the power of the spirit: not that the holy Ghost is the organe or
instrument of God, but that there is one and the same power of God the father,
and of the holy spirit: for the spirit distributeth to every one as he will,
1. Cor. 12.11. but this is a divine power, to give unto every one as he will:
so then in that God is said to work in and through the power of the spirit, it
shows a diversity of person, but not a difference of power.

Doct. 7. Of the duty of Ministers in preaching the Gospel.
v. 16. Ministering the Gospel of God. The word is (...), which signifies
properly laboring in holy things: whereby is set forth, what the special
duty of the ministers of the word is, to labor in the word and doctrine: it
is not to sacrifice in the Mass, as Popish Priests: nor to medele in worldly
affairs, leaving the preaching of the Gospel, as many Pastors of the Church
do: but their calling is to minister in the Gospel: Gualter here notes well,
Nec pro fidis Christi ministris haberi possunt, qui post habita verbi
praedicatione circa alia negotia occupantur, etc. they are not to be counted
for the faithful ministers of Christ, which leaving the preaching of the word,
are occupied about other affairs, which do not edify the Church, and do
call them from their duty, etc. Ministers then as Gods soldiers should not
entangle themselves, with the affairs of this life, 2. Tim. 2.4.

Doct. 8. What the Ministers conversation ought to be.
Origin upon these words, ministering the Gospel, etc. observes well, that as
the Priests in the law did provide, that the sacrifice which they offered was
without blemish, that it might be accepted: so they which preach the word, must
have care, ne quod in docendo vitium, ne quae in ministerio culpa nascatur, sed
sua primum vitia iugulet, vt non solum doctrina, sed and vitae exemplo
discipulorum salutem, oblationem suam acceptam faciat Deo, that there be no
fault committed in teaching, nor any offense in his Ministry, but that he
first do slay and mortify his own sins, that not only by doctrine, but by
example of life, he may make his oblation, the salvation of his disciples
acceptable unto God, etc. for Ministers are like a city set upon an hill, that
cannot be hid, Matthew. 5.14.

Doct. 9. That the course of the Gospel cannot be hindered.
v. 19. From Jerusalem round about to Illyricum I have caused to abound, etc.
Herein appears the singular power of God, who by the preaching of S. Paul
converted so many idolatrous nations to the knowledge of Christ: which work
Satan by all his malice could not hinder: as our Blessed Savior said, when he
had sent forth his disciples to preach, that he saw Satan fall from heaven
like lightening, Luke 10. herein appears also the mercy of God, in calling
the barbarous nations to the knowledge of ^is truth: and withal his justice
and severity is manifested toward these nations, that are for their
unthankfulness now deprived of the Gospel of Christ: for where the Gospel was
sometime preached and professed, now the Turkish Alcaron is taught.

Doct. 10. Of the difference between the calling of the Apostles and ordinary
Pastors, v. 19.
The Apostles charge was to be witnesses of Christ, unto the end of the world,
and to the utmost parts of the earth, Act. 1.9. which commission was given unto
them upon necessity for the planting of Churches, and converting of nations:
and in regard of the excellency of their gifts, who were furnished also with
the power of miracles to confirm their doctrine, and for getting more
authority unto the doctrine of the Gospel, it being preached first by them
which had seen, and heard Christ, and had their calling immediately from him:
But other ordinary Pastors are tied to their charges, and unto them belongs
that exhortation of S. Paul to the Pastors of Ephesus, Act. 20.28. Take heed
unto your selves, and to the flock, over the which the holy Ghost has made
you overseers: Pastors then, which are set over their special flocks, must
not, hinc inde discurrere, run up and down without the special calling of
the spirit: as Chrysostom well reproved Epiphanius the Bishop of Cyprus, for
busying himself out of his own charge, and entermedling in Church-affaires at
Constantinople.

11. Doct. That the Pastors and Ministers of the Gospel ought to be
sufficiently maintained.
v. 27. Their debtors are they, for if the Gentiles be made partakers of their
spiritual things, their duty is also to minister unto them carnal, etc. The
same reason the Apostle urges for the maintenance of the Ministers of the
Gospel, 1. Cor. 9.12. so our Savior says, The labourer is worthy of his
hire, Matthew. 10.10. yea and many great promises are made to them, which
perform this duty, that they shall receive the reward of a Prophet, of a
righteous man, of a disciple, Matthew. 10.42. and contrariwise many judgments
do fall upon the people, for the neglect of this duty; as Hagg. 1.9. because
they suffered Gods house to be wast, prohibiti sunt coeli, ne darent rorem, and
prohibita est terra, ne daret gramen, the heavens were restrained from yielding
rain, and the earth was restrained from yielding grass. And where there is
not sufficient maintenance for the Ministers, these two mischiefs do follow,
that both for the present, the people want instruction, and the means of
provision is cut off for future times also, that learning and religion will
decay: ea res minatur interitum vniversae religionis, which thing threatens
the ruin of all religion: to this purpose Melancthon gravely by occasion of
these words.

12. Doct. That the means working under Gods providence are not to be
neglected.
v. 30. That you would strive with me, by prayer, etc. Origin well observes
here, that though the Apostle were assured he should come to the Romans with
abundance of blessing, nihilominus tamen in his, quae manifest futura
cognoverat, sciebat orationem esse necessariam, yet he knew prayer to be
necessary, even in those things, which he knew would certainly come to pass,
etc. the means then must be used: for as it is a carnal confidence to rely
upon the means altogether, leaving Gods providence, so it is presumption and a
tempting of God, to rest immediately upon his providence without the means: S.
Paul knew when he suffered shipwreck, that all should be saved, yet he says,
Unless these stay in the ship, ye can not be saved, Act. 27.30. so the
fruits of the earth are Gods blessing, yet the husbandman must labor: God is
the author of all good gifts, yet are they obtained by prayer.

13. Doct. The faithful have their infirmities.
v. 31. That my service may be accepted of the Saints. S. Paul calls them
Saints, and yet he fears, least his service in bringing them alms from the
Gentiles, by reason of some suspicions conceived, and sinister rumors raised of
him, should not be accepted: for even the godly are many times deceived in
humane matters, by reason either of want of judgment in themselves, or that
they are seduced by others: even the most holy men in Scripture, are set forth
with infirmities; as we read of Moses doubtfulnes at the waters of strife, of
Elias impatience, when he wished to die; of Paul and Barnabas falling out: We
should not then condemn Christians, and censure them as carnal men, and
hypocrites, for some small infirmities.

14. Doct. The faithful have their passions and affections.
v. 32. That I may come unto you with joy. S. Paul being an holy and
sanctified man, yet had his passions sometime of grief, sometime of joy: for
these affections are natural, and are not evil in themselves: nay often, they
are the instruments of virtuous actions: the holy Prophets and Patriarks had
their affections: nay, our blessed Savior had his affections of anger, grief,
joy. The opinion then of the Stoikes is wide, who would have a wise man like a
stone, without any passions at all: for Cato V^icensis a professed Stoike in
his life, that seemed to be moved with nothing, yet was so faint hearted at
his death, that attempting to kill himself, least he should fall into the
hands of Caesar, he could not enter his sword deep to make a deadly wound: and
then struggling and wrestling, his body falling from his bed overthrew a
great press or cupboard standing in the way.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. Whether Saint Peter were justly reprehended of Saint Paul for
refusing to eat with the Gentiles, Gal. 2.14.
This question arises, because S. Peter there might seem to have respect to
the infirmity of the Jews, according to the rule here given by S. Paul, v. 1.
We which are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak: and if it
were so, S. Paul should seem to have reproved Peter causles, for doing that,
which S. Paul himself here advises to be done.

This question was long since controverted, and notably handled between
Hierome and Augustine: Hierome was of opinion, that either S. Paul's
reprehension was only in show, and as it were by agreement between them, or
else not just: Augustine maintains the contrary, that it was in truth, and
most just. Hieromes arguments for his opinion are these.

1. It is said in the text, that Paul reprehended Peter (...), not to the face,
but in speciem, in show: for so also the word signifies: it was as agreed
between them, that S. Paul should rebuke Peter for withdrawing himself from
eating with the Gentiles, and that Peter should seem to bear it patiently, to
content both the Gentiles and the Jews, that neither of them should think any
meats to be unclean.

Ans. But this phrase (...), is not taken in that sense in Scripture, but it
signifies to the face; as Luke 2.31. Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which
thou have prepared [before the face] of all people: so also Act. 3.13. Act.
25.16. and in diverse other places.

2. Argum. Peter offended not against Paul's rule, for before the Jews came, he
did eat with the Gentiles of all meat, according to the liberty of the
Gospel, but after the Jews came, he withdrew himself, therein condescending
to their infirmity.

Ans. S. Peter did avoid the scandale of the Jews, sed maiore scandalo
Gentium, with a greater scandale of the Gentiles: for he by his example, did
constrain them to do like the Jews, as S. Paul says, Gal. 2.14. and therein
was his error.

3. Arg. Peter being an Apostle inspired with the spirit, could not err in a
point of doctrine concerning the difference of meats, especially seeing he had
been specially admonished and instructed herein by an oracle from heaven, Act.
10. and therefore it is not like that he erred herein.

Ans. The antecedent is true, that S. Peter erred not in a point of doctrine,
having therein the sufficient direction of the spirit: but it follows not,
that therefore he erred not in the practice of that doctrine: Peter did not
here deliver any point of doctrine for the which he was reproved, but he erred
in his example and practice: as S. Paul likewise, that every where exhorts
unto charity, and to take heed of strife and contention, yet failed in his
practice, when he fell out with Barnabas, Act. 15.39. neither were the
infirmities of the Apostles any disparagement to their doctrine, as wicked
Porphyrie objected: as it derogateth not to the hauenly treasure, to be carried
in earthly vessels, 2. Cor. 4.7.

4. Argum. If Paul had verily and in deed reprehended Peter, he had been the
author of a great scandale, in reproouing so great an Apostle, for therein he
should not have condescended to the infirmity of the Jews, and the Gentiles
by this means might have suspected Peter's doctrine.

Ans. 1. It is no scandale to reprove a great doctor of the Church, it being
done by authority, as Paul was an Apostle as well as Peter, and upon
necessary cause, as here there was danger least by Peter's example, others
should have been brought into the same dissimulation to be like the Jews. 2.
S. Paul condescended so far and so long to the infirmity of the Jews, that
they were not thereby confirmed in their error, which was feared here. 3.
neither does Paul reprove Peter for his doctrine, but for his practice:
therefore that was a needelesse fear of suspecting his doctrine by this
occasion.

5. Arg. Peter here does none other thing, then Paul did, to condescend to the
infirmity of the Jews, as when he caused Timothy to be circumcised.

Ans. Paul did never constrain the Gentiles to Iudaize, as though the
observation of the ceremonies, were necessary to salvation: for as he
circumcised Timothy least he should offend the Jews, so he refused at an
other time to circumcise Titus, least he should confirm them in their error:
but Peter by his example, did constrain the Gentiles to Iudaize: thus
Augustine, Paulus non ideo Petrum emendavit, Paul did not amend or correct
Peter, because he observed the ceremonies of the Fathers, sed quoniam Gentes
cogebat Iudaizare, tanquam ea saluti necessaria forent: but because he
constrained the Gentiles to Iudaize, as though those things were necessary to
salvation: itaque and Petrus vere correctus, etc. therefore both Peter was
truly reproved, and Paul vera narravit, reports a truth.

6. Hierome obiecteth the authority of Dydimus, Origin, Eusebius, and others
which were of his opinion.

Answ. Augustine sets against these, Cyrpian and Ambrose, to whom may be
added Tertullian, who likewise held, that Peter was in truth, and justly
reprehended of Paul: imo supra hos omnes Paulus ipse occurrit, but above all
these I esteem S. Paul, that affirms it to be so.

Contra. Now on the contrary Augustine produces these reasons, to show that
S. Paul did in earnest and justly reprove S. Peter.

1. The text is evident, v. 11. Saint Paul says, I resisted him to his face,
for he was to be blamed: he that Paul says was too blame, and worthy to be
reproved, was so indeed.

2. Dissimulation in matters concerning the judgment of the necessity and
lawfulnes of a thing, is an error worthy of reproof: but so did Peter
dissemble, making as though it were necessary to hold a difference of meats,
as the Jews did.

3. Beside he by his example constrained the Gentiles to do like the Jews, as
though the observation of the ceremonies were necessary.

4. And further he did confirm the Jews in their error, of the necessary
observing and keeping the ceremonies, in so much that Barnabas, and other Jews
were brought into the same dissimulation.

5. S. Paul says further of Peter and the rest, that they went not the right
way to the truth of the Gospel: and so Augustine concludes, si hoc fecit
Petrus quod facere debuit, mentitus est Paulus, etc. if Peter did that which he
ought to do, then Paul lied, in saying, that he saw they went not with a right
foot to the truth of the Gospel: Augustine. epist. 8.9.12.15.19.

Controv. 2. That Christ is not set forth only as an example for us to
imitate, but as our Savior to redeem us.
v. 3. For Christ also would not please himself: impious Socinus that most
blasphemous heretic against the efficacy of Christ's most holy passion,
whereby he wrought our redemption, will have our Blessed Savior only an
exemplarie instructor by his doctrine and life, not a saving Redeemer by his
death: whose wicked heresy see confuted before c. 5. Con. 6.

Now least this wicked dogmatist and his sectaries might take occasion, here to
confirm their error, it must be considered, that Christ is not here only set
forth unto us as an example to follow both for his patience in bearing the
rebukes of the wicked, and of his zeal, in taking the reproaches and
blasphemies against God his Father, as uttered against himself: but he is to
be looked upon, as our Redeemer, who has taken upon him our infirmities, and
satisfied for our sins committed against God: which is the true meaning of
these words, v. 3. the rebukes of them, which rebuke thee, fell on me: as has
been showed before at large, qu. 8.

And this to be so, that Christ is not only an example unto us of godliness,
but our Redeemer and iustifier from our sins, by dying, and in his death
satisfying for them, to omit other places of Scripture, which are infinite, the
Prophet Isay is a plentiful witness, who in one short chapter the 53.
prophesying of this our redemption by Christ, in ten several places, by most
effectual words does describe the same in this manner: v. 4. he has borne our
infirmities: and again, he has carried our sorrows: v. 5. he was wounded for
our transgressions: and it follows, he was broken for our iniquities: and
again, the chasticement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are
we healed: verse 6. the Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all:
verse 8. For the transgression of my people was he plagued. v. 10. he shall
make his soul an offering for sin. v. 11. he shall bear their iniquities.
v. 12. he bare the sins of many, and prayed for the transgressors: what could
be more evidently expressed, or how in more full and effectual terms could
the force and efficacy of Christ's death redeeming and justifying us from our
sins, be described?

3. Controv. Against the enemies and adversaries to the Scriptures, the
Marcionites, Libertines, with others.
v. 4. Whatsoever is written, etc. Those heretics which impugn the
Scriptures, do either condemn them as unnecessary, or of no use, or reject
them as superfluous for such as are perfect, or hold them as defective and
imperfect, and such as have need of other helps, and supplies: the first are
the Manichees and Marcionites, which condemn the books of Moses, and the old
Testament: the second the Libertines, which do cleave unto their fantastical
dreams, which they call revelations, and say the Scriptures are only for such
as are weak: the third are the Romanists, which do beside the Scriptures
receive many traditions, which they call verbum Dei non scriptum, the word of
God not written, which they make of equal authority with the Scriptures.

1. Against the first, Origin in his commentary here shows, how the things
written aforetime in the old Testament, were written for our learning: and
gives instance of these places; Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the ox,
etc. which S. Paul applies to the Ministers of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. and that
allegory of Abraham's two sons, the one by a free woman, the other by a bond,
which S. Paul expounds of the two testaments, Gal. 4. and that of Manna, and
the rock, which signified Christ, 1. Cor. 10. by this induction Origin
confuteth those heretics which refused the old Testament.

2. The Libertines also and Anabaptists are confuted, which think the
Scriptures serve only for the weak, seeing the Apostle, who counts himself
among the strong, v. 1. here says, whatsoever is written, is written for [our]
learning: the Apostle confesses, that he among the rest received instruction
and learning from the Scriptures. Those then are impudent, and shameless
creatures, which do take themselves to be more perfect then S. Paul, as
needing not the help of the Scriptures.

3. Our adversaries the Papists are here in an other extreme: for as the
Libertines allow the Scriptures only for the use of the simple; so they
contrariwise deny them to the simple and unlearned, and challenge a property
in them only to themselves, that are professed among them of the Clergy, and
to such other, to whom they shall permit the reading of the Scriptures. But S.
Paul here writing to the whole Church of the believing Romans, both learned,
and unlearned, both Pastors and people, says generally, they are written for
our learning: and so our blessed Savior, speaking unto the people of the
Jews, says, Search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39.

And as for that other part of Pharisaicall leaven, in adding unwritten
traditions beside the Scriptures, it is also rejected by warrant of the
Apostles words here; whatsoever things are written, are written for our
learning: things then not written, are not for our learning, as having no
certentie, nor foundation. And S. Paul else where setting forth the manifold use
and profit of the Scriptures, adds, That the man of God may be absolute, and
made perfect, etc. 1. Tim. 3.17. if perfection of knowledge, and to every good
work may be attained unto out of the Scriptures, all other additions are
superfluous. See further hereof, Synops. Centur. 1. err. 12.

4. Controv. Of the authority of the Scriptures, that it depends not upon
the approbation or allowance of the Church.
Whatsoever is written, etc. From hence also may be confuted an other point of
Popish doctrine, that the Scriptures receive their authority and allowance
from the Church: for the word of God in the Scriptures is sufficient of it
self: and we do believe the Scriptures because we are persuaded by the Spirit
of God speaking in the Scriptures, that they are the word of God.

1. For if the Scriptures should receive their authority from the Church, then
it would follow, that God must submit himself to the judgment and approbation
of men: and the Prophet David says, Every man is a liar: can they then which
are natura mendaces, liars by nature, give approbation and authority to the
truth? and further, seeing faith comes by hearing of the word of God, Romans
10.17. and the faithful are begotten by the immortal seed of Gods word, as
the holy Apostle Saint Peter says, how can they that are begotten, beget
credit and authority unto that, which first begat them.

2. We grant that there are certain motives and external inducements to
prepare us to this persuasion of the Scriptures, that they are the word of God:
as 1. That they were written by Prophets which were stirred up of God, and
inspired with his spirit: for how otherwise could plain and simple men, as
Amos, that was a keeper of cattle, the Apostles that were fisher men, be made
able to such great works. 2. they were confirmed by miracles. 3. the
predictions of the Prophets, as of Daniel and the rest, were fulfilled in their
time and place: but God only can foretell and foreshew things to come. 4.
Beside the Scriptures have been miraculously preserved, as the books of the
Law in the time of the captivity, and under the tyranny of Antiochus, that
committed them to the fire; so since both the old and new Testament, have been
by impious Tyrants, as Julian, the Goths, and Vandales, sought for, to be
utterly extinguished, but yet God has preserved them: whereas many humane
writings of Philosophers, Historiographers, and others, have perished by fire,
as when Ptolomes library was burned at Alexandria; and by other casualities.
5. add hereunto the consent of all nations, that have received the Christian
faith, who with one consent, have acknowledged the Scriptures for the word of
God: All these and such other motives, may be inducements unto us at the first
to receive the Scriptures: but the full persuasion is wrought in us by the
spirit of God, in the reading and learning of the Scriptures themselves: that
we may say, touching these motives, as the Samaritanes did unto the woman, that
called them to see Christ, that they believed him, not so much upon her report,
as for that they had heard him themselves, Ioh. 4.

3. But that saying of Augustine will be objected: Evangelio non crederem, nisi
Ecclesiae Catholicae me commoverit authoritas, I had not believed the Gospel,
if the authority of the Catholic Church had not moved me: I answer, that
Augustine was then a Manichee: and we deny not but by this, and the like
means, one may be at the first moved and induced, but the firm belief of
this point, is a work of the spirit: See further Synops. Centur. 1. err. 5.

Controv. 5. Against the invocation of Saints.
v. 13. Now the God of hope fill you, etc. The Apostle teaches us only to put
our trust in God, in calling him, the God of hope, and so the Prophet Jeremy
says, c. 17.5. Cursed is the man, that trusts in man, and makes flesh his
arm: and in that he wishes, God to fill them with joy, we also learn only
to direct our prayers to God, who is the author of all grace: hence then is
refelled the Popish invocation of Saints: which both does derogate from the
honor of God, who bids us to call upon him in the day of trouble, Psalm.
50.15. and it deceives them with vain hope, that place any confidence in such
prayers: for Saints cannot help us, nor furnish us with graces necessary: as
here, joy, peace, faith, hope, are ascribed unto God, as his peculiar gifts: it
is then in vain to pray, O Saint Paul, or Saint Peter help me, and have
mercy upon me, as Papists use to pray: See further of this point, Synops.
Centur. 2. err. 30.

Controv. 6. Of the certainty of salvation, against the Popish diffidence and
doubtfulnesse.
v. 13. That ye may abound in hope, etc. This word (...), to abound, shows a
fulness and certainty of hope: which is nothing else but being armed with a
costant and assured hope, to continue unto the end; and out of this place we
have three special arguments for this certainty of hope, and assurance of
salvation. 1. The Apostle says, the God of hope fill you with all joy: but
where is doubtfulnesse of mind, and perplexity of conscience, there is no
assured hope, but such uncertainty rather brings anxietie, fear, and
grief: so Origin says, he which believes, and is armed by the virtue of the
spirit, certum est, quod plenitudinem gaudij semper habet, it is certain, that
he has always fulness of joy: where then there is fulness of joy, there is
abounding also in hope: but by faith we have fulness of joy, therefore also
fulness of hope. 2. the word here used, to abcund in hope, shows a certainty
of hope: as Haymo well interprets, that by the virtue of the holy Ghost,
plenam habeatis spem aeternae remunerationis, ye may have full hope of the
eternal reward; so also the ordinary gloss, which Gorrhan follows, vt per
ista habita certiores sitis de aeterna beatitudine, that by these things being
once had, ye may be certain of eternal happiness. 3. the prayers of the
faithful cannot be in vain, but are effectual to obtain things appertaining
to salvation: but the Apostle here prays for abundance of hope, and
perseverance to the end, therefore the faithful are sure so to abound, and to
persevere: see further also hereof Synops. Pap. Centur. 4. err. 25.

Controv. 7. Against the power of free will, in spiritual things.
v. 13. The God of peace, etc. in that the Apostle prays unto God, to fill
them with joy and peace in believing, an argument may be framed against that
old Pelagian heresy, touching the power of man's free will in things belonging
to eternal life: which argument is much urged by Augustine against the
Pelagians: for if it were in man's power to attain unto these graces, as faith,
hope, then it were superfluous, assidiuis precibus a Deo emendicare, to beg
them of God by continual prayer: Martyr: See further hereof Synops. Cen. 4.
err. 43.

Controv. 8. Whether the Apostles excusing of himself do derogate from the
authority of this epistle.
v. 16. I have somewhat boldly after a sort written: this may seem to
extenuate the authority of this Epistle, for he which excuses himself,
confesses a fault; but in the Canonical writings no fault or error at all is
to be admitted: And yet if this excuse made by the Apostle do not extenuate
the authority of this Epistle, no more can that excuse of the author of the
book of Macchabees prejudice the authority thereof: 2. Maccha. 15.39. where
the Author says thus: If I have done well, and as the story required, it is
the thing that I desired: but if I have spoken slenderly and barely, it is that
I could: what does this our Author say more then Saint Paul: 2. Cor. 11.6. If I
be rude in speech, yet am I not rude in knowledge, to this purpose Bellarm.
lib. 1. de verb. c. 15.

Contra. 1. Every one which uses excuse, does not acknowledge a fault, but he
that so excuses, as that he craves pardon for his fault: But so does not Paul
here: he makes an excuse, to prevent an objection: as if he should have said,
it may seem unto you, that I have written somewhat boldly: but indeed I have
not, I have only used that boldness, which became mine office, according to the
grace given unto me: he therefore does not crave pardon of a fault, but
defends and justifies that, which might seem to have been a fault.

2. But the author of the books of the Macchabees does excuse himself far
otherwise: for he doubts, whether he have well written or not, as he ought,
and he craves pardon if he fail, saying, it is that I could, as if he should
say, he were worthy to be pardoned, because he did it as well as he could:
this shows, that he writ not by a divine spirit: for the spirit of God uses
not to crave pardon of any thing done amiss.

3. And beside other arguments there are, which do make against the authority
of this book, as 1. because all the Canonical Scriptures were written by
Prophets, but in the Macchabees time there was no Prophet. 2. Eusebius, and
Hierome think, that Josephus was the writer of those books, but his writings
are not canonical. 3. the author says, that he did epitomize the work of
Jason the Cyrenian: but the spirit of God uses not the help of others
writings. 4. this book was not received into the Canon, of the Jews, to whom
all the oracles of God were committed. 5. and it contains diverse things
contrary to the Canonical Scriptures: as is showed else where: Synops.
Centur. 1. p. 15.

4. S. Paul in that place to the Corinthians, excuses not the slendernes of
his writing, as though he had written otherwise then he should: but he
justifies the simplicity of his style, as his adversaries did take it,
because he would not by humane eloquence obscure the virtue of the cross of
Christ, which consisted not in the vain show of words, but in the power and
evidence of the spirit: 1. Cor. 2.4.

Controv. 9. That the Scriptures are perfect and absolute, containing
whatsoever is necessary to salvation, both touching doctrine and manners.
v. 15. I have written to you after a sort to put you in remembrance: Hence the
Romanists infer. 1. That the Scriptures are not perfect, as not containing
all necessary points of doctrine, but only certain parts, not all, as the
Apostle says: he has written in part, Stapleton: antid. p. 804. 2. whereas
the Apostle says, to put you in remembrance, Bellarmine concludes, that the
Scriptures were not appointed to be a rule of faith and doctrine, but only
commentarium quoddam, a certain remembrance to preserve the doctrine received
by preaching: his reasons are these. 1. the Apostle here says, he did write to
put them in remembrance. 2. If the Scriptures were a rule of faith, they should
contain only those things which are necessary unto faith, but now there are
many things in the Scripture as the histories of the old Testament, which are
not so necessary, being not written to that end to be believed, but
therefore to be believed, because they are written. 3. If it were a rule of
faith, it should be totalis, a total rule, whereas it is only partialis, a
rule in part, not containing all necessary points of doctrine.

Contra. 1. These words in part, are not to be joined with the former word
written, but with the other boldly: so the Syrian interpreter, does well put
them together, paulo audacius scripsi, I have written somewhat boldly:
therefore it is a mere cavil to apply it to the imperfection of Scripture:
See before qu. 20. upon this chapter.

2. And Bellarmines collection is as sophistical. 1. it does not follow, the
Scripture serves to admonish or put in remembrance, therefore it is not a rule
of faith, for it is both; and that it serves more then only to put us in
remembrance, the Apostle showed before, v. 4. that by the Scriptures we attain
unto doctrine, patience, consolation, hope: and elsewhere, 2. Tim. 3.16. the
Apostle says, the Scripture is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct,
and instruct in righteousness, it is not then profitable only to put us in
remembrance. 2. neither does it follow, that the Scripture should be no rule
of faith, if it should contain other things, which are not necessary unto
faith: for although other matter should be there found, not simply necessary
unto faith: yet may it contain all things necessary unto faith; nay the
contrary would follow better, it contains more then is requisite to faith,
Ergo, whatsoever is necessary to faith: but we rather deny the antecedent,
that nothing is expressed in Scripture, which is not in some sort necessary
unto faith, doctrine, or manners, though every thing is not in the same degree
and measure so necessary; for the Apostle had said before, v. 4. that
whatsoever is written, is written for our learning, he speaks of all the
Scripture excluding no part thereof, no not those historical books. 3. And we
deny that the Scripture is a partial rule, for if it were not total, it were
no rule at all: neither is there any doctrine necessary unto faith, and
salvation which is not delivered in the Scriptures: See more hereof, Pareus,
dub. 6. and Synops. Centur. 1. err. 12.

Controv. 10. Against the Popish sacrifice of the Mass, which the Papists make
the peculiar act of their Priesthood.
v. 16. Ministering the Gospel of God. Pet. Martyr, M. Calvin, Osiander,
Pareus, do fitly apply this text against the Popish sacrificing priesthood,
and their sacrifice of the Mass: Paul makes himself a sacrificing Priest of
the Gospel, for so the word (...), signifies to consecrate, to sacrifice: this
was Paul's sacrifice, to offer up the obedience of the Gentiles a spiritual
sacrifice unto God: as Chrysostom here says, ipsum mihi sacerdotium est
praedicare and Evangelizari, this is my priesthood to preach the Gospel,
machaera mea Euangeliu^, my sword is the Gospel, so Origin also sanctificale
opus esse praedicare Euangelium, this is the sanctified and (priestly) work to
preach the Gospel. The Papists will have an external sacrifice of the Mass
beside, wherein the body of Christ is offered up in sacrifice: if this had
been the principal act of S. Paul's Priesthood, he had occasion to speak of
it here, when he sets forth the dignity and excellency of his ministry:
and further, the principal act of his priesthood, was to win the Gentiles to
the obedience of the Gospel: but this is not performed by the Mass, men are
not thereby taught, to mortify their flesh, by faith in Christ, Osiand. and
this oblation of S. Paul, and the other of Popish Priests is far unlike, he
offreth up the Gentiles, but they presume to offer up Christ in sacrifice: so
they are not, ministri Christi, sed mactatores, not the Ministers of Christ,
but the manslayers, not the imitators of Paul, but of Judas rather, that
delivered up Christ to be slain, Pareus: See further hereof, Synops. Papis.
Centur.

Controv. 11. Against the superstitious orders of Monks and Friars.
v. 18. For the obedience of the Gentiles: S. Paul by his preaching labored to
bring the Gentiles to the obedience of faith: his end was not to bring them to
the obedience of men, and to make sects in religion: as some among the Papists
hold of Frauncis, some of Dominike, some of Bernard, and other such patrones
they have, this division of sects S. Paul directly condemned among the
Corinthians: one says I am Paul's, an other Apollos, an other of Cephas, is
Christ divided, was Paul crucified for you, either were you baptized into the
name of Paul? 1. Cor. 1.13. If Paul would not arrogate this honor to himself,
to have any called by his name, Paulians, or Peter, Petrians, how much more
uncomely is it, for them to be called Franciscans, Dominicans, Bernardines, and
such like? And all these are sworn to the obedience of their orders, under
which color and pretense, they maintain their superstitions: but it was
obedience to Christ and his Gospel, whereunto S. Paul persuaded, not to the
observance of the precepts of men: S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought
with a price, be not the servants of men: See further Synops.

Controv. 12. That miracles are not now necessary in the Church.
v. 19. With the power of signs and wonders. Though it pleased God, that for
the better confirmation of his truth, to furnish his Apostles with the gift and
power of miracles, yet it is not necessary now. 1. Miracles were then
necessary when as the Scriptures were believed and received of few, and the
doctrine of the Gospel was accused of novelty: but now he is not worthy the
name of a Christian, which believes not the Scriptures and embraces the
Christian faith: signs are not for them which believe, but for them which
believe not, 1. Cor. 14.22. 2. it were as a part of infidelity now to require
miracles, so also a part of curiosity: for like as the Jews required a sign
of our blessed Savior, when he wrought nothing else but signs and wonders
among them, so is it with them, who hear out of the Scriptures of the great
signs and wonders wrought by our Savior, and his Apostles, and yet require
now signs still. 3. Augustine gives these two reasons, why it pleased not God
that the power of miracles should continue still, ne animus semper visibilia
quaereret, least the mind should always seek and look after visible things,
and eorum confuetudine frigesceret genus humanum, quorum novitate flagravit,
and least that those things by continual custom and use should grow cold,
which by their strangenes at the first enflamed mankind: de ver. religion. c.
25. 4. But it will be objected, that the gift of miracles is yet to be seen in
the Popish Church: I answer with Augustine, that the miracles which they boast
to be done at the tombs, relics, and images of their Saints, are either
portenta mendacium spirituum, vel mendacia falacium hominum, prodigious works
of lying spirits, or the fables and lies of deceitful men: they are either
cousening and deceitful tricks, or wrought by the operation of Satan, as the
Apostle describes Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. whose coming is by the working
of Satan, withal powers, and signs, and lying wonders: And such wonders as
are wrought for the confirmation of a false worship, as to maintain idolatry,
we are not to regard, Deuteronomy. 13.2.3.

Controv. 13. Against the vain pomp of the Popish Pontifical ornaments.
v. 19. With the power of signs and wonders, etc. Chrysostom hereupon well
observes, sacerdotij met symbola ostendere possum, non tunicas talares,
mitram, cidarim, etc. I can show the signs of my preisthood, not long
garments, a miter, a priestly bonet, such as the Priests of the Law were
adorned with, but signs and wonders, and the power of the spirit in word and
deed, both in life and doctrine, etc. like as then the Priests of the Jews
had no other signs, but their Priestly garments, their miters, phylacteries,
and such like, but knowledge they had none, nor sanctity of life: so the
Popish prelacie, is descerned at this day, by their palles, crozier flaues,
miters, rings, and such like, but to preach the word, and to adorn the same
with holy, religious, and pious acts, is a rare thing in that Pontifical order.

Controv. 14. Of the idle boastings, and vain glorious excursions of the
Jesuits.
v. 20. I enforced my self to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named,
etc. As S. Paul being called to be an Apostle, preached the Gospel where it
had not been so much as heard of: so the Popish Jesuits (or rather Iudasites)
do boast of their conversion of the Indians, and preaching unto people that
never heard before of Christ: but there is great difference between S. Paul's
preaching and theirs. 1. he was an Apostle sent to preach the Gospel with the
rest to the whole world, they are no Apostles. 2. he was sent by Christ, they
came from Antichrist. 3. S. Paul preached the truth of the Gospel, they
publish their own doctrines and superstitious errors. 4. the Apostles
converted nations, and made them the servants of God: but they make their
conuerts, by their superstitious doctrines, the children of hell more then
before, as the Pharisees did their Profelytes, Matthew. 23.

Controv. 15. Against the pompous processions, and Persian like train of the
Popes Legates and Cardinals.
v. 24. And to be brought on my way thitherward by you: Pet. Martyr here by the
way touches the vain pomp and ostentation of the Cardinals in their viages,
and embassages: much unlike the company, which S. Paul here required of the
Romans. 1. he desires no pompous train, with hawks, hounds, or sumpture
horse, and such like, but such companions as he might confer with in the way
touching spiritual matters: but the other ride rather like Princes, then
spiritual Pastors: and the end of their embassage is not to plant the faith,
but rather to supplant it, and to stir up to war, and set one Prince
against another. 2. S. Paul went to Jerusalem to carry alms and relief, but
the Popes Legates come to pill and poll. 3. S. Paul preached in his embassage,
but the Popes Legates and Cardinals preach not. 4. he converted many to the
knowledge of Christ, but they pervert many and draw them from Christ.

Controv. 16. Against the Anabaptisticall community.
v. 27. Their debtors are they. S. Paul shows what great equity there was
that the Gentiles should communicate unto the believing Jews of their carnal
things, seeing they were made partakers of their spiritual: so by the same
reason, the poor members of Christ, which enjoy the same spiritual things
with us, should also have their part with us in our temporal possessions: but
this makes not at all for the confused community, which the Anabaptists would
bring in, there is great difference between the property and possession, and
the fruit and use thereof: the property may be several, and yet the use
common as occasion shall serve and need require. The tribes of Israel had
their proper and peculiar possessions, yet they were to extend the use of their
goods unto their poor brethren: And if the right and interest in lands and
goods should be common, it would breed an horrible confusion and disorder: But
God is not the author of confusion, 1. Cor. 14.33. and he would have all things
done in order, v. 20.

Controv. 17. Against the invocation of Saints.
v. 30. That you would strive with me by prayer, etc. The Romanists hence would
pick out an argument for the invocation of Saints: If S. Paul does invocate
and call upon the Romans to pray for him, much more may we call upon, and unto
Saints to pray for us: But there is great difference between S. Paul's request
made here to the Romans, and the superstitious invocation of Saints. 1. he
does not with any religious devotion or adoration entreat this, but only with
a charitable affection, as one Christian may move an other. 2. he speaks not
to the dead, but to the living. 3. he does not cast himself wholly upon their
prayers, but desires them only to join with him in prayer: but the Papists
will not say, that they join with the Saints in prayer, whom they make their
mediators. 4. this mutual prayer of one for an other, is agreeable to the will
and commandment of God, but the invocation of the dead is against it, as the
Prophet Isay says, 8.19. should not a people enquire of their God, should they
for the living, consult with the dead?

Controv. 18. Against the merit of prayers.
v. 30. That you would strive with me by prayers, etc. Origin notes, that the
Apostle entreats the Romans to pray for him, qui erant inferiores meritis,
which were far inferior in merit: whereupon Pet. Martyr infers well, vim
precum non constare meritis, that the force of prayers depend not upon men's
merits; for S. Paul was, as Origin says, apostolocis praeditus meritis, endued
with Apostolic merits: that is, with Apostolic graces, and yet he desires to
be helped by their prayers: Ambrose gives two reasons, why S. Paul did this,
ordinem servat, vt ab ecclesia pro rectore suo fiat oration, he observes order,
that by the Church intercession may be made for their Rector: and again, multi
minimi, dum congregantur vnanimes, siunt magni, many little ones, while they
are gathered together with one accord, are become great, the prayer of the
congregation is effectual: all this being, admitted yet this follows well,
that seeing Paul craveth the assistance of the Romans in their prayers, who
were far inferior unto him, that the efficacy of prayer depends not upon
the worthiness of the person.

6. Moral observations.
Observe. 1. How we ought to read the Scriptures.
v. 4. Whatsoever things are written, are written for our learning, etc. Thus
ought every one to read the Scriptures, that he may edify himself thereby:
either inform his judgment, correct some error of life, be stirred up to some
holy duty or other: as Dan. c. 9. by reading the prophecy of Jeremy received
some comfort concerning the deliverance of Gods people out of captivity: If
every one that takes Gods book into his hand, did make this the end of his
reading and hearing, the Scriptures should not be turned over in vain, as now
they are of many: Some will not consult with Gods book at all: some look into
it but of curiosity to increase their knowledge: some of a corrupt mind to
wrest the Scripture to confirm their errors: but the true reading of
Scripture, is thereby to be edified.

Observe. 2. Prayers to be joined with preaching the word and reading of
Scripture.
v. 5. Now the God of patience and consolation, etc. S. Paul unto his
exhortation adds prayer, showing the right kind of preaching, to join unto
the interpretation of Scripture prayer, as Ezra. 9.4. the Israelites in that
their solemn feast, did read in the book of the law four times a day, and
as often did they pray, and confess their sins: so they which read the
Scriptures should with prayer make a way, that God would open their
understanding, and make their reading profitable unto them.

Observe. 3. What an excellent thing it is to be of one mind.
v. 6. That ye with one mind and one mouth, etc. Origin here takes occasion
to set forth what an excellent thing vnanimitatis gratia, the grace of
unanimity is, to be of one mind: as Matthew. 18. our blessed Savior promises,
that when two or three are gathered together in his name, he will be present in
the mids among them: whereof see a president, Act. 2.1. where the Apostles
being with one heart assembled together in prayer, received the holy Ghost.
Origin alleges an other example taken out of the old Testament, how in the
division of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, whom the earth for their rebellion
swallowed up quick, the three sons of Core, Assir, Elkanah, and Ebiasaph,
with one heart and consent did sequester themselves from that conspiracy, and
died not with their father: see Numb. 26.11. and 1. Chron. 6.23. where these
sons of Core are named as surviuers to their father: And for this cause he
thinks that S. Paul joins with himself in his epistles sometime Softhenes,
sometime Syluanus and Timothy in the salutations, to show their consent of
mind and unanimity, unto the which they exhorted others.

Observe. 4. How we ought to entertain one an other with loving affection, even
those which hate us.
v. 17. Receive ye one an other, etc. Chrysostom has here an excellent
moral, that though one be averse from us, we should not be averse in affection
from him: say not, if he love me, I will love him. 1. this is as if thou
should say, si me dexter oculus non dilexerit, eff^diam illum, if my right
eye do not love me, I will pull it out: if one of the parts of thy body be in
danger, to be cut off from the rest, nihil non molimur quo iliud vniamus
itreum, we use all means to unite it again: so must we seek by all means to
win those unto us by our love, that are alienated in mind from us. 2. mayor
expectanda tibi merces, etc. thou a^^o expect a greater reward, if thou love
him, that loves not thee: for he that loves thee again has recompensed
thee, but he that being loved, loves thee not again, Deum tibi pro seipso
debitorem constituit, does make God thy debtor for him. 3. co magis te
imitatorem esse Christi declarabis, thou shall so much the more make thy self
an imitator of Christ, who prayed for his enemies. 4. by this means, nullam
non animam emollies, thou shall mollify any heart, though never so hard, for
if one love him, of who^ he is loved, much more shall they win love, that love
where they are hated. 5. Do thou not see turpes amatores alapas far, etc.
that filthy lovers do suffer blows, checks, taunts, at the hands of their
paramours: shall not the love of God as much prevail with us, as that
diabolical love? 6. Moses aversari non potuit illos qui illum toties aversati,
Moses could not be averse to those, which had been averse to him, but wishes
rather to be blotted out of Gods book, then they should not be spared. 7.
aversaris hominem fidelem, quem Christus cum adhuc infidelis esset, non est
aversatus; do thou turn away from a faithful man, whom Christ disdained
not, being yet an infidel, but vouchsafed to die for him?

Observe. 5. How God is to be praised, not with the mouth only but the heart.
v. 6. That ye with one mind and one mouth may praise God, etc. Chrysostom
also well shows, how we should sing unto God. 1. Cythara Davidica nobis opus
est, we have need of David's harp: for the devil goes about to strangle us as
he did Saul, strangulat nos malis artibus; he does strangle us with wicked
works: he that sings with his mouth, and haltech in his life, is like unto
Saul, who was more inflamed at David's playing: psallenti malis operibus
repugnat, he with evil works resists and spurneth against the singer. 2.
when we are about to hear or sing David's Psalms, timet malius ille demon,
etc. the wicked spirit fears, least after we have heard, we should frame our
life thereafter: but when he sees us to continue the same which we were
before, nothing reformed, isto protinus timore exuitur, he is rid of this
fear. 3. psallamus itaque operum cantionem, etc. let us then sing a song of
good life and works, and so cast out sin worse then the devil: for the
devil oftentimes prodest vigilanti, profits him that is watchful and
vigilant, but sin is altogether unprofitable: the devil does assault a man
against his will, voluntarius demon est peccatum, and spontanea insania, sin
is a voluntary devil, and a selfewilled madness: incantemus igitur anima
peccatis obsessae ex Scripturis, let us therefore enchaunt the soul possessed
with sin by the Scriptures. 4. howsoever let us use to sing Psalms, for this
is a thing of no small moment: for if we teach our tongue to sing, psallente
illa pudefiet anima, contraria ab eo quod psallitur, volens, for while the
tongue sings, the mind will be ashamed to will things contrary to that which
is sung.

Observe. 6. That Pastors and Ministers should temper their reprehensions with
due commendations.
v. 14. I my self am persuaded of you brethren, that ye are full of goodness,
etc. S. Paul's commendable use is, as sometime sharply to rebuke, so also to
commend the good things, which he saw in them, to whom he writes; as writing
to the Corinthians, he calls them carnal, 1. ep. 3.1. yet before he said of
them, that they were made rich in all kind of speech, and in all knowledge: so
the Galatians he calls foolish, Gal. 3.1. and yet he commends them for
their zeal toward him, that they would have plucked out their eyes to have
given him, Galat. 4.15. by this example of the Apostle, Ministers must learn
discreetly and wisely to mix their commendations and rebukes together: this
the Poet could see, laudataque virtus crescit, and immensum gloria calcar
habet, virtue praised does increase, and glory is as a spur to do well: as
the Poet says of the horse, Acer and ad palmae per se cursurus honores,
si tamen horteris fortior ibit equus,
though horse be quick to run his race,
yet runs he better with thy praise:
for if the Minister shall always be chiding and rebuking, it will discourage
the people: whereas their due praise and commendation will encourage them.

Observe. 7. What things are required in them, that should admonish others.
v. 14. That ye are full of all goodness and knowledge, and are able one to
admonish an other. He which should instruct an other, must both be furnished
with knowledge, that he be not ignorant how, and wherein to instruct an other:
he must also have goodness, that he be not culpable in that, whereof he does
admonish an other: for if he want the one he is as an unwise builder, that
knows not how to lay a good foundation, and if he want the other he is as one
which pulls down that by example of life, which before he seemed to build
up: Socrates required three things in a teacher, (...), knowledge, (...), good
will, and boldness: both these latter may be referred to (...), goodness: that as
he must have knowledge, so must he be ready and willing to use it to an others
good: and boldness to reprove, that he himself be not touched with that which
he reprooueth in an other.

Observe. 8. How God is delighted in the conversion of a sinner.
v. 16. That the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable: he calls the
calling and conversion of the Gentiles unto God, an offering: signifying thereby,
that god is so desirous of the salvation of men, vt sit instar acceptissimae
victimae, that it is as a most acceptable sacrifice: yea the Apostle says, 2.
Cor. 5.20. As though God did beseech you thorough us, we pray you in Christ's
stead to be reconciled unto God, etc. God does as it were pray and beseech us
to have care of our own souls, and to be reconciled unto him, that we may be
saved: Then how senseless is man, that has no care of his own salvation,
which Christ so thirsts after and longs for.

Observe. 9. Of the love which ought to be between the Pastor and his people.
v. 24. After I have been somewhat filled with your company, etc. Chrysostom
by occasion of these words, shows what ardent affection the Apostle did bear
toward the Romans, that he could never be fully satisfied with their company:
whereupon he further declares how necessary a thing it is in a Pastor, to
love his sheep. 1. he begins with the example of Peter, to whom Christ
said, if thou love me, feed my sheep for he that loves Christ, loves his
flock: so God appointed Moses to be the captain of his people, after he had
showed his love to his brethren, Exodus 2. and David first showed an experiment
of his love to the people of God, in killing Goliath, before he was inaugurated
to the kingdom: So David, when the land was smitten with the plague, offered
himself for his sheep: and therefore he made choice of the plague, rather
then famine, or the sword, whereby he hoped other might be safe, se vero ante
reliquos omnes e medio tollendum, and that he might be taken away first: which
when he saw not to be done, then he lamentably cries out, in me sit manus tua,
let thy hand be against me, and if that be not enought, against my fathers
house. 2. he propounds also the example of Abraham, which had such great
respect and care of those, qui non erant sibi concrediti, which were not
committed to his care and trust, that he offered himself to many dangers for
them, as when he pursued after the army of the Persians to rescue not only
Lot, but the Sodomites also, for whom he earnestly besought God at the time of
their destruction: how much more careful should the Pastor be for the people
committed to his charge. 3. he makes mention of the sheepeheards of
Cappadocia, which in keeping of their sheep, vniversum triduum nive adobruti
perdurant, do endure three days covered with snow: and in Lybia the
sheepheards for love of their sheep, integres menses difficilem illam
solitudinem, etc. circument, whole months do go up and down in that vast
desert full of wild beasts? what excuse then shall idle and careless Pastors
have, cui rationales animae concreditae sunt, to whom reasonable souls are
committed to keep? 4. do thou not know the dignity of this flock, for the
which Christ did so many things, yea sanguinem suum fudit, and tu requiem
quaeris, he shed his blood for it, and art thou careless, and seek thine
ease, quid poterit peius esse pastoribus istis, what can be worse, the^ such
sheepheards? 5. consider also the danger of the flock, that it is beset with
many ravenous wolves: see thou not, how the governors of the people being
to consult of temporal affairs, being not content with the day, do, watch
all night, and we which strive for heaven, ipsa quoque die dormimus, do sleep
in the day: quis ab eo nos supplicio eripiet, quod istis debetur, who shall
deliver us from the punishment which is due unto such sheepheards? let every
one consider with what mind then he take upon him this office: and seeing the
danger is such, numquid ad hoc munus, tanquam ad nundiuas currendum erit, shall
men run unto this function, as unto a fair. 6. Then Chrysostom turns
himself to the people, that they should love their Pastors also: hac audiant
oves, vt alacriores faciant Pastores, let the sheep also hear this to make
their Pastors more cheerful: for a good shepherd, such an one as Christ
would have, innumeris certat martyrijs, does put himself upon many
martyrdomes: Christ died for him once, hic millies propter gregem singulis
diebus mori potest, but he a thousand times, yea every day is in danger to die
for his flock: wherefore knowing our labor, dilectione vestra nos iuvate, and
vos nostra, help us with your love, as we do you with ours: then he
concludes, with this modest insinuation, these things be spoken, de optimis
Pastoribus, non de meipso and mei similibus, of the best sheepheards, not of
such as I am, and others like unto me. 6. Lastly, he says unto the people, and
they which are under their Pastors, even every one also must, pro part
pastorem agere, domus suae, vxoris, liberorum, domesticorum, play the part of a
pastor, over his house, wife, and children, and household servants: Thus
excellently Chrysostom, according to his manner does follow this moral,
which I have abridged.

CHAP. XVI.
1. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1. I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a minister ( a servant,
B.G.) of the Church of Cenchris, ( Cenchrea, B.G. but the word is in the
plural.)

2 That ye receive her in the Lord, as it becomes Saints, and that ye assist
her in whatsoever business she has need of you: ( needs your aid, G.) for
she has been helpefull ( succored, B. given hospitality, G. been
assistant, (...), Gr.) to many, and to me also.

3 Greet Priscilla and Aquila my fellow helpers ( helpers, L.B.V. but the word
is (...),) in Christ Jesus.

4 Which have for my life laid down their own neck: unto whom not I only
give thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles.

5 Likewise greet the Church that is in their house. Salute my beloved
Epenetus, which is the first fruits of Achaia ( the first of Asiae, I^^ad.) in
Christ.

6 Greet Marie, which bestowed much labor ( labored much, Gr.) on us. ( on
you, L.S.)

7 Salute Andronicus and Iunia my cousins and fellow prisoners, which are
notable ( noble, L. well taken, B. (...), Gr.) among the Apostles.

8 Greet Amphas my beloved in the Lord.

9 Salute Vrbanus our fellow helper in Christ, and Stachys my well-beloved.

10 Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Salute them which are of Aristobulus
household: L.V.B.S., ( friends, B.G. the first rather may be supplied out of the
5. v.)

11 Salute Herodian my kinsman. Greet them which are of the household (of the
friends, B.G.) of Narcissus, which are in the Lord.

12 Salute Tryphena, and Tryphosa, which women labor in the Lord. Salute the
beloved Persis, which woman has labored much in the Lord.

13 Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his mother, and mine.

14 Salute Afyncritus, Plegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, L.V. ( Mercurius, B.G.
but if he had been called Mercurius, it is like the same name should have
been retained in Greek, as the name Rufus, v. 13.) and the brethren which are
with them.

15 Salute Phylologus, and Iulia, Nereus, ( Nereas, G.) and his sister, and
Olympa, ( Lympa, S. Olympas, B.G.) and the Saints which are with them.

16 Salute one an other with an holy kiss. The Churches ( all the Churches, L.
ad.) of Christ salute you.

17 Now I beseech you brethren, mark them ( or observe) which cause ( make,
Gr.) division and offenses, ( scandals, Gr.) contrary to the doctrine which ye
have learned, and avoid them.

18 For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellies, and with fair speech and flattering ( blessing, Gr.) deceive the
hearts of the simple, ( innocents, B. men not evil, S.Gr.)

19 For your obedience is gone abroad among all: I am glad therefore of you:
but yet I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning
evil.

20 The God of peace shall tread ( crush, tread, B.G.L.S. in the imperative)
Satan under your feet shortly. ( quickly, L.S.) The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you.

21 Timotheus my workfellow, ( helper, G.) and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater
my kinsmen, salute you.

22 I Tertius, which wrote out this Epistle, salute you in the Lord.

23 Gaius mine host, and of the whole Church saluteth you. Erastus the steward
( chamberlain, B. treasurer, V. cofferer, L. (...), the steward, Gr.) of the
city saluteth you, and Quartus a brother.

24 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.

25 To him now, that is of power to establish you according to my Gospel and
preaching of Jesus Christ, by the revelation of the mystery, a long time (
since the beginning of the world, B.G. from everlasting time, G.) kept secret:
( in silence, Gr.)

26 (But now is opened, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets, at the
commandment of the everlasting God for the obedience of faith, published (
made known) among all nations)

27 To God, I say, only wise, be glory thorough Jesus Christ, for ever: Amen.

2. The Argument, method, and parts.
IN this chapter the Apostle concludes the whole Epistle, with familiar
salutations, and celebrating the praise of God: there are five parts.

1. He commends Phebe, whom he sent unto them, v. 1. showing what he would
have done unto her, and why.

2. He sends greeting to certain of special note among the Romans for
their singular virtues, whose catalogue is set down, v. 3. to v. 18.

3. He exhorts to take heed of schismatikes, v. 17. which he enforces by
three reasons. 1. one taken from the evil condition and effects of such
persons, v. 18. 2. an other from the person of the Romans, that they should
join wisdom, with their simplicity, v. 19. 3. the third from the hope of
victory on Gods behalf, v. 20.

4. The Apostle sets down the salutations of others, which he sends to v.
25.

5. Then the doxologie follows: wherein he sets forth, 1. the power of
God, what he is able to do toward the Romans. 2. his goodness toward all
people in revealing the Gospel, a long time kept secret, v. 25. the causes
whereof he shows, the author and efficient, the commandment of God, the
instrument, the Scriptures of the Prophets, and the end, for obedience of
faith, v. 26. 3. his wisdom. 4. his glory, which he desires to be ascribed
unto God.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. Of the diverse salutations sent by the Apostle in general.
1. As hitherto from the beginning of the 12. c. the Apostle has delivered
diverse moral precepts and exhortations, so now he propounds diverse examples
of worthy and imitable persons among them.

2. Which examples may be thus sorted out. 1. he saluteth such special
persons, as were more familiarly known unto him, to v. 12. 2. either for some
temporal benefit, either generally bestowed upon him together with other, such
an one was Phebe, v. 2. or specially showed toward the Apostle, such were
Priscilla and Aquila, which had laid down their necks for his life, v. 4. 2.
or for some spiritual benefit, such were Epenetus the first fruits of Achaia,
v. 5. Andronicus and Iunia, v. 7. 3. or by reason of his familiar acquaintance
with them, as Amplias with the rest, unto v. 14.

2. Then he saluteth other persons by name, neither so well known unto him,
nor of such special note.

3. And lastly, he concludes with a general salutation to them all, v. 16.

3. Wherein appears the singular memory, and thankful remembrance of the
Apostle, that being occupied in the affairs of so many Churches, yet took
such special notice of so many singular persons among the Romans, especially
seeing he had not yet seen them in the flesh.

2. Quest. Of Phebe, commended here by S. Paul, what place she had in the
Church, and wherefore commended.
1. I commend: To commend signifies two things, both to praise one, and set
forth the good parts, which are in them; and to entreat favor for one,
commending and committing the same to the faith and trust of an other, to be
helped, or any way pleasured.

2. Phebe. Tolet annot. 1. confuteth their opinion, that take this Phebe to
have been S. Paul's wife: which he would confute by this argument, that S. Paul
was never married: and whereas Clemens Alex. lib. 3. stromat. thinks that S.
Paul was married, and proves it by that place 1. Cor. 9.5. that he had power
to lead about a sister a wife, as well as the rest of the Apostles; he
confuteth that opinion, showing, that the place must be thus read rather; a
sister a woman, then a sister a wife. Contr. 1. I agree with Tolet, that Phebe
could not be S. Paul's wife, because she was a minister of the Cenchrean
Church: but she should have ministered unto S. Paul, if she had been his
wife. 2. I also consent, that the place given in instance, 1. Cor. 9.5.
proves not directly, that S. Paul was married, but that he had liberty and
power to take a wife, as well as the other Apostles: but whether he were married
or not, it is uncertain: it is as like he was, as otherwise: there are of the
Fathers; of both opinions, some think he was a virgin, as Hierome, Ambrose,
Epiphanius, some that he had a wife, as Ignatius epist. 9. and Clemens before
alleged: but it is not greatly material whether he had a wife or not: it is
sufficient, that some other of the Apostles were married, as Peter by name, and
Saint Paul might have used the same liberty, if it had pleased him: yet Tolets
exposition of that place is very fond, though the rest of his side concur
with him, to read a sister a woman, rather then a sister a wife: for the word
sister, includes a woman: and what women were fitter to follow the Apostles,
and to minister unto them, then their own wives: See of this question touching
S. Paul's marriage more 7. Cont. general before the 1. c.

3. Our sister: The Apostle commends this Phebe: 1. by her profession, she
was a sister, fide non cognatione, in faith, not by kindred. 2. by her office,
she was a Minister of the Church. 3. by her beneficence and liberality: she
had given hospitality to many, and to S. Paul among the rest: where Origin
observes, that as Abraham being given to hospitality received Angels among
the rest, so Phebe while she is obsequious in her hospitality to all, was
worthy also to entertain Paul.

4. A Minister of the Church of Cenchrea: 1. Tolet thinks she was a
deaconesse of that Church, whose office he describes out of Clement to have
consisted in these three things specially: to attend upon children coming to
Baptism, to make them ready to be baptized: to keep the doors of certain
women which were for a time sequestered and separated from their husbands for
greater devotion sake, and to take care of the sick: such were the widows,
whose office S. Paul describes, 1. Tim. 5. such an one Theodoret thinks this
Phebe was, writing on that chapter: and so before him Origin faith, she was in
ministerio Ecclesia constituta, settled in the office and ministry of the
Church: so also Calvin, Osiander, Gualter, with other of our new writers: But
Pareus refuses this opinion, because the widows were ancient women of 60.
year old, and of the poorer sort, which were maintained of the Church; But
this was a rich woman, and maintained other, and by reason of her far travel,
and long journey, not like to be so old: neither could the widows of the
Church, whose charge was to attend the sick, be long absent from their office.
2. Wherefore the better opinion is, that she was a rich woman, Lyranus
thinks, that ecclesiam aedificaverat, she had built a Church at Cenchre^^ but
there were no common Churches then: it is more like that ecclesiam sustentabat,
that she did relieve the Church, and succored the poor converted to the
faith, and specially the Apostles and other ministers, Gorrhan, Hugo:
subministravit facultates, she did minister of her substance, Vatablus: and
beside it is like, that her house was both a common receptacle of strangers,
and a place for their holy meetings and assemblies: Pareus: ministrabat
nobilissima matrona vestimentum and victum, she being a noble matrone
ministered both raiment and food: Haymo: as we read of certain rich and noble
women, as Ioanna the wife of Chuza Herod's steward, and Susanna, which (...),
ministered unto our Blessed Savior of their substance: there a word is used of
the same original and deriuation, with this here.

5. Of Cenchrea, or Cenchus, because the word in the original is in the
plural: 1. there was a kenchus in Italy, an other in Troas, but this was
near unto Corinth: it was statio navalis, the haven of Corinth, whereof
mention is made Act. 18.18. as Pyraeum was the port at Athens. 2. It seems
that the Christians, who could not so safely exercise their religion in the
City of Corinth, had their recourse, as it were to the suburbs: as Act. 16.
they went out of the City, and prayed by the river side. 3. Tolet observes
further, that the Gospel was so propagated by the preaching of Saint Paul, that
the faith shined, non solum in vrbibus, sedetiam in pagis, not only in Cities,
but in villages.

Quest. 3. Of Paul's request in the behalf of Phebe.
1. That ye receive her in the Lord. The Apostle entreats three things for
her: 1. that they would receive her, and give her entertainment in the Lord,
that is, as Chrysostom interprets, propter Dominum, for the Lords cause. 2.
that they give her honorable entertainment, as it becomes Saints, which
Chrysostom understands passively, as is fit Saints should be entertained: it
may also be taken actively, as it is fit for them, which profess themselves
Saints, to receive one an other. 3. the third is, to be helpful unto her, and
to assist her in her business.

2. In whatsoever business. 1. Haymo thinks that Phebe being a rich matrone,
might have some business in the Emperors Court by occasion of her lands and
possessions, or by reason of some unjust vexation or oppression: for there were
some of Caesar's household, that were Christians, Philip. 4.22. who might stand
her in stead. 2. It is thought that S. Paul sent this epistle by Phebe, which
might make her better welcome, but thereof there is no certentie: Hierome
thinks it was sent by Timothy: which two opinions Lyranus would thus
reconcile, that it might be, that Timothy and Phebe travailed together, and so
the epistle might be sent by them both: or the Apostle might make two copies of
this epistle, because of the danger of the Seas, and send one by Timothy, an
other by Phebe: but these are mere conjectures and gesses.

3. For she has been helpful unto many, etc. 1. Beza interprets, she has
given hospitality, but the Greek word (...), signifies more, to be helpful,
or assistant, as the Syrian interpreter, and so the verb, whereof it comes,
is taken before, that ye assist her. 2. Chrysostom sets forth the singular
commendation of this woman herein, that she had been assistant and helpful,
not only unto others, but to S. Paul orbis praedicatori, the Preacher to the
whole world.

Quest. 4. Of Priscilla and Aquila, whom the Apostle saluteth in the second
place.
v. 3. 1. S. Paul names the persons, whom he saluteth, and gives the reasons
of this his salutation, which are these four. 1. because they were his fellow
helpers in propagating the Gospel. 2. they had put their own life in danger
for Paul. 3. all the Churches were therefore for Paul's sake, beholding unto
them. 4. and they had a Christian family, he saluteth the Church in their
house.

Prisca and Aquila. 1. she is also called Priscilla, Act. 18.2. they were both
Jews borne, by profession tent makers, and Paul at Corinth remained with them
a while being of the same craft. 2. here the woman is named before the
husband, as likewise Act. 18.18. 2. Tim. 4.12. some think because she was
first called, Gorrhan: or more famous, Lyran. but the Apostle therein observes
no order, nor is not therein curious; as Act. 18.16. Aquila is named first, but
v. 18. Priscilla is set before Aquila. 3. hence may appear, how silly an
argument it is for Peter's primacie, used and urged by the Romanists, because he
is sometime named first: for by that reason the wife here should be preferred
before her husband. 4. and Chrysostom notes, that neither artificium
obscurum, neque coniugium fuit aliquo damno, their obscure trade, nor their
marriage was any impediment unto them: which may be observed against the
Romanists, which make marriage such an impediment of Orders.

My fellow helpers, etc. 1. An example whereof Saint Luke sets forth Act.
18.26. how Aquila and Priscilla take unto them Apollos, and instructed him in
the way of Christ more perfitely. 2. wherein Saint Paul's modesty appears,
who disdained not to call them his fellow helpers: even a woman he
acknowledges to have much helped him in the labors of the Gospel: not that
Priscilla took upon her publicly to preach, but by her private exhortations
she prepared many. 3. let this be noted, that S. Paul refused not the help
even of lay people, whom the Romanists will not admit so much as to the reading
of the Scriptures without their license. 4. some as Theophylact notes, did
think they are called S. Paul's fellow helpers, because they wrought together
with him in the same trade, but this is excluded by the words following, they
were his fellow laborers in Christ, that is, as Haymo, in praedicatione and
alijs operibus, in preaching and other works: as in laboribus and periculis,
in his labors and pertils.

Which have for my life laid down their necks. 1. the interlinearie gloss,
adds, gladi^, to the sword, as though they had been killed: and Theophylact
seems so to think, perfecti hi martyrs extitere, they were perfect martyrs:
but then could not S. Paul have saluted them here. 2. Chrysostom thinks,
that these dangers were under Nero, when the Jews were commanded to depart
from Rome: but neither had S. Paul bin yet at Rome, they could not then there
offer themselves to danger for Paul: and the commandment given for the
departure of the Jews from Rome, was under Claudius, not Nero: Act. 18.2. 3.
some understand this hazard and adventure of their necks for Paul, of their
ministering unto him, being in bonds, cum periculo vitae, with danger of their
life, Gorrh. 4. some of their dangerous travel with Paul, for he sailed into
Syria with them, Act. 18.18. Osiand. 5. Pareus thinks this was done, in the
commotion and stir before Gallio at Corinth, Act. 18.12. or in the seditious
vproare at Ephesus, Act. 19. Pareus. 6. but I rather allow Gualters opinion,
that this might happen rather, while Paul soiourned with Aquila and Priscilla
in their house, when he had such an hot combat with the Jews, that he was
constrained to leave them, and go unto the house of one Iustus: it seems,
that they with hazard of their lives protected Paul, while he was in their
house: for otherwhere it was an unlike and unmeet thing for Priscilla being a
woman, to adventure her life for Paul.

Unto whom, not I only give thanks, but also all the Churches, etc. 1. Origin
gives this reason, quia hospitales fuerunt erga omnes fratres, because they
had showed hospitality toward all the brethren: and so Chrysostom, omnem suam
substantiam communem proposuerunt, they had made all their substance common:
but it is not like, that this couple living by making of tents, were of such
ability, to give such entertainment to all the faithful. 2. all the Gentiles
then were beholding, because they had preserved the life of S. Paul their
Apostle and teacher: thus Haymo, Lyranus, Martyr, Par. vita Pauli servata in
omnium Ecclesiarum vtilitatem redundavit, the life of Paul being preserved,
redounded to the profit of all Churches.

And the Church in their house, etc. 1. Chrysostom understands their
Christian family, for they were so godly, vt domum suam ecclesiam facerent, to
make their whole house the Church. 2. Origin de grato and fideli ministerio
famulorum, interprets it of the faithful and ready ministry of the
servants, in entertaining of the Saints. 3. Theophylact thinks it to be
called the Church in their house, quia hospitio credentes admitteret, because
the faithful were entertained there. 4. but beside this, it seems, that
their house was a place for the Saints to assemble in: there the congregation
used to come together, Martyr: and so, else where S. Paul in his salvation of
Aquila and Priscilla, remembers the church in their house, 1. Cor. 16.19. the
like salutation he sends to Philemon 2.

5. Quest. How S. Paul could salute Aquila and Priscilla, as being at Rome,
seeing they were at Corinth with him, Act. 18. whence he wrote this Epistle.
1. Origin, whom Haymo follows, give this solution, that Aquila and
Priscilla were twice at Rome, once, when by the edict of Claudius, they were
thence expelled, Act. 18.2. and afterward, edicti saevitia cessante, when the
cruel edict ceased, they returned to Rome again, where they were at this
time, when S. Paul wrote this epistle. This solution takes away some part of
the doubt, but not all: for Aquila and Priscilla were at Corinth, when S. Paul
wrote this epistle.

2. But Tolet is much deceived, who thinks, that Aquila and Priscilla might
be suffered of favor to remain at Rome, when other Jews by the Emperors
general edict were expelled: for at that time Aquila and Priscilla departed
from Rome with the rest, and by that occasion came to Corinth, Act. 18.2.

3. Wherefore, as for one part of the doubt, we admit Origens solution, that
Aquila and Priscilla were twice at Rome: so it must be supposed, that S. Paul
was twice at Corinth: the first time he stayed there with Aquila and Priscilla,
a year and six months, Act. 18.11. but at this time he did not write this
Epistle to the Romans: for when he sent this Epistle, he was going with the
alms of the Gentiles to Jerusalem, c. 15.25. but when he was first at Corinth,
he had not yet written unto them his first Epistle, wherein he persuades them
to make collection for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, 1. Cor. 16.2, 3. and
further, from Corinth S. Paul went to Ephesus, and then to Jerusalem, but then
only to visit the Church there, Act. 18.21, 22. he carried alms to Jerusalem,
afterward, when he went thither again, Act. 24.17. from Jerusalem S. Paul
returns to Ephesus with Aquila and Priscilla, Act. 18.24.26. from whence he
writes his first epistle to the Corinthians, sending commendation from Aquila
and Priscilla, 1. Cor. 16. who had their habitation at Ephesus at that time: at
Ephesus Paul stayed two years, Act. 19.10. during his abode there, it is like
that Aquila and Priscilla returned to Rome: and from Ephesus, S. Paul went to
Macedonia, and then to Grecia or Achaia, where he stayed three months, Act.
20.3. during which time it is most like he visited Corinth, and then he wrote
this Epistle to the Romans.

4. So then, 1. Aquila and Priscilla from Rome came to Corinth, from thence
with S. Paul removed to Ephesus, then they returned to Rome again. 2. S. Paul
was twice at Corinth, twice at Ephesus, twice at Jerusalem, after he had been
the first time at Corinth, as is showed before. 3. and between Paul's first and
second being at Corinth, there may be supposed some five years, ( Pareus
thinks six or seven) to have come between: he might come thither first in
the 9. year of Claudius reign, when the Jews were expelled, as Orosius
says, and the second time, in the 14. year of Claudius, not in the 7. or 8.
year of Nero, as Pareus. See in the end of the 10. quest. following.

6. Quest. Why Epenetus is called the first fruits, etc.
1. Origin reads, the first fruits of Asia, so reads Haymo, the vulgar
Latin, Lyranus, Gorrhan: but the Syrian interpreter reads Achaia, so also
Chrysostom, Theophylact: and it is unlike, that any man should be first called
of so many Provinces and countries as are in Asia.

2. Origin by the first fruits, understands not those, qui tempore primi
sunt, sed virtutibus excellunt, which are the first called in time, but they
which are most excellent in virtue: and here he runs to his usual
speculations of Angels, how they in their countries, over the which they are
Presidents, do offer unto God the first fruits, that is, the more principal
of those, which believe: but the Apostle by his preaching, not the Angels by
their presidencie, did offer up the Gentiles an oblation to God, c. 15.16.

3. Ambrose seems to understand this Epenetus to have been a chief man in
office or by nobility: but Chrysostom refuses this, ne mandanam suspicias
gloriam, adiecit in Christo, least you should imagine any worldly glory, he
adds, in Christ.

4. Chrysostom gives this sense, quia reliquos omnes credendo praevenerit, he
is called the first fruits, because he prevented others in believing: he was
the first: so also Theophylact, Lyranus, Calvin, Gualter.

5. But because the Apostle names the family of Stephana also to have been
the first fruits of Achaia, 1. Cor. 16.15. we must not so take it, that
Epenetus was himself the first that was called, but that he was one of the
first: and so was as the first fruits offered unto God, alluding therein to the
ceremony of the law, where the first ripe fruits were offered to God.

6. And in that he is called the first fruits, therein is noted, 1. his
excellent spirit, that made a way, and gave the first entrance into the faith,
despising the opinion of the world. 2. his good example to others. 3. his
perseverance and continuance in his first zeal: for otherwise the Apostle
would not have commended him for his good beginnings.

7. Quest. Of the salutation and commendation of Marie.
1. Origin understands this laboring of private instruction of women, in
teaching them to be sober, obedient to their husbands, careful to bring up
their children: and so Haymo restrains it only unto the instructing of
women: and so women may labor for the Church of God, as the Apostle says,
she has labored, in nos, toward us.

2. Chrysostom reading, erga vos, toward you, understands it of the office
of teaching, not that women were allowed to teach, praesidentiam in media
ecclesia prohibet Apostolus, non doctrinae verbum, the Apostle forbids
women, presidencie in the mids of the congregation, not all kind of teaching:
for it is lawful for the woman to teach and instruct her husband and children
at home: and he does not understand it only of spiritual labor, but of her
other travails, in iourneying, sustaining, and enduring many perils, in
ministering alms.

3. Some refer it to her travel in compounding the dissension among the
Romans between the Jews and Gentiles, a denuntiando Apostolo, in certifying
the Apostle thereof, Gorrh. Lyran. but the original word is, (...), toward us,
not toward you.

4. Wherefore it is better understood of the labors and services which belong
unto hospitality, in providing food, raiment, and other necessary things for
entertainment: which Pareus says, the Apostle acknowledges as done unto
himself, because of the communion of the Saints, though he had not yet been
at Rome.

5. But I think rather with Osiander, that this woman had dwelt before at
Jerusalem, or Antioch, or in some other place, where she had ministered unto
Saint Paul himself: for the Apostle before made some distinction between the
labors bestowed upon others, and done to himself, as ver. 2. she has given
hospitality to many, and to me also.

6. So here three things are set forth in Marie, the act of her charity, she
labored, modus, the manner, she labored much, fructus, the fruit of her
labor, she labored for us.

Quest. 8. Of the commendation of Andronicus and Iunia.
1. These two are commended by these four arguments. 1. by their flock and
kindred, he calls them his cousins. 2. by their constancy, his concaptiues,
and fellow prisoners. 3. by their name and fame among the Apostles. 4. by the
antiquity of their conversion, they were in Christ before him.

2. Andronicus and Iunia. Origin takes both these for men, and Pareus thinks
they might be two brethren of the Jews: Chrysostom and Theophylact thinks
rather this Iunia to have been a woman: and Pet Martyr takes her to be the
wife of Andronicus.

3. My Cousines, (...): some think they were his kinsmen, because Jews,
Tolet: but there was propinquitas sanguinis, a near propinquitie and affinity
in blood, Theophyl. cognati fuerunt Paulo, they were the kinsmen of Paul after
the flesh, Origin: forte ex cadem tribu, it might be they were of the same
tribe: Lyran.

4. My prison fellows. 1. Origin makes an allegory of this, they were
concaptivi in hoc mundo, they were S. Paul's concaptiues in this world: so also
the interlinearie gloss, as long as we are in the body, peregrinamur a
Domino, we are strangers from God, and so captives in the body. 2. Chrysostom
understands this captivity of the many dangers which the Apostle was in,
whereof these were partakers. 3. or multas sustinuerunt tribulationes sicut
ipse, they had sustained many tribulations, as well as he. 4. but it is better
understood literally of S. Paul's imprisonment indeed: which because it happened
but once to S. Paul at Philippi, before he was in bonds at Jerusalem, Pareus
thinks, that these were his fellow prisoners there: for there were other
prisoners then delivered beside Paul and Silas, Act. 16.25.26. or it might be
at some other time and place, because all S. Paul's troubles for the Gospel are
not expressed.

5. Notable among the Apostles. 1. Origin and Haymo, so also Lyranus think
they were of the 72. disciples of Christ, who also were called Apostles: but
the one being a woman could not be of that number. 2. Chrysostom takes here
the name of an Apostle generally, that this woman, digna est habita apostolica
appellatione, was counted worthy of the Apostolic name: and so also Calvin
thinks that they were called Apostles in general, qui promulgando Evangelio
operas impendunt, which did labor in the promulgation of the Gospel: so Osian.
and so they think the meaning to be this, that they were famous Apostles and
teachers: but the name of an Apostle, I think cannot be readily showed in the
new Testament to be given unto a woman. 3. Pareus thinks they were
principal messengers and Legates from the Romans to S. Paul, for they were
also called Apostles, as Philip. 2.25. Epaphroditus, is called there an
Apostle, that is, a messenger: but that had not bin such a singular note of
commendation: neither was a woman so fit to be a messenger of a whole Church.
4. Therefore the literal sense and meaning is best, they were famous and well
accepted among the Apostles of Christ: Origin misliketh not this sense: and
Martyr follows it, probe sunt noti, they were well known to the Apostles,
and well esteemed of them: and the rather, because of that which follows,
they were in Christ before Paul, and so known to the Apostles.

6. In that he says, they were in Christ before him. 1. it is probable that
they were converted before the passion of Christ, whereas S. Paul was converted
not long after his ascension, Gorrhan. 2. Chrysostom notes the modesty of
Paul, who seeks not his own glory, but prefers these before himself,
and beside, priorem vitam manifestare non detrectat, he spares not to lay open
his former life, to call to mind what he was, before he was yet called. 3. but
the rule of the civil law here has no place, tempore prior, iure petior, that
he which is first in time, is chief in right: for S. Paul though called after
many, yet in labor exceeded them all. 4. further, let the phrase be
considered, they are said to be in Christ, that is, planted into him by faith:
faith does incorporate us into Christ, as the branches into the vine.

Quest. 9. Of S. Paul's salutation of certain of his familiar acquaintance, v.
8, 9.
1. He saluteth Amplias his beloved. 1. Origin observes, that although the
Apostle give no other commendation of this Amplias, yet he was worthy of
salutation, because he was beloved of Paul. 2. Chrysostom gives two reasons
thereof: both in respect of S. Paul's person, so great and worthy an Apostle,
si magnum est a rege diligi, etc. if it be a great thing to be beloved of a
king, much more of S. Paul: as also because they knew that S. Paul would not
have loved him, nisi multam virtutem possedisset, unless he had been endued
with many virtues. 3. and least they might think that he loved him either for
his riches, or for any such thing, he added in the Lord, that is, for his faith
and piety sake. 4. so three things are observed in the Apostles love, that he
was beloved, tantum, so much, a tali, of such an one, and taliter, in such
manner, in the Lord.

2. Vrbanus is in the next place saluted. 1. it seems by his name that he was
an Italian or Roman, and most like to be one of their Pastors, for S. Paul
calls him, (...), his fellow helper, that is, as Origin says, particeps
Apostolici operis, a partaker of the Apostolic work and business, in seeking
to propagate the Gospel among the Romans. 2. Chrysostom observes, that
though he call him not beloved, yet he gives him a greater commendation, for
this praecedens complectitur, does comprehend the other, being his fellow
labourer, he was likewise beloved.

3. Stachis: by the annuntiation of his name, which signifies spica, an ear
of corn, it seems he was a Grecian, and one of S. Paul's familiar
acquaintance in time past: though he were not his fellow helper, yet he was
also beloved of the Apostle for his virtue: where we see, that the Apostle does
not flatter them, but gives unto every one that commendation which was due.

Quest. 10. Of S. Paul's saluting of some, commended for their faith, though not
of such special acquaintance, v. 10.11.
1. Salute Apelles. 1. Origin thinks this might be Apollo mentioned Act. 18.
who was instructed by Aquila and Priscilla, but that is uncertain. 2. he is
called approved in Christ: Haymo makes mention of some, that should take the
word probus, or probatus, approved, for a proper name, so also Hugo: but in
the original it is (...), approved. 3. Chrysostom takes this to be an
absolute commendation: for in so saying, omnem virtutem recenset, he reckons
a number of virtues: he was probatus per tribulationes, approved by many
tentations and tribulations, Lyran. and beside, iudicio non errabat, he erred
not in judgment, he was in all points orthodoxall. 4. and hereby the Apostle
does encourage him to proceed in his constancy, and he propounds also his
example to the Romans.

2. Salute them of Aristobulus household. 1. Lyranus thinks that this
Aristobulus had made an house, ad fideles congregandum, to gather the faithful
together, and is principally understood in this salutation, tanquam principalis
in domo, as the principal in the house: Hugo thinks he was not then at Rome,
and therefore is not saluted: Gualter coniectureth he might be dead: but it is
more like he was a fide Christi alienus, a stranger from the faith of Christ,
and yet no great enemy, because there were some faithful in his house,
Pareus, Osiander. 2. and whereas these are not saluted by name, Chrysostom
thinks, non tales fuisse, quales priores, that they were not such as the
former: and because he gives them no such commendation as the other, that they
were beloved, his helpers, or approved: Origin thinks, nihil habebant tale
in meritis, they were not of such worthiness as the other. 3. these the Apostle
encourages that they should go on in their Christian profession, though they
served an unbelieving Master.

3. Salute Herodian my kinsman. 1. natione and religione, both in nation and
religion, Lyran. and it seems, that he was of nearer alliance unto S. Paul,
then by nation only, as Andronicus and Iunia, before mentioned, v. 7. 2.
Origin observes, that whereas he gave other titles unto those cousens, that
they were his concaptiues and famous among the Apostles, that there was great
difference in those, whom S. Paul calls his kinsman.

4. Greet them which are of the house of Narcissus. 1. Ambrose thinks that
this Narcissus was a presbiter of Rome, so also Hay. Lyranus adds, discurrens
per civitates, that he went up and down from city to city to confirm the
faithful: and that he was not at this time at Rome, but employed abroad: But
if this Narcissus had been of the Church, S. Paul would not have omitted him:
for of his absence from Rome, the Apostle being so far off, was ignorant. 2.
Beza interpreting of the familiars or friends of Narcissus, seems to think,
that this Narcissus was converted to the faith: otherwise his familiars and
acquaintance were not like to be Christians. 3. But I think rather with
Martyr, Calvin, Gualter, Pareus, that this Narcissus was the same, whom
Suetonius reports to have been in great favor with Claudius the Emperor:
he was exceeding rich, worth ten millions, that is, an 100. hundred thousand
pounds, in so much, that when Caesar complained of the smalnes of his treasure,
the saying was, that if two of his servants, Narcissus and Pollas would make
him their associate, he should of money enough: he was a crafty and wicked
fellow, and being mighty in the Emperors favor, he practiced the death of
some of the nobility, as of Appius Syllanus, upon suspicion of treason: at
length he had a miserable end, being murdered by the means of Agrippina,
who first caused Claudius the Emperor to be poisoned, while Narcissus was at
the bath: it seems that even in this wicked man's house, there were some
Christians: and as M. Calvin says, domum quasi inferis similem Christi gratia
visicari, that an house like unto hell was visited by the grace of Christ. 4.
But if this were that Narcissus, as Pareus thinks, then was it not so long
before S. Paul came the second time to Corinth, when he should write this
epistle to the Romans, about the 7. or 8. year of Nero, as he thinks: for
that Narcissus was slain not long after Claudius the Emperors death: and
after he was taken away, it is like his household was dissolved. See before in
the end of the 5. quest. 5. Origin observes, that whereas it is added, which
are in the Lord, man omnes in Domino fuisse, that all of Narcissus family were
not in the Lord, they were not all Christians. 6. Hugo notes, that here the
Apostle saluteth them, as they were divided into sundry congregations, as our
Savior did feed the people causing them to sit down by ranks.

Quest. 11. Of other salutations of the Apostle of some of special note, v.
12.13.
1. Tryphena and Tryphosa are first commended for their labor. 1. some think
this labor was of three sorts, in exhortatione, ministerio sanctorum, in
pressuris, in exhortation, ministering to the Saints, in afflictions for the
Gospel, gloss. ordinar. but rather the services of these women are to be
understood, which they bestowed in the entertainment of the Saints, such as
before Marie was commended for, Pareus: P. Martyr thinks they might have such
a ministry in the Church, as Phebe had, one of the widows: Gualter takes it
for the domestical care in household affairs, and in the education of
children: but they are commended rather, for their public and profitable
service to the Church. 2. Chrysostom thinks this sets forth their
commendation, because they are said, non solum operari, sed laborare, not only
to work but to labor. 3. and Origin adds further, that they are said to
labor in the Lord: many do labor, but not for the Lord. 4. Chrysostom
notes this, as a part of commendation, that whereas Marie is said to have
labored, they continue laboring still, in laudem cedit continenter aliquid
factitare, it is to ones praise, to continue in doing a thing, Theophyl.

2. Persis is commended beyond the other. 1. because he calls her beloved,
ostendens maiorem esse, showing her therein to be greater, Chrysostom. 2. and de
multo labor testimonium fert, he gives testimony of her much labor,
Chrysostom. Origin. 3. and somewhat there is in it, that of the other he says,
they labor, of this, she has labored, noting some special labor and
trouble, which she had sustained for the Gospel.

3. Rufus elected in the Lord. 1. Origin thinks he is called (...), elected,
in respect of his election, he knew him to be of the number of the elect: but
there were other beside here named, which belonged to Gods election. 2. Haymo
and Lyranus, because he was promotus ad sacerdotium, promoted to the ministry
or Priesthood. 3. But he is rather so called because he was an excellent and
chief man in piety, as Beza calls him selected: so also Tolet: and
Theophilact has no other meaning, here is a double good, filius and matter
reprehensibilis, the son and mother are reprehensible: an elect and choice
mother, had an elect and choice son. 4. Paul calls this matrone his mother,
and of Rufus, his in affection, the others in nature: as he wills that the
elder women should be reverenced as mothers, 1. Tim. 5.2. as he called Phebe
his sister, v. 1. 5. Origin observes, that Paul and Rufus had one mother in
affection, as Jesus and John had, to whom our Blessed Savior commended his
mother.

Quest. 12. Of S. Paul's general salutations, without any special note of
commendation, v. 14.15.
1. Lyranus this distinguishes the persons here saluted by S. Paul, that as v.
10.11. he commended some for their faith in Christ, as Apelles with others, and
v. 12.13. others for their labor and ministry in the Church, as Thryphena,
and Tryphosa, so now he propounds, exempla concordiae, certain examples of
concord, joining many together of one society and company.

2. Tolet observes well, that these two companies, the one named, v. 14. the
other, v. 15. might belong unto two families, and so Origin thinks they
dwelled together: Philologus and Iulia are thought to be the husband and wife.

3. Touching some particulars. 1. Origin thinks that Hermas was the author of
the book called pastor, which Scripture or writing, he holds to have been
divinitus inspirata, written by inspiration: But it was held of others to be an
Apochryphal book: See Eusebius. l. 3. c. 2.5. 2. there is one Hermas, and an
other called Hermes, whom Beza translateth Mercurius, but the same name would
have been retained in the Greek, as Vrbanus and Rufus, which are Latin
names. 3. Philologus is thought by S. Andrew to have been made the first Bishop
of Synope. 4. Olympas, not Olympius, as the vulgar Latin reads, is the name
here of a man, not of a woman, as Erasmus and Beza observe.

4. Origin thinks this was the reason, why Saint Paul gives no special
commendation to these, and namely none to Hermas, quia post multa peccata ad
poenitentiam conversus, etc. because he was converted unto repentance, after
many sins: But I rather allow here of Chrysostomes judgment, that although
they are not set forth by their several commendations, as the rest, yet this
is to be considered, that these being inferior to the rest, the Apostle
salutatione sua non dedignatur, does vouchsafe to salute them, and he also
calls them brethren and Saints.

5. And least any might have been grieved, that they were not by name saluted,
illos commiscet, etc. he mingleth them together, salute one another, etc.
Chrysostom: so the Greek scholiast, omnes promiscue ponit, he puts all
together, least any should have been offended, cuius nomen expressum non
fuerit, whose name was not expressed.

Quest. 13. Of the custom then used to kiss one an other, v. 16.
1. Chrysostom and Theophylact here observe, because the Apostle had given
diverse commendations unto them, to whom he sends greeting, that the less
commended should not envy the greater, nor the greater despise and contemn
the less, osculo sancto permiscet, and pares facit, he puts them together,
with an holy kiss, and so makes them all alike.

2. This use was then taken up in the Church, for one to kiss an other in
their holy meetings and assemblies, in token of mutual love and goodwill, as
is evident, both in this place, and 1. Cor 16.20. 2. Cor. 13.12. 1 Thessalonians.
5.26. in all these places it is called an holy kiss, and 1. Pet. 5.14. the
kiss of love: this use was frequented in their assemblies, as in their
general prayers, as Tertullian testifies, lib. de orat. and specially in
receiving of the Sacrament: as Chrysostom. hom. 77. in Joan. 16. been in
mysterijs osculamur, vt vnum efficiamur, we do well to kiss in the mysteries,
that we may become one: for as Gellius notes out of Plato, lib. 19. c. 11.
anima animae coniungitur vsque ad labia progressa per osculum, one soul is
joined to an other, by a kiss meeting as it were at the lips: And not only
then, but upon other occasions, as when they received any epistle from the
Apostle, they used to salute one an other with a kiss, Hugo: whereof Haymo
gives this reason, because I am not present to kiss you all, salute ye one an
other with a kiss, met amoris causa, for my love sake.

3. Concerning the original of this custom. 1. Neither did it take beginning
from this and the like places of the Apostle, as Haymo says, ex hoc loco
alijsque similibus mos traditus est ecclesiae, out of this place and the like
was delivered this custom to the Church: for the Apostle did not first bring
in this custom, it was in use before. 2. neither yet was it mos Romanae
gentis, the fashion of the Romans so to do, Osiander: but as Calvin says, it
seems among them to have been minus vsitatum, less in use, for it was not
lawful for women to kiss any but of their own kindred: and Tiberius made a
law against it, Sueten. in Tiber. c. 39. 3. It was then an old custom among
the Hebrews, taken from the Patriarchs, and other holy men and women, which
used one to salute an other with a kiss, as we read, Genesis 27.26. Genesis 29.12.
and in other places: from them then was this custom descended: And among them
it was not only amoris and benevolentiae, sed honoris and reverentiae signum,
not only a sign of love and goodwill, but of honor and reverence: as it is
said, Psalm. 2. Kiss the son least he be angry: as where the kissing of the
Princes hand is used, as a sign of loyalty and subjection, Gualter.

4. It is called an holy kiss: to show, both vt casta sint oscula, deinde non
simulata, that kisses given in the Church should be chaste, and then without
dissimulation, not as Judas kiss was, Origin: but Lyranus more distinctly
makes these five kind of kisses: adulatorium, a flattering kiss, as was
Absaloms, who would take the people to him, and kiss them: semulatorium, a
dissembling kiss, as was Ioabs, when he kissed and embraced Abner and killed
him: proditorium, a treacherous and betraying kiss, as was that of Judas given
to Christ's impudicum, an unchaste kiss, such as the harlot gives to the young
man, Prove. 7. then there is, osculum fidile and sanctum, a faithful and holy
kiss, whereof the Apostle speaks here.

5. From this custom of kissing came that foolish and superstitious ceremony
of kissing the Pax in the Popish Mass: whereof Hugo takes upon him to give
this reason: the Priest first kisseth the Pax himself, and then gives it unto
all the people, to signify, that he is in loco Dei a quo omnis pax, in the
place of God from whom comes all peace, and that all are reconciled by
Christ, who then is in the altar: wherein they show great presumption in the
one, for a mortal man to take upon him to be in Gods place, and great
falshoode in the other, to make the people believe, that Christ's very body is
in the altar, which the heavens shall contain until his coming, Act. 3.21.

6. Wherefore concerning this use, it was only of those times, referendum est
ad illius temporis morem, it must be referred to the manner of those times,
Beza: it is not necessary either to retain it or any other outward ceremony
or usage in stead of it: S. Paul exacteth not the outward gesture, but the
inward affection, and so as Clemens Alexand. says well, dilectio non sensetur
in osculo, sed in benevolentia, love is not measured by the kiss, but by the
goodwill.

Quest. 14. How the Apostle says, The Churches salute, you, etc. v. 16.
1. Origin here moves this doubt, reading all the Churches, how all of them
could send salutation unto the Romans: and he answeareth, because there was
vnus spiritus Paulo and omnibus Ecclesijs, there was one and the same spirit in
Paul and all the Churches; or by saluting he understands, per vnum spiritum
iungi, to be joined together by one spirit: Hugo answeareth, that whereas v. 4.
all the Churches, must be taken vniversaliter, generally, here it must be
understood only distributive, by way of distribution, for those churches where
he then was: so also Gorrhan: But this doubt is easily remooved, because that
universal particle all, is not in the original, it is inferred by the Latin
interpreter: by Churches then, the Apostle understands the Churches of Achaia
and Macedonia, where he then was, of whose affection toward the Romans he was
assured.

2. And he names Churches in the plural number, meaning the particular
Churches which had their denomination from their special places, as the Church
of Antioch, Hicrusalem, the Roman Church, which all made but one universal
Church, and general body, whereof Christ was the head, Bucer.

3. Chrysostom moves an other doubt, why the Apostle saluteth so many in
this his epistle to the Romans, which he does in no other epistle, and hereof
he gives these reasons. 1. not only for that he had not yet seen them, for
so neither had he seen the Colossians, c. 2.1. 2. but Romani erant celebriores
alijs, the Romans were more famous then others. 3. and beside many of these
were known unto S. Paul, and were fled to Rome, as unto a more safe place,
and therefore he saluteth them by name. 4. but the greatest reason is, inter
advenas dogebant, many which were fled thither lived among strangers, and
therefore had need of the greater commendation, and such was the glory of
Paul, that per solas literas multum haberent praerogativae, they had a great
prerogative that could get to be commended only by his letters. 5. But Tolets
reason is far fetched, that S. Paul saluteth that city in the name of the
Churches, quae omnibus Christianis praesidet, which is set over all Churches,
for the Roman Church is the head of all Churches, where the vicar of Christ
the universal Bishop sits, etc. for if this were the cause, how comes it
to pass, that Saint Paul leaves S. Peter unsaluted, whom the Romanists
affirm to have been at this time Bishop of Rome, would he write to the chief
Church, and not salute the chief Pastor thereof: But hereupon it is strongly
concluded and inferred, that Peter was not Bishop of Rome, nor at this time
there, and whether at all or not is uncertain: which point shall be further
handled among the controversies: But I insist upon Chrysostomes reasons, why S.
Paul sends such ample salutations to the Romaness, more then to other.

Quest. 15. General observations concerning the greeting and salutation sent
here by the Apostle.
1. Origin notes the singular wisdom and discretion of the Apostle, that
gives unto every one a several commendation, pro merito altus probus, alius
charissimus, etc. one is according to his worthiness called approved, an other
well-beloved, an other elect, an other, laboring in the Lord.

2. Chrysostom shows two ends why the Apostle does thus. 1. ne invidiam
pararet, least if he should praise some, and not others, it might procure
envy. 2. ne socordiam and confusionem generaret, least it might engender
sloth and confusion, if one should not be commended before an other: so he
both makes them alacriores, more cheerful and willing to go forward,
omitting nothing worthy of commendation in them, and others diligentiores,
more diligent in stirring them up to follow their example.

3. Calvin observes, that none of any great place among the Romans are here
saluted, nullum ex splendidis illis nominibus audivs, we hear none of the
famous and illustrous names among the Romans here rehearsed: but they are all
obscure men: which shows what the state of the Church was in those days,
that not many noble or great men were called, as the Apostle shows, 1. Cor.
11. and the Apostle hereby is freed from all suspicion of flattery that he
does not venari amicitias potentium, hunt for the friendship of great men.

4. Gryneus adds, that these salutations, are species invocationis, kinds of
prayer, showing, that one ought to pray for an other.

5. And they are communionis sanctorum religiosa documenta, religious documents
of the communion of Saints, Gryn. that their ought to be amicitiae commercia,
intercourse of friendship between the Churches of Christ, Gualter.

Quest. 16. Of the shunning and avoiding of the authors of dissension.
1. As hitherto S. Paul had propounded examples to be imitated and followed, so
now he shows, whom they ought to decline and take heed of, Lyran. and this
admonition he reserueth to the last, that it might better be remembered.

2. He prays them to mark diligently, etc. 1. This charge of the Apostle
belongs unto the governors of the Church, and ad omnes credentes, and to all
other believers, Origin: though specially it concern the Pastors. 2. and he
uses the word (...), to mark or observe, because it falls out oftentimes,
socordia and incuria, by the sloth and carelesnes of Pastors, that such false
intruders do enter, Melancth. 3. and in that he would have them narrowly
observed, he shows their craft and subtlety, non enim palam conspiciendos se
praebent, they do not show themselves openly, Oecum.

3. Which cause division and offenses. 1. Origin understands these to be all
one, and interprets them to be dissentions contrary to peace. 2. Lyranus
thinks that the divisions are declinationes a fide, declinings from the
faith: and scandals, which are occasion of ruin unto others. 3. some refer
divisions to faith, and offenses to manners. 4. But the first are understood to
be they which do corrupt the doctrine of the Church, such are heretics, the
other they which violate the discipline of the Church, and give evil example,
as schismatikes, Pareus. 5. Chrysostom thinks that the Apostle especially
means the Jews, which together with the Christian faith urged the ceremonies
of the law, of whom as enemies to the Gospel, the Apostle often complains:
but all other beside are noted, which were bringers in of corrupt doctrine.

4. Beside the doctrine. 1. Gualter observes well, that the Apostle forbids
not all dissentions, but such as are caused by innovation of doctrine: for
there are some profitable divisions, quibus consensus in superstitione
turbatur, whereby consent in superstition is hindered. 2. and Faius notes
well, that (...), here signifies not only contrary, but beside: for that
only is not forbidden which is directly contrary unto the doctrine received,
sed si quid aliud, vel aliter introducitur, but if any other thing, or in other
manner be brought in, which belongs to doctrine: which S. Paul calls,
(...), to reach an other doctrine, 1. Timoth. 1.3. which is not only when
false doctrine apparently contrary to the truth is brought in, but when the
pure doctrine is by humane inventions adulterated, Beza annot. 1. Tim. 1.3.

5. The doctrine which ye have learned. 1. Chrysostom notes, that he says
not, which I have taught, but which ye have learned, arguing hereby,
permuniendum esse in ijs, quae accepissent, that they should continue in those
things, which they had received. 2. But Tolets note is wide, he would have them
constant, in doctrina fidei a principe Apostolorum Petro accepta, in the
doctrine of faith received from Peter the Prince of the Apostles: both which
assertions are untrue: for neither was Peter the Prince of the Apostles: he
acknowledged Paul to be his equal, when he gave him (...), the right hands of
fellowship: Gal. 2. and in the same chapter it is showed, that Paul rebuked
Peter to the face, wherein he declared himself no whit inferior to Peter: And
seeing Peter was the Apostle of the circumcision it is not like, that he should
be the first Preacher to the Gentiles at Rome: Gorrhan is yet more equal, who
does not refrain this to the doctrine delivered by Saint Peter at Rome, but
that which they had learned a veris Apostolis, from the true Apostles: see more
of this qu. 19. upon the 1. chapter. 3. here the wisdom also of the Apostles
appears, which speaking of the authors of those factions, yet concealeth
their names.

6. Decline or avoid them. 1. that is such, qui scientes in id facinus
prolabuntur, which wilfully fall into this mischief: they which are seduced
thorough ignorance, reduci in viam possunt, may be reduced into the way, and
amended, Theophyl. 2. Chrysostom notes further, he said not, aggredimini and
manus conserite, assault him, and try it by hand strokes, but only shun him
and decline him: for as Peter Martyr here infers, the Church has no other
sword beside excommunication: their cruelty and tyranny then is taxed, that
will by force, sword, and fire, suppress those which they call heresies, not
first discovering them by the word of God. 3. By declining here, 1. is not
meant, that no disputation should be had with such, as Tolet: the Apostle
shows the contrary by his example, who disputed at Ephesus with the
gainesayers, daily in the school of Tyrannus, Act. 19.9. 2. but we must
decline thence eorum societatem vitando, both privately in avoiding their
company: as Ioh. 2.10. If any come, and bring not this doctrine, receive him
not to house: Gorrhan: 3. and publicly he must be excommunicate. Tit. 3.10.
Him that is an heretic reject after once or twice admonition: 4. and it is the
Magistrates part also not to suffer such within his jurisdiction, but to cast
them out: Osiander.

Quest. 17. How these false teachers and seducers are to be discerned, v. 18.
The Apostle shows how such must be known: 1. by their hypocrisy, which is
seen by the event, they serve not the Lord Jesus. 2. by the end which they
propound, namely to serve their belly. 3. by the manner of their deceiving,
they use deceitful and flattering speech. 4. by the object, whereupon they
work, they seduce those which are simple.

1. They serve not the Lord Jesus: 1. whom they ought to serve, ratione
potestatis because of his power, he is the Lord, ratione bonitatis, because of
his goodness he is Jesus our Savior: Gorrhan: 2. these are they which pretend
to be the servants of Jesus, and make as though nothing were more pleasing unto
them, then the name of Jesus, which they take up often in their mouths, and
yet they are enemies unto Jesus.

2. By their own bellies: 1. that is, as Origin, they teach, questus and
cupiditatis causa, for the desire of gain: as the Apostle says: Tit. 1.11.
They teach things which they ought not for filthy lucres sake: and such make
their belly their god, Philip. 3.18. 2. who then will not be ashamed, servos
ventris pro doctoribus habere, to have them for their teachers, which are
servants of their belly? Chrysostom.

3. By fair speech and flattering. 1. The words are (...), which are thus
distinguished: the first signifies a fair speech, which intends an others
profit, and means nothing less, as Satan insinuated himself unto Eve, under
a pretense of wishing her good: and in such speech, much is promised, and
little performed: this is de rebus, concerning the things, which they persuade;
the other is de personis, touching their persons, whom they flatter, they
deceive by the one, and flatter by the other. 2. by blessing or benediction, 1.
Origin understands, their flattering of men in their sins, vel permanere,
vel proficere etc. they exhort them either to continue or go on in their
sins: Erasmus thinks it is put pro laudatione, for flattering praise and
commendation. 2. they speak things pleasing unto men, and apply themselves to
their humors, as Physicians, that minister things delectable, but not
medecinable to their patientes. 3. and we may understand also, orationes, quas
faciebant, etc. the prayers which they made and blessings over them, of whom
they received any thing: as Baals prophets wished prosperous success to Ahab,
and the Pharisees under color of long prayer deuouted widows houses, Matthew.
23. Hugo. 4. Haymo adds further, that as they flatter some, sic detrahunt
alijs, so they detract from others, that they may the better insinuate
themselves. 5. But yet this forbids not the Ministers of the Gospel, to use
humanity in their speech, curiosity and bitterness of words must be avoided,
as much as flattery: habeant comitatem, sed cum liberate coniunctam: they
must show gentleness in speech, but joined with liberty, Calvin.

4. The hearts of the simple. 1. Not the innocent, as the vulgar latin
reads, and Haymo interprets, that they go about to seduce them, vt eorum
innocentiam auferant, to take away their innocence: for they cannot be
innocent, that are so easily seduced. 2. neither does it signify such as are
without fraud, sine dolo, and malice, Tolet: for one may be without fraud, and
yet not simple. 3. Melancthon understands those, qui affectubus infatuantur,
which are weak in their affections, and are as infatuate, that may easily be
drawn unto hope, or fear, and such like. 4. but it signifies those which are
weak rather in judgment, then affection, qui minus circumspecti sunt ad
cavendas frauds, which are not circumspect to take heed of fraud and deceit,
Calvin: and so they are called (...), not evil, that is not suspicious,
cautelous, but simple: they are so said, not evil, or innocent, harmless,
non a puritate conscientiae, sed defectu industriae, not in the purity of
their conscience, but in their want of industry and circumspection: Lyran. as
the Apostle describes them, 2. Tim. 3. 6. They lead captive women laden with
sins, etc. which are ever learning, and never come unto knowledge: They are
simple then, not as innocent, for they are laden with sins, but as ignorant,
and continually learning: such the wise man speaks of, Prove. 17.15. The
simple believes every word.

5. Let now any indifferent man judge, if all these notes and marks of false
teachers and seducers do not adhere and cleave as fast as pitch unto the
seducing Popish Jesuits, or Iudasites rather. 1. They pretend the name of
Jesus, and call themselves by his name, yet their doctrine and practice
shows, that they are not the servants of Jesus. 2. They grow rich, and turn
all to their own commodity: in France, they could in few years bestow an
100. thousand crowns in the building of the Jesuits College at La-flesh, and
an 100. thousand crowns more in revenew: witness Anti Cotton. 3. through
their insinuating speeches, promising heaven for works worthy of hell, and
with praising, yea adoring their ministers and instruments of mischief, they
deceive and seduce many. 4. and especially they work upon carnal and ignorant
persons, that have no knowledge in themselves, but altogether depend upon them
for their instruction and direction in faith.

Quest. 18. Why the Apostle makes here mention of the obedience of the Romans,
v. 19.
1. He does speak of their obedience, some think to that end, vt bono exemplo
essent alijs, that they should give a good example unto others, to decline
false teachers, because they were in the eye of the world: Lyran. 2. some will
have it used as a reason, why they should take heed of false teachers, because
they had professed their obedience and subjection to the faith: and therefore
being subditi verae fidei and veris Apostolis, subject to the true faith, and
true Apostles, they should not receive false doctrine, Gorrhan. 3. Origin
thinks that the Apostle subtiliter facilem and indiscretam Romanorum,
obedientiam notat, does cunningly note their facile and indiscreet obedience,
how ready they were to be swaied, and therefore they had need to be
admonished: so also Martyr and Pareus: but such facility in listening unto any
teacher, had not been worthy the name of obedience. 4. Chrysostom thinks,
it is a preoccupation to prevent their suspicion, least they should have such
an opinion of the Apostle as though he held them wavering, and unconstant, and
easy to be carried away: and therefore he should say in effect, incautos alios
alliciunt, they do intise others, that are not cautelous, but not you,
Theophylact: your obedience is known well enough, but yet you had need to be
admonished, Calvin: but this is not so fit, because the Apostle rather renders
a reason of his former exhortation, as the words show, for your obedience, etc.
then uses any preoccupation. 5. wherefore this sense is more agreeable; that
although the Apostle had good experience already of their obedience, yet he
would have them be constant, nolit eos gradu suo excidere, he would not have
them fall from that degree of perfection, which they had already attained
unto, but continue constant still in resisting of contrary doctrines: for the
Apostle did foresee, that the Roman Church being once infected with error,
would be dangerous to other Churches: Gualter: as it is not sufficient for a
matrone to have been once chaste, unless she still continue: Osiander.

Quest. 19. What it is to be wise concerning that which is good, and simple in
evil.
1. Origin thus understands it, to be wise unto good, is semper aliquid boni
invenire, to find out always some good thing, as if we be hindered, that we
cannot bring forth a good work, then to find out some good saying, if not
that, then votum bonum, to make some good vow, or wish: to be simple in evil,
that we be not crafty malum pro malo reddere, to render evil for evil: to
the same purpose Severianus in Oecumenius: to be wise to do good, is to
provide, ne nobis noceatur, that we be not hurt, to be simple in evil, that we
offer no hurt to others.

2. Lyranus thus, we must be wise, in bono cognoscendo and operando, in knowing
and working of that which is good, and simple, not in knowing, but in working
of evil: so Haymo, bonum sapite faciendo, malum ignorate vitando, be wise unto
good in doing it, and simple or ignorant in shunning of evil.

3. But this sentence rather is to be understood, according to the present
argument: that the Apostle would have them wise, in discerning of true doctrine
from false, but simple in devising of evil: which is agreeable to that saying
of our Blessed Savior, they should be wise as serpents, innocent as doves, and
of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 13. that they should be children in maliciousness, but not
in knowledge: this sense the words themselves favor: the simple are called
(...), that is without any mixture of evil, of the word (...), to mingle, and
the privative a, though some will have it derived of (...), an horn, such an
one, as is without horns, that is, has no power to do hurt; so then he is
simple and sincere to evil, that neither has cunning to sophisticate the
truth, and to bolster out false doctrine, neither to work mischief.

4. But yet this place makes nothing at all for ignorant simplicity, for it
must be joined with wisdom, and there is no wisdom without knowledge: the
Popish simplicity then joined with gross ignorance, which the Jesuits
require in their disciples, is not the simplicity, which S. Paul speaks of:
Martyr.

5. Origin here moves a question, how one and the same man, may be said both
to be wise, and yet simple: and he answeareth, that this may well be in diverse
respects: as one may be wise toward God, and yet a fool to the world: as here
in the world, he that is skilful in one art, may be yet simple in another: as
sapientissimus Grammaticus, etc. a wise Grammarian, may be simple in the
carpenters trade, and a good Pilote of a ship may be ignorant in Physic.

Quest. 20. How the God of peace shall tread down Satan.
1. The God of peace. 1. This is a good reason, to stir them up to vigilancie
against false teachers, from the hope of victory. 2. he calls him the Lord
of peace, to show, that qui pacem amat, he that loves peace, will dissolve
whatsoever destroieth it: Chrysostom. 3. and God shall do it, they must not
be confident upon their own strength: neither yet must they be slouhtfull,
they must use vigilancie.

2. Shall tread. 1. The vulgar Latin reads in the imperative, tread, and so
Chrysostom. says it is both prophetia and precatio, a prophecy, and a prayer,
but in the original it is put in the future tence. 2. he says not, shall
subdue, but shall tread down or crush: Chrysostom. that is, shall so keep him
under, as then he shall not prevail against the members of Christ. 3. and here
there is an allusion to the first promise made to Eve, that the seed of the
woman, should break the serpents head. 4. this victory is not perfect here,
but the perfect conquest shall be in the next world, Martyr. 5. Origin notes
well, that God is said suscitare Sathanam negligentibus, conterere studiosit,
to raise up Satan or an adversary to those which are negligent, as he is said
to have stirred up Satan an adversary to Solomon, 1. King. 11.14. and to
crush Satan unto the diligent.

3. Satan. 1. Chrysostom understands the deceivers, which are adversaries
(for so the word Satan signifies an adversary) but chiefly, the devil, qui
ad ista ducem agit, who is their ringleader. 2. and Origin does draw it to
particulars, as si quis agone^ susceperit castitatis, if any strive for
chastity, if he continue, God shall vanquish under him the spirit contrary to
chastity, and so likewise in the fight of faith, of patience, and such like.

4. Shortly. 1. Some refer it to the day of judgment. 2. Ambrose to Paul's
coming to Rome. 3. Tolet thinks this was fulfilled in Constantine, who
overthrew idolatry. 4. but even then presently this was in part fulfilled: God
gave the Romans constancy both against the Roman persecutors, and spiritual
wisdom against false teachers.

Quest. 21. What Saint Paul means by the grace of our Lord Jesus, which he
wishes unto them. v. 20.
1. As the Apostle began his Epistle with grace and peace, so he ends it,
as c. 15.33. he says, the God of peace be with you: and here he says, the
grace of our Lord Jesus: which words he repeateth again v. 24. (though Origin
and Ambrose have them but once) which is not a vain repetition, but thereby
the Apostle shows the necessity of the grace of Christ, which he so often
prays for: and further he shows herein a fatherly affection, as the manner
of a loving father is, to bid his children farewell again and again, and
being both to take his leave, saepe ad colloquium convertitur, does return
often to his colloquie with them: and this benediction is there repeated
because of the salutatious of the brethren, which he sends, ending in the
same form, as the Apostles does, Gorrhan.

2. Whereas S. Paul 1. c. 7. does ascribe this grace to God the father, and to
Jesus Christ, but here he makes mention only of Jesus, Origin observes well,
that it is vna atque eadem gratia, one and the same grace: for as the father
has life in himself, and has given unto the Son to have life in himself,
so, gratiam quam dat pater, dat and filius, the grace which the father gives,
the Son gives also. This then is an evident argument, of an equality of
power and goodness, in the father and the Son.

3. Chrysostom does here enforce an argument from the greater to the less;
that if when they were enemies, they were freed by grace, and redeemed from
Satan, much more, amici facti, being made friends, shall they have grace to be
delivered from less dangers: thus far Chrysostom well: but his other note
here is dangerous, that whereas before he spoke of their obedience, and now
turns unto God by prayer, showing that we had need of both, and quae
divinitus dantur, and quae a nobis sunt, as well those things, which are given
of God, as which are of our selves: for we have nothing of our selves, all is
of God. Therefore Origens note is here to be preferred, sciendum, quod omne,
quod homines habent a Deo gratia est, we must know, that all which a man has,
is of God and grace, nihil habet ex debito, he has nothing of debt, for who
has given unto him first, etc.

4. By grace here, 1. neither is understood that grace, which the Apostle
should bring unto them at his coming, which he wishes unto them now: for he
speaks of immediate grace from Christ. 2. nor yet only the grace, whereby we
were first reconciled unto God, that they might continue therein, as Osiand. 3.
but thereby is signified, both the favor of God, and the effects thereof, the
graces and gifts of the spirit, Martyr: and whatsoever the elect have by grace
from God, as faith, hope, remission of sins, Haymo.

5. This salutation, the grace of God, etc. S. Paul was wont with his own hand
to write in the end of every Epistle, whereby it was discerned, whether it
were his epistle or an others: as he himself says, 2 Thessalonians. 4.17. The
salutation of me Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in every Epistle,
so I write: hereby then this epistle to the Romans, is discerned to have been
written by S. Paul; that whereas the rest of it was set down from S. Paul's
mouth by his Scribe, this salutation was extant under his own hand.

22. Quest. Of the salutations of others, which Saint Paul sends to the
Romans, v. 21. to 23.
1. As before the Apostle named diverse persons, to whom he sends greeting to
v. 16. so now he sends the salutations of others unto them: and these are of
two sorts, either such as were strangers in Corinth, or such as were citizens
and inhabitants there, as Gaius, Erastus, v. 23.

2. The Apostle sends greeting from others, not that he needed in himself
their testimony, but he does it partly to continue amity and love between
the brethren, that they might be joined in good will, though they were divided
in place: as also in respect of the Romans, that his Epistle having the
consent of the whole Church, might be of the more weight, not in it self, but
in regard of their weakness.

3. The first is Timothy. 1. of whom we read, Act. 16. how he was circumcised
by S. Paul: Origin thinks he was of Derbe, and so Haymo: but it seems
rather that he was of Lystra, because he was commended by the brethren at
Lystra, Act. 16.3. Gualter. 2. Saint Paul calls him his fellow helper,
because he labored with S. Paul in preaching the Gospel: where we see the
great humility of S. Paul, that disdaineth not so to call a young man, newly
converted to the faith of Christ: unto this Timothy, whom S. Paul left at
Ephesus, did he write the two epistles to Timothy. 3. Lyranus says, he was
Bishop of Ephesus, but howsoever afterward he were, he was not at this time,
for then S. Paul would not have called him from his charge.

4. Then follow the other. 1. Lucius, whom Origin and Haymo think to have
been S. Luke, the inseparable companion of Saint Paul: of whom he makes
mention in 3. places: Col. 4.14. 2. Tim. 4.11. Phil. 2.4. and here he is called
Lucius after the Roman inflexion: but it is more like to be Lucius of Cyrene
mentioned Act. 13.1. who is their numbered among the Prophets at Antioch. 2.
Iosan was S. Paul's host at Thessalonica, that endured so much for him, Act.
17.5. 3. and Sosipater, as Origin thinks is that Sopater of Berea, which
accompanied S. Paul sailing into Syria, Act. 20.4. 4. these three are called
Saint Paul's kinsmen, not only because they were natione Iudaei, Jews by
nation, for so as Origin says, all the believing Jews were his kinsmen, to
whom he notwithstanding gives not this title: neither yet because they were of
the same faith, Gorrhan, and as Origin thinks, this consanguinitie, ex
baptismo intrabat, came in by baptism: but it seems they were sanguine
iuncti, near in consanguinitie unto Paul, yet so, as that they were joined in
religion: for otherwise Saint Paul would not have made mention of them:
Theophyl. whereby it is evident that Saint Paul had illustrem familiam, a
famous stock, that finds of his kindred in diverse places.

5. I Tertius, etc. 1. this Tertius was Saint Paul's scribe, who did write it
from S. Paul's mouth as he endited it: he is Tertius, which signifies, the
third, non numero, sed nomine, not in number, but in name, Ambros. 2. he put in
his name by Saint Paul's license: Lyran. whereby we see, that the labors and
ministry of the faithful are not forgotten with God: as here the name of this
Tertius is eternized to posterity for his faithful ministry and service to
Saint Paul, and to the whole Church, in writing his Epistles. 3. neither as
Chrysostom. observes, did he make mention of himself, to get praise, but rather
by this his service to insinuate himself into the love of the Romans. 4. these
words in the Lord, may have a treble sense, either to join them with his name,
I Tertius in the Lord, that is, of the faith of Christ, Gorrhan: or I have
written in the Lord, for the Lords cause: or, I salute you in the Lord, and
this last sense is the fittest, Beza.

6. Gaius. 1. Ambrose thinks that this was he, unto whom S. John wrote his
third Epistle: which may seem probable, because he is also there commended for
his great hospitality, as here: yet Pareus thinks he was not this Gaius,
because S. John wrote long after S. Paul: but this lets not, all falling out
in one age. 2. Origin thinks this was that Gaius, who was baptized by S. Paul
at Corinth, 1. Cor. 1.14. 3. but, he can not be that Gaius, as Pareus thinks,
who was one of S. Paul's companions, mentioned Act. 20.4. for that Gaius is
said to be of Derbe: therefore I consent rather with M. Beza and Tolet, that
there were three of this name, one of Derbe, Act. 24.4. an other a Macedonian,
Act. 19.29. the third of Corinth, whom S. Paul baptized, 1. Cor. 1.14. 4. If he
had been only S. Paul's host, it had been a singular commendation, for no
doubt the Apostle, according to Christ's rule, did dignum exquirere hospitem,
seek out a meet host to soiourne with, Chrysostom. but he was a common host of
all the brethren, that passed that way. 5. Origin says, it was received
traditione maiorum, by tradition from their Elders, that this Gaius was Bishop
of Thessalonica: Lyranus says he was Bishop of Corinth: of these reports there
is no great certentie.

7. Erastus the steward of the city. 1. The word is (...), which properly
signifies a steward: the vulgar Latin calls him arcarius, the cofferer: but
here diverse notations are given of this word, arcarius: some derive it
ignorantly, of archos, which signifies a Prince, or the chief, gloss interl.
or of ab arce, of the castle of the city which he kept, Hugo: or of arca, a
cheft, where the acts and writings of the city were kept, Lyran. the
chamberlain, Genev. or the common treasurer of the city, Gorrh. and so
Chrysostom takes him to have bin the quaestor aerarius, the treasurer or
receiver: Beza, and the Syrian interpreter think he was the Procurator or
gouerner: so also Theophylact: but he was more like to be the steward, or
annonae praefectus, that made provision for the city, he that had the laying
out of the money for the common use, and received the rents of the city,
Haymo: Origin makes a spiritual sense, that he was steward of that city,
cuius artifex Deus, of the which the builder is God. 2. This city, some take
to be Athens, Hugo: Origin leaves it in doubt, what city it should be,
because no name is expressed: but it was Corinth the city, where S. Paul wrote
this epistle. 3. This is that Erastus, whom S. Paul says he left at Corinth,
2. Tim. 4.20. namely to attend upon his office: yet he sometime ministered unto
Paul, as he was sent with Timotheus into Macedonia, Act. 19.21. his riches, and
office were no impediment to his calling.

8. Quartus. This is no word of number, as the word signifies the fourth, but
it was his name, as Tertius of an other: as there were also among the Romans
that were called Quinti, Sexti, etc.

23. Quest. Of the doxologie, that is, of ascribing glory unto God, wherewith
the Apostle concludes his Epistle in general.
1. Concerning the order and placing thereof; Origin observes, that wicked
Marcion the heretic, who had corrupted the Apostles writings, putting in and
out at his pleasure, had quite cut off these two last chapters from this
epistle: beside there is an other difference among the Orthodoxall Expositors:
for some do place this doxologie in the end of the 15. chapter, immediately
after these words, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: and so Chrysostom
does treat of it in that place, but Origin places it here.

2. Chrysostom observes this to be the Apostles holy manner, to shut up and
conclude his exhortations with prayer: for it belongs unto a teacher, non
solum sermon instruere, not only to instruct by speech, but to entreat also
the divine help.

3. Three arguments the Apostle coucheth together, whereby he sets forth the
praise of God: his power, in being able to confirm them: his wisdom, in
keeping secret the great mystery for many years, and manifesting it now: his
goodness, in revealing the same, and making it known unto the Gentiles.

4. But concerning the reading of this place, it has much troubled
interpreters, how it should be joined together in a good construction: because
in the last verse, it is added, To whom be praise thorough Jesus Christ: which
can not hang upon this clause, v. 25. to him that is of power, etc. Erasmus
thinks it were great impudency to put out the relative (...), to whom,
which is found in the most Greek copies: and therefore he professes, he can
not tell what to think, but that the Apostle after his manner, orationem
imperfecta^, etc. brought forth here an imperfect speech. But 1. this were no
such boldness or impudency, as Erasmus thinks: for neither has the Syrian
interpreter that relative, nor yet the Complutensian copy, which Beza
follows. 2. Augustine, as he is cited by the ordinary gloss, will have the
word, praise or glory, to be twice supplied, in this sense: to him, that is of
power, etc. be praise and glory, to whom be all praise: but this were a
superfluous supply. 3. Chrysostom, howsoever he reads that word in his
text, yet he omitteth it in his comment: lectionis haec est consequentia, this
is the consequence and coherence of the reading, and sense: to him, that is of
power, etc. be glory: so also Ambrose: Lyranus interprets, cui, to whom,
that is to Christ: Tolet, cui, that is, ipsi, to him: but yet the sense and the
words should not hang well together.

4. Wherefore, I think with Beza, that this particle (...), to whom, is a
pleonasme, a filling or superfluous word, according to the manner of the Hebrew
tongue: as he gives instance of the word (...), himself, used superfluously,
Ephesians. 3.21. 1. Pet. 2.24. but Pareus gives a fitter instance, Hosh. 10.7.
succisus est Samariae rex eius, the king of Samaria, of it, is cut off: and so
in this place, this word, to whom, may abound, and be superfluous, but the
sense and coherence is that which Chrysostom follows.

24. Quest. A description of the Gospel preached by the Apostle, inserted here
in the conclusion of his Epistle, v. 25, 26.
There are four parts of this description, containing the four causes
thereof. 1. the material cause, or object, which is Jesus Christ. 2. the
form, revealed now by the Scriptures of the Prophets, before kept secret. 3.
the author and efficient, at the commandment of God. 4. the end, for the
obedience of the Gentiles.

1. According to my Gospel, and preaching of Jesus Christ. 1. he calls it his
Gospel, because he was the minister of it, as our Savior calls it, their
word, Job. 17.20. which shall believe thorough their word: the Gospel he names
the word of the Apostles. 2. the preaching of Jesus, some take actiuely, as
Chrysostom, quem ipse praedicavit, which he preached: so also the interlinear.
gloss, a qua non discordat, etc. from the which the preaching of Christ
disagreeth not: but it is rather taken passiuely, for the Gospel preached
concerning Christ, as it is taken, c. 1.3. and so the Syrian interpreter
translateth, and withal it shows Christ to be the author of S. Paul's
preaching: he was minister, Christus magister, the minister, and Christ the
Master, Lyran. Gorrhan. and so Origin, praedicatio Pauli, est praedicatio
Christi, the preaching of Paul, is also the preaching of Christ as he says, 2.
Cor. 13.3. seeing ye seek experience of Christ, that speaks in me.

2. By the revelation of the mystery. 1. This mystery is not to be restrained
to the calling of the Gentiles only, but to be understood of the whole
doctrine of the Gospel, concerning the Trinity, the incarnation of the Son
of God, and such like: which although they were in some sort made known in the
old Testament, yet then but obscurely, that in respect of the clear light of
the Gospel, they were but as a mystery. 2. Origin here understands one
thing by the preaching of Christ, which belonged unto the faithful, an other,
by the revelation of the mystery, which was manifested but to a few, unto
such, as capaces esse possunt scientiae Dei, may be capable of the knowledge of
God: but the Apostle says, this mystery is made manifest among all nations,
therefore not to a few, but unto all believers. 3. Kept secret, or in silence,
not that either the Prophets knew not what they prophesied: for as Origin
says, si Prophetae non intellexerunt, ea quae dicebant, non erant sapientes,
if the Prophets understood not the things they said, they were not wise: not
yet, that the Prophets knew these things, sed non licebat profere alijs
hominibus, but it was not lawful to bring them forth to others, as Origin: but
it is spoken comparatively, that although these things were revealed in some
part to the Prophets, yet ratione praesentis lucis, in respect of the present
light of the Gospel, these mysteries were kept secret, and hid, Par. 4. by the
everlasting times, (...), we understand not with Haymo, tempora aeterna quae
praecesserunt mundi exordium, the infinite times which went before the
beginning of the world: for they could not then be said to be kept secret or in
silence, seeing there were none, to whom they should then be uttered: and
whereas Tolet would justify this sense, by that place, 1. Cor. 2.7. We speak
the wisdom of God in a mystery, even hid, which God had determined before
the world, etc. there is great difference between these two places: for there
the Apostle uses the word (...), determined, and the preposition (...), which
signifies before, but here he says only (...), which was kept in silence:
therefore this place is better explaned by that other, Ephesians. 3.5. which (...),
in other ages, was not opened: the Apostle then by these long and eternal
times, understands the ages past: quod fuit occultum ab initio temporis,
which was hid from the beginning of time, Hugo: from the beginning of the
world: for the Greek word (...), which answeareth to the Hebrewe gholam, does
not always understand a time simply without beginning or end, but according to
the matter whereunto it is applied.

3. But now is opened among all nations, etc. by the Scriptures, etc. 1. here
the efficient cause is showed, with the isntrumental means, the prophetical
Scriptures: Tolet refers this nunc, now, to the times of the Prophets, and
he understands totum tempus creatum, all the time created: but if this
mystery had been opened then, S. Paul should speak contrary to himself,
Ephesians. 3.5. in other ages it was not opened: therefore Lyranus better
interprets, the Scriptures of the Prophets Apostolis reseratas, opened to the
Apostles, as Luke 24. Christ opened the sense of the two disciples to
understand the Scriptures, in illis propheticis Scripturis praedictum est, etc.
that is, foretold in the prophetical Scriptures, which we see fulfilled in the
Gospel: Calv. Christus concionum argumenta sumpsit, etc. Christ took the
argument of his sermons out of Moses and the Prophets. 2. and the Apostle
wisely makes mention here of the Prophetical Scriptures, both to give
contentment to the believing Jews, that were addicted to the law: be not
afraid, least thou should go from the law, in receiving the Gospel, atqui
hoc exigit lex, this is that which law it self, and the Prophets require,
Chrysostom. and beside this is added, ne Evangelium, quasi novum, and a veteri
lege dissidens, least the Gospel should be suspected as new, and dissenting
from the law.

At the commandment of the eternal God. 1. Haymo refers it to the
commandment of Christ, given to his Apostles, go and preach the Gospel to
every creature, but it signifies more, the everlasting ordinance and
appointment of God, aeternaliter disposuit, qua fierent in tempore, he disposed
from everlasting, the things which should be done in time, Lyran. so Chrysostom.
olim praefinitum erat, nunc autem apparuit, it was appointed before, but
appeared now. 2. so here the Apostle curiosis quaestionibus ianuam claudit,
does shut a door against all curious questions: least any man should enquire,
why the mystery of the Gospel was kept secret and hid so long, the Apostle
sends us to the secret counsel and determination of God. 3. God is called
eternal, as a title peculiar unto himself: that is truly eternal which is
without beginning and end: and whereas other things are immortal, as Angels,
and the soul of man: yet this difference there is, it is one thing non mutari
cum possit mutari, not to be changed, when it has yet a possibility to be
changed, an other, non posse prorsus mutari, not to have any possibility to be
changed at all, which only belongs unto God, to be of an immutable nature,
gloss. ordinar.

4. The end follows: for the obedience of faith. 1. Chrysostom observes
here, fides obedientiam exigit, non curiositatem, faith exacteth obedience, not
curiosity: we must not curiously inquire and ask a reason of that which is
commanded, but willingly yield our obedience. 2. there are two acts of this
obedience, the one is, to receive the faith without exception or gainsaying,
the other, to bring forth the fruits of this faith, by good works. 3. and the
Apostle by pressing this end, the obedience of all nations, here also
comprehends the Romans, non solum tu ita credis, sed tecum vniversus etiam
orbis, but all the world also with thee, Chrysostom.

Quest. 25. Of the doxologie it self, to God only wise, etc.
1. It is not said, to God only wise, as though the Son were excluded, sed
ad discretionem vniuersae creaturae, but to distinguish all creatures from the
creator: he only compared to the creatures is alone wise, Chrysostom. for the
Apostle says not, to the father only wise, but to God only wise, which one
God is the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

2. Origin notes further, that God is not said to be wise, as though by
wisdom he is made wise, as men are, but he is the fountain of wisdom, non
enim ex sapientia sapiens Deus, sed ex sapiente Deo sapientia procedit, for God
is not wise by wisdom, but wisdom proceeds from God, who is wise.

3. Glory. 1. Lyranus reads honor, and glory, which he thus
distinguishes, that honor, is a reverence exhibited as a testimony of ones
virtue: but glory, is an honor exhibited coram multis, before many: but here
there is no use of this distinction: for in the original there is found only
(...), glory. 2. this ascribing of all glory unto God signifies a threefold
act: one in respect of God, to glorify him in his wisdom, in wondering at the
depth thereof, glorificat illum denuo stupefactus, he does glorify him, being
again astonished at these incomprehensible mysteries, Chrysostom. as S. Paul cries
out in admiration of the unsearchable depth of Gods wisdom, Romans 11.33. then
in our selves, there is our rejoicing, and thanksgiving unto God: glory, is
clara cum laud laetitia, a clear kind of rejoicing with praise, gloss. as the
Apostle says, Romans 7.25. I thank my God, etc. the third act is in respect of
others, that they may come to the knowledge of the Gospel, and so set forth the
glory of God: as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 3.10. That by the Church may be
known the manifold wisdom of God.

4. Thorough Jesus Christ. 1. which some refer to the former words, to the
only wise God, that is, to Jesus Christ, gloss. interlin. but Jesus Christ is
here distinguished from the only wise God, as being a distinct person. 2.
Origin refers it to the eternal generation of Christ, because God the
Father, genuerit sapientiam Iesum Christum, has begotten the true wisdom
Jesus Christ, and so he declares God to be only wise. 3. Hugo refers it to
the preaching of Jesus Christ, and those things which were done by him in the
flesh, by the which he declares God to be only wise. 4. Haymo, because by
Christ, manifestatum est mysterium Trinitatis, the mystery of the Trinity was
manifested. 5. Chrysostom joins it to the first words, v. 25. to him that is
able to establish you, etc. by Jesus Christ, etc. 6. But it is better coupled
with the words following, be glory: whereby the Mediatorship of Christ is
commended, that we are by his Mediation made partakers of those benenefits,
Calvin: and beside our praise and thanksgiving, cannot be accepted of God, but
thorough Christ, Osiander: as the Apostle uses to say, I thank my God
thorough Jesus Christ, Romans 1.8. chap. 7.25.

5. For ever. 1. the vulgar Latin reads in secula seculorum, for ever and
ever, but in the original, it is only (...), in secula, for ever: though the
Syrian read it as the Latin does. 2. but the sense is the same: and howsoever
here the Greek so reads not, yet in other places, as Rev. 5.13. we find the
word doubled, in seculo seculorum, for ever and ever, or for age after age, as
we say world without end: as Origin says, it is the manner of scripture
immensitatem temporum per hoc designare, thus to set forth the immensitie and
infinitenes of time: and it is all one as if the Apostle should have said, in
omnia futura secula, for all the ages to come, honor and glory be given unto
God, Haymo. 3. And as this glory and praise is here set forth by the
immensitie of time, it never shall have end: so two other circumstances of the
like infiniteness and immensitie are elsewhere added, as Revel. 5.13. all
creatures in heaven and earth do join together to give praise unto him, that
sits upon the throne: and they give praise, honor, glory, power, that is,
all, and all manner of praise.

Quest. 26. Of the use of the word, Amen.
v. 27. Amen. 1. This word Amen, as Augustine observes is neither Greek nor
Latin, but an Hebrewe word, and signifies truth, or it is true, which word is
retained in all languages, as Augustine coniectureth, ne vilesceret nudatum,
that it should not being made bare (by interpretation) become more vile, and
therefore the interpreter keeps the original word, vt honorem haberet
velamenti secreti, to give honor to the veiled secret: other reasons also may
be yielded hereof, as herein the consent of nations is testified in the worship
of God: and beside, this remainder of the holy tongue, all nations speaking the
language of Canaan, as it is prophesied, Isay 19.18. is a pledge unto the
Gentiles of the calling and reuniting of that nation, from whence they received
their first faith, namely, the Jews. 2. Haymo thinks that this word, is
iuramentum vel affirmatio, an oath or affirmation: but the first it is not: it
is only a constant and earnest asseveration of the truth: it were hard to say,
that our blessed Savior when he used to say Amen, Amen, as he did often, did
swear, or take an oath.

3. There was a double use of this word Amen: for it either shows the
approbation of the judgment, that the things spoken are true, as Origin says
here, vera and fidelia esse signat, quae scripta sunt, it shows the things to
be faithful and true which are said: and in this sense the Apostle says, that
all the promises in Christ are yea, and Amen, 2. Cor. 1.23. or it shows the
desire of the heart, and consent of the will unto the prayers and blessings
pronounced: as the people used at the giving of thanks to say Amen, in the
Primitive Church, 1. Cor. 14.16. as Justinius also testifies in the end of his
second apology for the Christians: and so also Hierome, praefat. in 2. lib.
epist. ad Galat. says, that in the Churches at Rome, audiri veluti coelesti
tonitru, populum reboantem Amen, that the people is heard founding Amen, as a
thunder from heaven: and Chrysostom more particularly shows the manner, how
they said Amen, illud in seculo seculorum, qui finis precum est, audiens, Amen
non dicit, the people hearing these words, for ever and ever, which is the end
of the prayers, cannot say Amen, if he understand not: so Amen was added in the
end of their prayers and thanksgiving to express the common voices and
desires of the people, and their hearty consent to that which was prayed for:
so Calvin observes well, upon that place, 1. Cor. 14.14. this word Amen, est
nota confirmationis tam asserendo quam optando, is a note of confirmation both
in affirming and in wishing: and it shows, that the prayer conceived by the
minister, whereunto the people answer, Amen, omnium esse communem, to be
common to all.

4. Hugo Cardinal has a pretty observation upon that place, that Amen, in the
law, was answered unto the maledictions and curses pronounced, Deuteronomy. 27. v.
15. to the end, but not to the blessings, as may be seen, Deuteronomy. 28. v. 1. to
v. 8. but in the Gospel, Amen is said to blessings, and not to curses.

5. But that is a ridiculous observation of the Carnotensian Canons, that upon
that place of the Apostle, where it appears that it belonged only unto the
idiore and unlearned to say Amen, hereby they would confirm their blind
custom, that none say Amen, because their Church in the beginning consisted of
noble and learned persons, there was none unlearned among them: to the which it
may be answered, that there Church could not be more perfect then the
Primitive Church, wherein the people said Amen: and how perfect soever a Church
is, there must be order, that one pray in the name of the people, and the rest
say Amen: and Hugo says well, modo videtur quod satis possunt illud resumere
per contrarium, but now it seems that they may rather resume and take up the
contrary custom, etc. to say Amen, his meaning is, because there are none but
unlearned there.

Quest. 27. Of the postscript or date of this epistle, whether it were written
from Corinth, and sent by Phebe.
1. It must be observed that these postscripts of the Epistles, are no part of
the Apostles writings, but were added afterward by others: neither are they
generally true: for in the end of the first epistle to the Corinthians, it is
said to be written from Philippi, whereas it was written and sent from Ephesus,
as does diuersely appear: the Apostle says, v. 5. of the last chapter, I will
come unto you, after I have gone thorough Macedonia, for I will pass thorough
Macedonia: he was not then yet come into Macedonia, where Philippis was: again
he says, I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost, and v. 19. the Churches of
Asia salute you, and Aquila and Priscilla: he was then at this time in Asia and
at Ephesus, where Saint Paul left Aquila and Priscilla, Act. 19.^9. he was not
then at Philippis in Macedonia, which is in Europe.

2. But yet this epistle is dated right from Corinth, the haven of which city
or port town was called Cenchris: this is the opinion of Origin, Hierome, with
others: yet Haymo thinks it was dated from Athens, and Lyranus to reconcile
them, thinks that S. Paul began his epistle at Athens, and finished the
rest at Corinth: But this is a mere conjecture: for it is evident, that the
Apostle was not at Athens, but at Corinth when he wrote this epistle, because
he makes mention of Cenchris, c. 16.1. from whence this epistle is supposed to
be sent: and he sends salutations from Gaius, ver. 23. who was his host at
Corinth, 1. Corin. 1.14.

3. Whether this epistle were sent by Phebe or not, see diverse opinions
before, qu. 3. as it is like she was the messenger, because she was now going
to Rome. c. 16.1.2. Erasmus by the way has a glaunse at the ambitious
statelines of the Popes Ambassadors now a days, seeing the Apostles vere
maximi pontifices, the great Bishops of the world did use such messengers: as
S. Paul writes of great and deep matters per mulierculam, by a silly woman:
and here an end of these questions.

4. Places of Doctrine.
Doct. 1. That women do belong unto the kingdom of Christ.
1. Phebe my sister. This woman is highly commended by S. Paul as a necessary
member of the Church, who had done much good unto many: so godly women, though
they are not admitted to the office of public teaching, yet by private
exhortation, virtuous education of children, charitable relief of the poor,
may edify much, so as S. Paul says, there is in Christ Jesus, neither bond nor
free, male nor female, ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28.

Doct. 2. Religion takes not away the offices of humanity.
v. 1. I commend. S. Paul in sending commendations, in saluting and sending
salutations of the brethren one to an other, which he does thoroughout this
chapter, shows that humanity, courtesy, gentleness, may very well stand with
Christianity, against the opinion of those hypocrites, as here Melancthon
calls them, that allow of nothing but austeritie, or rather curiosity:
which was the fashion of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 6. to have four
looks: but gentleness, lenity, benignity, goodness, are the fruits of the
spirit, Galat. 5. and it is specially required of a Bishop, to be (...), easy,
equal, gentle, 1. Tim. 3.3.

Doct. 3. That no part of the Scripture is superfluous or unprofitable.
Chrysostom here observes well, that though small benefit or profit may seem
to rise unto the reader by this last chapter, which is only full of names and
seems to contain no great matter of edifiyng: yet he that reads it
advisedly, shall find it to be otherwise, diligens lector, and hinc ditescet,
remissus and negligens manifestis nihil lucri capiet, the diligent reader, will
even gather riches from hence, but the remiss and negligent, will take no
profit by any place, though never so manifest: he would therefore have us do
as goldsmiths boys do, minuta fragmenta conquirunt, isti tantas auri messas
negligunt, they gather up the small fragments, whereas these neglect and regard
not great masses of gold: so the Apostle says, that the whole Scripture (both
it and every part thereof) is given by inspiration, and is profitable, etc. as
our Blessed Savior also before him said, Matthew. 5. that one iota, or jot of
the word of God shall not perish.

Doct. 4. Religion takes not away the respect of consanguinitie.
Whereas S. Paul, v. 7. saluteth Andronicus and Iunia, and v. 11. Herodian by
the name of (...), kinsman, we learn, that even Christians may and ought to
have respect unto their kindred after the flesh, as S. Paul gives this rule, 1.
Tim. 5.4. that they should learn to show godliness first toward their own
house: as our Blessed Savior hanging upon the cross commended his mother unto
John: and this is reckoned by Saint Paul among other vices and enormities of
the heathen, they were (...), without natural affection, Romans 1.30.

Doct. 5. That all are not always of one mind and religion in one house.
Whereas the Apostle saluteth those, which were of Aristobulus and Narcissus
household, whereby it seems, that they themselves, being not remembered, but
omitted as unworthy of the Apostolical greeting, that they were not
believers: and Narcissus as is showed before, was an ungracious man, one that
abused the Emperor Claudius favor, to enrich himself by the decay and
overthrow of others: hence it is evident, that even in one family there may be
a division and separation of mind in religion: as in Adams family, there was
a Cain for an Abel, in Noah's, a Cham for a Sem, in Abraham's, an Ismael as well
as an Izaak, and in Isaacks, an Esau for a Jacob, and so as our Savior says,
Luke 17.34. two shall be in one bed, the one received, the other refused.

Doct. 6. That a Christian may with a good conscience, and is bound to yeilde
civil obedience to an unbelieving Master.
This also is proved out of this place, for they which were of Aristobulus and
Narcissus family, being converted to the Christian faith, did serve those
Masters of a contrary profession, and yet they continued in that service
still: so the Apostle 1. Tim. 6. gives this rule to servants, to count their
Masters (he means, such as were unbelievers) worthy of double honor, and he
gives this reason, that the name of God, and his doctrine be not evil spoken
of: Then by the same reason, ought subjects to perform all civil obedience
even unto heathen Princes: if to such men, more to Christian governors,
howsoever they stand under the presumptuous curse of the Roman Antichrist.

Doct. 7. That there are diverse degrees of gifts and of rewards for the same.
Chrysostom collecteth this doctrine out of the tenor and style of the
Apostles salutations in this chapter: some he commends and saluteth, a
laboribus, alios a nomine fratrum, alios ab appellatione sanctoru^, for their
labors, some by the name of brethren, others in calling the^ Saints: so that
although they were all faithful, yet they were not all equal: so was it among
the Patriarchs, Lot was a just man, but not as Abraham, and so was Hezekias,
but not as David: and all the Prophets, sed non vt Ioannes, but not as John,
and all the Apostles were beloved of Christ, but John more then the rest: like
as one star differs from an other in glory: and so he concludes, diligens
omnium inquisitio, etc. there shall be a diligent inquiry made of every ones
worth, and if one do but a little go before an other, neque hoc minimum
negleget Deus, God will not neglect that little.

Doct. 8. Dissentions and divisions may be even within the Church.
v. 17. Mark those which cause divisions. So then it is clear, that there
were dissentions and differences even in matters of faith among the Romans:
yet they ceased not to be a Church: Satan raises such co^tentions not without
the Church: for he has over such an absolute power and dominion already, he
need not practice to make them his: but within the Church, that the
proceedings of faith may be hindered: and the Apostle gives an other reason
thereof, 1. Cor. 11.19. there must be heresies among you, that they which are
approved may be known: Then neither can the Romanists condemn the Church of
Protestants for their divisions, which do more abound themselves, nor the
scismatikes for the same cause to refuse our Church, in the which they
themselves have made the rent.

Doct. 9. The first doctrine is the best, and comes nearest the truth.
v. 17. Contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned: like as the doctrine
first taught and planted by the Apostles was the best, and heresy and schism
sprang up afterward; so as Tertullian generally observes, quod primum id
verum, that which is first is true, that false which comes in afterward; as
among the Israelites, Moses and the Prophets doctrine concerning the true
worship of God, was first, Idolatry and Baalisme came in afterward, so Christ
and his Apostles doctrine touching justification by faith was first; the Popish
doctrine of merits, and satisfactions, and of the rest, came in afterward.

5. Places of controversy.
Controv. 1. Against cloistered Nuns.
1. I commend Phebe, etc. a servant of the Church of Cenchrea: This president
of Phebe is a very simple warrant, and a slender ground for that superstitious
order of cloistred and enclosed Nuns. 1. This Phebe ministered unto the whole
Church of her substance, and so was a servant unto it: but these serve nor the
Church, being sequestered from the public company and society of men. 2.
this Phebe was a disciple of S. Paul's, and no doubt one that received and
allowed his doctrine concerning justification by faith, but the other hope, vt
suis obseruantiunculis mercantur remissionem, etc. that by their observations
they may merit remission of sins, Osiand. 3. S. Paul would have no widows
chosen under 60. year old, they contrary to S. Paul's rule, shut up young
maids in cloisters, which wax wanton against Christ, as the Apostle says. 4.
and so far were these cloisters from being places of devotion, vt publica
lupanaria videbantur, that many of them seemed rather to be common
brothelhouses, Gualter.

Controv. 2. The Church not always visible and consisting of multitudes.
v. 5. The Apostle saluteth the Church, which was in the house of Aquila and
Priscilla, so also he makes mention of the Church in Philemons house, Phil. 2.
whereby it is evident that the name of a Church agrees even unto a few
gathered together in Christ's name, as our Blessed Savior promises, that where
two or three are gathered together in Christ's name, he will be in the mids of
them, Matthew. 28. We must not then look always to find out a Church, by the
outward pomp and glory of it, or by the multitude and great troops and
number of people: as the Romanists make these the notes and marks of the
Church: see further, Synops. Cent. 1. err. 18.19.

Controv. 3. All doctrine is to examined by the Scriptures.
Whereas the Apostle, v. 17. wills the Romans to take heed of those which
cause divisions contrary to the doctrine which they had received: the Rhemists
give this corrupt gloss in their annotations: tht he bids them not to
examine the case by Scriptures, but by their first form of faith and religion
delivered to them, before they had, or did read any book of the new
Testament.

Contra. 1. The doctrine which had been preached among the Romans, was
agreeable to the old Scriptures, though there had been yet no books of the
new Testament extant, as S. Paul professes that he said none other things,
then Moses and the Prophets did say should come, Act. 26.22. and therefore the
brethen of Berca, are commended, Act. 17.11. for searching the Scriptures, and
examining the Apostles doctrine thereby. 2. yet it is very probable, that some
of the Gospels were written at this time, as Ieraeneus l. 3. c. 1. thinks,
that S. Matthewes was, and Hierome in catalog. S. Marks. 3. but it follows
not, before the Scriptures were written, they received their doctrine and faith
by tradition, when they had immediate direction from the Apostles, therefore
now when the Sriptures of the old and new Testament are extant, and no
Apostles to direct the Church, who were privileged not to err, we should
leave the written word of God, and flee unto unwritten traditions: Origin has
here an excellent saying, vide quam prope periculis fiunt hi, qui exerceri in
divinis Scripturis negligunt, ex quibus solis huinsmodi examinationis
agnoscenda discretio est, see how near they are unto danger, which neglect to
be exercised in the divine Scriptures, out of the which only, this examination
is to be discerned and acknowledged.

Controv. 4. That Papists not Protestants serve their own belly.
Whereas the Apostle gives this as a note of false teachers and seducers, that
they seek rather to serve their belly, then Jesus Christ, v. 18. our unkind
countrymen the Rhemists, do glaunce here at Protestants, whom they falsely
and blasphemously call heretics, That they seek only their own profit and
pleasure, what soever they pretend: But it is as clear as the Sun, that they
here take themselves by the nose, and that they are the heretics, if ever any,
that serve their belly, and are cunning kators for their kitchen: They may
remember what Erasmus answer was to the Duke of Saxony, when he was asked his
opinion of Luther, that he meddled with two dangerous things, the Popes crown,
and the Monks belly: witness also that pitiful complaint and sup^^icatio^ of
certain Monks to Henry the second, that whereas they had before 13. dishes of
meat allowed them to a mess, their Bishop cut off three of them. And are the
friars of these days think you, more sparing and pinching of their belly?
let that factious crew of those makebates the traiterous Iudasites rather then
Jesuits speak, who in few years at la-flesh in France, beside the sumptuous
building of their College, which cost an 100. thousand crowns, bestowed as
much in their revennue: a reasonable proportion to keep a fat table, and to
fill their bellies.

Controv. 5. That Protestants are no schismatikes.
Whereas the Apostle gives a double caveat, v. 17. concerning seducers and
false teachers that first they must be examined and observed, how they do bring
in strange and novel doctrine contrary to the received truth, and then they
must be avoided and declined: this does justify the departure of the
Protestants from the Church of Rome, because it is a false and Antichristian
Church, and has fallen away, and played the Apostata from the faith of Christ:
and therefore we are to leave them: according to S. Paul's rule, Tit. 3.11. A
man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition, avoid.

Controv. 6. Why the Gospel was kept secret so many years under the kingdom
of Antichrist, against the objection of the Papists.
v. 25. By the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret from the
beginning of the world: whereas the Papists object against the Protestants,
where was your Gospel 60. or 70. years ago, how comes it to pass, that it
was so long kept secret, and hid in the world, is it like, that God would have
his truth so long co^cealed? Hereunto we answer, that as the Gospel of Christ
was a long time folded up in a mystery till Christ came, but then revealed at
Gods own appointment: So it pleased God, that the Gospel once preached to the
world, being by men's unthankfulness obscured, should liehid as a punishment of
their ingratitude, that loved lies rather then the truth, yet should again for
the gathering together of the elect, be revealed unto the world, at such time,
as seemed good unto our gracious God.

Contr. 7. Against the Popish doxologie ascribing glory with Christ unto the
virgin Marie.
v. 27. To God only wise be glory thorough Jesus Christ, etc. This was the
holy use of the Apostles, to conclude with giving praise to God only through
Jesus Christ: we may then justly wonder at the superstitious impiety and
audacious presumption of the Romanists, which use a contrary style joining
Christ and the Virgin Marie together in their doxologies: as Tolet thus
concludes his commentary upon this epistle, sit gloria omnipotenti Deo, and
glorios^ssima m^tri eius, glory be to the omnipotent God, and to his most
glorious mother: so Pererius concludes, laus Deo and Dei genetrici semper
virgini Mariae, praise be to God, and to the mother (or bringer forth) of God
the ever virgin Marie: And before him Bellarmine thus shuts up his
controversiall disputes, Praise be to God, and to the Virgin his mother Marie.

But this superstitious doxologie of Papists may thus be refelled. 1. the
Creator and the creature are not to be coupled or sorted together, in any
religious act: as it is in the Psalm 115. 1. not unto us Lord, etc. but unto
thy name give the praise: and S. Paul thus writing, Romans 1.25. who served the
creature rather then the Creator, who is blessed for ever: denies all such
praise and blessing to be done unto creatures, but to belong only to the
Creator. 2. S. Peter says, if any speak, let them speak as the words of God,
1. Pet. 4.11. but the word of God thus speaks not: never did the Apostles
use, in their thanksgiuings, to join Christ and his mother together, nor yet
any of the found ancient writers: therefore it is a superstitious phrase taken
up by the Romanists, without any warrant of Scripture or antiquity. 3. as
prayer and invocation is due only to God, because in him only we are to
believe, Ioh. 14.1. Romans 10.14. so thanksgiving being a kind of prayer, and a
part of religious worship, is only to be given unto God. 4. we acknowledge the
Virgin Marie to have been a chosen vessel of the Lord, and graced with the
greatest blessing, that could be in this world, to be the mother of our Lord,
and therefore of all generations to be held and called blessed, as she her
self prophesies in her song, and not to be held inferior to any of Gods
Saints: but yet no religious worship is to be given to her, neither therein is
she to be partener with her Son: Our blessed Savior foreseeing the
superstition, which in time to come might grow in too high conceit of this
external privilege given to his mother, as it were to prevent this
inconveniencie, does of purpose extenuate this carnal respect, and detracteth
from it: as when one cried out, happy is the womb that bare thee, etc. he
answered, nay blessed are they which hear the word of God, and keep it, Luke
11. and an other time, when his mother forgetting her self, would have
prescribed unto Christ what to do, to turn water into wine: he sharply
rebuked her, saying, woman what have I to do with thee, Ioh. 2. and after
this, when it was told him, that his mother and brethren were without, desirous
to speak with him, he not willing to be interrupted in his heavenly business,
by any such temporal respect, answered, he that does the will of my Father
which is in heaven, he is my sister, and brother, and mother, Matthew. 12.50.

Contr. 8. Whether S. Peter were ever at Rome, and continued there Bishop 25.
years.
Now in the last place, because that in this last chapter, wherein S. Paul
sends salutations by name unto many brethren at Rome, and makes no mention
of S. Peter, the Protestants do infer, that Peter was not then at Rome, and
so either was not there at all, or could not there so long continue, as the
Papists generally hold, it shall not be amiss briefly to examine the truth
herein: and first we will answer the Papists objections, and then propound our
own reasons. It is the general received opinion of the Romish Catholics,
that Peter should come thither in the 2. or 3. year of Claudius, in the 45.
year of Christ, and continue there Bishop 25. years, (saving that sometime he
was absent thence by occasion of the affairs of the Church,) unto the 14.
year of Nero, when he was beheaded in the 70. year of Christ: so Bellar. l.
2. de Romans Pont. c. 5. Rhemists in their table of S. Peter set after the Acts
of the Apostles: they reason and object thus.

1. Ob. S. Peter writ his first epistle from Rome as it appears, 1. ep. 5.13.
the Church which is at Babylon saluteth you, and Marcus my son: but this
Babylon is Rome as it is called Rev. 17. and so Papias in Eusebius. l. 2. c. 15.
and Hierome de viris illustribus, do understand it, Rhemist annot. 1. Pet. 5. v.
13.

Ans. 1. This Babylon some take to be that great city in Assyria, Beza: or
rather it was the Egyptian Babylon, that great city now called Cayre, or
Alcayre, which is 13. or 14. german miles about, and this is most like, because
Mark was with Peter at this time, who is held to have been constituted the
first Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt, where also he was put to death, and
buried, as Nichep. l. 2. c. 35. and Doroth. in the life of Mark. 2. the
Apostle would not date his epistle from a place so called in an allegorical
sense: epistles are dated from places and cities as they are usually called. 3.
in the Revelation Rome is called mystical Babylon, not the first Rome, but as
it should be under Antichrist: but S. Peter handles no such thing in this
place, of the seat and place of Antichrist. 4. Eusebius rejects diverse of
Papi^s fables, lib. 3. c. 36. neither is every thing that Hierome writes,
Gospel.

2. Ob. The sight of the monuments of S. Peter's chair, sepulcher, death at
Rome, do evidently convince them which deny, his being there, Rhemist.

Ans. This is to prove one uncertain thing by an other: for how do they
prove that S. Peter sat in such a chair, or that his body lies there
buried: when as they themselves have deceived the world with diverse fables
concerning this matter: half of his body they say is at S. Peter's in Rome,
and half at S. Paul's, his head at S. John Lateran; his nether iaw with the
beard upon it at Poyters in France: at Triers many of his bones, at Geneva
part of his brain, which was found to be a pumice stone: Therefore this
argument taken from the sepulcher of Peter, proves nothing: their own fables
take away the credit of their report.

3. Ob. But diverse ancient writers to testify, that S. Peter was at Rome,
and among the rest Egesip. l. 3. c. 2. de excid. Hierosol. Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
Eusebius. l. 2. c. 13.15. Hier. in Cat. with diverse other fathers, Chrysostom. Amb.
August. Cypr. cited by the Rhemists, an. 4. in 16. c. Romans

Answ. 1. In general we say, that the fathers might follow the received
opinion of those days, not observing how the mystery of iniquity then
wrought, and a way even the^ was a preparing for Antichrist: and that their
testimony without warrant of Scripture, is too weak a ground to build an
article of faith upon, such as the Papists make this to be of Peter's being at
Rome, and sitting Bishop there. 2. either the fathers writings coming
afterward to be handled with soul fingers, may be thought herein to be
corrupted, or of small credit, considering the great variety of their reports,
which shall be examined among our arguments following. 2. In particular, just
exception may be taken to the four authors first alleged: Egesippus is held
to be but a fabler, and not that ancient Egesippus mentioned by Eusebius, but
an other of later time, or a counterfeit author. 1. that ancient Egesippus
wrote the Acts of the Apostles, and their doctrine out of the Gospel secundum
Hebraeos and Syros, according to the Hebrews and Syrians, but this fabulous
Egesippus wrote in Greek. 2. This last Egesippus makes mention of
Constantinople, to which Rome should be equal in dignity, which was concluded
after Constantines time, after an. 340. but the elder Egesippus lived an. 146.
or thereabout, near 200. year before. 3. the fables themselves are unsavory
avouched by this Egesippus, as how Peter and Simon Magus did strive, which of
them should raise Neros cousin, that was dead, and he that could not do it
should die, and how Peter fleeing out of Rome, met Christ at the gates, and
asked him, Domine quo vadis, Master whether go thou, and he answered, I
come again to be crucified, whereupon Peter returned and was crucified: for
this is contrary to S. Peter's own doctrine, that the heavens should contain
Christ until his second coming, Act. 3.21.

To Ireneus testimony we answer. 1. whereas he says that Matthew wrote his
Gospel at what time Peter and Paul preached at Rome: this cannot agree with
the history of times: for Matthew is held to have written his Gospel in the 3.
year of Caligula, from which year unto the 2. of Nero, when S. Paul is held
to have first come unto Rome, are very near 20. years. 2. and as Ireneus is
uncertain in this, so an other opinion he has of the like credit, that Christ
should be 40. or 50. year old when he preached, and this he says he received
of all the Elders of Asia, who testified, id ipsum tradidisse eis Iohannem,
that John delivered the same unto them: and yet the other opinion of Epiphanius
that Christ died in the 33. year of his age, and began to preach at 30. is
held of all to come nearer unto the truth.

Hierome is as uncertain. 1. he says that Paul came to Rome in the 2. year
of Claudius, and yet he grants that before he had been at Antioch, and from
thence went and preached to the dispersed brethren in Pontus, Galatia,
Bithinia, Cappadocia, Asia, which might hold him not much less then 14.
years, as shall be showed afterward, so that he could not in this account come
to Rome til the 2. of Nero. 2. Hierome is as uncertain in other things: in his
epistle to Marcella, he thinks Adam was buried in mount Calvarie: in his
epitath of Eustach. he will have him buried in Chebron: in his epistle to
Evagr. he thinks Job came of Esau, and in his co^mentarie upon Genesis, that
he descended of Nahor Abraham's brother.

To Eusebius these exceptions may be taken. 1. that he was an Arrian, and
being an Arrian wrote his history, which makes it of the less credit. 2. he
is contrary to himself, for l. 3. c. 2. he affirms that Peter came not to
Rome, till the last year of Claudius: See Christ. Carlil in his book of the
life and peregrination of Peter, 1. dis. This shall suffice concerning the
contrary arguments and objections made by the Papists: now ours follow for the
demonstration of the contrary part, of Peter's not being at Rome: where first
I will set down the opinion of the Protestants, and then produce their reasons.

Though the Protestants in general and by the most full and sufficient warrant
of Scripture do hold that Peter was not at Rome, as Bishop there, or founder of
that Church, and so in effect do agree in the substance, yet I find some
difference among them in certain points coincident to this question. 1. Some
directly affirm and prove it by evident places of Scripture, that Peter was
not at Rome at all, as Vl. Vellanus, whose objections Bellarmine rather makes
an offer to confute, then indeed confuteth them, l. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 5.6.

2. Some go yet further, and affirm, that Peter neither lived at Rome nor yet
died there, nor S. Paul neither: but assigns Jerusalem to be the place where
S. Peter was crucified, by warrant of that place, Matthew. 23.34. where our
Savior says, that Jerusalem shall kill and crucify some of the wise men and
Prophets whom he should send thither: Christopher Carlil, who alleges
Lyranus and the interlinear. gloss. upon that place, that Peter was crucified
at Jerusalem: for none else of the Apostles were crucified there: Linus also
affirms that Peter was slain at Jerusalem, by Agrippa the last king of the
Jews, when also James the less was killed, with Ioses, Simon, and Jude.

3. Some of our writers deny not Peter to have been at Rome, but they affirm
he could not come thither so soon, nor continue there so long, 25. years from
the 2. of Claudius: as Beza, says, non invitus concedam, etc. I will not
unwillingly grant that Peter was at Rome, and there put to death, but not the
other: annot. in 1. Pet. 5.14. so also Gualter, id ego non facile negaverim,
etc. I will not easily deny, that Peter in the last year of Nero received the
crown of Martyrdom, because of the consent of ancient writers, etc. to the
same purpose also D. Fulke annot. 4. in 16. c. ad Roman.

4. To this we add further, that howsoever we absolutely deny not, but that
Peter might be at Rome, yet it is more probable he was not: certainly out of
the Scripture it can not be proved that he was there at all, and it is not de
fide, a thing concerning faith, neither to be held as an article of faith, as
the Church of Rome does defend it, because the Scripture only must be a rule of
our faith: and further it is evident out of the Scripture, that Peter was not
at Rome, till Paul's first being there in bonds, where the history of the acts
of the Apostle ends, whatsoever he was afterward: which Pareus thinks to
have been the 11. year of Nero, but it was rather the second year, when S.
Paul came thither first, and his second arrival was in the 11. year, for this
Epistle was not written in the 8. year of Nero, as Pareus thinks, but rather
in the end of Claudius reign, while Narcissus was yet in authority: see
before in the end of the 5. and 10. quest. Our reasons against Peter's being
at Rome, in manner and form aforesaid, are these.

Our first argument shall be out of the Scripture. 1. it is evident, that Peter
was at Jerusalem, the third year after Paul's conversion, for there he stayed
with him 15. days, which was the 37. year of Christ: he was not then yet at
Rome.

2. 8. year after this he was imprisoned by Herod, which was the 43. year of
Christ, and the 3. year of Claudius, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 11. Joseph. l. 19. c. 7.
Peter the^ was not yet at Rome.

3. Six year after this, was Peter at Jerusalem, for there S. Paul found him,
14. year after his first coming thither, Galat. 2.1. then was celebrated the
Apostolical counsel, mentioned Act, 15. when each gave to other the right hand
of fellowship, this was the 9. year of Claudius, as witnesses Hierome:
hitherto Peter had not visited Rome: neither will it suffice to say, that he
came from Rome thither to the council: for then what time will they leave unto
Peter to visit Antioch, and the Churches of Asia, Bythinia, Cappadocia,
Galatia, and Egypt, where Nicephorus says he preached, lib. 2. c. 35. in all
these places he preached, as it appears by his 1. epistle written unto the
dispersed brethren in all these countries: and again if Peter had come from
Rome, when Claudius expelled the Jews, it is like mention should have been
made as well of Peter's coming from thence, as of Aquila and Priscilla, Act.
18.2.

4. Then after this council, it is not like that Peter went to Rome, for these
two reasons; because the Jews had been lately expelled from thence: and S.
Paul was by consent appointed to be the Apostle of the uncircumcision, Peter of
the circumcision: he then went not to preach to the Romans, which belonged
unto Paul's lot.

5. When S. Paul, writ the epistle to the Romans, which might be in the last
year of Claudius, Peter was not at Rome, for the^ Paul would not have left him
out unsaluted, c. 16.

6. And after this when Paul was brought prisoner to Rome, which might be in
the 2. of Nero, and there continued in bonds, to the 4. of Nero, all this while
Peter was not there: for then S. Paul in his epistles written from Rome, where
he sends commendations from diverse of the brethren, as from Epaphras, Luke,
and Demas, Coloss. 4.12.14. and to Philemon, v. 23. from Marcus, Aristarchus,
Demas, Luke, his cohelpers, would not have forgotten also to send greeting from
S. Peter, if he had been at Rome: again he says, 2. Tim. 4.11. only Luke is
with me, then was not Peter with him; and he further says, v. 16. at my first
answearing no man assisted me, but all forsook me: but if S. Peter had been
there he would not in all likelihoode have forsaken him. Thus then it is
evident, that to the end of S. Paul's first captivity at Rome, which was in
the 4. of Nero, Pareus places it in the 11. and 12. of Nero, it is proved by
the continuance of the sacred history that Peter was not at Rome; then could
he not come thither in the 2. of Claudius, which was 16. years before, and sit
Bishop there 25. years. After this time it cannot be certainly proved,
whether he came to Rome, and therefore it cannot be received, and believed as
an article of faith.

Our second general argument is taken from the great uncertainty, and
manifold contradictions of the ancient writers, concerning the time of S.
Peter's coming and continuing at Rome.

1. They dissent about the time of Peter's coming to Rome: Eutropius says,
that Peter was at Rome the 1. year of Caius Caligula, who was Emperor 5.
years next before Claudius, and that Philo an ambassador from the Jews there
spoke with him: Orosius says, he came thither in the beginning of Claudius
reign: Hierome, in the second year; fasciculus temporum in the 4. Nauclerus
says he came to Rome in the beginning of Claudius reign, but was not
installed Bishop till the 4. year: the Passionall says, he came not thither
till the 13. year of Claudius: Eusebius l. 2. c. 13. says, he came to Rome in
the reign of Claudius, but he assigns not the year: Damasus says he came
in the reign of Nero.

2. There is also great difference about the time and place of S. Peter's death:
Lyranus in his annotations, Matthew. 23. thinks he was crucified at Jerusalem,
so also Linus: others say at Rome: Epiphanius in Nason, assign the 12. year
of Nero: the most the 14. year: Ambrose sermon. 67. says that S. Paul and S.
Peter vna die, vno loco, etc. in one day, and the same place endured the
sentence of the same Tyrant: Hierome thinks they suffered the same day, but
Paul a year after Peter; Abdias says, that Peter suffered at Rome in the time
of S. Paul's free imprisonment, which was in the 3. or 4. year of Nero, so that
Saint Paul should surviue him 10. years; Ireneus says, that Mark surviued
Peter, and writ his Gospel after his death, lib. 3. c. 1. and Eusebius writes
that Mark was put to death, in the 8. of Nero, l. 2. c. 24. then, if these
authors say true, must Peter be put to death before the 8. year of Nero.

3. A third difference is in the time of Peter's being Bishop at Rome: Eusebius
gives him 25. years, Hierome 27. Beda 29. Damasus holding that he came to
Rome in the reign of Nero, cannot give him above half so many, if he were put
to death by Nero; otherwise the 25. years which he gives him will reach to
Domitians reign: See Christoph. Carlil. p. 7.14. of his first discourse.

Let now the indifferent Reader judge, whether in such uncertainty it be not
more probable, that Peter was never at Rome, or if he were, not as Bishop there
being an Apostle and that of the circumcision: at the least his being there
cannot be proved by Scripture, and so cannot be affirmed, as an article of
faith: See further Synops. Pap. Centur. 1. err. 38.

6. Moral observations.
Observe. 1. Whom we are to commend.
v. 1. I commend Phebe. S. Paul commends Phebe for her singular service
performed to the church, in going hospitality to the Saints, which teaches us
whom we should commend by our testimony: that we take heed that we give not
our commendation of any unworthy person, for then we should be found to be
false witnesses: as we should not deprave the good gifts in any, so neither
should we commend them, which have few or no commendable parts: under Christ's
kingdom it is prophesied, that a niggard shall no more be called liberal, nor
a churl rich, Isa 32.5. but every one shall be called and commended according
to his worth: a good caveat for these days, wherein flattery so much
prevails especially about great persons, that in such, great and enormous
vices do often mask under the name and title of honor.

Observe. 2. Of hospitality.
v. 2. She has given hospitality to many. These duties belong unto
hospitality, affectuosa invitatio, a most affectionate and earnest inviting,
as the disciples compelled Christ (as yet unknown unto them) to stay with
them. 2. laeta susceptio, a joyful receiving and entertaining, as Zacheus
received Christ joyfully and gladly into his house. 3. larga procuratio, large
and liberal provision, as Abraham went himself and fetch a calse and killed
it, 4. quiescendi opportunitas, opportunity and fit place to rest in, as the
Shunamite provided for the Prophet a chamber, 2. King. 4. 5. securitas and
protectio, security and protection; as Lot did safeguard his ghests, the two
young men came into his house. 6. amicabilis diductio, a friendly bringi^^ on
the way, in their departure, as Abraham did, Genesis 18.

Observe. 3. Of the true ornaments of women.
3. Greet Priscilla and Aquila, etc. This woman with her husband are commended
for being assistants and helpers unto Paul in his ministry, and in preserving
his life with endangering their own: such was their piety and zeal: behold
these are the virtues and true ornaments of women: how many Queens says
Chrysostom, are buried in silence and oblivion, whereas this tentmakers wife,
est in ore omnium, is in every ones mouth, and that not only ten or twenty
years, but until the coming of Christ: vbi nunc facierum ornatus, vbi vana
gloria, where is now the vain glory of women, in tricking up their faces:
learn of this woman, what are the true ornaments, not sought for in earth, but
laid up in heaven: This woman and her husband gave entertainment to S. Paul
two years: and thou if thou will, before illum habebis quam illi shall enjoy
him more fully then they, neque anim aspectus Pauli tales illos fecit, sed
verba, for it was not the fight of Paul, but his words which graced them so
much: therefore accipe beatorum illorum libros, etc. take thou the books of
those blessed men the Prophets and Apostles and thou shall be as Priscilla
which received Paul: Hic est ecclesia ornatus, ille theatrorum, hic caelis
dignus, iste equis and mulis, this is the ornament of the Church, the other to
have glistring apparel, is for theaters and stages, this is beseeming heaven,
the other, to horse and mules, this is often put about dead bodies, namely
costly apparel, hic vero in sola splendet anima, but the other only shines
in the soul: these true ornaments let us all labor for.

Observe. 4. Of the profitable meditation of the punishment of hell.
Chrysostom upon the diversity of gifts, which S. Paul commends in the
brethren who^ he saluteth in this chapter, groundeth the difference of rewards:
and by a consequent he proves the punishment of the wicked in hell, si non
eisdem potientur iusti omnes, etc. quomodo cum justice eadem gloria fruentur
peccatores, if the just shall not enjoy the same reward, how shall sinners
enjoy the same glory with the just: then he proceeds in this manner. 1. many
doubt of hell, enquiring of the place, erit alicubi extra orbem hunc gehenna,
hell shall be somewhere out of this world, (he means this visible world,) ^e
quaeramus vbi sit, sed quomodo illam fugiamus, let us not seek where it is,
but how we shall escape it. 2. some may doubt of the punishment to come,
because here God punishes not all, but the reason hereof is, Gods longanimitie
and patience: propterea minatur, and non statim in gehenuam conijcit, therefore
he threateneth, and does not strait cast down into hell. 3. but some will
further ask what manner of punishment it is: what thing can thou name in
this life so grievous, as sicknenes, diseases, torment of body, perpetual
blindness, ridicula ista sunt ad futura mala, these are but toys to the evils
to come. 4. But if there be hell it shall be only for infidels, not for
believers: yes even for them also, if they live not according to their faith:
for he which knows his Masters will and does it not, is worthy of more
stripes: for otherwise the devils should not be punished, for they believe and
acknowledge God: and so he concludes, continuos sermones de illis versemus,
non enim sinet in gehenuam incidere, gebennae meminisse, let us talk
continually of those punishments: for to remember hell, it will keep a man out
of hell: vtinam in tabernis vtnarijs, etc. immo vbique de gehenna disputatum
esset, I would that in wine-taverns, and other banketting places, yea every
where men would talk and dispute of hell.

Observe. 5. The company of the wicked is to be shunned.
v. 17. Avoid them. So S. Paul commands, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. that they withdraw
themselves from them that walk inordinately: Moses from the Lord commanded the
congregation to get them away from about the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, Numb. 16.16.24. the company of the wicked, is to be declined, both
least they be partakers of their sins, and parteners also in their plagues.

Observe. 6. To give thanks always unto God.
v. 27. To God only wise be praise thorough Jesus Christ for ever: the Apostle
teaches us by his example to remember always to show our thankfulness to God:
as he says, 2. These. 5.18. in all things give thanks: thus does the Apostle
upon every occasion break forth into the praise of God, as Romans 1.8. I thank
my God thorough Jesus Christ: and c. 7.25. I thank God, etc. and we must not
be weary of giving thanks, praise must be yielded for ever: as Ambrose well
says, imitare Lusiniam, cui quoniam ad dicendas lau^^s dies sola non sufficit,
nocturna spacia pervigili cantilena decurrit, imitate the nightinghal, which
because the day suffices not to set forth the praise of the Creator, does
pass over the night with continual singing, Ambr. sermon. 43.

And now as S. Paul gives thanks for the revelation of the mystery, a long
time kept secret, which he has opened in this divine epistle, so unto the same
God, which has given me strength thus to unfold the secrets of this epistle,
otherwise far exceeding my capacity and ability, I conclude with the
Apostle, saying, To God only wise, be praise thorough Jesus Christ for ever.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE QUESTIons handled in this Commentary.
General Questions out of the whole Book.
Quest. 1. Of the word Testament, what it signifies, and of what things it
must be understood.

2. qu. Of the diverse significations of the old and new Testament.

3. qu. Of the books of the new Testament, their number, and authority.

More special questions out of the whole Book.
1. qu. Whether S. Paul were the Author of this Epistle.

2. qu. Of the birth, the life, acts, and death of S. Paul.

3. qu. Of S. Paul's place of birth.

4. qu. Whether S. Paul were noble by birth.

5. qu. Whether S. Paul were brought up in the learning of the Greeks.

6. qu. Of the years of the reign of the Emperors of Rome unto Nero, under
whom S. Paul suffered.

7. qu. In which year after the passion of Christ Paul was converted.

8. qu. At what age S. Paul was converted.

9. qu. How long S. Paul after his conversion, was ravished in spirit, and
taken up into Paradise.

10. qu. At what time Paul was first in bonds, and of his going to Jerusalem,
how often he went thither, before he came into bonds.

11. qu. Of Paul's being in bonds first at Cesarea, and afterward at Rome.

12. qu. Whether S. Paul was set at liberty, after he was prisoner at Rome,
and where he bestowed himself afterward.

qu. 13. In what year after the passion of Christ, and of Nero his reign, S.
Paul was put to death at Rome.

qu. 14. Of Paul's person, and of the manner and place of his death.

qu. 15. What moved Nero to put the holy Apostle to death.

qu. 16. Of the epistles of S. Paul, the number of them.

qu. 17. Of the order of time, wherein S. Paul's several Epistles were written.

18. qu. That it is no point of curiosity, but a thing very requisite, to know
the diverse times of the writing of S. Paul's Epistles.

19. qu. Of the order of placing the Epistles, and why this to the Romans is
set first.

20. qu. Unto whom this Epistle to the Romans was written, and from whence.

21. qu. Of the excellency, and worthiness of this Epistle.

Questions upon the first Chapter.
Quest. 1. Why Paul sets his name before this Epistle.

2. qu. Of the two names of the Apostle, Saul and Paul, what they signify.

3. quest. Upon what occasion the name Saul was turned to Paul.

4. qu. At what time the Apostles name began to be called Paul.

5. qu. In what sense Paul calls himself the servant of Jesus Christ.

6. qu. How Paul calls himself a servant, seeing Christ says, I will not
call you servants, Ioh. 15.15.

7. qu. How S. Paul says, called to be an Apostle.

8. qu. Of the office, and calling of an Apostle, what it is.

9. qu. Diverse points, wherein consists the excellency of the Apostleship.

10. qu. How S. Paul is said to be set, or put apart for the Gospel of God.

11. qu. Of the description of the Gospel.

12. qu. Whether the Gospel be comprehended in the old Testament.

13. qu. How Christ is said to be made of David after the flesh.

14. qu. How it can be showed that Christ was borne of the seed and posterity
of David.

15. qu. Whether Christ descended of David by Solomon, or Nathan.

16. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 4. declared mightily to be the Son
of God, etc.

17. qu. Of the meaning of these words, declared to be the Son of God in
power.

18. qu. Of these words, according to the spirit of sanctification, v. 4.

19. qu. Of these words, by the resurrection of the dead.

20. qu. Of these words, v. 5. By whom we have received grace, and Apostleship.

21. qu. Of the persons, whom the Apostle saluteth, To all you, that be at
Rome, etc.

22. qu. What the Apostle understands by grace, and peace, v. 7.

23. qu. Of Paul's giving of thanks for the faith of the Romans, which was
published abroad, v. 8.

24. qu. How the faith of the Romans was published through the world.

25. qu. Of the singular faith of the Romans.

26. qu. Whether the Church of Rome, were first founded by S. Peter.

27. qu. The place, Act. 28.21. reconciled.

28. qu. Whether this be an oath, God is my witness, v. 9.

29. qu. Whether it be lawful to swear, and upon what occasion.

30. qu. How Paul is said to serve in the spirit.

31. qu. What prosperous journey the Apostle means, v. 10.

32. qu. Whether S. Paul needed to be mutually strengthened by the faith of the
Romans.

33. qu. Of the impediments whereby Saint Paul was let to come unto the
Romans.

34. qu. Why S. Paul expresses not the cause in particular, what let him.

35. qu. Whether Saint Paul's desire to go to Rome, being therein let, were
contrary to Gods will, and so sinned therein.

36. qu. How S. Paul, was a debtor unto all, v. 14.

37. qu. Whom S. Paul understands by the Grecians, and Barbarians.

38. qu. How Paul is not ashamed of the Gospel, v. 16.

39. qu. What the Gospel, or Evangel signifies.

40. qu. Of the definition of the Gospel, It is the power of God unto
salvation, to every one that believes.

41. qu. Of the difference between the Law and the Gospel.

42. qu. Why the Jews are named before the Grecians, v. 16.

43. qu. The justice, or righteousness of God is revealed: what justice the
Apostle means.

44. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 17 is revealed from faith to faith.

45. qu. Whether the Apostle does rightly cite this place out of the Prophet,
The just by faith shall live.

46. qu. Whether S. Paul in citing this saying, follows the Prophets sense.

47. qu. How the wrath of God is said to be revealed from heaven, against all
unrighteousness.

48. qu. What it is to withhold the truth in unrighteousness, v. 18.

49. qu. What the Apostle means by these words, v. 19. That which may be
known of God, is manifest in them.

50. qu. Of the ways and means, whereby the Lord does manifest himself unto
men.

51. qu. What invisible things of God the Apostle speaks of, and how they are
made known unto us.

52. qu. Of the knowledge which the Philophers had of God, and by what means
they attained unto it.

53. qu. How other Scriptures, that deny all knowledge of God unto the wicked,
agree with this place of S. Paul.

54. qu. Of the meaning of these words, that they should be inexcusable, v. 20.

55. qu. Whether there is any natural knowledge of God in man.

56. qu. Whether the natural knowledge which the Heathen had of God, was
sufficient unto salvation.

57. qu. Whether any of the Philosophers were saved, by that natural
knowledge, which they had of God.

58. qu. Seeing that the natural knowledge which the Heathen had, was not
sufficient unto salvation, how are they thereby made inexcusable.

59. qu. v. 21. How the Gentiles are said to have known God, and yet glorified
him not as God.

60. qu. v. 21. How the Gentiles did not glorify God, neither were thankful,
but became vain.

61. qu. How the Gentiles changed the glory of God, into the image of men and
beasts, v. 23.

62. qu. Of the diverse kinds of idolatry among the heathen, in worshipping the
images of men and beasts, v. 23.

63. qu. Of the gross idolatry of the heathen, in worshipping the images of
men and beasts, v. 23.

64. qu. How God is said to have delivered them to their own hearts lusts, v.
24.

65. qu. How the Gentiles are said to defile their bodies in themselves.

66. qu. How they worshipped the creature, rather then the Creator.

67. qu. Of the unnatural sins of the heathen.

68. qu. How one sin is punished by an other, upon these words, And received
in themselves such recompense of their error, etc. v. 27.

69. qu. How the Gentiles are said, not to regard to know God, v. 28.

70. qu. What it is, to be delivered up to a reprobate mind.

71. qu. General observations out of the Catalogue of the sins of the
heathen, reckoned up by the Apostle, v. 29, 30.

72. qu. Of the order observed by the Apostle, in the particular enumeration of
the sins of the Gentiles.

73. qu. Of the particular sins of the Gentiles here rehearsed by the Apostle.

74. qu. Of the true reading of the last verse. 31. and the meaning thereof.

75. qu. What a dangerous thing it is to be a favorer, and procurer of sin
in others.

76. qu. How one may be accessarie to an others sin.

77. qu. Whether all the Gentiles were guilty of the sins which are here
rehearsed by the Apostle.

Questions upon the second Chapter.
1. qu. To whom the Apostle here speaks, Wherefore thou art inexcusable, O
man.

2. qu. Whether one offend in judging an other, wherein he is guilty himself.

3. qu. Of these words, v. 2. We know that the judgment of God is according
to truth.

4. qu. Whether a Judge be bound herein to be like unto God, to judge according
to the truth, which he knows.

5. qu. Of the reasons, why the Lord uses patience and forbearance toward
sinners.

6. qu. Whether the leading of men to repentance by Gods long suffrance,
argues that they are not reprobate.

7. qu. How the bountifulnes of God in leading men to repentance, and the
revelation of his wrath spoken of chapter 1.18. may stand together.

8. qu. How God is said to harden the heart, seeing the wicked do harden their
own hearts.

9. qu. Whether hardness of heart, and final impenitencie, be a special kind
of sin.

10. qu. Whether it stand with Gods justice to punish twice for the same sins.

11. qu. Whether every one shall be rewarded according to his works.

12. qu. How it stands with Gods goodness to punish evil, with evil.

13. qu. Of the true reading of the 7. verse.

14. qu. What the Apostle means by patience of good works.

15. qu. What glory, honor, and immortality, the Apostle speaks of, v. 7.

16. qu. How it stands with Gods justice to punish eternally sin temporally
committed.

17. qu. How eternal life is to be sought.

18. qu. Whom the Apostle means, by contentious, and such as disobey the
truth.

19. qu. Of the punishment due unto the wicked, indignation, wrath,
tribulation, anguish, etc. v. 8.

20. qu. Why the Jew is set before the Grecian.

21. qu. What Jews and Gentiles the Apostle here means.

22. qu. Of the diverse acception of the word person, v. 11.

23. qu. How God is said, not to accept the persons of men.

24. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 22. As many as have sinned without
the law, shall perish without the Law.

25. qu. Of the occasion of these words, v. 13. The hearers of the Law are not
righteous before God, but the doers shall be justified.

26. qu. Of the meaning of these words, Not the hearers of the Law, etc. but
the doers shall be justified, v. 13.

27. qu. How the Gentiles which had not the Law, did by nature the things
contained in the Law.

28. qu. How any thing can be said to be written in the heart by nature, seeing
the mind is commonly held to be as a bare and naked table.

29. qu. Of the Law of nature, what it is.

30. qu. What precepts the law of nature contains, and prescribes.

31. qu. What the law of nature was before and after man's fall, and wherein
they differ.

32. qu. Whether the light of nature, though much obscured, can altogether be
blotted out of the mind of man.

33. qu. Whether ignorance of the law of nature in man does make any way
excusable.

34. qu. That the light of nature is not sufficient of it self to direct a
man, to bring forth any virtuous act, without the grace of Christ.

35. qu. Of the testimony of the conscience, and the accusing or excusing of
the thoughts.

36. qu. Why the Apostle makes mention of the day of judgment, v. 16.

37. qu. Why it is called the day, and of the application of other words, v. 16.

38. qu. Whence the Jews were so called, v. 17. Behold thou art called a Jew.

39. qu. Of the privileges of the Jews here recited by the Apostle.

40. qu. How the Jews are said to commit sasacriledge, v. 22.

41. qu. How the name of God was blasphemed by the Jews, and whether this
testimony be rightly alleged by the Apostle.

42. qu. In what sense the Apostle says, Circumcision is profitable, v. 25.

43. qu. How circumcision was availeable for infants.

44. qu. What uncircumcised the Apostle here speaks of, whether such of the
Gentiles as were converted to the faith, and what keeping of the law he
means.

45. qu. Of the explanation of certain terms here used by the Apostle, and of
the letter, and spirit.

46. qu. Of two kinds of Jews, and two kinds of circumcision, v. 28.

Questions upon the third Chapter.
1. qu. Of the privileges of the Jews, and of their pre-eminence before the
Gentiles.

2. qu. How men's unbelief cannot make the faith of God without effect.

3. qu. How God is said to be true.

4. qu. How every man is said to be a liar.

5. qu. Whether every man can be said to be a liar.

6. qu. How the Prophet David is to be understood, saying, every man is a liar,
Psalm. 116.11.

7. qu. Of the occasion of these words, cited our of the 51. Psalm, that thou
might be justified, etc. against thee only have I sinned.

8. qu. Of the diverse acceptions of this word justified.

9. qu. Of the meaning of these words, That thou might be justified in thy
words, and overcome, when thou iudgest.

10. qu. Whether a man may do evil, and commit sin to that end, to set
forth Gods justice.

11. qu. Of the meaning of the 5, 6, 7, 8, verses.

12. qu. Whether none evil is to be done at all, that good may come thereof.

13. qu. Whether God do not evil, that good may come thereof, in reprobating
the vessels of wrath, to show his power.

14. qu. In what sense the Apostle denies the Jews to be more excellent then
the Gentiles, v. 9.

15. qu. Of the meaning of certain phrases which the Apostle uses, v. 9. We
have already proved, and, Under sin.

16. qu. Whence the Apostle alleges those testimonies, v. 10. to 18.

17. qu. Of the matter and order observed by the Apostle in citing those
testimonies.

18. qu. How none are said to be just, seeing Noah, and other holy men, are
reported to have bin just in their time.

19. qu. Of the particular explication of the sins, wherewith the Apostle
here charge both Jews and Gentiles.

20. qu. v. 19. Whatsoever the Law says: what is here understood by the Law,
and how diversely this word is taken.

21. qu. It says to them, which are under the Law: who are here understood to
be under the law.

23. qu. How no flesh is justified by the works of the law, v. 20.

24. qu. How the Apostle here denies justification by works, seeing he said
before, c. 2. v. 13. that the doers of the Law are justified.

25. qu. How by the Law came the knowledge of sin.

26. qu. Of the meaning of these words, The righteousness of God is made
manifest without the law.

27. qu. How the righteousness of faith had witness of the Law and Prophets.

28. qu. Of these words, v. 22. The righteousness of God, by the faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all, and upon all.

29. qu. What it is to be deprived of the glory of God, v. 23.

30. qu. Of justification freely by grace, v. 24.

31. qu. How God is said to have purposed or set forth Christ to be our
reconciliation.

32. qu. How we are said to be justified freely, seeing faith is required,
which is an act in the believer.

33. qu. v. 25. To declare his justice or righteousness, what justice the
Apostle understands here.

34. qu. What is meant by sins that are past, v. 25.

35. qu. Why the Apostle only makes mention of sins past.

36. qu. How God is said to be just, and a iustifier of him, which is of the
faith, etc. v. 26.

37. qu. How rejoicing is excluded, not by the law of works, but by the law of
faith.

38. qu. Of the difference between these two phrases; of faith, through faith,
v. 30.

39. qu. How the Law is established by the doctrine of faith.

Questions upon the fourth Chapter.
1. qu. Upon what occasion S. Paul brings in the example of Abraham.

2. qu. Of the meaning of the first verse.

3. qu. Of the meaning of the 2. verse.

4. qu. How the Apostle alleges that testimony, concerning the imputation
of Abraham's faith for righteousness, v. 4.

5. qu. Of the meaning of the words; who counted this for righteousness unto
Abraham.

6. qu. What it was, that Abraham believed.

7. qu. Why Abraham's faith was imputed to him at this time, and not before.

8. qu. What imputation is, and what to be imputed.

9. qu. How Abraham's faith was imputed to him for righteousness.

10. qu. Whether Abraham were justified by any thing beside his faith.

11. qu. How S. Paul and S. James are reconciled about the manner of Abraham's
justifying.

12. qu. Of the explication of the 4. and 5. verses.

13. qu. Of the diverse kinds of rewards.

14. qu. How it stands with Gods justice to justify the wicked, v. 5.

15. qu. How our sins are said to be forgiven, and covered, v. 7.

16. qu. In what sense circumcision is said to be a sign, and wherefore it was
instituted.

17. qu. In what sense circumcision is called a seal of the righteousness of
faith, v. 11.

18. qu. Whether the mystery of faith in the Messiah to come were generally
known under the Law.

19. qu. Certain questions of circumcision: and first of the external sign,
why it was placed in the generative part.

20. qu. Certain doubts removed, and objections answered concerning
circumcision.

21. qu. How Abraham is said to be the father of them which believe, v. 11, 12.

22. qu. How Abraham is said to be the father of circumcision, v. 12.

23. qu. How and where Abraham was promised to be heir of the world, v. 13.

24. qu. Wherein Abraham was made heir of the world, and wherein this
inheritance consisted.

25. qu. How faith is said to be made void, if they which are of the law be
heirs.

26. qu. How they law is said to cause wrath.

27. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 15. where no law is, there is no
transgression.

27. qu. Who are meant by Abraham's seed which is of the law, v. 16.

28. qu. Of the meaning of these words, I have made thee a father of many
nations, before God.

29. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 17. who quickneth the dead, and
calls those things, which be not, etc.

30. qu. How God is said to call those things, which be not, as though they
were.

31. qu. Whether it be peculiar to God only to quicken, and raise the dead.

32. qu. How Abraham is said against hope to have believed under hope.

33. qu. How Abraham's body is said to be dead, v. 19.

34. qu. What promise of God made to Abraham it was, whereof he is said, not
to have doubted, v. 20.

35. qu. Whether Abraham doubted of Gods promise.

36. qu. How Abraham is said to have given glory unto God, v. 20.

37. qu. What was imputed to Abraham for righteousness.

38. qu. Of these words, Now it is not written for him only, etc. v. 23.

39. qu. How Abraham's faith is to be imitated by us.

40. qu. Wherein Abraham's faith and ours differ, and wherein they agree.

41. qu. How Christ is said to have bin delivered up for our sins, v. 25.

42. qu. Why the Apostle thus distinguishes the benefits of our redemption,
ascribing remission of sins to Christ's death, and justification to his
resurrection, v. 25.

Questions upon the fifth Chapter.
1. qu. What peace the Apostle means, v. 1.

2. qu. Of the second benefit proceeding of our justification, which is to
stand, and persevere in the state of grace.

3. qu. Of the benefit of our justification, the hope of everlasting glory.

4. qu. How we are said to rejoice in tribulation.

5. qu. How S. Paul and S. James are reconciled together: the one making
patience the cause of trialls, or probation, the other the effect.

6. qu. Of the coherence of these words with the former, because the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts, v. 5.

7. qu. What kind of love the Apostle speaks of, saying, the love of God is
shed abroad, etc.

8. qu. Why the love of God is said to be shed abroad in our hearts.

9. qu. Why it is added, by the holy Ghost, which is given us.

10. qu. How Christ is said to have died according to the time, v. 6.

11. qu. Of the meaning of the 7. v. One will scarce die for a righteous man,
etc.

12. qu. Of the difference between Christ's dying for us, and those which died
for their country.

13. qu. Of the greatness of the love of God toward man, in sending Christ to
die for us, v. 8.

14. qu. Whether man's redemption could not otherwise have been wrought, but by
the death of Christ.

15. qu. Wherein the force of the Apostles reason consists, saying, Much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, v. 9.

16. qu. Why the Apostle says, not only so but we also rejoice in God, etc.
v. 11.

17. qu. Whether any thing need to be supplied in the Apostles speech, v. 12.
to make the sense perfect.

18. qu. Who was that one by whom sin entered into the world, v. 12.

19. qu. What sin the Apostle speaks of here, original, or actual, by one
man sin entered.

20. qu. How sin is said to have entered into the world.

21. qu. And death by sin; what kind of death the Apostle speaks of.

22. qu. Whether the death of the body be natural, or inflicted by reason of
sin.

23. qu. Of the meaning of the Apostle in these words, in whom all have
sinned: and of the best reading thereof, v. 12.

24. qu. Whether the Apostle means original, or actual sins, saying, in
whom all have sinned.

25. qu. Of the coherence of these words, Unto the time of the Law was sin in
the world.

26. qu. How sin is said to have been unto the time of the Law.

27. qu. What sin the Apostle means which was in the world unto the time of
the law.

28. qu. How sin is said not to be imputed, where there is no law.

29. qu. How death is said to have reigned from Adam to Moses.

30. qu. Of the meaning of these words, which sin not after the transgression
of Adam.

31. qu. How Adam is said to be the figure of him that was to come, v. 14.

32. qu. Of the names and terms, which the Apostle uses, in this comparison.

33. qu. Of the comparison between Adam and Christ in general.

34. qu. Of the disparitie and unlikeness between Adam and Christ in this
comparison.

35. qu. Of the excellency and superiority which the benefit by grace in
Christ, has beyond our fall, and loss in Adam.

36. qu. Some other opinions refused, wherein this excellency should consist.

37. qu. In what sense the grace of God is said to have abounded unto more.

38. qu. How all men are said to be justified in Christ, v. 18.

39. qu. Why the Apostle says, v. 19. By one man's disobedience many were made
sinners, and not all.

40. qu. How, many are said to be sinners in Adam.

41. qu. How the law is said to have entered thereupon, v. 20.

42. qu. How the offense is said to have abounded by the entering of the law,
v. 20.

43. qu. How grace is said to have abounded more.

44. qu. Of the reign of sin unto death, and of grace unto life.

Questions upon the sixth Chapter.
1. qu. Of the meaning of these words, Shall we continue in sin, v. 1.

2. qu. What it is, to die unto sin.

3. qu. What it is to be baptized into Jesus Christ.

4. qu. Of the diverse significations of the word Baptism, and to be baptized.

5. qu. What it is to be baptized into the death of Christ, v. 3.

7. qu. Of the meaning of this phrase, to be graft, etc.

8. qu. What resurrection the Apostle speaks of, v. 5.

9. qu. What is understood by the old man, v. 6.

10. qu. What is meant by the body of sin, v. 6. that the body of sin
might be destroyed.

11. qu. How the dead are said to be freed from sin, v. 7.

12. qu. What life the Apostle speaks of, v. 8. We believe that we shall also
live with him.

13. qu. How death is said to have bad dominion over Christ, v. 9.

14. qu. How Christ is said to have died to sin, v. 10.

15. qu. How Christ is said now to live unto God, v. 10.

16. qu. Of these words, v. 11. Likewise think ye, etc.

17. qu. How sin is said not to reign, etc. v. 12.

18. qu. What the Apostle means, by mortal body, v. 12.

19. qu. Of these words, that we should obey it in the lusts, etc. v. 12.

20. qu. How we are not to give our members as weapons unto sin, v. 13.

21. qu. What it is, not to be under the law, but under grace, v. 14.

23. qu. Whether the Fathers also, that lived under the law, were not under
grace.

24. qu. What the Apostle means by the form of doctrine, whereunto they were
delivered.

25. qu. How we are made servants of righteousness.

26. qu. Of the meaning of these words, I speak after the manner of men,
because of your infirmity, v. 19.

Questions upon the seventh Chapter.
1. qu. How the law is said to have dominion over a man, as long as he lives.

2. qu. Whether the woman be simply free, if the man be once dead.

3. qu. Whether the woman have not the like liberty and freedom, in respect
of the bond of marriage, as the man has.

4. qu. Why the Apostle says, we are dead to the law, v. 4. and not rather the
law is dead to us.

5. qu. How we are said to be mortified to, and freed from the law.

6. qu. What is meant, by the body of Christ.

7. qu. Of the meaning of these words, being dead unto it.

8. qu. What is meant by the newnes of the spirit, and oldnes of the letter.

9. qu. How S. Paul being brought up in the knowledge of the law, could say, I
knew not lust, v. 7. and, I was alive without the law, v. 9.

10. qu. What law the Apostle speaks of, v. 7. is the law of sin.

11. qu. What lust or concupiscence the Apostle speaks of: I had not known
lust, etc. except, etc.

12. qu. Why the Apostle gives instance in the tenth Command. Thou shall not
lust, and alleges not all the words of the law.

13. qu. What sin the Apostle means, v. 8. sin took an occasion, etc.

14. qu. How sin took occasion by the Law.

15. qu. Of what time S. Paul speaks, when he knew not the law, and afterward
sin took occasion by the law, etc.

16. What the Apostle means by all concupiscence.

17. qu. In what sense the Apostle says, Sin was dead, and he alive without
the law, v. 8.

18. qu. How sin is said to have revived.

19. qu. How sin is said to have deceived.

20. qu. How sin is said to have slain him.

21. qu. How the law is said to be holy, just, good, and likewise the
commandment.

22. qu. How sin is said to be out of measure sinful.

23. qu. How the law is said to be spiritual.

24. qu. How the Apostle says, he is carnal and sold under sin, v. 17.

25. qu. Of these words, v. 15. I allow not what I do, what I would, that do
I not.

26. qu. What the Apostle understands by flesh, I know that in me, that is my
flesh, dwells no good thing, etc. v. 18.

27. qu. How the Apostle says, To will is present with me, etc. but I find no
means to perform, etc. v. 18.

28. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 21. I find a law, etc.

29. qu. How the Apostle says, Evil is present with me, v. 21.

30. qu. Of these words, I delight in the law of God, etc. v. 22, 23. of the
number of these laws, and what they are.

31. qu. Why these are called Laws, and why they are said, the one to be in the
inner man, the other in the members.

32. qu. Of the Apostles exclamation, O wretched man that I am!

33. qu. What the Apostle understands by this body of death, from the which
he desires to be delivered.

34. qu. Why the Apostle gives thanks to God, v. 25.

35. qu. Of these words, I in my mind serve the law of God, etc.

36. qu. Of that famous question, whether S. Paul do speak in his own
person, or of an other, here in this chapter.

Questions upon the eight Chapter.
1. qu. Who are said to be in Christ.

2. qu. What is meant by the law of the spirit of life.

3. qu. What is understood by the law of sin and death.

4. qu. Of the best reading of the 3. v.

5. qu. What is meant by the similitude of sinful flesh.

6. qu. Of these words, And for sin condemned sin in the flesh.

7. qu. How Christ condemned sin in the flesh.

8. qu. Who are after the flesh, and savor the things of the flesh.

9. qu. How the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God.

10. qu. How they which are in the flesh cannot please God, v. 8.

11. qu. Of the dwelling of the spirit of God in us, v. 9.

12. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 10. The body is dead because of
sin, the spirit is life, etc.

13. qu. How the quickening of the dead is ascribed to the spirit of Christ,
seeing all both good and bad shall rise.

14. qu. What it is to be lead by the spirit of God.

15. qu. What is understood by the spirit of bondage.

16. qu. Whether the fathers under the law had only the spirit of servitude.

17. qu. Of the diverse kinds of fear.

18. qu. Why the Apostle joins together two words of the same sense, Abba,
father.

19. qu. Of the testimony of the Spirit, what it is.

20. qu. Whether the testimony of the Spirit, and of our spirit, be one and
the same.

21. qu. How we are said to be heirs, and what our inheritance is.

22. qu. How these words are to be understood, If so be you suffer with him.

23. qu. How we are said to suffer together with Christ.

24. qu. Of the meaning of these words of the 18. v. I count that the
afflictions, etc.

25. qu. Wherein the sufferings of this life, are not proportionable, and so
not worthy of the glory to come.

26. qu. How the creatures are said to wait, and to be subject to vanity, and
to be delivered, and to groan, v. 19. v. 23.

27. qu. What creatures the Apostle here speaks of.

28. qu. Of the servitude of corruption whereunto the creature is subject, and
wherefore.

29. qu. Whether the heavens and earth are corruptible, and shall perish in the
end of the world.

30. qu. How the creature shall be delivered, etc. into the glorious liberty.

31. qu. To what end the new heavens and new earth shall serve in the next
world.

32. qu. Why the Apostle says, every creature, v. 22. having hitherto named
the creature without any other addition.

33. qu. Whom the Apostle understands, v. 23. We which have the first fruits
of the spirit.

34. qu. That no living creatures shall be restored in the next world, but
only man.

35. qu. How we are said to be saved by hope, v. 24.

36. qu. Of the difference between faith and hope.

37. qu. Whether things hoped for cannot be seen.

38. qu. What Spirit is said to help our infirmity, v. 36.

39. qu. What infirmities the Spirit helps in us.

40. qu. How we are said, not to know how to pray, as we ought, v. 28.

41. qu. How the Spirit is said to make request with sighs, that cannot be
expressed.

42. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 27. He that searches the hearts,
knows what is the meaning of the spirit, etc.

43. qu. Of the nature, condition, and property of a true and lively prayer,
out of verse. 27.

44. qu. How all things make together for the best to those that love God.

45. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 29. Those whom he knew before, he
also predestinate.

46. qu. Wherein our conformity to the image of Christ consists.

47. qu. How Christ is said to be (...), the first borne among many brethren.

48. qu. Of certain doubts out of the 30. v. Whom he predestinate, the^ also
he called.

49. qu. Of the difference between the purpose or counsel of God, his
prescience, and predestination.

50. qu. Of these words, v. 31. If God be on our side, who can be against us?

51. qu. Of those words, v. 32. which spared not his own Son.

52. qu. How nothing ca^ be laid to the charg of the elect.

53. qu. How Christ is said to make request for us.

54. qu. Whether Christ's intercession, and interpellation for us, do extenuate
the merit of his death.

55. qu. What charity the Apostle speaks of, from which nothing can separate
us.

56. qu. Of these words, v. 36. for they sake are we killed all the day long.

57. qu. Wherein the faithful are compared unto sheep: we are counted as
sheep for the slaughter, v. 36.

58. qu. How the faithful are said to be more then conquerours.

59. qu. Of the diverse interpretation in general of the 38. 39. verse, I am
persuaded that neither life nor death, etc.

60. qu. Of the diverse interpretations in particular.

Questions upon the 9. Chapter.
1. qu. Why the Apostle begins his treatise with an oath, I speak the truth
in Christ, etc.

2. qu. Of the form and words of the Apostles oath.

3. qu. Whether it be lawefull for Paul to griue for the Jews, whose reiection
was according to Gods appointment.

4. qu. Of the meaning of these words (...), which the Apostle uses.

5. qu. Whether the Apostle did well in desiring to be separated from Christ,
from who^ be knew he could not be separated.

6. qu. How Moses wished to be blotted out of the book of life.

7. qu. Whether in matters of salvation our kindred after the flesh, ought to
have any prioritie before others.

8. qu. The causes which made the Apostle to be so much grieved for the Jews.

9. qu. Of the excellency of the Israelites, and of true nobility.

10. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 5. Who is God over all, blessed for
ever.

11. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 6. all they are not Israel, which
are of Israel.

12. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 10. and not only, etc. but also
Rebeccah, etc.

13. qu. Whether these examples concern te^porall, or eternal election and
reprobation.

14. qu. How this saying of the Prophet, Esau have I hated, agrees with that,
Wis. 11.25. thou hate nothing which thou have made.

15. qu. Of the meaning of these words, I will have mercy, on whom I will have
mercy.

16. qu. How it is said, It is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but in God that shows mercy.

17. qu. How the Lord is said to have raised or stirred up Pharaoh, v. 17.

18. qu. How the Lord is said to harden who^ he will, v. 18.

19. qu. Of the objection propounded, v. 19. thou will say why does he yet
complain?

20. qu. Of the Apostles answer to the former objection, Who art thou O man
that pleadest? v. 20.

21. qu. How the similitude which the Apostle brings in of the potter is to
be understood.

22. qu. What the Apostle means by the same lump or mass, v. 21.

23. qu. Of the 22. v. what and if God would.

24. qu. In what sense the vessels of wrath are said to be prepared to
destruction, v. 21.

25. qu. Of the testimony cited, v. 21. out of the Prophet Hosea.

26. qu. What is meant by the short sum or account which God shall make in
the earth.

27. qu. Why God is called the Lord of Hosts.

28. qu. What is understood by seed.

29. qu. How the Gentiles obtained righteousness, that sought it not, and the
Jews missed of it, that sought it.

30. qu. How Christ is said to be a stumbling stone, and rock of offense, v.
33.

31. qu. Of the mening of these words, he that believes in him shall not be
ashamed.

32. qu. Whether it be the property of faith; to make one not to be ashamed,
which is ascribed unto hope, c. 5.5.

Questions upon the 10. Chapter.
1. qu. Of the general scope and intendment of the Apostle in this Chapter.

2. qu. How S. Paul prays for their salvation, whom in the former Chapter he
shows to be rejected of God.

3. qu. Why the Apostle does thus insinuate himself, by professing his love to
the Jews.

4. qu. How the Jews are said to have zeal, but not according to knowledge.

5. qu. Why the Jews ar said to stablish their own righteousness, v. 3.

6. qu. How Christ is said to be the end of the law.

7. qu. How Christ is said to be the end of the law seeing the Law requires
nothing, but the justice of works.

8. qu. That Christ is not the end of the law, that we by grace in him should
be justified in keeping of the law.

9. qu. What life temporal, or spiritual, is promised to the keepers of the
law, v. 5.

10. qu. Whether Paul did of purpose allege that place of Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.12.
or allude only unto it.

11. qu. Whether Moses in that place directly speaks of the righteousness of
faith.

12. qu. By what occasion Moses makes mention in that place of the Gospel, and
of the meaning of the words.

13. qu. Of these words, the word is near thee, etc.

14. qu. How Moses that preached the law, is alleged for justification by
faith.

15. qu. How Christ is to be confessed.

16. qu. How Christ is said to be raised by God.

17. qu. Whether to believe in the heart, be not sufficient unto salvation,
without confession of the mouth.

18. qu. Of these words, Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be
saved, v. 13.

19. qu. Of the gradation used here by the Apostle, v. 14. and the occasion
thereof.

20. qu. Of these words, v. 15. how beautiful are the feet, etc. whether it
be rightly cited out of the Prophet.

21. qu. Of these words, v. 16. but they have not all believed our report, etc.

22. qu. Of the saying of the Prophet Isai, Lord, who has believed, etc. c.
53.1. cited by the Apostle, v. 16.

23. qu. Whether all faith come by hearing.

24. qu. Whether the Apostle mean the Jews or Gentiles, Have they not heard,
v. 18.

25. qu. Whether that place of the 19. Psalm. their sound went through all the
earth, be rightly cited by the Apostle.

26. qu. Whether the Gospel were preached to all the world in the Apostles time.

28. qu. How God provoked the Jews to envy by the Gentiles, v. 19.

29. qu. Of these words, Isaias is bold, etc. v. 20.

30. qu. Of these words, All the day long have I stretched forth my hands, etc.
v. 21.

Questions upon the 11. Chapter.
1. qu. Of the scope and intent of the Apostle in this chapter.

2. qu. Why the Apostle makes mention of the tribe of Benjamin, whereof he was.

3. qu. How God is said not to cast off that people whom he knew before, v. 2.

4. qu. Of Elias complaint unto God, concerning Israel.

5. qu. Of Gods answer unto Elias.

6. qu. Of the Apostles collection inferred out of this answer made by Elias.

7. qu. Of these words, If of grace, it is no more of works, etc.

8. qu. How it is said, Israel obtained not that he sought, v. 7.

9. qu. Of these words, v. 8. As it is written, God has given them the spirit
of slumber; whence it is taken.

10. qu. How God is said to send the spirit of slumber, to give ears not to
hear, etc.

11. qu. Of the meaning of these words, Let their table be made a snare, etc.
v. 9.

12. qu. Whether it be lawful to use any imprecation, as David does here.

13. qu. Of the end of the stumbling of the Jews, v. 11.

14. qu. How the stumbling and falling of the Jews brought salvation to the
Gentiles.

15. qu. How the Jews were provoked to follow the Gentiles.

16. qu. What is meant by the diminishing of the Jews, and their abundance, v.
12.

17. qu. How it stands with Gods justice to cast off the Jews, that the
Gentiles might enter in.

18. qu. Why the Apostle makes mention of his Apostleship, and how he is said
to magnify his office, v. 13.

19. qu. What the Apostle means by these words, v. 15. What shall the
receiving be but life from the dead?

20. qu. What the Apostle means by the first fruits, and the whole lump, the
root, and the branches.

21. qu. How the root can make the branches holy, seeing many branches did
degenerate, and by nature all are unholy branches.

22. qu. How Abraham is said to be the root to be grafied into, whereas we are
said to be grafied into Christ, c. 6.5.

23. qu. What S. Paul means by the wild olive, and the grafting of it in, v.
17.

24. qu. Of the meaning of these words, Thou bear not the root, but the
root thee.

25. qu. Of these words, v. 22. If thou continue in his bountifulnes.

26. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 24. was grafted contrary to nature.

27. qu. What mystery the Apostle here means, I would not have you ignorant
of this mystery, v. 25.

28. qu. Whether toward the end of the world the whole nation of the Jews
shall be converted.

29. qu. Of the testimonies here cited by the Apostle, how they are alleged,
and whence.

30. qu. Of these words, v. 28. As touching the Gospel, they are enemies for
your sakes, etc.

31. qu. Of the meaning of these words, The gifts and calling of God, are
without repentance, v. 24.

32. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 31. So now how have they not
believed by your mercy.

33. qu. How God has concluded, and shut up all in unbelief, v. 32.

34. qu. Of the Apostles exclamation, v. 33. The deepenes of the riches, etc.

35. qu. How these words must be understood, Of him, through him, and for him,
are all things, etc.

Questions upon the 12. Chapter.
1. qu. Why the Apostle uses entreatie, saying, I beseech you brethren, by the
mercies, etc. v. 1.

2. qu. Why the Apostle adds, By the mercies.

3. qu. Of sacrifices in general, v. 1. upon these words, A living sacrifice,
etc.

4. qu. The general observations of the sacrifice, which the Apostle here
requires.

5. qu. OF the conditions of this spiritual sacrifice in general.

6. qu. How we must not fashion our selves to this world, v. 2

7. qu. Of our transforming by the newnes of mind.

8. qu. Of these words, That ye may prove, what the good will of God is,
acceptable and perfect, etc. v. 2.

9. qu. What the Apostle understands by grace, I say by grace, etc.

10. qu. What it is to understand above that which is meet to understand, v. 3.

11. qu. What is understood, by the measure of futh.

12. qu. Of the similitude, which the Apostle takes from the members of the
body.

13. qu. Of the best reading of the 6. v. seeing then we have gifts, which are
diverse, etc.

14. qu. Of the distinction of the offices, here named by the Apostle in
general.

15. qu. What is to be understood by the proportion or analogy of faith, v. 6.

16. qu. Of these several offices here rehearsed by the Apostle in particular.

17. qu. Of the Christian affection of love, and the properties thereof.

18. qu. Of certain external offices of love, as in giving honor one to an
other.

19. qu. The duties and properties of our love toward God.

20. qu. Of the remedies against the calamities of this life, namely, hope,
patience, prayer.

21. qu. Of the communicating to the necessity of the Saints, and of
hospitality.

22. qu. How our enemies are to be blessed, bless them which persecute you.

23. qu. Of the reasons, which should move us to love our enemies.

24. qu. Whether it be not lawefull upon any occasion to pray against our
enemies.

25. qu. Whether S. Paul in calling Ananias the high Priest, painted wall, Act.
23. observes his own precept here.

26. qu. How we should rejoice with the^ that rejoice, and weep with them that
weep, v. 15.

27. qu. What it is to be like affectioned one toward an other.

28. qu. What it is to be high minded, and to be wise in our selves.

29. qu. How evil is not to be recompensed for evil, v. 17.

30. qu. How honest things are to be procured before all men.

31. qu. How we should have peace with all men.

32. qu. How we should not avenge our selves but leave it unto God.

33. qu. Of doing good unto our enemies.

34. qu. What it is to heap coals of fire upon the head of the enemy.

35. qu. Of these words, v. 21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil
with goodness.

Questions out of the 13. Chapter.
1. qu. Of the occasion, which moved the Apostle in this Chapter, to entreat
of the duty of the subjects to the Magistrate.

2. qu. How every soul should be subject to the higher powers.

3. qu. How the powers that be, are said to be of God.

4. qu. Whether every superior power be of God.

5. qu. How far evil governors have their power from God, whether by his
permission and sufferance only.

6. qu. Why the Apostle says again, the powers that be, are ordained of God.

7. qu. Of not resisting the power.

8. qu. What kind of judgment they procure to themselves, which resist the
Magistrate.

9. qu. How the Prince is not to be feared for good works, but for evil.

10. qu. What it is to have praise of the power, v. 3.

11. qu. How the Magistrate is said to be Gods minister, for our wealth or good.

12. qu. How the Magistrate is said, not to bear the sword for naught, v. 4.

13. qu. Of the right use of the sword, both in time of peace, and war.

14. qu. How it is said, It is necessary to be subject, for conscience sake.

15. qu. Why tribute is to be paid, v. 6.

16. qu. Of the diverse kinds of tribute, and to whom they are due.

17. qu. The several duties summed together which are due to the Magistrate.

18. qu. How far the Magistrate is to be obeyed, and wherein not to be obeyed.

How far the Civil state may proceed in resisting a Tyrant.

How far private men may be warranted, in denying obedience unto Tyrants.

19. qu. How we should not owe any thing to any man, but love one another.

20. qu. How he that loves his brother fulfilleth the law.

21. qu. How a man is to love his neighbor as himself.

22. qu. Who is understood by our neighbor.

23. qu. How salvation is said to be nearer then when we believed.

24. qu. How the night is said to be past, the day at hand: of the literal
sense.

25. qu. What time is understood by the day, and night.

26. qu. How we should walk honestly.

27. qu. How we must put on Christ.

28. qu. How the flesh is to be cared for.

Questions out of the 14. Chapter.
1. qu. Who are the weak in faith, and how they are to be received.

2. qu. What is meant by controversies of disputations.

3. qu. Why he is called weak, that eats herbs.

4. qu. Whether any things be indifferent in their nature, as being neither
good, nor evil of themselves.

5. qu. How the Apostle makes the eating, or not eating of flesh, and the
observing of days indifferent, which else where he condemns.

6. qu. Whom the Apostle speaks of, the Jew or Gentile saying, God has
received him, etc.

7. qu. Whether it be not lawful at all for one to judge an other.

8. qu. What it is to stand or fall to his own Master.

9. qu. Of the meaning of these words, God is able to make him stand, v. 4.

10. qu. What it is to esteem one day above an other, v. 5.

11. qu. Of the meaning of these words, Let every one be fully persuaded in his
mind, v. 5.

12. qu. What it is to observe or take care of the day unto the Lord.

13. qu. Of the sense and meaning of the former words, He that observes, etc.
observes it to the Lord.

14. qu. How he that eats not, is said to give thanks.

15. qu. Whether S. Paul's defense, that he which does, or omitteth any thing in
matters of religion, does, or not does it unto God, be perpetual.

16. qu. Of the coherence of these words, None of us lives to himself, v. 17.
etc.

17. qu. How we are said to live unto the Lord.

18. qu. How Christ by his dying, and rising again, is said to be Lord both of
the dead, and quick.

19. qu. Of the tribunal seat of Christ, what it is, and of other
circumstances of the day of judgment.

20. qu. Whether the saying of the Prophet alleged, v. 11. be rightly cited
by the Apostle.

21. qu. When this prophecy shall be fulfilled, that every tongue shall
confess unto God.

22. qu. Whether every one shall give an account for himself, and appear
before Christ's judgment seat, v. 12.

23. qu. Of scandals and offenses, the occasion, and diverse kinds thereof, v.
13.

24. qu. Of the occasion of these words, v. 14. I know and am persuaded, etc.
and of the meaning thereof.

25. qu. How nothing is said to be unclean of it self, v. 14.

26. qu. Of the legal difference of meats, why it was commanded.

27. qu. Of the manner how meats are sanctified and made clean.

28. qu. Why ones opinion and judgment makes that unclean which is not, and
whether an erroneous conscience binds.

29. qu. How our brother is said to be grieved, and to be lost and destroyed,
v. 15.

30. qu. Whether any indeed can perish, for whom Christ died.

31. qu. What is meant by the good, or commodity, which they must not cause to
be blasphemed, v. 16.

32. qu. How the kingdom of God is not said to be meat, and drink, v. 17.

33. qu. Of righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

34. qu. Of these words, he which in these things serves Christ is acceptable
to God, etc. v. 18.

35. qu. How we ought to follow peace, and those things which concern
edifying, v. 19.

36. qu. What the Apostle means by the work of God, v. 21.

37. qu. In what sense the Apostle says, It is good, neither to eat flesh,
nor drink wine, etc. v. 21.

38. qu. Whether it be sufficient for one to have his faith before God, v. 22.

39. qu. How many things are to be avoided in the use, and eating of meats.

40. qu. What it is for one not to condemn himself in that which he allows.

41. qu. Why he that doubts is condemned.

42. qu. Of the right meaning of these words, Whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin.

Questions out of the 15. Chapter.
1. qu. Of the argument and scope of this Chapter in general.

2. qu. Whom, and wherein the strong should support the weak.

3. qu. Of the reasons why the weak should be supported.

4. qu. How the Apostle here counts himself among the strong, elsewhere
maintaining himself among the weak.

5. qu. What it is not to please our selves, but our neighbor, v. 1.2.

6. qu. How far, and wherein we must please our neighbors.

7. qu. How Christ is said not to have pleased himself.

8. qu. To what purpose the Apostle alleges this saying out of the Psalm,
the rebukes of them, that rekuke thee, etc.

9. qu. Why the Apostle says, whatsoever is written, is written for our
learning.

10. qu. How whatsoever is written, is written for our learning.

11. qu. Of the Apostles prayer v. 5. the God of patience, and consolation.

12. qu. Of the end of concord, which is to glorify God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

13. qu. Of the meaning of the 7. v. receive ye one another, as Christ received
us, etc.

14. qu. How Christ is said to have been the Minister of circumcision, v. 8.

15. qu. Of the vocation and calling of the Gentiles, why it is said to be of
mercy, and of the Jews in truth.

16. qu. Of the places of Scripture produced by the Apostle to prove the
calling of the Gentiles. v. 9, 10, 11, 12.

17. qu. Of the Apostles prayer, v. 13. The God of hope, fill you with all joy
and peace, etc.

18. qu. Why the Apostle does thus insinuate himself, that he was persuaded of
the Romans, that they had such excellent gifts.

19. qu. Whether S. Paul do truly give this commendation unto the Romans.

20. qu. Why the Apostle says, I have written boldly after a sort.

21. qu. Of S. Paul's description of the ministry of the Gospel.

22. qu. Of the Apostles boasting and rejoicing, and the manner thereof.

23. qu. Of the meaning of these words, I dare not speak of any thing, etc. v.
18.

24. qu. Of the things which Christ wrought by S. Paul, as signs, wonders, how
they differ, v. 19.

25. qu. Of S. Paul's labors in preaching the Gospel, from Ieursalem unto
Illyricum.

26. qu. Why the Apostle would not build upon an others foundation, v. 20. that
is, preach, where Christ had been preached already.

27. qu. Whether this place of the Prophet be fitly alleged by the Apostle.

28. qu. How S. Paul is not contrary to Christ, which says of his Apostles,
that they entered into others labors, Ioh. 4.38.

29. qu. Of the Apostles let, and of his purpose to visit the Romans.

30. qu. Whether S. Paul in person preached in Spain, as here he intends, v.
24.

31. qu. Of the meaning of the 24. ver.

32. qu. Of Paul's journey to Jerusalem, why he takes it in hand, v. 25.

33. qu. Of the collection gathered among the Gentiles for the Jews, and the
reasons thereof.

34. qu. How the Gentiles are said to be debtors to the Jews.

35. qu. In what manner alms ought to be given.

36. qu. What the Apostle means, by sealing of the fruit, v. 28.

37. qu. What the Apostle means, by the abundance of the blessing of the
Gospel of Christ.

38. qu. Of the Apostles request, that they would join in prayer with him.

39. qu. Of the things which S. Paul would have them pray for.

40. qu. Of the fruits of the prayer of the Romans for S. Paul.

41. qu. Of the Apostles salutation: The God of peace, etc.

Questions upon the 16. and last Chapter.
1. qu. Of the diverse salutations sent by the Apostle in general.

2. qu. Of Phebe commended here by S. Paul, what place she had in the Church,
and wherefore commended.

3. qu. Of Paul's request in the behalf of Phebe.

4. qu. Of Priscilla and Aquila, whom the Apostle saluteth in the second place.

5. qu. How S. Paul could salute Aquilae and Priscilla, as being at Rome,
seeing they were at Corinth with him, Act. 18. whence he wrote this epistle.

6. qu. Why Epinetus is called the first fruits.

7. qu. Of the salutation and commendation of Marie.

8. qu. Of the commendation of Andronicus and Iunia.

9. qu. Of Paul's salutation, of certain of his familiar acquaintance, v. 8.9.

10. qu. Of S. Paul's saluting of some, commended for their faith, though not of
such special acquaintance, v. 10.11.

11. qu. Of other salutations of the Apostle of some of special note, v. 12.13.

12. qu. Of S. Paul's general salutations, without any special note of
commendation, v. 14.15.

13. qu. Of the custom then used to kiss one an other.

14. qu. How the Apostle says, the Churches salute you, etc. v. 16.

15. qu. General observations concerning the greeting and salutation sent here
by the Apostle.

16. qu. Of the shunuing of the Authors of dissension.

17. qu. How these false teachers and seducers are said to be discerned.

18. qu. Why the Apostle makes here mention of the obedience of the Romans,
v. 19.

19. qu. What it is to be wise concerning that which is good, and simple in
evil.

20. qu. How the God of peace should tread down Satan.

21. qu. What S. Paul means by the grace of our Lord Jesus, which he wishes
unto them, v. 20.

22. qu. Of the salutations of others which S. Paul sends to the Romans, v.
21.23.

23. qu. Of the doxologie, that is, of ascribing glory unto God, where the
Apostle concludes his epistle in general.

24. qu. A description of the Gospel preached by the Apostle, inferred here in
the conclusion of his epistle, v. 25.26.

25. qu. Of the doxologie it self, to God only wise, etc.

26. qu. Of the use of the word, Amen.

27. qu. Of the prescript or date of this Epistle, whether it were written from
Corinth, and send by Phebe.

The sum of the questions discussed in this Commentary amounts to 660.

The table of the Controversies.
General controversies concerning the new Testament.
1. Con. Against those which think it is against the nature of the new
Testament, to be committed to writing.

2. con. Against the Romanists, that hold, that the writing of the Gospel, and
other Scriptures, is not simply necessary to salvation.

More special controversies out of the whole Epistle.
1. con. That it is known, that this Epistle was written by Paul, and is of
divine authority, by the epistle it self.

2. contr. That S. Paul's epistles are not so obscure, that any should be
terrified from the reading thereof.

3. contr. Against the Ebionites, which retained the rites and ceremonies of
Moses.

4. contr. Against the Marcionites, that rejected the law of Moses.

5. contr. Against the Romanists, which deprave the doctrine taught by S. Paul
in his Epistle.

6. contr. Against Socinus, that blasphemously subverteth the doctrine of our
redemption by Christ, and justification by faith.

7. contr. Whether Paul may be thought to have been married.

Controversies upon the 1. Chapter.
1. contr. Against the Manichees, which refuse Moses and the Prophets.

2. contr. Against Election, by the foresight of works.

3. contr. Against the Nestorians, and Vbiquitaries.

4. contr. Against the heresy of one Georgius Eniedinus, a Samosatenian
heretic in Transylvania.

5. cont. Against the Marcionites, that Christ had a true body.

6. contr. Against the Apollina^^sts, that Christ had no humane soul.

7. contr. That the Roman faith is not the same now, which was commended by
the Apostle.

8. contr. That the Pope is not universal Bishop.

9. contr. Against the Popish distinction between (...), to worship, and
(...), to serve, v. 9. whom I serve in my spirit.

10. contr. That God only spiritually is to be served, and worshipped.

11. contr. Of the vain use of Popish pilgrimages.

12. contr. None to be barred from the knowledge of Gods word.

13. contr. Against diverse heretical assertions of Socinus, touching the
justice of God.

14. contr. Against inherent justice.

15. contr. That the Sacraments did not confer grace.

16. contr. That faith only justifies.

17. contr. How the Gospel is the power of God to salvation, to every one that
believes.

18. contr. Of the difference between the law and the Gospel.

19. contr. Whether by natural means the Gentiles might have attained to the
knowledge of the only true God, without the special assistance of Gods grace.

20. contr. Against some Philosophers, that the world is not eternal.

21. contr. Against the adoration and setting up of images, in Churches and
places of prayer, v. 23. they turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to
the similitude of an image.

22. contr. Of the corrupt reading of the vulgar Latin translation, v. 32.

23. contr. Against the Popish distinction of venial and mortal sins.

Controversies out of the 2. Chapter.
1. contr. Against the power of freewill in good things.

2. contr. Of justification by the imputative justice of faith.

3. contr. Against the merit of works.

4. contr. Which are to be counted good works.

5. con. Whether any good works of the faithful be perfect.

6. contr. Whether men ought to do well for hope of recompense or reward.

7. contr. Against justification by works, upon these words, v. 13. Not the
hears of the law, but the doers shall be justified.

8. contr. That it is not possible in this life to keep the law.

9. contr. Whether by the light of nature only a man may do any thing morally
good.

10. contr. Of the imperfection of the vulgar Latin translation.

11. contr. That the Sacraments do not confer grace.

12. contr. That the Sacraments depend not upon the worthiness of the Minister
or receiver.

13. contr. Against the Marcionites, and other, which condemned the old
Testament, and the ceremonies thereof.

14. contr. Against the Anabaptists, which reject the Sacraments of the new
Testament.

15. contr. That the want of Baptism condemns not.

16. contr. That the wicked and unbelievers eat not the body of Christ in the
Sacrament.

Controversies upon the 3. Chapter.
1. contr. That the Sacraments of the old Testament did not justify ex opere
operato, by the work wrought, and so consequenly neither the new.

2. contr. Of the Apochryphall Scriptures.

3. contr. That the wicked and unbelievers do not eat the body of Christ in
the Eucharist.

4. contr. That the Roman Church has not the promise of the perpetual
presence of Gods spirit.

5. contr. The Virgin Marie not exempted from sin.

6. contr. The reading of the Scripture is not to be denied to any.

7. contr. Against the adversaries of the law the Marcionites and other
heretics.

8. contr. Against the counsels of perfection.

9. contr. Against the Pelagians, which established free will.

10. contr. That the virtue of Christ's death, is indifferently extended, both
to sins before baptism, and after.

11. contr. That the believing fathers before Christ, were not kept in Limbo.

12. contr. Against the Marcionite heretics.

13. contr. Against the Novatian heretics.

14. contr. Against inherent justice.

15. contr. Against the Popish distinction of the first and second
justification.

16. contr. Against the works of preparation, going before justification.

17. contr. What justifying faith is.

18. contr. What manner of faith it is that justifies.

19. contr. Of the manner how faith justifies.

20. contr. Whether faith alone justifies.

21. contr. How S. Paul and S. James are reconciled together.

23. contr. Against Socinus, that Christ properly redeemed us by paying the
ransom for us, and not metaphorically.

23. contr. That Christ truly reconciled us by his blood, against an other
blasphemous assertion of Socinus.

Controversies out of the 4. Chapter.
1. contr. That the Apostle excludes all kind of works from justification.

2. contr. Whether blessedness consist only in the conversion of sinners, v. 7.

3. contr. Whether sin is wholly purged and taken away in the justification
of the faithful.

4. contr. Against works of satisfaction.

5. contr. Of imputative justice against inherent righteousness.

6. contr. That the Sacraments do not confer grace by the external
participation only.

7. contr. That there is the same substance, and efficacy of the Sacraments of
the old and new Testament.

8. contr. That circumcision was not only a sign, signifying or
distinguishing, but a seal confirming the promise of God.

9. contr. Whether circumcision were availeable for the remission of sin.

10. contr. Of the presumptuous titles of the Pope, calling himself the father
and head of the faithful.

11. contr. Against the Chiliasts or Millenaries, that hold that Christ should
reign a 1000. years in the earth.

12. contr. Of the certainty of faith, v. 16. that the promise might be sure.

13. contr. Whether faith be an act of the understanding only.

14. contr. That justifying faith is not a general apprehension, or believing
of the articles of the faith, but an assurance of the remission and
forgiveness of sins in Christ.

15. contr. That faith does not justify by the merit or act thereof, but only
instrumentally, as it applies and apprehends the righteousness of Christ.

16. contr. The people are no to be denied the reading of the Scriptures.

17. contr. Against the heretics which condemned the old Testament, and the
author thereof.

18. contr. Whether justification consist only in the remission of sins.

19. contr. Against Socinus corrupt interpretation of these words, v. 25. was
delivered up for our sins.

20. contr. Piscators opinion examined, that our sins are remitted only by
Christ's death, not for the the obedience, and merit of his life.

Controversies upon the 5. Chapter.
1. contr. Whether a good conscience and integrity of life, be the cause of
peace with God.

2. contr. Against invocation of Saints.

3. contr. Of the certainty of salvation and of perseverance.

4. contr. That the tribulation of the Saints, is not meritorius, though it be
said to work patience.

5. contr. That we are not justified by the inherent habit of charity.

6. contr. Against the heresy of impious Socinus, who denies that Christ died
for our sins, and paid the ransom for them.

7. contr. Against other objections of Socinus and other impugning the fruit
and efficacy of Christ's death, in reconciling us to God his Father.

8. con. That Christ's death was a full satisfaction for our sins, against
Socinus his cauils.

9. contr. That Christ's death was not only satisfactorie, but meritorious,
against Socinus.

Certain controversies touching Original sin.
10. cont. That there is original sin in men by the corruption of nature,
against the opinion of the Hebrews.

11. contr. That Adaws sin is entered into his posterity, by propagation, not
imitation only, against the Pelagians.

12. contr. Of the manner how original sin is propagated, against the
Pelagians, where it is disputed, whether the soul be derived from the Parents.

13. contr. Against the Pelagians and Papists, that original sin is not
quite taken away in Baptism.

14. contr. What original sin is, against the Romanists, and some some
others, and specially against them which hold it to be Adams sin imputed
only to his posterity.

15. contr. That original sin is not only the privation of original
justice.

16. contr. Of the wicked heresy of Marcion and Valentinus, with the
blasphemous Manichees.

17. cont. That all sins are mortal, and worthy of death by nature.

18. contr. That Henoch and Elias are not yet alive in the body.

19. contr. The Virgin Marie conceived in original sin.

20. contr. Again meritts.

21. contr. That the punishment of original sin is everlasting death.

22. contr. That Christ's essential justice is not infused into us.

23. contr. Against the Patrons of universal grace.

24. contr. Against the Popish inherent justice.

25. contr. That we are justified both by the active and passive obedience of
Christ.

26. contr. Against the Philosophers, who placed righteousness in their own
works.

27. contr. Against the Manichees and Pelagians, the one giving too much, the
other too little to the law.

28. contr. Of the assurance of salvation.

29. contr. Of the diverse kinds of grace, against the Romanists.

Controversies out of the 6. Chapter.
1. contr. Against the administering of the Sacraments in an unknown tongue.

2. contr. Concerning inherent justice.

3. contr. That the Sacrament of Baptism does not confer grace by the
outward work.

4. contr. That Baptism serves as well for the remission of sins to come,
as of sins past.

5. contr. Whether in Baptism our sins be clean taken away.

6. contr. Of the baptism of infants.

7. contr. Of the assurance of salvation.

8. contr. That Christ shall not die in the next world again for those which
were not healed here.

9. contr. Against the Sacrifice of the Mass.

10. contr. Concerning freewill.

11. contr. That concupiscence remaining in the regenerate is properly sin.

12. contr. Whether a righteous man may fall into any mortal, or deadly sin.

13. contr. Against the Manichees.

14. contr. Concerning inherent justice.

15. contr. Against the power of freewill in the fruits of righteousness.

16. contr. Whether all death is the wages of sin.

17. contr. Against the distinction of venial and mortal sins.

18. contr. That everlasting life cannot be merited by good works.

Controversies upon the 7. Chapter.
1. contr. Against Purgatory.

2. contr. Of the lawfulnes of second marriage.

3. contr. Whether the marriage bond be indissoluable before the one party be
dead.

4. contr. That the disparitie of profession is no cause of the dissolution of
marriage.

5. contr. Whether the bill of divorce permitted to the Jews, did lawfully
dissolve matrimony under the Law.

6. contr. Against the works of propitiation.

7. contr. Against the Heretics which condemned the Law.

8. contr. That we are freed by grace from the strict and rigorous observation
of the law.

9. contr. That concupiscence though it have no deliberate consent of the will,
is sin, and forbidden by the commandment.

10. contr. That the commandment, thou shall not lust, is but one.

11. contr. Against freewill.

Controversies out of the 8. Chapter.
1. contr. That concupiscence remaining even in the regenerate is sin, and in
it self worthy of condemnation.

2. controver. That none are perfect in this life.

3. controver. That regeneration is not the cause that there is no condemnation
to the faithful.

4. contr. Against the Arrians and Eunomians, concerning the dietie of the holy
Ghost.

5. contr. Against the Pelagians, that a man by nature cannot keep and fulfill
the law.

6. contr. The fulfilling of the law is not possible in this life, no not to
them, which are in the state of grace.

7. con. That not the carnal eating of Christ's flesh is the cause of the
resurrection, but the spiritual, v. 11.

8. contr. Against merits.

9. contr. Whether in this life one by faith may be sure of salvation.

10. contr. Against the invocation of Saints.

11. contr. That a strange tongue is not to be used in the service of God.

12. contr. That everlasting glory cannot be merited.

13. contr. That hope justifies not.

14. contr. Whether hope rely upon the merit of our works.

15. contr. Against the natural power and integrity of man's will.

16. contr. That predestination depends not upon the foresight of faith or
good works.

17. contr. Against the opinion of Ambrosius Catharinus concerning
predestination.

18. contr. That election is certain and infallible, of grace without merit,
and of some selected, not generally of all.

19. contr. That the elect cannot full away from the grace and favor of God,
and be wholly given over unto sin.

20. contr. Whether a reprobate may have the grace of God, and true justice.

21. contr. That the elect by faith may be assured of everlasting salvation.

Controversies out of the 9. Chapter.
1. contr. That succession of Bishops is no sure note of the Church of Christ.

2. contr. Against the old heretics the Manichees, Arrians, Nestorians,
confuted out of the 5. ver.

3. contr. Against the profane and impious collections of Eniedinus and
Socinus late heretics.

4. contr. That the water in baptism does not sanctify or give grace.

5. contr. Against the vain observation of Astrologers in casting of
nativities.

6. contr. That the souls had no being in a former life, before they came
into the body.

7. contr. Whether the foresight of faith or works be the cause of election.

8. contr. That not only election unto grace, but unto glory also, is only
of the good will of God.

9. contr. That the Apostle treats as well of reprobation in this place, as
of Election.

10. contr. Whether as well the decree of reprobation as of election, be
without the foresight of works.

11. contr. Of the difference between the decree of election and reprobation,
and of the agreement between them.

12. contr. Whether mercy be a natural property in God, or an effect only
of his will, against Socinus.

13. contr. Whether the mercy of God in the forgiveness of sin, be an
effect of Gods free and absolute will only, and be not grounded upon Christ,
against the heresy of Socinus and Ostorodius.

15. contr. Of the sufficiency of Scripture.

16. contr. Of the certainty of salvation.

17. contr. Against the works of preparation.

Controversies upon the 10. Chapter.
1. contr. Against inherent justice.

2. contr. Against the works of preparation, which are done without faith.

3. contr. That it is impossible for any in this life to keep the law.

4. contr. Against the doubting of salvation.

5. contr. Against unwritten traditions.

6. contr. Against freewill.

7. contr. Against Limbu, Patrum, that Christ went not down thither to deliver
the Patriarchs.

8. contr. Whether the righteousness of faith and the righteousness of the law,
be one and the same, or contrary the one to the other.

9. contr. Whether the righteousness of the law, and that which is by the
law, do differ.

10. contr. That Baptism does not give, or confer grace.

11. contr. Against the dissembling of our faith and profession.

12. contr. That faith is not only in the understanding.

13. contr. The Scriptures the only sufficient rule of faith.

14. contr. How the Apostle says, there is no difference between the Jew and
the Grecian, v. 12.

15. contr. Against the maintainers of universal grace.

16. contr. That faith justifies not by the act thereof, but only as it
apprehends Christ.

17. contr. That faith only justifies, not invocation.

18. contr. Against the invocation of Saints.

19. contr. That we must pray with confidence, and assurance.

20. contr. Against the vain pomp of the Pope of Rome, in offering his feet
to be kissed.

21. contr. Against humane traditions.

22. contr. That the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel, have a lawful
calling against Stapleton.

23. contr. That the Hebrew text is more authentical then the vulgar Latin
translation.

24. contr. Against the works of preparation.

25. contr. Against the Jews, that will not have the Prophet to speak of
them, in these words, I have stretched out my hands, etc.

Controversies out of the 11. Chapter.
1. contr. That none which are elected can finally fall away.

2. contr. Whether the complaint of Elias of the paucitie of true worshippers,
be well applied to the decay of religion under the Pope at the time of the
first reformation.

3. contr. That works are excluded both from election; and justification.

4. contr. Against free will.

5. contr. That universality and multitude is not always a note of the true
Church.

6. contr. Of the sufficiency of Scripture, and of the right way to interpret
the same.

7. contr. Against the Jews.

8. contr. Whether any of the true branches may be broken off.

9. contr. Against the heresy of Valentinus and Basilides, that held some
things to be evil, some good by nature.

10. contr. That there was the same spirit of faith, and the same spiritual
substance of the Sacraments, under the old Testament, and in the New.

11. contr. That the Scriptures are the judge of every one in particular.

12. contr. Against the Popish uncertainty and doubtfulnes of salvation.

13. contr. Against the Manichees, and Marcionites.

14. contr. Against the works of preparation.

15. contr. Against the erroneous opinion of Origin, concerning the purgatory
of hell.

Controversies upon the 12. Chapter.
1. contr. Concerning the power of free will.

2. contr. Whether the Mass be a sacrifice properly so called.

3. contr. Of the difference between (...), and (...), worship, and service,
whether they signify two kinds of religious worships, the one peculiar to God,
the other to the creatures.

4. contr. Of the comparison between virginity, and marriage.

5. contr. The mind it self, and not the sensual part only has need of
renovation.

6. contr. Of the perfections of the Scripture: against traditions.

7. contr. Against free will.

8. contr. Against the arrogancy of the Pope.

9. contr. Against the superstitious orders of the Popish Clergy.

10. controv. The Pope not the head of the Church.

11. contr. That to love our enemy is a precept, and commanded, not counseled
as indifferent.

Controversies upon the 13. Chapter.
1. contr. Whether the Pope, and other Ecclesiastical persons, ought to be
subject to the Civil power.

2. contr. Whether the Pope have a spiritual power over Kings and Princes.

3. contr. That the tyranny and idolatry of the Pope, may be gain said, and
resisted.

4. contr. Whether the Civil magistrate have any power or authority, in
matters of religion.

5. contr. Whether Ecclesiastical persons, as Bishops, and others, may have
the temporal sword committed unto them.

6. contr. Whether it be lawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate, and to use
the sword in the time of peace and war.

7. contr. Whether laws Civil, and Ecclesiastical, do bind simply in
conscience.

8. contr. Whether Ecclesiastical persons are exempted from tribute.

9. contr. Whether the fulfilling of the law be possible in this life.

10. contr. Against the Marcionites, which denied the moral precepts, to be
now in force, but to be ceased.

11. contr. Against justification by the works of the law.

Controversies upon the 14. Chapter.
1. contr. Whether to abstain from certain meats, be an act of religion, and
a part of Gods worship, or a thing in it self indifferent.

2. contr. That faith is not only an assenting of the will, but an act also of
the understanding, and it is joined with knowledge.

3. contr. That it is necessary, that festival days should be observed among
Christians.

4. contr. That festival days ought not to be consecrated to the honor of
Saints.

6. contr. Whether all the festivalls of Christians are alike arbitrarie to be
altered, and changed, as shall seem good to the Church.

7. contr. Against Purgatory.

8. contr. Whether Christ by his obedience and suffering, merited for himself
eternal glory, and dominion.

9. contr. Of bowing the knee to the name of Jesus, whether it be necessarily
inferred out of this place, v. 11. and Phil. 2.10.

10. contr. That Christ is proved to be God, by this saying of the Prophet,
cited v. 11. as I live, every knee shall bow unto me: against the blasphemy of
Georg. Eniedinus.

11. contr. That moral works, which are done without faith are sin, howsoever
outwardly they appear good.

Controversies out of the 15. Chapter.
1. contr. Whether S. Peter were justly reprehended of S. Paul for refusing to
eat with the Gentiles.

2. contr. That Christ is not set forth only as an example for us to imitate,
but as our Savior to redeem us.

3. contr. Against the enemies and adversaries to the Scriptures, the
Marcionites, Libertines, and others.

4. contr. Of the authority of the Scripture, that it depends not upon the
approbation or allowance of the Church.

5. contr. Against the invocation of Saints.

6. contr. Of the certentie of salvation, against the Popish diffidence and
doubtfulnes.

7. contr. Against the power of freewill in spiritual things.

8. contr. Whether the Apostles excusing of himself, do derogate from the
authority of this epistle.

9. contr. That the Scriptures are perfect and absolute, containing whatsoever
is necessary to salvation, both touching doctrine and manners.

10. contr. Against the Popish sacrifice of the Mass, which the Papists make
the peculiar act of their Priesthood.

11. contr. Against the superstitious order of Monks and Friars.

12. contr. That miracles are not necessary in the Church.

13. contr. Against the vain pomp of the Popish pontifical ornaments.

14. contr. Of the idle boastings, and vaineglorious excursions of the Jesuits.

15. contr. Against the pompous processions and Persian-like train of the
Popes Legates and Cardinals.

16. contr. Against the Anabaptisticall community.

17. contr. Against the invocation of Saints.

18. contr. Against the merit of prayers.

Controversies out of the 16. Chapter.
1. contr. Against cloistered Nuns.

2. contr. The Church not always visible and consisting of multitudes.

3. contr. All doctrine is to be examined by the Scriptures.

4. contr. That Papists not Protestants serve their own belly.

5. contr. That Protestants are no schismatikes.

6. contr. Why the Gospel was kept secret so many years under the kingdom of
Antichrist, against the objection of the Papists.

7. contr. Against the Popish doxologie ascribing glory with Christ unto the
virgin Marie.

8. contr. Whether S. Peter were ever at Rome, and continued there Bishop 25.
years.

The sum of the Controversies handled in this Commentary, beside Doctrines
and Moral observations, makes in all about 290.

The Questions and Controversies summed together, make toward a thousand,
being in all 950.

This COMMENTARY by Gods gracious assistance, was finished April 10. Ann. Dom.
1611. anno aetatis Authoris currente 48.

To God only wise be praise through Jesus Christ for ever. Romans 16.27.

The Printer to the Reader.
Whereas the copy was in many places dark and obscure, as being but once
written, as it was first framed by the Author, neither could he be present
himself to ouersee the work, I pray thee, Courteous Reader, with patience to
amend the faults, which fell out to be more, then either we had thought, or
could by our diligence (which was not wanting) prevent.

The first figure shows the page, the other the line: exp. signifies to put
out: r. read: f. for.

Page 2. lin. 30. for S. Matthew, read S. Mark. p. 5 25. r. letter. 6 29:r
praeponit, and f. propounds, prefers. p. 12.3.r. which in, f and (...) 3
29 f. January, r. December, 14.56. r. how often. 15 20 of the, 16 f. officer,
r ofine^. 18. r Hortiensi^. l. 28. exp. and. p. 20. r. Phrygia paccaltana. 24
r. ipsius Corinthi. 26 part, s. puto. 28. (...) 29 (...) 30. (...) 34 3. r. of
his. 37. r opponit 39.12 r. finite, f. infinite. 41. r. advers. Praxeam 42.17
significatur 45.30 collato. 44.61 (...) 9. r. illo. 45.20. f. he says, ^ he
says not, 16 25. r incontaminatam 47.40. r quidam. 52.56. r it, that is the
Gospel 56.3 (...) 601.7. r (...) eat. f immiserat. 62.54 r. (...), the best
thing living, and eternal, and the heaven, (...) 64.3. r consecutive. 67 21.
it, exp. 70.36. r. and is not. 71.1 r de placit. 43 Midata. 72.35
incorruptible. 36. r. pro, f pio 75.14 r. actiones, f. notim^^. 50 and, f. end.
76.57. r depriving. 77.9. r. ea part 21. r. as with. 81.24 p^^na^ exp. 37.
impr. be. 82.29 impugnatio. 83.33. Venerecu, 8^ 27 implacable. 36 (...) ^0.45.
Mahometane 91.2. r. in elatione. 14. (...) 21 (...) ^3.21. r. conversation. 38.
satisfaction. 96 34. Tharasius, 107 56. furnished. 110 19. proposition. 111.9.
strange. 117.17 maintained, f. mentioned. 120 46. r not now. 121.^9. r. esse.
122.32. in doing. 127 43. r. circumcision, f. remission. 131.4. carnal, f.
moral. 141 ^7. Apostolici. 40. Christians, f. heathen. 1^4. 4. then, f. that.
156.51. their, f. then. 56. meriteth not. 57 accepert^nt. 162.30. denies, f.
decrees. 166 6 treated of 169.25 satisfied, f. ^o testified. 170.31. framing,
f. straining. 172.40. ipsam. 174.9. of, f if 180 49 qua, f quia 52. virtue, f.
verity. 181.5. Catharinus. 15 antididagma. 184.20. whereas, f wherein. 188.23.
and yet, f. nor yet 189 53. execration, f. operation. 56. r. is not 194.6.
application. 13. amplified. 196.42.16. f. 6.201.18 iustificandi. 23.
oppositions, 204 30. exp. of. 206.12. exp not. 208.15. foreshewer, f.
foreshewen. 55. quae, f quia. 209 26 it is evident, f it was evidently 213.51
retracteth, f returns 216.1. we not have. 47. should not. 229.36. is joined.
230.24 Gods grace, f. his. 233.50. we, f. he. 51. unto him. 234.33 positiuely,
f. passiuely. 35. renders, f. reads. 49 sinned not. 237.7. the one, f. the
other. 241.29 forth, f. faith 244.55. might, f must. 247. (...). 39 exp. place.
250.11. (...) 17. Pho^^s. 256 (...). 257.1 (...) 54. one, f our. 263.29.
obfuscationem. 34. depravation. 266.23. m, f an. 270 51. (...) 53.1.3.24. f.
2.14.272.20 if men were, f. of men. 277.4. form, f. former, 278.20 and to
come, f the come. 28. out of a vessel not originally, etc. 279 23. is for. 47.
a weak consequent. 286.13. and, f. on. 290.12. exp if 50. birth, f both. 29^.
Flacius, f. Florius. 293 8 omittendo. 45. several, f. severe. 295.55.
observes, f. ascribes. 298.14 form of, f. former. 301.17. unto, f. upon.
302.12 cura. 303.41. was in those, f. or those. 307.28. life, f death. 309.34.
^^der, f order. 45. makes, f. works. 313.30. propounded, f. provided. 52.
mind, f. word. 315.42. defect, f. desert. 49. the woman is free. 319.28. exp.
of. 320.12. dum, f. nondum. 321.12. depraved. 19. cum hominibus. 24. repeated.
322.17. the things which 18. some, f. four. 29. prisons, f persons. 324 2^
(...) 328.11 (...) 44. the present. 333.27. expositum, exposed. 38. potuit non
mort. 334 vet, f. not. 24. prioribus, f principibus. 335.27. regul^bre^^er. 336
21. war,, f. marry. 337.29 accepted. 338.17 as of one. 340.11. ad Eust^ch.
341.56. preparatorie. 344.51. in f. to. 351.25. some, f. sin. 352.21. join,
f. coin. 355.38. contumacie, f continuance. 365.37 creature, f. nature 368.11
restored. 27. Hexemer, f. Hypertum. 373.50. wait, f. wail. 375.57. in, f.
not. 376.20. interpellare 45. impatient. 377.11. expositions 49. neither, f.
either. 380.11. arithmeticall. 15 not in. 492.23. perfited, f. excepted 57.
whatsoever 395 37. overthrows. 397.11. wall, f. will 398 51 ad gloriam.
400.51. as long 401.8. are mentioned. 404.4 (...). 410 14. the wind. 50.
raptum. 413.6 Iphicrate. 414.46. all sin, 415 9 strong. 418.6. should have.
420.50. in duritie. 430. curiously, f. earnestly 440.20. wherefore, f. whereas.
441.31. is, f. of 442 56. Thus then, f Then seeing 459 39 circumcision. 465.
bashar, f. bashur. 466. operation, f. expectation. 469 of ^ne, f. Ive. Centur.
5. f. 3.470. tobel, f. tobel. 471.53. which is, f. with it is. 478.13. mind, f.
word 479.25. whence, f. where. 38. safe, f. sure. 482.23. with, f. which,
485.32. titulare. 488.37. any, f. a. 489.30. ascribes it not. 490. impetum.
492.6. Sidoniniaus, f. Sodomites. 497.27. exp. to, and. 499.30. interpretation.
502.25. nation, f. nature. 41. Gentiles, f. Jews. 49. (...). 503.42. a reason,
f. occasion. 504. they, f. their. 506.25. of grace. 507. fractorum. 509.38.
find out. 40 infiltando. 43. referre^. 512 ^. ^^^sion. 51^.4. impenitienda. 11.
repented of. 49. explication. 515. iniecerit. 519.56. eternal. 531. contribuo.
537. saguina, f. sanguina. 539.11. conscilarium. 540.37. clause. 542.14. that
he. 544. on teaching. 549.50. fratrem. f. proprium 55^ (...) 551.28 in ob^^^
554.1. Psallia^. 3. fall, f. fault. 555.19. communicate 32, yea the. 567, 44.
mal. ficij, 18, non sua, etc, perdunt, 577.7, (...) 35. provision. 580.
emanavit, 581.35. causes, f. clauses, 587, 30, debitum, f, delictum, 596.18,
hunc, 45, exp that, 50, omnem hominum, 597.57, constancy, f, conscience,
601.32, do, f, may, v 33, exp for, 602, 23, extorta, extorted by etc 604, 2,
decipere, 8, directiva, 609, 8, exercise, f, excuse, 32, exp. rather, 615, 11,
Iudis, 619, 43, were not, 620, 9, liberality, 623, 5, beloved, 25, itineribus
pedestribus, 625.50, (...), 641.44, could f. would, 643, 18, not now, 48, over,
f even, 646, 44, ipsa, 649, 30, feret, f. fecerit, 37, ends, f. orders, 65^,
48, Cle^^^ f. Clemen. 656, 34, constituti, 663, 44, vnionis. adoptionis, 664,
5, mercatur, 668, 24, time, f. term, 669, 20, simplicity, 671, 35.3. f.
5.673, ^0, numbering, f. maintaining, 675, 46, world, 57, cross, f. curse, 654,
49 f^cerat, 690, 41, Act 9, f. 29, 691, 46, acervos, ^^3, 6, (...), 693, 8,
misericordiam expectant, 704, 8, felicitas. 723, 18, whence, f, when, 722, 50,
in, f. a, 724, 17, annotation, 725, 4, Pallis, 5, have, f. of, 724, 50,
irreprehensibilis, f. irreprehensibili, 727, 3, censetur, 729, 2, permanendu^^
^6, them, f. thence, 43, but, f. by, 735, ^4. prefer. 737.5. secula. 20.
velati. 738.55. massas. 740.34. is to be.


