THE SEARCH OF CAUSES.

CONTAINING A THEophysicall Inuestigation of the Possibility of Transmutatorie
Alchemie.

By Timothy Willis, Apprentise in Physic.

LONDON Printed by JOHN LEGATT. 1616.

To the Reader.
THE cause of this Press, is rather compulsory, then voluntary: Indeed an
extorted will, proceeding first from my facility in copies, and thereby from
too much liberty in some: who of amanuensed transcripts (peradventure not
perfect) gave me just suspicion of an ignorant exposing. Which to prevent, I
have sent to the worlds view this whatsoever, being occasioned by discourse and
arguments at a supper between diverse learned Gentlemen some years past. My
self am so little ambitious thereof, that I shall think it well if it escape
without tax, specially virulent: having entertained no thought of reply to
gainsayers. An incky Duel about natural opinables, should proceed like faults
escaped in the printing.

Mend and say nothing.
The search of Causes, containing a Theophysicall Inuestigation of the
possibility of Transmutatorie Alchemie.
CAP. 1.
THE knowledge of truth revealed unto the first friends of God, and by
succession from them continued unto us their children, is more perfect then the
wisdom of any Philosophy. Philosophers seek for, and require reason and
necessary causes in all things. But we are taught and assured, that the
beginning was without any such cause as they seek after, or we can
comprehend. For nothing is more true, then that all things were made by an
infinite power of an incomprehensible Creator, in that beginning of which we
have no perfect knowledge. And because we are taught that so perfect a cause
can do nothing not answerable to it self, we must believe that all his works
be most perfect in absolute order of Number, Weight, and Measure: created,
made, and preserved, in and under an unchangeable law of created Nature,
answerable to the archety pall and chief exemplary cause of their being and
preservation. Wherefore to understand so much, as our imperfection may
comprehend, it is necessary that we consider the degrees of this excellent
wisdom to and in his Creatures, whereby all things are, and continue: And how
the essential causes depend and abide inuiolably the same, unto the last
determination of all time and times.

CAP. 2.
BEfore this creation there was nothing of this natural world, either in
actual existence, or potentiallie: Neither Form, Matter; Spirit, Body;
Substance, Accident; Time, Place; Order, Confusion; Positive, Privative;
Absolute, Relative; Abstract, Concrete; Agent, Patient; Negation, or
Affirmation: But one only the Ineffable and Incomprehensible Iah; divine
Essence, Eternal, without beginning or end, whose name then was, and in his
abstract Essence ever shall be, I Am. And since the Creation as he is God the
Creator and preserver, etc. Emanuel, God with us, which Us is man, containing
in him somewhat by proportion from the Son of God and man, and from Angels, to
the insensible Center of the earth.

CAP. 3.
THe difference or distance between Being and absolute not being, is infinite:
And therefore cannot be mediate, or filled, but by an infinite Power: But there
is nothing infinite in Power, saving only the uncreated Power without
beginning or ending. Of whose counsels we may not require cause or reason,
because they exceed reason, and cannot by us be comprehended. This power
because it is infinite, is always the same without change. Wherefore it is
simply without respect or relation Good and Goodness: from which all created
Good and Goodness comes, and on it depends. And this created Good and
Goodness to it self and every particular creature is respective and relative.
The first absolute Power infinite, and infinitely Good, with his will eternally
decreed a creation: and with his infinite action and spirit effected the same:
Infinite in the Creator, though determined and finite in the Creature, Ad modum
Recipientis. So we find in this workmanship of the Almighty three causes,
which are a rule, intellectual and ideall law, in and to the creature: Power,
Will, Spirit, being three coessential in one God, and three distinct in the
Creature concerning his operations, though one in the universality of their
subject, much more in the cause whereon they depend. For what Creature soever
shall do any thing, must have Power to effect, Will to work, and instruments
of action; which is Spirit, giving motion: and this is common to all creatures,
under what degree of substance soever they be particularizied. For the
Philosophers power merely passive, concerns only a supposition of natural
disposition and appetite to a process, A non Ente tali ad ens tale. But except
they will imagine it to be with privation of action in the patible or passive
subject (which is absurd) they must needs grant this power to effect.

CAP. 4.
IN the history of the Creation we find thus. In the beginning God made heaven
and earth, etc. as there follows. Where note, that the word Deep, Abyssus, or
Chaos, was that which is here called heaven and earth, being yet one confused
heap or mass, undivided, without form, and void, oueruailed with universal
darkness; which darkness was not the privation of light, because no created or
relative light had then bin. 2. Esdras, 6.39.
But without any voice the darkness was on every side with silence. From this
matter, Time and Place only begins the search of reason, understanding, and
created wisdom, unto which all Philosophy in the highest Metaphysics must be
reduced. For no reason can be given, or inuestigation made of that which was
not: And not any thing ever was, but in some time and place: which have no use
but only to measure and contain. But before this beginning their neither was
measure nor thing measured; Conteiner nor thing contained: And therefore no
time, no place: But both had being and beginning in and with this creation,
being themselves creatures, and concluded under the law of Nature: which here
in this Reshith with them took beginning. I am not ignorant, that a late
writer labors much about Principium increatum. In which he would have this
dark and silent mother, the common womb, this Chaos of possibilities, this
all changeable unformed to be and receive beginning; or more explicately to be
with it Coaeuall. But that is too Chaldaicall, and implies an eternity and
infinite forebeing of Matter, Time, and Place: which agrees not with the
infinite contradiction and contradictorie predications of Deus, and Non Deus.
And there is nothing definible, demonstrable, or consequent out of any
principle of natural wisdom, which this beginning of Matter, Time, and Place
do not as certainly auerre, as the supposed eternity of them. Besides that it
is more orthodoxall: Except his phrase and sentence can bear construction of
that Word which was in and from the beginning; by which all things were made:
And receive the construction of Saint Paulssermon to the Athenians. Now
therefore let us see what rivers run from this sea, Conducts from this
wellhead: and what principles of Philosophy we are necessarily tied unto by
this most certain and true beginning of nature and natural causes. No doubt
whatsoever is elsewhere necessarily or probably delivered, is either directly
taken from hence, Or else is but a shadow of this substance, and a deriuation
of this light.

CAP. 5.
Every work and action of God, expressed or implied in his Creation, has as
a necessary cause produced some created effect, and established it under the
law of Nature, with time still to continue. By his Power in the beginning he
created that void and unformed Chaos, which because it was void and unformed,
had power and hability alike to every thing or form. And because nature, that
is the Creature, is the Image of the Creator, as being Relative to him; There
is in it a natural will and appetite unto perfection, which is the natural
Good and Goodness of every creature, which is manifested by distinction, in
instruments, parts, etc. That the heavens may declare the glory of God, and all
his works magnify his holy name. The third cause in the creature was yet
wanting; that is, spirit, the formal cause of motion, in every Creature: which
likewise answered his proper cause, distinct from the other, as is said in
their effects relatiuely, but not in their universal subject, nor in the
Prototypal being, whose Image they are: Three in One, and One in Three, or
rather Trinity Coessentiall in Unity, and Unity in Trinity. The spirit of God
moved upon the waters. The spirit moving upon the waters created in them
spiritualnesse and natural motion, in such proportion as might most absolutely
answer the excellency of the Creators disposition, and harmony in the
innumerable variety of all his particular creatures: and be a most sure ground
to inform the contemplation of reason by exact dependence of effects upon
their causes. The whole Chaos contained two parts, Water and Earth. In this
there is diversity of positio^, above and beneath. The Water was above the
Earth, and therefore lighter and more capable of actiuity; The Earth was under
the waters, and therefore heavier and naturally more passible. The spirit moved
upon the surface of the waters, which then thereby became more spiritual,
active, and stirring: and from thence the other waters in that deep received
their dower in the like virtues in proportion, even to those that were
contiguall to the earth. The Earth in it self has no power of spirit or
motion, but mediatly by the Waters: and that likewise in exact and graduated
proportion, sufficient for the agreeing diversity of al bodies. This
spiritualnes or natural spirit being but potentially in the waters, could not
in natural course (which God had now established) be acted but by a mean. The
Spirit was moved, Motion breeds heat, Heat causes rarefaction, or subtilty:
and subtilty is the perfection of spirit in every kind: And of all spiritual
things light is most subtle, which therefore was the first Creature actually
distinguished in and out of the confused Chaos. And that which before was the
confused power of all things, void, and without form, by this appeared the
universal matter of all bodies, informed with light, the most universal of
all forms. And as in the darkness nature travailed with the burden of this
wonderful birth in her womb, and as it were sat hatching her eggs, so now
in this light she was delivered of her first borne: and after disclosed her
other chickens, formed and well shaped, out of the shell of darkness. And
here the waters were endowed with Spirit, Motion, Heat, and Light, as is
aforesaid: which light was not actually in the inferior waters (as nights
Mantle proves:) But showing the neerenesse of water unto light by
transparence, the easy reception of light, their easy rarefaction by the
work of heat, the child of Spirit, do give good testimony of lights
materiality. But this is not so proper to the universal light, of which we
speak, by which the superior waters be continually illumined and illustred,
without any shadow of the night of our less general time; yet it may serve in
near similitude to illustrate. The next distinct Creature named the Expansion,
Firmament, or Heaven (which a certain Wiseman calls the heavenly Air) had
in the very instant of his calling and creation an office appointed most
general: To divide the waters above from the waters below. And here is no
mention made of Air and Fire, but of Motion and Light, which are never without
heat, the most proper passion or form of that which we commonly call Fire:
Also of the upper Waters and their rarefaction, which agrees with the Air of
common Philosophy in the efficient and subject. But whether those names be
proper or no, concerns not this place: and I have elsewhere paradoxally
handled. Of the substance and composition of heaven many heads have brought
forth many horns: and arming their reasons with fantastical imaginations,
have pushed at each other so long till they be all galled. It is sufficient for
us to consider their use and office: that is, to divide the waters above from
the waters below; and how being composed of the common Chaos, water and earth,
more pure then things beneath them, less pure then things above them, they be
solid, fixed, permanent, and as it were of an immortal substance, patible
only by fire. Job 37.18.
And therefore it is said, the heavens are strong and as a molten glass. For
when the Spirit gets the upper hand in a pure and clean body, and that
body afterward of the Spirit in the second conjunction, not by incrassation
of the spirit but by subtilation of the body, the whole compound becomes
quintessentiall: then all is permanent, and, as you would say, fixed
spiritually. Then there is no natural alteration nor corruption. I know that
some writers make two distinct materialities, or materias primas, first matters
in this beginning of creation: one containing the water of heaven above, the
other a confused mass of earth and water, the corporalitie of all sublunarie
bodies. But that opinion seems to draw a tail after it of many absurdities
and inco^ueniences: and that golden chain of Participation of Symboles, which
linketh heaven and earth together, cannot abide two material principles of one
creature. Neither can such duality subsist with that Talmudique mystery of
light shining out of darkness, which is figuratively verbu^ Dei in nobis. Then
there is no natural alteration nor corruption, but men's sana in corpore sano,
a pure spirit in a perfect body. Next after the firmament and this division of
waters, followed the separation or parting of the waters beneath the firmament
from the earth; whereby sea and land were made. In all this relation and
respect are manifest; darkness and light above, beneath; and diuider, or
mean between extremes, Water, Earth, Sea, Land; wet, dry, Motion, Rest, etc.
Then in order followed, In the earth Vegetables, In heaven stars and their
offices, In the waters Fish and Foul: In the earth again sensibles, commonly
called Brutes, or Irrationals: Lastly Man with appointment of meat for
himself and all sensibles, except fishes.

CAP. 6.
IN the beginning the Waters contained all; were contained of none, but teemed
in darkness. The heavens were of old; And the earth that was of the water,
by the Word of God. Wherefore the world that then was, perished by water. The
heavens and earth which now are, be kept in store by the same Word unto fire.
The first matter of all things is water: and therefore the first cleansing is
by and with water. The last perfection of all things is spirit, and the last
cleansing is by fire, which is the violence of the spirit consuming all matter
imperfectible, and leaving in an immortal body, that which is pure, clean,
and perfectible. In which triumph of the spirit all shall burn saving the
perfect seed of them that escaped in the waters.

For nothing that is unclean comes to the last and second perfection of the
fire, not having been washed and depured in the first of water. But how the
earth was of water, whether by separation of the lower waters when the dry
land appeared, or by subsidence of the heavier part of the Chaos in the
rarefaction caused by the spirit moving, is a matter of great and necessary
consequence: doubtless it was by both, as we see in depuring of liquors and
Chymicall extractions. And so the second world is of the dividing of fire, as
in spagiricall mysteries we may plainly see. This is true in that we seek
after: which is more easy to understand if we consider that hea^e the form,
or essentially inseparable from the form of fire, was made by the spirits
moving upon the waters, and that the life and fuel of fire is aer. The waters
as being most spiritual had the first ornament of distinction and form in all
degrees: first light (which some think to comprehend Angels) and therefore
fire. But that thought has many great adversaries, and may imply matter of
strong heresye, as though they had been Coadiutors, or agents in the following
days of creation. Therefore they do best which understand the creation of
Angels to be in the sixth day, in which man himself also was created: besides
many other sound reasons. Then heaven followed the diuider and mediator of the
waters above from the^ beneath: next vegetables, etc. as before: where note
that before any sensible creature was created in the water or earth, the better
part, that is, the superior waters, and the heaven, had all their furniture of
light, with the whole host of heaven, of innumerable stars and their
offices. And lastly Angels a little before man. For though it be not defined
when Angels were created; yet their residence being in heaven, and their
Indiuidualitie immortal, it cannot be doubted, that they were before and
near the perfectest form of the ruling creature. And the light of Angels in
origination must differ infinitely from the inaccessible light of God. And as
they could not suffer by water, so they that continued in their original light
shall not perish nor suffer by fire, as all other things shall, even the
heavens themselves. The heavens and earth which are kept by the same word in
store, and reserved unto fire, etc. 2. Pet. 3. Psa. 102.25
Thou have laid the foundations of the earth, the heavens are the work of
thine hands, they shall perish but thou shall endure: Even they all shall wax
old as does a garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed, 2. Pet. 3.12. Eccl. 17.31.
etc. The heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall
melt with heat, etc. What is more clear then the Sun? yet it shall fail;
Yea the heavens and stars though insensible be far more excellent then the
sensible creatures of the earth, and inferior waters: Not concerning their
form, but concerning their composition, perfect mixture, and pure matter of
corporalitie: All which cause their permanent indiuidualitie. Such is the
substance of our question. The stars are unclean in his sight: How much more
man even the Son of man, Job 15.15.
which is but a worm? etc. The heavens are not clean in his sight, how much
more Man? For man is of the earth. And heaven is the congregation of waters: In
which they become fixed and permanent, which cannot be without the action of
their spirit of light and fire. For though every one have their part of all
four: Yet we find the earth and air patible, and as it were Nurses or
rather Seminaries, and very wombes of corruption, diseases, and death: From
which (not speaking of them in their regenerated bodies,) no sacrament either
divine or natural is taken: And in, from, and by which all things both
macrocosmicall and microcosmicall have their Morbificall exhalations. But the
other two, water, and fire, be the cleansers and natural renewers of all;
which as they decay not in themselves, so do they preserve. For the fishes
were not brought into the Arc, but were preserved in their own proper Element.
And by the way we may observe one notable doctrine. That the more pure, clean,
and subtle any thing is in the materialitie of his primitive nature, the more
irreuocable is the ruin and destruction, if it suffer violence above or beyond
that number, weight, and measure in which it was created. So we see the fall
of Angels eternally judged, and vitrified substance be irreducible. And this
in natural things and natural causes is also true. But to proceed: after in
the creation of sensible creatures the waters were first served with fish and
souls, which are attributed and appropriated unto the waters, because air
comes by rarefaction of waters, and is extended under the hollow of heaven.
Lastly was Man, being the Epitome and Abridgement of the whole Creation; and
therefore rightly called Microcosmus, a little world: for whose use and service
all other things were created: For the good or bad use whereof, he shall
account to his and their Creator God Almighty. The order of proceeding herein,
we see to be from the most simple and universal, to the most compound and
special or particular. So sensibles are more compounded then vegetables, Man
more then other sensibles; minerals less then vegetables: and all concerning
their materiality, of the first Chaos, partakers of the essential corporality,
which contained all in darkness.

CAP. 7.
IN this Chronicle of the creation, there is very excellently taught the
condition of all Creatures, their composition, and state of their natural
life. There are two corporal or bodied Elements, Earth and Water; of which all
things under heaven are materially compounded: The spirit of life in every
thing is his natural heat, joined therewith by the means of the air (which
is here called the rarefied waters,) first created by the motion of the spirit,
and made able to multiply it self in any fit and prepared subject. This heat
is chiefly in the light, which was first brought out of the Chaos, and dwells
in the rarefied waters, as in their proper subject. So the whole composition
consists of four; two patient and material respectively, inferior water and
earth: two agent and formal respectively, superior water and heat, or light:
which if we call air and fire in the compound, it shall be indifferent, for it
matters not what names or words be used, so the thing be understood. These
four Elements or parts of composition must be considered two ways;
particularly, and generally. Considered particularly they ever concur to the
composition of things corruptible: but generally, of things incorruptible. To
which purpose let us consider; that there is a general light, made before the
heavens: of and with which the Elements, and every elementary compound does
communicate more or less: and thereby has in it some spark of
incorruptibility, and possibility to attain it, according to the primitive
natural predestination of his first creation; which also it might, and should
enjoy, were it adapted to fit digestion, and fermentation of it self: where
all the Elements should never cease from their circular labor until by equal
proportion and temper that subject could no more be altered; of which there is
some near example in Gold and precious stones.

There is also a general Heaven, not made to distinguish times and seasons,
but to divide, and to be as it were a Land-marke between the Waters, (the
interpretations of the Hebrew Maim, and the Comments of the Aerial Expansion
may have their truth, not opposing this divisor:) which general heaven gives
general influence from the Waters above, by means of the general light, into
the inferior Elements and elementarie compounds, and also spiritual fixation:
continuing and preserving the cause of their incorruptibilitie, being an
active Spirit of life, able to work by digestion and fermentation as aforesaid.

There is also a general and universal Time, and that of diverse degrees. When
the Chaos was created, Time was created with it. And as the matter of all
things, being then in this Chaos, is incorruptible in it self, though
diversely passible in his indefinitenesse to all forms: so is that time with
it created, in it self abstractiuely understood, undivided, though
communicated unto Elements and Compounds, and measuring in them no other thing
then the incorruptibility of their matter. Besides this, there is another
general Time, measuring the general and incorruptible matter, which slept in
unrevealed darkness. And as the first measures in the Elements and elemental
bodies the incorruptibility of the matter, so this measures in them the same
of their forms, to the preservation of one general form in one general
matter of natural transcendence. The third general Time began with the
Firmament; which time measures the third order of natural Being from the
Chaos; and the second order of distinction from the general light. That is the
division of waters, and therefore it is in the first degree of composition,
alterable by generation and corruption: for in it the four elements were
perfected of all natural sublunary things. This time is the first of all, unto
which our speculation reaches, concerning the natural estate of things
corruptible and generable: for the other two come nearer the last dissolution,
when al things shall stand adorned in one light, or fall confused in one
darkness. And these universal and incorruptible causes, Matter and Form, are
really according to their natures in the elements and every compound; and
either shall with them in their present estate continue unto the last
possibility of their predestination, or alter them that they may so continue;
or else being severed from them return to their proper place, under the
commensuration of their proper time, till all things be restored in the
incorruptible regeneration of an immortal spring. So is their particular
matter and form separable, corruptible in respect of the composition; and
measured by particular times, in which generations and corruptions do happen of
all things thereunto subject. The particular light began with the Stars, and
that of so many different effects, as there be varieties in their motion,
receptions of light, irradiations, and whatsoever else in true Astronomy can
be said of them. This is the particular beginning of time and times, and the
proper measure of all specifications and particularities: Yet some would have
the measure of specifications to be in the time of the vnstarred heavens, and
of particularities as is here said. It is no inconvenience to agree with them,
both have their speculations, but agree in the issue of particularities. If it
be objected, that this being true, vegetables be incorruptible, because they
were created before this light, and time of the Stars; I say, it follows not.
For they are made of earth and inferior waters, earth being predominant, which
imply matter and form separable, and by consequent corruptibility of the
co^pound, not withstanding the concours of the other two elements aforesaid.
They were given for food to man, and all other animals (except Fishes) which
were made after the Stars; and therefore do communicate in nature with them.
And though they were made before the light and time of generations and
corruptions, yet they were not then absolutely perfect. For neither had they
then increased their species with succession of indiuiduals, nor attained their
last end in which al perfection is consummate: that is, to be meat for man and
beasts, made in the light and times of generations. But therein we may note,
that all things made before this time, being generable and corruptible, be in
their generations hermaphroditicall: and therein differ from the other more
multitudinary and angulare. And from this place a good cabalist may gather
something of the immortality of the flesh, and by consequent of resurrection:
because their food is of that which in the first creation concerning time and
light, is incorruptible; amongst which there is a tree of life. What then shall
we say of meat and medicine made of that, which in creation preceeds these, in
his particular body is durable with the heavens, less compounded and angulare
then any vegetable. But to return: moreover the earth and all things therein
received the curse, and became hereunto subject by Adams fall, and cannot
without sweat and labor eat their bread, that is, enjoy the predestination
of the spirit of life which is in them. But if they were helped and cherished
by some matter like and connaturall to that spirit of life, which they have of
the universal light, and the upper waters measured by the universal time of
the vnstarred heaven; noe doubt they might endure far beyond that time they
now do, if peradventure not to the worlds end: which in their present estate
is impossible for many causes, and by reason hereditarie corruption has taken
so great and deep root; as one (though to another end) says; Damnosa quid
non imminuit Dies?
Aetas Parentum, peior auis tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.


Wherein the whole world, and every part thereof, have their part, both in
quantity diminished, life shortened, natural virtues decayed, and generally in
minority of all things that belong to their natural being or well being: and
shall not be restored, until the general restoration of the universe. Say
unto a woman which trauaileth, 2. Efdras. 5.52.
wherefore are not they whom thou have now brought forth like those that were
before thee, but less of stature? And she will answer thee, some were born in
the flower of youth, others were borne in the time of age, when the womb
failed: Consider now that ye are less of stature then those that were before
you, and so are they that come after you less then they: as the Creatures
which now begin to be old, and have passed over the strength of youth.

CAP. 8.
OF these two kinds of essential causes, general and particular, corruptible
and incorruptible, all sublunary things consist and have their being and
existence in matter and form, body and spirit. And are in possibility to such
end, as naturally follow these beginnings, corruptible or incorruptible,
transumtable or permanent. And nature naturally proceeding, ever intends the
greatest natural perfection in all her works, and the preservation thereof.
But because in the excellent ornament and beauty of Gods glorious workmanship
(consisting of innumerable variety of several species and perticularities in
nature) all participate not alike, of the incorruptible causes, nor be alike
tempered by the digestion of their compounding Elements, many things of
necessity are of shorter continuance then other, more subject to change and
corruption. This change and corruption, being properly the death of every
particular body, comes not by utter destruction or annihilation of any
essential part, but is only a disorganizing of the spirits tenement, and a
separating of these said parts, each returning to his place under the measure
of general time. Neither do any of the^ so perish, but that their mortal
immortality, under the said comme^suration continuing unto the worlds end, is
manifest. For those things, which in their individual bodies have not this
immortality (as we see the heavens, gold, and precious stones to have) are
preserved here by succession, as it were of immortal seed. For all men came
out of Adams loins: And his substance by propagation continues to the last
end of al natural things. In contemplation whereof the Greek Philosophers
affirm, that in all seeds there is something wonderful, proportionable to the
Element of Stars. But if we consider the regeneration of this body in his
digested, purified Elements, though it be above the compass of common reason,
and seem miraculous; yet no doubt we may therein contemplate, and most
notably discern the complement of Nature in the immortality of every
particular, which before was shadowed in succession. Nothing can proceed
infinitely in change; therefore there must be some end or period of particular
times, wherein changes happen. The whole memory of Nature, being the Image of
God, cannot be blotted out and destroyed. Therefore after the determination of
number, to avoid infinity, there shall be an immortality of particular
things: Not by the ruin of Nature, but by the full acted accomplishment of the
whole possibility, and satisfying the appetite of all causes. If it be
demanded whether this shall also be in other sensibles, vegetables, and
minerals, the answer requires modesty, for it is not made certain unto us; Et
praestat dubitare de occultis, quam litigare de incertis. For my self I rather
think of the Negative. My reason is: The whole university and frame of the
creation is the Image of God: And this whatsoever is epitomized in Man,
containing most exactly the whole harmony and discord, order and confusion of
all causes and effects, according as he stands or falls to God his master.
And so is the true and real storehouse of al Gods works, and his most perfect
Image: the Image of his glory if he stand, of his wrath and judgment if he
fall. Alt hings were blessed for his sake and use: the same were cursed for his
sin and abusing the creatures contrary to commandment: he shall account to
God as his Steward for all; and in him they shall be perfected to immortality,
not distinctlie in their present shapes, but as having in him that they are.
For after the regeneration man has no more use of them, either necessary or
ornamentall. And so the cause of their natural and distinct being cease. So
the whole creature is immortal, that is, the general causes of matter and
form, of which all things were in an elementall body perfectly tried,
digested, depured, and inseparably united, and as it were fixed in the highest
perfection, which is Man. In whom all natural bodies of which wespeake,
concur and rest, as al rivers run into the sea making one deep. And if the
exposition of Dionysius Carthusianus be not received, peradventure this may
agree with the meaning of S. Paul in the 8. Cha. to the Romans, from the 19.
verse to the 24. To this purpose we may further consider, how God in all his
works ever abhorred multitude tending to division, making all things conspire
in unity of most accomplished perfection. In the creation of the second day it
is not said, And God saw that it was good. Not that the Creatures of that day
wanted his blessing, but to teach us the danger of division, which beginning in
the first defection from unity, ends in confusion: and is never restored but
by returning again from the tumult of multiplied duality, and conspiring in
the united goodness of all good things, to receive the undivided blessing of
rest and quietness in the mystical Septenarie. So God saw all that he had
made, and lo it was very good. It is not said, he saw them and every of them,
and they were good. Duo, two, as the number of division had no blessing, but in
6. being vnitiuely tripled, according to the first universal causes, it was
joined to the number of all, as one of, in, and with them, without division for
them; and so rested in the perfection of unity, sanctifying the creature in 7.
And as all things natural are of three universal causes, so on that root is
squared the last preparation of them, which is Man: receiving perfection in 10.
by which, 9. returns into unity, the first and last perfection of all
perfections. For 6. and 9. be the numbers of preparation and motion. 7. and 10.
the numbers of rest and perfection in nature.

CAP. 9.
NOW let us enquire whither it be possible in nature to produce such a
compounded substance, tempered of the Elements, in which, after exact
digestion, the predominancy of the spiritual causes shall be manifested in true
figure of regeneration. So that the appetite of this matter being fully
satisfied, it shall be capable of no greater natural perfection, nor subject
to change in it self: but, like the superior waters, mix it self with the
spirit of life in every natural thing, and work in it restoration and
preservation in such measure, as the natural predestination of that thing
wherewith it is joined is able to receive: and so be Genus generum, and forma
formarum, most universal to all elementate compounds. I say a natural
perfection and natural change, meaning so great and high degree, as the
possibility of this world, hasting in speedy flux to an end, can suffer and
bear. For I know that when the pure heavens, and perfect elements do burn,
melt, and shall be purged with the powerful fire in the last complement of
Nature, that then also all things of or under them consisting, shall much more
suffer the same. Such things therefore as we speak of be commonly divided into
animals, vegetables, and minerals: understanding each largely to comprehend all
the particular Species of their own kind, also all errors whether by abundance
or defect of matter, strength and weakness of causes, etc. amongst these we also
comprehend lithophytes, transplanted from a vegetable root to a mineral body,
and zoophytes, which for the most part have in nearest agreement an animal
body, and a mineral house. For a ground and principle herein we assume that
which with common consent is received in every sect of Philosophy: Nature not
hindered in her actions does produce that wherein she labors, in the
greatest perfection that may be. This we see to be true in all individual
things, in the specification of their birthes, in their proper and natural
matrices: as also in unnatural issues from improper and unnatural matrices:
and in Monsters of superfluity, defect, etc.

In all which nature frames something as near to the specifical perfection of
the seed sown, as the matrice, matter, causes, and adaptation thereof will
suffer: Also in equivocal generations, and things animated by fermentation,
putrefaction, etc. And this also in Vegetables, as in graffing; where a
Crab-stocke feeds a Pippin. In transplantation, as of wheat into Rye, etc.
In culture, both of degeneration and exaltation, as in garden fruits, double
flowers, etc. Likewise in minerals, as is sufficiently declared by good
Authors, and daily experienced by such as use judgment in searching, digging,
and use of Mines. Also in spagyricall maturation of unripe Mines, and of
imperfect minerals by cohobating imbibition of fit mineral waters, etc. The
second serving to this point, is no less evident and common. Every effect is
the effect of some cause, and therefore answerable unto it. And of this
follows a third. There is no real cause actually being, without his effect
in actus all existence: Else should nature labor in vain, and consume her
self about nothing with less profit, then a mountain calling a Midwife to
be delivered of a Mouse. This being granted, let us remember what is before
proved of the difference of causes, General and Particucular, not taking away
the subalternate dependence of all, for the whole being of subjects with their
inherent virtues and applications, as they now are to themselves and others. By
particular I mean not individual, but that which is put under or beneath the
universality of Natures indefinitenesse, by being appropriated to any inferior
or subalternate kind of specificatio^. General causes working in themselves
produce general effects, but received in particular subjects work according to
every particular kind, in Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals. This bar or
repulsion from generality comes by specification; and specification from the
concourse of particular causes, hindering nature from her general work. The
matter is indifferent to all; because it is general, and more incorruptible:
and desiring a form most natural to it self, must needs be best satisfied
with generality. Take away the particular specificating causes, and this
general effect must needs follow: as the light of the Sun is altered
according to the color of any Glass wherethrough it passes, which glass
being taken away, it appears in that general brightness which is proper to
it self. If therefore it be possible to continue in nature the action of the
general causes not hindered by subalternation of particularity, unto the last
digestive fermentation of this matter, no doubt there will be produced an effect
general, a real existing substance, indefinite, indeterminate, to al
specificated substances: being spirit of natural life in all perfection to
every one in his kind, of which it shall be received as aforesaid. As the
honor and authority of a King, continuing in his own absolute power
undiminished, gives honor and authority to all kind of his subjects to
every one according to his place, degree, and office. And to his subjects is as
it were Genus generum, and Forma formarum: so matter being in it self
indifferent to all, and informed in the first light of Nature, with the most
universal form of simplicity, in composition naturally desires the most
general form which is possible for any elementate compound to have. Yet
notwithstanding is specificated according to the subalternate causes working
therein. As we may say, a King in his officers is coarcted into a Chancellor, a
Treasuror, an Admiral, Judge, Justice, Constable, etc.

CAP. 10.
THe possibility of this general vnspecificated substance appears: and more,
a very necessity thereof, lest Nature should work in vain, having the
concourse of all necessary causes not corrupted. Let us therefore search
further, how and of what this may be done, in any sublunary matter compounded
of the elements, animal, vegetable, mineral, largely taken as aforesaid.
First let us consider the state of innocence, in which all things were
absolutely perfect, each in his own kind: so that the measure of the general
causes in them was not hindered from their actions by any seed of corruption or
clog of grossness, but free in their own liberty to work and produce
effects answerable to their proportion in every body. For all bodies in their
natural being are not alike perdurable, but graduated with more or less, as
the concourse of particular causes and agents is more or less in them. And
those, whose composition is most simple and least remote from the Elements by
subalternation, are of all others least subject to corruption in their
specificated natural bodies: as minerals. But to return where we left; this
primitive and genethliacal perfection by Adams fall was impaired and ouerueiled,
as it were in a shadow of death: so that those things which God saw to be good,
were now infected with the fruit and juice of that tree in which the knowledge
of evil grew: and being poisoned by Adams taste, were with him cursed. Neither
was there any way left for him to enjoy their goodness severed from evil, but
by labor and travail. Cursed is the earth for thy sake. In sorrow shall thou
eat of it all the days of thy life. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat
thy bread, until thou return to earth. This sweat and travel to eat bread
is not tied to the table of meals, nor to plowing and sowing, but is general
to the fruition of every natural thing in his use of virtue and goodness. Was
not the water made sweet with wood, Ecclus. 38.
that men might know the virtue thereof? The virtue of this wood and all other
things was known to Adam, but lost in the heirs of the slothful, married
unto the beauty of the Daughters of men, either refusing, or not rightly
understanding the sweat of eating bread. Man became rebellious and disobedient
unto God; so other creatures to man. Man is restored to God by the suffering of
one most perfect; so natural things under the ordinance of God, unto man by
one most exactly purified, digested and regenerated natural compound. And (not
defining) I think it no error to say, ^^m. 8.
that as every creature is subject to vanity, and groneth with us, and at last
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption unto the glorious liberty of
the sons of God: so also there may be naturally, before that consummation of
all things, some proof of this restored incorruptibilitie, really existing in
a complete elementate Compound, as is before said in the 9. chapter. Of this
matter and substance speaks Roger Bacon. It is possible to nature and art
helping nature, to prepare Corpus aequalis complexionis, in quo omnia elementa
sunt aequalia, and adaequata, quo-ad virtutes. Necesse etiam est quod sit
possibilitas huius corporis; quoniam corpora in resurrectione non possunt
habere incorruptionem and immortalitatem, nisi per hoc corpus etc. and in
another place, Et hoc est corpus aequale, ex quo componentur corpora post
resurrectionem. And this is the rest from sweat and labor that every natural
thing shall have after it is returned into earth; in the second purifying of
examination by fire: As our Hermes says of the worlds wonder, Vis eius est
integra, si versa fuerit in terram. The perfection of the earthly paradise
decayed not: but the way thereof was precluded: whither nature cannot enter,
but by passing the fiery sword. Man in the Scripture is called Omnis creatura,
every creature: And therefore in him shall this restoring from groaning and
travailing, and delivery from the bondage of corruption be vltimate, in
consummation perfected; As before in the eight chapter. Where heat is
multiplied, It is indifferent to congeale earth and melt wax, to rarifie water
into air, or incinerate Combustible matter. Clay in the potters hand, and wood
in the grauers, are in the workemans power to form at his pleasure,
Indifferent to all shapes: So is the efficient cause in the mind of the
Artist. But after one form induced there is no place for any other without
destroiing the first. So Nature (though not abridged, and so short tied as
mechanisme) before the specificall perfection of any thing, is free to any
thing. For things perfected have attained the last determinate end of their
possibility, and therein natural motion tending to generation does cease: But
the seeds and spermatical substances have not attained any end or perfection,
neither be out of thelatitude of indetermination, and indefinitenesse; and
therefore are in the power of the predominant causes to produce such effects, as
answer them: which be most universal, most general, such as before are
spoken of and declared. This in any form merely artificial cannot be;
because the matter in which art works has no internal cause active, neither
power nor appetite natural to the effects of art, but lies there like a
peripatetick privation: and all rests in the brain and hand of the Workman,
external and foreign to the matter. It may be objected, and commonly is, That
of any seed or spermaticall matter nothing can naturally be produced or bred;
but a body of that kind or species, of which the seed is: and that therefore
God in the several blessings of his several creatures commanded every one to
increase and multiply in his own kind. But herein we condemn the shallownes
of understanding, and besotted reason, which regarding only things at hand,
and the first face, look no further. Generally any seed grows to a
perfection of life, being received in any near matrice of his own next Genus:
though this thing so produced be not specificall to any kind, either of male or
female. And this is of the natural power of causes subalternately general.
But this is against the end of specificall nature, ever intending the
preservation of the species, and so the generation of things like in specie,
that may have the like power of propagation in their own kind, which is not
only according to the natural law, but also according to the commandment.
So for preservation of families the Jews had a commandment in what Tribe and
stock to marry; Yet, if they married contrary to that commandment, there
were children borne. So for chastity and preservation of families, adultery
is forbidden; Yet there be whole generations of adulterous mixture, according
to the natural gift, though with breach of the moral law. The seed of man
received into his proper matrice can naturally produce nothing but man; except
in certain causes of superfetation, inequality, etc. Yet these be called
unnatural errors, etc. and so they be, being compared to the final intent.
But being in the matrice of some other Animal there is formed a Monster, no
man. Partus exparte sequitur ventrem. So in all other Animals, else we should
be more full of Asses, and want Mules. Hence comes the proverb, Africasemper
aliquid apportat noui. The like we see in Vegetables, both in grafts and
seeds: which for the most part are in the hands of the husbandman, and
gardener, to alter at their pleasure. For, as it is true that nature does
produce seed and spermaticall substances, so it is most certain that the hand
of man may join them together in any other matrice then that by which they are
specificated: or, if they be hermaphroditicall, plant them in like sort in any
other matrice: And being so joined or planted, nature will fall to work, and
never cease until she have brought the matter to the last perfection possible
for those causes to induce, be it more or less excellent, then the species of
the seed. Instance of this is not so easily given in minerals: because their
spermaticall matter is not so familiar amongst us. Yet a man painful in
search, diligent in observing, judicious in reading, industrious in practice,
may satisfy himself therein. Excellent things be farthest from sense, and
therefore more difficult. In the creation there is no mention made of Minerals:
But they be afterward named for the riches of some of the countries divided
by the rivers flowing out of Eden. And in the whole Scriptures very little is
taught of their original, and that very darkely.

This is the chief sweat and labor wherein man eats his natural bread. It
is somwhere said, Out of much earth is turned a little gold. But if we can
find out their material element, it will be no hard matter to know their next
seedie substance. All things that are of the earth shall turn to earth again,
Ecles. 40.^^.
and they that are of the waters shall return into the sea. In Job it is
briefly touched, yet more plainly then elsewhere in one continued place. The dead
things are formed under the waters, Job. 26.5.
or near unto them. This shows truly the material element of the purest
minerals. (...) 8.1.
And again, The silver has his vein, and the gold his place where they take
it. Iron is taken out of the dust, and brass is moulten out of the stone. God
puts an end to darkness, and he tries the perfection of all things. He
sets a bound of darkness and of the shadow of death. The flood breaks
out against the inhabitant, and the waters forgotten of the foot, being higher
then man, are gone away. The stones thereof are a place of saphires, and the
dust of it is gold. There is a path which no foul has known, neither has
the Kytes eyeseene: the Lions whelps have not walked it, neither the Lions
passed thereby. He puts his hands upon the rocks, and his eye sees
every precious thing. He binds the floods, that they do not ouerflow, and
the thing that is hid brings to light. But where is wisdom found, and where
is understanding? etc. Not profaning the divine application and sense of this
place, consider as a chimicall natural Philosopher in these verses, what is
meant by dead things, waters, vein, place, darkness, shadow of death, flood,
inhabitant, bread, fire turned up, dust, unknown path, Kites eye, Lions
whelpe, Lion, Rocks, Mountains, and then you may boast that you know the
beginnings, spermaticall substance and true generation of metals. And for your
better help in this search take with you one thing out of Paracelsus, and
believe it as an article of your natural creed. Heat is life, and cold is
cause of death. The effect of heat and life is opennesse of the body and
fluidnes; congelation and immobilitie is of cold and death. Whatsoever
tinckteth into a white color, has the nature of life and the property of
light, and power causing life; on the other side, whatsoever tinkteth into
blackness, or makes black, communicates in nature with death, and has the
nature of darkness, and power to kill. The coagulation and fixation of this
corruption is the earth with his coldness. The house is ever dead, but that
which dwells therein lives. But to proceed in our intent: we seek not to
make or have produced, by nature single, or helped by the hand of her servant
art, any such irregular monster as is contrary to any law or commandment in
the assertion of unity, or against the natural and shamefaced chastity of
natural specifications, as by the issue shall appear. We search a substance
of natural equality of Justice, exalted in Hermaphroditicall fruitfulness of
it self, above the three forenamed kinds, that it may be to every of them
generally applicable, and with their indiuiduals be made specificall to all,
and each; wherein we offer no unhallowed violence to any thing. And therefore
we say, As it is not perpetually necessary that the thing produced must ever
answer the kind of that whose seed it was, but may be and often is traduced
particularly as is said: So also is it as infalliblie true, that of a
spermaticall matter may be made naturally, a transcendent universal and
general substance, Genus generum and Forma formarum, of such property,
virtue, and efficacy as has been spoken of. And this rests for us further
to prove.

CAP. 11.
IN every of the three kinds, whereof we speak, Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals, this thing must be sought. But we must resolve of the nearest. It is
easier for nature to make air of water, then of earth. And the caruer chooses
not the whole truncke to make his images, but a piece of timber fit and ready
squared, where there is no superfluity, but that which filles up the
hollownesse, which he is to engraue: No defect but of the form, which he
must make, etc. In each of these three kinds there be considerable, The whole
entire or integrall perfected indiuidualles, Their parts, Their unprofitable
excrements, their spermes and spermaticall substance. Against all which Nature
in this work does wholly except, saving only sperme or spermaticall substance.
The whole body is concluded under all the confluence of specification: and
Nature has therein done all that she intended; and so motion cease, as
before said in the next precedent Chapter. The like reason is of parts; In
excrements many have either been mired, or drowned altogether, with what
success themselves best know, with what reason other men can judge, though
never taught by ill sauoured experience. The elementall proportion of every
thing is known only to Nature, not to man. We must neither part nor join,
but continue the application of Natures instruments, until all the Elements
appear to our sight clean, in or under one Element. For then has Nature in
that one Element weighed and measured all the Elements, whereby their
specificall Nature is wholly changed from that which it first was into a
general substance. If the foundation of this building be laid upon offals
and excrements, which have no use but for the draft, and cannot be handled
without offense of nature, nor spoken of without a Preface of reverence; surely
we are enclosed in an il favored straight. That which is unfit for norishment
of others, vnwholsom to the body wherein it is contained, intended of Nature to
no other use, but that which it has already attained, excrementitious not
only to the body from whence by excretion it is cast, but even in it self in
temperament and digestion, shall such a scorn of all things be the chief
flower in Natures Garland, or bear the key of her treasury? What though such a
matter be full of strong spirits, able to poison a man, or choke a dog? that
urges nothing; for we hope to be beholders of great wonders without perfumes,
or need of much water to wash. Nature loves cleanliness; because God has made
nothing profitable for man, to the attaining whereof he shall be compelled to
any dishonest or unseemly thing. It imports not what constructions be made
in this behalf from the shadows of good Writers, nor what Orator this opinion
has: he teaches nothing but the old repentance of young men. Believe him not
though he have five hundred on his side. So for us there is nothing left but
the seminall matter, in some of the three kinds. For the more simple the
composition of any thing is, the nearer it is to the first causes, and
communicates more abundantly with the general beginnings of all things;
because subalternate causes, authors of specificatio^, be fewer. But the sperme
or seed of every thing, Animal, Vegetable, Mineral, is more simple in
composition, and tied with fewer subalternate causes of specification, then the
body or perfect individual, whose seed it is. And therefore every seed is
nearer the first causes, and communicates more abundantly with the general
beginning, etc. And of such a substance Nature may make that general compound
we seek after. But for better declaration hereof, the differences of matrices
or wombs are necessary to be understood. And the manners of the seeds growing
and increasing in every of them, so much as concerns this present purpose:
whereof I have more amply written in the Possible Perfection of Miscibles, and
in the Possibility of Natural Transmutations.

CAP. 12.
ANimals have apparently male and female distinct in several bodies
(understand them of perfection, and for the most part of univocal generation)
And therefore distinct or several spermes: which being mixed in their proper
matrice, grow up to perfection in their own kind, as God has appointed. The
seed only is prolificall and matter of birth: The matrice is but the place,
or, as you would say, the house and Tenement ordained for the nourishing and
breeding thereof, unto such a particular end. And because every perfect thing
in this kind is far greater then the seed of which it came, the matrice
must have amongst other faculties, this one especially, To nourish. In men,
quadrupedes, and ravenous fishes in the seas, Whales, Swordfishes,
Whirlepooles, Thornpooles, Sharkes, Porkpisces, Dogfishes, and some Amphibials,
as Seals, Sea-calues, Sea-horses, etc.) they be all nourished within the body
of the mother or female, where they be conceived, though not all alike. In Men
and Quadrupedes, there be certain conducts and veins in the Matrice for that
purpose. And this nourishment is of that which the mother or female parent
receives and digesteth: and for want thereof, the birth seldom comes to
perfection, or at least is unnaturally wretched; so likewise in some
Amphibials. In the Fishes whereof we speak it is not so. For their young,
being never above two at one birth, have growing from the midst of their
navel, (or that which to them is in stead of a navel) a white pipe or vein
like a navel string, broad at the bottom, full of a thick milky substance,
whereof it may be thought they be nourished until they be spawned; other
Fishes and Fowls be (concerning this) in another difference: For Fishes,
either they first breed their Eggs, and keep them continually in their
bodies, till they be delivered of a young perfect Fish; as Thornebackes, and
such other cartilagineous or gristly fishes: or they breed Eggs, and after lay
them in a hole made upon the land in a sandy ground, which be there hatched
with the help of heat of the Sun and Sand: from whence they creep directly
to the Sea; such be Torteises and their kinds: Or they keep their Eggs about
them in the rough places under their bellies, and about their feet, as
Lobsters, Shrimps, Prawnes, Crafishes, which after be perfected in shelles. As
Lobsters be first Welkes, and in that shell by degrees perfected into their
kind, and Crabs sometimes in Oysters. But whether this be Catholic and of
Canonical perpetuity, I think no man has been in all places so general a
Mermaid, or constant Vrinator as to affirm. Or lastly they breed within
themselves imperfect Eggs, which after they cast into some scooring or
spawning place, whither the male follows, and sheddeth his sperme upon these
Eggs; so they increase, grow great, and breed young fishes: such be all kind
of fishes not before spoken of. And where some exclude Torteses and their kinds
from the generation of fishes, it is not material whether truly or not, for it
is all one to our end, which here only search the difference of matrices, and
of the seeds growing to specificall perfection. And within these differences
be all kinds of serpents. Now for fowls (we except only to us known the
featherlesse night-bird) the Bat or Reremouse, which lays no eggs, but
breeds and gives suck as other mice do, their breed and specificall
increase is by eggs: The male proiecteth his sperme into the matrice of the
female, whose office is not to bring forth a perfect bird, but an egg; which
egg supplieth the office of a matrice. For it has in it self both seeds,
masculine and feminine, by the natural appetite of the Coition of the male and
female, before the prolificall egg be formed: Also sufficient matter of
nourishment, until the bird be hatched. In which egg the natural and vital
heat of the maleseede is sensible to the tippe of a man's tongue on the outside
of the shell, as they know which steal Hawks eggs out of the eyrie. In
Vegebles every Herb and Plant is Hermaphroditical, being both male and female
it self, concerning propagation. Their natural propagation is of two sorts,
by seed, and by slip: for graffes increase in the same kind, and for the same
reasons that slips do. The seed is from one and the self same plant, made,
ripened, and cast off: it receives no help of any other, containing seminarily
both fexes in one body, and being put into fit ground in seasonable air and
time, it rises up and grows into a new plant or herb like to that from
which it came. The coats or skins wherein it is closed, differ not in use much
from the skins about the eg: the earth supplieth the wants which the seed has
in it self to increase specifically, that is, heat and norishment. For without
heat there is no attraction, without attraction no norishment. And because it
is necessary that the seed increase in quantity and greatness before it become a
plant, attraction of norishme^t is necessary for every seed: which by the other
natural faculties is altered and specificated into the substance of the plant.
The like manner of growing and increasing is in slippes and graffes.

Though Terminus a quo, the point from whence they proceed, is not so remote
from composition, nor so near to simplicity as in seeds; which also is one
reason why the increase in slips and graffes is quicker then in feeds. For
their attractiue virtue and assimilation of the nourishment is stronger, etc.
In these two kinds of Animales and Vegetables (for so much as concerns the
present purpose) we find the first difference of Matrices to be of two sorts;
Inseparable, separable. Then again of two sorts, The specificall body of the
seed prepares nourishment for the increase, or that nourishment is drawn out
of another body. The third difference is also of two sorts, The heat moving
to generation is either proper to the particular female body whose seed it
is, or indifferent to others. There is also a fourth difference, The
nourishment attracted in the immediate matrice either is specifically prepared
for the seed, or is not, but common to all the next genus: As the moisture
mineral of earth to plants. In the seed there is also a difference. The
individual at his first birth is greater then the seed and spermaticall
matter was, or not greater: for that which is properly called Semen prolificum,
the seed powerful to generation is not the whole body of the spermaticall
matter, but as it were the center thereof: As in eggs may easily in some
neerenesse be shown to the eye, and hereupon lies the demonstration of
hereditary diseases, and many other strange things in Nature, bred of this
spermaticall superfluity. The sum of these two kinds briefly is this.

1 Those things which have male and female distinct in several bodies, having a
natural appetite each to other, cannot increase or multiply their own kind
without local motion and actual copulation: whereby both seeds, may be
joined. Such be Men, Quadrupedes, Fowls, Serpents, Fishes, etc.

2 Those things which being brought forth, be greater in quantity then the
feed or spermaticall matter of which they came, must have their seed received
into such a matrice from whence they may draw sufficient nourishment, as in
men, quadrupedes, some fish, plants.

3 Those things which cannot have nourishment fitly prepared for them to
attract, but within the body into whose matrice they are received; may never be
separated from thence until the time of perfection, and their delivery; as in
men, beasts, ravenous fishes aforesaid, the Bat only amongst those that fly.

4 Those seeds which may by nature be enclosed in a convenient matrice with
apt and sufficient matter for nourishment, until the perfection of the birth,
may be separated from the body of the female, having received the masculine
seed in a separable matrice, and may be ripened either by the heat of the
same body, or of any other natural or artificial, being like and equally
temperate, as in Eggs of Fowls, and some Aquatiles.

5 Those things which being enclosed in a natural separable matrice, have not
there (...) sufficient matter for nourishment, must be sowed or planted in
another matrice, which shall supply this defect; as in plants, etc. But herein
is something further to be considered more particularly in the Animal kind,
specially between Man and Quadrupedes on the one side, and Birds or Fowls on
the other. The Eg has a hard shell without, a thin skin or membrane within
that, and another more thin and subtle about the yelk, covering and exactly
winding about the true prolificall seeds of male and female in the spermaticall
matter; whereby though the outward shell were taken away, yet the outward air
cannot immediately touch the true seed, neither the aetherious spirit
presently vanish. And before age or moisture have resolved the very sperme it
self within the eg, whether of both together, or of the solitary femals eg, it
never putrifieth. And for the same reason the eg with both spermes resists
putrefaction longer then the sole female. And, as is said of those skins
defending the sperme within the Eg, nature in like sort has ordained in man, a
womb, secondines, etc. not unlike the defense of the brain in the skull, and
2. meninges, or me^branes, called Dura matter and Pia matter: it being the most
spermaticall substance in all the body. But in men and quadrupedes, though it were
possible to receive their seed into another matrice, or separable conteiner,
and to administer heat thereunto convenient (as may be done in eggs) yet
because that seed and spermaticall matter has not within it self sufficient
matter of nourishment, but is compelled to attract from the daily nourishment
of the mother: and though this be supposed possible to be supplied, yet the
nourishment must be first digested and specificated, for that seed by the
proper and natural mother; therefore it were altogether impossible that any
natural birth should be had thereof. And moreover this kind of seed has
nothing to defend it from the immediate touch of the outward air, nor to
preserve the vital archaeical spirit in the seed, that it present lie vanish
not, and leave the body like a common excrement unprofitable. Else had Nature
without cause made the conjunction of those seeds so close, and in a matrice so
inseperable from the female body. Which shows the vanity of the Authors of
the bathing conceptions; and destroys their magneticall power of the matrices
attraction. All these Paracelsus understood very well, as in many places he
has showed. Wherefore they do him the more wrong, and have been little
exercised in contemplation of generalities, that traduce his Homunculus or
Dwarf, to any unseemly or wicked practice. Now rests the third kind of our
division, that is Minerals: which differs mainely from Animals, and agrees
very little with Vegetables. Their seed is hermaphroditicall, and that into
which the specifical form of minerality in every kind is immediately brought.
By immediately I mean, as in the seed of man: we say the form of man is
immediately brought; That is, man is the last form which Nature intends in
that seed, and the only specifical form of which that seed is naturally
capable. In this kind there is to be observed specially the difference
between it and the other two. For in plants with the first perfection of the
Species out of the seed, which is in the first germination of the green leaf
from the root, the Species is perfect but the individual body is yet weak,
tender, and imperfect, for the specificall uses of his kind. So in Animals, the
species is perfected with the first reception of the specificall form: more
notably in common acception, in parturition, or enixation: But the indiuidual
body requires time to grow up to the fullness of his natural faculties and
functions, especially of the most natural, which is to multiply in his own
kind. In Minerals it is not so; for as soon as they be perfected in their
indiuidualitie under any Species of that kind, they be in the same instant as
powerful in all dower of their natural virtues, to all uses whatsoever, as if
they had bin existently perfected 10000. ages. And of them, those that be
multiplicable, be in the same instant as powerful as any other. For the whole
body in the homogeneall matter is all seed: and is not increased by
attraction, but by apposition, etc. And generally the nearer any thing
comes, in the natural composition of his specificall indiuidualitie, to the
simplicity of the Elements, the sooner after the first perfection it is in the
full vigor, for the use of al virtues, endowments, and faculties of his
species; and contrary. Which is one reason that some animals be generatiue
sooner then others: and a good paradoxall ground for the difference of sensible
souls, and the degrees of their more or less propinquity to reason and
intellect. The consideration of this difference is very profitable in the whole
Chimicall Academie. For in those things, which being compounded are most
homogeneall, and stand in the first or nearest approximation to the simplicity
of the first symbolizing bodies, the whole substance in his open body, is
totallie or very near, all seed, regenerable into a body generable and
generatiue. The mystery of which school if any be curious to understand, let
them read good Philosophers. For certainly more then one have dealt liberally
herein. And in reading let them diligently observe and collect, whether such
seed in Metals and other Minerals be pure, or mingled with spermaticall
superfluity, as is said of the other two kinds. 2. Next whether it be to be
gotten only in the earth before the metal perfected, or lie hid also in the
complete body, and may be found by art in dissolution, and regresse from
composition to simplicity. 3. And if so, then whether it be some particular
substance by decision, or any other means natural or artificial to be
separated from it, or else only a power in it self intensiuely to receive
exaltation, and thereby enabled to give out of this exuberance unto others the
perfection of his first specifical degree. 4. Whether this seminary subject be
alike pure and homogeneall in the total and separated substances of every
metalline body. These things being thus delivered and understood; that which
remains in the necessary demonstration of this general substance will be
plain without any difficulty.

CAP. 13.
THe instruments of nature in breeding and procreation are the effects of
Spirit, In number three: Motion, Heat, Light. And that which we most look
after is Heat, which never is nor can be in any natural subject without the
other 2. nor any of them without the rest. Vbi motus talis, ibi calor talis,
and lux talis: Vbi calortalis, ibi motus talis, and lux talis: Vbi lux talis,
ibi calor talis, and motus talis. Heat is of two sorts: In ward, or natural,
of the seed or substance; the second outward or isntrumental of the matrice,
and body wherein the matrice is, or of that which is in stead thereof. By this
outward isntrumental heat the inward natural heat is stirred to actiuitie,
and from the sleepy power or bability (which only it had) brought unto, and
continued in actual working until the effect be perfected. Therefore outward
isntrumental heat must be so fitted, that it serve only to this exciting of
the inward natural heat, in most exact degree and proportion. This may be
familiarly exemplified in eggs; which often are ripened, and out of them birds
hatched by diverse manners of heat; Not only by incubation and sitting of the
same hen, or any other of the same species whose eggs they were, but of some
other foul, and also by any other like heat: be it of sand, ashes, etc. being
continued in equal adaptation. That which is spoken of the heat of man's
body, as under his arme-pits or any other part, is senslessee for the
uncertainty of temper, with variety, satiety, want of meat, and drink, and
sleep, and passions alters the heat both subiectiuely and in degree, almost
every moment. Besides the sweattie perspiration passes the shell, and causes
putrefaction. Nature has given us the first experiments of this reason: as in
the Amphibials before spoken of: Job 39.17.
and in the Ostrich, which leaves her eggs in the earth and makes them hot
in the dust, and forgets that the foot might scatter them, or that the wild
beasts might break them: he shows himself cruel unto his young ones, as
they were not his, and is without fear, as if he travailed in vain, etc. Too
much heat roasteth, whereby the spirit of life in the seed is destroyed, and
the substance is as it were vitrificat. Too little heat makes no perfect mixture
of the agents and patie^ts; and produces no reciprocal actio^ and passion,
whereby the work begun proceeds not, but the matter rots, and the spirits
decay. A disco^tinued heat breaks off natures work, so that the natural
heat beginning to work in the seed to propagatio^, dies in it self, and can
never be restored again, because the spirit of life in the same seed also
dies: And so the matter being of easy mixture and composition putrifieth,
without life or power of life, to an unprofitable end. But it is not so in the
things of stronger mixture and compositio^ being nearer to the simplicity of
the first materialities of bodies co^pounded. And therefore not so easily
subject to destractiue putrefaction. Because their very corporal co^pounding
parts be symbolizing near the degree of the prime symbolizing bodies, not
altered out of the circle and latitude of the species digested or co^cocted;
except there be addition of something extraneall in the mixture. For then the
whole co^pound concerning specification yields to the predominance of the
virtuall predominant in the mixture: Yet still is preserved within the
denomination and general essence of the next immediate genus of that species;
not exceeding that circle or latitude, except it be directed to our known
period of universality. The matrice being open or not perfectly closed, the
spirit of life with his heat and light of life, flies away unto the Catholic
fountain of all natural spirits, Heat and Light: and so leaves the matter
dead: as in Mines of metals, if there be any vent or passage by which the
mineral spirit may vapor out or fly, that never comes to perfection,
experimental objections be made against this, but none grounded on reason, A
radice mineralitatis metallicae. An open stomach never digesteth well. But
herein is a difference obseruable between Animals, Vegetables and Minerals.
For in Animals the seeds and spermes do utterly perish, nay even the formed
Embryons by the opennes of the matrice; and the formed chickens in the egg
either by discontinuing the heat, or a little crack in the shell.

Of Vegetables we see seeds lying on the face of the earth on stones and walls
to shoot their roots, stalks, burgeons and leaves, which die afterward for
want of nourishment, after they have spent in corporal augment that natural
humidity and nutritive substance which the seed in his separable matrice
contained. But in Minerals we find, that though some part of the matter
exhale and fly through the opennes of the matrice, yet that which remains
may be brought afterward to his full specificall perfection if the matrice be
closed again. And this is a good and obserueable ground to inuestigate the
true seed of all mettalles, the manner of ripening them, their generation,
regeneration, and exuberation: Also to confirm the doctrine of homogeneitie of
that which is most perfect in the metalline predicament: also of the
symbolizing of the corporal metalline Elements before spoken of. Being
understood it is a key opening the door of many mystical vestries in Hermes
temple. And so we see, that it is impossible for any thing to attain natural
perfection more then it has, without natural motion, such as nature uses in
generation and augmentation: Therefore in all times and in all matters the
cautions here delivered must be carefully observed. That the seed may be
brought to such motion and enabled to receive the benefit of such natural
exaltation. The reasons and causes why every thing is particularized in his
birth are two. The first, because it is kept and bred up in a matrice where it
is fed and nourished with nourishment by a specificated body, which in things
not hermaphroditicall we may prove true by monsters begotten between male
and female specifically differing. The second, because the feed and
spermaticall matter is so straightly enclosed in the matrice, that the elements
cannot be enlarged to any unbridled circulare motion by which only is
acquired that last excellent perfection of which we speak. One probable
argument of this is, that minerals be more general and powerful in effect
then either Vegetables, Animals, or any other superterraneals: And the heavens
more then they. For the Elements so communicate in their symbolicall qualities,
that they never cease to work each on other. The earth striving to overcome
and transmute the water, and to bring the fire in accord therewith; likewise
the air, with the water and fire, water with earth and air, fire with air
and earth, And finally all with all to make one, etc: and if it happen the
combat of Elements: to be in a matter, having the properties of life before
spoken of (though it live in a dead house,) and that in a matrice or
receptacle, where they cannot be dispersed, nor the spirits fly out, Their
Ambition of victory and transmutation must needs end at last and determine in
some natural compounded body which shall not be specificated to any kind,
Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral. But that in application it may be above them
all, such as this generality of matter must needs produce. For where the
matter is the most simple and pure mixture of Elements, indefinite,
indeterminate, and this matter continued in natural motion, without dispersing
the elements or spirits, without any adition of other matter, It is impossible
that the action of the active and passion of the passive should ever cease, so
long as the causes continue, that is any inequality in the formalities of
these elements. By which means there must needs be produced a body of most
exact and absolute temper, wherein no element is predominant: such is the ninth
temperament of which Galen speaks, and of late writers is called the
temperament of justice: which they deny not to be at some time really in some
Man; but allow it not to continue any time, because of the momentany
alteration, which that body suffers, by reason of the triangular
specification. If therefore they will grant this in such a market of meats and
sallets, as man is, why may we not boldly require it much more in such a body
as we speak of? which having gotten his perfection in the fire by the natural
triumph of all elements in a quintessentiall body, must needs hold this exact
temperament and the dowers thereof inuiolably against all elementall forces.
For if this exact measure of digestion be complete in a substance not yet
restrained from the latitude and indifferency between general and
specificall; the cause of such momentany alteration is taken away: especially
if in the choice of the root; the number of the angles be answerable. And
then it must needs be reduced unto, and rest in an homogeneall substance of
most perfect natural unity: more permanent in being, and victorious over all
elements, then any mineral, even gold it self, remaining in his metalleitie.
In which work the thing produced exceedes not in quantie, the first
spermaticall substance, because there is no attraction of nourishment: But the
moist is food to the dry, the cold to the hot, the dry to the moist, and hot
to the cold. So they change and are changed, until they be all in equal
strength and proportion geometrically anatised, inseparably united in one body.
And before the matter comes to this point it is never properly said to be one,
or unity. For as a true unity suffers no division, either in descending
into fractions, or ascending to warring dualitie; so this substance being more
transcendent then any natural substance of Aristotle's predicament, and having
no heterogeneall parts of different composition, mixture, and temper, neither
any notion of such difference, is and must needs be the most perfect absolute
unity of all natural sublunare compounds. The like whereof nature alone and
of her self could never produce, being hindered by the foresaid causes of
specificall definitions; but requires the band of Gods image, and then is able
of her self to effect that, which before she could not adapt. For man being
so much above nature by how much he is more then others illumined and formally
essensificated of a divine intellect, does in many things help nature to
proceed naturally farther by many degrees, then she could without that help,
and so in the excellence of nature either exceeds, or greatly inricheth
nature in the production of natural effects. But whether nature alone has
produced and left enclosed in any natural body this mystical transcendent,
and real existing predicament, it is a great question. Doubtless she has in
a certain number, and masked under a definition of determinate uses in the
philosophy of generations. But she has not, neither ever shall per se,
without the help of our science and art, act and produce it in the number which
we admire; nor unmasked in the glorious triumph over Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals, being in a high freedom of generality, indifferent to all, Genus
generum and Forma formarum naturalium. And so we may truly say, that this
matter whereof we speak (at which so many good Archers have bent their bows)
is a natural thing brought forth in his vnueiled glory by the help of art;
yet is it, neither natural nor artificial, but has a nature and essence,
exceeding common capacity: And to know in what form or body this strange
son of the elements shall arise, and in what attire he shall be presented to
the world at his first nativity, we must consider the sphericall scale or
ladder of natural things: wherein we shall find an admirable beauty and
proportion.

The last of which sphere being Man, a reasonable Creature, stands in place
and nature next unto spirits: and they both next under God transcende^t above
the sphere of Creatures. Between these two we find things in descent less
noble then spirits, more noble and perfect then Man, concerning his elementall
dowry, and durability of his body. In ascent less noble then Man, concerning
that form whereby he is called Man, and a fellow servant with spirits, more
noble then the spirits concerning their immediate application to natural things
for perfection. These be the heavens with all their parts and distinctions:
the Elements, Mineral, Plantall, Animal: whereby it plainly appears that
those things whose use is most general to the perfection before spoken, of
elementall natural bodies, are farthest from the simplicity of spirits: But
those things which be farthest from the simplicity of spirits, have in their
natural being least show and appearance of the effects of spirit. And where the
effects of spirit in thenaturall body be most apparent, that body is in the
sphere removed by most differences and specifications from the Elements. So is
Plantall farther then Mineral, and Animal then Plantal: and in the Animal
kind, though humane agree with the rest, as having the natural life in blood,
yet it goes one degree further by that spark of divine irradiation, by which
it is essentially formed with an immortal substance; which though diversely
traducible and passive by the natural part of the common Genus in the Organs
whereof it works, yet either in real or conte^platiue sequestration
comprehends Notions of al divine and immortal things, and so verily finds
it self in the rank of immortal essences, and spiritual life's. This thing
therefore we speak of, being the regeneration of Elements in every elementarie
body, and made with rest and peace purchased with the war of his own
unmingled, vndispersed, undefiled Elements, must needs be the mean or center
of this sphere, the first compound under heaven having no proper name of his
own to us known: yet necessarily appearing in that shape which the elements
in their first composition, not restrained by the specificating causes
aforesaid must needs produce. That is Minerale fluidum: this is Aqua viscosa,
Aquae permanens, and the Philosophers Mercury, sought of many, found of few.
The passage of all natural causes of this birth, Raymond Lullie well
understood in the first Book of his Testament, being of Theorie, in the figure
proceeding from Elements to Metals, and from Metals to Elements, by eight
letters: A.B.C.D. E.F.G.H. which we have therefore here set down; wherein we
give but this one note, that it is a matter of deep understanding, how G. and
H. be immediate, that is, Sulphur Aqueum and Metalla, for it contains a great
practicke mystery.



This heptagonall is in all natural generations truly circular.

The scale of degrees and differences in descent and ascent, of which we speak,
here follows.

Scala Magica naturalis.
Deus
Potestas Voluntas Spiritus Synthesis Materia 1 1 Animal Analysis Angeli 2
Rationale Coelum divisor 3 2 Animalia. Caelum stellatum 4 3 Plantae Elementa 5
4 Minerae Minerae 6 5 Elementa Plantae 7 6 Coelum stellatum Animalia 8 7 Coelum
divisor Animal 9 8 Angeli Rationale. 9 Materia.

CAP. 14.
FOr our better understanding herein, let us consider the History of the
Creation, That there be two waters; superior, inferior; Two earths, Eden, and
therest without and about it: Two waterings, Cohobation by the miste ascending
out of the earth without attraction; Another by rain attracted out of the
earth and lower globe by heat; Two Cultures or Manurings, natural without the
help of man, and artificial by the help of Man. The waters being
spiritualized, and having received motion, light and heat, were parted into
superior, and inferior. The inferior as connaturall to the superior, and of
the same womb communicate with them (though in less measure) in this rich
birthright.

The inferior waters being coupled in marriage with their natural and equal
Spouse the earth, enriched her with fruitfulness, as a mean by God appointed
in the Law of Nature by him created and established. And of all the earth that
Sanctuary of Gods Image and glory, the Garden Eden had the pre-eminence. This
chosen earth was made fruitful by water of miste or vapor, ascending out of it
self, and again descending upon it. This miste the earth did yield of her
natural air and portion of spirit, and heat conceived in the universal
coupling, as it were ingendering with the Waters in the first darkness. The
second watering, by rain, God caused to begin after the Stars, and Man
were created. It comes naturally by attraction of the Sun and other
Stars, and the violence of winds from the earth, particularized in such sort
as of the Stars, etc. before is said. And because the heat of the sun is
not always alike in any place of the earth, no not in the same anniuersary
day, hour, nor season; neither the sun, etc. alike near, and aspected at
all times to the same place; neither matter vaporous ever in like quantity,
quality, and readiness to be attracted: beside the particularities of other
Astronomicall and Physical observations; therefore the rain is not always in
the same measure, time, and season. Hence come unseasonable times in the four
quarters, too hot, or too cold, too wet, or too dry, and so in complexion, with
impurities of the first mixture mineral, new diseases; and much trouble. But
where the earth is watered by vapor or miste begotten in darkness, ascending
from it self, and again descending, no such mischances happen. But Nature
rejoicing and well pleased with her self, earth and water is made fruitful
unto perfection. And then the two Cultures or Manurings are both necessary, and
cannot fail of a good blessing: but from Elements simple, become Elements
elementate in the first mixture simply quintessentiall, impregnate with
aethereall nourishing, not burning fire: whereof resulteth this Catholic
unity, general in application to all things, which we seek for and so much
admire, and shall rejoice to have found. These two Cultures are, the one
natural by Coh^bation; the other artificial by man, attending only the
select earth or Garden to dress and keep it, not having swallowed the fruit
of dualitie, the apple of evil: nor being driven, or selfe-straying out of this
Garden into other ground, where not such miste or vapor does arise; and which
is watered with the rain of the time of generations and corruptions. This is
that ladder in Nature of Angels ascending and descending between heaven and
earth. This is the hoope of pure gold, round, endless, and bottomless, and
inscribed according to the truth and true resemblance, Imago spei, the natural
wedding ring of these two great parents of natural things. This is the
continual springtide of never vading greennes in the Emerauld, the wealth of
Hermes his Smaragdine Table, True without leasing, most true, The strong
strength of all (natural) strength, because it will overcome every subtle,
and pierce every solid thing, etc.

Cuius vis est Integra, si versa fuerit in terram.
FINIS.

