A Comfortable MEDITATION OF Humane Frailty, AND Divine Mercy: IN TWO SERMONS
upon PSALM 146.4. AND PSALM 51.17. The one chiefly occasioned by the death of
Katharine, youngest Daughter of Mr. Thomas Harlakenden of Earles-Cone in Essex.

1 Thessalonians. 5.9,10,11,12. God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain
salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ:

Who died for us; that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with
him.

Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one another, even as ye
also do.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for James Boler, dwelling at the sign of the
Marigold in PAVLS Churchyard. 1630.

SIC te, sic solare tuas; sic Iusta bentae
Solve tuae, nullo dissoluenda die.
Nec me cognatae, (...) salisque laboris,
Nec natae poterit poenituisse patrem.
Ipse oculos madidus, nobis detergis ocellos,
Consortemque ^enes, qua potesusque tuam.
Non satis est viva prolis quod imagine vivit
Phoenix Materno quae velut orta rogo est;
Ipsam sed superesse velis, dum plectra Davidis
Tang^, Threicia plus va^ra lyra.
Iam Mausolaei superasti dona sepulchri,
Hoc saxa officium vincit, and era tuam.
Non aurum, nec ebur; sed qua Sacraria condis
Sacra est materies, nobiliorque tibi.
Nempe decet castam casta requiescere iniurna,
Et quem viva locum semper amavit, habet
Scripturis tumulata sacris, ubi conditur urna
Carmen, and artifices exsuperante manus.
Sigeneris, formaeve canam, morumve decorem,
Vile, ait, hoc Sanctus mun^, and imp^ honor.
Singula deliban^ plenum mutilabit acervum,
Hujus and enumerans plurima, parous erit:
Innumeras melius dictura silentia lauds.
Sed tu perge viam, fide marite, sacram.
Et si quae facimus sanctissima sentiat umbra,
Non aliter vellet te meminisse sui.
Mors indignatur, dehinc frustra and fata minantur,
Dum parat, amissam qui dolet, ipse mori,
Vivere te suadente mori est: Dum Spiritus exit
Vita ego sperarim liberiore frui.
Non ego lectorem moror ultra, maxima cujus
Ingenii pars est officiosus amor.
T. R.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL Mr. THOMAS HARLAKENDEN, his loving Father.
THat which in some part you have heard, I now make a visible word, first to
quicken a little the memory of that good soul now with God, to whom you had
the relation and love of a father: Secondly, to do you the office of comfort
and gratitude amidst our great loss, and indeed, according to the equity of
Gods own Law, none should make an Epitaphicall Monument to that name rather
than my self, because none on earth is so nigh of kin. And, o that I might
say, what she, though in Paradise, yet does; even as the faith of righteous
Abel, he being dead, yet speaks: O that I might raise out that example and
copy of goodness, out of yours and mine, and much other private knowledge:
For the kingdom of Heaven, the grace of Christ in her, it was Thesaurus in
agro absconditus, A treasure, a pearl of price, private, and hidden in a field
of humble innocence: Simon the son of Onias, was (as says the son of
Syrach) both a fair Olive, and a tall Cypress tree: but she was no haughty
Cypress (the more barren, the more high) an Olive, if you will, of love and
humble growth, or a fruitful Vine of low stature, as says the Prophet, Ezech.
17.6. Yet the shadow, the honor of her virtues, it shall follow, yea though
she did not affect it, but seemed to fly from it rather, from appearances into
the heart: God will have her honored, he complains by his Prophet, that the
righteous should be taken away without this good testimony, or with a
non-considering. Clavus fixus in loco fideli, (as the Prophet speaks,) A nail
fastened so sure; her blessedness can no whit be improved, or impaired, by
what we report. Yet let her light shine, even for the glory of the grace of
God, such a goodness should not lie in the grave of our private meditation.
Iehojakim and his like let them go; God would have them punished with
rottenness in their memory, that they shall not have a man to say so much, as
Ah my brother, ah Lord, or ah his glory: But this his servant the Lord
provides her of an everlasting remembrance, and all that knew her best, are
known to mourn most for such a bud, a flower not much past the spring so
fallen. She fell in her prime, I am sure not unpitied, not unwished for.
Artemisia Queen of Caria, so dearly did she rue the death of Mausolus her
husband, that by eating his heart in powder, she thought even to incorporate it
to hers, and after erected him the Mausolaeum, that worlds wonder: and feign I
would, as you see, some little pillar to perpetuate and keep up a while in the
world that grace we are now speaking of: but what is mine endeavor at the best,
more than a vapor that appears for a little time; and then vanishes quite
away. So you have the first reason why these weak notes dare come into public
light.

The other is a duty to the root of that branch: And first, of consolation. It
pleasing the Almighty to resume that gift he newly had bestowed by your
hands, this caused me, as much as ever did any thing, to look about me, even
as far as to mine own grave; for, Si hoc in viridi, quid in arido? and the
issue of some thoughts that may come now to your review. The sum is, that we
set our good, our loss, and her advantage together. A Christian at death parts
but with a body, and that to a fall rest, for it is totally insensible, and
perceives neither privation, nor presence of good or evil: And they that are
long and much exercised in this life, know what a good it is to be quit of
evil: Why died not I in the birth, for so, says Job, should I now be at rest
with the Kings and Counselors of the earth, and why is life given to the
bitter in soul, who long and dig for death more than for hid treasures, and
rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they find the grave? Job 3.

Again, the body of a good soul rests in full hope for the temple of the
Holy Spirit, the instrument of his graces and virtues, yea, the member of Jesus
Christ: reason, if it has any light of God in it, would show that such a thing
must not see final corruption, that have a better resurrection. See you, I
pray, the story of the dying mother with her seven sons, 2 Macchab. 7. But
bodily dissolution is painful, and what can a moment of time bring? Yea, many
suffer not by once dying, what others do with patience in a living death of
the Colic, Gout, Scyatica, and the like: and through age and consumptions,
dying is often times with pain in a manner impenceptible, in which case sure the
Lord dealt mildly with this his own servant, my yoke fellow, he tempered her
suffering according to her feeble ability: but the pain, what ere it is, by
Gods own appointment, is the only way and passage to endless joy and bliss:
And wise Heathen, out of a mere pang of moral magnanimity, have taken it up
with comfort: A Christian then should hear it, assisted with such a promise,
and grace; and spirit, even with God himself. Thus for what concerns the
body, a Christians death you see it should not be our discomfort.

And most of him, his soul it in blessefull being after death, and the dead
live, that we need not doubt to talk of our deceased friends, as alive, my
sister, my brother, my wife, for they live, though not with us, yet much
better: Wherefore it were a wrong to them, even our discomfortable vain wish,
that would have them back from God, which they by no means can desire; yea,
we should wrong our God and Savior, so to undervalue the immediate communion
with him in glory for a vile world: And we should wrong our selves, not to
make Gods will ours, and not to yield our passive obedience in some good
measure, when the event especially has revealed his will to us: for besides
the making vain our daily prayer, Our Father, Thy will be done, we strive
against the unavoidable will of God, as if a man should think much, because
he cannot with his toe overturne the globe of the earth: And what reason have
we to look for such a privilege, which is not incident to our nature, as the
case now is? a non subjection to death, can any one of all those millions which
come betwixt Adam and doomes-day say he had it? Besides, what thousands, as we
see, does a plague, or a siege, or a set battle devour together, that walls
and bridges have been made of the dead carcasses, and a poor mercenarie
Soldier so rightly estimates this common debt of our nature, even to venture
upon it hourly for a small pay, especially if he has a forward Leader: Malus
mi^es qui Imperatorem gemens sequitur, says Prosper. And we that have Jesus
Christ himself our Guide and Captain, and the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, with all our holy Ancestors, our fore runners, should we repine and
think so very hardly, and be so very heartlesse for death? Honorificum est
ex illo calice bibere quem Imperator noster delibavit, It is our honor, our
comfort, to be admitted to the fellowship and communion of the Lords cup; yea,
Christ has taken down the bitterness of the cup of death, and has left us
but the (...), as the Apostle speaks, Col. 1. That which is behind; some
relic of his affliction, as it were a drop to the Ocean: for Christ has not
foretasted only, but sanctified and sweetened this cup for us, because by the
virtue and merit of his death, he has separated hell from us, that the death
of Christ is the death of death, we can be no worse by death, if we be in
Christ, than that from a sinful and frail life, we enter into possession of
an estate or life happy and good above all the heart of man can conceive, an
exceedingly exceeding eternal weight of glory, as the Apostle speaks. Hence
S. Austen checks himself; What cause have I to mourn for a mother, of whose
happiness I may be so well assured? And I would not have you to be ignorant
concerning them which are asleep, says the Apostle, that ye sorrow not even
as others which have no hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4. It is our ignorance, it is a
scandal, which Christians give to Infidels, and to the ungodly, not to be
somewhat comfortable in death: Christiani genus hominum morti expeditum, says
Tacitus, according to the old (...), a Christian is as a man undaunted in death
through faith of a better life: And we, if we had the faithful comprehension
of the blessed promises we might have, it would make us to take up our cross
with joy: Gaudeo deais quae patior, I rejoice in my sufferings, Col. 1.24. You
see the way, that we may be steadfast in our faith, even to ground our hearts on
Christ through the word and spirit: the excess of our fear arises from the
defect of our faith. And now to bring your consolation home, or a little near.
Now your child has her property, her part in Christ and all his benefits:
You see my confidence, did the Lord ever fail to build on the ground she has
laid, true Christian humility? God gives grace unto the humble, the grace of
remission, and the grace of regeneration, and the grace of perseverance in
both, so that in Grace, humility in the first, second, and third, as S. Austen
says truly: And could a soul be more truly lowly and meek, than that we now
commemorate. The Lord had molded her of an ingenuous, innocent, and tender
frame, both of mind and body, even for himself, and before the Lamb of God
in her white stole of spotless innocence and joy, she now is and shall be
for evermore, amidst the spirits of the just, who in part are come to their
perfection, so it might suffice to our comfort, to have said she was humble.
Yet I will tell you of that you know her righteous, even and just disposicion.
And her religion, Lord thou know it, and I know it, and cannot forget it,
how constant in the study of Scriptures? Those of devotion, especially the
Psalms of David: and how continual in the sacrifice of her prayers, thou
did smell therein a savor of rest: yea Lord, thou know she was a pious
Monitor, have we not heard this of her, alas we have not prayed together to
day: And because a renewed preparing, a special stirring up of the graces that
be in us, is required to that maine part of a Christian to dye well and
comfortably, I might much assure you in this too: So had her native and
accidental weakness inured and minded her long before of the peril she was
to pass, not without an expectance of death in it: And to that purpose the
tracts of holy devotion and preparation, they were the most of her study and
meditation: The conclusion is, so humble, innocent an heart and life, of which
you had the experimental knowledge, it must be, it is crowned with an happy
death.

Thus I have said enough for your comfort, if not too much for me, and better
might have beseemed another pen or tongue, as some may censure; but let them
think as they will, it is no love of error, yea, the duty of remembrance, it
was due to the Lords servant now at rest and in peace: and the office of
consolation, not like to be done by another, was due to you that remain on
earth.

And lastly, I would have extant a testimony of my gratitude to you, of whose
integrity, and love, and godly humility, I have had good experience. And
though God has pleased to make a breach upon the bond which caused the union
and relation between us, and great distance of place and dwelling, may
threaten to divide, and cut me off from you, yet I must reckon you ever amongst
my best friends. And by the name we have now treated of, and what ere was
dear in it, I pray you let me be one of yours still: Yea, let this writing lie
by you, to inform you thus much, that it proceeds from a mind deeply affected
to you and yours. And the Lord Jesus Christ bless you all eternally.

Beckingham in Lincoln. June 16. 1630. Your very loving Son, Thomas
Williamson.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
PSALM. 146.4. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth, in that very
day his thoughts perish.


THis Psalm, and the rest to the end, are much-what of one kind, both for
manner and matter, and something may be said not unusefully from both. Their
method or manner is (...), a circular praying the Lord; like the heavens they
move in a circle, and have recourse to the same point; at Hallelujah is the
beginning, and at Hallelujah is the ending.

And this may be (...), a circular doctrine or instruction, that after this
manner we look up to God in all our designs, not as first disposer or mover
only, but as founder and finisher, a and o, first efficient, and supreme end,
to whom all our strength and service refers and bows, like the sheaves of
Jacobs sons to the sheafe of Joseph.

Again, the matter of these five last Psalms, the whole of them is but
Hallelujah; praise ye the Lord, runs like the blood in the veins, quite
through them.

And why may not this instruct us too, even wherein is every good man's duty, to
praise God thoroughly, and perpetually? The Lord our God, the keeper of Israel,
neither sleeps, nor slumbreth; and his Angels, or Seraphims cease not to
sing, Holy, Holy; and Satan and his Angels are ever in circuit to devour us,
and our indevotion to good is ever stealing on us; therefore we should not
content our selves with good beginnings, like the Church of Ephesus, nor
presume of mercy at the end, and be stark dead in the middle, like the Church
of Sardis; we should not rest in this, that we lift up our lips sometime to the
Lord in the morning, or end in the evening in our accustomed devotions, unless
the heart and matter of our day, our life be well bestowed: according to our
model here, we should be enwoven and wrought quite through; our maine bent
should be a Hallelujah to praise the Lord with all our might, as David did with
all Israel at the bringing home of the Arc, being very sensible whenever we
cease to be of service to the Lord, as David was grieved for the breach in
Vzzah, and therefore called it Perez-Vzzah, 1 Chronicles. 13. Now the Psalm in hand
is first Eucharisticall, a vow of perpetual praise to the Lord, in the two
first verses. Secondly, Paraineticall; it exhorts to it upon maine reason in
the residue of the Psalm.

Praise ye the Lord. Praise the Lord O my soul: While I live I will praise
the Lord; while I have any being; that is, O my mind or understanding meditate
thou on God, know him o my will or inmost affection, my very heart-root be
thou set for God, yea, and that not for a mood or humor only, sed quum adhuc
ego sum; while I live, while I have any being, I shall praise the Lord through
all times, places, and occasions.

Here is the man after God his own make; So let us awaken our selves, so
speak, and so do, James the second. Especially we who succeed the Psalmist in
office, so should we foretaste, and pre-digest the heavenly gift, and the
powers of the world to come, and speak of our God out of experience, or out of
a sense of that peace and grace which we preach; and this is Clarigatio, as
the Roman heralds use to speak, an Hallelujah, a denouncing war against hell
and sin, with a shrill and piercing sound.

Again, the Psalm is exhortative, pressed with good reason. The sum is
this; Stick close to the Lord by faith and love, for fruitless and vain is
all other confidence in comparison; in God there is much good will and
goodness, in God there is infinite ability and power, in God there is
eternal being, he rules for ever, as we see from the fifth verse to the end.
But humane succor that must fail us needs, sometime in will, sometime in
power, ever in duration, as in the third and fourth verses, Put not your trust
in Princes, nor in the son of man in whom there is no help: His breath goes
forth, etc.

Indeed, Christ is the Prince of peace, happy are we that have him our hope,
for as he is the son of man, the branch of David; so he is germen Iehovae,
the seed of Jehovah, Esa. 4.2. The Lord our righteousness, Ierem. 23.5. Ex
homine, non per hominem, borne of a woman, but by the Holy Ghost, and the
fulness of the Godhead dwells in him personally, that the help of Christ,
is the help of God.

But mere sons of men; every second cause whatsoever is no salvation, no solid
help, no merit or efficacy to build upon. The grace of a Prince is a shade
under which all flesh is glad to feed, Dan. 4. and Seneca wondereth how
Polybius could weep, Propitio Caesare, being in grace with Caesar: yet put not
your trust in Princes, not in the ingenious (as the word signifies) or
magnificent? No: Then the Psalmist takes off our trust from all the world, and
there is not that thing in it which is to be trusted and celebrated for ever,
because nothing in the world is for ever, and God his Deputies in office, are
filii hominis, in essence like other men: and so the best humane confidence is
but pons sublicius, a wooden bridge, very ready to sink under us; yea, scipio
arundincus, as he said of the King of Egypt, a broken reed, perilous to be
trusted on, when the waves of death, and judgment, and spiritual distresses
arise and swell; and therefore Hallelujah, praise God, and do not deifie or
propose to your hearts a rest in the creature, for it is all mutable.

His breath goes forth, he returns to the earth, in that very day his
thoughts perish. Here a treble note of humane imbecility: First, from that
which is the form or the fountain of lively being; Spiritus exit, His spirit,
or his breath goes forth: Secondly, from the matter that he is made of; Et
revertetur in terram s^am, and he shall return into his earth: Thirdly, from
the effects that he purposes or produces; In illo die pertbunt omnes
cogitationes little, in that very day his thoughts perish.

The word spirit is sometime taken substantially for the soul, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit, Acts 7. And the spirit returns to God that gave it,
Eccles. 12. So Saint Jerome and others take this place, his soul goes forth
according to that, as her soul was going forth or departing, Genesis 35.18.

Again, it is used effectually for breath or respiration; Aufer spiritum, Take
away their breath, and they die, Psalm. 104.29. And the body without the spirit
is dead, that is, without breath, James 2. For compare breath to a massy body,
and such is the rarity of it, or thinness, that it seems to be a spirit or
spiritual; and consider it with the soul, and such is the use of it, that it
seems no less to inform the body, than the spirit it self, by which it is.
But the argument is good however the word be taken: say our very essence, and
form, and soul is fleeting as a Pilgrim, and ready to pass from its Inn, to
go forth of the body, therefore Hallelujah, fasten mainly upon Jehovah,
because man is very soon out of being, so soon done, his soul goes forth.
Again, what a brittlenesse is this? if we say a breath, an aerie substance, so
thin and vanishing it is, that it is scarce visible, if we say a breath, it
is a tie which combines soul and body, and props up even Princes from
mouldring into ashes. Beside the Heavens and the Elements, God made man for his
glory, a creature able to conceive him, and to speak and declare his
excellency, and by those two rich donatives, (...), and (...), understanding
and speech; the Lord put man in a state of perfection, denied to all other
creatures below, namely, to be admitted into the immediate presence of God, and
most especially to behold and publish his glory, and so a soul understanding
and reasonable; animus aeterna mente delibatus, (as the Orator speaks) a
spirit breathed into man by the immediate act of God himself; it is such a
dowry wherein man is far nobler and better than the very heavens, and
therefore man had need of somewhat to abate the rising thoughts of the soul,
and the Lord has given us therefore Stimulum in carne, a mortality in the body
to buffet us; His breath goes forth.

Yea, there is the deaths head, the mortality of man indeed, that a very breath
is as much as his being is worth: Our soul that spiraculum vitarum, the Lord
inspired it, not into Adams eye or ear, or mouth, but into his nostrills,
which may show to man his imbecility, Cujus anima in naribus, whose soul is
in his nostrills, and depends upon a breath as it were, for the very soul
must away, if but breath expires, soul and breath go forth both together.

Now hear ye this, all ye People, ponder it high and low, your Castle is
built upon a very air, the subsistence is in flatu narium, in a blast, that
is out in the twinkling of an eye; Wherefore David makes a question, saying,
Domine, quid est homo? Lord, what is man? He answers himself also; Man is a
vanishing shadow, Psalm. 144. (...), A shadow of smoke, or (...), the dream of
a shadow rather (as the Poet speaks.) And blessed therefore are the poor in
spirit, this advantage have all afflicted ones, that they have checks enough to
call them home, to make them see they be but men: The curtain of honor,
profit, or pleasure, hard it is and rare to draw that aside, when it is spread
over us, man in honor understands not, Psalm. 49. To great ones therefore be
it spoken, the Psalm intends it to very Princes, His br^th goes forth.

And breathless man, who before amazed the bruit creature by the majesty of
his eye, no better is he to the eye now, than the dust and gravel, and chill
clay under our shoe: -- Iacet ingens littore truncus,
Avulsumque humeris caput, and sine nomine corpus.


The Poet speaks of King Priam. Now cease from the man whose breath is in his
nostrils, Isay 2. Ten thousand graves, and worms, and passing-bels, cannot
give us a truer touch. Waldus, a rich Merchant of Lions, seeing a man on the
sudden breathe his last in the streets: So was he taken with it, that as
suddenly he turned his old course, fell to study the Scriptures, and became in
earnest a Preacher, and Founder of the Christians called Waldenses: Ye see
what a point this is, and of what use, his breath goes forth. Our Savior hid
himself from the unsought honors of the Jews: and so should we, had we
learned but this, we would withdraw sure from the perilous dignities and
delights of the times. But as Julius Caesar, the same morning he went out to
sue for the Priesthood, saluting his mother said, Domum nisi Pontificem se non
reversurum, That he would never come home but high Priest: So (my brethren in
the Ministry) do not some of us in pursuit of honor, take leave of our
charge, which should be as our mother dear unto us; but we go out, as
resolved not to come to residence without an high Priesthood; for we never
think on it, that our spirit has but this to show for its residence in the
world, a breath, and if the Lord dash that, we die, if he take away his finger,
we fall away like water: Now therefore, that we may all grow to more
sincerity, let us, I pray you, accustom our ears and eyes to man dying, it
would certainly loosen us much from this world, to see, and to feel, and to
handle this truth, as it were, his spirit, his breath goes ^orth. And this for
the substance of the act, the going forth of the spirit, ye see what it
means.

See we now the continuednesse, Exit, it goes; as if it were now presently in
its pass to show this, that Homo vivens contin^ e moritur, That by the very
act of living we are dying, that life is a continued death, our candle
lightens, consumes and dies: as in the passing of an houre-glasse, every
minute some sand falls, and the glass once turned, no creature can entreat
the sands to stay, till they are drawn out: So is our life, it shortens and
dies every minute, and we cannot beg a minute of time back, and that we call
death, is but the term of it, or consummation; Vita ultimo die finitur, omni
perit, says Seneca: Many be our partial or petty deaths, sorrow, sickness,
mishap, but death is enclosed in the bowels of our life, and is essential with
it. Spiritus exit: His spirit goes forth. Lycurgus said, that according to the
threefold age of man, a threefold salutation might be used, you are welcome,
or you come in a good hour; God keep you, or stand in a good hour; God speed
you, or go in a good hour: to show that from the age of fifty and forward,
we are taking our leave, our spirit is going forth, but so frail and fluid is
life, that at all ages and times we may be bid, God speed, we may have our
Vale, or go in a good hour. For once imbarqued, we are going to the Port. The
going out of the Cradle is the entering into the grave, to have a beginning and
to be borne, is to breed or be in travel, yea to be darted, or put in a
slight to an end; Therefore Thales was wont to say, that there is no difference
between life and death, and being thereupon demanded, Tu ergo quid non
moreris? Why do not thou dye then? Because, says he, there is no
difference: So that if we seek the act of living, our hearts, if we be wise,
should be established against dying, because life and death are essential to
one another, or include one another, and it is as natural to dye, as to live,
and in themselves therefore to be regarded both alike: Quid ergo novi, si
mortalis natus moriatur? Let it not be strange to us, that we should die,
being borne dying or mortal. His spirit goes forth: Exit. And to us that be
Ministers in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, let this word be to us a
remembrance, like Bezaleel and Aholibah, by the grace that is given us, we are
master builders, but of the Lords Tabernacles, or Church militant on the earth,
and we are gentle among you, says the Apostle, even as a Nurse cherishes her
children, affectionately desirous of you, 1 Thessalonians. 3. even so with piteous
heart^ look we upon our charge, for they be earthly tabernacles, dying men
and women: their soul and spirit stand upon their lips as it were: It goes
forth; Spiritus exit. O let us tender them therefore, and apply our present
speedy relief, lest they fall out of our hands, before we have dispensed them
the bread of life, of which Christ has made us overseers and stewards, and as
upon the bed of our languishing, we would not have a lofty or profound, but a
gracious word come to us; so seeing we deal with such, whose living is a
continued dying, let us seek that our divinity may be as profitable as may be
to save: Salus populi suprema lex esto.

Now I come to the liberty of the spirit, that it recedes inviolate; 1. In
Act, it goes: 2. In essence, it goes forth.

Our spirit is free in the Act, it is not haled, not snatched out, as it were,
it goes forth. A soul in life sealed to eternity by the first fruits of the
spirit has its good issue, its free passing, its hopes even in death: for let
this breath fade, fidelis Deus, God who cannot lie, because he has said it, be
we sure he will stand nigh us in that exigencie, and begin to help where man
leaves, not suffering his to be tempted above that they are able, 1 Cor. 10.
The holy Spirit, whose name is the Comforter, will not omit and leave off his
own act or office in the great needs of death. Hence good Hilarion having
served the Lord Christ seventie years, checkes his soul that it was so loath
at the last to part, to go forth, saying, Egredere, o anima mea, egredere; Go
forth, my soul, go forth: And devout Simeon sueth for a manumission, Lord,
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: And this
is the freedom of the act, the Spirit goes forth; it yields, yea it goes and
passes freely, that is, it takes up, or embraces the Cross of Christ, as he
commands us to do. But is the act at our will and liberty? not simply, we
may not projicore animam, thrust or cast forth our breath or spirit, Spiritus
Exit, it goes forth, strive we must to cast the world out of us, we may not
cast our selves out of the world. Saint Paul dares not dissolve himself,
though he could wish to be dissolved, God must part that which he joins, God
gives, and God takes away; and if God say as he does to Lazarus, Exi for as,
come forth, with faithful Steven we must resign our Spirit, and all into his
hands. When God bids us yoke, he is the wisest man that yields his neck
most willingly; when our grand Captain recalls us, we must take the retreit in
good part, but it is heathenish to force out the soul, for when the misdeeming
flesh amidst our disasters, will not listen with patience for God his call, but
rather shake off the thought of divine providence quite, then are we ready to
curse God and die, and that is probably, to leap e fumo in stammam, out of the
sin of selfe-murder into hell; no, but God will have our spirits to pass
forth upon good terms. Spiritus exit, the spirit goes forth.

Secondly, the spirit goes free or inviolate in essence, death is not the end,
but the out-going of the soul, a transmigration or journey from one place to
another. It goes forth, so the character of our weakness we see in the issue,
it is an argument of our eternity, for man indeed is perishing, but so is not
his spirit, Non simul perit anima, and animal. The Phaenix goes forth, or out
of his ashes, the spirit returns to God that gave it, Eccles. 12. that is, it
abides still, and as in the body it pleased God to enclose the soul for a
season, so it may as well exist elsewhere without it, if God will, for it has
no rise at all from the clay, yea, it bears in it immortality, an image of
that breast whence it is breathed. The separate and very abstract acts of the
spirit, even while it is in the body, the wondrous visions of the Lord to his
Prophets, usually when their bodies were bound up in sleep; Saint Paul his
rapture when he knew not whether he was in the body or out of it: the
admirable inventions and arts of men manifest the soules-selfe-consisting. Not
Socrates, and Cato, and the civilized heathen only, but the very savage
believe this, and so entertain death, Vt exitum, non ut exitium, as a
dissolution, not as a destruction, Spiritus exit, his spirit goes forth.

But we know says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. we are sure God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, does no create, redeem, and regenerate man for the mere use
of a wretched short life; and who can imagine, so monstrously, that of all men
the good and righteous, and of all creatures man, for whom the rest are made,
and who has the use or sovereignty of all, yet by far that he should be the
most vile and miserable of all? but sure it were so, if in this life only we
had hope, seeing there be no lower creatures that are capable of sorrow, and
terrors of conscience, and fears of death, and conceit of future judgment,
yea, not so subject to bodily disease. But account me not dead said the holy
martyr, for I shall certainly live and never die. And the martyrs, so vigorous
(as we see) amidst the ruins and destructions of the body, had something in
them surely more than dust: A Philosopher, Hermes Trismegistus, dying, said;
Mourn not for me as if I were dead, for I return to the happiest City. Above
all Jesus Christ gives us an express watchword, Nothing is able to kill the
soul, Mat. 10. And Martin Luther going to give up his account before the
Emperor, received this Echo from the people, fear not them that cannot kill
the soul. Mundus minetur, aestuet, Death by all its pyoning takes but a fort
of clay; Animus ad seeds suas and cognata sydera recurrit, the spirit as new
hatched goes forth to live still, like as the light issuing from the Sun,
dies not at Suns^ing, but goes some whither else with the Sun; so life that
issues from the soul, goes with its own principle, and abides with it; so
Saint John the divine, to be better enabled to his banishment, he had a vision
of this by special privilege, a sight of the immortal safe subsistence of the
soul after death, under the altar the custody of Christ Jesus, Rev. 6.9 And
thence is Saint Paul's, Ne contristemini, sorrow not as hopeless men, 1 Thessalonians.
4. Yea, be we nured to a certain faith, and frequent thought of this, and a
fairer flower the book of God yields not, than the immortality of Saints in
bliss. Hence the great patience of the Saints, hence the challenge of death,
Vbi mors victoria, O death thou will take away our breath; Alas how small a
loss, seeing no death can divide us from Christ, Romans 8.38. and spiritus exit,
seeing the spirit does but migrare, it goes untouched in essence, and
inviolate.

The maine issue of this first point is, that seeing our breath, our spirit
goes forth, that we make sure provision therefore of some harbor or
sanctuary, that we get us into the Arc before the fl^ud, that we gather our
Manna, and prepare to our eternal Sabbath now in the Even of this life, Qui
laborat in vesp^re Sabbati, vesce ur in Sabbato, say the Rabbines, and what an
exceeding strength will it be to us when we are weak in mind and body, that
our spirit is to pass safely and comfortably, that we have a refuge, a
terminus ad quem for our spirit; so let us forecast for it by a true
apprehension and faith of the loves and promises of God in Christ Jesus. O my
Dove that art in the clefts of the rock, says our Savior, Cant. 2.14. The
wounds of Christ, are the clefts of the rock, therein let us coveandr hide us
over soul and body, let us make sure of a rightful hold in that rock of our
salvation, through faith and repentance, and so our spirits will grow
acquainted with the peace of conscience, and the joys of the Holy Ghost, and
the sense and hopes of the promised recompense, and so shall also we be well
composed and fortified for our migration or passage, even that our spirit goes
forth of an earthly vessel, but into an eternal and blessed receptacle.

I come to the second branch of the text: the second note of man's imbecility
from the matter that he is made of: Et revertetur in terram suam, and he
returns to his earth. He returns: The body of man before his fall was
beautiful and amiable in the eye of God, and awful in the eye of the
creature, and exacts in its own temper, and immortal by privilege sealed in
the tree of life; but since that sin came into the world, the body of man
incloseth a death, a selfe-ruining, beside outward violence, and perils of
contagion, none of which were incident to his pure estate; so man returns to
his earth without contradiction, he has no help for it. The spirit which
holds up the elements together in a body, when that goes forth, each of them
fall back to their own principles; earth goes to its earth, according to God
his ordinance, dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, Genesis 3. Nicodemus
thought it strange, but in this sense it is true, we re-enter the bowels of our
mother. The son of Syrach calls the earth, (...), the mother of us all,
Ecclus. 40. So Brutus wisely took the Oracle, when being warned to kiss his
mother, kissed the earth. His earth. Earth we see goes, very nigh us, it is
our earth, not only the matter or rock out of which we are hewn, but the
matter whereof we consist, our ingredient, and co-essentiall with us, that I
may say with the Prophet Jeremy, O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the
Lord. Trim we never so nicely, we are earth, Lutea progenies, an offspring of
earth, yea, pulvinaria, as the Romans styled their Temples, vessels or beds
made up or stuffed with dust, and shall we dote upon our earth? Shall we suffer
our immorta^ spirit to go out like a starveling, and over-care for what
^cernes the body, and over-decke the daughter of ro^ennesse? know we not that
our very make is such, that earth, that the chambers of death stand like the
houses of the Roman Tribunes, wide open for us night and day, and very usually
man sleeps, and never rises again, and walks, but never returns again,
unless it be into his earth.

The men of Anathoh said to the Prophet Jeremy, Prophecy not in the name of
the Lord, that thou dye not, Ier. 11. But to you, my fellow laborers, I say,
prophecy in the fear of God; for we shall die, because we shall be dissolved,
and return to our earth, we know not how soon, and if this does not quicken,
our account being so nigh at hand, what will? And of all Gods Officers, we his
especial Ambassadors, how shall we turn us on the bed of death, if we have
betrayed the immediate work and business of our Sovereign? The Indian
Priests or Brachmanes, so very separate were they from the body, that they are
said, Interra esse, and non in terra esse; To be, and not to be on the earth:
A Minister of Christ his Gospel much rather he should be unglued, and
abstracted from this earth, the body, like a star already fixed in Heaven:
But we care what we can for our body, and so tender it often times, that we
forget our God, and yet nevertheless we shall return to our earth; and when
our turn comes, what a crown of rejoicing should it be, to think that we
have wasted in body, by winning souls, and have truly sought to turn men to
God, though it turn us into the earth, stantem and praedicantem mori? But
beside counsel, the Lord has comfort for this point in the issue, namely,
that thus God ordains by his return into earth, to refine and turn our vile
bodies, to be like the glorious body of Jesus Christ: He that was wrapped up
into the third Heavens, and knew what he says, S. Paul speaks it, Yea (says
he) as the corn lives not except it die, and be cast into the earth, so we
are not clarified, not made blessed bodies, but by a return into the earth. So
then with an Eagles eye by faith, pierce we through, and look beyond the
grave, and we shall discern and see an incomparable light of grace, to which
the Lord works our return into earth, our very dissolution.

But if the spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead be in you, he that
raised Christ from the dead, shall quicken also your mortal bodies, by, or
because of the Spirit that dwells in you, Romans 8.11. our earth is Christ's
body, know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. Dead
and withered as we be, we are still united to Christ, it is not death that can
separate us from him, for I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, etc.
Romans 8. and by virtue of this mystical conjunction with Christ, even according
to our whole man, doubt we nothing, but our first resurrection by the same
spirit, is an earnest and certain pledge of a better resurrection; for that
same quickening spirit of Christ, which now dwells in us, and uniteth us to
him, it is he that made our bodies out of the earth at first, yea, which made
the earth it self, and the whole world out of nothing; and therefore he can
and will, as he has witnessed, fetch our bodies back from the earth to which
they are returned, and that because they are yet the members of Christ Jesus
though the same spirit, and his own temples God will surely rear them up
again, yea, though they lie in the dust, and the latter temples shall have
far more beauty than the former, according to his word.

I proceed to the third and last note of humane weakness from the effects,
that which man purposes or produces: In illo die peribunt omnes cogitationes
eorum, In that very day his thoughts perish: The night comes that no man can
work, John 9.4. The dead are out of office; so it is of our nature, to leave
our humane purposes cracked and broken in the very midst, my days are past, my
enterprises are broken off, Job 8. In that very day our life is defined to be
a vapor that appears a little time, and then vanishes, Iam. 4. My days are
a span long, says David, Fecisti dies meos palmarios, Psalm. 39. and we are
but as yesterday, Job 8. So though we make a bustle for a life time in this
world, that is all our projects go not on into another world, and life is such
a minute, such a drop of the bucket, Gutta e situla, as the Prophet speaks,
that our terrene thoughts perish all in that ve-day that they were hatched, as
it were.

Alexander had not elbow-roome, not space enough in the world for his thoughts.
Xerxes had such thoughts against Greece, that he undertaketh an expedition so
huge and great, that seas and mountains are even spurned out of his way. And
Julian madly projects a final and utter extirpation of all Christendom: Vast
and high thoughts all, yet a bubble, no sooner up than deaded, dashed that very
day that they were conceived, as it were. The Parable of that certain rich
man, Luke 12. shows how very perishing is the figure and thought of this
world, and it is well shadowed at the Coronation of the Popes, when he that is
new called passes on, the Master of the Ceremonies holds up an handful of
flax at the end of a dry reed, and setting fire to it, says aloud, Pater
sancte, sic transit gloria mundi; Holy Father, so passes the worlds glory:
Fortuna vitrea, It is a glassie condition, as that noble Lady, the Lady Jane
Gray admonished the Lieutenant at her death, now let us not be too eager on it
therefore, but keep in, and limit our terrene thoughts and purposes, yea let
us trample the Moon, the world under our feet, give it the lowest place in our
affections, as the Lord represents it in the twelfth of the Revelation. Every
Christian man like young Hannibal, tactis sacris, he voweth no less in
baptism, se cum primum posset hostem fore, even to hate the world in
comparison, and not to spend a thought for it, if it lay in his way to God and
his grace. But, by thoughts, not only the worldly, but the very quintessence,
or most excellent effects of the mind of man, are meant; namely, that all
which is not above humanity is most perishing. The best humane good is the
rich furniture of Wisdom, Arts, and Sciences; and, Let not the wise glory in
his wisdom, says the Lord, Esaias 9. and, God knows the thoughts of the wise
are but vain, 1 Cor. 3. uneffectuall to salvation: should any creature swell
or presume on this good? The depths of the Schools or State, what are they? An
anchor pitched in the air, a wall of breath about us, which if the Lord but
push at us, are gone verso pollice, with a wet finger (as they say) and when
the darts of temptation, and the fury of disease, and the fearful wan looks
of death and judgment come to us, in that very day these thoughts perish. O
fallacem hominum spem! o inanes nostras contentiones! Thus the Orator laments
the death of his learned Hortensius. But o the buckler of faith, the helmet of
salvation! at other times we may talk, and say our wits have made us, at the
evil hour nothing but God can ease us, no skill can cure us but of God his
mercy in Christ Jesus: and Luther therefore said well, that men were best
Christians in death, because when learning, policy, friends, and breath, and
all go from us, if we be wise, we then go from our selves, our own
abilities, and with all our strength and might, rest and repose on God, and his
especial favor and mercy in Christ Jesus revealed in the word; again, it is
a comfort at this very day, that In illo die peribunt omnes cogitationes
eorum, the Devil and the world league, and set in together, and work their
spleen out against the Church of Christ, and even plow it up before them,
fierce and cruel be their thoughts, but they are frail: the Holy Ghost
resembles them to grass on the house tops, Psalm. 129. one would think they
were good corn by their growing, they are vile grass, and such as is without
blessing. Iulians thoughts against the Church, were nubiculae cito transiturae,
clouds soon over, as Athanasius prophesied, They gave up the ghost in one day
as it were. The end of the upright God sets a mark upon it, that it is peace,
Psalm. 37. but the union of his enemies God will disjoynt it, and they shall
walk, as we hope at this day, in Baal-perizin, in the valley of division, 1 Chronicles. 14. Counsels against God shall not stand, not last, not a day in
comparison, In that very day his thoughts perish.

But are the thoughts of men so perishing, it is matter of advice then that we
redeem the spanne of time we have, husband it well, and on good thoughts, and
to good purposes, and there be thoughts, as we see in Mary's choice, which
shall not perish with our days, and of which no time shall bereave us. Blessed
are they that die in the Lord, they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them, Rev. 14. The thoughts of Gods worship, good works have their
abiding fruit for ever, and when all fail us they follow, go along with us
after death in their reward and crown, but the bent of our hearts if it be on
by matters, we may say, what is this we do? what fruit will this afford us in
or after death, In that very day our thoughts are cut off and perish.

Our days are a declining shadow, Psalm. 102. and the shadow declines and
lengthens, as the Sun goes off or on us: when it is direct or meridian short
is our shadow, and stretched out at even, when the light of Christ is far from
us, then according to the mold of our own blind thoughts, our shadow
lengthens, for life is our shadow, Job 14. but then we think of death as far
removed, In hoc enim fallimur quod mortem prospicimus, says Seneca. Now let
our eyes be truly enlightened, and all those thoughts perish, and we perceive
life sliding swifter away than a Weavers shuttle, Job 7. and so the Lord is
said to shorten our days, Psalm. 89. not that he cuts off, or depriveth us of
that time, which he had determined, but of that which our own thoughts have
minted: And, o we vain and blind, that think thus, as if we were at a fee
with death, and never to be removed. Nullius vita non spectat in crastinum,
says Seneca, we think all, to morrow we shall live, and we shall live better
to morrow, and the life we forge and fancy to us, fails us, even before we
think on it; In that very day his thoughts perish.

Be we therefore advised to fasten on the present time, to repent to day, and
believe to day, let us provoke our hearts to good purposes, and to day let us
put our hands to practice them. But there be who think or dream, rather of
future expiations or satisfactions to be made after death, of a release after a
time in hellish durance: but these are groundless perishing thoughts. It is
for men once to dye, but after death comes judgment, Heb. 9.27. Therefore
the tree of our life, while it has a standing, let it bend to Godward, and
then we shall both stand and fall to our own Lord and Master, and let us seek
presently to be reconciled to God, through the precious purgation of our
souls, which is through faith in Christ his blood, and then we shall never be
confounded, our thoughts shall not perish, or be made void, Praeveniendus ergo
dies est, qui praevenire consuevit, says S. Austen: we must trim our lamps
betime with the oil of faith, and love, and prevent the day of death, lest it
prevent us, our eternity of woe or bliss, we should not hazard it to
after-thoughts, and to second plots, yea, surely it cannot be mended afterward:
the watchlesse virgins, because unprovided then, were undone for ever; and
though sorrowing learnt them wit, they had no time to practice it: In that
very day his thoughts perish.

And to you especially (my Brethren in the Ministry) let me speak in the
words of S. Paul; As we have opportunity let us die good, Gal. 6.10. let us be
doing good while we may: -- Dum superest Lachesi quod torqueat: -- Should such
as we cast in our thoughts, (...), to serve our selves or the times for a
season, and think then afterward, (...), to serve the Lord in his Vineyard,
perhaps at even, but when our carnal thoughts have reached up to their ends:
alas, while we so think, while our thoughts are in our hearts, our thoughts
may perish, the hand of Justice may write bitter things against us in that
very moment; high is our race, and life is perishing, heavenly be our
thoughts; let us take that good of our high calling at the first opportunity,
the world should stoop to it; for the fashion of the world passes away, but
the Crown is uncorruptible which God reserveth for us, if we finish our
course, with a conscience of his ordinance, (...), with fear and trembling.

The Atticke Orators (says Quintilian) are, Eloquentiae, quadam frugalitate
contenti, ac semper manum intra pallium continentes; just so, many of us do
think with Nicodemus, we can plead for God in sober silence, husbanding both
our professing and preaching of Christ Jesus for fear of the Jews, lest we
should run into suspicion with great ones, and hazard our stock of worldly
favors. The argument of my Text is good to raise our diligence, namely that we
may be called to dye, in the midst of our ambitious and terrene thoughts, and
so to dye before we have begun to live, and so we may live and dye in vain,
and without Use: a wretched mishap especially in a most spiritual and heavenly
calling, a Prophet, a Seer of the Lord to perish before he has done any good,
a worthless case, and most to be feared. To conclude, hear we the words of
our Savior to his Apostles, What I say unto all, I say unto you, Watch, Mat.
26. and hear what Solomon says, Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it,
for there is no work, no device nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go,
Eccles. 9.10.

In that very day his thoughts perish. FINIS.
A FUNERAL SERMON.
PSALM. 51.17. A broken and a contrite heart O God, thou will not despise.


AS all civil bodies or commonwealths, so that of the Jews was made up of
three diverse parts: the rich, the middle sort, the poor; and so their
oblations were diverse, from the herd, the flock, the fowls of the air; and
diverse often was their end and acceptance: he in the impurity of his heart
kills an ox, or sacrifices a kid, Decollat canem, says the Prophet, is as
if he cut off a dogs neck, so little is the Lord affected to the worship we
do him in mere ceremony; but the honest contrite soul, the poor in spirit,
that comes trembling with his pair of turtle doves, repentance and faith, to
this man will I look says the Lord, Es. 66. The poor service we do him, if
it be in spirit, and in truth, he takes delight in it, wherefore David here at
the 15. verse, praying for ability to praise, or worship the Lord aright, sets
it out; First, by negation, even what it is not in comparison; thou desire
not sacrifice, thou delightest not in burnt offerings: Secondly, he positively
concludes what indeed that is, which indeed God wills, and likes; the
sacrifices of God are the contrite spirit, A broken and a contrite heart O God,
thou will not despise.

Not that the Jewish rights were not Gods ordinances, or were then in
abrogation, in sepultura, in their burial; but because these outward forms or
performances did never satisfy not please the Lord without the sacrifice and
service of the heart, a lip-devotion, a deed done, an heartlesse manner of
worship is not that which delights the Lord, or profits us; yea, if there be no
heart, no soul in it, it is a shining sin, it is abominable, as if we blessed
an Idol, as if a Jew had offered swines blood, The sacrifice of the wicked is
an abomination to the Lord, Pro. 21.27.

But a cup of cold water, says our Savior, and the least spark of zeal out
of a true heart, though mixed with much infirmity, yet goes not away
unregarded; this, when the widow, good soul, came in with her mite, the Lord
calls his disciples to see, as in admiration of her bounty: and David here upon
Nathans rebuke, a contrite sinner presents the Lord with his offering, even
such he had, a broken heart; and goes away well persuaded or satisfied
concerning Gods acceptance, O God thou will not despise.

You may see there is a double use of that I am to say: First, Preparatory,
like the Lords Epistle to the Church of Laodicea, that the lukewarm
indifferent Christian, who says he is rich, and needs nothing, may see he is
poor indeed, and so become poor in spirit. Secondly, Principal, like the
other Epistle of comfort to the Church of Smyrna, a Church of a broken heart we
see, and much humbled, but very rich, therefore according to the grace of Gods
acceptance.

Now two things were of great regard in the legal sacrifices or oblations, the
subject, and the manner; a lamb, or a dove: there is the thing, and both
without blemish; not the refuse, not the reversion, there is the quality. The
burden of the word of the Lord came down against Judah, because the table was
come into contempt; and if you offer the blind, says he, for sacrifice, is it
not evil? and if you offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? carry these to
your Prince, and can he be pleased with you, and can he accept your persons
says the Lord of hosts, Malac. 1.

The greatest man alive, let him come to the Table of the Lord to receive of
his visible and invisible word, with an unwasht, irreverent, and dead heart,
and the very Sacrament and word he takes are his judgments for not
discerning, and because of his contempt; wherefore King David offers like
himself, that is, according to Gods own heart: First, for the materials, his
heart: Secondly, for the form and qualification, his heart broken and contrite.

That very Caruncula, that little flesh, or part of the body, the heart, some
from the triangular figure of that observe a seat, and receptacle not of the
round world, but of the blessed Trinity, yea, and some gather this same
doctrine from the letters of the word Cor. But the heart, it means more
spiritually, and first, the understanding, in which Saint Paul says, Cor
excaecatum, a blinded heart, Romans 1. And David says, The fool has said in
his heart; in cord suo that is, in his unhallowed, unbroken understanding.
Secondly, the heart is the conscience, so David's heart smote him. Thirdly, it
is the desiring part of the soul, Quid est cor tuum, nisi voluntas tua, says
Saint Bernard; Love the Lord with all thy heart; and out of the abundance of
the heart, etc. Vbi thesaurus, ibi cor, our affections, our wills live with our
treasure, Vbi ancant, non ubi animant. Fourthly, the heart is the complete
soul quite through; With the heart we believe, Romans 1. with the act of the
understanding, conceiving; and with the arms of the will and affiance;
consenting. (...), Acts 15. God which searches the heart, that is, the
thoughts, the conscience, the affections, the whole depth of the soul, a
thing, which neither the sight of man can reach, nor the law of man can censure.

This is the subject of David's sacrifice, the matter, but without form, and
void as it was in the beginning; the manner or information, the due trimming to
the Lords Altar, follows in these words, [Broken and con^rite] and to take
them and apply them to the subject in order. First, the understanding, yea,
Nathan uses this method with David, by the parable of the Ewe lamb, 2 Samuel 12.
First of all he convinces the judgment, breaks that, makes David pliable to
understand himself, for the judgment unbroken approves of sin, thus David
makes no matter of numbering the people, so did pride hood-winke reason; upon
his confession he confesses he did very foolishly, or without any true
understanding. S. Paul so understood, as if he did well to persecute the says
of Christ, but upon his repentance his judgment altered, I did it ignorantly,
says he, and I am the least of the Apostles, not worthy to be so called, yea,
an abortive, or one borne out of time, because I did persecute the Church of
God. Surely, the reason why we so rarely repent in truth is, because we allow
sin in our judgment, our mind dislikes it not, and we have no apprehension
of the danger of it, that it is so deadly, and therefore we refuse the Physic
of contrition, because we conceive that, as a thing more than needs: we
consider not, that God is as well just as merciful, and cannot possibly be
served without repentance, and therefore this holy informing, it deals first
at the understanding; as in the case of comfort, namely, against the fears of
death, faith cheeres up the heart by meditation, or minding it of the blessed
promises, that the judgment rectified, and made to understand death inwardly,
as it is without the larvae, the shapes it appears in to ignorants and
Infidels, we may be so resolved, and settled, and not to be amazed for death;
even so in the case of renovation, the Lord alters and breaks the imaginations
of the heart, first of all lays open to our eye the heinousness of our
sinful estate in general, and then comes home to us, that we relent in
particular.

Yea, contrition gives the mind, the understanding a right reflection, that
it sees it self rightly without the veil, and scales of superficial proud
blind Science. The contrite heart feels how heavy the wings of depraved
reason are, and how it hovers like Noah's Raven, Super profundum, sine fundo;
and like the earth receives the light only in superficie, in the surface of
it, and in things divine, how it builds rather upon negation to know what the
truth is not, than what it is; how incapable, yea, averse it is since the fall
from the right scanning of truth, that the very Philosophers, the best or
wisest heathen, (...), as the Apostle speaks, They became vain in their
imaginations of God, Romans 1. and indeed the natural man judges of divine
truths but according to his own senses, receives no more in religion than he
can show reason for, not reason of the word or divine authority, but reason of
nature, or demonstration: So the things of God which are spiritually discerned,
or with a contrite eye, carry a kind of contrariety to him, and the undoubted
knowledge or persuasion of Gods gospel, is not to be had in the worldly wise,
who do not, who will not so far renounce their conceited knowledge, and
subdue their imaginations, as far as they exalt themselves against the word,
or have repugnance to Gods knowledge.

Now in the works of repentance or contrition, when the Lord puts a holy light
into the heart, this eye of the soul, he makes it simple and submisse, The Law
of the Lord is pure, making wise the simple, Psalm. 19. So that reason it comes
to conclude with Jewel, the peerless Bishop, Gratias ago Deo, quod
ignorantiam meam non ignoro, God I thank thee, that I am not ignorant of my
ignorance.

But faith, when it winnes upon us first, it finds reason sitting like Iezabel
painting her face, dressing her head, and looking out at the window, till
contrition, which like the Baptist, ushers the way of the Lord, calls to our
thoughts, and says with Iehu, throw her down, and if they yield not, but
advance themselves against God too, it says of them also, as Edom said of
Israel, Down with them, down with them, even to the ground.

Contrition, it breaks the understanding, makes it teachable, and glad of
Gods ways; as they that were stung with the fiery serpents, were glad to look
to the brazen serpent; so the broken soul with earnest expectation, erecto
capite, waits for the manifestation of Christ and his grace; Omne humidum
facile alieno termino. But take a man, when the sun of much prosperity, and
the like temptations, exhale, and draw out this holy moisture of contrition,
and the Lord of life, the Son of God, though he then approve himself never
so much before him by word, and works, yet like the Scribes and Pharisees,
seeing, he will not perceive, and learning, he will not understand; let the
Lord sing of mercy, and he needs it not, or of judgment, and he fears it
not: I refer you to Saint Austen, the third book of his Confess. the fifth
chapter, yea, let common experience speak, if many an impenitent heart
preaches not, talks not, disputes not subtly of the doctrines of God, and
has no right knowledge of them, nor acknowledging, but is even made up, and
mixed, of doubtings, unbeleefe, and error? and Where is the disputer of this
world, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.

Contrariwise, as Abraham went to offer his only son upon the mount of
Moriah, and never once advised with natural reason, he left his servants at
the foot of the hill, lest by their clamours and disswasions he might be
disturbed in his sacrifice; so the contrite broken heart, the mind thus
qualified of God, obeys the call of God, subdueth it self, and becomes a
slave to his word; Da quod jubes, and jube quod vis, Gods commands are not
grievous to him, but he is ready wheresoever he sees, thus says the Lord, to
entrust himself to the word. Say unto his soul, that man was by the breath of
the Lord, and the world was by his word at the beginning, he stands not with
Galen, to censure Moses for want of demonstration: say unto him, that God
Almighty was incarnate, and the mother a Virgin delivered of her Maker; he
learnes not to dispute where the Cherubins are said to veil, but says with
the Centurion, Domine dic verbum, and sanabitur servus tuus, the contrite
understanding takes the Lord at his word, though he sees not his own reason
for it, he follows the word of God in all forms, Vt aqua sequitur sulcantem
digitum. And as one said, having read the writings of Heraclitus, the things I
know, and the things I know not, omnia fortia, and generosa; so he of Gods
Scriptures, they be celestial, and good all; and what he cannot fadome, he
adoreth, and says, O the depths of Gods counsels! in sum, he has all
divinity in praeparatione animi, in a readiness to submit to the word, as it
shall be revealed to him, and ever says, Now faith arise, and sleeping hope
awake, awake my glory, and though reason would comprehend nothing, believes
all. Agrippina the mother of Nero said, o ccidar modo imperet; but the faith of
the contrite mind says, imperabo modo occidat, I will trust the Lord, though
he kill me: with Abraham, against hope, he believes in hope, and offers
himself in sacrifice to the Lord by an holy violence upon his carnal
reasonings: he seeks to bring every thought in captivity to the obedience of
Christ, and he reckons of all science, how subtle soever, but as dross,
compared to the excellency of the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ our
Savior: yea, that sweet and precious name, (with Ignatius the martyr) he has
such a dear impression of it, that it seems riveted, and graven, In tabulis
cordis, in the tables of his heart or understanding, for now he sees well, and
says with Themistocles, periissem nisi periissem, I had utterly perished, if
with the prodigal, by remorse and contrition, I had not been rein'd in to see
my foul mistakings, and so to seek and return to God my merciful father in
Christ Jesus.

And lastly, this contrite understanding is the only Irenaeus, he delights in
peace, and therefore goes on warily, and timorously, and fears to frame out
articles of faith, from the mould of his reason, much less to frame out
oppositions against manifest truths of Scripture, or to thrust out public
positions, from any private dispositions, ludere cum Deo; yea he dares not let
himself be deceived with any hate, or evil opinion of good, wheresoever it
is professed, lest he comes in the end to deceive himself with a delight or
good opinion of evil. In sum, he minds, and is taken up most of all, how, or
by what means he may confound the devil, rather than how to confute his
gainesayers, and bewail the time, that ever the simplicity of believing,
should lose it self in the Labyrinths of belief, and that the word should be
tam ferax religionum, so fruitful of opinions, and so barren of piety, as
Lipsius once spoke; and this is to be transformed by the renewing of the mind,
as the Apostle speaks, this is contrition, in spiritu mentis, in the spirit
of our mind, in the understanding.

The second seat of contrition, is the Conscience: the nimming away of the
skirts of Saul's garment, and a rash wish for the waters of Bethlem; if these
smote David to the heart, his conscience, if it was of so tender a touch,
surely his presumptuous fact in numbering the people, and this (...), especially
this scarlet, or double-dyed sin, of which the Prophet Nathan rebukt him, the
conscience of this heinous sin melts him away like water, as we see in this
Psalm: a Psalm we may all take up, as Gregory Nazianzene did the
Lamentations of Jeremy, to make us weep for our sins and transgressions.

But conscience is a part of the practicke understanding, as Gods Deputy
sitting within to judge, to see, and censure us together with God: it is a
certain secret feeling, or knowledge of our deeds, which leaves behind it,
or imprints the motions of joy, or sorrow, hope or fear, confidence or shame;
it is an inward key, which unlocketh and opens the doors and bars of our
hearts, that the grieved spirit comes forth, like good Lot out of the house
of sin, and says to the man of Sodom, O deal not so wickedly.

Now as the great Turk permits every one to live in his own religion, so they
pay him in his tribute; so the conscience hardened or seared, permits the
appetites to their pleasure, so it may partake; it neglects the soul, to
please the sense; it prevaricates, and wilfully suppresses the true verdict or
testimony, and is idle, and does not its office, but luls us asleep in our
sin, and lays the raines on the necks of our wild and untamed lusts. Cor
dilatatum, a spacious loose heart, a Chiverell conscience; and indeed, when the
mind is in mere darkness, as in the state of unregeneration, or when it is
overflowed or dimmed with the dampe of some temptation, or wasting sin, as it
may befall the godly, no marvel then if this particular knowledge be
darkness too, and our inward thoughts cease from their accusing for a season;
for the soul, it has not now an actual or exercised sense and light, (...),
as the Apostle speaks, to discern the proportions of good and evil; being
possessed with a spirit of slumber in any measure, so far it is no rightful
Judge, no more than the blind man is of colors: (...), a conscience without
science, a heart like Nabals, benumbed and senseless.

And the manner or growth of it is thus; Original sin sends out actual, and
they leave a strain, a disposition to sin so again, and sinning so again,
slight impressions of evil become radicate, and habitual, till the callum,
the crust, deadness or security in sin comes over the soul; the buds of
infirmity steal to the twigs of negligence, and they to the tyranny of
custom, and then audacious and grand sins plead prescription, and like a
stout tenant take no warning; and this is nervus ferreus, the iron sinew, the
heart of adamant. When Camels, gross sins pass, and digest without remorse,
and this our Church in her Letany deprecates most Christianly, From hardness
of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandments, good Lord deliver us.

Now the contrite conscience is the very contrary, and that it may have its
beginning thus; as Ioab would not be moved to come to Absalom till his fields
were set on fire; so we oft-times, we have no heart, no perceiving of our
estate toward God, till affliction, like fire cease upon us, till with
Manasses our chain, or with Hezekiah our bed of sickness, or with Mauritius
death of wife and children rouse and startle us, and wring forth a holy
confession, Iustus est Deus, and justa sunt judicia ejus. For thus the good
Shepherd oft-times sends after his sheep, poverty, persecution, sickness, and
the like, to hurry them back when they go astray from him; and the heart,
indeed the conscience, is in a very ill case, which ffliction cannot mollify,
(...), says the Apostle, Heb. 5.8. the sons of God learn obedience by the
things they suffer, and for this we may learn to take well the Lords
castigations, kiss the rod as often as it betides us.

Again, we must not think much to wait at the posts of Gods house
continually, to listen, as David did, to his word in the mouth of Nathan, his
word in the ministry of it, God uses to bless it, and to put forth his
spirit with it, that with David, our heart smites us, we tremble with Foelix,
we melt with Josiah, we are pierced to the quick, like those thousands at S.
Peter's Sermon; and we are rifled, and convinced in our consciences, like those
in the 1 Cor. 14. Without the Law sin is dead, Romans 7. It is not acknowledged;
the word is Gladius Domini, the sword of the Lord, Heb. 4. It opens our sins
to our eyes, and Malleus Domini, the Lords hammer to break our stony heart,
Ierem. 23.

Wherefore Moses and Aaron being called by the Lord in the wilderness before
the burning mount, he commanded them his word, and Law not to be suppressed in
secrecy, but to be pitched up in the eye of all the world, even that the
presumptuous heart might look on it, as Christ did on Jerusalem, with weeping
eyes, to see how short he comes of that he should, and that the dissembling
heart might have his paintings and colors, his faces of sanctity, thawed all
by the fire of Gods justice: The Word of the Lord is spirit and life, a sacred
perspective it is, we may behold in it our sins of thought, desire, and deed,
and thereupon see how the host of heaven, with chariots of fire, march in
array, ready pressed to charge; the curse of God, how ready it is to light on us.
A sight for which David's heart becomes so intenerate, that he a King,
commits a Psalm to be sung here in the Church, wherein his own capital sins
should be blazed to all posterity by his own confession, a sight for which S.
Austen needs would, that this very Psalm should be set over his bed night
and day, that with tears he might read over his transgressions, a roll whereof
he has left in his own Confessions, which is admirable to the Reader.

And Conscience indeed is a sleeping Lion, it will awaken, in the evil hour
we shall find it, our own heart then seeks occasions against us, as Job
speaks; and let not him think, who has not yet the sting of his sin, that
he has not offended; it watches the conscience, till the time of most
advantage; but the Lord, by this conscience of sin, awakens those to life,
that are his; by this sensiblenesse, or accusing of the heart, he does much in
our calling to grace, and in our continuing in it; for the contrite, or wounded
conscience, deals not with our evil motions, as Darius did with Alexander,
suffer them to pass, or come over the heart, as he did the Hellespont, till
they bear all before them; but like Pharaoh, that killed the infants of
Israel, lest they should overgrow his Country: So the truly broken, and tender
heart grows daily very conscientious of every the least sin, and takes care
therefore of the serpents in the shell, Allidere parvulos ad petram, to crush
the very occasions of sin, and with S. Paul, it shakes of the vipers from the
fingers ends, at the first motion of evil, lest suggestion beget delight, and
that multiply from action into custom, like the fish that swim down the
streams of Jordan, in mare mortuum, into the dead sea.

Yea, and in the midst of all our prosperities and pleasures, it is the
quality of a contrite conscience, ever and anon to send us down an holy
fear, as it were a bucket into the bottom of our hearts, to taste the waters,
whether or no they be still, sweet, and clear, and so to preserve us from
relapsing, or reciduation; I will put my fear into their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me, says the Lord, Ier. 32.

The third thing which partakes this contrition or breaking, is the will and
affections; O Lord, create in me a clean heart, verse. 10. which is as if he
had said; O Lord, enable me to break my will and affections from frowardness
and perverseness against thy will, to which I am bound by the cords of thy
word: will and affections, these are the horse and mule, that must be hold in,
or broken by the bit and bridle, as David speaks, yea, the horse may cast his
rider, and himself stand upright still; but affections endanger not the soul,
but by ruining themselves, as Pharaohs horse, and the riders also were drowned
in the red sea: affections, these are the intestine foes, the Jebusites which
fight still within our borders, yea, which rush in upon us often times amidst our
best devotions. S. Hierom in the wilderness, among all his mortifications, had
enough to do to break them; and S. Basil complains, that when he had
forsaken the society of men, he could not forsake his own affections, his
own heart haunted him, and pursued him still: But Ismael the son of Agar the
bondwoman, when he would be oppressing the son of the free, he was thrust
out of Abraham's house: The Father of the faithful gives us even in this a
pattern, namely, that we break with those affections, which hinder our holy
purposes, that we banish them, and bind them to their obedience and good
behavior; and this it is to sacrifice our affections, or to separate them to
the Lord, when we set them apart from their old excesses, and this is
Sacrificium vivum, as the Apostle calls it, the living sacrifice of a broken
heart or affection, a sacrifice that lives the better after it is offered.

Beloved, as in a common fire, when the flames take hold of our houses, we
instantly run to the rivers, to the water, to quench it: so our hearts within,
our affections naturally being set on fire with hell, as S. James speaks,
what should we do, but fly to the river of contrition and repentance? This
Red sea of remorsefull sorrow, our spiritual Pharaoh drownes in it, with all
his armies of vicious lusts, here they perish together: And as in a common
siege, when the enemies reares up works or edifices to the walls of a City,
and from thence shoots, and hurles fire into it, a chief remedy is to dig
secret ways and passages for water under the earth unto those fabrics, that
so their foundation may weaken, and fall; so a tower of Babel, of inordinate
affections, being set up against our soul, and therein the Archers of Satan,
Pride, Lust, Avarice, and the like, shooting the fire of sin into our hearts,
let us with the Magdalene derive thither even through the secret veins of our
hearts, floods of contrition and repentance, for this shakes the very
groundwork of Satan's holds: the gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the
palace shall be dissolved; that I may speak in the words of the Prophet Nahum
2.6. O poenitentiae lachryma rutulantior auro, splendidior Sole, says Anselme,
O Contrition, more radiant than gold, more shining than the Sun, respicis
avaritiam, horres luxuriam, and so forth; thou hate covetousness, thou
abhorrest luxury, thou breakest the power and yoke of evil affections: Thou
art the axe laid to the root of the heart, thou art the Catholicon, the
universal medicine, that works upon every peccant humor, thou make us
ready to part with all bad desires in obedience to the Lords command: for this
godly contrition is a distaste of sin as sin, and so it is impartial against
whatsoever comes, as a transgression against God. I have refrained my feet from
every evil way, that I may keep thy word, Psalm. 119.101. Worldly sorrow
hides our ill affections, restrains open breakings out, and that is all: Like
the cold air, it does but drive the disease of sin inward, Abscondit vitia,
non abscindit; But godly sorrow, or contrition enters and searches, it cancels
and sacrifices the evil that is in our most covert, and retired inclining, and
withal it calls out repentance, it is not content to sigh in secret, it calls
the heart, the affection into the eye, to weep for sin with S. Peter, and
into the mouth to confess it with King David, yea, and into the hands to break
it off by good works, the offices of piety and pity: Poros aperit cordis,
says S. Gregory: And the contrite affection is of all the openest, the
easiest to commiserate, (...), so well it is acquainted with its own evil,
that who is ill affected with sin and misery, that melts not? And so
respective is it to Gods ire and displeasure, which it has weighed and tasted,
that the least symptom, or sign of it, upon it self or others, dissolves it
into fear and trembling, and this is the circumcision of the heart, the
breaking or contrition of the will and affections.

Fourthly, to sum up all together, the heart means no less here, than the
soul complete, or quite through, Contriti cordis holocaustum, says S. Cyprian:
The perfect heart, Psalm. 101. Not perfection in every part, but perfection of
all the parts, Integritas animi. Create in me a clean heart, says David:
before, as in the first creation, God made man perfect in all members and
parts: so in the second, in regeneration, it is a new birth, or breaking of all
the powers of the soul in some good measure, and say not thou art contrite, or
renewed in the eye of the soul, in thy understanding and conscience, unless it
go also to thy bowels, to thy will and affections; the good heart is a broken,
but not a divided heart; their heart is divided, now shall they be found
faulty, Hos. 10.2. the Lord likes not to have his right parted with the
natural mother, he will part with his right rather; reason must become a
captive, and conscience an accuser; will and affections flexible, and laid
down at the feet of the Lord; the heart contrite, is the soul affected
thoroughly, the word signifies a grinding to powder, as of the corn between
the milstones.

And great reason and ground is there for this; the Lord besides his law
delivered on the mount, made us in Eden a new and everlasting covenant, even
that his holy son, the essential image of his person, should come in our
nature, by the price of redemption paid in his blood, to reconcile us to God;
so did the mighty God make a holy and special league with his mortal foe,
(...), says the Apostle, merely for the good pleasure of his grace, and bound
himself by as free promise, to make the faithful, his Church, a jointure of
all the joys of heaven; yet we rebel against the most high, and lightly
regard his counsels; if we look up to heaven, we see the seat indeed of a
tender Father, but infinitely have we sinned against him and it; if we gasp
in our trouble for the comfort of Christ his merits, the Redeemer of the world,
we see how vilely our own evil words and deeds crucify him daily, and put
him to open shame, grieving his spirit, quenching his gifts and abusing his
very grace.

Now the Adamant softens when warm blood is shed on it; and the blood of the
Lord Jesus so graciously effused on us, and for us, the riches of this
goodness should lead us to remorse, and to repent of our sins, even in love
of the Lord for his mercies, yea, no slight affection, no cursory Lord have
mercy upon us, should suffice us; with Jeremy we should call for a cottage in
the wilderness, and then broken to water, wash with tears the day wherein we
were borne. And, O that the precious balmes, the mercies of our Lord Jesus, the
sense of what he has done and suffered for us, should not mollify us, and
make us relent; yea, let us be sick with his love, the loves of Christ
constrain, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5. And if before time we have
served and loved the Lord, even for fear of wrath; henceforth let us fear God
for love, and repent, and sorrow for our sins in love, and so our contrition
will become entire, and of the whole heart, because the love of God is
absolute, and infinite.

Now there be who make a trade, yea, a sport and a merriment of their sins,
who can count, and chronicle their dissoluteness with delight, so far they
be from contrition and remorse, and they no doubt will laugh in their ^leeves
to hear of this bruising and maceration of spirit; and let the deceived world
take these for godly people, jolly fellows, they shall die like men, like the
beasts that perish: the Lord gave strength to the horse, and clothed his neck
with thunder, says Job, he mockes at fear, and believes not the sound of the
trumpet, yet if the quiver of the Lord rattle against him, he is afraid as a
grasshopper. Obdurate godless spirits, whose hearts like Prometheus, grow fat
and stupid in the night of their ignorance, there is a day when the Vulture of
fear, and heaviness of heart shall seize and gnaw upon them, death shall feed
upon the ungodly, Psalm. 49. and when they come indeed in sight of death, and
the fatal anchor begins to fall, that can never be weighed again, and the
lusty sailors, the senses, that rowed them over the streams of carnal
pleasures, stand amazed, and fail, and the waves of horror swell and break
upon the cracked vessel, and the unwise Pilot reason as at the end of his wits,
cries out with him in Seneca, Huc ego quemadmodum vens, Lord how may this be?
yea, their own heart and conscience then amidst their other evils, shall
return upon them like the Raven, in black and sable weeds, with the law, the
curse, and all the aberrations of life in his mouth, and what tongue can tell
their sorrow? Like as the chased Dear, recovering about the end of the day
some little breathing, stands and listens unto the cries of them that seek his
blood, and seeing the way stopped, pants, and shuts his fearef^ll eyes, and
finding his legs fail him at last, lies down, despaires, and dies; so they
oft-times, and amidst their agony, feign would give a thousand Rams, and a
thousand Rivers of oil, and the fruit of their body, the choicest goods they
have, to be assoyled from the sin of their soul. O consider we this, that we
do not quite forget God; without contrition and repentance the Lord we see is
a consuming fire, and the impenitent sooner or later, have there no peace,
their hell, even upon earth: and if so, in the first day, at the day of death
at least, what shall we say to the day of revelation, the day of the general
judgment. Surely Kings shall repine then at the beggars joy, and mighty
Emperors shall say with Theodosius, how much better is it to have been the
true member of Christ his Church, than the head of an Empire? For the Angels
shall be seen then to gather up the scattered pieces of every contrite and
broken heart, and to draw out to their encouragement the tears of repentance,
which the Lord had treasured, or put up into his bottle, and to take quite from
them the cup of trembling, and to reach it forth into the hands of all
impenitents, and remorselesse sinners; and so I have done with the sacrifice,
The broken and contrite hear^; and proceed to the second branch of the text,
the Lords gentle acceptance, O God thou will not despise.

If in the conscience of sin, the broken heart tremble to appear before the
Lord, and though humbled, yet fears lest God should not accept of him, behold
his Cordial, God will not despise him: Not despise him? Yea, dear shall he be
in Gods sight, that the Sun may not burn him by day, nor the Moon by n ght:
For as in the Scripture there is an excess of speech, when more is spoken than
is understood, (...), as cast out the beam that is in thine own eye: So there
is also a defect of speech, when more is understood than spoken, (...), as
despise not prophecy, the Apostle means we should honor that gift of the
Holy Ghost much: So here the words must be understood above the letter, and
mean much more than is spoken, namely, that God will highly esteem, and
comfort, and revive the spirit of the humble; for Christ his sweet allures and
invitations of the laden and contrite heart to come to him, show that it is no
despicable matter: a thing to be despised is fruitless, and of small use, but
this oblation of David is of exceeding much validity, and therefore he calls it
first, A sacrifice; an offering it is, wherewith if we approach before the
Lord, we have a good evidence before us, the pledge of our peace, and remission
of sins, because God has so promised to accept of us for Christ his sake.
Secondly, David calls it Sacrificia, in the plural number, Sacrifices, because
a penitent heart, why this is one for all, it includes and sums up all that
whatsoever it is that God accepts, it is in stead of all, no single sacrifice.
Thirdly, the Prophet calls it Sacrificia Dei, the sacrifices of the Lord, of the
Lord by way of Emphasis, or excellence, as Nineveh, the City of God, or the
exceeding great City, Jonah 3. and the trees of God are goodly Cedars, Psalm.
80. and Opera Dei, the works of God, or which God approves, John 6. So the
contri^e heart is the sacrifices of God, such as to God is very pleasing, an
heart that repents and believes in Christ's blood, and seeks mercy for the
same; yea, though it have sinned much, is yet such a work of God, wherein God
cannot but be well pleased. From the heart are the issues of life and death,
it rowles the lower spheres with it; and therefore though David's eyes were
adulterous, his hands imbrued, and his very lips sealed up with his sins, as
we see at the fifteenth verse. Yet no sooner does the Lord open his mouth, but
his prayer is for his heart and spirit; for till God give us grace to draine
that fen, or sink of evil, which is in our heart, in vain should we labor
about our words, or deeds. And therefore Apollodorus in Plutarch dreamed, that
his body being cut in pieces, and cast into a seething cauldron, his heart
leapt up and said, Ego horum tibi causa fui, I was the cause of all this
mischief. And therefore the Pharisees, those old hypocrites, when they
cleansed but the outside, Christ and the second Elias called them vipers, and a
generation of vipers, and bid them Mundare prius quod intus, cleanse within
first, or be sincere at heart, and humble that; for till contrition come to the
heart, their religion like a mill, it moved not without the wind of vain
glory; and the light of their good works, the lamp of their charity did not
shine, and burn without the oil of man's praise, they had no zeal but in
public, and in the corners of the street: whereas, the heart once well
affected and humbled, then would they enter their closets to pray, and seek in
their devotions not their own, but Gods glory, and though man would
super-admire, or deifie them for any their good deeds, yet the heart well
touched with a sense of its own infirmity, it would retain its humility
amidst the holiest and best performances, it would give back to God his due.
Of such behoof is the broken heart, the issue of it is sincerity, and that is
the soul of all virtue; and therefore the contrite heart is, as we see, the
very center wherein the lines of Gods graces meet, and to which they run, and
so it has Gods special love and acceptance for its circumference.

[O God thou will not despise.] The summons of death went out against Hezekiah,
he retires like the Sun in his dial, he goes back to the Lord, he
mournes in his prayer like a Dove, he chatters like a Crane or Swallow, and I
have heard thy prayers, I have seen thy tears, behold, says the Lord, I will
add unto thy days fifteen years, Isa. 38. The summons of death, the threats
of Gods Law and Word, were read in the cares of Josiah the King, and his heart
was tender, he humbled himself before the Lord, he rent his clothes, he
wept sore, and the Lord sent Huldah the Prophetess, to assure him that his
contrition was not despised, and he should be gathered to his fathers in
peace, 2 King. 22.19. The summons of death were out against Nineveh that great
City, and she relents, she fits her down in sackcloth, and turns her
silks into ashes, Peers and people, none excepted, come down, e s^lio in
solum: and by and by the hand of vengeance, that was waved over them, is taken
aside, and the writ of blood is reversed. Surge desperatio, vade ad Niniven:
Now rise despair, and go to Nineveh: Think how Nineveh was not refused,
though the cry of her sins went up to Heaven before the cry of her tears: And
who art thou then that say with Spira, I cannot be saved; or with Cain,
Major iniquitas, Mine iniquity is greater than God can forgive? Mentiris,
Cain; Cain, thou lie, says Austen, thy sins be they in number as the
hairs of thine head, Gods mercies are as the stars of Heaven, above all his
works: Can we with Elias surround our sacrifice with water, our prayers and
devotions with holy sorrow, for the wants and defects of our devotions; yea, if
but with sorrow for not sorrowing so heartily, so earnestly as we ought, the
Lord will not despise us.

In ipsius praesentia nunquam supervacuae mendicant lachrymae veniam, says S.
Cyprian, Never did tears or true contrition beg before the Lord in vain: Nec
unquam patitur repulsam contriti cordis holocaustum, And never did the
sacrifice of the broken heart find repulse at the hands of God: The Israel of
God that ever is fighting with Ammon, and conflicting to the very Sunsetting,
and the man of God that still holds up his hands and prays, life and victory
is laid up for them in the bosom of Jesus Christ our Redeemer, (...), Col. 3.
And now let him be hid to the world, and despised, that the very abjects have
him in derision, his light shall break forth like the Sun, through the
continual intercession of Christ for him, and all the world shall see, that
God will not despise him.

We see Gods manner or method, Deducit ad inferos and reducit, When he brings a
sinner to him, he leads him as he did the Israelites, through a perilous
wilderness into Canaan, through Hell to Heaven, by mount Sinai to mount Sion,
through painful contrition, and sorrow, and sense of his sins and
corruptions, to the consolations and peace of the Holy Ghost, so that being
well experienced in the miseries of his sinful estate, he shall fear to
return into Egypt, the bitter impression and sting of his sins, which still
remains, it will be a check to him from looking back again: and this may
be a reason of Gods dealing with us, why he accepts the sacrifice of our
hearts contrite and broken.

But now if we shall fear to venture into the ways of repentance and
godliness, for fear of losing our pleasures, and being cast upon the pains
of contrition, prayer and watching, we see the vanity of that delusion,
because from being Benonies sons of sorrow, the Lord makes us to be Benjamins
sons of his own right hand. From a deluge of contrition to rinse us, we come
to enjoy the certificates of our peace, like his heavenly rainbow, to
strengthen us. In sense of man, Jobs contrition was ignis foeno, like the fire
to the stubble, to undo him, or confound him; but in truth, and in the event
it was ignis auro, like fire to the gold, to refi^e him and do him good: For
his corruption we see assumeth incorruption, and this vile body rises up a
glorious body, Gods tender mercy a little bounded in for his trial, like a
river breaks forth the more, at the sluices of his repentance and contrition.
A broken and a contrite heart, o God, thou will not despise.

Wherefore, seeing the heart contrite is so acceptable an offering to the Lord,
let us from the little Spider learn here to begin our amendment, let us begin
to mend our web at the middle, our contrition let us seek to bring it to the
heart. A cursorie confession, a formal fast, a coat of sackcloth, and the
like; can these quench the flames which sin has blown and kindled? Leave
off renting your garments, says the Prophet, and learn to unharden your
hearts, the contrite heart is the oblation that God will not despise.

The Romish Votarie or Secluse, how often is her eye cast down and heavy,
when her heart is an Aetna of vicious affections? How seems the Jesuit, as if
with S. Paul he were crucified to the world, and the world to him, when his
spirit is with Lucifer in the clouds, contriving combustions of State? How
broken, abject, and vile, seem their begging Orders, being men of another
mould indeed, just like the Comedians, who play and act the siege of Troy, and
the tears, of Priam, without all sense or touch of that grief at the heart.
True acceptable contrition runs and goes in another strain, by inward smart
and groans of heart and spirit: it prays, it vows, it powers out the soul
before the Lord, Lam. 2. Like the parched earth, it gaspes toward Heaven, as
if it would devour the clouds, it wrestleth with the Lord like Jacob, with
strong supplications it repents from the very heart root, and the savor of
this incense ascends before the throne of the Lord, and returns not without a
blessing, yea, not without some inward pledge in the issue and experience of
Gods mercy and remission: The stroke of an wholly accusing guilty heart is
heavy, exiccat ossa, Prove. 17. but the joy of the contrite repenting heart is
incredible, it is sanitas carnium, Prove. 14. So sweet are the issues of the
contrite heart, that i^ sense thereof Job feels not the witness of man
against him, because God would witness for him, Job. 31. and when our hearts
dare indeed witness to us, that we are contrite, or do un^einedly repent,
this makes glad the heart, and is a continual Jubilee, because it is the
co-witnesse with Gods spirit, that we are his, that God has accepted us.

A broken and a contrite heart, o God, thou will not despise. FINIS.
Errata.
Page 10. lin. 4. for no, read not. page ib. lin. 35. for nured, read inured.
p. 11. l 19. read cover and hide. p. ib. l. 33. for exacts, read exact. p. 14.
l. 19, 20. read in that very day.


