Deus

(...)

(...)

If I Depart I will send the comforter unto you John 16.7

Christ is risen from the dead. 1 Cor 15 4

I am tormented in this flame Luk 16

pray continually 1 These: 5:17

He was broken for or. sin^es Esaias. 53 5

He shall be called the son^e of God luk 1:35

* And I saw 7 goulden Candlestickes and in the midst of the 7 candles i^ one
like unto the son of man clothed with. A garment down to ye foot girt about ye
paps with. A goulden girdle

This is etarnall life to know thee to be the true god John 17 3 SEVEN GOVLDEN
Candlestickes Houlding The Seven Greatest lights of Christian Religion:

Showing unto all men what they should believe, and how they ought to walk in
this life, that they may attain unto eternal life

By GR WILLIAMS Doctor of Divinity p: 36^9 with thee is the well of life and in
thy light we shall see light 1624

Printed for Nathaniell Butter

Delaram scup^

engraved title page

THE CONTENTS OF the whole BOOK.
1 The Misery of Man. Romans 6.23. The sum whereof was preached, At Paul's
Cross. 2 The Knowledge of God. Exodus 34.6.7. The sum whereof was preached,
Before the King at Greene-wich. 3 The Incarnation of the Word. Ioh. 1.14. The
sum whereof was preached, At S. Mary's in Cambridge. 4 The Passion of the
Messiah. Luke 24.46. 5 The Resurrection of Christ. Matthew. 28.5.6. The sum
whereof was preached, Within the Cathedral Church of S. Paul. 6 The Ascension
of our Savior, and the Donation of the Holy Ghost. Ephesians. 4.5. The sum
whereof was preached, At S. Mary's in Cambridge. 7 The duty of Christians. 1 Thessalonians. 5.28. The sum whereof was preached, Before the King at Theobalds.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND truly Religious, PHILIP HERBERT, Earl of
Montgomery, Baron of Sherland, and Knight of the most Honorable Order of the
Garter; and to the most Virtuous and Zealously Religious Lady, the La. SVSAN,
his most dear and loving Wife; and to those five blessed branches, their most
sweet, gracious, and hopeful children, the Lord Charles Herbert, the Lady
Anna-Sophia Herbert. Mr. Philip Herbert, Mr. William Herbert, and Mr. James
Herbert; all grace and happiness in this life, and eternal blessedness in
the life to come.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
TO you seven, I dedicate these seven Golden Candlestickes; and to whom
should I dedicate the same, but to you? for in your house, and by your light I
have composed them; and God has blessed you, not only in making you great
through the favor of Mutable men, but especially in making you good through
the immutable grace and favor of himself which changes not, and which has
planted his fear in your hearts, and diffused those graces into your souls,
that do infalliby accompany salvation, and make you to shine as you do, for
the sincerity of your profession in the truth of the Gospel, and the
uprightness of your hearts, which have bin ever seen void of all double
courtly dealing, amongst a crooked and perverse generation, whereof I had
almost said, the greatest part is either basely filled with hypocritical
flattery, or most pitifully blinded with idololatricall impiety; and as a sure
pledge of his pure love unto your Honors, he has given unto you such an
inestimable gift, so many, so sweet, and so graceful children, which for all
good parts and endowments of nature, and for infallible signs of grace, I dare
boldly say it, (and I may the rather say it, because, rather then any other, I
do more experimentally know it) God has anointed above their fellows,
Especially that worthily beloved child, my LORD CHARLES HERBERT; of whom for h
s admired towardness, I could truly say, more then any that know him not,
would easily believe.
that neither you nor all yours can be sufficiently thankful unto God for
them; so great a blessing it is, to have so many, so many such Oliue-branches
round about your Table. And therefore as God has blessed your Honors, and made
you great lights to shine for godly zeal in this wicked declining world, and
to be patterns of true piety unto others round about you; So I do assure my
self, you will not disdain to accept and peruse these my labors, which as a
small expression of my unfeigned thankfulness for those manifold testimonies
of your love and favors unto me, far I confess beyond my deserts, I do
most syncerely dedicate unto your Honors, for whose complete happiness my
witness is in Heaven, that since first I belonged unto you, I have daily
prayed upon my bended knees; and I do unfeignedly acknowledge that you deserve
more from me, then I can perform, and have performed more unto me, then I can
any ways deserve from you: And therefore I presumed to dedicate these
Treatises unto your Honors, not to shelter them from any storms of maleuolent
tongues, but to publish that thankfulness unto the world, which my heart ever
acknowledges to be due unto you: For I know it is fit that whosoever
publishes any thing unfit, should bear the whole burden of his own fault,
and whosoever ventureth to appear in print, must expect the common lot of all
Writers, to be variously censured of various dispositions; Some as Nebuzaradan
burnt the Temple, Greg. Cur. past. 3. p. c. 20. Nazian. in pacif. 2.
but kept the gold, will be content to take the matter, and yet blame the
Author; others will read it, (...), not to better themselves, but to censure
others; In all these I would never desire Patron to defend me, nor fear
enemy to deprave me; for what is good will defend it self, and to flatter
those whose pens are silent, and their tongues always babbling, to condemn
others in what they cannot mend themselves, were impiety, and to fear them
imbecility; for to please all is impossible, and to endeavor it is folly: And
therefore I hope you will receive them as I tender them. They be not
unbeseeming to be known by the greatest Monarchs, for they contain not the
smoking fume of humane reasonings, nor the meandrian windings of
Controuersiall subtilties, but the purest lights of all Christian Religion; for
I saw that as the Athenians were ever desirous of novelties, so to satisfy
this Critic age, affecting nothing so well as quiddities, too many men have
addressed their minds to disputable Controversies; and I found, though with
grief, that the Adversaries on either side, and especially the Pontificials,
as if there were not Controversies enough in Religion, do often forge tenants
out of their own brains, and impute them each one against the other; and so
each Adversary strives to make the other say what indeed he abhorres to think;
whereby it happens that a great part of disputations, being about imaginary
Controversies, is but like a skirmishing in the air, which seems furious,
but strikes no man; and is vainly spent to no purpose, but to increase
Schism, and to inuolue themselves within the thickets of inextricable
labyrinths; because iarring and iangling about errors, they let pass the
maine grounds of truth, and striving to find out new ways, they do quite
forget the old way, which is the good way, and are become almost ignorant of
the first and chiefest Principles of Religion. Such is the policy of Satan,
to busy their heads about the less needful Controversies, thereby to make
them the less diligent to inquire after the most necessary counsels of their
salvation. And therefore considering with my self what the Apostle says, that
he desired to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; I have applied
my self to treat of these ensuing Theames: I confess my manner of handling
them is like my self, plain and homely, without any gorgeous garments of
Rhetorical ornaments; because I ever desired to speak rather for the
edification of my hearers, then for the oftenstation of my self; but I assure
you the matter is like them from whom I received it, sound and good; fit to
feed all those Christians that desire rather to have their hungry souls fed
with the sincere milk of Gods Word, then their itching ears tickled with the
enticing speech of man's wisdom: for they do contain the knowledge of our
selves, how poor and miserable we are become by sin, the knowledge of the
true and eternal God, and the knowledge of Jesus Christ, God and Man, then
whom there is no greater, no better; which few lessons are alone able to make
us happy. I need speak no more of the work, let it speak for me: I refer
all to God, who esteems of our endeavors, not by their event, but by our
intent; but remembering that presenting your Honors with a Book, I must not
make a Book of an Epistle, I only desire you to accept these notes of a
Scholars observation, who desires not so much to make himself known, as to
acknowledge his duty to God, and his desire to do him service, to extol his
name in Heaven, and not to gain himself a name on Earth, and to have all his
thoughts and works to honor Christ, or to be dishonored himself for no
Christian. So with my daily prayers for you and all yours, I humbly take my
leave and rest;

Your Honors true servant and most humble Chaplain, in all Christian service,
ever to be commanded, GR. WILLIAMS.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Saint Asaph, and to
the Right Worshipful, the truly Honored Sir JOHN WIN Knight and Baronet;
all grace and happiness in this life, and eternal happiness in the life to
come.
Right Reverend Father:
I Write not this unto your Lordship by base flattery, to beg any thing of you;
for I do endeavor always to support my mean estate by meditating on the
Apostles lesson, in any state to be contented; and I know, that as we came
naked into this world, so we shall all return naked hence again: but I
presume to affixe these few lines unto these my poor labors, to assure the
world of mine unfeigned joy to see your Lordship placed in that seat of
government wherein you are, in a certain hope, that (as Saint Paul said of
Timothy) according to the prophesies that went before of you; that is, the
Prophetical expectation that all men conceived of you; and the fair promises
that your Religious and always upright carriage has made unto us; your
Lordship will be a great comfort, and a Divine blessing unto that whole
Diocese wherein you live. I know it is the practice of many, I dare not say of
any Bishop, either basely to sell their spiritual promotions, or sinisterly to
bestow them on their friends, their kinsmen and alliances; and yet I say not
the Church of England does imitate that painted Harlot of Babylon, nor that
Jerusalem justifies Samaria; but as Demodocus said of the Milesians, they were
no fools, and yet they did the same things that fools did; so I fear that we
may say of many in the Church of England, we are no Pagans, no Popes, no
Papists, no worldlings, no carnal men; and yet though I say not that any man
does ill, yet I doubt we do not all well, not much better then they use to
do herein. I confess the Apostle notes it as a vice of the latter times, to
be without natural affection; but if gifts blind the eyes of the wise, that
they pervert judgment, I doubt not but this carnal love of flesh and blood
will sometimes with Mydas, prefer Pan before Apollo: and this natural
affection to kindred, being unworthiest, will not only deiect the minds of
painful men, and cause men rather to seek to be allied to others, then to
attain unto any worth in themselves; but it must also turn to the hurt and
detriment of the whole Church of God, and does apparently show such spiritual
Patrons to be indeed carnally minded; for do not the Publicans and Sinners even
the same? and therefore though I wish all men to abound in love and affection
unto their Kins-folkes, yet in this case, I would to God that all of us, Deuteronomy.
33 ^8.
would imitate Leui, who said unto his father, and to his mother, I have not
seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children,
but observed Gods word, and kept his covenant, that we would set God always
before our eyes; Neither do I say this to deny that men should do for their
kinsfolk being worthy men, but that they should not do this, neglecting
others far more worthy.
and laying aside all sinister respects, would do only what should be most
for Gods glory, for the encouragement of painful Preachers, and for the best
benefit unto the people of God: for if Christ being lost by Mary and Joseph
could not be found among his own friends and kins-folkes, these men should
take heed they find him not among theirs. I could say more of this point, and
yet not so much as Saint Bernard says unto Eugenius, of many other points like
to this: but this will serve to be a witness against some at the dreadful
day, and perhaps to stir up as much rage against my self, as the Jews had
against Saint Stephen, for speaking this truth against them that use such
dealing against God: If it does, I say as Saint Chrysostom said of the rage of
that cruel Empress: If they keep me poor, I know Christ had not an house to
put his head in; if they silence me and thrust me out of their Sinagogue; so
was that poor man that confessed Christ, and the Apostles enjoined not to
speak in the Name of Christ; if they cast me into prison, so was Jeremy, Saint
Peter, Saint Paul, and many more; If I be forced to fly my Country, I have
that beloved John, and that Atlas-like Athanasius for presidents of the like
usage, or whatsoever else should be done unto me, I have the holy Martyrs for
my fellow sufferers, and I will never count my life dear unto me, so I may
finish my course with joy; but I will by Gods help, be ever ready, with all my
heart, to suffer any thing for the Name of Jesus Christ, and for the least jot
of his truth. But I do much rejoice in that assured confidence which I have,
that your Lordship will herein, as well as in all other points of true piety,
be an heavenly shining light and president unto all other circumstant and
succeeding Bishops, and other Patrons whatsoever; and to that end my prayers
shall ever continue for your Lordship.

And for you my most worthy friend, and never to be forgotten Benefactor, Sir
John Win, I must, because I may truly say of you with the Poet, Ego te intus
and in cute noui, I am so intimately and inwardly acquainted with your very
heart and affections, most earnestly pray to God for your long continuance
amongst us: not only because of your continual love and favors unto me and
mine, but especially to be, as you have been hitherto, the chiefest pillar of
civil government, the best relieuer of our poor and needy, and the most
apparent pattern of all good works of piety and charity in all these parts
wherein you live: and you have not lost your reward; for God has blessed you
and your Lady with many blessed children, all fearing God; I said enough,
though I could truly say much more hereof; such a comfort, that not many men
have the like; and God renueth your years as the Eagles, and I hope yet will
add unto your days, as he did unto the days of Ezechias: and yet this is
nothing; Quia merces tua apud Deum; in respect of that great reward which you
shall have of God; because that by continuance in well doing, you shall be sure
to have glory, and honor, and immortality; and therefore most worthy Knight,
as I bear witness of this truth which I have seen and know of your Religious
heart, fearing God, full of good, so I say unto you, as Christ says unto the
Church of Smyrna, Go on in your course of godliness, and be faithful unto
the death, and you shall have the Crown of life, when the Lord shall say unto
you, Euge serve bone, Well done thou good and faithful servant, enter thou
into thy Masters joy. Amen.

Your Lordships, and your Worships in all Christian service, to be commanded,
GR. WILLIAMS

To the Christian READER.
Dear and Christian Reader:
THe more grace any man receives from God, the more thankfulness and service
he owes to God: And I confess God has showed me far more then usual
favors, which I assure my self he denied to many far more worthy of love,
then I poor worm could any ways think my self to be; for he has three
times at least bestowed my life upon me: first, in making me as he did all
other men; secondly, in redeeming me, as he does all righteous men; and
thirdly, in preserving me from the hands of wicked men, who though they gave
not any life unto me, yet induced by the malice of Hell, and assisted by the
subtilty of Satan, did combine with a craftier cruelty, then ever (that I could
find) the Arrian Bishops did against that innocent constant Athanasius, to
take away my feeble life; for when the proud were risen up against me; Psalm.
86.14.
and the congregation of naughty men had sought after my soul, and compassed
me on every side, Ecclus 51.
so that there was no man to help me; yet when I prayed unto my God, Verse. 2.
that he would not leave me in the days of my trouble, and in the time of the
proud, when I had none other help, then did he awake as a Giant out of sleep,
and preserved my body from destruction, Verse. 3.
he saved me from the mouth of the King of Lions, and according to the
multitude of his mercies, he delivered me from the teeth of them that were
ready to devour me, and out of the hands of them that sought after my life;
Verse. 7.
yea, he was so gracious unto me, that he left me not until mine eyes did see
their desire upon mine enemies, not their destruction, which my soul desired
they might never taste of, and I pray God they desired the same themselves, but
their suppression, so as they might never triumph in the miseries of Gods
servants, nor trample the blood of innocents under feet: And therefore seeing
God has been so gracious unto me, I have most constantly resolved by the
assistance of his Spirit, not only to praise his Name for his goodness and to
tell what he has done for my soul, but also to dedicate my whole life wholly
to his service, to despise the vanities of this life, to abandon all the
pleasures of this world, to be careless of all earthly things, Quae possessa
onerant, amata inquinant, and amissa cruciant.
but what may make in ordine ad deum, to help me the better to serve my God,
and with John Baptist to consume my life in the preaching and penning of Gods
Word, and maugre all the malice of the proudest Prelates in the world, to
speak the truth, as my conscience tells me, though my wife and children should
all beg, and my body be burned for the same: I will never count my life dear
unto me, to spend it in his service that so often gave it me: And because I
desired to do that which I thought best for the edifying of Gods Church, I
have applied my self to treat of these ensuing theames, which do contain
the chiefest points and the most necessary grounds of all Christian Religion:
for, besides my natural inclination, ever tending rather to pacification then
contention, I think we have more need of fundamental instructions, which are
necessary for all men, then of any controuersiall positions, which may satisfy
some men, that perhaps desire rather to inform their judgment, then to
reform their manners: And in the handling of them I have intermingled the
positive declaration of the truth, in a scholasticke form, with a forcible
application of the same unto our souls, for the framing of our lives, to make
use of what we learn: for I approve not so well the handling of Gods word
with too slender inforcement of the same unto our consciences, as the
schoolmen did, and their too much addicted followers use to do; nor yet
merely to stand upon exhortations with too slight expounding the most
principle grounds of Religion, which I fear to be the fault of too many
amongst us: And therefore the one being but as a foundation without roof, and
the other as a building on the sand, or in the air upon reeden pillars, I have
ever adjudged it the best course to knit both together, to make both a perfect
buiding. If I have done well, it is that which I desired, but if I have done
slenderly, it is that I could attain unto; Aug. proaem. l. 3. de Trinit.
And therefore I will be ever of that Fathers mind, which in all his works
and writings, desired not only pium Lectorem, a courteous Reader of his
labors, but also liberum Correctorem, a free reprouer of his faults; but so
that they do it friendly, to blame in their judgment where it is equity, but
not to blaze my faults unto the world, which is a breach of charity; and that
they do as well accept of what is good, as except against what is ill herein;
for I know there be many, Momus-like, Qui vel non intelligendo reprehendunt,
Idem. contra Faust. l. 22. c. 34.
vel reprehendendo non intelligunt; that do show their folly in reproving
others, when out of envy or ignorance they blame that good of others which they
have not, or know not themselves: And for these there is none other help, but
to be careless of their censures, and to pray against their wickedness. There
be faults escaped in the Printing, the most of them be literal, as the
mistaking of e for ae, and econtra, and such like faults of no great moment,
especially to him that knows how hard it is to make things perfect; and
therefore I hope they shall be either mended with thy pen, or pardoned without
thy censure: for other things I only desire thy prayers for me, and thou
shall ever find his pains and prayers for thee, which loves thee and all men
in Jesus Christ, with all vnfainednesse.

GR. WILLIAMS.

This Treatise contains 1. The work done, i. e. sin, and that is either 1.
Original sin, where is considered, 1. What evil it brings. 2. How it is
derived.
2. Actual sin where is showed. 1. How it is defined. 2. How it is increased.
1. Inwardly. 1. By the suggestion of Satan. 2. By the delights of the flesh. 3.
By the consent of the spirit.
2. Outwardly. 1. Secretly committed. 2 Publicly adventured. 3. Usually
practiced. 4. Exceedingly enlarged.

3. How it is committed. viz. of 1. Ignorance. 2. Knowledge. 3. Infirmity. 4.
Malice, which is 1. Wilful. 2. Spiteful.


* And from hence is seen, 1. The diversity of sinners. 2. The inequality of
sins, and yet, that 1. Every sin brings death. 2. The sin of any one brings
death 3. The least sin of any one brings death.


2. The wages to be paid for sin, i. e. death, which signifies the curse of
God extending it self, 1. Upon all creatures, 1. Heavenly. 2. Earthly.
2. Upon every man, to whom it brings a treble death. 1. Of the soul whereof
it kills, 1. Will. 2. Understanding. 3. Memory.
2. Of the body: where is considered. 1. What is meant by death, i. e. all
miseries: 1. In all Ages. 2. In all States. 3. By all Creatures.
2. How far it extends, over all men. 3. How variably it works in respect
of the 1. Manner. 2. Time. 3. Place. 4. Effects which are different; the cause
whereof is, 1. The practice of a good life. 2. The meditation of our death. 3.
The applic. of Christ's death.



3. Of body and soul in Hell.

3. The equity of this wages is seen, if we consider, 1. That it is just to
punish sin. 2. That God is the iustest Judge that can be found to punish
sin. 1. Because he loves righteousness. 2. Because he judges without
respect of persons. 3. Because he punishes every man according to his desert.
Where the inequality of Hell punishment is showed.
3. That all the punishment aforesaid inflicted for sin, is most just: 1.
Not in respect of a sinners will eternally to sin, if he did eternally live:
but, 2. In a just proportion of the punishment to the haynousnesse of the sin
committed: which is seen in respect, 1. Of the leuity and easiness to do
what God commands. 2. Of the transcendent deformity of sin, which is seen
if we consider, 1. The Nature of him that is offended. 2. The quality of him
that does offend. 3. The Nature of the sin that is committed.





This Treatise shows, 1. What God is, and how God is known, what he is, two
ways: 1. As he is in himself: so none knows God but God himself. 2. As he
has expressed himself to us, and so he may be known, 1. By way of negation.
2. By way of affirmation. 3. By way of superexcellency, and so he is showed to
be 1. An eternal being in himself. 2. A giver of being, 1. To all creatures.
2. To all his promises; which should teach us to labor to be united to him, to
be thankful, and to believe all his promises.
3. An absolute L. of all things, which should teach us to serve him for 3.
especial reasons.


2. What manner of God he is; where the nature of God is showed by three
special attributes viz. 1. By his Power touching which is handled, 1. The
number and quality of the adversaries of Gods power, which are 1. The Infidels,
that will not believe in him. 2. The desperate men, that cannot hope in him. 3.
The vbiquitaries of Germany. 4. The pontificialls of Rome.
2. How the active power of God is to be considered, in resp. 1. Of his inward
operations. 2. Of his outward operatio^s; and so it must be considered 1.
Relatiuely, as it respects the will and decree of God. 2. Absolutely, and so
he can do all things, 1. Which are not contrary to Gods Nature. 2. Which imply
not contradiction.


3. The proof of Gods omnipotency, which is showed from 1. The Word of God. 2.
The works of God. 1. In the beginning of the world 2. Throughout the
continuance. 3. In the end of the world.
3. The consent of all Divines. 4. The testimony of many Heathens. 5. The
confession of the very Devils.
4. The answering to the chiefest objections. 1. Of the Infidels. 2. Of the
desperate. 3. Of the vbiquitaries. 4. Of the pontificials.
5. The useful appl. of this do, which serves 1. To confute many heresies. 2.
To comfort all the Godly. 3. To condemn all the wicked.

2 By his goodness, and that seven especial ways, viz. that he is, 1.
Merciful, which consists in 1. Giving of graces. 2. Forgiving of sins. 3.
Qualifying of punishments.
2. Gracious, which signifies. 1. Amiable. 2. Placable. 3. Liberal.
3. Slow to anger, showed, 1. By Scriptures. 2. By examples, old and new.
4. Abundant in goodness, 1. As he is in himself. 2. As he is to others; 1.
Generally to all creatures by 1. Creating all things. 1. simp. g. 2. rela. g.
2. pres. the^ from evil. 3. enric. the^ with g.
2. Specially to his elect. 1. by dec. their elec. 2. by their effect. call. 3.
by the filling of the^ with his graces.


5. Abundant in truth, 1. Essentially truth in himself. 2. Causally the
fountain of al truth 1. Of things. 2. Of the understanding. 3. Of expression,
which is, 1. Primar. in Scrip. 2 Secondarily from man to man.


6. Reserving mercy for thousands, that is, 1. Extensiuely. 2. Successively.
7. Forgiving iniquity and transgression, and sin, i. e. all kinds of sin, 1.
Original corruption. 2. Actual commission. 3. Greatest abhom. if we repent.
* The useful applic. of Gods goodness, teaching us, 1. To be afraid to
sin. 2. Never to desp. of Gods goodn. 3. To imitate God in each one of the
seven forenamed points.

3. By his justice, and that 1. Negatiuely, not making the wicked innocent. 2.
Positiuely by visiting of the sins of the wicked, 1. Upon themselves. 2. Upon
their children, where is distinguished of 1. Parents. 2. Sins. 3. Children.
4. Punishments.





This Treatise contains, 1. An Introduction of the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus C. where is showed that 1. his life is our chiefest direct.
2. himself our only consolation.
2. An explication of that great mystery of the Incarnation of the Word: where
is handled. 1. Who was made (...); where is showed; 1. That there can be but
one God, and yet that there are three persons in the unity of that one essence,
and how these three persons are distinguished, 1. By their personal actions, 1.
outward which are, 1. Communic. 2. Transcient. 3. Voluntary.
2. Inward which are, 1. Permanent. 2. Necessary. 3. Incommunicable.

2. By their nominall relation, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And that the
person made is the second person of the blessed Trinity; To his father.
1. Co-eternall. 2. Co-essentiall. 3. Co-equall.
And this is fully proved, all obict. plainly answered; and from thence
showed, 1. The greatness of Gods love. 2. The craftiness of Satan. 3. The
perverseness of heretics. 4. The unthankfulness of men.


2. Three especial things touching the word (...), viz. 1. What (...)
signifies, i. e. the Word. 2. Why Christ is termed the Word. 3. Why the
Evangelist uses this word, 1. Because this name of Christ was best known to
the Jews and to the Gentiles. 2. Because it was the fit st word that he could
use, to make way for his subsequent discourse.

3. The impulsive and the final causes of the Words incarnation; and the
reasons why the Word rather then the Father or the holy Ghost was to be
incarnate.
2. What he was made, flesh, where is showed, 1. The manner of his conception,
the reasons, and the end thereof. 2. The matter that he assumed 1. All our
humane nature, i. e. body and soul. 2. All our humane frailties both of body
and soul, sin only excepted. And here is showed many excellent lessons that
we ought to learn in respect 1. Of God. 2. Of Christ. 3. Of our selves.



3. How the Word was made flesh, or how the two natures, divine and humane, do
make but one person in Christ: where is showed. 1. The distinction of the two
natures, divine, and humane; that they do still remain entire, and
inconfused, is fully proved, and the chiefest objections made to the contrary,
are plainly answered. 2. The union of the two natures in one personis
explained, and 1. The confirmation of the truth of this point is showed and the
greatest obie, made against it are sufficiently answered 2. The manner of this
union, wherein it consists, is expressed, viz. 1. Not as the Arrians say,
only in respect of 1. Cohabitation. 2. Will and affection. 3. Cooperation. 4.
Participation of his names and dignities unto the manhood.
2. But in the communicating of the subsistence of the Word with the
subsistence of the manhood; where is showed that this union is, 1.
Inconuertible. 2. Indivisible. 3. Inconfused. 4. Inseparable. 5. Substantial.
6. Ineffable.

3. The chiefest benefits and effects of the said union, is showed, and that 1.
In respect of Christ: which are, 1. An exe^pt. from all sin. 2. A collation of
ineffable graces into the manhood of Christ. 3. A communication of the
properties of each nature, to the person of Chapter Where the objection of the
vbiquit, indeuouring to prove the manhood invested with Divine properties, are
fully answered.
2. In resp. of us, viz our union and reconciliation with God, and all the
happiness we have in this life, or do look for in the life to come.




This Treatise contains, 1 An introduction of the meditation of Christ his
death, which is 1. Acceptable unto God. 2. Profitable for us. 1. To hinder
sin. 2. To kindle our charity. 3. To erect our hope.

2. A declaration of the passion of Christ; wherein is handled 4. 1. The person
suffering, which was 1. A Man. 2. A just Man. 3. A good Man. 4. A King. 5. A
Priest. 6. A Prophet. 7. A God.
whereis showed who are subject to most affliction. 2. The sufferings of
Christ. 1. In the garden of Gethsemane 1. Alone, where is showed, 1. How the
affections of Christ differ from ours in respect of the 1. Object. 2. Manner. 3.
Effects.
2. The cause of his agony, in respect of 1. object. 2. subject
where is Explained. 1. What might grieve Christ. 1. In respect of himself 1.
The greatness of his pain and shame. 2. The deferring of his death and
punishment.
2. In respect of others 1. Small account he saw they would make of his death.
2. The greatness of their punishment, which he knew they must suffer for that
their neglect.

2. What Christ might fear. 1. The weight of sin. 2 The malice of Satan. 3
The wrath of God.



2 By others where is showed. 1. The treason of Judas, where is showed, 1. what
Christ had done for Judas. 2. why Judas betrayed Christ. 3. how Judas betrayed
him.
2. The flight of all the followers of Christ. 3. The taking and binding of
Jesus Christ.

2. Before his Judges. viz. 1. Before Annas, where 1. He is examined. 1. Of his
Disciples. 2. Of his Doctrine.
2. he is stricken by the hie P. ser. 3. he is denied by his stoutest Ap.
2. Before Pilate the first time, where he is accused; 1. Of impiety against
God. 2. Of treaso against Caesar.
3. Before Herod, where the mystery of clothing Christ in white is explained.
4. Before Pilate the 2. time, where his scourging, crowning with thorns, etc.
is expressed,
3. In Golgotha where is expressed 1. Those things that he suffered on the
Cross. 1. An accursed, 2. A shameful, 3. A painful, 4. a lingering D:
where also is showed the generality of his suffering. 2. The 7. gracious words
that he uttered, and many other special obseruat. full of comfort.

3. The necessity of Christ his sufferings in respect of the causes viz. 1.
Isntrumental. 1. The envy of Satan. 2. The malice of the Jews. 3. The
covetousness of Judas. 4. The desire of the multitude.
2. Efficient, God himself, for our sins, out of the love he bare to man. 3.
Final. 1. In resp. of men. 1 To save the Elect by the virtue of his death. 2.
To make the wicked without excuse for neglecting his death.
2. In resp. of God, for the glory of his blessed N. where is showed that this
should teach us; 1. To compassionate his death. 2. To make us thankful for so
great a benefit. 3. To cause us to love him above all things in the world. 4.
To make us ready to suffer any thing with him and for his sake.


4. The manner of his suffering these things. 1. So as the Prophets foretold,
that he should suffer. 2. So as the Apostles and his Disciples saw, and
declared unto us that he did suffer.
And so in respect of himself, as it is incomprehensible unto all men.


This Treatise shows, 1. The malice of the Jews. 2. The devotion of the
women, where is showed, 1. Their number, Three: and why? 2. Their names, 1.
Mary Magdalen. 2. Mary. Iacobi. 3. Mary Salome.
whereby is showed, 1. The fortitude. 2. The fruitfulness. 3. The
peaceablenesse of the Church.

3. The action, where is considered, 1. The matter, a seeking of Christ. 2. The
manner, which was a seeking him, 1. Early. 2. Earnestly. 3. Mournefully. 4
Only. 5. Continually.
3. The end, to embalme him.
4. A question resolved, how these women, or one of them at least being so
wicked, became so devout; handled at large.
3. The office of the Angel. 1. In respect of Christ to do him service. 2. In
respect of the keepere to terrify them. 3. In respect of the women; 1. To
comfort them, 1. By the manner of their apparition, 1. In white. 2. On the
right side.
2. By their friendly alloc. teach. 1. Whom we ought to fear. 2. Whom we ought
not to fear 3. How we ought to fear.
2. To instruct them, 1. What they should believe, touching the resurrection of
Christ: where is handled, 1. The resurrection it self, is showed, 1. Neg. that
C. was not in the gra. 2. Affir. that he was risen and gone away, and therefore
not there: where the corporal presence of Christ is handled at large. 3.
Illustratiuely two ways. viz. 1. A Priori from the predictions, that Chr.
should rise; where is showed, 1. Why he was to rise, in 1. resp. of Sat. 2.
res. of Man. 3. res. of Him.
2. Why to rise on the third day, 1. of his Ene. 2. of his Disci. 3. of all
Chas. To confirm their faith touching. 1. The quality of his Person. 2. The
certainty of his resur. 3. The manner of our restau. 4. The declaration of our
state and condition.




2. A Posteriori, from the subsequents of his resurrection, and here is
showed, 1. The Jews reasons why they will not believe. 2. Our reasons why we
believe him to have risen: 1. Angelical assertion. 2. Manifold apparitions. 3.
Many circumstantiall demonstrations.




2. The place from whence he rose is discussed: where the discention of Christ
to hell, is showed, the 1. Necessity requiring it 2. Scriptures proving it. 3.
The consent of all antiquity, confirming it.
3, The manner how Christ rose, in respect of the 1. The place, from the dead.
2. The time, early. 3. Person 1. Truly. 2. Perfectly. 3. Gloriously.

4. The application of the whole doctrine, where is showed, that the
resurrection works, 1. Our resurrection from sin, which must be as his
was; 1. Speedily. 2. Truly. 3. Totally. 4. Constantly.
2. Our assurance of resurrection into glory.

2. What they should do, where is showed how necessary it is to join practice
unto the profession of Christianity.




This Treatise shows, 1. The glory or ascension of Christ, which is handled,
1. By way of exposition. 1. Person ascending where is showed four sorts of
ascenders. 1. Angels. 2. Devils. 3. Men. 4. God and Man Christ Jesus.
2. The ascension it self is showed, where is more fully expressed 1. Person
ascending, both in respect of his 1. Humiliation, where is showed 1. That he
was in heaven before he descended. 2. The extent of his humiliation.
2. His exaltation.
2. Particular circumstances concerning his Ascension. viz. 1. Time. 2. Place.
3 Manner.

3. The place where he ascended, into Heaven, where is showed that there is a
threefold Heaven. 1. Material. 2. Spiritual. 3. Supersubstantiall, where is
proved that the body of Christ is local.

2. By way of application. 1. For our consolation, which is twofold. 1. That
Christ in our flesh is gone to take possession of Heaven. 2. That being in
Heaven, he is not unmindful of us that be on earth.
2. For our imitatio^, where is showed. 1. The place from whence we must
ascend. 2. The means how we may ascend. 3. The signs if we have ascended.


2. The victory of Christ which is understood, 1. Passiuely for all our
enemies, Hell, Death, Sin, etc. 2. Actiuely for all those men that are
delivered from sin, and set at liberty to serve their God.
3. The bounty of Christ, where is showed 1. What manner of gifts Christ gives,
free gifts, to exclude merit. 2. What gifts are here meant, where is showed,
that all gifts of God are either 1. Temporal gifts. 2. Spiritual gifts, and
they are 2 sorts. viz. 1. To edify the Church, as 1. Ministers. 2. Gifts to
ministers, especially 1. Tongues. 2. Knowledge. 3. Charity. 4. Constancy. 5.
Contempt of the world. 6. Perfect power, etc.
3. Ministers endued with these gifts.


2. To sanctify our souls, which are 1. Common gifts. 2. Special gifts,
which are 1. faith which is 1. Historical. 2. Of miracles. 3. Temporary. 4.
Justifying.
2. Hope, which is 1. Humane. 2. Divine.
3. Charity. 4. Providence. 5. Patience, etc.

3. How God bestows his gifts. viz. 1. the gifts for edifying the Church, he
gives not always alike; for, 1. In the beginning of the Church, visibly; where
is showed how the holy ghost appeared. viz. 1. Like a cloud. and why? 2. Like
fire. and why? 3. Like a Dove. and why? 4. Like wind. and why? 5. Like
tongues. and why? Where is showed the filling of the Apostles wi^^ the holy
Ghost, 4. signs of their fullness, and the effects thereof;
2. Now and to the end, sufficiently, but with our great industry; where is
showed how we may know whether we have the gifts of God or not.
2. Gifts for the sanctifying our souls, he gives by 1. Hearing the Word. 2.
Receiving the Sacrament. 1. Baptism 2. Euchar.


4. To who^ God bestows all these gifts; to who^ it pleases him.


This Treatise contains, 1. A most friendly co^pellatio^, where is handled,
1. The unity of brethren, where is showed, 1. How dearly Heathen brethren in
former times loved each other. 2. How little love and unity is now among
Christian brethren.
2. The policy of the Apostle in seeking to win the Thessallonians to pray
for them; Where is showed that there be three sorts of Preachers. 1. Discreet.
2. Parasites to Princes. 3. Flatterers of the people.



2. A most Christian request or exhortation, where is showed 1. The piety of
the Apostle in persuading all men to pray: where is handled concerning prayer,
1. The kinds of prayer. 1. In respect of the matter, 1. Invocation. 1. To
remove evil. 2. To obtain good. 1. grace, spiritual. blessings. 2. peace,
temporal. blessings.


2. Thanksgiving which is enforced by many reasons, etc.
2. In respect of the form. 1. Mental. 2. Vocal. 3. Sudden. 4. Composed. 5.
Conceived. 6. Prescribed. 7. Private. 8. Public. 9. Ordinary. 10. Extraord.

2. The party to whom we should pray, i. e. God, for diverse special reasons: as
1. Because he only is omnipresent. 2. Because he only is omniscient. 3.
Because he only is omnipotent.
3. The place whereto pray, 1. Generally: euerywhere. 2. Specially the Church:
and that for five special reasons.
4. The time when to pray, 1. With our heart and affect. always. 2. With our
voice, at the appointed times. 1. For our private prayers. 2. For our publ.
prayers. Where the neglectors of public prayers are sharply reprehended.


5. The manner how to pray; 1. In humility. 2. In faith. 3. In zeal. 4. With
constancy. 5. In charity. 6. In piety.
6. The motives to persuade us to pray; 1. In respect of God: because prayer is
an essential part of Gods service. 2. In respect of our selves 1. To obtain
our request, 1. Whatsoever we ask. 2. More then we ask. 3. Better then we
ask.
2. To prevent judgments. 3. To preserve al spiritual graces. 4 To weaken
finne. 5. To sanctify the creatures. 6. To overcome all creatures. 7. To
prevail with God, 1. When he is pleased. 2. When he is angry. Where is
showed that the gift to pray, is the most excellentest grace that God bestows
on man.



2. The charity of the Apostle in showing how we should pray one for another;
where is showed that we must pray, 1. Specially for our selves. 2. Generally
for all men, for three special reasons,
and more particularly. 1. For Kings and all Magistrates. 2. For our ministers
and that for three special reasons. 1. Because we owe this duty to pray for
them. 2 For our own good. 3. To help them to discharge that great charge
which is laid upon them: where is showed the dangerous estate of Ministers
whatsoever they do.






An Jntroduction to the whole BOOK.
WHen Almighty God had decreed from all eternity, to make certain creatures
partakers of his felicity, he did in that very period of the decreed time by
his eternal Council, create of nothing, all the things that are subsistent,
and thereby he showed himself to be, as all Gentiles confessed it, optimus
maximus, the very best of all that is good, and the very greatest of all that
is great: and, as Pliny says well, especially having but the light of nature
to enlighten him, Plutarch, in Panegyrico Trai^n. dict.
he did herein show himself to be prius optimus quam maximus; because he
which was so eminently good, that he could not be bettered, did all this for
them that were just nothing: but alas, behold a relapsed creature, from his
most indulgent Creator, and see how this goodness of God, abused by the
creature, became through the just judgment of GOD, an euitable cause of all
miseries upon all transgressors; for we not contented with that blessed state
wherein we were established, did spurn against our God by a most ambitious
usurpation of his very Deity, and so aspiring unto a blessed life as we
thought, we brought upon our selves a most accursed death, as we all find: yet
God still desiring to show himself a God of mercy, he promised to send a
Savior to redeem us, Gal. 4.4.
by taking our nature upon him, and suffering in our flesh, whatsoever we
deserved for our sins; and to this end when the fullness of time came, God
sent his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, subject to the curse of
the Law, which was death of body, burial in the grave, and discention into
hell, that he might free us from eternal death, and then to rise again the
third day, to ascend into heaven, and to send his holy Spirit into our hearts,
to work in us faith to apply all this unto our selves, and all other graces
whatsoever, that might fit us and bring us unto everlasting life.

And this is the sum of all that is contained in this book, to know our
selves, to know God, to know Jesus Christ, borne, dead, raised, ascended, and
now reigning in eternal glory, to guide his Church, and to confound his foes
for evermore.

Perhaps this work may seem as the water boughs of a fruitless tree, a
superfluous branch unto the Church of God; I willingly submit it to the
judgment of Gods children: they must all confess it is the last hour of the
worlds age, wherein iniquity is increased, impiety is enlarged, and all charity
is almost abandoned, all things growing worse and worse by continuance; Et
satanas tanto feruentior ad sauitiam, quanto se sentit viciniorem ad paenam:
and Satan having the greater rage to drive us to transgression by how much the
nearer he perceiues himself to destruction; And therefore let men say what
they will, yet seeing we may truly demand of them, Quid audiam verba, cum
vidiam contraria facta? What booteth all our knowledge, seeing we do nothing
that we know, nor know nothing indeed as we ought to know? I say that it cannot
be amiss to do what we can to express those things that may best make for
our happiness; and I know these points are necessary to be known, Aetas
parentum peior auis tulit, nos nequiores, mox daturos progienem visiorem Horat.
car. 3.6. Greg, Moral l. 34. c. 1.
and most profitable to be practiced by all Christians. Read them then, and I
will pray to God that he will give thee grace, Faeliciter currere and faelicius
in Christi pietate cursam tuum consummare; to understand what thou read, to
believe what thou understand, and to practice what thou beleeuest, that so
thou may attain unto everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Courteous Reader, these errors and the like, if you meet them, I pray you
correct them.
Page Lin. Errata. Corrige. 5 19 predicatum praedicatum 7 24 as some, deleatur
15 21 infelicitas infaelicitas 18 13 predicatum praedicatum 22 30 nay no. 23 36
(...). (...). 28 21 occulos. oculos 29 20 Athenienes Athenienses 31 15
gnostrickes gnostickes. praemit premit 37 1 equalities equality 38 2 qua^a
quantae at as 44 9 seruat deleatur 45 10 meritrix meretrix 47 23 a as 71 8
(...) (...) 71 6 presents praesentes 77 12 laethi lethi 81 18 souls sculles
84 16 are is 27 elephat elephante 86 37 it in 93 4 dilicijs delicijs 102 18
diliciae deliciae 128 14 future tens for the present present tens for the
future. 263 7 conquari conqueri 326 25 impleue^ impleuit 452 4 faerox ferox 463
1 progeniere progenuere 471 26 eterchangably interchangably 480 25 penae poenae
482 25 manibus maenibus 462 10 Querentis quaerentis 559 35 tum tam 571 12
fugentes fugientes 579 7 eo eos 669 31 honestatatis honestatis 676 34 lepido
tepido. 692 after, effusion of, v. their dearest blood to defend that in the
field, which they with the diffusion of, etc. 707 1 propter praeter

Marginall faults.
P. Err. Corrige. 15 qud quad 19 Aetneum Aetnaeum 41 number nun^ 124 seeing being
196 prestare praestare 438 Hilarious Hilarious 690 Psalm. page 695 Blando Blanda.

And some other mis-quotations, which for want of the copy, I cannot directly
amend.

The first golden Candlestick, HOLDING The first greatest light of Christian
RELIGION. Of the misery of MAN.
ROMANS 6.23. The reward of sin is death.
EVery man (says holy Job) is borne to labor, (...); yea, necessity
enioyneth all mortal men to labor (says Euripides) and every labourer is
induced (says Hugo Cardinalis) to perform his work with alacrity upon the
assured hope of just reward: and therefore the law required that no man should
detain the hyre of the Labourer until the morning, but as soon as ever he
had done his work, Leuit. 19.13.
to pay him his wages: because (as our Savior says) the Labourer is worthy of
his hyre, and we find, that according as the payment is, Luc. 10.7.
good or bad, so are the Laborers willing, or unwilling, to do their work:
for good and present payment makes a painful and a cheerful agent.

Now here the Apostle sets down a work performed, and the wages thereof,
not only justly deserved, but also presently discharged, the reward of sin
is death, and in what day thou sinnest, Genesis 2.17.
in that day thou shall die the death, says the Lord, few words but full of
matter, Sin and Death: the two most common things upon the face of the earth;
for all men sinned, except Christ himself, and all men died, except Enoch and
Elias, and yet two of the most lamentable, and most fearful things in the
world: for what is more lamentable then sin, or what is more terrible then
death? Judges 15.4.5.
and yet as Sampsons Foxes were tied together by the tails, and carried
firebrands betwixt them to destroy all the Corn of the Philistimes, so here
sin and death are indissolubly linked together, with unquenchable firebrands
betwixt them, to devour all the whole race of mankind: for the reward of
sin is death. But I must sever them for a time, to examine these murderers
of men, that all we may hate them, if we cannot shun them: and therefore
according to the number of the words of this text, The division of the Text.
stipendium peccati mors, I desire you to observe the parts of this tragedy,
three words, three parts.

1 the work performed, Sin. 2 the payment rendered, Death. 3 the equity
showed, the wages of sin is death.
All which well considered will show unto us all, the most woeful state and the
manifold miseries, of poor distressed miserable man.

CHAP. I. Of Original sin, The first Part.
and how the same is derived from the Parents unto the Children.
Of the work that is done, i. e. Sin.
HEre you see, sin is the root of death, and death is the fruit of sin.
Sower must be the root when the fruit does prove so bitter, and sin must
needs be execrable, when as death is a thing so lamentable, and therefore
sin makes me quake to think of it, and death should make you tremble to
consider of it, because death is the wages of sin.

And sin is either 1 original. Sin is twofold.
2 actual.
the first is traduced unto us from Adam, the second is daily committed by our
selves.

For the first, In what day thou eatest of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, thou shall die the death (says the Lord unto Adam) but you may eat,
Genesis 2.17.
and you shall not die at all (says the Devil unto Euah:) she believed the
Devil; and the man obayed his wife; and so both would needs eat, and
therefore God cannot be true, or else man must needs die, and he must justly
die, because he did unjustly eat. i. Of Original sin. Romans 5.12.
Here was the sin committed by one; and from him it was derived unto all: for
by one man, sin entered into the world, and sin went over all, and spread it
self like that far-spreading tree which Olympias dreamt she bare or like a
vile gangrene, over all the face of the whole earth, and corrupted all the race
of mankind, for it is a schoole-point most infallible, that Adam now stood,
not as a private person, or as one particular man, but as the root of all the
branches, and as bearing in his person the nature of all mankind.

And therefore if he had stood, we had all stood, Heb. 7.9.
but as Abraham paying tithes, Leui paid tithes in Abraham, so Adam sinning, we
have all sinned in Adam, Et omnes peccauimus in isto vno homine, quia omnes
eramus iste vnus homo. And we have all sinned in that one man, because we all
were that one man, says Saint Augustine. And so both himself and we all, The
damage that we receive by Adams fall, is twofold: 1. A deprivation of all
goodness.
do by this fact of Adam, receive a double damage.

1. A deprivation of all our original goodness, the image of God in us, and
the love of God toward us, and therefore if at the loss of earthly treasures
we show our selves so much grieved, O then how should our souls, for the
amission of such heavenly graces be continually perplexed, until we see the
same once again restored?

2. An habitual natural pronenesse to all kind of wickedness, 1. A pronesse
to all wickedness.
and to commit sin even with greediness.

In respect of the first, we are altogether unable to do any good: for who can
bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean? how can we, being void of
grace, bring forth any fruits of goodness? and,

In respect of the second, we are naturally inclined to all kind of evil,
like a stone tumbling down a hill, that can never stay it self until it come
to the bottom; So Medea says, Video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor,
Though I see the good, yet am I naturally driven to do that which is evil;
for our whole nature being defiled, we are wholly inclined to fall from one
wickedness unto another, as the Psalmist speaks.

And in respect of both these we are said to be conceived in sin, borne in
iniquiitie, destitute of grace, void of goodness, nothing but flesh, full of
corruption, children of darkness, sons of wrath, heirs of damnation,
slaves of death; for the reward of sin is death.

But here it may be questioned, and it is not easily to be resolved, how
original corruption is traduced from the Parents into the Children. The
question is not of the verity of the matter, for it is plain, Ezech. 18.
that our Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on
edge, and every one may truly say with the Prophet, Psalm. 51.5.
in sin my Mother has conceived me, but it is of the Mystery of the manner,
John 3.9.
as Nicodemus said to Christ, how can these things be? for

How original sin is traduced from the Parents into the Children.
1. On the one side, they say the child receives from his Parents, not his
soul, but only his body; for if the soul were ex traduce, begotten by
natural generation, then it must needs be traduced, either from the body, or
from the soul of the Parents.

Whether the soul is begotten by the Parents.
If from the soul, then is the soul subject to division, to corruption, and
then we might as well say, an Angel may beget an Angel, as to say, one soul
may beget another; but to say that the body being an elementarie substance,
subject to corruption, should beget a spiritual soul that is incorruptible,
is more absurd, as Aristotle does most truly declare.

And therefore they say that the soul creando infunditur, and infundendo
creatur, is infused as it is created, and created as it is infused; and then,
as clean water powered into a foul Cisterne, must needs be presently
corrupted, so the pure soul infused into a polluted flesh, must needs be
instantly defiled, for he that touches pitch, shall be defiled with pitch.

And to confirm this supposition, they allege that testimony of Scripture,
Heb. 12.9.
where the Apostle calls our natural Fathers, (...), the Fathers of our
flesh, and God (...), the Father of Spirits.

2. On the other side they say, if the soul should not proceed from the
Parents, then not only God might seem to deal unjustly:

1. In not performing his law, when he says: Ezech. 18.20.
the soul which sins, the same shall dye, and not the soul which never
sinned.

2. In the composing and joining together of two substances, so unequal to be
united, a pure soul that never offended, infused into a most vnpure substance
wholly corrupted: but also, the flesh must needs be yielded to be, the
primarie seat of sin: and though it be a corporal gross composition wanting
life, yet must it needs prove to be not only the taynter and defiler, but
also to predominate, and to be the guider and ruler of that spiritual
substance which gives us life, which is every way most absurd.

And so you see that (as Saint Augustine says) of this traducta culpa, the
traduction of this sin, nihil ad predicandum notiu^, Aug. de moribus
Ecclesiae c. 22.
nihil ad intelligendum secretius, nothing is better known to be published;
(for experience, woeful experience shows it) that in Adam and through Adam,
all the race of mankind is corrupted: but how this corruption is traduced in
the propagation of the posterity, nothing is harder to be expressed. For (as
the Prophet David says) we are fearfully and wonderfully made, Psalm. 139.13.
and ver. 5.
and the knowledge thereof is so excellent, that we may well wonder at it, but
no ways well attain unto it.

And therefore, as a fellow fallen into a dungeon, and crying unto his
companion for help, that his life might be preserved; his friend wondering how
he came there, began to question with him, which way he had fallen, and how
long he had continued: but he replied; Tu cogita quomodo hinc me liberes, Aug.
de moribus Eclesiae: c. 26.
non quomodo huc ceciderim quaeras I pray thee rather think thou how I may be
delivered, then stand questioning how I came endangered; so should we rather
earnestly seek the means how this original corruption may be removed from
us, then curiously to search how it is traduced unto us.

But because, as it seemed unto Festus to be unreasonable to send a prisoner,
Acts 25.27.
and not withal to signify the crimes laid against him, so this seems to me
very unfit, to propose the doubts, and not to do our best to express the
truth: therefore I will set down mine opinion touching this question that is
full of contradiction.

That God created all souls at once, as he did the Angels, in the beginning,
and then infuseth them into the bodies, as they are still begotten of their
Parents, though it was an opinion much patronized by the Origenists, yet has
it been long exploded, and truly confuted by the learned; and that God still
ex nihilo, of nothing, creates the souls, as he infuseth them into the
bodies, I see as little show of reason, as nothing, yet alleged; In what sense
God is called the Father of spirits.
whereby the said thesis may be confirmed. For the Apostle in the place above
cited, does not mean that God is more properly, a Father unto our spirits, i.
e. our souls (as if they were more immediately proceeding from God) then of
our bodies; or that our natural Parents are more properly the Fathers of our
flesh then of our spirits: for though the soul, in regard of its spiritual
being is nearer and more agreeable to the nature of God; then the body, yet in
regard of its being, God is the author, the framer, and the principal Father,
as well of the body as of the soul, Psalm. 139.12.
for my raynes are thine, and thou have covered me in my Mothers womb, says
the Psalmist.

And our natural Parents may be truly said, to be the isntrumental authors
and begetters of the soul, as well as of the body: for, Genesis 5.3.
when it is said that Adam begat a child in his image; we must not refer
this image only to the similitude of the body, but also to the like qualities
and properties of the soul, and so wholly like him both in body and soul: and
the Apostle, by the Fathers of our flesh, does understand Fathers of our
corruptible being, such as make us natural men and no more; and by Father of
spirits, he understands the Father of our spiritual birth, which makes us
spiritual men; and so the meaning of the Apostle is no more but this, viz.

That every godly man has a double being.
If we do so reverently and so contentedly suffer the correction of those
Fathers, which give us our natural being, quae nascimur ad laborem, nascimur
ad mortem, whereby we are borne to miseries, born to die: how much more
contentedly should we receive the chastisements of that Father, which gives us
our spiritual being, qua nascimur ad salutem, nascimur ad vitam, whereby we
are borne unto Sanctification, and brought unto eternal salvation? For all men
may easily see from the context of the place it self, that the Apostle
speaks thus, not of the natural and carnal men, that are borne only of
flesh and blood, but of these spiritual and regenerate men, which are also
borne of water and of the Spirit.

And therefore seeing the Apostle here by Spirit, understands the fruits of
the Spirit, that is, the spiritual graces of regeneration, whereby we live
(says the Apostle) that is, eternally: as the coherence of the place, and the
maine scope of the Apostle makes it plain, and not the Souls or Spirits of
our natural generation; I say that the parents begetting a child, do beget
both Body and Soul: not that the Soul begets a Soul, That man and all
other creatures, received power to produce creatures like unto themselves.
Totum generat totum, hoc est corpus generat corpus mediante anima and anima
generat animam, mediante corpore. Psalm. 51.5.
or the Body begets a spirit, but that as all other creatures received power
from God, to produce creatures like unto themselves, as the seed of the
vegetative to bring forth vegetative creatures, and the sensible, sensible
creatures, so man consisting both of Body and Soul, should beget a creature
like unto himself, consisting of the same parts: for otherwise sin must
needs be in the body, before the Soul be infused: for if the school of the
naturalists be to be believed, the Soul is not infused into the Body, until
the thirtieth (as some) or fortieth day, as some affirm; and yet the Psalmist
says that he was conceived in sin: therefore, both Body and Soul were both
conceived at once, or else corruption was in the Body before the infusion of
the Soul, and this living Soul by this dead flesh must needs be defiled,
which is most absurd: for (as Saint Augustine says of Adam, It was not his
corruptible flesh which made his Soul to become sinful, but his sinful
Soul made his flesh subject to corruption, so it must needs be in the sons
of Adam, Gene. 5.3.
that not our flesh corrupts our Souls; but both body and soul are conceived
in sin, both produced of sinful seed, and so sin principally resides in
the Soul and not in the Body, because the Soul gives life and motion unto the
flesh: hence it is that Adam having defiled both his Body and Soul, is said to
have begot a child in his own image: i. e. sinful and polluted like
himself, both in regard of his body and Soul: Bosquierus de finibus bonorum.
lib. 1. con 6. p. 27.
Nam Adam vt persona publica sibi ac suis aut sapiebat aut delirabat, for now
Adam standing in paradise a public person (as I told you before,) was to make
or to mar himself and all his posterity: and therefore if this root had
continued holy, the branches had been likewise holy, but the tree proving to
be evil, Romans 11.
the fruit could not possibly be good, Math. 7.18.
for a bad tree cannot bring forth good fruit, says our Savior: and therefore
Adam sinning, all his seed are become sinful, and all his offspring, tanquam
serie continuata, as in a continued line, do like corrupted branches of a
rotten tree, bring forth still corrupted fruits: and so make all their
generation, so soon as they are begotten, liable to the curse of God for that
first transgression: for the reward of sin is death; and the Prophet David
says, Psalm. 51.2.
he was shapen in wickedness, and conceived in sin, John 3.6.
and our Savior says, that which is borne of flesh is flesh, i. e. he that is
borne of a sinful man, can be nothing else but a sinful man: That Gods
graces are not traduced from the best parents.
(not that a godly man begets a godly man; for the graces of Gods spirit, are
not begotten in our carnal generation, but they are given from above in our
spiritual regeneration, and a man begets his child, not as he is spiritual,
but as he is a creature consisting of body and soul) and therefore whosoever
is borne of flesh and blood, must needs be tainted and corrupted with sin
and wickedness: for flesh here is not taken pro natura carnis, sed pro
vitiosa qualitate totius hominis, for the single nature of flesh, but for the
corrupted quality of the whole man, as Saint Paul excellently shows, when
he says, in my flesh dwells no goodness, Romans 7.8.
i. e. in the corrupted nature of a natural man there is no grace, there is no
goodness.

And therefore hoc virus paternum, this hereditarie poison (as Paulinus calls
it, What we learn from this doctrine.
) this our original sin that is inbred in every man, since the fall of the
first man, may sufficiently serve to teach us.

First, to justify God.
First, to justify God for inflicting death upon every man, though man should
do nothing else to procure his death: quia damnati antequam nati, because
every one is guilty of this sin, and therefore of death, before he comes
to this present life; for the reward of sin is death: and therefore the death
of children and infants that have done no actual sin, does prove them
tainted with this sin, because death cannot be justly inflicted upon those
that are no ways infected with sin; for the reward of sin is death: but
you see they are subject unto death, and therefore you may know they are
tainted with sin.

Secondly, Secondly, to be humbled.
this may serve to teach all those that stand so much upon the honor and
dignity of their natural birth, to consider wh^t they are and what they have
thereby, a sinful, corrupted, and contagious being, children of wrath,
subjects to death, slaves of damnation: be they Kings, Princes, Nobles, what
you will, this is all they have or can have by their natural birth: John 3.6.
for whatsoever is borne of flesh is flesh, i. e. all things that parents can
conuaye unto their children is but a corrupted natural being: yea, though the
parties should be sanctified themselves, and thereby procure their children to
be received and reputed members of the visible Church before men, yet can they
not infuse Grace, Perkins in Jud. 1.
nor produce sanctified children in the sight of God. For though we read of
some that were sanctified in their Mothers womb, as Jeremy, John Baptist, and
the like, Ier. 1.5.
yet this sanctifying grace was infused by God, and not traduced from their
parents: Luke 1.44.
and therefore this should make all men to be of an humble spirit, and to
rejoice more in their second birth, in the Baptism that they have received, it
may be by the hands of some mean Minister, and their begetting unto the faith
of Christ, by the preaching of the word of God, then in all that glory and
excellency that they have gotten from their natural parents: for they did but
make us Men, these must make us Christian men.

And thus you see that by the guilt of Adams sin, every child of Adam
deserves eternal death, before he comes to this present life.

But because we would be sure enough of death, we will hasten it, and draw it
on, as it were with cart-ropes throughout all our life, and we will not have it
said, Ezech. 18.2.
our fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge,
or, that Adam sinned and we are punished; nam errauimus cum patribus, for we
have sinned, and will sin with our fathers, and more then our fathers, we will
drink iniquity like water, and add unto our original corruption those daily
heaps of our actual transgressions.

And therefore you must give me leave to insist a little upon this point, and
to take a further view of this our immortal enemy, this actual sin that
brings death. I confess it is an Hydrian beast, that has many heads, it is
like a continued quantity that admits of infinite sections: I cannot touch
them all, yet for methods sake and the furtherance of our memory, I desire you
to consider these three points.

Three things considered in the handling of actual sin.
1. The nature of it, how it is defined. 2. The degrees whereby it is increased.
3. The manner how it is committed.
CHAP. II. Of actual sin, what it is: and by what degrees it inwardly
increases.
Aug. contra faustum. lib. 22. cap. 27. What actual sin is.
SAint Augustine defines sin to be factum, aut dictum, aut concupitum contra
legem Dei, any fact, or word, or thought, that is contrary to the Law of God;
and Saint Ambrose briefer, says that sin is the breach of Gods Law: but
Zanchius fuller, Zanch. de peccato actuali. lib. 1. these. 1. page 161.
and to my content, playner, says, that an actual sin is an anomie A want
of rule.
whereby those humane acts, that do proceed from the corruption of our flesh
are contrary to the Will of God, ingraffed in the minds of men, and especially
revealed in the word of truth: for herein is expressed both the matter and
the form of sin.

The matter of sin must be a humane act.
First, Materiale peccati, the matter of sin, is said to be a humane act,
whether thought, word, or deed, for otherwise it cannot be said to be an
actual sin where there is no act: and therefore not only in sins of
commission, as adultery, murder, theft, and such like; but also in those
sins which are called, sins of omission, as not to pray, not to do that
service unto God which we owe unto him, there is not only a mere privation,
but there must be also, aliquid positiuum, some act that makes the sin: as
when thou omittest thy duty, either because thou will not do it, and there is
an act of thy will; or because thou can not remember and have forgotten to
do it; and there is an act of thy memory; or else thy unwillingness, thy
unableness, and thy forgetfulness, do proceed from some act and occasion
either present or precedent, Furor iraque mentem precipitant.
which makes thee to omit the things commanded, and so to sin; as when thy
fear blindes thy judgment that thou can not discern the truth, or thy
drunkenness causes thee to sleep, when thou should be hearing the word of
God.

But you must not think every humane act to be a sin, but only those that
do proceed from the corruption of our flesh, and are contrary to the Will of
God. For:

Secondly, Formale peccati, The very being of sin, is an erring from the will
of God. Psalm. 40.10.
(as the Schoolmen call it) the very being of sin, is a deuiation from the
Will of God. For the Will of God is to be always set before our eyes, as the
only rule whereby we are to square all our actions; and therefore every man
should say with the Psalmist; In the volume of thy book it is written of me
that I should fulfill thy will, O my God, I am content to do it; and every man
should do as he says, Thy will be done in earth as it is Heaven; for
whosoever erreth from his Will sins against his own Soul, but whosoever
does the will of my Father, the same is my brother, and my sister, and my
mother, Mar. 3.35.
says our Savior Christ.

But because the will of God is not always known to us, neither can we search
into that which he concealeth from us, therefore you must understand that the
revealed will of God is lydius-lapis, that touchstone which tries every
action, and makes it either just or sinful. The will of God is revealed in
our consciences, and in the Scriptures.
Now this will of God is revealed in the book of every man's conscience, and in
the book of holy Scriptures. For of the first, the Apostle says, that the
Gentiles though they had not the written Law of Moses, yet had they the Law of
God written in their hearts, because there consciences bare them witness what
was to be performed, and what was to be eschewed, and did accuse them when they
did ill, and excuse them when they did well: and therefore whatsoever they did
against their own conscience, they did the same against the will of God,
revealed and engraven in their hearts: and therefore the Apostle says, that as
many as have sinned without the law, Romans 2.14. verse 14.
i. e. without the written law of Moses, shall also perish without the Law:
because they having not the law, were a law unto themselves. And,

The word of God is divided into two parts, id est, 1. The law, and 2. The
Gospel.

For the 2. we must not only understand the Law of decalogue, or 10.
commandments (although that be the chiefest rule to express all sin,) but
we must also consider the Gospel, as a part of that book wherein, the revealed
will of God is expressed; for there are many things forbidden, and many things
commanded in the Gospel, which are not plainly expressed or mentioned in the
Law, as to believe Jesus the son of Mary to be the Messiah whereby all sins
are taken away, and without whom all sins do remain: for so Christ himself
testifies, John. 6.9.
that the holy Ghost should reprove the world of sin, because they did not
believe in him; and therefore whatsoever act is done against the will of God
revealed either in the Law or the Gospel, the same is sin.

Secondly, For the degrees whereby sin is increased, we must note, Bernardus de
grad: humilitatis.
that nemo repentine fit pessimus sed paulatim descendit, no man is suddenly
desperately evil, but he descends to hell by little and little: for the devil
is like a serpent, creeping, and sliding by little and little, when we cannot
perceive his paths: and therefore we should be very wary to mark his
footesteps.

Now as every sin is committed either inwardly or outwardly, Jsidorus de
summo bono. Sin is inwardly increased by three degrees.
so every sin is increased either inwardly in our minds, or outwardly in our
actions.

1. Inwardly it increases and grows by 3. degrees, 1. By the suggestion of
Satan. 2. By the delight of the Flesh. 3. By the consent of the Spirit.


The first we cannot well avoid, because Satan is ever busy to suggest sin
into us, Satan suggesteth sin diverse ways.
sometimes horribly to prodigious villainies, sometimes secretly he insinuates
himself under the shape of an Angel of Light, and suggesteth sin under the
show of Virtue: and thus in every member of our Bodies, and in every corner of
our Souls, he lurketh and lies upon a bed of fornication, suggesting
falsehood into our hearts; lightness into our heads, adulteries into our eyes,
oaths into our mouths, intemperancies into our whole bodies.

The first suggestions of Satan are sins.
And although this suggestion is from Satan yet is it a transgression in us,
Inest enim peccatum cum suggeritur, regnat cum delectaris, primum peccatum
cogitasse quae mala sunt: for sin enters when it is suggested it reigns,
when thou consentest and art delighted with it: because the first sin is to
have any thoughts of sin, says Saint Hierome: Hierome: lib. 1. in Amos.
and therefore we should labor and strive what lies in us to prevent the
coming of the Devil, to suggest any sin unto us, and this we may do, if
we look upon him before he comes unto us, and if we shut him out when he
comes unto us.

He that would see the devil coming, How we may avoid the suggestions of
Satan.
must behold him before he comes too near; for as in the optikes, if a man
would perfectly see the perfection of any picture, he must stand a pretty
distance from it, so in the aspects of Satan, if a man would throghly perceive
the deceitfulness, and the ugliness of his shadows, 1. By beholding his
vgglinesse in others.
and the filthiness of his form, he must look upon him before he comes to
near him; and this is the reason why many do not detest him, because they
never looked on him, before he embraced them: for as our eyes being too near
any object, the beams of our sight will be confounded, so-Satan having closed
with us, he darkeneth the eyes of our understanding, that we cannot see him as
he is.

And therefore it would be well for us, if we could be induced to behold his
pride, his drunkenness, his oaths, his avarice, and all his foul deformities
in other men, that this might make us to detest him, and shun him before he
comes into our selves. for,

Faelix quem saciunt aliena pericula cautum, every schoole-boy learnt it: let
us all learn to practice it, behold the ugliness of Satan in his sinners,
before he comes into our Souls. and,

Secondly, When we have beheld him, 2. By the continual following of our
vocation.
let us not stand still while he comes unto us: but let us quickly run unto
the works of our vocations before he can fasten on us any of his suggestions:
For as a bird sitting still upon the perch when she sees the fowler, may be
easily catched; but if she soon flies, she is safe enough from all danger: so
a man giving himself to idleness is soon tempted to wickedness, Idleness
is a great furtherance to wickedness. Quaeritur Aegistus quare sit factus
adulter: in promptu causa est, desidiosus erat. How apt our flesh is to
commit sin.
but if he gives himself to reading, praying, or any other work of his
vocation he shall be the freer from the devils suggestion; and therefore Saint
Hierome exhorts his friend Rusticus to be never idle: but always busied
about some good work or other, vt quando diabolus veniret, inueniret
occupatum, that whenever the devil should come, he should find him working
in Gods vineyard.

Secondly, When Satan by his wicked suggestions, has emised the seed of sin
into our hearts like a father, then our corrupted flesh, by wicked thoughts and
imaginations, receaueth and conceaueth sin as a mother; and it is as
fruitful of all manner of sin as Diodorus Siculus reports the Egyptian
Islands to be of vermines: and therefore, (as the wise man says) cum omni
diligentia obserua cor tuum, Prouer. 4.22.
Look not only to thy hands, and to thy feet, to thy words, and to thy
works, (though these also should be carefully looked unto,) but especially
above all things, look to the thoughts and inward affections of thy heart; How
wicked thoughts will bring forth wicked works.
for as the wood is, so the fire will be; unsavory wood will make unwholesome
fire, but sweet Frankincense or dry Juniper, will yield a pleasant perfume:
so wicked thoughts and affections will bring forth Ieude words, and wicked
actions: Matthew. 12.34.
for, out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

Aug de trinit. lib. 12.
And therefore Saint Augustine says, that our hearts should be very wary, never
to be delighted with any sin suggested by Satan: Nam cum sola cogitatione
men's delectatur illicitis, for when the mind in the thoughts and cogitations
only, That the least titillation of the mind with sin is sin.
is delighted with unlawful things, though it purposes not to do them, but
does as it were think of them and is tickled with them, that little delight it
conceaues of those thougths, Non negandum esse peccatum, etsi long minus quam
si and opere statuatur implendum: It cannot be denied but it is a sin, though
not near so great as when we purpose to bring the said cogitations into
actions, and therefore (says he) Statim vt attigerunt animum, respui debent,
as soon as ever such thoughts of evil, do invade or touch our minds, we
should presently smother them and cast them off, and then De talibus quoque
cogitationibus venia petenda est, pectusque percutiendum atque dicendum,
Dimitte nobis debita nostra: We should crave pardon of God for such wandering
thoughts, and striking our breasts say, O Lord forgive us our sins, for who
can tell how often he offends,

Thirdly, When Satan, like the serpent, has persuaded and the concupiscence of
our flesh, like Eua, is delighted when she sees the fruit fair unto the eye,
and the sin pleasant unto the taste, Genesis 3. How the flesh labors to
draw our minds to yield consent to sin. Romans 7.17. Gregor. mar. 16.
then they draw in Reason, like Adam, to give consent, and so to finish all,
and perpetrate the sin; and this agrauates the sin, and makes us void of
any excuse: for whereas before, when the flesh was only delighted, but the
spirit was not consenting, a man might say, It is not I that do it, but the
flesh that is joined with me; and so if reason had refused when the flesh was
delighted a man might in some sort be excused, quia peccata non nocent, si non
placent, Because sins shall not hurt our souls, if our souls do not
delight in sins, and that man; haud est nocens, Seneca. in Her. oet.
quicunque non sponte est nocens, is scarcely guilty that is not willing to
offend, says Seneca: and therefore recipe iam sensus hera, quid te ipsa
lacerans, omnium aspectum fugis, men's impudicam facere non casus solet, those
that are violently haled to sin, Idem in hippol. Act: 3.
like Lucretia that was ravished against her will, need not so much vex
themselves with grief, and shun for shame the sight of men, because the
mind yielding or denying consent unto the desires of the flesh, does either
aggrauate or extenuate the fact.

But when the spirit yields consent unto the desires and delights of the flesh,
as Adam took of the tree likewise, Idem epi. 58. We are fully miserable when
we yield full consent and delight in sin.
and he did eat, then (as Seneca says) consummata est infelicitas, vbi non
solum turpia delectant sed and placent: The misery and iniquity of man is
perfected, when the sin does not only delight the flesh and sensual part
of man, but is also pleasing and acceptable unto the spirit and reasonable part
of man, and therefore (as Boethius says) voluntario facinori nulla est
excusatio, Boethius rhet. nouor. lib. 2.
to such witting sins delighting the flesh, and consented unto by the spirit,
there is not nor can be, any excuse: Nam vt nequius est odisse iustitiam quam
non fecisse ita nonnunquam grauius est peccatu^ diligere quam perpetrare: For,
as it is a viler thing to hate righteousness then not to do righteousness;
so many times, Hierom. in quad. epist.
it is a greater offense to delight in sin, or to love evil, then to commit
evil, as Saint Hierome says.

And the reason hereof is plain, The approbation of our fleshly desires makes
sin the more exceedingly sinful.
because it is the consent of the will, and the approbation of the fleshly
desires, that makes the sin, without which some ways, or in some respects,
it cannot be said to be a sin. Nam quemadmodum qui videt meretricem and scit
esse meretricem, non est scortator, propter hanc cognitionem: For as he which
sees a harlot, and knows her to be a harlot, is not thereby a transgressor,
because of his knowledge of her; but if he consents, purposes, or affects
to be joined unto her, Tum est scortator, aut action aut affectione: Then is
he a fornicator and offender, either in action or in affection: Justin. Mart.
in resp. ad Orthodox. ad q. 8. f. 273.
Sic and bonorum and malorum hominum cognitio non est in causa vt boni sint aut
mali: sed propositum quod eligit id quod ei visum est: So the knowledge of good
or wicked men, is not that which causes them to be either good or bad, but it
is their will and purpose to choose that which pleases the same, which makes
them to do well or ill: says Iustine Martyr.

If sin did forcibly invade the mind, the punishment of sin might seem
unjust.
And as this consent of will makes the sin, so without this consent of will,
there can be no sin: Nam si defectus iste qui peccatum dicitur, tanquam
febris inuitum occuparet, recte iniusta paena videretur, quae peccantem
consequitur and quae damnatio nuncupatur: For if sin, like a Fever, did
violently invade us, and take hold upon us against our wills, then the
punishment which is damnation, and is imposed for the sin upon the sinner,
would appear to be unjustly inflicted; And therefore, Vsque adeo peccatum
voluntarium malum est, vt nullo modo sit peccatum nisi aliquo modo sit
voluntarium: Sin is so voluntary an evil, that by no means it can be sin,
unless by some means it be voluntary: Aug. de vera relig.
Et hoc quidem ita manifestum est, vt nulla huic doctorum paucitas nulla
indoctorum turba dissentiat: And this is so manifest, and so agreed upon by all
men, that neither learned nor unlearned, do deny the same, says S. Augustine.

And therefore though the Devil, like a father, be always ready to beget
sin, and the lust and concupiscence of the flesh, which is appetitus
sensitiuus, be always like a mother, apt to conceive sin, yet if appetitus
rationalis; If our reason be not entreated, as a Midwife, to bring forth sin
into action, it will prove an abortiue, like the untimely fruit of a woman,
which perishes before it sees the Sun; that is, though the least
concupiscence (as I said before) be a sin, yet this sin will never prove
so odious in the sight of God, nor yet so dangerous unto man, as when the sin
is fully finished.

Ob.
But how then is that true (may some man say) which you said a little before,
When the mind is any ways delighted with the least tickling thoughts and
cogitations of evil, non negandum esse peccatum, we cannot deny the same to be
sin, therefore the sensitive appetite of any evil makes it sin, though the
rational appetite does not consent unto the same.

I answer, that the Objection answers it self, Sol.
for it says when the mind is any ways delighted; but the mind cannot be
any ways delighted, without some consent of the reasonable appetite; therefore
this proves not any sensitive desire to be a sin without the consent of the
reasonable appetite.

But we must note, The sensitive faculty does soon defile the reasonable
soul.
that here is aliquod malum propter vicinum malum, the will and affection of
the reasonable soul, by reason of his contiguity and vicinity with the
sensitive lust and concupisense of the flesh, is so dammaged, that, as no man
touches pitch, but is presently defiled with pitch: and the fire can never
touch the tinder but the same is presently kindled; How we should beware of
sin before sin comes near unto us.
so the thoughts and the apprehensions of the sensitive faculties, as soon as
ever, they touch the discussiue faculty of reason, do instantly taint and
corrupt the same.

And therefore that our reasonable will and affection do not yield to the
finishing of sin, reason should have her eyes always open, and with an
Eagles sight to behold sin afar off, to subdue the vile thoughts and
desires of the flesh, before ever it enters upon any faculty of the soul: And
so you see how sin is inwardly increased, Satan suggesteth it, Lust
conceiueth it, and the Will finisheth it.

CHAP. III. By what degrees actual sin is outwardly increased.
SEcondly, Isidorus de summo bono. Iacobus de valentia: in Psalm. 91. Actual
sin is outwardly increased four ways.
sin is outwardly increased and augmented (says Isidorus) three special
ways.

1. It is secretly committed. 2. It is publicly adventured, 3. It is usually
practiced: and to these ways I may add, that then 4. It is exceedingly, and
most fearfully enlarged.
When we first practice sin, we seek by all means to conceal and to hide
our sins.
First, we will commit the sin, credamus tamen, astudoloque tegere nos tantum
nefas; yet then we will seek by all craft and subtilty, and by all other means,
to conceal the same from the eyes of the world; for at the first we are like
Adam, ashamed that God should see our nakedness, or that the world should know
those things that are d^ne of us in darkness: and therefore we will use all
our skill to cover it, and conceal it under the sh^dow of the fig-leaues, that
if it be possible, neither God nor the world may epsy the same. For sin of
it self is so ugly, and so deformed a thing, that the sinner himself, if he
could but truly see the same, would truly loathe it.

How Satan seeks by all means to conceal the light of Gods Word
And therefore Satan labors by all means to put out either verbum
predicatum, the preaching of Gods Word, which is the true light and candle that
shines unto every man, and shows him the right ways of godliness, or else
verbum applicatum, the applying of this word unto our souls, which is as the
eyes whereby we do perceive this light, without which we are like blind men
that can see nothing in the clearest day: the first of these he put out in the
days of superstition, when men walked in darkness, and knew not where they
went, they knew not what was sin: And the second he puts out now in the
Sunshine of the Gospel, when the light shines in darkness, John 1.
and the darkness comprehends it not: and therefore he causes more sins,
and more horrible sins, to be committed now in the light of the Gospel, We
care not what great sins we do so we may conceal them.
then ever were done heretofore in the night of ignorance; for now, having our
own eyes of the application of Gods light, put out by that mist of malice
which blinds us, we care not how much, how great sins we do commit; so
we could put out the eyes of perspection, that the world might not see the
same. As the Hypocrites care was altogether that their good works might be
seen of men: so all our care is, that our evil works may not be seen of men.

Sin creepes into us as the Serpent crept into Paradise, we know not how, we
may well demand the question, quomod^ intrasti? how came thou in hither? but
we shall find the resolution, that it was most secretly and insensibly, and
therefore we will conceal it as cunningly; either like Appollonius the Iugler,
who as soon as he was before the Judge, was presently vanished out of his
fight. We hide our sins that none may see them, and we will stand in sin
that we have not sinned; and as Salomons harlot would wipe her mouth, and it
was not she, or, as Pilate would wash his hands when he had condemned the
Innocent blood; So now the drunkard, when he cannot stand, will stand to it,
that he is not drunk, and the swearer swears and out-sweares all, and if you
tell him of it, he presently swears he swore not at all. And thus, as Rachel
hid her fathers Teraphim, under a smooth pretense, Genesis 31.35.
that it was with her after the manner of women, or as Achan hid his wedge; so
does every sinner seek to hide his sins. And if we cannot hide them, but
that sin it self, like Abels blood, will cry so loud that it must be heard,
then presently we will either lessen our sins with Saul, and say we did it
indeed, but it was with no ill intent, I saved the fattest, but it was for a
sacrifice for the Lord; or else with Adam, we will transfer our sins from
our selves to others, light where they will, though it were on God himself:
For, the woman that thou gave me, gave it me, and I did eat. So cunning is
every man to conceal his sin.

But alas: Quid ille qui mundum quatit, vibrans coruscat fulmen Aetneum manu,
stator deorum? credis hoc posse effici inter videntes omnia vt lateas avos?
Senec. in Hipol. act. 1. John 1. That we cannot possibly hide our sins from the
eyes of God. Psalm. 139. John 1.18. John 1.48. Melissa par. 1. sermon. 16.
Quid ille rebus lumen infundens suum matris parens? What if thou could
escape the eyes of men, is it possible for thee to blind the all-seeing eyes
of God? for he is the true light that shines and gives light to every thing,
and he beholds the ends of the world, and sees all things that are under
Heaven, says holy Job, He is about our beds, and about our paths, and espieth
out all our ways, says the Prophet David; and his name is (...); Because he
sees and beholds all things; all things are naked in his eyes: and therefore
what aduantageth it thee to conceal thy sins from the knowledge of men, when
thou can no ways hide them from the eyes of God? For though no man saw God
at any time, yet God sees man at all times: He saw Nathanael under the
fig tree, when Nathanael saw not him; and he sees thee committing sin,
when thou see no man but thy self.

And therefore beware of sin, though no man sees thee, Nam quemadmodum
ignis, si tunica tegatur. For as the fire that is hid under thy coat, or in the
straw, may be concealed for a time, but at last it will burst out to thy cost;
so thy sin, which thou do in secret, may be kept secret for a while, but
at last, like an unwedded Virgins pregnancy, it will appear to thy shame:
Claudian de 4. consul honorij.
Nam lux altissima fati, occultum nil esse sinit; latebrasque per omnes intrat,
and obstrusos explorat fama recessus. For there is no thought so secret that it
shall go for naught, Sap. 1.7.10.
because the Spirit of the Lord fills the world, and has knowledge of the
voice, and the ear of jealousy hears all things, and the voice of murmurings
is not hid; and therefore our Savior says, That whatsoever is done in secret,
shall be preached openly. It may be in this life, as the adultery of David, and
almost all other horrible facts, as Treasons, Adulteryes, Murders, and such
like, whereof we see almost none, but God, strangely, and by unknown ways
does bring to light; or assuredly in the next life, when God shall show the
Nations our shame, and discover all our most secret sins in the sight of men
and Angels.

The longer we practice sin, the more impudent we grow in sin.
2. After that the Sinner has accustomed himself to private and secret sins,
then he begins to grow bolder and bolder, and as further and further from all
goodness; so worse and worse in all wickedness. For as Seneca says.

Seneca in Hip.
Obstare primum est, velle nec labi via.
pudor est secundus, nosse peccandi modum.
When we have cast off all shame of sin, we are past all hope of goodness?
To withstand the sin is the best, and not to fall; but if we have fallen, to
be ashamed that we have learned the way to sin, is the best planke after
shipwreck, to save a man; but when a man has cast off all shame of his
ill-doing, then is he almost past all hope of well-doing. For, not only the
Apostle says, it is a shame to speak of those things which are done of them
in darkness; but the very Heathen Poet could say: Quis furor est qua nocte
latent in luce fateri,
Ovid. l. 3. amor.
Et quae clam facias facta refer palam?
What a madness is it to speak openly, what abominable sins thou have
committed secretly? And if it be a shame and a frenzy to speak of thine
abominations openly; O then how lamentable is thy case, to commit them
publicly in the sight of the Sun? Isidor. de summo bono l. 2.
Quia mayor est culpa manifest quam oeculte peccare, Because it is a far
greater sin to commit any wicked fault openly, then it is to commit the same
fact privately and secretly: for he is doubly guilty that sins publicly;
What a heinous thing it is to sin publicly, and so to teach others by our
ill examples. Matthew. 5.19.
Et quia agit, and quia docet; First, because he does that evil himself; and
secondly, because he teaches others, by his example, to do the like; and you
know what our Savior says: He that breaks the least of these
Commandments, and teaches others so to do, he shall be called the least in
the Kingdom of heaven: i. e. None at all: He shall have no place at all in
Heaven.

And yet as the Prophet Jeremy said of the Jews, That they carried their
sins in their foreheads: and had Whores faces, Ier. 3.3.
which would not be ashamed: so may we now say of our selves, we are as an
impudent Strumpet, that will play the Harlot in the sight of her Husband, and
are more abashed at our base apparel, then we are at our wicked lives.

Thirdly, when we are come to that pass, to commit sin without fear, and to
do it openly without shame, to have our conscience seared, and our hearts
hardened in sin, then (as the old saying is) Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum
peccati; Custom of sinning does take away all the sense and feeling of sin,
and in familiaritatem grauissima adducit, and makes the heauiest sins, like
Miloe's Ox, seem light and small unto them: for now the sinner is in his own
element, and no element is heavy in his own sphere: Ideo and peccata, Seneca
de tranq.
quamvis magna and horrenda, cum in consuetudinem venerint, aut parna, aut
nulla esse credunt peccatores: The custom of sinning makes the greatest sins
seem but very small.
And therefore the sinners which are accustomed to sin, do esteem their
sins, though they be never so horrid and horrible, to be either no sins, or
but very little sins; and therefore though every sin in it self is like a
talent of Lead, able to sink down the strongest soul to Hell: or like the
poisonous juice of Aconite, Lurida terribiles miscent a conita nouercae
(which they say is the mortallest poison in the world; because, as the Poets
feign, this herb grew from that froth that fell out of the Jaws of Cerberus,
when Hercules dragged him out of Hell) yet do these men carry all their sins
away, Judge. 16.3.
as nimbly as Sampson did the Gates of Azza, and drink up the same as smoothly
as the drunkards use to sip up their pleasant Wine.

And when we have accustomed our selves to sin, then are we bound in sin as
with a chain more strong then those seven green Withes, or those seven new
Ropes wherewith Dalila bound Sampson, The longer we continue in sin, the
harder it is for us to forsake our sins.
for he brake the same as a thread; but we shall hardly escape out of these
miserable bonds of sin: Nam vsitata culpa ita mentem retinet, vt nequaquam ad
rectitudinem surgere possit: For an usual custom of sinning, does so retain
the soul in sin, that it cannot rise to virtue; yea, though he should
sometimes endeavor to rise, yet should he always fail to stand; Greg. in
quad. Homilia.
Quia vbi sponte diu persistit, ibi and cum noluerit cadit; Because where he
willingly long persisted, there of necessity, he shall often nillingly fall:
says Saint Gregory. And so Saint Chrysostom says, Chrysostom aduersus
gentiles: ad Babylam Martyrem.
that the soul of man which once tasted of the sweetness of sin, and is not
moved with sorrow or repentance for the same; causes by her own negligence,
the strength of sin always to increase. For as a spark of fire falling
among the stubble, How sin will increase, if it be not at the first resisted.
does instantly kindle it, and is more and more augmented, if it be not
presently extinguished, and then it never leaves burning, till all be
consumed: Even so is the nature of sin, when it has once seized upon the
thoughts of man, if it be not presently subdued, crushed in the shell, or as
Saint Augustine speaks of the children of the Babylonians, dashed to the
walls, while they are yet tender and young, it will grow further and further,
and ever prove worse and worse, and more and more wild and untamed: and so
the latter sins do always prove the greater sins, and the end of such
Sinners, far worse then their beginnings, as our Savior speaks; for seeing
they would not quench the first flames of sin, they are soon fallen into all
kind of sins.

Chrysostom. hom. 59. in Matthew. What a slavery it is to serve sin.
And then, Quemadmodum qui sub mill paedagogis vitam degunt, Even as those men
which are kept under a thousand Schoolemasters, dare not look aside for fear
of being espied of them; nay more, then the daughter of Inacus durst turn any
where for fear of Argos eyes; so they that are filled with sins, cannot, nay
dare not speak of virtue, no more then a servant dares to speak against his
Master: John 8.34.
He that does sin is the servant of sin, 2 Pet. 2.19.
says our Savior: Et duram seruit seruitutem; and surely such a one has but
a hard service of it, as hereafter I shall show unto you.

Hypocrat. l. 2. Aphor. 9.
And therefore seeing, that as, (...); the infected parts of the body the more
they are cherished, the more they are indammaged: So the soul daily accustomed
to sin, is the more infinitely endammaged by sin. It were well for us
Christians, if we would often remember the Heathen man's saying, (...); No wise
man will twice commit the same sin: and it would be better for us, that we
would follow the other man's counsel, which says: Obsta principijs, sero
medicina paratur
Cum mala per longas conualnere moras.


Give the water no passage, Ecclus 25.25.
no not a little (says the Son of Syrach) and suffer not sin to have
footing in thee, How we ought to be very careful to resist the beginnings of
sin.
but withstand the very first motions, and the least beginnings of the same; so
may thou the easier keep all these mad Greeks out of Troy, these deadly
sins out of thy heart, if every Protesilaus, every first sin that seeks
entrance into thy soul, shall upon the first footing, be there laid for dead.

Otherwise, as Nature, though it can easily exclude somekindes of diseases
which casually come, yet is it pressed and wearied with those that are
habitual: Thriuer. in Apoth. 169.
Even so (says Thriuerus) the soul of man that is but once wounded, may the
easier be cured, and the Sin by repentance may be the sooner excluded, but the
same wounds being still wounded, and the same sins being usually practiced,
they will never, or hardly be subdued.

For if an Ethiopian can change his black skin, Ierem. 13.23.
or a Leopard his spots that are upon his back, then can you do well, having
learned and practiced all the days of your life to do evil, says the Lord,
and therefore as our Savior says of rich men, I may as truly say of these
men, Matthew. 19.23.
that they can hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

O then beloved Brethren, let us not continue in sin; Luc. 15.13.
for the further we go with the Prodigal Child, the harder it is for us to
return, and the more steps we go from any City, the more pains it will be
for us to return to that City again; so the more sin we commit, the more
must be our sorrows for our sins, and the harder it will be for us to
forsake our sins; Great sins must have great repentance.
for as, (...), Great sins and offenses, deserve great punishments, so they
must be greatly sorrowed for, before they be pardoned; for whosoever sins
wickedly with Saint Peter, he must go out with Saint Peter, out of wicked
company, out of his wicked sins, and weep bitterly.

And he that is used to sin, and to leese grace, will hardly be induced to
leave his sins, and to seek for grace: or if he should seek it, Luke 2.46.
That we ought suddenly to return unto the Lord, and not to defer our
conversion.
yet will it be very hard for such a one to find it: for when Mary lost Christ
but one days journey; she was three days seeking and searching after him,
sorrowing, before she found him: and therefore questionless if we leese him
thirty, forty, or fifty years, (as many men use to do) it will be very hard
for us to find him in an hour, in the last hour, when we have no more hours
left unto us; and therefore, to day if you will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts, but return O Shunamite, Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit.
return, return, and seek him diligently whom thy soul loves, but seek
him quickly, and seek him now, while he may be found.

Fourthly, When the custom of sinning has taken away the sense of the sin,
and that the consciences of the sinners are cauterized, and as it were seared
with a hot iron, then they do aggrauate each sin, and make every sin
exceedingly sinful: for now, peccator non timet suam famam, sin is grown
to his tallest grows, and the sinner has eaten shame, and drunk after it,
and therefore he can well digest it, he can fearelessely commit it, in all
places, at all times, and before all persons.

Iacobus de valen in ps. 91
Nay now he will,

First, Excuse it, and say, it is no sin, or if it be, it is but a sin of
Infirmity, issuing from the temperature of his body; a trick of youth, or his
heat and choler: or else it is but a sin of Conformity, he does but as the
most men do, because he would not be singular.

1 Samuel 13 12. What wicked men will do to justify themselves.
Secondly, They will lessen it, and pretending some excuses, they will say with
Saul, that they presumed and forced themselves to do such things; but they
hope they are but trifles, small venial sins; Tush say they, will God be
angry for such small sins? Why; if he will; then,

Thirdly, They will clear themselves, and say with the same Saul, we have
performed all the commandments of the Lord; Matt. 19 20.
we have kept them from our youth up as the young man in the Gospel said: and
if, as the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of the oxen told Saul that
he lied, so their sins do testify unto their face that they have offended;
then, 1. Sam 15 15.
as Saul laid all the burden upon the people, saying, the people spared the
best of the Sheep, and of the Oxen, and not I: and as Adam laid all the fault
upon his wife, saying, Genesis 3.12.
the woman whom thou gave to be with me, She gave me of the tree and I did
eat, and therefore is she in all the fault and not I: even so do they lay
all their sins on others, even on God himself, rather then they will
confess themselves guilty of sin. Then,

Fourthly, They will not only clear themselves from sin, and blasphemously
say, that either God is in fault that they do sin, or else because he did
not make them so that they could not sin, but they will also approve these
sins in others, and knowing the judgment of God (that they which commit such
things are worthy of death) not only do the same, but also have pleasure in
them that do them: Ro^ ^
a most fearful behavior of most impudent men, and yet not all: for then,

Fifthly, They will not only consent with them that do such things, but they
will also teach them how to do them: as our Savior shows; they will set up
a School of wickedness: these shall be the least in the Kingdom of Heaven,
i. e. none at all, Matt 5.19.
says the blessed Verity. And yet for all this, we are not come to the height
of our times iniquity, for we will be sure to have a note above Ela, to go a
little further then either Scriptures or times can give us presidents: and
therefore,

Sixthly, If these men's scholars be not able enough to learn to sin, they
will cause them and compel them to do it: there is no resistance. See how the
drunkards do it in every place, and many more, who take delight to drive men
into Hell.

And therefore now, this (...)* this spirit of slumber, or this sleep in
sin, which we may rightly call (...), the brother of death, or a deadly
sleep, makes these woeful sins to sit in the seat of the scornful, that
is, secure and pertinaciter perseuerare in delictis, Psalm. 1 1. Mollerus in
Psalm. 1.
and omnem pietatem habere pro ludibrio: most securely to continue, most
obstinately to go on in all iniquity, and most basely to esteem of all piety:
making but a mock of God and of all godliness: And therefore the Prophet
says of such sinners, that they have made a covenant with death, and an
agreement with hell it self, i. e. never to forsake that sinful course of
life, till death does send them quick to Hell.

But I could wish that they would be herein false, and as they have broken the
covenant of their God, That we should break the covenant which we have made
with Hell, if ever we would go to Heaven.
which they have made with him in Baptism, so they would break this agreement
with Hell, and cast off these cords from them: for the reward of sin is
death, and therefore much more of such fearful sins as these be. And so
you see the degrees by which sin is increased.

CHAP. IV. Of the manner how every Sin is committed.
THirdly, having seen how sin is augmented, The manner how every sin is
committed is fourfold.
and grows more and more heinous by degrees like the Cockatrice egg, that in
a short time proves to be a destroying fiery Serpent, you must now understand
the manner, how every sin is committed and that we find to be; 1. Of Ignorance.
2. Of Knowledge. 3. Of Infirmity. 4. Of Malice.


First, The heathen man says, (...): Whosoever knows nothing, sins
nothing: and Divines say, he that knows least sins least.

That ignorance is twofold.
But here you must understand Ignorance to be twofold.

First, Simple, when a man therefore knows not, because he cannot learn.

Secondly, Affected, when a man therefore knows not because he will not
learn, as those in Job, who said unto God, Discede a nobis quia scientiam
viarum tuaru^ nolumus; Job. 21.14.
Depart from us, for we will not have knowledge of thy ways: and therefore the
Prophet complains of such ignorant men, quod noluerunt intelligere vt been
agerent, that they refused to learn that they might do well, and quod caeci
licet, ducem tamen non modo non quaerunt, sed and oblatum respuunt; and that
although they were stark blind and could see nothing, Bern: in ep. ad magist.
Vincent.
yet not only sought no guide, but refused and contemned them that were
offered, as Saint Bernard speaks.

The first may excuse us, a tanto licet, non atoto, That simple ignorance does
extenuate the sin. Acts 17.30. 1. Tim.
from the greater punishment, though not from blame, as Saint Paul shows of
the Gentiles, saying, The times of this ignorance, God regarded not; and of
himself, That God had mercy upon him, because, in persecuting the Church, He
did it ignorantly. For this circumstance does much extenuate a sin, when a
man can plead for himself with, Abimelech, Genesis 20.4.
Lord will thou slay the righteous Nation? As if he should have said, O Lord,
lay not this sin to my charge, for if I had known her to be his wife, I
would never have intended to make her mine.

And therefore this moved our Savior, at the time of his passion, to say,
Father forgive them, Luke 23.43.
for they know not what they do: Which is as if he should have said, if they
knew that I were the Messiah, the son of God, and the Savior of the world,
and would notwithstanding crucify me, Luke 24.43.
then would I not desire thee to pardon them; but now these things are
concealed from them, and therefore I desire thee that this sin may not be
imputed unto them.

And so Saint Peter, after he had declared their sin, how They had denied the
Holy and Just, and had preferred before him, a most unjust and wicked
murderer, he delivers their comfort, that if they would repent, and believe
in him, they should obtain remission, and have their sins done away at the
time of refreshing, Acts 3.17.
Because they had done all this through ignorance.

And so the Lord himself shows this to be the reason, why he spared Nineveh,
after the denouncement of her judgment, because, There were sixescore thousand
persons therein, Jonas 4.11.
which could not judge betwixt good and bad, which could not discern betwixt
their right hand, and their left. For a simple ignorance, in a devoted and
well-meaning man, such as Saint Augustine calls, fidelis ignorantia, a
faithful ignorance, or the ignorance of a good and faithful man, whose heart
like Iehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 20.32.33.
is upright toward God, though he fail in many particular duties, is either
passed over in mercy, as was the superstition of our forefathers, Acts 10.
or else is illuminated with knowledge, in Gods appointed time, Psalm. 50. vlt.
as we read of Cornelius, and as the Apostle shows, and the Psalmist
promises, To him that orders his conversation right, will I show the
Salvation of God.

Bosq. de finibus bonarum, l. 2. conc. 12. p. 123.
But the 2. that is, affected ignorance, Scaelus adcusat grauius non excusat,
augetque non minuit supplicium, it does enlarge the sin, and increase the
punishment, and it should treble the same, says Bosquierus; First, For
committing the sin: Secondly, For neglecting to learn, and Thirdly, For
affecting ignorance; for when things are not known, because men will not
learn, such ignorance is without excuse, Quia aliud est nescire, aliud est
nolle scire: Bernard. in ep. ad Valent: Chrysostom.
nescire ignorantia est, scire noluisse superbia est: Because this refusing to
know, is rather Arrogancy, then Ignorancie; as Saint Bernad says.

Gregor in Moral.
And therefore of such ignorant men, quibus fuit inveniendi facultas, si fuisset
quaerendi voluntas, Which had the means to know, How dangerous a thing it is
to be wilfully ignorant of the will of God.
if they had had the desire to learn, the Apostle says, si quis ignorant,
ignorabitur, if any man know not God, the same shall not be known of God: for
as the blind, and lame, were not to enter into the Temple, so the judge
bids us, educere for as, populum caecum occulos habentes, to bring forth, and
shut out of his kingdom, those men which have eyes, and cannot see, and which
have ears, and do not hear, that is, which are borne to know, but will not
learn, and which are capable of discipline, and yet will remain untaught.

Cokus de iure regis ecclesiastico.
And so in humane laws, we find the same truth. Nam tantum abest vt ignorantia
excuset, etc. For it is so far from reason, that ignorance should any ways
excuse the fault of him, which might know the truth that he ought necessarily
to have known, but through his negligence, or wilfulness, would not learn
the same, as that there is very great reason that he should be, the more
severely punished; because that to be ignorant of those things which a man
ought to know, but will not learn, non pro ignorantia, sed pro contemptu
haberi debet, is rather to be judged a contempt of knowledge, then an
ignorance of the truth.

And therefore if for our sins we plead ignorance, when we might easily have
known the will of God, if we had had any desire or diligence, to search out
the same, we shall but deceive our selves, and be found guilty of greater
condemnation.

Secondly, For the sins of knowledge, John 9.39. What a fearful thing it is
to commit those sins which we know to be sins.
Our Savior says of the Pharisees, that if they were blind they should have
no sin, but because they said they did see, therefore their sin remained:
For as Adams great perfection, both in power and knowledge, made his sin so
inexcusable, and the like transcendent excellency of Lucifer, made his fall so
unrecoverable; so the more noble, the more powerful, or the more excellent in
knowledge we be, the more heinous and intolerable are our sins.

And therefore Saint Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. hom. 5. in Romans
(...). He that has enjoyed more instruction deserves to undergo the more
punishment, if he transgress: and our Savior says, Luke 12.47.
that the servant which knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes: For to him that knows to do good, James 4.17.
and does it not, to him it is sin: i. e. Sin (...). Sin in the highest
degree, says the Apostle.

And yet as an old man said of the Athenians, at the games of Olympus, Plutarch
in lacon.
Athenienes norunt quid sit honestum sed eo soli vtuntur Lacedaemonij: They
knew what was honest, but they did it not, they were excellent gnostrickes, but
bad practitioners, like the Pharisees that sat in Moses Chair, and taught
what was good, but did none of those things themselves. That we do those
sins which we know to be grievous sins.
So might I say of many millions of men amongst us: they know that swearing and
drunkenesse, lewdness and prophannesse, and such like horrible sins, are most
odious and damnable in the sight of God. They know the Sabbaoths should be
sanctified, our poor Brethren should be relieved, Romans 1. vlt.
and our good God should be worshipped, they know that they which commit such
sins are worthy of death; and that they which do such works of piety shall
be sure of life; and yet you see how we do continually commit the one, and
omit the other.

Alas, beloved, we cannot say with Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 1.13.
we do it ignorantly. We cannot say we know not these things to be sins, for
we know them, we do know them, and yet we daily do them.

And therefore, art thou inexcusable, O man, Romans 2.1.
whosoever thou art that know these things, Bern. in Cantic. Ser. 36.
or the like to be sin; and yet wilt fearelesly and carelessly commit them,
then of all other men thou shall find thy self at last to be most woeful and
lamentable: for, The excellency of our knowledge makes us the more horrible
sinners in the sight of God.
vt cibus sumptus and non decoctus perniciofus est; As meat received, and not
digested, proves most dangerous; or as physic taken inwardly, and not working
outwardly, proves poisonous; so the knowledge of the truth, which is the meat
and physic of our souls, being received in our understanding, and not
practiced in our conversation, will prove to be a most dangerous deadly disease
unto every Christian soul.

What the sins of infirmity are.
3. We say those are the sins of infirmity, when in our hearts we have an
earnest desire to serve our God, and to refrain from sin; but through the
violence of Satan's temptations, and the untamed lusts of our own flesh, (which
is ever prone to evil, and unapt to good) we either neglect that duty which
we heartily desire to do, or perpetrate those deeds which by no means we
would do: for so our Savior says of his Disciples, Math 26.41.
that the spirit was willing, but the flesh was weak: So Saint Peter in heart
was willing to die with his Master, but for fear of death, he was driven to
deny him, and to swear that he knew him not; Cap 26.14.
and so all other Saints of God do find, that how desirous soever they be to
do their duties, and to serve their God, their flesh is often times weak, and
unwilling to perform those good things, and most violently strong to draw
their unwilling souls to sin.

Aug. de eccles. dogmat. That no man is free from the sins of infirmity.
And therefore Saint Augustine says, that in respect of this infirmity of the
flesh, Nullus Sanctus and iustus vacuus est peccato, nec tamen definit esse
iustus, quia affectu semper tenet Sanctitatem: There is not any Saint that is
void of sin, neither yet may he be said for that to be no Saint, because in
heart and affection he always desires, and to the uttermost of his ability,
follows after Sanctity: and so Saint John shows, quod non est homo qui non
peccat; James 3.2.
That no man lives, but he sins: for, in some things we sin all, i. e.
through the infirmity of our flesh; and yet he that is borne of God, John 3.9.
sins not, that is, with his full consent, but does even then sigh and
grieve in spirit, when his flesh draws him on to sin.

But, that we may the better know those sins, which though they be enormities
in themselves, yet may be truly said to be infirmities in the Saints, and may
stand with grace, Galat. 6.1.
as they are committed by them, it is observed by Divines, that they are;

First, Such sins as are committed of incogitancie, Aug. de peccat. merit,
and remiss: l 2. cap. 2.
and besides the purpose general or particular of the offender. i. e. sins
of precipitation, and not of deliberation, as Saint Gregory terms them: for
so Saint Augustine, speaking of these sins says, Tentatio fallit and
praeoccupat nescientes, How we may know sins of infirmity, by four special
differences
they do suddenly assault us, and attache us unawares: and we are as it were
overtaken with the sin, before we can see the sin: So the adultery of
David, was not thought of, before it was suggested; and the denial of Saint
Peter, was never purposed, until it was acted.

Secondly, Such sins as are ever resisted, to the uttermost of our abilities,
before they be committed, and yet at last are perpetrated, quia tentatio
praemit and vrget infirmos: Aug: quo supra.
because the violence of the temptation subdueth the infirmity of our flesh.

Thirdly, Such sins as have for their causes, some preualent passions in
nature; as the fear of death in Saint Peter, which is the most terrible of all
evil, says the Philosopher; and the fear of shame in David, which many men
do more fear then death.

Fourthly, Such sins, as in the reluctation are many times subdued, and after
they be committed, they be not often itterated: (I speak not of the
inevitable lustings of the flesh, against the spirit, which no strength of
grace, in the best men was ever able in this life to suppress; but I speak of
outward enormities, that are sometimes committed, through the infirmities of
the Saints,) for so Saint Augustine, speaking of Noas sin says, Aliquando
fuit ebrius, sed non ebrosius: Idem. de peccat. merit and remiss. l. 2. c 10.
that he was once drunk indeed, but he was no drunkard, quia vt actus
virtutis, etc; because as one act of virtue makes not a virtuous man, so one
act of sin in a Saint, makes him not wholly vicious, says the Philosopher.

But those that plot for iniquity, and imagine mischief upon their beds;
those that never seek to resist, but ever to kindle the sinders of sin; that
follow after drunkenness, and hunt for opportunities, and like Salomons
strumpet, will come forth to meet sin, and rejoice when they find it, and
commit it with greediness; I dare not not say they sin of infirmity, but I
rather fear, that they are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity.

Acts 8.23. Esaias 5 ^2.
And therefore, though they that are mighty to drink Wine, the common swearers,
and blasphemers of Gods sacred name, the lascivious talkers, and all leaude
livers, do pretend infirmities, to excuse their sins, yet may they truly
fear, that these spirits of infirmities, are no humane but hellish spirits,
wherewith they are like the woman in the Gospel, Luke 13.11.
most lamentably possessed.

Malicious sins have two violent properties.
Fourthly, For sins committed of malice, it is observed that they have two
violent and bitter properties.

1. Wilful. 2. Spiteful.
First, They be wilful sinners, and they do commit their sins, with
resolute wilfulness, i. e. with an absolute will, and with a full consent: for
otherwise every sin is voluntary, or else it cannot be iniquity; Zanch. de
peccat: actuali li. 1. These. 1. page 101. Acts merely violent are no sins.
for those actions, quae mouentur a principio extrinseco, which are outwardly
compelled by violence, and are merely violent, without any consent of the
will; as if a man were dragged by force, into the idols temple, or a woman
forced to adultery, and she no ways yielding consent of will, either before
the deed, or in the doing thereof; we say these things cannot be sins:
because they are outwardly compelled by force, and not inwardly moved by the
will; and voluntati vis inferri non potest, and no outward force can work upon
the inward will: Jdem ibid.
but all those actions, quae mouentur a principio intrinseco, which proceed
from within, and are done with any manner of consent of will, must needs be
sins, (if they be such acts as are contrary to Gods will;) because they are
voluntary, though not wholly, yet in part; in respect of the flesh, though not
in respect of the spirit.

But this sin, that I am to speak of, which is done of malice, is not only
voluntary In some respect, but wholly in all respects, with all greediness
committed, and without any manner of unwillingness effected; so as Satan does
no sooner tempt them to sin, but they do as readily attempt to commit the
sin: for as the godly are desirous to serve God, (...) (...), not by
constraint but willingly, Examples of most wilful sinners.
so do malicious sinners perpetrate their sins, not through any great
constraint, but with all willingness.

And we have almost infinite examples of this kind: the Sodomites would not be
diswaded by any means, Genesis 19.8.9.
from seeking to offer violence unto the Angels of God; but still obstinately,
and maliciously persisted, until they were wearied; and the Prophet David,
reports of the courtiers of Saul, that they said, our tongues are our own,
and we will speak, who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.4.
So the Israelites, in the days of Jeremy, being most earnestly entreated, by
Gods servants, to walk in the good way, which is the commandments of God, did
most wilfully answer, Jeremy 6.16.
We will not walk therein; and so are all those amongst us, that
notwithstanding all the earnest admonitions of the preachers, and the sweet
motions of Gods Spirit, that does often times knock, and call at the door of
their hearts for amendment, and the infallible testimony of their own souls
and consciences, that do assure them they should not do as they do, yet will
they commit all uncleanness, all prophanes, (...), even with all greediness.

But they may assure themselves, How fearful is the state of wilful sinners.
Deuteronomy. 29.19.
that their state is very dangerous, for he that hears the curse of the Law,
and yet blesses himself in his sins, and will still confidently and
wilfully go one in his wickedness, the Lord will not be merciful unto that
man, (says Moses) neither shall the iniquity, Esaias 22.
of such a sinner be pardoned, (says Esayas;) quia in his nulla est excusatio
infirmitatis, sed culpa voluntatis; because such sinners can plead no excuse,
either of ignorance, or impotencie, says Anselmus: Anselmus in heb. c. 6.
and therefore the Lord is mightily provoked, and most highly offended with all
such wilful resolute sinners.

Secondly, The malicious sinners, are likewise spightfull sinners, Heb. 6.
Examples of spiteful sinners. 2. Chron. vlt. 16.
i. e. such as do despite the spirit of Grace, and do make but a mock of
Christ, and of all Christian Religion.

Such sinners were those Jews, that mocked the messengers of God, and despised
his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against
his people, so as there was no remedy: and such sinners were those
stiff-necked Jews, who though they were not able to resist the spirit, to
speak in Saint Stephen, yet with their stones they stopped his mouth; and (as
he says) did always resist that spirit, Acts 8.
to work in themselves.

2. Tim. 4.15.
Such a sinner was Alexander the Copper-smith, who did not only distaste, but
also withstand, yea vehemently withstand, the Preaching of the word of God:
Such were Julian the Apostata. Libanius the Sophister, Pope Julius the third,
and the like; who scorned Christ, and scoffed at all Christians; and such are
those in our days, whosoever they be, and wheresoever they are, which not
only wilfully sin, but also most lewdly, and profanely, make a mock of
Religion, and with Serapion, scoff at all Preachers, and either wickedly
hinder the free passage of the Gospel, or else secretly trample it under their
feet.

And therefore, being thus grown to the height of sin, to sit in the seat of
the scornful; Psalm. 1.1. The fearful state of spightfull sinners. 1. John 5
16.
and with Achab to set and to sell themselves to commit wickedness,
presumptuously, and with an high hand to sin against Heaven, and against the
God of Heaven, they are not only deprived of the prayers of the faithful, for
them; because we are forbidden to pray for such sinners, Iere. 7.11.
(as Jeremy, was forbidden to pray for the Jews, when the Lord himself said
unto him, Thou shall not pray for this people, nor lift up thy voice for them:)
but they are also continually assaulted, with the prayers of the Saints, (like
so many two-edged swords) against them: for so David says, that he would pray
yet against their wickedness: Psalm. 59.5.
and it is a heavy prayer that he uses, that God would not be merciful unto
them, that offend of malicious wickedness: 1. Cor. 16.22.
so Saint Paul accurseth every one that loves not the Lord Jesus: so did Simon
Peter, pray against Simon Magus, Theodoret. l. 3. c. 9.
and all the Christians against Julian; and so do we pray against those
malicious sinners, that despise Gods word, and scoff at us, and crucify
again unto themselves the Son of God.

And then God, hearing the prayers of his Saints, he gives these sinners over
unto a reprobate mind, Romans 11.
to do those things that are not convenient; and to fall from one iniquity
unto another, until they bring upon themselves swift damnation: Christ hom.
67. in Joh.
Nam cum a Deo deseruntur, tum diabolo traduntur: for when God has once
forsaken them, then does the Devil wholly enjoy them; and fills their hearts
with all wickedness, and with the very gall of bitterness; and leaves no
place for repentance: Ansel: in Heb: 6.
quia ((...)) prorsus lapsi; Aquinas in loc. (...).
because they are altogether fallen (as Anselmus expounds the word, used by the
Apostle) or, totaliter lapsi, totally fallen, and wholly eclipsed, and deprived
of all the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit; and (as a stone, tumbling down the
hill, when it comes to the bottom, can go no further; so these men, cum in
profundum venerint peccatorum, being thus fallen into the depth of sin, they
can fall no lower, till with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, they do fall down to
Hell.

And thus you see, what sin is, how it grows, and how it is committed.

CHAP. V. Of the diversity of sinners, and of the inequality of sins.
FRom this that I have spoken, concerning sin, there is no mean capacity
but may observe, these two especial points.

1. The diversity of sinners. 2. The inequality of sins. Of the great
difference between the sins of the godly and of the wicked, seen in three
especial things: 1. Res^lution. 2. Reluctation. 3. Repentance.


First, The diversity of sinners: for though all men do sin, yet all men
are not alike sinners: for the Saints do sin, and it may be the same sins,
as the wicked do; but they do not sin in the same manner, with the wicked:
for the godly do either commit sins of ignorance, that is such sins as
they know not to be sins, or if they know them to be sins, then are they
certainly committed of infirmity, and the doers have ever with them these
three properties.

First, Before they sin, they are firmly resolved, not to sin.

Secondly, When they do sin, there is such a reluctation, and such a
conflict, betwixt the flesh and the spirit, that the Soul sigheth even then
when the flesh rejoices: and so they never sin with a full consent: Romans
7.17.
and therefore they may truly say, It is not we that do these sinful
acts, but it is sin that dwells in us.

Thirdly, After they have sinned, the spirit will presently draw the flesh to
join with it in repentance, which a little before had drawn the spirit to
give it motion to commit the sin: Seneca in Agamem:
and then (as Seneca says) Quum paenitet peccasse pene est innocens, When a
man is sorry that he has sinned, he is almost as innocent as if he had not
offended; or as Saint Paul says, he is washed, he is sanctified; and he is
restored unto his former integrity.

How the sins of the wicked differ in three things from the sins of the
godly: 1. greediness to do it.
But the sins of the wicked, are not of ignorance, not of infirmity; but of
an obstinate will, and of a contemptuous spightfull malice: For,

First, Before they sin, they are as greedy to do it, as Curio was ready to
obey Casars commandes: they swell with desire, and burn with lust to have it
done: Et si non aliqua nocuisset mortuus esset; And if they may not do it,
they cannot live without it; 1. reg. 21.4.
for they are as sick for sin, as Achab was for Naboths Vineyard.

2. Delight in the doing.
Secondly, When they do sin, they have their Jubilee, they are in their own
element, as Judas is said to have gone, in locum suum, into his own proper
place; and they have their full content; and therefore they are said, to drink
iniquity like water, which goes down smothely without any stop.

3. Content when it is done. Hieron. l. 1. in Amos.
Thirdly, After they have sinned, they are so far from sorrowing for it, as
that they do even rejoice, for the committing of it; and in suis complacent
sibi delictis, and they do delight themselves with their sins, as Saint
Hierome says: Olim haec meminisse iuuabit, they do delight to relate their
sins: and therefore the Scripture says, Romans 3.13.
that as their feet are swift to shed blood; so their hearts do rejoice in
the works of their own hands.

And so you see, how differently sin may be committed: the godly are most
unwilling to commit any sin; the wicked are most greedy to commit every
sin: the godly are hardly drawn to sin, the wicked draw sin as it were
with carteropes: and in the godly, sin is like a fire, which they endeavor to
quench; but in the wicked, it is like a fire which they labor to kindle.

Secondly, We may see from what I have spoken, that stoicall paradoxe, of the
equallities of all sins, sufficiently confuted: How some sins are a great
deal more heinous then other sins.
for sins publicly committed, are more heinous then those that are done in
private; for that he does not only sin; sed and peccat and docet, but he
does also teach others how to sin, and likewise scandalize those, that do
detest their sins: and ideo qui public peccat public corrigendus est, he
that openly sins, should be openly punished, for his greater shame, by
reason of his greater sin: and he that sins wittingly through knowledge,
is worthy of many more stripes, Justin Mart: in resp. ad orthodox. ad q. fo:
271.
then he that sins through ignorance, says our Savior: and therefore
Quemadmodum (autore Apostolo) says Justin Martyr, fidelis qui rei suae non
perspicit, deum negauit etc. Even as he which believes in Christ, (as says
the Apostle,) and provides not for his family, has denied the faith, and is
worse then an Infidel; and as he which professes Christian Religion, and with
his knowledge, and Faith, and Baptism, has no good manners, no holiness of
life, and conversation, which may express the liuelihood of this doctrine; but
has only a certain show of Religion, having denied the power thereof, is
farte worse then an Infidel; so is he, which sins wittingly, through
knowledge, by so much worse then he is which sins through ignorance, as an
inexcusable sin is worse then that which has a just excuse.

And so Saint Isidore says, Jsidorus de summo bono l 2.
that tanto maius peccatum esse cognoscitur, quanto mayor qui peccat habetur,
according to the quality of the offender, so is the quality of the offense:
Criminostor culpa est, vbi honestior status.
the greater the man is, which sins, the greater is the sin, which he
commits: for, as Plato says, that ignorantia potentum robustorumque
hominum, hostilis atque teterrima res est; the ignorance of great and mighty
men, is a most vile, and hateful thing; Why the sins of great men of eminent
place are the greatest sins.
because it may be very hurtful unto many: so may we say, that the sins of
great men, and of those that are in place and authority, are exceedingly
sinful; and do deserve the greater condemnation: not only because their
sins are exemplarie sins; as the old verse says: Regis ad exemplum totus
componitur orbis; and as the proverb is, like Priest like People: Matthew. 6.23.
but also because in them is required the more eminent virtue; we should be
the light of the world; and the great men, should be the defenders of the
distressed, and the helpers of the needy: and therefore, Si lumen quod in te
est tenebrae sunt, ipsae tenebrae quatae erunt? If thou, which should be at
pattern of all virtue, committest sin; how great is thy sin? and if they,
which should be Patrons of the poor Preachers, become robbers of the Church;
and they which should be Releeuers of the needy, become oppressors of their
neighbors; how intolerable is that cruelty? Surely though these things should
be but small sins in others; yet in us they are horrible transgressions;
Chrysostom hom. 24 in c. 7. Matthew.
Quia impossible omnino nobis est, ad ignorantiae praesidium aliquando
confugere; Because it is impossible for us to find any excuse for our selves.

And therefore, though Gentlemen and Courtiers, Citizens and worldlings do
lead their lives in lewdness, and turn the graces of God into wantonness;
and think it no great sins, but either the infirmities of their youth, or
but the custom of their times; yet in us that are the Preachers of Gods Word,
or in those that are the Governors of the people; the least sin, or
mis-cariage of our selves, which perhaps, alijs ignoscitur, nobis imputatur; is
but a venial sin in others, and shall be pardoned, will be found a heinous
sin in us, for which we shall be surely punished; Bern. l. 2. de consid. ad
Eugen.
for so Saint Bernard says, Inter seculares nugae, nugae sunt, in ore
sacerdotis sunt blasphemiae: Triffles are but triffles among secular men, but
in the mouth of the Priests, triffles prove to be blasphemies: and therefore the
wise man says, that the mean and the simple man shall obtain mercy, Wis. 6.6.
when the wise and the mighty, shall be mightily punished.

CHAP. VI. How every sin, and the least sin of every one; brings death.
YOu have heard the diversity of sinners, and the inequality of sins: and
therefore I might now proceed unto the second part, which is the reward of
sin: but that I may not forget to observe that the Apostle says,
indefinitely, the reward of sin is death, to teach us these three special
lessons: 1. That every One sin brings death. 2. That the sin of every one
brings death. 3. That the least sin of any one brings death.
for

First, He says the reward of sin is death; not of sins. That any one
sin is sufficient to bring death unto the Sinner. 1 Samuel 17. 2 Samuel 20 9.
Sueton. in vit. Caesar.
One is enough, if there were no more: For as one leake in a ship, is
sufficient to sink it; and one veins bleeding, is enough to let out all the
vital spirits; and one wound may kill Golias, and Amasa: as well as 23 did
Caesar: So one proud disdainefull thought, may cast Lucifer out of Heaven, one
Apple may cast Adam out of Paradise, and one sin may bring death, upon any
one of the sons of Adam.

And therefore, seeing the purity of God can abide no sin, and his justice
will so severely punish every sin, Genesis 3.24.
we should not give way to any sin: for though we keep the royal Law, James
2.10.
yet if we fail but in any one point, we are guilty of all; (not that he which
commits any one sin, committeh all sins; but that he is as guilty of
death, by that one sin, as if he had committed all sins:) and God can as
easily spy out one sin in man, though he had no more, as well as he could
spy out one man amongst his guests, which had not on his wedding garment.
Matthew. 22.12.


Secondly, as One sin, so the sin of any one brings death: That the sin of
any one man be he great or small brings death. Gal. 3.10. Jerem 22 24.
for, cursed is every one (whosoever he be) that continues not in all things
that are written in the Book of the Law, for to do them, says the Lord: and,
the soul which sins, that soul shall die, says the Prophet, and Coniah if
he offend, though he were as the Signet on Gods right hand, yet will God cut
him off, says the Lord.

But what? have not Kings and Princes, Lords and Ladies, great men, Knights,
and rich men; have not they any privilege to have their pleasures, nor any
prerogative to commit any sin? must they have no more liberty, then the
poorest peasant? Yes, that they have; for when the mean men cannot offend, but
presently they shall be reproved, and it may be punished: whereby many times
they are brought to repentance, and are themselves cleansed and have their
sins pardoned: the great men, The dangerous estate of Great men.
because many of us dare not reprove them for fear to offend them, and so to
be offended by them; may go on in their sins without controulement; they may
do it without fear, though with the more danger: for though it be true of a
poor fearful Preacher, dat veniam coruis, vexat censura columbas: that he
dares not reprove these mighty men, yet with God there is no respect of
persons: but, Veniam laeso numine nullus habet; If Moses the Prince of Gods
people sin, he shall not enter into the land of Canaan: If Aaron the Priest
does offend, Numb. 20.12.
the wrath of God will be soon insensed: If the man of God, which was a Prophet
does offend, and transgress the commandments of God; he shall be slain by
the Lion: 2 Samuel 24.
and if David that was both Prince and Prophet, Dan. 4.35.
sin; he shall not go unpunished: and if Nebuchadnezzar which was the great
Monarch, does exalt himself in pride against God; he shall graze with the
beasts of the field, until he confess, that the most high God rules over all
the Kingdoms of the Earth.

Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be learned all ye Nobles, and all ye
Judges of the Earth; and as you keep us in fear to offend you, so let us keep
you in fear to offend your God: or else you may hear that dreadful sentence,
I lictor liga manus, Go executioner, bind those Kings in fetters, and those
Nobles with links of iron, and then cast them into utter darkness, where shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Psalm. 149.8.
Thirdly, we must note that as any one sin, and the sin of any one; That the
least sin brings death.
so the least sin, as well as the greatest sin of any one brings death:
for, not only those seven sins, which the Romanists call the seven deadly
sins, and which they briefly comprehend in the word Saligia; according to
that verse; Vt mortem vites, semper Saligia vites,

Where, S a l i g i Genesis 4.10. c. 19.13. Exodus 22.23. Jam. 3.4.
a
signifies 1. Superbiam, Pride. 2. Auaritiam, Covetousness. 3. Luxuriam,
Luxury. 4. Inuidiam Envy. 5. Gulam, Gluttony. 6. Iram, Wrath. 7. Acidiam,
Sloth.
Nor yet those four great sins, which the Scripture calls crying sins:
expressed in that distiche.

Clamitat ad Coelum, vox sanguinis and Sodomorum,
Vox oppressorum, merces retenta laborum.
1. Murder. 2. Sodomie. 3. Oppression of Widows and Orphans. 4. Detayning of
the Laborers wages.
Nor yet that great Master-sinne Idolatry; which does quite separate us from
God, and does for ever unite us unto the Devil, without great and unfeigned
repentance; does bring death unto us: but every sin, and any sin
whatsoever, brings death unto the sinner: For the reward of sin, be it
little, or be it great, is death: for as the small egg of a Cockatrice, will
prove in time to be a devouring Serpent, and as the little thieves, if they
once get in at the windows, will soon, like Sinon, set open the doors, for
the greater Thieves to enter in, and to despoile us; so these little sins,
that at the first we deem venial, will grow by custom to be very great; and
will in time make way for the greatest of all.

But Saint Hierome says, Nescio an possumus, leave aliquod peccatum dicere,
quod in dei contemptum admittitur. He knows no reason, why any sin should
be thought to be small, when as they are all, and every one of them all, is
committed against the eternal Majesty of the incomprehensible God. And yet
Satan at the first will persuade us, that we need not make such great account
of such small sins, such venial sins, Richardus de differen: mortalu and
venpeccati.
quibus nunquam debetur poena eternae damnationis; to which eternal damnation
can never be due, (as Richardus says:) but when we have usually practiced
them, and throughout our whole course of life continued in them; How subtlely
Satan deals with men, to make them sin, and then to bring them to despair.
then will he at last open our eyes, to let us see our selves where we are;
even in the midst of Samaria, and in the hands of all our greatest enemies; and
then (as Cyrus promised those that would war with him against the Medes, to
make every Footman an Horseman: every Soldier, a Captain; and every Captain,
a Colonel:) so Satan will make every venial sin mortal; and each mortal
sin irremissible: O quantum mutatus ab illo Hectore! Qui color albus erat,
number est contrarius albo.


O how is he, and how are our sins now changed? he that was an Angel of
light, to persuade us unto sin, is now become a Devil of darkness, to bring
us to despair for sin; and those sins which seemed to be but Mole-hills,
do now show themselves to be bigger then Mountains. And no marvel: Nam sicut
ebrius, quando multum vini ingurgitat, etc. For as he that fills himself
with Wine, does for the present feel no hurt; How sin blinds us at the
first, that we cannot perceive its ugliness.
yea, though he sustained many losses: but within a while he shall clearly
perceive how greatly he was thereby indammaged; even so, peccatum donec
consummatur, obtenebrat mentem, etc. Sin while it is in action, and before it
be consummate, does so obtenebrate and darken the mind of man, and as a thick
cloud ouer-shaddow it, that it cannot perceive the ugliness of sin; but
when the sin is once finished and those mystie clouds of stupidity, which
Satan sets before our eyes, be vanished, Tum conscientia insurgit; then does
the conscience awake and arise, and worse then any accuser, lay to our charge
the foulness of our sin: and so vex our souls, with the fear of the
greatness of the punishment: Sophocl. Sueton in vit. little.
as we may see in the lives of Oedipus, that incestuous King of Thebes, and of
Tiberius Nero, and others: whereof you may find more in my Treatise of The
delights of the Saints.

That we should carefully take heed, not to commit the least sin.
And therefore Saint Augustine does most wisely advise us, Non despicere peccata
nostra, quia parua: sed timere quia plura: Not to be fearelesse of our sins,
because they are small, but rather, to be the more afraid of them, because
they are many: and specially, seeing that the smallest beasts are as full of
deadly poison, and the least creatures are as able to destroy us, as the
greatest: Aug. de d^cem. chordis.
for, nunquid minutissima sunt grana araneae: Are not the sands of Sea very
small? and yet if you take too many of them into your Ship, Flumina magna vides
paruis de fontibus orta, plurima collectis multiplicantur aquis.
they are able to sink her: Et quam minutae guttae pluviae; and how small are
the drops of rain? and yet you see, flumina implent and domos deijciunt, what
floods they make, and what mighty holds they have overthrown: They have
destroyed the whole world: Even so, the least sins do make us as liable unto
death, as the greatest: for you see, Adams eating of an Apple, does as well
cast him out of Paradise, as Lucifers usurping the dignity of God, and denial
to submit himself to Christ, did cast him out of Heaven; and Vzza's touching
of the Arc, brings death upon him, as well as Judas his betraying of Christ,
causes him to hang himself: And therefore, timenda est ruina multitudinis,
etsi non magnitudinis: We should as well take heed to be destroyed by the
smallest, Aug. de vera relig and in ep. 138.
as by the greatest things: Nam quid interest, ad naufragium, etc. For what
skils it, whether the Ship suffers wrack, from one huge billow that
ouer-whelmes her, or by some small Leakes, which in time does sincke her? So,
what difference is it, Luc 16.21.
with Dives to be sent to hell, for his daily denial of his crummes of bread
unto poor Lazarus; 1 King 21.16.
or with Achab for once taking away of Naboths Vineyard; or with our continual
swaggerers, for daily swearing, and loose-liuing, or with the blood-like Caine,
that do, though but seldom, commitimmane and fearful murders? surely none
but this: that they do walk diverse ways, but do meet in the end at the same
place: And therefore the very heathen man could say, Cicerol. 1. offic.
Qua parua videntur esse delicta, etc. Those sins which seem to be so small,
as that they scarcely be perceived to be sins, by many; ought with all care
and diligence be to avoided: or otherwise we shall find our Saviors words to be
true; that, for every moment of time that we have spent in vain, Matthew. 12 39.
and for every idle word that we have spoken, to no purpose, we shall render an
account at the last day: For, the reward of Sin (be it never so little) is
Death.

And so much for the first part, the work done, i. e. Sin.

Part. 2.
PART. II. The payment for Sin. i. e. Death: For the reward of Sin is death.
CHAP. I. Of the deceit of Sin.
Of the great deceit of sin; in promising much, and performing the clean
contrary.
YOu saw the Work, you see the Wages; and thereby you may see the deceit of
sin. -- Front polita Astutum vapido seruat seruat sub pectore vultum.

For, it will appear at first with a Sirens face, most delightful, but it will
prove at last to have a Serpents sting, and to be most woeful: and you may
easily find almost infinite instances of this truth: Genesis 3.6.7.
for Eve saw the tree was good for meat, and pleasant to the eye, and a tree
to be desired to make one wise: therefore she took and did eat, and gave unto
her Husband: But then (says Moses) their eyes were opened, and they knew they
were naked: naked in body, naked in soul, naked of all grace, and naked of all
goodness: and therefore you see, the Serpents promise to make them like Gods,
made them like Devils, and that the desire of delight and ostentation did
work their grief and confusion: Cle. Al. l. 3. Strom Justin Martyr apol. pro
Christianis. Sulpit l. 1. de sac. hist. Gen 6.1.2.
So the sons of God, that is, not the Angels as Clemens, Alexandrinus, Justin
Martyr, Sulpitius, Lactantius and others thought; but the godly sons of Seth,
as Saint Augustine and others do most truly collect, did see the daughters of
men, that is of the posterity of Caine, that they were fair, and therefore they
took them wives of all that they liked; and what could they have more then to
have their own desires? but what says the Text? when they thought themselves
most happy, then did they feel the greatest misery: for suddenly the flood
came and took them all away: Mat. 24.9.
So Saul thought to make advantage by saving Agag, and the fattest of the
Cattle, but thereby he lost his Kingdom from his Offspring: 1 Samuel 15.9.
So Iereboam thought to establish his Throne by his Idolatry, but it proved to
root out all his Posterity, 1 King. 12.28.
and so (as the Scripture shows) we find the same truth in all other
particular sins, for though the Harlots words be sweet, her countenance
fair, Proverb. 7.27. etc. 9.18.
and her bed perfumed, yet her house (says Solomon) is the way to the grave,
her chamber is the door of death, and her guests are in the depth of Hell: and
the very Heathen man could say: Meritrix meum herum miserum, Plantus Truc.
sua blanditia intulit in pauperiem, spoliauit bonis, luce, honor atque amicis:

This Harlot with her cogging flattery has impouerished and undone my poor
miserable Master, she has spoiled and deprived him of all his goods, honor,
friends, and all: So, though stolen waters be sweet, and the bread of deceit is
pleasant unto a man, yet afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel:
Prou. 20.17.
and though the Wine seem Cos: to the drunkard; that is, to have colorem,
odorem and saporem; an excellent color in the glass, a pleasant smell in the
nostrels, and a sweet taste in the mouth; yet in the end, it will bite like a
Serpent, Prou. 23 32.
it will hurt like a Cockatrice: It will Circe-like transform Men to Swines,
Virgil.
and make them with Ulysses fellows, to become worse then the very beasts.
When (as the Poet says) Et pudor and probitas, and metus omnis abest: We
shall find in them, neither fear of God, nor shame of face, nor scarce any
quality or property of man, besides humane shape: for, (as Propertius says:)
Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas, Propertius l. 2. eleg. vlt.

Vino saepe suum, nescit amica virum.


By Wine the beauty fails, by Wine man waxes old; Vt Venus enervat vires sic
copia Bacchi and tentat gressus debilitatque pedes.

Festus Anieno de ven: and vino.


by Wine the wedded wife, with strangers will be bold. And to be brief, though
young men and Gallants, do rejoice in their youth, and walk in the ways of
their hearts, and in the sight of their eyes, that is, enjoy what pleasure
soever they will, what their eye sees, or what their heart desires; yet in
the end, God will bring them to judgment for all those things, and then shall
their bread in their bellies be turned into the gall of Serpents. Eccles 11.9.


And so every sin is like it self, like Duke Ioab, whose words were smoother
then oil when he said unto Amasa; Est ne pax mi frater, 2 Samuel 20.9.10.
Is it peace brother? and yet while the tongue called him brother, his sword
stabbed him to death, like an enemy: So sin, as it were a cunning Apothecary,
that writes on the outside of his box, Pharmaca, medicines; when as within
there is nothing but Venena, poisons: Proponit quod delectabile, supponit quod
exitiale, vngit, pungit: It promises wealth, but it brings woes: Revel 8.13.
Woe, woe, woe, to the Inhabitants of the Earth; Vae propter culpam, vae
propter tribulationem mundanam, and vae propter paenam aeternam: Woe for our
offenses, woe for our miseries, woe for our eternal punishment: and it
annointeth us with oil; but it stingeth us to death: And so indeed it is like
the Devil, Cyprian l. 1. ep 8.
a liar, and the father of lies. Quia peccatum mentitur vt fallat, vitam
pollicetur vt perimat; Because every sin lies, that it may deceive us, and
proposes pleasure, that it may bring us into pain.

Venerab. Beda l. exhort. 4 and. 5.
Venerable Bede, compares sin unto a Witch, which transformeth every man unto
a Monster; as Lust makes a man like a Siren, or an Horse, to yeane after his
neighbors wife; Sloth, makes him like an Ass, or Ostridge; Cruelty like a
Wolf, or Hyenna: Covetousness like the ravening Harpies: and so every other
sin, makes the poor Sinner to become, Monstrum horrendum ingens cui lumen
ademptum:

The most ugly Monster upon the face of the earth. Why then should we not hate
this sin, which speaks friendly unto us, and promises great felicity, but
in the end brings us to the extremest misery? Bern. insentent.
Quia via peccati ingredientes contaminat, progredientes obstinat, egredientes
exterminat: Because (as Saint Bernard says) sin in the first entrance
defiles, in the progress hardneth, and in its going out, destroys every
Sinner: and (as Solomon says of the Harlot,) her ways lead unto death, and
her footsteps take hold of Hell: so the same is most true of sin: and
therefore if any man should be asked, what he does in sin, he might justly
answer, as an old Courtier did, when he was demanded, Every sin pays the
same wages, though it promises several pleasures.
what he did in Court, I do nothing but undo my self: For, the reward of
sin is death.

And here likewise you may observe, that although every sin does not promise
the same thing (for some sins promise pleasure, some profit, some honor, and
some one thing, and some another) yet every sin brings us to the same end,
and in the end pays us with the same reward: for the reward of sin, of any
sin, is death.

But because, Thriuerus Apoth. 19.
as many do make none account of most deadly diseases, by reason that they are
ignorant of the dangerous effects of the same: Ita multi euidenter peccant,
quia turpitudinem and consequentiam peccati, perspectam non habent: So many men
fear not to sin, but do as smoothly drink up the same as pleasant Wine;
because they do not understand the filthiness and wretched effects of sin:
and because, as if a man might with his outward eyes, behold the beauty of
virtue and goodness; mirabilem amorem excitaret sui; It would wonderfully
inflame their hearts with the love thereof: So if we did behold the
loathsomeness of sin, and consider well the fearful events thereof, it
would make us, with Job, Job 42 6.
to abhor our selves in Dust and Ashes: Therefore I will search a little
further into this Labyrinth of sin, and take a little more pains to unfold
the miserable effects of the same: for, the reward of Sin is Death.

When sin is first committed, it will presently gall and wound our
consciences, and it will continually show unto us, how good a Law is violated,
how great a Majesty is offended, and how grievous a punishment we have
deserved: and (a the Poet says) Occultum, quatiante animo tortore, flagellum;
Juven Satyr. 13.
When the great Tormentor will shake his hidden whip in the soul of the
offender; then is he troubled night and day, walking in the hands of his
executioner, and sleeping like the Nightingall, which has always a prick
before her breast. Neither is this all; for, the reward of sin is death.

Now by Death, By Death are understood all the miseries contained under the
curse of God.
we must understand not only the separation, of the body and soul of man; but
all other things that are comprehended under the curse of God; for the curse of
God and the Death of Man, are Voces aequipollentes, equivalent terms, and do
signify the same thing; and therefore as Saint Paul says here, The wages of
sin is Death; So he says elsewhere, out of Moses; Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, that are written in the
Book of the Law for to do them.

And we find, that the curse of God for the sin of man extends it self.

1. To all those creatures that were created and made for the use of man. 2. To
all the properties, and faculties of each part of man.
Rom 8 20. and 22.
First, The creature was made subject unto vanity, and groaneth, and trauelleth
in pain until now, not of it own accord; but by reason of the transgression
of man; the earth was accursed for his sake, and the very Heavens were
subjected unto vanity: and as then he dealt with Adam; so ever since he
deals in like manner with all the sons of Adam: Psalm. 107.34.
for he makes a fruitful land barren, for the iniquity of them that dwell
therein: that is, either such as brings forth no fruits at all, or else such
as where, Infaelix lolium and steriles dominantur auenae:

How the earth is accursed and her fruits, by reason of our sins.
The good seed is ouergrowen with darnell, smothered with thorns, or spoiled
with cockle: for though the earth was made, to yield us fruits of increase; yet
instantly upon our sinning, the grounds denied to pay her tribute; unless (as
the Poet says) iuncto boue, aratra trahuntur; we do rippe up her bowels, to
fetch it out of her belly: And yet this is not all; for though we manure the
ground, and plant the seed, never so fair: yet, except the Lord gives the
increase, all our labor is but in vain.

And the Lord tells us plainly, that if we cease to sin and serve our God,
Psalm. 107.35.
he will make the Wilderness a standing water, and water springs of a dry
ground; but if we continue in sin, and sow iniquity: Hosea 8.7.
he tells us plainly, we shall reap but vanity; and if we sow the wind,
we shall reap, but whirlewind for our harvest.

And therefore if God stops the windows of Heaven, and withholdeth the
rain from us, 1 Reg. 17.1.
as he did in the days of Elias, and so causes the Heavens to be as brass,
and the earth to be as iron under our feet; the one yielding no dew, the other
bearing no fruit: or if God opens the Cataracts and floodgates of Heaven,
Genesis 7.11.
as he did in the days of Noah, and so cause the Heavens to weep, and the
floods to carry away our fruits, before we can carry them into our barnes: then
must we know, Saluian: Massali^ de guber. dei.
that all this, and whatsoever of this kind happens to us, is inflicted upon
us, for our sins; quia ira diuinitatis est paena peccantis; because all the
grievous effects of Gods wrath, Genesis 3 17.
are the just deserts of man's sin: for cursed is the Earth for thy sake.

CHAP. II. How every sin slays the soul.
AS sin brings a curse upon all creatures; How sin brought on man a treble
death.
so it brings death upon all men: for the reward of sin is death: and we
find this death to be three fold.

1. A spiritual death of the Soul, within the Body. 2. A corporal death of
the Body: by continual castigation of the same throughout all our life, and a
final separation from the soul, at the end of our life. 3. An eternal death,
both of Body and Soul, in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone
foreuermore.
The first, is set down in the 8. of Matthew. 22. Chrysostom. hom. 11. in c. 6. ad
romans
Where our Savior says: Let the dead bury their dead: i. e. Let those that
are spiritually dead, in trespasses and sins, (as the Apostle says) bury
those that are naturally dead: to show that a sinners body, is but the
breathing Sepulcher of his sinful soul: and therefore the Prophet David
says, Psalm. 14.5. Romans 3.13.
that their throat is an open Sepulcher; which yields a more loathsome sent
unto the nostrils of God, from the corrupted putrified soul; then any grave
can yield unto the nostrils of man, from all its rotten carkases.

The second, is set down in the 11. of John the 39. John 11.39.
where Martha says, her brother Lazarus was dead and stinked: i. e. deprived
of the fruition of the soul; and therefore loathsome to be seen, and more
loathsome to be smell: for experience shows us, that how sweet soever we be
in our life, and how soft and tender soever our flesh be; most amiably
complexioned, with that fresh and lively blood, which be deckes the same with
the fairest colors, and glides up and down in silver veins; yet are the best
of these sweetest Ladies, but most loathsome stinking carrions, within a short
space after death: all flesh being subject to corruption.

Luke 16.24.
The third, is set down in the 16. of Luke 24. where Dives being in torments,
prays unto Abraham, to show that he had a soul, and desires a drop of water
to cool his tongue, to prove that he had a body.

But to speak of these three more fully.

First, We must understand that the spiritual death of the soul is twofold.

1. Mori peccatis, to die to sin. 2. Mori in Peccatis: to die in sin.
Macrob. c. 1. in some. scip. 13.
For the first, (...); the whole study, and life of the Philosopher, was
nothing else but a commentary, Hieron ad Heliod. ex Platone in Phaedone.
or preparation for death, says Macrobius: Nam mori dicimur, cum anima adhuc
in corpore constituta, corporeas illecebras contemnit; for he may be truly
said to die, whose soul still remaining within the body, does notwithstanding
contemn and abstain from all fleshly delights. And this was aimed at by the
Philosophers, but it was only attained unto by the true Christians; What it is
to die to sin.
for they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh and have mortified the
lusts of the same, says the Apostle: these have ears and hear not the
Sirenian notes of sin, nor the flattering suggestions of Satan; they have
eyes, and see not the alluring vanities of this world, any ways worthy to be
desired: for I have made a covenant with mine eyes, Job 31.
that they should not look, that is, unlawfully, or with any lascivious
desire, upon a maid, says holy Job; and I said, I would take heed unto my
ways, (says the Prophet David) that I offend not in my tongue: Psalm. 39.1.
and therefore (as the Apostle says) they use the world, as though they used
it not.

To die to sin is a punishment for sin.
And although this death be good, the only way to bring us unto a better life;
for he that will not die before he dies, shall never live when he dies; yet
is this the reward of sin: for had it not been for sin, we had not needed
to take this care and pain, Cyprian de duplici Martyrio.
to fight against our selves; yea, to Martyr and mortify our own flesh, by
chastening our own bodies, to bring them to subjection: least we should prove
to be cast-awayes, as the Apostle speaks: and therefore the chastisements of
the Saints, are the punishments of their sins.

For the second, to die in sin, What it is to die in sin.
is when God forsakes a sinful soul, and suffers the same to lie and die
in her transgressions: for as the soul is the life of the body; so is God the
life of the soul, (says Saint Augustine: Aug. de ciuit. dei. l. 13. c. 21.
Matthew. 4.4.
) And therefore all those that live by bread only, and not by every word which
proceeds out of the mouth of God; i. e. which live the life of nature, and
not the life of grace; they are like those wanton widows, whereof the Apostle
says, 1 Timothy 5.6.
that they are dead while they live: for though the soul be truly immortal,
yet it has a kind of death (says Saint Augustine;) and that is, when God
forsakes the same for sin; and what a heavy case is this? Plangis corpus
quod deserit anima, and non plangis animam quam deserit Deus: We bewail the
body when the soul is parted, and shall we not bewail the soul which God
has forsaken? says Saint Chrysostom.

Saint Augustine, being as then a Manichee, and reading the History of Aeneas
and Queen Dido, A most excellent consideration of Saint Augustine.
did weep (as himself confesses,) when he came to the death of Dido: and
therefore after that he was converted, he most divinely says; o me miserum,
etc. O wretched man that I was, that would bewail the death of Dido, forsaken
of Aeneas, and did not bewail the death of mine own soul forsaken of God: so
we many times do weep for the death of our friends, but do never weep for
the death of our own souls.

They may say unto us as Christ said to the daughters of Jerusalem, weep not
for us, but weep for your selves, Luke 23.28.
and for your own souls, that are dead in sins: for every one of us may say
with the poet; Atque vtinam lugenda tibi non vita, Repentance is the only
means to revive our dying souls.
sed esset
mors mea. --


Our life is a great deal more worthy to be bewailed, then our death; in as
much as the death of the soul, is a great deal more lamentable then the death
of the body.

But as we have no other remedy for the death of our friends, but only
tears, -- Est quadam flere voluptas: Expletur lachrymis egeriturque dolor.
for this is a great ease unto the afflicted heart, and a kind of comfort unto
the sorrowful soul; so we have none other help for the death of our souls,
but only tears: Saepe per has flecti, principis ira solet;

For though Gods anger did burn like fire, yet the tears of repentance is
able to quench his wrath: and therefore Saint Peter when he sinned, Matthew.
26.75.
in denying the innocent blood, he went out and wept bitterly; Ambros. in Luc.
vt lachryme lauaraent delictum, that his bitter tears might wash away his
grievous sin, and his true repentance give life unto his dying soul. Vade and
fac tu similiter: go thou, and do the like: revive thy languishing soul with
weeping tears: and I can say no more, quia non inuenio quid dixerit, sed quod
fleuit, for I find no more but that he wept; his tears perhaps drowned his
word^: but they restored life unto his dying soul; they laid hold on God with
Israel, and would not suffer him to depart until he had forgiven him; Hierom.
in Esayam.
Nam oration Deum lenit, sed lachrymae cogunt, for when words do but desire
him, but incline him; our tears will compel him to be merciful unto us.

How sin polluteth the soul of man.
You see then, he that delights in sin slays the soul, yea it defiles
and polluteth the whole soul; and it makes it so odious, and so detestable,
that God cannot endure it; for he dwells not in a body that is subject unto
sin: and therefore Saint Chrysostom says, Wised. 1.4.
that melius est luto pollui quam peccatis, it is far better to tumble our
bodies in the filthiest mire, then to touch our souls with the least sin, No
dirt so foul as sin.
for he which falls into the mire, may in a short time be washed, and become
as clean as they that never were bemired: but he that once falls into the
puddle of sin, receives such pollution, as that all the waters in the ocean
Sea, can never wash him clean; nor any thing else in the world, save only the
blood of Jesus Christ, which cleanses us from all sins: and this also must
be laid hold upon to effect it, Chrysostom hom. 12. ad Heb.
and poenitentia diligenti and lachrymis: even with the bitter tears of true
repentance.

CHAP. III. How sin slays every faculty of the Soul.
ANd further we must understand, that as sin defiles the whole soul in
general, so it polluteth every faculty of the same in particular. Plato
says, That there are three special faculties in the soul of man.
(and Aristotle from him) that in the soul of man there are three especial
faculties:

The first, he calls (...). i. e. the vegetative faculty, which of others
is called, virtus naturalis, the natural virtue of increasing: and the seat of
this in man, he says to be the liver; the properties whereof are, to nourish,
and to beget, etc.

The second, he calls (...). The sensitive faculty, whose seat (he says)
is in the heart; and to which he ascribes the vital virtue, and the motions
of the sensitive appetite.

The third, he calls (...). The reasonable faculty, whose seat (says
Galenus) is the head: and whose operations are, to imagine, to remember, to
understand, to judge, and to guide all voluntary motions.

And there is none of these but sin defiles* How sin defiles every
faculty of the reasonable soul.
and especially above all the rest, the reasonable soul: for in it, we find
three especial faculties, 1. The will. 2. The understanding. 3. The memory:


And we find all these exceedingly corrupted, and defiled by sin. For,

First, The Philosopher says, that there is no doubt of this; Arist. aeth: l.
10 c. 8. The chiefest perfection of man consists in the will of man.
quin in affectu and voluntate perfectio summa consistit: But that all, or the
chiefest perfection of man, consists in the will and affection of man: for
the will is not only the immediate agent of all those actions, quae vocantur
elicitae, which are called free actions; as to will, to nill, to choose, to
refuse, to love, to hate, to desire, and such like; but it is also the effecter
of the other actions, quae vocantur imperatae, which are called compelled
actions; because the will commands all; as the mind to think, and to
consider, the understanding to discuss, the judgment to approve, and all the
other faculties of the soul, to execute his command: so that there is neither
sin, nor virtue, but the same is first in this commanding will, before it
comes to any part either of soul or body.

All actions are adjudged according to the disposition of the will. Propertius:
lib. 2. 10.
And therefore are all actions, good or badde, adjudged and deemed, according to
the disposition of the will.

First, Good actions have all their goodness from the will, for not only the
Poet says, Quod si dificiant vires, audacia certe
Laus erit, in magnis and voluisse sat est:


That the will is sufficient, where the power is wanting; but also Saint
Augustine says, Aug. sup. Psalm. 57.
that whatsoever good thou would do, and can not do it, God accepts
the same as done: and Saint Paul himself says, that in such cases, God
accepts the will for the deed: Gregor. moral. lib. 10.
for God looks not so much, quantum quilibet valet, sed quantum velit, into
what a man is able to do, as into what a man is willing to do: and therefore
our Savior commends the poor widow, and prefers her before all the rest
of the rich men; Mar. 12.43.
because, though her gift was lesser, yet was her will better then all the
rest: for that they of their abundance, bestowed what they could well spare;
but she of her penury had cast in all that she had: and David willing, and
saying that he would build God an house, Ver. 44. 2 Samuel 7.
was accepted as if he had built it: for, seeing God looks not so much into
the outward work, as into the inward intention of the heart; Jdem ibid. l. 1^.
whatsoever is intended by the will, in the very heart of man, the same is
reputed and deemed as done, in the eyes of God: says Saint Gregory.

Secondly, Evil actions have the same estimation; for, si sit voluntas and
desit potestas, etc. If thou have a will to do evil, and have no power to do
it; thou art no less guilty of the deed, in the sight of God, then if thou
had done it: and therefore he that looks on a Woman, that is, with a will
to lust after her, has committed adultery with her in his heart already,
says our Savior: and the very heathen Poet, subscribeth unto the same truth,
saying; I^^n. 13.
Ha^ patitur poenas, peccandi sola voluntas
Nam scaelus intrase, tacitum qui cogitat vllum
Facti crimen habet.


Whosoever thinks evil inwardly within his breast, must needs be guilty of
the outward fact; The will or desire of sin deserves the punishments of
sin. Lanch. de operibus dei. p. 1. l. 4. c. 11.
and so liable to the just punishment that is due for such a sin. And
therefore (in the judgment of the very heathen) the will of sinning, does most
justly deserve the punishment of the sin. For,

It is observed by Divines, that although Satan's power be very great, to
corrupt all other faculties of the soul of man, as to darken the
understanding, to dazzle the fancy, to delude the senses, and to provoke the
appetite, That Satan has no power to compel the will.
yet that he has no power to remove, or to turn the will; he may tempt, and
persuade; but he cannot compel the same: for seeing this is the primum mobile,
the highest wheel in the frame of our soul, that moves and guides all our
actions, and according to which they shall be discerned, and judged: therefore
in the midst of man's greatest assaults, God would not suffer Satan to
prevail and to command the will; but he has left the same in our own
liberty; so that Satan cannot destroy us, unless we be willing to destroy
our selves: and therefore Saint Ambrose says, Ambros: de vita beata. and
habetur. 15. q. 1. can: Non est.
Non est quod cuiquam nostram ad scribamus ar^^mnam, nisi nostra voluntati, qui
nemo tenetur ad culpam, nisi voluntate propria deflexerit; There is no reason,
why any man should ascribe the cause of his miseries, to any thing in the
world, save only to his own will: for we perish, because we will perish;
perditio tua ex te, Our own will is the cause of all our woe.
our destruction is from our selves, and from no where else: for no man is
drawn to sin, neither can it be a sin, unless the agent does some way
yield some consent of will: for if Satan had power to force the will, aliquis
iustorum non remaneret, then not a righteous man should remain upon the face
of the earth: and therefore are all his temptations, called persuasions, or
suggestions, and not compulsions; because they are all used to make us
voluntary agents, to make us yield consent of will; for that (as I said before)
Non est peccatum nisi sit voluntarium, No act can be a sin any way, unless
it be voluntary some way.

And therefore, as Apollodorus the tyrant, dreamed that he was flea^d by the
Scythians, and boiled in a seething Caldron; and that his own heart should say
unto him, I am the cause, of this thy fearful torments; so it is most
certain that there is no damned soul in hell, but he may justly say, his own
heart and his own will sent him thither: for let Satan do what he will, and
let him strive what he can, yet if man were true to himself, The gates of Hell
should never prevail against him: because no created power is able to compel
the will of man.

And yet, such is the power of sin, that although reason should show us what
is good; Video meliora, proboque deteriora sequor.
yet it makes us to will only that which is evil; to leave the incommutable
and infallible good, and to follow after base and vile affections: and then
God, seeing us nilling the good, and willing the evil, he gives us over to a
reprobate mind, Aug. de l. arbit:
Vt cum vult homo recte agere non potest, quia quando potuit, noluit; and ideo
per malum velle perdidit bonum pesse: That if we would will well, we cannot;
because when we could will well, we would not: and therefore, as our first
Father Adam, so all we that are the sons of Adam, by willing evil, have, and
do loose the power of willing good. For,

Romans 1.21.24. That our sin has deprived us of all will to do good.
As because the Gentiles, when they knew God, glorified him not as God, neither
were thankful; therefore God gave them over to vile affections, to do those
things that were not convenient; So because, when we had our will free, and
none could command it, we willed evil, and not good; therefore God in Justice
gives us over, to such wilful greediness of sinning, that now of our selves
we have not the least will, to do good, for if any man wills good it is from
infused grace, and not from our inbred will; Philip. 1.13.
for God works in us both the will and the deed, says the Apostle: but our
natural will is dead from good; for sin has so defiled the same, that it
wills and affects nothing but vile and vain things; and so it compels
every part and faculty of the soul, to long and lust after evil: for the vis
irascibilis, the irascible, distasting, and angry faculty which should be as a
dog, to keep away sin, does now wax angry at every virtue: and that which
should detest evil in his brother, does rage and swell at the reproof of his
Father; and the vis concupiscibilis, the concupiscible faculty, or desiring
appetite, which should desire nothing but goodness, and what were just and
honest, does now affect nothing but lewdness, and what is most vile and
abominable; and it cannot do any otherwise: Max. l 1. de charitate.
Nomquemadmodum passerculus pede alligatus, etc. For as a little bird tied by
the leg, when he begins to fly, is presently drawn down again by the
string; So the mind of man, tied by base affections, if it seek to mount up to
heavenly thoughts, it is presently plucked down again by sin: says
Maximus. And so you see, that Quam non mill ferae, quam non steneleius hostis
Nec potuit quicquam vincere, vincit Adam:


This will of man, which neither mortal enemies, nor yet infernal spirits,
nor any other created thing, could subdue; is now defiled, polluted, and wholly
corrupted by sin. That no outward enemy can compel our will.
And therefore I can freely yield unto our adversaries, that we have
free will, in regard of any outward compulsion: for that Satan himself cannot
compel it; for if he could, we could not justly be condemned, for doing that
unwillingly, which we are wholly and forcibly compelled to do; Our inward
natural corruption is that which draws our will to sin.
but we have not the least free will, in regard of our natural corruption:
for, as a stone tumbling down the hill needs no man to drive it; so the will
of it self is so inclined to evil, that of it self, it can no more affect
goodness, then a stone of it self to run upwards: and therefore Saint John
says, of the regenerate; John 2.13.
that they are not borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God.

Secondly, as no action can be good, unless the will be right, and the will
can never be right, unless the understanding be right, as Seneca says; for
though the will be the Mistress, and the Commander of all the faculties of the
soul, Our will is guided by our judgment.
save only the vegetative, as Nyssenus says; yet of it self it has no
light, but is enlightened by the reason and judgment of the understanding:
Viues l. de anima.
And therefore actus voluntatis a voluntate producitur, sed a ratione suadetur;
The Act of the will is produced by the will, but it is induced and moved by the
reason, says Viues: And therefore if the understanding be darkened, Matthew
15.14.
it is no marvel that the will should be corrupted; for, if the lame will,
carry and command the blind understanding, and the blind reason, do lead
and guide the lame will, then are both like to fall into the Ditch. Of the
perfection of Adams understanding.


But, though the understanding of Adam, in Paradise, was so perfect, that he
knew his God, which made him; his wife to be bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, though he never saw her before, and all the other creatures so well,
that at the first sight, he was able to give them names agreeable to their
natures; Genesis 2.20.23.
yet now the understanding of all men i^ so blinded, that it cannot see the
light of any Divine truth: How our understanding is now darkened through sin.
Peccatum enim tenebrae, for sin is as the blackness of darkness, and as a
deep dungeon, wherein there is no light; and all sins are called the works
of darkness; not only because they are done in darkness: or at least
desired to be kept secret, but also because they are the works of them, whose
understandings are so darkened, that they cannot perceive the excellency of the
Grace of God, Rom 13.12.13.
but do think all the mysteries of our faith to be, not only mirabilia,
strange and wonderful; but also incredibilia, impossible and incredible: and
therefore whatsoever we do say of grace, and of spiritual things, Ephesians. 5.8.
they are but foolishness unto them; for, as in the night time, when there is
no light, a bush seems a man, and a man a beast, and we judge Lead to be
silver, Brass Gold, and Gold no better then Copper; So those men, qui sordide
viuunt, Chrysostom. hom. 4. in John.
which do love, and live in iniquity, can no ways understand the excellency of
piety, says Saint Chrysostom.

And therefore sin brought this infirmity upon us, to be (...), Darkened in
our understandings; and our fathers affected-knowledge of good and evil,
brought inflicted ignorance of all good, upon all his children: for as we read
of a certain Widow, Ephesians. 4.1^.
that desiring to see better then she did, had her eyes so cunningly closed, by
a subtle and a false Physician, that while she hoped for a greater measure of
sight, How Adam by affecting knowledge brought ignorance vp-all his posterity.
he stole away all the treasure that she had, and then having her eyes opened,
and seeing how she was cozened, she worthily complained that she saw worse
then ever she did before. So Adam, desiring to know much, and to see better
then he did before, became indeed to know just nothing, and to see himself in
a far worser state, then ever he was before: for, God is light, and in him
there is no darkness at all: and therefore falling away from God, we are
deprived of all light, 1 John 1.5.
and are plunged into the place of utter darkness: John 12.35.
and therefore as he that walks in darkness, knows not where he goes; so,
we being separated from God, we know not what is truth, we know not what is
good.

And the Philosophers themselves, the seekers and searcher^ after Knowledge,
did find, to their endless grief, The Philosophers saw and professed the
blindness of all men.
that when they had turned their strength into weakness, their marrow into
dryness, and their color into palenesse, by their continual watchings, and
indefessed unwearied studies, and musing to get knowledge; they attained at
length, to no more, but hoc vnum scire, se nihil scire to know this one thing,
that they knew just nothing.

And (as our Savior said to Nicodemus, in the like case) if they could not
attain to the knowledge of earthly things, John 3.12.
how should they understand heavenly things? For although the understanding,
which Nazianzene calls, (...), the eye and lamp of reas^n, should be
exceeding sharp, to discern the alterations of the skies, to enter into the
secrets of nature, How sharp our understanding is in natural things.
and to reach unto the height of heaven, and the deepnesse of Hell it self;
yet in things concerning God, he could reach no further, then (...), such
points as might be manifested by demonstration: as Saint Clement speaks.

For if we talk of Christ's conception, by the holy Ghost, How blockish every
man is naturally in the mysteries of our Faith.
without the help of man; of his birth of a pure Virgin, without breach or
impeachment of her Virginity, of his Death, as the Son of God personally
understood, (for otherwise the Divine Nature is impassible;) and so of his
resurrection, as he is the Son of Man, and of the resurrection of all flesh
at the last day; and such li^^ Mysteries of our Faith; then both the wise
Grecians, even all the School of Athens, and the foolish Jews, even all the
whole rank of Rabbis, will count each point (...), a fained thing; and cry
out with the Athenians, Act. 17.18.
What will these bablers say? for, as the eye of man (says S. Augustine) being
either blind or pur-blinde, cannot presently discern the cleerest object:
even so (says he) Animus pollutus, aut men's turbata, deum presentem videre non
potest: the mind that is distracted with worldly cares, or the soul that is
polluted with filthy sin, can neither understand God nor godliness.

And therefore Moses says, that all the imaginations of the thoughts of man's
heart, were only evil continually; Genesis 6.5. Tit. 1 15. Romans 8.6.
and Saint Paul says, that our very minds are defiled, and our wisdoms
death: but, if the light that is in thee, be darkness, how great is that
darkness? if our minds and understandings be thus blinded, and defiled
through sin, in what case shall the other faculties of the soul be?

What an excellent faculty the memory is. Sabel. l. 10. c. 9. Exemp. de memor.
Thirdly, for the memory, It is a faculty, qua repetit animus quae fuerunt;
Whereby the soul retains, as it were in her sight and knowledge, all the
things that are past; Et hoc nil sanctius, nil vtilius homini dedit Deus; and
it is the best and most excellent gift that God bestowed on man, says
Sabellicus: for, this is the Treasurer of all Learning, and the Keeper of all
those Arts, and Knowledge, which by great study and labor, we have attained
unto: and therefore in vain were our understanding; in vain were all our
seeking and searching after Knowledge, if the memory did not faithfully
retain what we have industriously found.

Plato in Crat. and in tymaeo. That forgetfulness is an infernal fiend.
And therefore it is a common saying, that tantum scimus quantum memoria
tenemus; We know no more, but what we remember. And for this cause, Plato
says, that memory is the mother of the Muses; and Aristotle compares it unto
a Scribe, intus manens and omnia scribens, that sits always within, and
records all things that are done, either within or without; and the Poets
placed Lethe, that is, oblivion and forgetfulness, which is always the enemy
contrary to the memory, in Hell, among the infernal spirits.

Wherein the memory excels the other faculties of the soul.
And in this we find the memory to be preferred, and enriched with more
excellent prerogatives then any other faculty of the soul; that the
understanding has much a do to discuss of things, and by reason to find out
the truth; and the will many times is thwarted, and contradicted by reason;
when wisdom shows, the will should not affect many things so indirectly as
it does: but the memory is never distracted by any foreign foe, but retains
peaceably at home (like a good Huswife) both what the will affects, and what
the understanding finds.

How God recommendeth his benefits unto our memories. Exodus 20.2.
And therefore God in the delivering of the Law, does chiefly work upon this
faculty of the memory, by presenting unto the Israelites what he had done for
them, saying: I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, out out of the house of bondage; And so Christ in the sealing of the
Gospel by the participation of his blessed body and blood, recommends that
excellent benefit unto our memories saying: Do this in remembrance of me: Luc
22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24.
for in vain should God do his wonderful works, unless they were had in
remembrance: if so soon as he had done them, we should with the Israelites
presently forget them: for as the meat is received in vain into the stomach,
unless it be retained until it be digested; so are all the works of God,
done in vain for us, unless the Memory, like a good stomach, (as Saint
Bernard calls it) does retain them until they have wrought their appointed
ends, upon our souls.

And yet now, this excellent faculty of the soul is so defiled, How the
Memory is defiled by sin.
and corrupted by sin, that like a raw bad stomach, it receives not, it
retains not, it degesteth not, that good meat that is offered unto it; but
is only delighted with those corrupter things that do turn to bad humors, and
crudities, for to increase the diseases, and to hasten the death of the soul:
For,

First, touching vain things, and unprofitable matters, Autore Plinio. How
faithful is our memory in vain or evil things?
we see the fidelity of this faculty, that admirable things are recorded of
the same. Cyrus could remember the name of every Soldier that was in his huge
army; and Mythridates King of Pontus, learned to speak two and twenty
several languages: and Portius Latronus, could rehearse any speech, verbatim,
that he had once written, without missing of any word thereof: and the like
memory had Themistocles, Lucullus, Hortentius, Seneca, and diverse others.

So now in all men, tenacissima est iniuriae memoria; Scribit in marmore
laefas. Cicero. l. 2. Oratore.
We can never forget ill turns done unto us; we write these things in marble;
yea though we say that we do forgive them, yet, we do profess that we shall
never forget them; (a fine distinction to destroy our souls, and a witty way
to go to hell:) and so of many other things, that do oftentimes tear our
hearts and vex our minds, with unspeakable griefs; we cannot (though we
would never so feign) forget them: and therefore Themistocles, when it was told
him, that Simonides had found out the art of memory, said that he would like
better of him, that could teach him the art of forgetfulness, that he might
forget those things which he should not, and would not, remember. But,

How soon we forget good things.
Secondly, touching good things, that should be had in everlasting remembrance,
we see quam facilis est obliuio boni: How easily they are forgotten, as Saint
Hierome says: there be but ten commandments, ten words says Moses, but two
says our Savior, Mar. 12.30.31. Romans 13.8.
but one says, the Apostle; and that is but a short one too, Love, and that is
all: and yet how hardly do we learn it, and how soon do we forget it? how
many thousand, have we in England, that can tell you a thousand tales, but
cannot say their Prayers, their Creed, and their ten Commandments? there is
but one God: and as the Poet says, -- Est deus in nobis, agitate calescimus
illo.

This God is not only present with us, about our bed^, and about our paths,
as the Prophet speaks; but he is also within us; for in him we live, Psalm.
139.2. Act. 17.28.
we move, and have our being, as the Apostle says; and yet we do quite forget
him, we think not of him: yea, we forget our selves, and whatsoever is good
for our own souls: Luk 10.12.
for though there be but vnum necessarium, one thing that is needful for us,
(as our Savior testifies) yet alas you see, how few of us do remember that
one thing: and therefore forgetting this one thing, we forget all things; and
we can remember nothing that is good for our own selves.

Thou shall remember (says Moses unto the Israelites,) that thou wast a
bondman in Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeedeemed thee thence; Deuteronomy. 14.18.
but they soon forgate, says David what God had done, Psalm 78.12. What we
should always remember.
and the wonderful things that he had showed for them. So we should remember
Gods blessings, that we might be thankful to him, and we should remember our
own sins, that we might be sorrowful for them: we should remember Gods
Justice, that we might fear to sin, and we should remember his mercy, that
we might not fall to despair.

But alas, alas: such is our nature, such grievous sores do possess our
souls, and this excellent faculty of our memory is so wounded by sin,
Francisc. Petrarch. dialog. 8. de memoria.
that as we read of Messala Coruinus, who became so sottish, as to forget his
own name; so we are become to that pass, Vt discenda discimus, and discenda
dediscimus; We always remember, what we should forget; and we ever forget,
what we should ever remember.

And so I hope you see, (as to our grief we feel it) how filthy sin slays
the soul; corrupting and defiling each part and faculty of the same; the
will, with lewd affections; the understanding, with gross ignorance; and the
memory, with sottish forgetfulness: so that now we will indirectly, we judge
darkely, and we remember nothing that is heavenly.

Hence it comes to pass, How our souls are fuller of diseases then our bodies.
that our bodies are not so subject to diseases, as our souls be to sins:
for pride, is the souls tympany: when it does -- turgescerefastu, wax big,
and swell through the distaine of others; envy, is the worm that gnaweth at
the heart: then which, it is most certain that -- Siculi non inuenere tyranui,
tormentum maius. --


The Sicilian Tyrants did never feel a more fearful torment: and wrath, is a
plurisie, that will not be appeased without blood: for of the raging man it is
most truly said, Mad that his poison cannot others kill,
He drinks it off himself, himself to spill.


And therefore of all the men in the world, we are advised to keep no company
with an angry furious man; but as the Poet says, Dum furor in cursu, currenti
cede furori; Ouidius lib. 1. de rem amor.

Difficiles aditus, impetus omnis habet.
To turn aside from every furious wight,
Cause fury, will have passage in despite.


And Lust, is the souls fever: the flames thereof, are the flames of fire:
and the waters thereof are aqua (...) the waters of folly and madness.

And in this, How the sickness of the soul is worse then the sickness of
the body.
the sickness of the soul does exceed all the sickness of the body: for the
body has some respite, from its sickness; but the soul has none from
sin: and every sickness of the body kills it not, but every sin slays the
soul: for the reward of sin, that is, of every sin, is death, says the
Apostle.

And hence likewise, in my judgment, that branch of Pellagianisme, taught also
by Lactantius, that the light of Nature, if it were well used, might make way
for Divine instruction; may be sufficiently confuted: for, though they teach
that man by sin has not quite killed his soul; but wounded the same, like
the man that fell among thieves, and was left half alive: and therefore might,
Lactan divine. iustit. c. 5. That Nature though never so well used cannot
procure the gifts of grace. Ephesians. 2.1.5. Coloss. 2.13.
(says Lactantius) come to the same doctrine, that we do follow, Si quae,
natura ducente sanserunt, defendissent: If they had constantly maintained those
things which Nature taught them: yet the Apostle says here, that sin brings
death unto the Sinner: and if death, then sure there was no life; i. e. no life
of Grace in him. And so in many other places, the Apostle shows as much; for
he says, that we were dead in trespasses and sins; and that God has
quickened us by Jesus Christ.

And therefore it is apparently plain, that at the beginning of our
conversion, we are altogether passive, and have no power in the world, to
relieve our selves, until grace has quickened our souls.

Ob.
But against this, it may be objected, that the Apostle says, the Gentiles knew
God; Romans 1.21.
(...); so much as might be known concerning God; that is, his eternal power
and Godhead, when they considered him in his works; and therefore the light
of Nature, was not quite extinguished in them.

Sol. That sin extinguished all knowledge of God, but what God reuealeth to
man.
I answer, that this knowledge of God, was not from the light of Nature in
them; but it was revealed by God unto these natural men, to make them without
excuse, as Zanchius well observes: for so the Apostle shows in the 19 verse
of the same Chapter; where he says, Deus enim illis manifestauit, for God
revealed the same unto them: and therefore I say that the sin of Adam, did
quite kill the soul of every man: for, the reward of sin is death: and
therefore we may all of us cry out with the Apostle, Romans 7.24.
O wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from this body of death?

And here-hence we may also see, the judgment of God threatened in Paradise,
Genesis 1.17.
In what day thou eatest of the tree of Knowledge of good and evil, thou shall
die the death; to be truly and presently inflicted upon Adam: for, though his
body seemed to live, yet was his soul separated from God, and therefore must
needs be presently dead.

Aug. de ser dom. in monte, and habetur de poenitent. distinct. 2.
But as sin is three manner of ways committed, (as I showed before) so is the
death of the soul three ways inflicted: and they are prefigured by those
three sorts of dead men, which our Savior raised in the Gospel, as S.
Augustine shows.

The first, was Iayrus his daughter: she was a Virgin, and was as yet within
the doors; and therefore our Savior went into the house, and put out all the
people, and vouchsafed to take her by the hand, and to say Talitha cumi,
Damsel, Mar. 5.41. Of a threefold death of the soul.
I say unto thee arise. This signifies that soul, which sinned only by
consent, but has not yet brought forth the sin into fact: and therefore God
will be merciful unto such, and will not require to shame them before the
world; but he will go in himself, and accept of their inward repentance for
such inward sins.

The second, was the Widows son of Naime, and he was carried out to be
buried; and therefore our Savior in the presence of them all, Did touch the
Beer, and said, Luk 7.14.
Young man I say unto thee, arise; and he sat up, and began to speak. And this
signifies the soul that sins in fact: and therefore as she publicly
sinned, so she must be publicly restored; and as by her sin she offended
many; so by her sitting up, They that publicly sin, must publicly testify
their repentance.
i. e. by her standing, and constancy in grace, and by her talking, i. e. by
her confession of her sins, she must give satisfaction unto many: Nam qui
public peccat, public corrigendus, public restaurandus est: For he that
publicly offends, is publicly to be reproved, publicly to be restored:
says the Law.

The third was Lazaus, John 11.
and he was dead and laid in his grave; and therefore Jesus was feign to go a
great journey to raise him: and when he came to him, he groned in his spirit,
and was troubled; he wept and he groaned again; Ver. 35.
he lifted up his eyes, he prayed, and he cried with a loud voice, saying,
Ver. 43.
Lazarus come forth: and then he came forth, but how? bound, hand and foot
(says the Evangelist;) with grave clothes, and his face bound with a Napkin:
so that his friends and standers by, were feign to loose him, and to let him
go. Ver 44.
And this signifies the soul that is accustomed to sin, that is dead and
buried in sin: and therefore many groans and sighs, How hard it is to recover
a sinner accustomed to sin.
many tears and prayers, and loud cries, must be used, before such a soul can
be raised from her sins: and because the accustomed sinners are bound with
sins, as with a chain, and have their faces bound up with shameless
impudency, and covered with the same, as with the Napkin: therefore the
Ministers of the word, their friends, their neigh^ours, by reproves, by
counsel, and by all other means must do their best, to loose them, and to
let them go: that is, to withdraw them from their evil ways, and to cause
them to walk in the paths of Righteousness.

Well then, seeing (...), the life of sin is the death of the soul; yea,
seeing every sin slays the soul, and that it is so hard a thing to revive
the soul from accustomed sins; Oh why should we accustom our selves to
sin? for it is more dangerous to sleep with one sin, then with an hundred
Scorpions: For they can but kill the body, but sin kills both, the body and
soul.

Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore. That the love of goodness should move us
to hate sin.

Siscirem deos ignoscitur^s and homines ignor^turos: Tamen propter peccati
turpitudinem peccare dedignarer. Seneca.


We know that good men will not sin, for the very love they bear to virtue,
and for the detestation they bear to vice; for so we read that Seneca, though
a Heathen, hated sin; least it should defile his soul; and Anselmus, that
good Christian says that if he should see all punishments, without sin, on
the one hand; and find sin with all the pleasures of sin, on the other
hand; and were compelled to make choice of one of them as Origin was, either to
commit Sodomie with a Blackamoore, or to cast Thu^ibilum his censer into the
fire, for to sacrifice unto the Idols; he would surely embrace the
punishments, and forsake the sin; because all the Saints of God, do ever
esteem it better, to suffer affliction with the people of GOD, Heb. 11.25.
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

But if we will not imitate these good men, to forsake sin, for the
filthiness of sin: yet, as many wicked men are said to have done it, That
wicked men should forsake sin for fear of punishment.
so let us do it -- formi ine poenae; for fear of the reward of sin: for
the wages of sin is death, and that not only of the soul in sin, but also
of the body for sin. And so I come to the second kind of death.

CHAP. IIII. How sin slays the body, by inflicting on it, all the miseries
of this life: and of the large extent of death, over all men.
SEcondly, Touching the death of the Body: that we may the more fully take a
view thereof, and the more orderly proceed in this point, I must desire you to
consider these three things.

1. How it is defined. 2. How far it extends. Three things to be
considered concerning natural death.
3. How variably it works.
For the first, (...): death is said to be the dissolution of the body and
soul; that is, the separation of the one from the other, and not the
destruction of either: And we must note, that whatsoever works or causes
the divorce and dissolution of these two, must needs be a branch of this tree:
and therefore by death, is understood, By death is understood all that is
contained in the curse of God.
not only the last final stroke, and fatal separation of the body and soul,
but also all other forerunners, and fore-causers of this dissolution; as
sickness, grief, sorrow, and all the other miseries that do happen
throughout the whole course of man's life: for (as I told you before) the death
of man, pronounced here, and the curse of God denounced elsewhere, are
aequiualent, the like reward of sin: and therefore whatsoever is the curse of
God, the same must needs be contained under the name of death: but we know,
that all the miseries of man, do proceed from the curse of God for sin: and
therefore all the miseries, and troubles, and sorrows of this life, must needs
be understood under the name of death: for as the last stroke of a tree, is
not the only cause that does throw down the tree, but that, with all the
rest, are properly said to have cut it down: so the last stroke of death,
cannot be said to be the sole killer of any man; but that, with all the rest of
his precedent miseries. So death daily strikes, to beat us down, and the more
sorrows are suffered, or the more days are passed, the more chippes are
chopped off, from this tree of life.

Now the whole life of man, is nothing else but a map of miseries; and my
life would be too short to relate it: yet seeing all, is the wages of sin;
for man suffers all that he suffers for his sins: (as the Prophet
shows,) my text calls me to speak a little of all, and the time bids me to
speak but a little of the same: and therefore I desire you to consider, The
manifold miseries of all ages.
1. How all ages. 2. How all estates. 3. How all creatures.


Do accumulate, and heap upon man heaps of miseries.

For the first, In our infancy, we come crawling into the world, without any
strength.

Ovid. Met. l. 15.
Editus in lucem iacuit, sine viribus infans, and as Lucretius says -- Nudus
humi iacet. Lucret. l. 5. Job. 1.
We come naked out of our mothers wombes, and have not any, the least, covering
to hide us, save only the blood of filthiness: and if we had understanding to
see it, we might perceive our mothers halfe-dead by giving us a little life,
and that if we were not helped by others, the hour of our birth, would be the
end of our life: and therefore as the Poet says: Lucret Ibid.
Vagituque locum lugubri complet, vt aequum est
Cui tantum in vita restet, tranfire laborum.


The poor infant, now begins with doleful cries, (and tears within a while)
as his best orators, to express his own miseries: Justin. hist l. 1.
and you never saw, neither have we ever read of any one, save only of
Zoroastres king of the Bactrians; that either laughed or smiled at his birth:
nor yet in forty days after (says Arist.) except it be sometimes as they
sleep and are at rest. Arist. histor. animal. l. 7. c. 10


After we are thus cast into the world, weak, wailing and miserable; Galenus
de diffi. medicis.
our whole life is divided by Galenus into four parts, whereof he makes the,
1. (...). iuuenum, of children, till 15. The age of man is divided into 4.
parts.
2. (...). vigentium, of youths, till 30. 3. (...). mediorum, of men, till 50.
4. (...). senum, of old age, till death, as Varro distributeth the same.


Years of their age.

First, In our childehood we are all alike, the heir differing nothing from a
servant, though he be Lord of all, all Lords or what you will; but they must
be under Tutors and Governors says the Apostle, and because -- exultat
leuitaete puer -- children are childish, and apish, rather delighting in toys,
then embracing instructions; therefore they are kept under correction, and
brought unto virtue, by good discipline while they may be taught: for as it is
prouerbially said, Flexilis est iuncus, salices flectuntur amarae,

Robora dura minus. -- the tender branch may be easily bowed; but the
well-growne Oak, Prouer. 29.18. and c. 4.3.4.
will be sooner broken then straitened: so we may teach a child, a trade in
his youth; but we shall hardly teach an old Horse to amble: and therefore, the
wisest among the sons of men, advises all men to correct their children,
though they be never so dear in their sight: because this is as necessary
unto the children, as their food, and as comfortable unto the parents as the
child himself; in as much, as to have a good child, is better then to have a
child.

And yet this instruction, and especially the correction, is such an
intolerable burden, so heavy for them to bear, What a burden correction is
unto children.
as that they think no creatures more miserable then themselves, when they see
all others free, and themselves only (as they think,) bound under the rod;
and therefore would they give all they have, to be once rid out of this servile
bondage.

Secondly, In our youth, we are like untamed colts, wild and wanton, unable to
rule our selves, and unwilling to be ruled by others: and therefore we do
loosen our bridles to all licentiousness; and every young man is for the most
part, as the Poet describes him briefly.

Inuidus, iracundus, iners, vinosus, amator. We burn with lust while we be
youths, How dissolute we are in our youth. Ouidius l. 13. Metam: Dum mihi lae^^
genas conuestit flore inuentus, militiae ingredior castra cupido tu^:
and are still inflamed with that untameable fire of wanton love: -- neque enim
robustior aetas
Vlla, nec vberior, nec quae magis ardeat vlla est.


Pleasure and youth, do smile on us, to woe us

To taste vain lusts, tasted they undo us. Therefore S. Iere. says, That it
is almost impossible to find a young man, that is not sometimes tempted with
fleshly lusts: and Saint Ambrose says, Inter omnia certamina christianorum,
durissima sunt praelia caftitatis; Prodigus, and curae vacuus, temerarius,
audax, Omne genus vitae liberioris amo.
Among all the combats of Christians, it is the hardest thing for us to
overcome, and subdue our own lusts: and to keep our own flesh a chaste and a
modest virgin: And as we are inflamed with lust, so we are drowned in
drunkenness; we swell with pride, and we fill our selves with all filthynesse;
and thereby we do many times, (as we daily see in many desperate youths) by
drinking, whooring, swearing, quarrelling, and such like effects of
deboysnesse, suddenly cut off our selves, in our own wickedness: and what
greater miseries can there be, then these? and yet behold I will show thee
greater abominations. For,

The miseries incident to us in our Manhood.

Nunc me ludus habet, nunc me formosa puella, nunc fera pro pacta praelia nocte
g^ro; Sedvelut herba perit, sic flos cadit ipse inuentae, faelix qui potuit
dicere talis eram.


Thirdly, In our manhood we are come to the midst of miseries; so that quocunque
afpiciam quocunque lumina vertam: Wheresoever we look and turn our eyes, we
shall see nothing, but our selves swimming in a Sea of sorrows, and there
tumbled and tossed with many waves of woes: micat ignibus ether, Clouds of
darkness, are in stead of comforts; and about our heads we shall find
haile-stones and coals of fire: for now we find the affairs of the world,
the fears of enemies, the cares for families, the discontents at home, many
times of thy Wife, that lies in thy bosom; many times of thy Children, the
fruits of thine own bowels; the wrongs of Neighbors abroad, the suites of
Law, and a thousand such bitter fruits of sin, do so vex and affright the
heart of man; that they make him often sleep like the Nightingale, that is
said to have always a prick before her breast; and then to rise up early, and
late to go to bed, Psalm. 127.3.
and to eat the bread of carfulness, and all to no purpose; for after we
have wearied, and worn out our selves in the pursuit of this world, all our
works and labors are but as the Spiders web; it will make no garment for
us: and when we have brought our years to an end, as it were a tale that is
told; then, notwithstanding all our former pomp and power, we shall be as
poor as when we were borne, even as poor as Job: for, The miseries incident
to us in old age. Job. 1.21.
as we came naked into the world, so naked we shall return again: and so
this is not only the misery, but also the folly and madness of men. And yet
behold a little more. For,

Fourthly, In old age. Vsque adeo grauis vxori, gnatisque, sibique, vt
captatori moueat fastidia Cosso. We are troublesome to our selves and others.

(...). Nunc mihi cum medicis res est, and iudice summo, and misere vitam
semisepultus ago, rixosae inuestant vetula, execrabile vulgus, inuidus in terra
parta recondo s^num. Eccles. 12.1.
An old man is troublesome unto youths, says Menander: yea, our own Wives,
though they cannot leave us, yet do they loathe us: and indeed our selves, do
now begin to hate our selves: Laudat praeteritos, presents despicit annos,

For these be the days wherein there is no pleasure.

(...). Because old age is like an heavy burden unto men, that makes them
stoop down to the earth, Nec coelum spectare licet, sed prona senectus
Terram, a qua genita est, and reditura videt:
and never suffers them to rise, or scarce to look up toward Heaven, until
they return to the earth, Genesis 3.19.
from whence they were taken. Alas then, what a misery is this, to consider the
miseries of old age? our bodies are weakened, our beauty vanished, our senses
blunted: the eyes cannot see, the ears cannot hear, the hands cannot work,
and the feet cannot walk: and then besides, -- Circumsilit agmine facto
morborum omne genus --
We are seized upon by all kind of diseases; our heads ache, our hearts faint,
and all our bodies tremble; Coughes, Rheumes and Feauers, do now seem to be
our vital spirits: and so the Heathens saw, and so they said, that no age was
free from miseries, yet, not one so bad as this: for notwithstanding all this,
and that they see they cannot live, and Nature tells them they must needs die;
yea, all these forerunners of death, Auri sacra fames, and amor sceleratus
habendi, assolet imprimis excruciare fenes.
do daily tell them, that they are even drawing their last breath; yet the
nearer they be unto their death, the more covetous they are, the more worldly
minded, the more desirous to live, and the more loath to leave this wretched
life.

Secondly, as all the Ages of man's life, The miseries of all estates.
so all the estates of life, are full of the punishments of sin: For,

First, if thou be poor: -- Nihil habet infaelix paupertas, Thou shall be
sure of nothing, but contempt, which is pouerties necessary attendant; for, the
poor man shall be despighted of his own brethren: and it is strange to see,
what pains and drudgery, those poor snakes (as we call them) do take, The
miseries of the poor. Genesis 3.19.
and endure both at home and abroad, to get a little maintenance; in the sweat
of their face, it may be in the coldest Winter, they do eat their bread, and
perhaps scarce sufficient to satisfy mere necesity; as if they only were
allotted to sustain that heavy sentence that was first denounced against man
for sin: and therefore Menander says, -- (...): No burden is more
burdensome then poverty: and Plautus says: Omnibus modis, Plaut. rud.
qui pauperes sunt, misere viuunt: The poor are miserable every way: and it
was the common received opinion of the Gentiles, miseros esse deis inuisos;
that they were hated of the gods which were thus plagued by the gods; and the
Jews thought little less; Deuteronomy. 28.22.23.
because this is numbered among the curses of the Law: and therefore Hecuba,
being brought to such extreme poverty, as that she had neither clothes to
cover her nakedness, nor yet food to satisfy nature, calls her misfortunes
and miseries (...); Such as surpassed the sufferance of any creature; and
Plutarch reports, that many men, to avoid the same, did prevent this misery of
life, by a sudden and unnatural death; choosing to die, rather then to live in
extreme poverty: and so with the impatient Fishes, they did but leap out of
the Drying Pan, into the fire; and run away from that misery which for a while
they would not endure, into that intolerable torments, which now they must
eternally suffer.

The misery of the rich.
Secondly, If thou be rich, then art thou envied of others, and shall be very
like to be consened of thy goods; for thieves will seek to rob thee, thy
friends to betray thee, and thy neighbors to deceive thee; which makes the
rich men to take more care to keep their wealth, then they took pains to get
it; and thereby they are vexed and crucified of themselves: Inuenal. Satyr. 10.
Nam plures, nimia congesta pecunia cura strangulat. -- For gold and silver have
destroyed many a man; says the Son of Syrach: Eccle. 8.
for riches are like thorns, says our Savior Christ; because they have the
same power to tear our hearts, Mar. 4.18.
as the others have to rend our garments. Neither is this all the evil, that
riches bring unto us; but they puff us up with pride, they make us to disdain
our Inferiors, wrong our neighbors, forget our God, and to think our selves,
poor worms, to be no less then gods on earth: and therefore the Lord says,
that he is greatly angry against rich Nations; Because, Zephan 1.
they that will be rich, do fall into temptation, and a snare, 1 Timothy 6.9.
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction: and our Savior says, Matthew. 19.23.
it is a very hard thing for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

And therefore, though poverty be an extreme misery, Whether to be poor, or
to be rich, is the more miserable.
yet do not I know well, whether to be wealthy or to be in want, is the
worser: for though to, be poor, is a miserable thing in this life, yet to be
rich, is a great hinderance for us to eternal life: and therefore I find that
the son of Iakeh, prayed to God, that he would give him neither poverty nor
riches: Prou. 30.3.
but feed him with food convenient: Because the mean state is the best state.
And yet,

Thirdly, If thou be mean, then art thou accounted base, The miseries of
the mean estate.
and deemed unfit for the Society, nay, for the service, of many men: for now
Gentlemen, and not good men, are the men that are most generally required for
the service of great men.

Fourthly, If thou be Noble, The miseries of Nobility.
then art thou ever in fear of disgrace, and must, perhaps in foreign wars,
with the imbruing of thy hands in others blood, mainetaine the reputation of
thine own blood at home.

Fifthly, If thou be one of the vulgar people, The miseries of the common
people.
then art thou at others command, and ever in fear of thy Judges anger.

Sixthly, If thou be a Magistrate, then must thou labor and toil for the
good of others; and many times, The miseries of Magistrates.
disturb thine own rest, and peace; yea, disburse thine own state, and
suffer many other hazards, to undergo, to procure rest and peace unto thy
neighbors: and when in any difference, betwixt men, thou have done thy best,
and dealt as justly as Justice it self could do; yet, for his saying, that is
righted, and perhaps but coldly too, that thou have done well, thou art like to
be sure, of him that would have done the wrong, to be more wronged thy self,
by his railing and proclayming thee to be a corrupt and unrighteous Judge.

The miseries of the Ministers.
Seauenthly, If thou be a Minister, and a teacher of Gods people, then shall
thou see, that this highest calling in Gods Church, is subject to the greatest
miseries in the world: for, they are sent as sheep into the midst of Wolves,
Matthew. 10.16.
and they are incident to be punished by God many times for the sins of
others, when they make them their own, Ezekiel. 18.
because they reprove them not: and to be scorned and contemned of men when
they do their best: and we see many of them, even of the best, to be left
unregarded, unrewarded. And what should I speak of more, Fathers, Children,
Husbands, Wives, Masters, Servants, and whatsoever else, no estate is free from
sin: how can they then be free from miseries?

How all creatures do heap up miseries upon man.
Thirdly, we know that when God made man, he made Lord of all his creatures; the
trembling trees bowing, yielded their fruits, the silver streams running
offered their service, the Lions roaring after their prey, and all other
creatures, standing in their order, subjected themselves willingly unto man;
but he, not contented to be a man above these; but desiring to be a god above
all, was made a worm and no man, inferior unto all; and then all, like Acteons
dogs, seeing us metamorphosed from men to worse then beasts, began to rebel
against us, and most furiously to pursue us: Gen 19.24.
the fire to consume us, as it did Sodom and Gomorrah; 2 Samuel 24.
the air to infect us, as it did the Israelites, in the time of David; the
water to drown us, as it did the whole world in the days of Noah; Genesis 7.23.
the earth to swallow us, as it did Corah, Number. 16.32.
Dathan, and Abiram; and all other creatures to devour us, as the bears did
those children that mocked Elizeus: the Stars in their order, Judge. 5.20.
did fight against Sisera: and since we have sinned and rebelled against the
Lord, there is no creature but has cast away the created yoke of obedience,
and have rebelled against us: so that now hic labor hoc opus est: It is a task
too great for Hercules to bring them again to the obedience of man.

And thus you see, that from our first entrance into this wretched life, sin
labors still to kill us; and does at all times, and by all means, vex us,
grieve us, weaken us; by passions, sorrows, sicknesses, and such like, and
will never leave us until it lays us down in the dust: and therefore, that
all these are the prodromi, the forerunners, and beginnings of death, or
rather like so many little deaths, that do bring us, unto our last and fatal
death: For all these are the reward of sin, and therefore branches of this
death. And so you see what is meant by Death.

For the second point, having seen what is meant by death, Of the large extent
of death.
that is, all the miseries that do consume and waste our lives: we are now to
consider how far this death extends. And this the Apostle shows briefly,
when he says, Statutum est omnibus semel mori; It is appointed for all men
once to die; Heb. 9.27.
and the very Heathens say as much; Seneca.
Lex vniuersa iubet nasci and mori: It is an universal Law, and a debt that we
owe, and must pay to Nature, that every one which is borne to life, should
pass away by death: Laertius lib. 2. c. 3.
And therefore when it was told Anaxagoras, that all his sons were dead, he
answered, Sciebam me genuisse mortales; I knew that I had begotten mortal
creatures: for as, nullis amorest medicabilis herbis, so, nihil est moderabile
morte; There is nothing in the world that can moderate the rage, or preserve us
from the fatal stroke of death. Non Torquate genus, Horatius lib. 4.
non te facundia, non te restituet pietas, says Horace unto his friend,
Torquatus. And we see the faith of Abraham, the strength of Sampson, the
wisdom of Solomon, the riches of Craesus, and the Kingdoms of Alexander
could not preserve them from Death.

Polydor Virgil writes, that King Canutus, seeing the Sea beginning to flow,
said, I command thee not to touch my feet; but his command was bootlesse, for
he had scarce ended his Edict, but the surging wave dashed at his teeth: So we
may out-braue death in words, but we may be sure, that as the Sea, so Death,
How irresistable is death.
antiquum obtinebit, will keep his old wont: Yea, though we could hinder the
course of the Sea, for means have been found to tame the fiercest beasts, to
break the hardest marble, to mollify the impenetrable Adamant, and to deal
with the Seas as Xerxes did with the waters of Hellespont, or Caesar with all
the Rivers of Germany; yet is there no means in the world to escape the hands
of death: and therefore Saint Augustine says, August. Psalm. 121.
Resistitur ignibus, vndis, ferro, resistitur regibus, imperijs, venit vna
mors, and quis ei resistit? Fire, Waters, Swords, Kings, Kingdoms were
resisted, but who has ever withstood the stroke of death: Quia nec miseretur
inopum, nec reueretur diuites; Because (as Saint Bernard says) it neither
pittieth the poor, Ber. de conu. cler.
nor regards the rich; but Nereus the fair, Thirsites the soul, Craesus the
rich; Irus the poor; Solym the cruel; Solomon the magnificent, Diomedes the
Prince; and Damaetas the Peas^nt, must all fall down at Deaths feet: Because
that no tears, no prayers, no threatenings, no intre^tings, will serve the
turn, to turn away the face of death. So stiff, so deaffe, so inexorable is
death.

How the Egyptians expressed death to be the sole enemy of all men.
And therefore the Egyptians in their Hierogliphickes painted Death like a
Goddess, holding a sickle in her hand, with this inscription, Nemini parco; I
spare no man. And because they found her so hard-hearted, so implacable, and so
inexorable, that nothing could appease her wrath, when she did mean to cut us
down, but that she took the Husband from the bosom of his loving wife, and
the Parents from the poor helpelesse Infants; and so fulfilling her own will,
and careful for none else: therefore they built her no temples, they offered
no sacrifice, they celebrated no rites unto her: but seeing she used all alike,
Constantinus imperator, and famulus meus; making no difference betwixt
Agamemnon and Thirsites: therefore all used her alike, and stood all upon their
guards to defend themselves, so well, and so long as they might, against all
her darts; though they knew that in the end, she would overcome them all:
because they had all sinned; and the reward of sin is death.

Psalm. 50.22.
O consider this, all ye that forget God; all ye that neglect God, all
whosoever, Kings, Lords, and great men; old and young, rich and poor, one with
another: for though you live like gods; and none dare say, why do you so? yet
you shall die like men, and if you fearelesly commit the sin; I dare boldly
say, that you shall be sure, Aequo pode pulsat pauperum tabernas, regumque
turres. Horatius.
most fearfully to endure the punishments: for, as you see Death spares none,
but cutteth down, as well the Cedars of Lebanon, and the Oaks of Bashan, as
the Shrubs of Cades; So, much less will God spare any man that sins.

CHAP. V. How Death works variably in diverse respects, and the diverse causes
thereof.
FOr the third point, we must consider, that although Death passes over all,
yet that it works not upon all alike: but works variably, and that, (as we
find it) in four special respects.

1. Of the manner. 2. Of the time. 3. Of the place. 4. Of the effects: or,
consequents of Death.
For the first, we find that there be more ways of death, then there be
means to preserve our life: for as the Poet says, Mill mod^s laethi, miseros
mors vna fatigat.

Though there is but one way for all men to come into the world, yet there is
1000. ways, How death has diverse ways to shorten life. Prou 17.22. Act. 5.10.
for every man to go out of the world. And so we find, some have perished
with sudden death, as Ananias and Saphira; some with Gluttony, as Domitius
Afer; others with drunkenness, as Attila King of Hunnes; some by fire from
Heaven, as the Sodomites, Genesis ^9.
the two fifties that were sent to fetch Elias, and Anastatius the Emperor, an
Eutychian Heretic: others by waters, as Marcus Marcellus, Exodus 24.28.
King Pharaoh, and all his host, and all the old wicked world, excepting those
eight persons that were saved in Noah's Arc. Genesis 7 21. 1 Pet 2.5. Numb. 16.32.
Some with hunger, as Cleanthes; others with thirst, as Thales Milesius; some
were swallowed up quick to Hell, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; and others by
earthquakes were stricken dead, as Ephrasius Bishop of Antioch. Some were
stifled with smoke, as Catulus; others dyed with a fall, as Nestorius; some
were taken in their lascivious dalliances, as Cornelius Gallus; others with
ouerwatching^, as M. Attillius; some with poison, as Phocion; others choked
with flies, as Pope Adrian; some at the disburdening of Nature, as that wicked
Arrius; others torn in pieces by wild beasts; as Heraclius, Lucian, 2 King. 2
24.
and Acteon by dogs, Hypolitus by wild Horses; Licus the Emperor, and the
disobedient Prophet, by Lions; Ancaeus King of Samos by Bores; and Hatto Bishop
of Mentz by Rats; and so some die with joy, as Chylo the Lacedemonian, and
Diagoras the Rhodian: who seeing his three sons crowned Champions in one day,
he rejoiced so much, that he dyed for joy in the very place: More die with
grief, Quia spir^tus tristis exiccat ossa; Because a broken spirit dries the
bones; and a heavy heart does hasten to death: and therefore the Prophet David,
when he found h^mselfe so melancholicke and discontented, did rouse up his
heart and spirits, saying, Why art thou so heavy, O my soul? and why art thou
so disquieted within me? yet put thy trust in the Lord, for he is thy helper
and defender: and so should we do, Bosquier. de finibus bonorum and mal. page
31. and 32.
when either cares, or crosses, do dismay us. But most men die with sicknesses
and diseases, Feauers, Fluxes, Gouts, Plagues, and 1000. more; they being so
many, that neither Galenus nor Hypocrates, nor all the best Physicians can
number them, says Bosquierus, the generations of men here on earth, being as
Homer says, (...).

Tale, quale est foliorum: Like unto the leaves of a tree, whereof some do
perish, and others spring in their places. They spring, they flourish; they
wax old, and soon wither away; Et tum quoque cum crescimus, Senecal 3. ep. 24.
vita decrescit, and our life then decreaseth, as our years increases.

Vt rosa mane viget, and sero mox vespere languet,
Sic modo qui fuimus, cras leuis vmbra sumus.
We bring our years to an end, as it were a tale that is told.

For the second, that is, the Time when death does attach us; We see some are
taken young, and some are left until they be very old; Death takes men of all.
ages.
some taste of death before they do see the light; when their mothers wombes,
are as the tombs for their burial: some die in their Cradles, as the babes of
Bethelem; and some live so long, that they are weary of life. And sometimes the
good are soonest taken, as Enoch; sometimes the bad, as Onan: Et vocantur ante
tempus boni; Genesis 5.24. Genesis 33.
ne diutius vexarentur a noxijs: And the good are often taken away, that they
should be neither vexed, nor corrupted, by the wicked; and the wicked are
sometimes taken away, that they should not persecute the godly any longer; and
that they might be an example of Gods vengeance, upon all such as fear not God.

And sometimes death fore-warneth us, as it did Ezechias; by sending his
messengers, to bid us to set our houses in order, that we may be prepared for
death; as age, sickenesses, and such like: and sometimes it preuenteth us, and
takes us before we are aware of it: as it did young Onan, and old Ely, who were
both suddenly met by death; when death was looked for by neither of them.

For the third, that is, the Place where death will meet us, Death smites in
every place.
we know death is not very scrupulous; be it fair or soul; wide, or narrrow;
private or public; in the field, or in the Church; or wheresoever; where he
meets us, there he will arrest us: Poet Eu^ulus and his wife, both a bed:
Vrias in the field, and Ioab at the horns of the altar.

And all this taking of us, in any Manner, at any Time, That we sh^ld be
always ready for death.
and in any Place; is to teach us, to be always ready, and to look for death,
at all times, and in all places.

Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum: For seeing thou know neither the
time nor the place, where death means to arrest thee; it is thy chiefest
wisdom to be ready for death at all times; and to wait for the same in every
place.

For the fourth, that is, the effects of death; we must note, Death is a
comfortable thing to the godly.
that they are very different, both about the time of the dissolution, and
after the time of the separation of the body and soul: for first, at the time
of their dissolution, bona mors iusti, right dear in the sight of the Lord, is
the death of his Saints: And this is the thing they longed for, to be losed
from the bonds of sin, and to be with their Savior Christ in happiness; to
be with him, which was dead, and is alive, and lives for evermore. Revel. 2.8.
And therefore to these men -- Mors vltima poenae est, Lucan. l. 8.

nec metuenda viris --


Death is the ending of their pain, and the beginning of their pleasure: nay,
more as Prudentius says, Tormenta, carcer, vngulae stridensque flammis lamina,
atque ipsa poenarum vltima mors, Christianis ludus est, All the bitterness of
the bitterest death, Prudent. in hymno de Vincent.
is joy and sweetness unto them: for that in death they see their life, they
behold the Angels pitching their tents round about them, and ready to receive
their souls to glory, before their bodies can be laid in their graves: and
therefore well might Solomon say that the godly man has hope in his death:
Prou. 14.32.
for he knows not, what to fear; because he knows, in whom he believed.

The death of the wicked is most terrible unto them.
But, mors peccatorum, pessima, the death of the wicked is most fearful; and
therefore the very remembrance of it is most bitter unto them; for now, before
it shuts the eyes of their bodies, it will open the eyes of their consciences;
and they shall see that they must part from all the things that they have
gathered; but that not one of those sins will part from them, which they have
committed; and least they should forget them; Satan will now open his book,
and set all their sins before their eyes: and then he will bestirre himself,
because he knows his harvest is great, and his time is but short: and
therefore he will tell them, Matthew. 19.17.
that if they would have entered into life they should have kept the
commandments; as our Savior Christ himself does testify; Romans 2.13.
he will allege against them, that not the hearers, but the doers of the Law,
shall be justified; and he will infer, that if the just shall scarce be
saved, it is intolerable for them being wicked men to appear; How Satan
discourageth the wicked at their death.
and what the Preachers of God now cannot beat into the thoughts of these
careless men, this wicked, damned spirit will then irremoueably settle, in
their deepest considerations; 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
viz. that neither adulterers, nor fornicators, nor drunkards, nor swearers,
nor usurers, nor extortioners, nor liars, nor envious men, nor haters of men,
nor any such like, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, and of Christ.

O then, what agonies and perplexities, will invade, and tear the woeful
hearts of wicked men? In that day, says the Lord, I will cause the Sun to
go down at noone, Amos 8.9.10.
and I will darken the earth, in the clear day; I will turn their feasts,
into mournings, and their songs into lamentations: that is, they shall be sure
then to have the greatest grief and vexation, when they have the greatest need
of comfort and consolation: for I will make all those things, that were wont,
most sweetly to delight them, now most of all to torment them; the pleasure of
sin, shall now turn to be as bitter as Gall: and now they shall see that
they must die, and live they can no longer: and that Satan, whom they would not
forsake all their lifetime: will not forsake them now at their death-time: but
will be still sounding in their ears Me you have served, and from me you must
expect your wages.

We read the Devil assailed the best-Saints, Saint Martin, Saint Bernard,
Eusebius, Ignatius and others; Luke 23.31.
and if these things be done in a green tree, what shall be done in a
withered, says our Savior? If he be so busy about the Saints, Pet. 4.17:
which have the Angels of God round about them to preserve them; Psalm. 91.11.
What shall he do to sinners, who have nothing but devils round about them to
confound them? This is the state of wicked men at their dying day: and
therefore, mors peccatorum pessima, of all terrible things, the death of
sinful men is the most terrible.

Secondly, After the separation of the body and soul, How death aequalizeth
the bodies of all men.
then death indeed makes different effects: for though it makes the bodies of
all alike; their dust is so mingled, and their bones are so like one another;
that we know not Irus from Craesus: as Diogenes, being demanded by Alexander,
what he sought for among the tombs, said; he sought for his father Phillips
bones, but among so many dead men's souls, he knew not which they were; yet in
respect of the souls, How death sends the souls of the good to Heaven, and
of the wicked to hell.
it works very different consequents, for it sends the good souls into
Abraham's bosom, and the wicked souls to hell, to be tormented in fire, for
evermore.

Now, that the efficiente cause of death, which is sin, should be the same in
all men; and that the fruits and effects, or subsequents of death, should be
so different in the godly, from all other men, we find a treble reason. A
threefold reason of the subsequent different effects of death.


The 1. Is, the practice of a godly life. 2. Is, the meditation of our own
death. 3. Is, the application of the death of Christ.


These things (as Sampson said in his riddle) out of the eater, bring meat,
and out of the strong suck sweetness: these things do translate the sting
and curse of death, into a sweet and a blessed life.

Of the first Saint Augustine says, Mala mors putanda non est, Aug. de ciuit.
dei. l. 1. c. 21. That to live well, is a special means to make us die well.
quam bona vita praecessit: It is impossible that his death should be ill,
whose whole life has been always good: quia nunquam Deus deserit hominem
quovsque homo deserat deum; because God will never forsake that man at his
death, which has truly served God, throughout all his life: and therefore
Seneca says, Seneca in quad. epist.
Ante senectutem curaui vt been viu^rem, vt in senectute been morerer; While I
was young all my care was, to live well, that when I were old, I might die
well, and so let us do: if we would die well, let us live well: let us
learn, artem vi^endi, the art to live the life of the righteous; and we shall
be sure to die the death of the righteous: for seeing the wages of sin is
death, it must needs be, that the lesser and the fewer our sins be, the
better our death will be: But if we live like Baalam, which loved the gain and
wages of unrighteousness, it is impossible that we should die the death of
Israel: for God beheld there was no iniquity in Jacob, Numb 23 21.
nor any perverseness in Israel: and therefore the Lord his God was with him.

Godly sorrow for sin and the meditation of our death, is the death of sin.
Of the second, Bosquierus says, that, a culpa natae sunt duae filiae,
Tristitia and Mors, and hae duae filiae hanc pessimani matrem destruunt; Sin
brought forth two goodly damosells, Sorrow and Death: and these two daughters,
like the brood of vipers, do eat through the bowels, and destroy that wicked
mother, For,

First, Paenitudine commissa delentur, by repentance we wash away the sins
that are past: and therefore John Baptist says, O generation of Vipers, if you
would kill your cruel wicked mother, Matthew. 3.7, 8.
that is, Sin, bring forth fruits meet for repentance; for that is the
only way for you to escape death, and to flee from the wrath to come. And,

Secondly, Meditatione mortis futura cauentur, by the frequent meditation of
death, we come more and more to detest and to beware of sin, Aug l. 1. contra
Man:
for so Saint Augustine says, that, nihil sic reuocat hominem a peccato, quam
frequens meditatio mortis; Nothing is so powerful to make a man hate sin, as
continually to consider of this bitter fruit, and reward of sin, which is
death: and Seneca before him, says the same thing: and therefore he advises
every man, Seneca epist. 25.
efficere mortem sibi familiarem, to make death his companion, and as his wife
that should ever lie in his bosom; that by the continual sight of death; he
might be ever kept to abstain from sin: for the covetous man, might be the
easier drawn to contemn the trash and trumperies of this vain and
transitory world, if he did believe that he should presently dye: for so
profane Esau says, Lo, I die, Facile contem. nit omnia, qui credit se cito
morit^rum. Hieron. in ep: ad Paulin: Eccles. 10. Incert. aut^r.
and what good will my Birthright do unto me? So the proud man would let fall
his Peacocks feathers, if he could think that he is but dust and ashes, and
that when he dies, he shall inherit worms: as the wise man says, Omnia
Caesar habet, sed gloria Caesaris esse
desinit, and tumulus vix erit octo pedum.
And that if he triumphed in his life, like Caesar, to be the sole Monarch of
the world; yet would his glory soon fail when death should lock him up in
his coffin: and so of all other sins, the frequent meditation of death, is
the only preservative against them: For, as one truly says of himself, Quum
recordor quod sum cinis,
Et quam cit^ venit finis;
Sine fine pertimesco,
Et vt cinis refrigesco:
When I think I am but dust, And how soon to earth I must, Bernard in carm.
Then incessantly I shake, And as dust it does me make.

So, questionless if we did continually think of death, and fix that
fearful day of Gods just judgment before our eyes; it would be a marvelous
great means, to deter us from all sins.

And as the meditation of death does prevent sin; Bosq. p. 12. de finibus
honorum.
so it sweetneth death, and makes it far the less terrible unto us: for if
our eyes be dead, and weaned from beholding vanities; The frequent meditation
of death is a great means, to preserve us from the fear of death.
our ears, from hearing the Sirens songs of sinful pleasure: and our hearts
especially, from the love of vain and worldly things; then certainly they
will not, (being thus mortified, and accustomed with this death to sin,) be
any whit afraid of the death of the body; which is the reward of sin: but as
a horse that is to run a race, having often walked his way before, is the
more fearelesse to go on, when he comes at the day of trial; so the man that
is acquainted with the ways of death, through the daily meditation of death,
is not afraid to die when he sees the day of his dissolution Palladius reports
it, that an Eremite, being at the point to die, his scholars and friends asked
him, if death did not seem terrible unto him; he smilingly answered, that
death was no stranger, but a most familiar acquaintance to him: it was his
manual, and his vade mecum, his table-booke, which he always carried about
him: and therefore dying, he did but now repeat that his old lesson, which he
had been long in learning, O that it were so with every one of us; that
throughout all our life, we would learn to die; The application of Christ's
death, is the only cause that makes us happy after death. Osee 13.14.
that having made death present with us before it comes, it may never prove
terrible unto us when it comes!

Of the third, the Divine verity says, that the chiefest cause, the only
cause indeed of this different effect of death, is the application of the death
of Christ; for it is he that says, O death I will be thy death, O grave I will
be thy destruction: and therefore, as when Alexander overthrew the walls of
Thebes, Phryne, a harlot, promised to build them up again if she might
ingraue upon them, this inscription: (...): Alexander battered down this Wall,
but Phryne built it up again: so we may truly say, that Eve threw down,
these muddie walls of ours, but Christ does raise them up: for though the
wages of sin are death, Romans 6.23.
yet the grace of God brings eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And the manner how he does deliver us, and metamorphose death, to become life
unto us; he himself does show, when he says, if I be lift up, I will draw up
all unto my self: i. e. if I die, I will destroy the power of death: for so
the Apostle says, That forasmuch as the children were partakers of flesh and
blood, John. 8.28. and C. 12.32. Heb. 2.14, 15.
he himself likewise took part of the same; that through death, he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, and deliver them
that through the fear of death, were all their life time subject unto bondage:
1 Machah 6.46 Judges 16.30.
and therefore, as Eleazer by his own death, did put the great Elephat to
death, and Sampson by pulling down the house upon his own head, did put to
death all the Philistines; so Christ by his own death, did put the devils,
Origin hom: 8. in Johan:
and all the powers of darkness, unto death: and therefore Origin says, that
upon the cross of Christ, two were crucified; that is, Christ and the devil,
but after a diverse manner, for Christ was crucified, visibly, and most
willingly; for he laid down his life himself, but the devil was crucified
inuisibly, and most unwillingly; Matthew. 12.29.
for this strong man armed, was feign to be bound, before Christ could spoil
his house.

And the Lord speaking of his enemies, and saying, that he would be unto them
as a Lion, Ose 13.7.
and would observe them as a Libbard, in the way of Ashur; does foreshew unto
us, both the destruction, and the manner of the destruction of these our
spiritual enemies; for in being like a Lion, he shows their destruction: and
in being like a Libbard; he shows the manner, The manner how Christ by death
overcame death.
how he would destroy them: for it is observed of the Libbard, that he uses
this policy to kill those Apes that do molest him: first, he lies down as
dead, and suffers the apes to mock him, and trample him, and to insult over
him, as much as they will; but when he perceives them to be wearied, with
leaping, and skipping upon him; he reuines himself on a sudden, and with his
claws and teeth he teareth them all to pieces: even so, our Savior Christ
suffered the devil, and death, and all the wicked Jews, like apes to mock
him, to tread him, and trample him under feet; to crucify him, to bury him,
to seal up his grave, and to have armed Soldiers to watch him, that he
should not rise any more; and it may be, to knock him on the head again, if
he sought to revive: but when he saw they had done their worst, and that they
could do no more, Psalm. 78.66.67.
He waked as a giant out of sleep, and smote all his enemies upon the cheek
bone, and brought them unto perpetual shame; and as the Apostle says, Collos.
2.15.
he spoiled principalities and powers, and led away captivity captive, Ephesians.
4.8.
and received gifts for men.

And therefore, as many as lay hold upon this death of Christ, they need not
fear their own death: for they may say with the Phoenix; Moritur, me moriente,
senectus.

Sin and misery dies in us, but we do still live with Christ. And
therefore Saint Cyprian says, that, Cyprian de mortalitate.
eius est timere mortem qui ad Christum nolit ire; it is enough for them to
fear death, which will not believe in Christ his death: John 11.26.
for he that believes in him shall never die: but they that will not believe
in him, may well fear and tremble at the remembrance of this death: because
after death comes judgment; and then shall they feel another death, which is
eternal death: for the reward of sin is death, that is indeed, eternal
death in hell, Mark 9.44.
where their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched.

CHAP. VI. How sin brings eternal death both of Body and Soul.
THirdly, Touching eternal death, we must understand, What eternal death is.
that this is a separation of man from God, which is paena damni, the loss of
eternal happiness; a loss far exceeding the loss of all the world; and an
allegation of a damned soul, in a tormented body: non viuend^ sed dolendi
causa; not to give any comfort of life or joy, but to give the true sense and
feeling of eternal death and sorrow; which is paena sensus, the pain of
feeling, and suffering the greatest pains that can be conceived: for when the
wicked are called by God, to be adjudged for sin, they shall be condemned by
Christ, Of the intolerable pains of hell.
and then carried by the devils, into everlasting torments; into the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone for evermore: and there their music shall be
horrors, and howlings; their meat shall be balls of fire, and their drink
shall be fountains of tears; always distilling down from their eyes; and
yet never procuring them any ease: there, their torments shall be intolerable,
their times endless, and their companions devils: for so Saint Augustine
says, August. ser. 55. de tempore.
that, in inferno nec tortores deficiant, nec miseri torti moriantur, sed per
milia milia annorum cruciandi, nec tamen in secula liberandi: in hell neither
the cruel tormenters shall be wanting, nor the miserably tormented shall be
eased; but for thousand thousands of years be plagued, and never thence to
be delivered: Isidorus de summo bono.
and as Isidorus says, Ibi erit semper velle, quod nunquam erit, and semper
nolle, quod nunquam non erit, there shall be a will never satisfied, and a
nille never gratified; never inioying the ease they would; and ever suffering
the pains they would not. And if we diue into the depth of that doleful
tragedy, of miserable Dives; we shall see this truth fully confirmed: for,
as the Scripture shows, that here, judgment shall be without mercy, and that
every one shall receive his punishment, in wait and measure, according to the
measure of their sins; so we find it true it him, who as he denied the
crumbes of bread to poor Lazarus; so is he now denied, the least drop of
water, to cool his burning tongue; How the least comfort shall be denied unto
the damned.
and the least dram of mercy to refresh his poor distressed soul: quis
talia fando sustinet a lachrymis? Who can endure to dwell in devouring flames?
and yet behold, this is the reward of sin: for the wages of sin is death.

Oh then, A most earnest persuasion to forsake sin.
(beloved brethren) seeing every sin slays the soul, within the body,
corrupts the body in the grave, and eternally tormenteth both the body and
soul in hell; let us hate and detest all sins: for though we read of many
tyrants, Nero, Phalaris, Caligula, Heliagabalus, and such like; that were
carniuorants, and blood-thirsty men, savage beasts in the shapes of men,
delighting themselves only in blood, and cruelties; yet we never read of such
a tyrant as Sin: for the blood of death would quench these men's rage; but no
pain, no death, but eternal death, a death that never dies, and a pain that
never ends will satisfy this tyrant Sin. This is the deceit of sin; as
the Poet said of Venus: Laeta venire Venus, tristis abire solet.

To present pleasure, or profit, unto our eyes, but as soon as over the sin
is done, to deal with us, 2 Samuel 13.18.
as Ammon did by Thamar, thrust her out and hate her: wound our conscience, and
destroy our souls.

And therefore (once again I beseech you) let us forsake our sins, let us
leave our drinking, our swaggering, and our swearing; and instead of, by God,
by God, and more fearful oaths (which I am afraid to name) at every word,
which is the most odious, yet most careless custom, both of Court and
Country, let us say, in truth, in truth: the words are as easy, and they will
bring more ease unto our souls: for swearing graceth not your speech; but
disgraceth you, and dishonors God: and therefore one day you must greatly
repent you of it, or you shall fearfully die for it: and I beseech you pardon
me for speaking it; for it is my duty that I owe you, and it would be my
destruction if I did conceal it from you, Clemens. l. 1. recog.
as S. Clemens says in the like case; and I desire not so much, with
Aristotle, my God of Heaven is my witness that I lie not, to be deemed a
great Scholar, as with Gregory Nazianzen, to be indeed an honest man, to
live as I teach, and to discharge my duty in reproving sin, rather then to
show my knowledge in any Science; and therefore, I humbly entreat you all, to
give me leave, to beseech you, to leave your sins; and because we cannot
quite forsake them, to confess them, and to be ashamed of them; John 1.19.
for if we confess our sins, God is merciful and just, to forgive us all
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

But the devil cannot endure that we should confess them, least God should
thereby forgive them; and therefore as he persuades us, ever to commit them;
so he persuades us, ever to conceal them, and never to confess them: For I
read that on a time, a sinner being at confession, That the devil cannot
endure we should confess our sins.
the devil intruded himself and came to him; and being demanded by the
Priest, wherefore he came in, he answered, to make restitution; and being asked
what he would restore, he said shame; for this says he I have stolen from
this sinner, to make him shameless in sinning, and now I come to restore it,
to make him ashamed to confess his sins: And surely thus he deals with us
all; he makes us shameless to commit all sins, even with Absolon, in the
sight of all Israel, 2 Samuel 16.22.
and in the sight of the Sun; but he makes us ashamed to confess any sin.

But if we fear this punishment of sin; all miseries in this life, death
shortning life, and eternal torments after death, and would be delivered from
it, then let us not make the Ministers afraid to reprove our sins, nor be
our selves ashamed to confess our sins; for as the first degree of
righteousness is, not to sin; so the second is, to acknowledge and forsake
our sins. If we had not sinned, we had not died; and if we do acknowledge,
and forsake them, we shall receive no damage by death: but if we continue in
sin, we shall die; and we shall justly die, for, the reward of sin is death.

And so I come to the third part, which is the equity of this reward: because,
death is the wages of sin.

PART. III. The equity of this payment, Death is the stipend of Sin. Part. 3.

CHAP. I. How just a thing it is to punish Sin. The reward of Sin is Death.
YOu have heard of a world of miseries, that are inflicted on man for sin,
here in this life; you have heard of eternal death, and intolerable torments
for ever and ever, that shall be inflicted on sinful souls in the future
life; and now it rests, that I should show the equity of this punishment; how
just it is with God, to render all this on man for sin: and therefore, that I
may the more fully clear this point, Three points to be considered, to show
the equity of the punishment of sin.
I must desire you to consider these three especial things.

1. That it is just to punish sin. 2. That God is the iustest Judge that can
be found, to punish it. 3. That this punishment which God imposes and
inflicteth for sin, is most right and just.
First, there is nothing in the world, Cicero de not. deorum l. 1.
(says Cicero) more agreeable to reason, then that true and honest labor
should be commended and rewarded, and the vices of men should be severely
punished, according to their just desert: for, it is impossible (says he) that
either house or Commonwealth should stand, Si in ea nec recte factis proemia
extant vlla, Idem l. 3 de not. deor.
nec supplicia peccatis: if there be not in the same both rewards for good
deeds, and punishments for sins: and therefore Solon being demanded, what was
most profitable for the welfare of a Commonwealth, said; Si boni proemijs
innitantur, and mali paenis coercentur, Stobaeus ser. 41.
to defend and reward the good, and to restrain and punish the bad: and M.
Cato says, that there is nothing more pernicious unto any state, Plutarch in
Apoth.
Quam si improborum mores paena non coerceantur, then to suffer wicked men to
go away unpunished: and therefore he would have those Magistrates that did not
punish the impieties of the wicked and dissolute fellows, Non tantum non
ferendos, The Law of Nature teaches, that sin should be punished.
sed lapidihus obruendos, not only not to be suffered, but to be stoned with
stones to death: and so the Laws of all Nations do provide, that good and
virtuous deeds should be rewarded, and evil deeds should be punished: for we
find it very true by experience that, impunitas delicti inuitat homines ad
malignandum: To forbear the punishment of sin does increase the number of
sinners. Prou. 17 15.
because punishment is deferred, the hearts of the children of men, are even
set to do evil: and therefore God himself does say, that whosoever
justifies the wicked, is a like culpable before him, as if he had condemned
the innocent; and Saint Ambrose tells us plainly, that it is sometimes
miserecordia punire, and crudelitas parcere, a pious work to punish, and a
cruelty for to spare; for this does not only encourage sinners, to go on from
one wickedness to another; but it is an ill pattern, and a great prouokement
to draw others to do the like: and therefore we may well conclude this first
point, that it is a most just thing to punish sins and offenses.

CHAP. II. How God is the iustest Judge to punish Sin.
SEcondly, that God is the iustest Judge that can be found to punish sin, it
appears by these 3. reasons.

God loves righteousness. Psalm. 45.7.8. Heb. ^.9.
First, because he loves righteousness; For it is the property of a just
Judge, not only to judge righteously, to justify the innocent, and to punish
the offenders, but also to love righteousness, and to hate iniquity; but of
God, the Prophet says: Psalm. 5.5.
Thy throne O God, is for ever and ever, thou have loved righteousness and
hated iniquity: wherefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil
of gladness above thy fellows: And again, thou hate all those that work
vanity.

Secondly, because he judges without any respect of persons: God is no
respecter of persons.
for this is one of the chiefest properties of a righteous Judge; to judge
according to the equity of the cause, and according to the quality of the
person: and therefore Iethro, Iehosophat, Exodus 18.21.
and others, do make this not respecting of persons, 2 Chronicles 19 7.
to be one of the essential properties of a righteous Judge: Prou 24.23. 1 Samuel 6.7. Act. 10 33. Gal. 1.6. Psalm. 50.10. Psalm. 149 8. Deuteronomy. 26.7.
but with God there is no respect of persons: for he will not be corrupted with
the reward of the rich; for all the beasts of the Forest are his, and so are
all the cattle upon a thousand hills; he will not be terrified for fear of
the mighty; for he will bind Kings in fetters, and Nobles in linkes of iron;
neither is he angered or molested with the incessant complaynings of the poor;
but he will hear their cry, Psalm. 145.19.
and will help them, Psalm. 145.19.

Indeed with men, it is a common practice, With men we find Justice often
perverted.
to have our laws like a spiders web; wherein the little flies are caught,
and the great buzzing bumble bees, do easily pass through: and therefore it
is truly said of man's Law, That

Dat veniam coruis vexat censura columbas. It spares the rich, but spoils the
poor.

But Gods law is rete Vulcanium, like Vulcans iron net, That God is most just
which apprehends and condemns all alike: for if the greatest men hurt the
poorest, and those poor men cry unto me, says the Lord, I will hear them;
that is, to help the oppressed, and to punish the wrong doer: and therefore
Moses says of him, Deuteronomy. 10.17.
that he is a great God, mighty and terrible, which accepts no person, nor
takes reward; but does justice and right, unto the Orphans, and the Widow:
and David says, Deus iudex iustus est, Psa^. 7.12.
God is a righteous Judge, and that the Heavens shall declare his
righteousness, i. e. approve and justify him in his judgments. And Saint
Paul says, that he shall have the crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8.
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give him in that day: and the very
Heathens say as much: for not only Euripides says. (...), that Justice is not
in the eyes of mortal men; but Hesiod goes further, saying; (...), Ipsa autem
Iustitia est virgo, ex Jove nata; That Justice is a pure Virgin, and an
immaculate daughter of the chiefest God; that is indeed, a true and essential
property of the true and everliving God: and therefore it must needs follow,
that of all Judges, God is the iustest Judge, that can be found, to punish
sin.

That God judges every man according to his desert. Valor. l. 1.
Thirdly, because he rendereth to every man, according to his works, and
punishes great sins, with the greater punishment: and the longer he stays to
expect our amendment, the sorer will be our punishment, if we do not repent.

Lucius Apuleius do asino aureo.
I have read of an Ass, that having an huge burden upon his back, by chance
stumbled at a stone and fell; her master presently began to chide, and to beat
her; whereat the poor Ass repined and bemoaned her self, saying, in what a
miserable state do I live, and what a cruel master do I serve? for I have
done him many good and faithful services, and yet see, how for one fault by
chance committed, I am thus most grievously handled. The fable shows us, Men
reward not men according to just deserts.
that men many times do neither reward, nor punish according unto just
deserts; but do oftentimes suffer good deeds, to go unrewarded, and punish
small offenses, with seuerer punishments then in the rigor of Justice they have
deserved; and it may be, often suffer the greater sinners, to escape all
punishment.

But it is not so with God: for if we do well, and have our hearts upright, to
do him service, he will not always be chiding, though we should commit many
faults: but if we do ill, Sin lies at the door, Genesis 4.7.
ready to accuse us, and God the righteous Judge will deal with us according
to our sins, whether they be great or small. Gregor. in mor.
Nam iniustus quisquis eo attrocius in tormentis obruitur, quo altius
inpeccatis eleuatur; For every sinful wretch, the more heinous has been his
sins, the more grievous shall be his punishments, Hieron. super Ezech.
says Saint Gregory, So Saint Hierome says, Cui dubium, quin inter tres
peccatores; Gentilem, Haereticum, and Ecclesiasticum, multo maioribus paenis
dignus sit, qui maioris fuerit dignitatis? That God punishes the greater
sinners with the greater punishment.
Who makes any doubt of this, but of three sinners, that is, the Gentile,
which is without the Church; and the Heretic which is against the Church; and
the Hypocrite that is within the bosom of the Church, he (that is, the
Hypocrite) shall be the most severely punished, which had the chiefest place,
and was most dignified with that honorable title of a Christian? And so Saint
Augustine says, Aug. l. 3. de lib. arb.
Mitissima omnium paenarum erit eorum, qui preter peccatum quod originale
contraxerunt, nullum insuper addiderunt: Of all punishments theirs shall be the
least, which besides their original sin, have committed none other sin. And
the divine Scripture is as plain in this point as need to be: for the Lord,
speaking of Iezabell, says, Quantum in dilicijs fuit, tantum date illi
tormenti; That as much as she has been in pleasure, i. e. of sin and
iniquity, so much torments shall be laid upon her: and our Savior says,
Matthew. 11.12.24.
It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorra, and more tolerable for Tire and
Sydon in the day of judgment: then for Corazin and Bethsaida, and other like
sinful Cities which heard our Savior Preach, and did see his mighty works,
and yet would not repent.

But against this it may be objected: Ob.
How can it be that they should be all in the same place, tied in the same
lake, and burning in the same fire, and yet that they should not feel the same
punishment?

To this we answer, Sol.
that they shall feel the same punishment, but not in the same measure; the
same for length of time, but not the same for quantity of pain. Nam sicut vno
sole omnes tanguntur, etc. For, as men (says S. Gregory) sitting in the heat
of the same Sun, That the torments of Hell are not equal unto all Greg. in
Moral.
are not heated and warmed in the same manner; because the weight of the heat
is felt according to the quality and disposition of the body; Sic damnatis vna
est gehenna, quae affligit, and tamen non omnes vno calore comburit; quia quod
hic agit dispar valetudo corporum, hoc illic exhibet dispar causa meritorum:
Even so, though there be but one hell which tormenteth all; yet does it not
torment all alike: for as here the different disposition of their bodies, does
cause men differently to perceive the heat: So there, the inaequality of their
merits, will be the cause of disparity in their torments. And therefore seeing
God loves righteousness, judges all without respect of persons, and in his
judgments, renders unto every man according to his deeds; it is most apparent
that God is the iustest Judge that can be found to punish sin.

CHAP. III. That God does not inflict eternal punishment upon the foresight of
any act of the will, that we would eternally sin.
How a temporal sin can deserve an eternal punishment.
THirdly, that this punishment, which God inflicteth on man for sin, is most
right and just; it is concluded by all Divines: but how this can be, that a
sin temporally committed, should be eternally punished, it seems a doubt not
easy to be decided: for, some say, it is because the sinners will is eternally
to live, that he might eternally sin: So Saint Gregory says; Iniqui ideo
cum fine deliquerunt, quia cum fine vixerunt; nam voluissent vtique sine fine
viuere vt potuissent sine fine peccare: The wicked do therefore make an end of
sinning, because there is an end of their being; for they would desire to live
without end, that they might sin without end; for this shows, that they do
always desire to live in sin; because while they live, they never cease to
sin. Et nullus detur iniquo terminus vltionis, quia quamdiu vixit, habere
noluit terminum criminis.
Ad magnam igitur iudicantis iustitiam pertinet, vt nunquam careat supplicio,
cuius meus in hac vitae nunquam voluit earere peccato; And therefore (says he)
it shows the great sincerity of the Judge, and it behooves his justice to
deal so with them, that they should never want punishment, whose wi^s and
minds in this life, would never want sin; and that there should be no end
set to the torments of the wicked, because while they are able, they set no end
to their wickedness.

Bern. Ep. 252.
And Saint Bernard is of the same mind: for he says, that for this cause is
the sin of an inflexible and obstinate mind, eternally punished, Whether God
punishes a sinner eternally, because he wills to live eternally, that he
might sin eternally.
though it be temporally committed; Quia quod breue fuit tempore vel opere,
longum esse constat in pertinaci voluntate, ita vt si nunquam moreretur,
nunquam velle peccare defineret; imo semper viuere vellet, vt semper peccare
posset; Because that which was but short in time or action, does appear to be
long in an obstinate will and affection; so that if he never died, he would
never leave to sin; nay, he would desire ever to live, that he might ever
sin. And I find most of our own modern Divines, to join with these
Fathers in the same judgment.

But for mine own part, I cannot fully yield unto this opinion: for if this be
true, then God damneth them for sins that they would have done, and not for
the sins that they have already done. Indeed it was the opinion of
Pellagius, Propter praeuisa bona quae facturi essent si vixissent.
that GOD received many into glory for those good works they would have done,
if they might have lived; and damned others propter praeuisa mala, for the
evil works that they would have done, if they could have lived to do them;
for he that would do any thing whether good or evil, it is as done in the
sight of God: because he sees as well the inward intention of the heart, as
the outward execution of the work, Matthew. 5.28:
as our Savior shows in the example of him, that looks upon a woman to
lust after her; and is said thereby to be, That God punishes no man for the
sins he never did. Aug de praed^st. c. 12. and l. de perseueran. c. 9.
an adulterer in his heart already; but,

To this Saint Augustine answers, that it cannot be, that any man should
receive, either glory or punishment, for the works that he never did; but
would have done, if he might have lived to do them: for,

First, the Apostle says; 1 Reason.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, 2 Cor 5.10.
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, i. e. while he lived, whether it be good or bad. Where we must
observe, that he does not say, according to that he would have done; but
according to that which he has done. So our Savior says, John 5.29.
that they which have done good, shall come forth to the resurrection of life,
and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of damnation. Where again,
we must note, that he does not say, they that would have done evil; but they
that have done it: so, when he says, Matthew. 25.35. etc.
Come ye blessed into everlasting life, and shows the reason; for I was
hungry, and ye gave me to eat; and to the wicked, Go ye cursed; for I was
hungry, and you gave me no meat; it is to be observed, that he says not, you
would have given me, or you would not have given me; but you have given me, and
you have not given me: and therefore God saves none, for any good works
foreseen, that they would have done; nor condemns any, for any sins
foreseen, that they would have committed.

2. Reason.
Secondly, if this were true, that God judges according to what men would have
been, if they could have continued; then the Tyrians, and the Sidonians, and
many other wicked men, should be saved, or could not well be justly condemned:
for, Matthew. 11.21.
If the great works and wonders, which our Savior did among the Jews, had
been done amongst them, they would have repented them of their sins, in dust
and ashes: And so many of the godly, must of necessity have been condemned;
for they are speedily taken away, least that wickedness should alter their
understanding, Sap. 4.10.
or deceit beguile their soul; for the bewitching of naughtiness does obscure
things that are honest.

3. Reason.
Thirdly, if this were true, it must needs follow, that God should foresee
those things, as future things, which were never to be; which does imply a
contradiction; for though God knows, what may be done, though it be never
done; yet can he not be said to foresee any thing to be, Zanchius de natura
Dei. l. 5. c. 2. p. 530.
which indeed shall not be; for things that are existent, and have a being,
are seen; things that are possible to be, are known; and all future things,
that shall be, and are to be, are as present with God as if they were; but
those things, that were never to be, nor shall ever be, cannot be said to be
present with him: and therefore, to say that God will punish them eternally,
because they would have sinned eternally, if they had eternally lived, is
neither agreeable to the justice of God, to punish them for the things that
they have never done; nor to the truth of God, which says, they shall receive
their reward, according to what they have done, 2 Cor. 5.10.
and not according to what they would have done; nor yet to the reason of man,
that sins never committed should be so severely punished.

That the desire of the heart is an act done.
To the reason alleged, that the will of sinning, is the same with God, as if
they had actually sinned; I answer first, that sin is two ways to be
considered; first, as it is in the heart, and intention; and secondly, as it is
in the act, and execution; Now our Savior does not say, that he which looks
on a woman, to lust after her, has committed the fact, in the sight of God,
but is guilty of the sin, in respect of the desire and intention, which is an
act already done, and not in respect of the outward act, which is not done at
all: and therefore he says, that such a one has committed adultery with her
in his heart, i. e. inwardly but not outwardly: and therefore is he only so
far guilty, i. e. so far forth as the act is done, but no further:
Secondly, I say that if their will were, to desire to live ever, that they
might sin ever; That to will to sin ever is a temporary act.
yet this is but a temporary act of the will, and does not include an
everlasting willing of the same; because we see there is no necessity to
continuate the same act of the will, but that it nilleth now, what it willed a
little before: and because no act can exceed the bounds and limits of the
agent; but the agent sailing, the act is ended: and therefore man being
temporary, being but a while to live here; his will being temporary, being no
longer properly the will of man then it rests in man: therefore all acts of
the will, while it is in this life, must needs be temporary, and so all sins
done, or of the will to do them, must be likewise temporary.

And therefore I say, that God does not punish them, God punishes only sins
done.
for any foreseen facts, that they would have done, nor for any foreseen
continuance of the will, in the same desire to live ever in sin; nor for any
other foreseen future thing whatsoever; but only for those things that are
done in this life; either those works that are outwardly acted; or those
desires of the heart, and acts of the will, which it produces, while it is in
this life, and no otherwise: so that God punishes only sins done, and not
sins that would be done.

And if we search a little further, Two things make a temporary sin to
deserve eternal punishment.
into the nature of the sin done: we shall see the haynousnesse of the
offense, and the equity of this inflicted punishment in two respects.

1. A leuitate praecepti iniuncti, from the easiness of the things commanded.
2. A grauitate peccati perpetrati, from the haynousnesse of the sin
committed.
CHAP. IIII. How easy and light are all the Commandments that God does give,
and how hard are the ways of sin.
John 5.3.
FOr the first, Saint John says, His commandments are not grievous; and our
Savior says, His yoke is easy, Matthew. 11.30.
and his burden light; so easy, that the Prophet David says, Psalm. 119.
he did run the way of Gods commandments, when God had set his heart at
liberty, i. e. had untied him from those bonds of sin wherewith he was so
tied by his natural corruption, that he could not stir, nor walk one jot in
this easy path, How the way to Heaven is said to be hard.
and therefore, if the way be cragged and at the gate narrow and straight, that
leads into life; it is in respect of our unableness now, to perform any
thing that is good, and not in respect of any difficulty, or hardness, in
themselves simply considered.

Look into the commandment, that God gave unto Adam, What a small matter it
was that God commanded Adam.
and you shall easily find this truth: for at that time, there was no Man to
be envied; no Man to be oppressed; no Woman to be defiled, no Churches to be
robbed: and therefore he cumbred them not with many precepts, all was but one;
to forbear the fruits, Gene. 2.17.
but of one Tree, they might eat of all besides that one: and as his precepts
were not many, but one; so this one was not great; not to create Worlds, not to
remove Mountains, but to forbear the fruits of that one Tree. Alas, was this
so great, was this so grievous? what if he had forbidden all, but one? had it
not been right that we should obey? and if we had asked him, what he would
have done with all the rest; might not he have justly said, Matthew. 20.15.
May not I do what I will with mine own? and what is that to thee? Do thou
as I command thee; John 21.22:
but he was contented to make himself, as it were, poor, to give them store;
for he gave them leave to eat of all the rest, and reserved but one for
himself; yet would they needs eat of that one; and as if they longed to
break this one Commandment of God; they would presently eat of the Tree, and
it may be, before they tasted of any other Tree, sure, before they saw any
other day: Quia non pernoctauit in honor, For he remained not one night in
his dignity, says the vulgar-latine.

So look into the Commandments he gives unto us, What a small matter it is
that God requires at our hands.
and we shall soon see the same truth: they are Pauca, breuia, leuia, and
vtilia: Few, short, easy, and profitable: for he gives not many, but ten,
but two, but one: and that one not long, one word, one syllable, Love; it is
impossible therefore to forget it: and it is easy enough, it is natural
enough, to perform it, to Love: the poorest, the youngest, the eldest, the
richest, at home, and abroad, may do this: who can say he cannot do it?
there needs no wealth, there needs no wisdom to Love: and therefore all may
do it, if they would do it, and it is for our profit to do it; for to that
end does the Lord require it; Deuteronomy 5.33. and C. 29.9.
that It may go well with Us and our Children.

But on the other side, What a slavery and bondage it is to serve sin.
the ways of Wickedness are very hard, and full of labor; for all the world
may see, that the envious man does more vex his wretched soul, at the
prosperity of the Righteous; then the Godly man does his righteous soul,
either at the sins or prosperity of the Wicked; that the wrathful man takes
more pains, and frets and chafes more, to execute his fury, then the patient
man does, in suffering all his injuries; that the tyrants were, and are more
tormented, in tormenting the poor Christians; then the Christians are, in
suffering all their exquisite strange invented torments: that the worldlings
do wear and weary themselves, a great deal more, in pursuing after the
vanities of this life, and purchasing unto themselves eternal miseries; then
the Righteous do, in seeking for the grace of God, to attain unto everlasting
Happiness: and that the Devil requires more time, and greater pains, to
serve him, then God does to keep his Commandments; for God gives us six
days to provide for our selves, and requires but one day to be served of us,
himself; but the Devil will have the six, the seventh, and all, to serve
him; and all is to little two: for we must serve him day and night, and God
requires but one hour, or two, of that one day, that he reserueth for
himself, to hear his Word, and to call upon his Name, and that for our own
good: (as I showed unto you before:) but the Devil requires not only many
hours, That sinners take more pain to go to Hell then the godly do to
attain unto eternal happiness.
and them not only, to be spent in vain pleasures, and vanities, but also in
horrible sins, and iniquities; but he would have us also, to forget that one
day of Gods service, and to spend the greatest part of those few hours,
wherein we should chiefly serve our God; Aut male agendo, aut nihil agendo;
either in doing nothing, or in doing worse then if we had done nothing at all.

And so in all other things, the works of darkness are a great deal more
hard and difficult then the works of light; so painful are the ways of
wickedness, as that it is most true of the sinner, Gene. 3.16.
which God pronounced of the woman; that in sorrow she should bring forth: and
so themselves, when it is too late, do most lamentably confess; Wisd. 5.7.
We have wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness, yea, we have gone
through deserts, where there was no way, but rocks, and cragges, and dangerous
paths: and no marvel; for as it is a great deal harder, to work, or to
walk in the dark, then in the light; so it is a great deal more difficult,
to do the works of darkness, then to do the works of righteousness. And
so we see; A proud man takes more pains, to make himself ready in the
morning, then the humble man does: and the malicious man labors more to
revenge, then the peaceable man does to forgive; and so of all other sinners,
though we be naturally inclined to all sins, yet we take a great deal of
pains to go to hell; as a stone tumbling down a rockie hill, shall have many
a knock before it comes to the bottom. And therefore, as one said unto his
friend, that would feign see the games of Olympus, but was discouraged, with
the tediousness of the journey; that if he would go every day, but so much as
he used to walk for his recreation, he should at last ariue unto his iournyes
end; so may I say unto every man; that if he would take as much pains, to
attain unto the joys of Heaven, as we do to gain the vanities of this
world, we should both soon, and easily, ariue to happiness.

And yet for all this, (though the way of Virtue be never so easy, and the way
of Sin never so hard,) such is our wilful frowardness, Psalm. 127.3.
that we had rather, to rise up early, to go late to bed, to eat the bread
of carfulness, to spend all our time, and to wear out our whole life, in
these inextricable works of darkness, then to follow this pleasant pathe,
and to do these sweet and easy works of grace, which do lead us unto
salvation.

And therefore seeing the labor is so small, The smalnesse of the duty
required, deserves the greatness of the punishment inflicted.
the commandment so easy, and the burden so light, what marvel is it that
the punishment should be so great, if we neglect to do so small a service? If
a King should say unto his Subject, he that will not say, Good morrow King,
shall have his goods confiscate, his house subverted, and himself condemned to
perpetual imprisonment; would ye not think that he justly deserved it, which
would refuse to obey so light a precept, and neglect to perform so small a
duty? And yet God in a manner requires as little at our hands; to ask of him
what we want, to give him thanks for what we have: for, who so offers him
thanks and praise, he honors him: And therefore justly do we deserve so
great a punishment, because we refuse so small a service: for lesser at our
hands he could not require; and therefore lesser at his hands we cannot deserve.

CHAP. V. Of the haynousnesse of every sin, in three respects.
FOr the second, We must consider that as the leuitie and smalnesse of the
service required; so the gravity and greatness of the sin committed, does
most justly require the height of all punishment. Now the greatness of the
sin, is seen in a threefold respect.

1. Of him that is offended. The haynousnesse of sin is seen in a threefold
respect.
2. Of him that does offend. 3. Of the offense that is done.
First, Touching the Person that is offended, we must consider his, 1.
Greatness. 2. Goodness.


The person offended, is a great God, mighty, and terrible.
First, If thou strikest thy fellow, the offense is not so heinous; but if thou
strikest a King, a Prince, or a Priest, thine offense deserves the greater
punishment; for the quality of the offended, does aggrauate and add unto the
quantity of the offense: but we by our sins, do offend not any one of the
earthly Kings, and Potentates of this world, whereof the best and the greatest
is but Man, as we are, and his breath is in his nostrels: but we offend the
great God of Heaven and earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Cuius
magnitudinis non est finis; Of whos^ greatness there is no end: and therefore
offending an infinite God, his anger is infinite, and our punishment must needs
be infinite.

Secondly, if thou should kill a Tyrant, whose delight is in the ruin of
his subjects, and whose intention every way, is to work thy destruction; thy
fault were the more tolerable though not justifiable, but it thou should
offer violence, unto such a Prince, as not only is the life and happiness of
his subjects; by doing good to all; ill to none, like Titus Vespasian, that was
Dili^iae generis humani, The very joy and delight of all mankind, but also
has raised thee from the dust, enriched, innobled and endowed thee with all
the indowments that possibly could be heaped upon thee: Oh what a miserable
Caitife, and how worthy of all punishment, would all men judge thee most justly
to deserve? surely they would think no punishment, to be sufficient enough for
such a wretch.

Of the incomprehensible goodness of God to man, and what a good God we do
offend.
But our God whom we offend, is good and gracious unto all, ill to none, he
hates nothing that he has made. When Adam was created, he raised him out of
the dust,

-- Diuino semine fecit; He made him in his own image and likeness, and he
made him sole Monarch of this whole world: and as if every soil were not fit
for such a creature, he placed him in Paradise, the choicest place of al
pleasure: he put all things in subjection under his feet, Psalm. 8.6.7.
and looking if there was any thing wanting for his happiness, he saw that it
was not good for him to be alone; and therefore he made him an help meet for
him; such a help, as that Adam as soon as ever he saw her, Genesis 2.23.
said; This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh: as if he had said,
among all the other creatures, which thou Lord have brought unto me, I could
not satisfy my mind with any mate; but now I am fully pleased, and cannot
dislike this mate, while I like my self, because she is of my self. Thus did
God look that man might want nothing that might make him happy.

Say thou were none of Adams race, but were an indifferent Judge to censure
such a creature, that should offend so good a God, Et reddere malum pro bono,
And render unto him evil for good, and hatred for his good will; what
punishment I pray thee, would thou think too great, for such great
ingratitude? for as the Prophet David, at the consideration of Gods goodness
unto man, says; Oh God, Psalm. 8.4.
what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou so
regardest him? So at the consideration of man's sin against God; we may all
cry, and cry again; Oh man what is God, that thou art so unmindful of him,
or, the Son of God that thou so little regardest him?

And as God was then good and gracious unto man, so now, and ever since the
fall of man, we may say with the Prophet: Oh how good a God is the God of
Israel? How many are raised from the dust, like Saul, that seeking his fathers
Asses, 1 Samuel 9. Psalm. 78.71.
found a Kingdom; or David, that from the Sheepfold, was raised unto the
Scepter; and how does God continually bestow his blessings unto men, and make
his Sun to shine upon the good, Matthew. 5.45.
and upon the bad, and send his rain, yea, and that a gracious rain upon the
just, and upon the unjust, and cause our wives to be like the Vine that is by
the house-side, and our children to be like the Olive branches round about our
Tables, our Oxen strong to labor, and our sheep to bring forth thousands and
ten thousands in our streets? And therefore as he says unto the Israelites,
Esaias 5.4.
What could I do more for my Vineyard? So may he say to every man, what should
I do more for thee, then I have done? If thou think others in better state
then thy self, thou must know that thou do not know thine own estate, nor
understand what is best for thy self; Sed quid profit vel obsit, nouit
medicus non aegrotus: But God knows what is best for every man, and he ever
works all things together for the best, Romans 8.28.
for them that love him.

And therefore for silly man, to offend such a good God, that does so much good
for man; I know not how this sin should be sufficiently punished; to eat his
bread, to enjoy his Sun, to receive his blessings, and to spurn him with our
heels, to tear him with our teeth, and to abuse him in all our actions; It is
such a transcendent sin as it passes all understanding to imagine punishment
enough for the same.

The baseness of the offender does ever aggrauate the offense.
Secondly, we must consider the quality of the Offender: for if a King should
iniure his subject, or a Master his servant, the offense is not so great, as if
a Subject should rebel against his Sovereign, or a servant lay violent hands
upon his master: and therefore humane laws decreed, that the baseness of the
offender should be censured with the seuerer punishment; as if a Master should
kill his Servant, he should but hang for his labor; but if a Servant should
kill his Master, he must be burnt all to ashes; as for a sin against Heaven
and against Nature.

What a poor miserable thing is Man that does offend so great and so good a
God.
But what are we that do offend so great and so good a God, which the very
Heathens termed, Optimus Maximus; best and greatest? We are but men, and no
Angels; but worms and no men; dust and ashes, things of nothing, and worth
nothing; base and beggarly; not able in need to relieve our selves with one
drop of cold water to cool our tongues.

Omnia sunt hominum, tenui pendentia filo,
Et subito casu quae valuere ruent.
All our strength is but like a rush, that may be soon knapt a sunder; Psalm.
1.5.
and all we have is but like the dust, which the wind can easily scatter away
from off the face of the earth. The very Heathens tell us, that omnis homo
bulla est, Every man is but like a bubble of water, soon blown up, and sooner
off.

Sic in non hominem vertitur omnis homo. So mean, and so base a thing is man:
Psalm. 144.4.
He is like a thing of naught, and his time passes away like a shadow.

And yet these silly worms, like as the poor Psilii would war against the
wind, until they were all overwhelmed with the sands; so will they (...),
with the Giants, rebel and war against their God, (Impar congressus Achilli)
until (as the Pigmies were by Hercules) they shall see themselves to be far
ouer-matched with this God of Gods, that holds the Winds in his fist, and
rides upon the Heavens as upon a Horse: And therefore what marvel that their
punishment should be interminable, whose rebellion is so intolerable?

Thirdly, we must consider the quality of the Offense: How we offend God, and
as it were sell God for trifles, for nothing.
For if once for some great matter we did offend; it might be thought the more
tolerable; Nam si violanda fides, regnandi causa violanda est: For small
matters should never make us to break our word, says the Heathen man: And
therefore the Romans were so upright, and so faithful unto their
confederates, that they would never offer to break faith and promise, but in
case of dominion, of very great advantage; for they deemed him a very fool,
that would undo himself for nothing; and so our own Citizens here have
learnt this rule of the Romans; for, when they break, they will never do it
for nothing but for hundreds, and thousands, Luke 16.6.7 8.
that they may with the unjust Steward, gain something to themselves, for the
loss of their honesty.

But how do we offend our God? even for nothing; for as Saint Paul says, An
idol is nothing in the world; 1 Cor. 8.4.
so may I say of Sin; it is nothing in the world; it is no substance, it is
no being in the world; but it is the corruption of being, and it brings us
nothing in the world, but the least and vaynest momentary pleasure that ever
can be imagined: and so themselves in Hell confess, saying, What has pride
profited us, Wisd. 5.8.
or what good has our riches, with our vaunting, brought us? What are they the
better for their daily swearing, swaggering, drinking, and such like vile and
horrible sins, which I do abhor to name, but that I must in such gross
terms, because I love not to guilde sins, and to give them better names
then they deserve; they are all p^st away like a shadow: Transit quod
extollitur, Gregor. in Moral.
permanet quod punitur: The pleasure is past as soon as ever the fact is done;
but the punishment remains never to be abolished.

And yet, for such a trifle, for such a momentary pleasure, we will adventure
to offend our God: Genesis 3.
Adam for an Apple will forsake his Creator: Judas for thirty pence, will sell
his Redeemer: and we, for a cup of drink to make us drunken, for a little
trash, it may be one penny to make us richer, for an oath of our mouth, to show
our selves Gallants, and for such like other things of nothing, will not be
afraid to offend our God, to lose his favor, and to cast him off for ever.

I remember that when God shows how little he respects wicked sinners,
Psalm. 44 13.
the Prophet says; Thou sellest thy people for naught and take no money for
them; as if they were worth nothing in the world: even so do these men deal
with God, they sell him for naught, and esteem him worth nothing in the world;
for putting God on the one hand, and the least pleasure or profit of sin on
the other hand; they will embrace that sin, and forsake their God: and this
they will not only do once or twice, and then leave; but they will do it
daily and hourly, and every moment; never leaving to sin until we be
compelled to leave the world; for every one of us may say with Manasses, Vt
februm recidiuarum maiora pericula, and vt vulnerum post cicatrices, etc.
Bosquierus de passione Dom: conc. 3. p. 692.
Peccaui super numerum arenae maris, My sins are more in number then the
sands of the Sea: And therefore as often wounding the same scarres, does
increase the danger, (says Bosquierus;) So the continual committing of the
same sins, does every way much increase and aggrauate the offenses; for if we
did it but once, it might be thought we did it precipitately of
inconsideration; but when we do it continually, it is apparent that we do it
wilfully, with delight and deliberation, and therefore must be left every way
without excuse.

Ansel. in l. de casu diaboli.
Anselmus comparing the sin of Satan with his own sin, says, Diabolus nulla
praecedentis vindicta superbiens, peccauit; ego visa eius paena non continens,
ad peccatum properaui: ille in innocentia constitutus, ego vero restitutus:
ille perstitit in malitia, deo reprobante; ego vero deo reuocante: ille
obduratur ad punientem; ego vera ad blandientem; and sic vterque contra deum;
ille contra non requirentem se; ego vero contra morientem pro me; ecce cuius
imaginem horrebam, in multis aspicio me horribiliorem. The Devil not seeing
any vengeance upon any former sinner, by waxing proud did sin; but I though I
saw his punishment for sin, did notwithstanding hasten unto sin: He sinned
in his innocence, wherein he was first created; I after I was again restored;
he persisted in his malice, God forsaking him; I persist in my sin, God
still seeking to reclaim me from sin; he was hardened against God, punishing
him: I against my God, that gently and mildly entreated me: and so both of us
did sin against God; he against him, that after he sinned, sought him not;
but I against him, that after I had sinned, sought me, and dyed for me: and
therefore behold I find my self in many things, more vile and horrible then
him, whom for his obstinacy against God, I do so much hate and detest. So
infinitely great, Man is not able to comprehend the infinite deformity of
sin.
and so transcendently horrible is the sin of man: insomuch that Divines
conclude, that as God is infinite, Propter summam formositatem, In regard of
his excellent beauty; so is sin infinite in respect of us, Propter summam
deformitatem, By reason of its unspeakable deformity: and therefore that it
can deserve no less then infinite punishment.

Well then, beloved Brethren, seeing the person offended, All punishment ought
to be answerable to the offense.
is so great and so excellent; the offenders so base and so beggarly: and the
offense so heinous and so intolerable: and that the punishment of a sin, Vt
nec mayor crimine, ita nec minor esse debet, As it ought not to be more, so it
should not be less then the offense deserves; what man can imagine a
punishment great enough for such, and so great offenses as we daily commit
against our God?

Hence it is that Saint Paul, willing to show the equity of this inflicted
punishment, calls it (...) stipendia: The stipend, or the wages of sin.
Now, stipendium Dr: a stipe: A stipend is an hirelings reward, and was wont to
be called the wages that was appointed to be paid the Soldiers, to make
provision for their daily meat and drink, to sustain themselves until they
received their full pay: this was called (...), their stipend; and none can
say, but the poor Soldier which aduentureth his life and his limbs every
moment, for the defense of his Prince, Peers, and Country, is justly worthy
of this small measure of meat. Now Death, says the Apostle, is the stipend of
the Sinner: and therefore Death is as due to him, Aretius in Romans c. 6. 25.
Vti militi stipendium suum: as is the stipend unto the Soldier, says
Aretius. And so you see, the Work, Sin; the Wages, Death; and the Equity of
it, as justly due to him, as the stipend is to the Soldier: For, the wages of
Sin is Death.

CHAP. VI. Of the especial application of each one of these three parts of the
whole Text.
ANd now to press each one of these, to make impression in our hearts, let us
ever learn and remember; that,

First, seeing sin is so various, so ambiguous, so horrible, and so odious,
in its meandrian windings; we should be very careful to look into the secret
corners, and tortuous labyrinths of the same; for it comes (as I showed you)
creeping by degrees, and it comes vayled with shadows.

As the Serpent crept into Paradise, so the Devil creeps into our hearts, and
draws us into the height of sin by little and little.
Look into all the Ecclesiastical Stories, and you shall see that neither
Idolatry nor Superstition stepped into its height at first, but rather crept on
by little and little. Saint Peter's Successor was long before he could come to
wear a triple Crown: so Satan seeks to bring in sin; and therefore, seeing
that -- Sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala, per longas conualuere moras:
It is hard to cure an old festered disease; we should, obstare principijs,
withstand the very first beginnings of sin, and hate the very garment, Jude,
verse 23.
that is any ways spotted or stained with iniquity: That is, the very least
thing that may occasionate evil.

How we may withstand and hinder the grows of sin.
But you will say, how shall this be done? you tell us what we should do, but
you show us not the way to do it? I answer, that I find two especial
means, whereby Satan sought to enlarge the Kingdom of Sin; and by which, he
had almost overthrown the Kingdom of Israel. The one was, the advice of
Baalam, Numb. 24 14.
the son of Beor, a great Prophet, that taught Balak King of Moab, 1 Cor.
10.8.
to entangle Israel, by making mutual matches, and marriages betwixt their
Children; whereby the anger of the Lord was so kindled, that he slew of them
three and twenty thousand in one day.

1 Kings 12.31.
The other was, the practice of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, a great King, that
to establish his Kingdom, did make Officers, and Priests, of the basest of the
people; 1 Kings 12.31.
and thereby he made all Israel for to sin.

And therefore, if you would suppress, or hinder the increase of sin; you
must take heed, among other things, of these two especial points.

First, Marry not your Children unto sinners; That we should not marry our
Children but to the best men.
but look rather into the sincerity of their Religion, the purity of their
profession, and the uprightness of their conversation, then the greatness of
their reputation here amongst men: and if you find them Drunkards, Swearers,
Players, Idolaters, superstitious, or lewd livers, or any ways inclined to
these, or the like sins; decline you from them, and meddle not with them;
least their sins do bring a plague and punishment, to consume both you and
yours: for though it be a good thing to bestow thy Daughter in marriage; yet is
it not good, unless it be to a man of understanding, says the Wiseman: but
they are a people void of reason, and a Nation destitute of understanding, that
turn the Divine Verity, into Idolatry; or that do any ways err from Gods
Commandments.

Secondly, make not any Officers, especially Priests, That we should not make
any Officers, especially Priests, but those that are truly religious and honest.
of the basest of the people; but look into their lives, and consider well
their profession; yea, mark their inclination: and whom you see corrupted with
sin, or any ways infected with the poison of iniquity, drunkenness,
profaneness, cruelty, idolatry, or superstition, promote them not unto your
seats of Government; or if they be promoted, and preferred by others, yet have
you nothing to do with this stool of wickedness; receive them not into your
Houses, entertain them not at your Tables, have no commerce or conversation
with them, meddle not with them, favor them not; for you may be sure that they
will favor sin; and you should fear, least by meddling with them, you should
be defiled, and tainted with sin: for the bewitching of naughtiness, Wisdom
4.10.
does soon obscure things that are honest.

But make much of them that fear the Lord, and whom you see zealously
affected, to follow the true Religion, and earnestly laboring to lead an
upright conversation; O let them be helped, and furthered, to be promoted both
in Church and Commonwealth; for you may be sure, That we should make much of
those that are good and godly men, and do our best to promote such into
dignity.
that they will faithfully do what lies in them, to suppress Idolatry and
all iniquity: Who so is wise, will ponder these things; and he shall
understand, and perceive, and feel, the loving kindness of the Lord. And as
sin seeks to creep by degrees, so if you look into the lives of men, you
shall see how it comes fairly clad; and vayled, with the shadows of vain
excuses.

Sometimes of infirmity, either of Age, or of Nature: young men think it too
soon for them to be precise; old men are weak, and are not able to endure any
longer service; the wrathful man, Gen 4.23.
with Lamech, lays all the fault on his fury; if he slayes a man in his
wound, and a young man in his hurt: the Drunkard says, it was his drink, and
not he, that acts all the mischief; and the lascivious man excuses
himself, with the heat of his blood, and the lust of his flesh.

Of the manifold excuses that sinners have to lessen and to excuse their
sins. Genesis 3.7.
Sometimes of conformity, the proud, the drunken, the ambitious, the covetous,
and the like sinful men, they do but as most men do; and why should they
be singular?

Sometimes of simplicity, there meaning is good, what evil soever they do.
And thus sin couers it self, like Adam, with the fruitless figge-leaues of
hypocrisy.

But alas beloved, we must know, that for Gods Husbandry, no season proves
unseasonable; but young men and maidens, old men and children, Psalm 148.12.
must praise and serve the Lord: and Nature must be subdued by Grace, if ever
we will be the Children of Glory; and all your excuses of sin, will not free
your souls from eternal death; but as the Proverb is, Kill a man when thou
art drunk, and thou shall be hanged when thou art sober: So swear, and rail,
and rage, and offend thy God, and abuse man, when thou art in thy drink, in
thy fury; and God will lay the punishment on thee, and not on thy drink, when
thou shall not have a drop of drink to quench thy thirst, nor a drop of
water to cool thy tongue: Luc. 16.24. That we ought to keep our selves
spotless in the midst of the wicked.
And we have learnt in Gods School, that Judah must not sin, no, though all
Israel should play the Harlot; but as the River Alphaeus conuayes it self
through the Seas, into his beloved Arethusa, and yet participates not at all
with the Sea-saltish humor; so must Lot preserve himself chaste in the
midst of Sodom, and the Saints in the midst of the World; as I have showed
at large in my Treatise, The Delights of the Saints. Page 47.
of the Delights of the Saints: And the School of Divinity teaches us, that
Bonum est de integra causa, The beginning, means, and ending of every action,
must needs be right, or the whole action will prove wrong: and therefore we
must take away these vailes from sin, if we would perceive the ugliness of
sin; and so escape the wages of Sin, which is Death.

Secondly, seeing Sin is the real, and radical cause, Et mali, and morbi,
and mortis, Of weakness, sickness, miseries, death, and destruction, (a
pernicious parent of most dreadful and deadly offspring;) for foolish men are
plagued, Psalm. 107.17.
because of their offenses: and I will smite thee (says God himself unto
Jacob) because of thy sins, and it is an axiom infallible, Mich. 6.13.
that sin and punishment, are inseparable companions; so inseparable, that
the Hebruists do often call them both, by one name; as where the text says,
Sin lies at the door, Gene. 4.7. and ver. 13.
and My sin is greater then I can bear; and again, your Sin shall find
you out; there Arias Montanus, and Tremellius translate it, punishment: Numb.
32.23. That we should acknowledge our own sins to be the true cause of all
our miseries. Jere. 44.17.
therefore, if we feel any plagues or miseries, either Dearth of Corn, or
decaying of Trade, increase of Superstition, or decrease of Religion, or any
such like plagues and miseries; let us not blame the times, nor truth of God;
but let us lay the fault where it is, upon our selves, and upon our own
Sins: for though the many multitude say, it was a good world with them, When
they sacrificed unto the Queen of Heaven; yet the King of Heaven knows, what
a woeful time it was for Man, when the Crucifixe was kissed with the kisses of
their Mouths, and Jesus Christ was crucified again with the works of their
hands; and when they changed, The truth of God into a lie, and Worshipped and
served the creature, made a god with their own hands; Romans 1.15.
More then the Creator who is blessed for ever. Amen. And if we would be free
from plagues, free from punishments; let us free our selves from sin.

I know that fear of Poperies coming again, with superstitions has spread
it self over the face of this whole Island; but alas, We fear where no fear
is: for I dare confidently affirm, that it never was his Majesty's mind, nor
the purpose of the State, to bring in Idolatry and superstition into this land
again, Cantic: 5.3.
for We have washed our feet, and shall we foul them again? But the secrets
of State, is more then either I can perceive, or most of you well understand.
Or if they did, yet were it vain, Quia non est concilium contra Dominum:
because no device of man, can subvert the truth of God; unless our sins do
provoke our God, Revel. 2.5. Nulla nocebit aduersitas si nulla dominetur
iniquitas. Gregor. Cyprian.
to remove our Candlestick, and to take away our light: and therefore though
all the Jesuits of the world, and all the Cardinals of Rome, nay, though all
the Devils of Hell, should do their worst against us; yet if we fear our God,
and forsake all Sin; the devils may have all their servants, before they all
shall be able to hurt any one servant of the Lord: quia non plus valet ad
deijciendum terrena paena, quam ad erigendum diuina tutela; 1 John 4.4.
because, He that is in us, is greater then he that is in the World; and is
more able to preserve us, then the Prince of darkness is to destroy us.

That we should turn to the Lord our God.
And therefore, if you think Popery to be evil, and would be free from
superstition, never fear the State; nor lay the blame on others; but leave
your sins, and Turn to the Lord your God, with all your hearts, and with all
your souls, and you shall see the Salvation of the Lord, which he will show
unto us this day, Exodus 14.13.
for the Egyptians, whom you have seen, and fear; you shall see them again
no more for ever; the Lord shall fight for you, and you may be sure no evil
shall happen unto you; it shall not come nigh your dwelling: for the only way
to escape all punishments is to forsake all sins.

Neither do I say this, as if we could be clean from sins: for I know it
was Nouatus his error, and we must all know it for an error, Hieron: adversus.
Pelag.
that a Christian after Baptism does not sin, and it was but a Pellagian
conceit, before him invented by Pythagoras, that the exercise of Virtue,
rooteth out all the seed of Vices; Matthew. 7.18.
for a Bad tree cannot bring forth good fruit, and in some things, says the
Apostle, I fear I may say (as it is in our last English translation) in many
things we Sin all: James 3.2. 1 John 1.8.
And if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no
truth in us.

But I say this, that we should have a fervent desire, not to sin, and to say
with the Prophet, O that my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy
Commandments; and that we would endeavor, pro virili; to the uttermost of our
abilities, not to sin; and labor always with the Apostle, Acts 24.16.
to keep a clear conscience in all things, both before God and Man,

Thirdly, Seeing all miseries, death, and damnation, are as justly inflicted
upon the sinner, as the poor Soldier may justly claim his little stipend; we
should not complain against God, Sueton. in vita Vesp. C. 10.
with Vespasian, Immerenti sibi vitam aripi, that he took away his life
without any fault of his; or without any failing on his part; but we should
with the Levites in Nehemiah, with Daniel, with Jeremy, and with all the rest
of the men of God; commend the Lord, and condemn our selves; saying, surely
thou art just in all that is come upon us, thou have dealt truly, Nehem. 9.33.
but we have done wickedly.

And thus I have showed thee, O man, quid sit malum, what is evil; and you
have heard, a large discourse of Sin, and the most lamentable effect, and
wages, of Sin: And now it is a thousand to one, that the first thing, many
one of us will do, is to go home, or perhaps before we go home, to sin:
some to swear, some to their whores, some to be drunk, some to deceive, and
most of us to some sin or other:

But if ever any of you do, for those sins, receive this pay; remember I
have told you, what you should have, Death; for the wages of Sin is Death:
and I can do no more, but pray to God, that he would give us grace to forsake
Sin, that we may escape Death, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, three distinct Persons, of that one eternal in
divided Essence, be given, as is most due, all praise, and glory, for ever and
ever. Amen.

A Prayer.
O Blessed God, which have created Man; we do acknowledge that thou have made
him righteous, but he sought out many inuentious, and has most grievously
sinned against thy divine Majesty, and thereby has most justly pulled upon
himself, and all his posterity, all miseries, death, and damnation: But thou
desire not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn from his
wickedness and live: And therefore we do confess our sins, we do detest
our sins, and we do most humbly pray thee, even for thy mercies sake, to be
merciful unto us; to deal with us, not according to our offenses: but
according to thy Grace, to give us Grace to serve thee; that so we may be
delivered from our just deserved punishment, and be received into thine
everlasting favor, to praise and magnify thy blessed Name, for ever and ever.
Amen.

A wearied loathed Life I lead, content with only Sadness,
To see my self oppressed with Sin, and with this worlds Madness.
I always strive with wicked Sin, yet does my Sin prevail
I therefore hate my Self, because my Sins I cannot quail.
And I do likewise wish for Grace, that I might never offend,
But truly serve my Master Christ, and please him to my end.
And yet I see this tyrant Sin, and wicked men do wrong me,
To Hell the one, to Misery, the other still would throng me.
But reason bids me for to Wait, till God delivers me,
And fetch my imprisoned Soul from hence, to live at liberty.
IEHOVAE LIBERATORI.

FINIS.
The Second golden Candlestick, HOLDING The second greatest light of Christian
RELIGION. Of the Knowledge of GOD.
EXODUS 34.6.7. Jehovah, Jehovah, Strong, Merciful, and Gracious, slow to
anger, and abundant in goodness and truth.

Reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and
sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children, and upon the childrens children, unto the third
and fourth generation.


YOu have heard in my former Treatise, the poor and miserable estate of
distressed Man: The coherence of this with the former Treatise.
how lamentable he made himself by Sin; I am now to show you a poole of
Bethesda, wherein, if we can but bathe our selves, we shall be made
perfectly whole, and most comfortably delivered from all diseases: John 5.2.
and therefore, I beseech you, let this Panchrestum, this medicine for all
maladies, be diligently acquired, and be most carefully applied to every
sickned soul. You shall find it in Jerusalem, i. e. in the Church of God, and
no where else: for extra Ecclesiam non est salus, no salvation is out of the
Church; and you shall find it by the Sheepe-market, i. e. in the place where
the sheep of Christ, and children of God, do find all provision for their
souls; that is, the Holy and Heavenly Scripture; and there if you look, you
shall find a porch ample enough for you to enter into this Bethesda, in these
words which I have read unto you.

The Lord, the Lord God, or else, Iehoua, Iehoua, Strong, Merciful, and
Gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness, and truth, etc. And I
hope you will give the more diligent heed unto my words, Quia speciosi pedes
Euangelizantium pacem, because (as the Pro. Esaias says) the feet of the^ that
bring tidings of good things are most welcome unto us: Esaias 52.7.
and (as the Angel said unto the Shepherds, Luke 2.10.
) I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all people; For I am
now to preach and to expound, that gracious Sermon unto you here which God
himself has Preached heretofore unto Moses, in Mount Sinay; and it contains
the whole description of Almighty God, so far forth, as himself thought it
fit, Chrysostom varior: loc. in Matthew. Hom. 9.
to reveal himself at this time unto his people: and therefore Excutite
pigritiam, quia non est res leuis quam audituri estis; I do must humbly crave
your attention, and most diligent observation of these things: for I think
that you can neither heart, nor read, a sweeter text, if God give me grace to
handle it well.

It is large indeed, I must confess, and my allotted time is short, and it is
as difficult to contract much into a little, as to enlarge a little into much;
yet seeing I cannot speak all that I would, I will, by Gods help, speak a
little of all, as I may.

The Occasion of these words
The occasion hereof is plain enough, in this precedent Chapter: Moses desired
to see God: God tells him he cannot; because it is as natural unto him, to be
invisible, as to be a God: and therefore Saint John says, John 4.12.
no man has seen God at any time; yet, (to satisfy Moses, so much as was fit
for his happiness) God says; that he should see his backe-parts; that is, he
should understand so much concerning God, as the weak understanding of Man
could possibly comprehend; for he saw nothing at all, after any visible
manner, but only heard this voice describing God; and we must know that God
has neither forepart nor backepart, that can be seen, with any mortal eyes:
and therefore this phrase, of seeing Gods backeparts, is only used, quoad
captum nostrum, after a humane manner; and it imports thus much in effect;
thou shall see, that is, thou shall understand or see with thine eyes of
knowledge, my backeparts, That God is not to be seen with any material eyes.
that is, so much concerning me, as thy weak apprehension shall be able to
comprehend: For,

First, That God is no otherwise to be seen, then with the spiritual eyes of
our Faith, and understanding, it appears plain; because Moses here saw no
visible thing, but only heard a voice: So, when God appeared to Elias, 1 Kings
19.11.12.
there passed before the Lord a mighty strong wind, but the Lord was not in
the Wind; then an Earthquake, but the Lord was not in the Earthquake; and then
came a still soft Voice, and the Lord was in the Voice; and so when he
delivered the Law, he says; Ye saw no similitude, save a voice; therefore, as
God shows himself none otherwise then by a voice, so he can be seen none
otherwise then by the spiritual eyes of our understanding.

Secondly, That by the backeparts of God, is understood, By the backeparts of
God is understood so much knowledge of God as we are able to comprehend.
so much knowledge of God, as our weak apprehension can conceive, it is
apparent in this place: for Moses neither saw nor heard any other thing, but
only this voice, proclayming these words, that I have read unto you, and
therefore this is all one, as if the voice had said unto him, this is all that
thou can understand of me, that I am such and such a one, as I show unto
thee. It is true indeed, that I am so glorious, to excellent, so ineffable, and
so incomprehensible in my self, that if I should show thee my Majesty, and
fully declare unto thee mine excellency, what I am; thou were not able to
comprehend it; and therefore humano more loqui, to speak unto thee as a man,
that thou may the better understand how far thou may know me; I would
have thee to look upon a Man, and to consider how much more glory and
excellency, shines in his face, then in his backepartes: even so thou must
understand, that all this which I show unto thee, concerning my self, in
comparison of what I am, in the excellency of my Majesty, That we can conceive
but the least part of Gods excellency.
is but as the back-parts of a man, in comparison of his face and fore-parts:
So far short is this, that thou can know of me, to what I am; and yet this
least part of my excellency, is so much as thou, or any man breathing upon the
face of the earth is able to comprehend.

And therefore the meaning of this phrase, to see the backe-parts of God; is
nothing else, but the revealing of himself unto Moses, so far as Moses was
able to comprehend; that is, a little, but not near all his properties; for to
be incomprehensible, is as proper to God, as to be Invisible; Secundum
essentiam incognitus, secundum maiestatem immensus; His Majesty is
immeasurable, Thalas. apud Paulinum Praesbyt. Job 28.24.
and his being inconceivable, says Thalassus, (...); For he is every where,
and he sees every thing, when as nothing can see him.

Ob.
But here it may be, some will say; that although now by reason of sin that
blinds us, we can neither see his Essence, nor comprehend his excellency;
Cor. 15.53.
yet when this corruption shall put on incorruption, and this veil of
ignorance, shall be taken from us, we shall fully see him, and comprehend him
in his excellency; 1 Cor. 13.12.
for, we shall see him face to face, we shall see him as he is; and we shall
know him as we are known: And therefore he is neither so invisible, nor so
incomprehensible, but that he might be seen, and comprehended, were it not
for our sins and ignorance, that do so blind our understandings, that we
cannot perceive him.

Sol. That the Essence of God shall not be seen in Heaven, but in the face of
Jesus Christ.
To this I answer, that if Adam had never sinned, yet could he never have seen
the essence of God, unless God would have taken some visible shape upon him to
appear unto him; and so I say, that in the life to come, when the Saints shall
be free from all sin, and endued with a far more excellent measure of
knowledge and understanding, then ever Adam was in Paradise, they shall never
see the Dietie, any otherwise then in the face of Jesus Christ: for so the
Apostle shows, that God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
has shined in our hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6.
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ: John 14.7. and 9. and 10. v.
And our Savior himself more plainly says, when Philip desired to see the
Father; He that knows me, knows the Father; and he that sees me, sees
the Father; because I am in the Father, and the Father in me: And therefore I
say, that Visio Dei beatifica, The blessed fruition of the Godhead, which the
Saints shall have in Heaven, shall be no otherwise reueiled unto us, then in
the face of the Man Jesus Christ; because the Deity considered in it self,
Inhabitat lucem inaccessibilem, 1 Timothy 6.16.
dwells in the light that no man can attain unto.

And so you see the occasion of these words; that God having told Moses he
could neither see his Essence, nor yet fully understand his Excellency; he
would notwithstanding so far satisfy his desire, as to show him all that he
could possibly comprehend; viz. that he was Iehoua, Iehoua, strong, merciful,
and gracious, etc. Et sic condescendit nobis Deus, vt nos consurgamus ei: And
thus God does most graciously condescend, and make himself known to man, that
man might ascend, and, as much as possibly lies in him, know his God.

In all this Divine description of Almighty God, The division of the Text.
I find these two especial things set down.

1. Quid est 2. Qualis est
Deus, i. e. 1. What God is, and 2. What manner of God he is.


And in the handling of these two points, I shall by Gods help spend and
finish this whole Treatise.

CHAP I. Of the description of God, how he maybe known; what he is: Part. 1.
and of this special Name, IEHOVA.
TOuching the first Part; Danda imprimis opera est, vt Deum noscamus, quotquot
faelices esse volumus: It must be the chiefest care of all that would be
happy, to know God, which is the chiefest happiness of all: for to fear God
and to keep his Commandments; Hoc est omnis homo: This is the duty, and this
is the felicity of every man. Bernard.
At non potes aut amare quem non noueris, aut habere quem non amaueris; But
thou can not either love him, whom thou do not know, or imoy him whom thou
do not love; Quia ignoti nulla cupido, Because Knowledge is the ground of
love; and whom we love not, we can neither seek any help from him, nor yet
render any service to him: John 17 3.
and therefore our Savior says, that this is eternal life to know him to be
the only true God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ. And this is the reason
why so many thousands shall be destroyed; 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
because they know not God: And this the very Heathens perceived, though they
could not attain it, when among all their Precepts, this was their chiefest
lesson: (...); Know God.

That there are three ways of knowing God.
Now we must understand that there are three ways of knowing God, (I speak not
of that knowledge which the Book of Nature teaches; for that is too small to
make us happy, but of that which we do collect out of the Book of God) and
those according to the Schools, are these:

Exodus 23.19.20.23.
The first is according to that, which he is in himself, whereby he is (...),
unspeakable, infinite, and incomprehensible; and thus, none knows God, but
God himself; and the reason hereof is, that although, Nihil magis
intelligibile quam Deus, Nothing of his own nature is more intelligible, then
God; because he is the first, Zanch. de not. Dei l 3. c. 2. p. 199.
the perfectest, and the truest being, most pure and simple, and free from any
matter; yet is our understanding toward God, but as the eyes of the Owls, or
Reremouse, which are not able to behold the brightness of the Sun: and
therefore, thus if we seek to know him, That we are not able to know God as he
is in himself.
we shall be but like Symonides, that being commanded by the Emperor, to tell
him, what God was, demanded three days respite for to resolve so great a
quaere: and when he came, he required six days more: and being therefore
asked why he prolonged so the time, and thereby so deluded him, he ingeniously
answered; because the more I search into him, the further I find my self from
attaining to him; And therefore in this respect we should, Sapere ad
sobrietatem, Be wise unto sobriety, and not curiously search into his
ineffable Majesty, but rather with the Cherubims, to cover our faces with two
of our Wings; Esaias 6.2.
because we are not able to know him as he is.

The second is according to that, which may be known of us, and may be any
ways comprehended in our minds and best understandings. And thus we conceive
him to be most admirable; but yet by infinite degrees inferior to that which he
is in himself; and therefore we should strive and labor what we can, to
understand and know him more and more; for the more fully that we shall know
him, the more perfectly we shall love him, and the more perfectly we love him,
the more happiness we shall add unto our own felicity.

The third is, according to that which may be spoken or written by the best of
men: And this is the narrowest way to express him: and yet we can reach no
further; for as he is in himself, he is (as I said before) a light of an
infinite brightness, 1 John 1 5.
in whom is no darkness at all; and as the Apostle says, He dwells in the
light that none can attain unto: 1 Timothy 6.16.
no Eagles eye can fully look upon the brightness of his light, no
understanding can comprehend the incomprehensible excellency of his Majesty;
and therefore we must rest our selves contented, to know him so, as we are able
to conceive of him; and to express him so, as our slender speech will give us
leave. Casman. in thest de Deo.


And thus we find three special ways of expressing what he is. First, by way
of negation, by removing from him what we find in the creatures, or what ever
is said of any of them; Aug in l. de cognit. verae vit. and de verbis dom ser.
38.
as when with the ancient Philosophers, we say God is not the Sun, not the
Moon, not a Man, not mooueable, not finite, etc. and this is the best part of
our Knowledge of him, (as Saint Augustine says,) when we know rather what he
is not, That there are three especial ways of expressing what God is.
then what he is: For, as a curious Statue is composed and perfected, by hewing
and cutting something still from it, and not by adding any thing unto it: So is
our God known of us, by denying him to be such and such things, as are common
to the creatures, and by paring away humane conceits from him, when we go
about to conceive what he is.

Secondly, by way of affirmation and perfection, as when we do analogically,
and in respect of certain similitudes, ascribe unto God the best and most
excellent things that can be found in any creatures, and so we say, he is
great, strong, fair, merciful, just, etc.

Thirdly, By way of supereminency, and transcendent excellency; as when we
ascribe to God, whatsoever excellencies that are spoken, or may be spoken of
him; far above all the excellencies of all other creatures whatsoever: and so
we do refer and reduce all excellencies unto him, as unto the common cause
of them all; or as unto the fountain from whence all these little channels of
excellencies do flow: And therefore we say not only in the concrete, that God
is just, merciful, wise strong, good, That the abstract names of all
excellencies, are only proper unto God.
and such like, but also in the abstract, that he is justice, mercy, wisdom,
strength, and goodness it self, which cannot be said of any creatures: for
that all the best excellencies of the chiefest creatures, are but as little
sparks in respect of a huge infinite fire: or as a few drops of rain in
comparison of the whole Ocean Sea, if we should compare them to the excellency
of God: Nay, we should find their wisdoms folly, their strength weakness,
their beauty baldness, and all their goodness to be nothing in respect of the
goodness of God: for, he charge his Angels with folly, and the Heavens are
not clear in his sight, says holy Job.

A description of God by way of 1 Negation. 2 Affirmation. 3 Supereminencie.

Now according to these three ways, God is described to be an immortal,
invisible, incomprehensible, spiritual, infinite, eternal Essence, the cause
of all causes, and the Author of all excellencies.

Here is a boundless Ocean, and a very large description of God; and I may
sooner loose my self, in the prosecuting of the same, then to find him fully
as he is, in any place, which is fully and truly in every place.

Aug. de trinitate.
But I remember that excellent rule of Saint Augustine, Cauendum est, ne dum de
deo cogitamus, and non possumus inuenire quid sit, aliquid de eosentiamus quod
non sit: We must take great heed least in seeking to know what God is, we
think him to be what he is not: and therefore that I may not err in this
point, I will say no more, but with himself, which knows himself best; that
he is Iehoua, this he is, and this is his Name for ever, and as the old saying
is, Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe suis, and of all his Names, this is the only
Name that does express the Essence and the Nature of God; for all other Names
are but adjuncts, expressing, Qualis est essentiae, Of what manner of being he
is, as Eternal, Omniscient, Omnipotent; or else qualis non est, what he is
not, as Immortal, Invisible, incomprehensible, or derived from the root of
this, as Eheich, (...) and (...) (as some would have it) but Iehoua, Nomen
tetra grammaton, This Name of four letters, the most Venerable, and Ineffable
Name amongst the Jews, (as Galatinus says,) derived of Haiah, Galat. l. 2. c.
9. The name Jehoua, is the most proper Name of God.
(as the Hebritians note) which signifies Esse, an everlasting being; Est
solummodo proprium and essentiale nomen Dei; is the only proper and Essential
Name of God: Because all the other names of God (whereof Saint Hierome
collecteth nine) besides Iehoua, and such as are derived from the root
thereof, are names attributed unto him in respect of his works: either
internal, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and such like, which are names
attributed unto him, Hieron. in epist. ad Marcell.
in respect of the inward operations of God: or else external, as El, Shadai,
Lord, Creator, and such like, which are names attributed unto him in respect of
his outward works; as Galatinus shows.

And therefore when Moses desired to know the Name of God, God names himself
Eheich Ascher Eheich, Exodus 3.14.
which the Sept. translated, (...). I am that I am, (putting the present Tense
for the future Tense;) is my Name; and it is all one, as if he had said more
plainly, He that was, he that is, and he that ever shall be: For if you
look never so far back, you shall never find where his being began; or if
you inquire never so curiously into the time to come, you shall never find
likelihood of his ending; for, Thou art God from everlasting, and world without
end, says the Psalmist: and so Yesterday, to day, 1 Timothy 1.17.
and the same for evermore, says the Apostle: and in this respect, he is
called, the King of Ages, which has made the times, Esaias 57.15.
and does inhabit eternity.

Moreover, it is observed, that in this name Iehoua, (besides many other
Mysteries, that the more curious searchers into the same do collect) there is
not only showed, the being of God, but also the manner of that being; that is,
the three manner of subsistings, in that one simple and eternal being: or the
Trinity of persons in that Unity of Essence. And I confess, that seeing there
cannot be but one Iehoua, one infinite and eternal being; and that both the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, Each person of the Trinity, is the true
Iehoua.
are called each one of them Iehoua, as you may most apparently see, if you
compare the 6. of Esaias and the 9. where the great Iehoua says unto the
Prophet, Go and tell this people, hear and understand not; see, but perceive
not; make the heart of this people fat: with the 12 of John 41. Where the
Evangelist says, that these words of the Prophet, were spoken of Christ: when
he saw his glory, and spoke of him; and with the 28 of the Acts 25. Where
Saint Paul says, The Holy Ghost spoke these words by Esayas the Prophet: and
if you look into the first of the Revelations 8. where Christ assumeth the
same name unto himself, saying, I am Alpha, and Omega: the beginning, and the
ending; (...), which was, which is, which is to come: And so into the 8 of
John, the 58. where our Savior alludeth unto the same Name, saying; Before
Abraham was, I am, It does sufficiently prove each one of these persons, to be
an infinite God, subsisting in that one eternal Essence; Zanch. de natura dei
l. 1. c. 13. p. 35.
because it is most certain, that the Name Iehoua, is so propper unto God,
that it can be ascribed to none else: as Zanchius says.

But because many other places of Scripture, are more plain and pregnant, to
prove this great Mystery of godliness; I will not insist to wring out an
apparent truth from the obscurest places: Chrysostom. hom. 2 in Heb.
and because, as Saint Chrysostom says, Nequue ad loquendum digne de Deo
lingua sufficit, neque ad percipiendum intellectus praeualet. Our tongues are
not able to speak worthily enough of God, and our understandings are not
sufficient to conceive of him as we ought to do: yea, and that, De deo loqui
etiam vera aliquando periculosissimum est; It may be dangerous sometimes to
speak truths of God: for as Euclides being demanded of one, what God did; and
in what things he most delighted, did most truly answer; that he knew not well
what he did: but he was certain he delighted not in vain and curious persons:
Maxim. ser. 33. That it is not safe to search too far into the seeing of God.
so I say that curiosity in this highest point of Divinity, is very dangerous;
or, as Saint Bernard says; to inquire too far into this point, is perverse
curiosity; to believe it as the Scripture teaches, is infallible security;
and to see him as he is, is most absolute felicity: therefore I will wade no
further into this depth; but I will exhort and desire you all, Potius
glorificare eum qui est, quam inuestigare quid est; Chrysostom. quo supra hom. 2.
in Heb.
Rather most faithfully to serve him, which is, then curiously to search what
he is, Ne and in hac illicite curiosi, and in illa damnabiliter inueniamur
ingrati; least in this, we be found unlawfully curious, Prosper de vocat:
gentium.
and in the other most damnably unthankful; as Prosper speaks.

CHAP. II. How God is the giver of Being to all Creatures, and the fulfiller of
all his promises.
AND yet, I must note unto you, Zanch de natura Dei. l. 1. c. 18. Why Jehoua is
twice repeated.
that here Iehoua is twice repeated, not to make Moses the more attentive, (as
some do think it,) for the very speech of God, at such a time, and in such a
manner, was enough, in my judgment, to move attention; but rather, to signify
(as I take it) that as he is an eternal being in himself, so he gives being
to all things else; viz. 1. To all Creatures. 2. To all his promises.
For

First, In him we live, we move, and have our being; Acts 17.1.28.
says the most learned Apostle of the Gentiles, even in the streets of
Athens: and of him, and for him, and through him, are all things, Romans 11.36.
says the same Apostle unto the Romans, the sole Monarchs of the whole World;
and so GOD himself says, Esaias 44.24.
I am Iehoua that made all things: Which is all one, as if he had said; As I
am called the Creator, because I have made, That all things do subsist in God.
and created all things: so I am called Iehoua, Being; because I gave, and do
give their being, unto all the things that are. And it is observed, that as in
the Hebrew word Iehoua, there is nothing but Consonants, Iod, He, Vau, Am,
which without their pricks, that do stand for the vowels, can not be
pronounced; to show how ineffable, How ineffable is God.
and how inexpressible the essence of God is: So in the Latin word Iehoua
there are contained all the vowels, a. e. i. o. u; without some of which, no
word can be spoken, no name can be uttered; and that in it there is nothing but
vowels, excepting h. which is no letter, but the aspiration of the word; to
note unto us, That God is the very life of all things.
that as the vowels together with the aspiration, is the life, and as it were
the soul of every word: so is Iehoua, the Lord God, the very life, and being
as it were of every Creature that can be named; because that, of him, and for
him, and through him are all things. Romans 11.36.


Non quod illa sunt quod ipse est, sed quia ex ipso sunt; Not that they are the
same, Bern. in cant. sermon. 4.
that he is; but because they have their existence and perfection from him, as
Saint Bernard says.

Exodus 6.3. This place of Exodus explained.
Secondly, when God says, He was not known unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by
his name Jehovah; it is not to be understood of his essential being; for so
they knew him, even by this very name, Jehovah; as we may see in the fifteenth
of Genesis, and the seventh verse; and in the eight and twenty of Genesis, and
the thirteenth verse, of the original Text; and so Tremellius reads it:
Gerard. l. 3 de not. Dei.
Neither is it to be understood, De gradibus diuinarum patefactionum, Of the
degrees of the divine manifestations of God, (as Gerardus says) because
sometimes it is the manner of the Scriptures, to say, that things are then,
when they are manifested to be, Alsted. Lexic. Theol. c. 2.
as it is said of the holy Ghost, Quod nondum erat, quia nondum innotuerat,
That he was not, because as yet he had not manifested himself to be; John 7.39.
for so he may be said not to be known unto Moses, nor unto any man else,
because neither himself, nor any of his names can be known of any man, 1 Cor.
13.
but only in part, as the Apostle shows. And the example alleged of the
holy Ghost, is mis-interpreted; because the Evangelist speaks not there of the
person of the holy Ghost, nor yet of the invisible bestowing of the gifts of
the holy Ghost; for so they ever knew him to be, and his gifts to be given unto
the Saints: and therefore they did use to pray with the Psalmist, That God
would renew a right spirit within them. Psalm. 50.11.12.
But the meaning of the Evangelist is, that the gifts and graces of the holy
Ghost, were not as yet plentifully, visibly, and miraculously given; because
that Jesus was not yet glorified: for that, according to the prophecy of
David, Psalm. 68.18.
Christ was first to ascend up on high, and to lead captivity captive; and
then in that manner to bestow gifts on men.

But these words, that he was not known unto them, by his name Jehovah; are to
be understood of the performing and accomplishing of those promises, which he
made unto them, of the giving of the Land of Canaan unto them, and their
posterity: for the words going before, I have appeared unto them by the name of
Almighty God; and the words immediately following, and I have established my
covenant with them, to give them the Land of Canaan, the Land of their
pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers; does make it sufficiently plain, that
the meaning of the holy Ghost is this; videlicet, that although by the creation
of the World, and the destruction of the same, and so by the restoration, and
the continual preservation of the World, and of themselves especially, in all
their pilgrimage, Vide Zanch. de not. Dei l 2. c. 13.
he had sufficiently showed himself unto them to be Almighty; yet by the
giving of the Land of Canaan unto them, and their posterity, he had not showed
himself a fulfiller and accomplisher of his promise; because that same promise
of giving them the Land of Canaan, though it was faithfully made unto Abraham,
yet was it not fully accomplished, until the days of Iosuah.

And therefore, God hereby would give Moses, That God is a faithful performer
of all his promises.
and us all to understand, that as he is an eternal Jehovah, or being in
himself, and the giver of being unto all Creatures, so would he perform, and
give being unto all his promises; and as he was now mindful, to accomplish
this promise which he made with Abraham, of giving the Land of Canaan; so
would he be as mindful to perform that great promise, which he chiefly aimed
at, and intended by this; viz. of giving eternal life unto Abraham, and all
his faithful Children: for we must understand, that whatsoever was done, or
said unto the Patriarchs, and Fathers of the Old Testament, 1 Cor. 10.11.
Omnia in figura contingebant illis; They were but Types and Figures, and had
relation unto far more excellent things: and therefore the chief meaning of
God herein is, that although he had but promised unto Adam, that the seed of
the Woman should break the Serpents head; Gen 3 15. Gen 22.18.
and unto Abraham, that in his seed all the Nations of the Earth should be
blessed; and should through the said seed be brought to possess and enjoy the
everlasting Canaan; and had not as yet performed the same in their time: yet as
now he intended by him, and especially by Joshua, to give unto the posterity of
Abraham, the temporal Land of Canaan, (as their own eyes should immediately
see) so he would as certainly in his due time, by, and through, Jesus Christ,
(whereof Joshua was but a type and figure) give unto all the faithful sons of
Abraham, the possession and inheritance of the spiritual Canaan, that is,
eternal life: and then they should all see, and perceive him to be, as true a
Jehovah, that is, as true a performer, and giver of being, unto this his
promise of their redemption, and eternal salvation; as they do see him, and
know him to be an eternal being in himself, and the giver of being, id est,
The Creator of all the things that be; or as the Children of Israel do see
him, to perform his promise, of giving the Land of Canaan unto the posterity
of Abraham. And so much for the most especial things, that we may observe out
of this name Jehovah.

CHAP. III. Of the useful instructions, that we may gather out of the former
Doctrine.
WEll then, beloved Brethren, let us apply this truth unto our selves: and
first, seeing that good is no good, which wants perpetuity, (as Nazianzen
says,) and that God only, is that eternal being, which has, and gives
immortality; it teaches us, where to seek for our eternity. Indeed, of our
selves we shall be ever: for though God made us, Ex nihilo, How we may attain
unto immortality.
Out of nothing; yet he did not make us, Ad nihilum, To return to nothing:
There may be a dissolution of soul and body for a time, but there cannot be an
annihilation of neither, because they must be reunited again, to remain for
ever; but ever (without God) in eternal misery: and therefore, seeing it is a
deadly immortality, to be immortal only for immortal torments, we ought to
ascend to him, and be united to him, if we would be happy, and desire to make
our immortality profitable unto us.

1 Pet. 2.11. Heb. 13.14.
Why then should we place our rest on Earth, where we be strangers and
pilgrims, and have no continuing City? and not rather cry to God, Claud l.
2. in Eut.
Eripe nos tandem seruilibus eripe regnis.

Revel. 6.10.
How long tarriest thou, holy and true? or when come thou, O good God, to
free us, E lutulentis manum operibus, from this more then Egyptian bondage in
this wicked world, and to bring us Lord unto thy self, where we shall have a
most hap^^ b^ing, and a most glorious Kingdom, without ending? For here alas,
Mill parit luctus mortalibus vna voluptas.

We have a thousand bitter sighs, for every little smile; Et praeterit
iucunditas non redditura, and manet anxietas non peritura, And our little
pleasure will soon vanish, and yet leave a sting and a torment, that shall
never be finished: but in thy presence, there is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.12.
and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore.

Secondly, seeing we, and all things else, have our being from God: Jupiter est
quodcumque vides quocunque moueris, Lucan. l. 9. That we ought to be thankful
unto God, because we have all things from God.
For whatsoever we are, or wheresoever we are, we are all, and have all from
God: Why then should we be so ungrateful, and so undutiful as we are unto
God? For had we not had our being, all the titles of honors, all the
confluence of wealth, and all the pompous things that we have from Parents,
Kings, Masters, Friends, or whom you will, had auailed us nothing; nay, had we
not had these things from God, we had had nothing at all; because he gave
them their being, and then gave them to us, Per manus eorum, By the hands of
them which brought them unto us: for he is the giver of every good and perfect
gift; James 1.17.
and all other things are but the instruments, whereby he conuayes and sends
those gifts unto us: 1 Cor. 9.7.
And therefore why should we not wholly dedicate our selves and ours, unto the
service of God? For, who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruits
thereof?

And yet God may justly say of us, Filios enutriui, Esaias 1.2.
I have nourished and brought up Children, but they have despised me; for
though he made man, and made all things for man: yet cannot all these things,
make man to serve him, as he ought to do; but that every one of us will follow
after the lusts, and concupiscence of his own flesh, which (as the Poet says)
Et nocitura placet, and placitura nocet; Does even wound us, when it most
delights us.

Thirdly, seeing God gives being unto all his promises, Psalm. 146.4.
and keeps his promise for ever, as he has done already, in sending a
Joshua, to give the Land of Canaan unto the Israelites; and especially in
sending Jesus Christ, to give eternal life unto all believers: And that, dicta
Iehouae sunt dicta pura; The words of the Lord are pure words: That we should
never doubt of Gods promises. 2 Pet. 2.4.
We should expectare imp^^ a^ ^em, never doubt of the performance of Gods
promises, nor say with those incredulous Athiests, in the second of Peter, 2.4.
Where is the promise of his coming? But we should believe them to be as sure
and as certain, as if they were already accomplished: For he is Iehoua, that
will give them their being, in their appointed time. Matthew. 24.3^.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but his Word shall not pass: That shall be
surely accomplished.

CHAP. IV. Of the word LORD, and how many ways it is taken, and of the reasons
to persuade us to serve him.
I Might now pass unto the second part, but that the translating of this word,
Iehoua, by our last Translators into the word Lord; (for so we read it, The
Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, etc.) must here stay me a while:
For searching into the reason, why Iehoua should be translated Lord, Why Iehoua
is translated Lord.
I found that the seauenty Interpreters do translate it so in every place; and
that because (...) or (...), from whence (...) is derived, signifies, I am;
which is the same in effect, as Iehoua; and also because he is properly called
(...), The Lord of any thing, Qui plenum, (...) and (...), in eadem rem habet,
Which has full right, and a most absolute authority over the same thing; for,
Dominus primo dicebatur, a domo: He was at the first called Lord, which was the
Master of the House, and had full right and authority over all the Household:
and we find that none but God alone, can simply and absolutely say, that he
has full right and authority over any thing in the World; because he only is
the Maker, and preserver of all things, and of every thing: Polanus Syntag. l.
2. c. 6.
and therefore all other Lords are but Lords under him, and from him; and he
only is, (...), Lord of himself, and so indeed Lord of Lords.

And in this respect, we find (...), Lord, and Iehoua, to be equivalent, and
to fall into the same thing: That God only is an absolute Lord. Tertul. in
Apol. c. 34. Lamprid. in Alex. Sever.
and therefore Augustus, the first founder of the Roman Empire, refused to be
called Lord; and so did Alexander Seuerus, and diverse others, because they
thought the name of Lord, to be too high a title for so mean Creatures, as
they knew themselves to be.

But we distinguish betwixt a Lord simply, and a Lord (...),
in some respect.

In the first sense, none is Lord but God alone; and therefore in this respect,
our Savior says, Be not you called Lords; but,

In the second sense, Dicam plane imperatore^^ Dominum, Tertul. quo sup.
says Tertullian; I may, and will call the Emperor Lord: and so says Obadiah,
unto the Prophet Elias, Art not thou my Lord Elias? 1 Reg 18.7.
Because God, which gave them their rule, and dominion, in his stead, has also
innobled them with his own names; Et ego dixi, dij estis, And I my self (says
God) have called you gods, Psalm. 82.6.
and have given these names unto you, to be called Gods; and so Lords. And yet
they should remember Saint Peter's rule, (...), Not to Lord it so, as to
overrule Gods people; or, as Saint Augustine says, Non dominandi superbia,
sed officio consulendi: Not for the love of Sovereignty, but in a desire to do
them good, and to imitate God himself.

Parcere subiectis, and debellare superbos: To defend and help the innocent,
and to punish the wrong doer.

And so you see how Iehoua, is rightly translated (...), Lord, because truly
and absolutely he alone is Lord of all things, as the sole giver of their
being, That we should fear and serve our Lord. Malach. 1.6. Psalm. 24.2.
and preserver of them in that being. And this should incite us, to fear, and
to serve this our Lord: for, Si Dominus, vbi timor? If I am a Lord, where is my
fear? The Prophet David says, that the Earth is the Lords, and all that
therein is, because he has founded it upon the Seas, and prepared and
established it upon the floods: And so this Iehoua is our Lord, because he made
us, and has given us our very being; and yet we find that he is our Lord in
a more excellent respect: for as those, Aug. de ciuit. Dei. l. 19. c. 15.
which by right of war might justly be put to death, and yet were redeemed
and preserved alive, were called servants; and those that redeemed them, were
called their Lords; so are we called Gods Servants, and he our Lord; not only
because he made us, but also because when we might have been justly put to
eternal death for our sins, we were redeemed, and saved by the death of
Jesus Christ. And in this respect, we find, that although the Father, and the
Son, and the holy Ghost, be each one of them our Lord, as our Creator, and
the giver of our Being; yet is Christ generally, and most commonly throughout
all the New Testament, called our Lord: as if this name were now wholly and
solely to be appropriated unto him, Why Christ is most properly called Lord.
because he is our sole Savior and Redeemer. And therefore, seeing the very
name of a Servant, does include seruitium, a service to be performed unto our
Lord and Savior; and that indeed we were preserved to that end, that we might
serve him, as Zacharias tells us, That we were delivered from our enemies,
that we might serve the Lord in holiness and righteousness all the days of
our life: We ought to endeavor what lies in us to serve this Lord; and we
should the more joyfully do it, because as Philo says, Philo in l. de Regno.
(...): To serve the Lord, is not only better then liberty, but also more
excellent then all Sovereignty. And Hugo de prato sets down three especial
reasons, to persuade all men to serve the Lord.

Hugo de prato ser. 6. de temp.
1. Because we owe our service unto God. 2. That we may obtain a good reward
from God. 3. That we may escape the punishment of them, that neglect to serve
God; for,
Three special reasons to persuade us to serve God.
First, The Lord has made us, redeemed us, preserved us, enriched us with all
that we have: and therefore, What reward shall we render unto the Lord, for all
the benefits that he has done unto us; unless we will be contented, to take
the Cup of salvation, and to call upon the name of the Lord; and so dedicate
our selves wholly to the praising and glorifying of his name?

Secondly, if we will serve him, we shall be sure to have in this life, his
grace to guide us, his Angels to guard us, his holy Spirit to comfort us, and
whatsoever he knows to be needful for us; and in the life to come, we shall
have eternal happiness: we shall have the Crown of everlasting glory.

Thirdly, if we will not serve him, but say, Nolumus hunc regnare super nos, We
will not have him to be our Lord, and Master; but we will serve our selves,
and the lusts of our own flesh; then you must know what he will say to such,
Those mine enemies that would not serve me, bring them hither, and slay them
before me: nay, if you will despise my Statutes, and abhor my judgments, so
that you will not do all my Commandments; I also will do this unto you: I
will even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that
shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart; and you shall sow your seed
in vain, Leuit. 26.15.16.17.
and I will set my face against you; he manes here in this life: and at the
last dreadful day, they shall be bound hand and foot, and cast into that lake
which burns with fire and brimstone for evermore: There shall be weeping, and
gnashing of teeth. And therefore, to discharge our duty, to attain unto
eternal felicity, and to escape this endless misery; let us serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence: And blessed are all they that
serve him. Psalm. 2.11.
And so much for the first Part, What God is, or of the Essence of God.

PART. II. Of the Nature of God, Part. 2.
or what manner of God he is.
CHAP. I. Of the power of God, and how many sorts of Adversaries there be,
which do oppose the Truth of this Doctrine of the power of God.
YOu have heard what God is, IEHOVA, that is, an Eternal being in himself,
and a giver of being unto all the things that do subsist, and now we are
diligently to consider, The nature of God, or, what manner of God he is: for, I
find that God does here express himself unto Moses by three especial
attributes, 1. His Power, to make us believe in him. 2. His Goodness, to make
us love him. 3. His Justice, to make us fear him.
3. excellent points to be thoroughly known: to be ever learnt, and never to
be forgotten: for,

The first attribute of God, i. e. His Power.
First, the Doctrine of Gods Power, is the very Anchor of our Faith, and the
foundation of all Christian Religion; for hence proceed all Heresies; because
the Heretics know not the Scriptures, nor the Power of God; and hence
proceeds all Faith; because we believe with the blessed Virgin, Stella in Luc.
c. 1. p. 36. b
Quia potens est, that God is able to do all these things, which Reason is not
able to comprehend; and therefore here, immediately after Iehoua, he adds E
L: Jeron. tom. 3. p. 95. in ep. ad Marell.
which the Septuagint. turned and translated (...), GOD: and Aquila, searching
into the Etymology of the word, interprets it, (...), that is, Strong; says
Saint Hierome, and so Zanchius every where; Tremelius and some other Latin
versions, and the old English Translation reads it strong: How needful is the
Doctrine of the Power of God. Psalm 62.11.
and so in Lege credendi in the Symbol of our Belief, as soon as ever he
shows himself to be, he shows himself to be Almighty; and so the Prophet
David says, God spoke once and twice, I have also heard the same, that Power
belongs unto God.

And surely this Doctrine of GODS Power, is so useful for all Christians, and
so necessary for the vnderstand^ng of the Scriptures; that among all the
Attributes of God this deserves first to be discussed because, there is,
almost no page of Scripture, Zanch. de not. Dei. l. 3. c. 1.
wherein there is not some mention made of the Power of God; and the ignorance,
or not rightly understanding of this Truth, is the cause of so many Infidels
and Heretics in the world: and therefore I must crave leave to insist a
little upon this point of Doctrine, of the Power of God: And for Method sake, I
will divide my whole discourse of this point, into these four heads.

1 I will set down the number, Four points handled, touching the Power of God.
and the quality of the Adversaries of this Truth. 2 I will explain this
point, and show wherein and how far this Power of God extends. 3 I will
sufficiently confirm the truth hereof, and answer to whatsoever is, or can be
said against it. 4 I will briefly show the useful application of the whole
Doctrine.
For the first, the Adversaries of this Truth, which do either exceedingly
err, or be mightily deceived; are almost infinite: but I may reduce the
chiefest of them into these four sorts; whereof two by impayring and denying
his Power, do unto him the greatest wrong; that is, Four sorts of men do
err, about the Truth of this Doctrine, of the Power of God.
1. The Infidels, that will not believe in him. 2. The desperate men, that will
not hope in him.
Because they think he cannot do those things, which in very deed are most
facile and easy for him to do.

And the other two, by misunderstanding the extent of his Power, do not show
much less indignity unto God, then the former: and they are 1. The
Vbiquitaries of Germany, 2. The Pontificials of Rome.
Which say he can do those things, which indeed are agreeable, neither to the
Power, nor to the Truth of God. And so as Goclenius says; Crimen in excessu,
nec non defectus aberrat
S^d verum, medium qui tenucre, tenent.


We must walk in the middle-way, if we would not walk awry.

Psalm. 14.1.
First, for the Infidels, The fool has said in his heart, there is no God; and
what he says in his heart, he testifies and confirms by his works; for, by
their works they deny God, says the Apostle, and some in plain terms, as
Diagoras and others: And therefore seeing they deny him to be, what marvel is
it that they should deny him to be Almighty? and therefore one of the
Captains, 2 Reg. 7.2.
and a Lord of the King of Israel, said unto Elizeus; If the Lord should make
windows in Heaven to rain down Corn like hayle-stones, yet how can he do
those things that thou have spoken? and the wicked in Job say, Quis est
omnipotens vt seruiamus ei? How the Atheists and Infidels deny the Power of God.
or, quid est omnipotens, as Tremelius reads it, who, or what is Almighty God
that we should serve him? as if they said we know none such. But what do I
stand upon Infidels? the most learned of their Philosophers, the wittyest of
their Poets, and many Heretics have made but a scoff of that Doctrine, of
the Omnipotent Power of God: and did with all their strength maintain, that Ex
nihilo nihil fit, Of nothing, nothing could be made: and therefore concluded it
was impossible for God, Ex non ente ens producere, To make any being of that,
which had no being in the world: Arist. l 1. and 2. de caelo and mundo.
and thereupon Aristotle, the Prince of all the Philosophers, does strive with
all his might to prove, that this world is Eternal, and never had any
beginning: and they that yield it was made, do affirm that it was composed of
a prae-existent matter: this was the opinion of the Stoiks, and Peripateticks,
Cicero l. 3. de not. deorum.
which Cicero imbraceth; So Seleucus and Hermias (as Sebastianus Medices
witnesses) and Hermogines (against whom Tertullian writ a most elegant book)
have said, Medices in summa haeres.
that the matter and the substance of the Elements, whereof the world was made,
was not made by God; but was coeternall with God: D. Sicul. l. 1. c. 1. Eusebius.
de preparat. Euang l. 1.
all which, with many others (whose opinions, Diodorus Siculus, and Eusebius
Caesariensis have most painefully collected, and which is needless for me to
rehearse) have erred in this point; because with Petrus Abaylardus (as Medices
says) they were ignorant of the Omnipotent Power of God.

But against all these, and the like, How the Power of God is proved.
the Power of God may be easily showed, both from the Creation of the world,
and also from the Gubernation of it, and of all things that are therein: for
the World it self, says Saint Augustine, Ordinatissima sua mutabilitate, and
mobilitate, etc. by his most comely mutability and mobility, and all visible
things in their kind, First, from the creation of things.
do as it were tacitly, and after a secret manner, proclaim it self to be
made; Yea, and to be made by none other, but by that most ineffable and
invisible excellent God: and therefore, although Aristotle in saying that this
world was eternal, was far wide from the Truth: because that whatsoever does
consist of a solid and a ponderous body, as it must of necessity have an
ending, Diverse Heathens confessed God to have made the world.
so it must needs be, that at some time or other, it has had its beginning:
yet diverse of the very Heathens, have by the light of Nature, seen and confessed
this Truth; for we read that Orpheus said, (...), etc. There is one of
himself, i. e. God, Justin. Martyr. in l de Monarchia.
and from him alone, are all things that are, and Pythagoras (as Justin Martyr
cites him) said, (...),
(...).


If any man (besides that one everliving God) does say, I am God; let him
create a world like unto this, and say this is mine: And so Epicurus himself,
did in this thing confess the Truth; He ydelpheldius de deo. c. 2.
and say that this world had beginning and must in its due time have ending;
and so many others of the most ancient Philosophers, did profess this Truth,
and left their faith written for their posterities: If any man desire to see
it, let him look into Justin Martyr, in his exhortation unto the Gentiles, and
in his Book of Monarchy; and to Eusebius Casariensis de preparat: Euangel: and
especially into Lactantius Firmianus, l. 1. c. 5. 6. and 7. By whom the sayings
and opinions of the former Age are most carefully collected.

And yet not one of them was able, either to show any reason, or to express
the manner how any of these things should be made, (which was the cause that
Aristotle and his followers, that would have the reason of every thing, No man
by the light of Nature is able to show the reason how the world should be made.
Heb. 11.3.
or else would believe nothing; to say it was not made at all:) because they
were all ignorant of those Divine Oracles, whereby God had made known this
Truth unto men; and especially, because they were destitute of that Spirit,
whereby we are persuaded to believe this Truth; for that (as the Apostle says)
through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the Word of God.

Secondly, Gods Power is proved from the government of the world. Quintus
Curt. de rebus gest. Alexand.
And as the Creation of the World, so the Gubernation of the same does as fully
show the Omnipotent Power of God: for I may truly say, Non minor est virtus
quam condere, facta tueri: It requires as great a power, or greater, to
sustain all things, that they turn not to nothing, as to create all things of
nothing.

When Alexander asked a certain people what thing they feared most, (thinking
they would say they feared him) they scoffingly answered, the falling of the
Skies; and indeed if we knew all, we might fear both the falling of the
Heavens, and the ouerflowings of the Seas, and the untamed fury both of men
and beasts; were it not for Almighty God; which rides upon the Heavens as upon
a Horse, Psalm. 68 4.
and by his Power rules the rage of the Seas, and the noise of his waves, and
the madness of the people. And therefore well does that Christian Poet
conclude, Est Deus omnipotens, qui temperat omnia nutu.

That he must needs be an Omnipotent God, which rules and guides all things
with his beck, or with a word, according to his own will. And Victorinus
Strigelius says, that it is worth the observation, to consider out of
Histories, the beginnings and inlargements, the declinations, and subuersions
of Empires; because that this consideration, does illustrate, and confirm unto
us, the song of the blessed Virgin, and the Power of the great Creator, Qui
fecit Potentiam and deposuit potentes; Which raises the poor out of the mire,
and brings down the high looks of the proud; because his hand is able both
to exalt the one, and to deiect the other; as Aesope being demanded, what God
did, answered; Exaltat humilia and deijcit alta, He exalts the lowly, and
casts down the mighty; Victor. Strig. in Justin. epit. p. 296.
and this may be seen, as in all things, and in all Ages else; So especially
in those Empires which we call the four Monarchies, says Strigelius. And
Poet Iuuenal says; Fortuna multis dat nimis, nulli satis
Si fortuna volet, fies de consule rhetor,
Si volet haec eadem, fies de rhetore consul.
Fortune we see does give too much to many, The Heathens did falsely ascribe
that to Fortune which is true indeed of God.

And yet alas gives not enough to any.
If Fortune will, thou may be a Consul made
And if that will, thou m^st unto thy former trade.


And therefore Maro considering this admirable disposition of things, does
positiuely pronounce; Fortuna omnipotens, and ineluctabile fatum. Virgil.
Aeneid. l. 8.


That Fortune is Omnipotent, and destinies uncontrollable. All which, Mutato
nomine. If we change the name of Fortune, (which was their error to say, -- Te
facimus fortuna deam, And to ascribe all to chance) into the unchangeable
providence of God, we find it to be most apparently true: and therefore of
an unanswerable validity, to confirm and prove the power of God.

Secondly, for the desperate men: All wicked wretches, How wicked sinners
think God cannot forgive there sins. Deuteronomy. 32.
when they are grown unto the height of sin, or fallen down into the depth
of all iniquity, and shall on the one side, see God exceedingly angry with them
for their sins, and the fire kindled in his wrath, which shall burn unto the
bottom of Hell; and on the other side, the devouring Gulf, ready to receive
them, and to detain them in everlasting flames; then do these men, not so
much (...) Atheists without the Knowledge of God, as (...) Infidels, without
Faith or Hope in God, say with wicked Caine; Our sins are more then can be
forgiven us: for that our iniquities which are so horrible, and Gods Justice
which is so incorruptible, have such a (...), great Gulf and distance betwixt
them, that Non been conueniunt, nec in vna sede morantur; They can never be
reconciled; and therefore our iniquity can never be remitted.

Neither do I truly, find these men, to be much more stupid then the former,
whereof I have even now spoken; for although I find many men affirming, the
powerful Creation of all Creatures, others saying, the conservation of the
said created things, and others the Incarnation of the Son of God, to be the
greatest work, and argument of Gods divine Power; yet I find many Divines not
meanly learned, most confidently to auerre, That to forgive sins, is the
greatest work of Gods power.
the remission of our sins, to be simply and absolutely the greatest and
most remarkable work of Gods power: and not without reason neither; because
it is easier to create a thousand worlds of nothing, then it is to forgive one
sin that is committed: for to the bringing forth of all creatures he did but
Speak the word, Psalm. 33.9.
and they were made; he commanded and they stood fast: But to obtain for us,
remission of our sins, multa dixit magna fecit, dira tulit, he spoke many
words, he did great works, and he suffered grievous wrongs; as Saint Bernard
says: for Sin is such a transcendent thing that as God himself in regard of
his infinite beauty, Heydelpheld: C. 2. de deo. p. 9.
so sin in respect of its infinite deformity, cannot be defined, nor showed
how heinous a thing it is: and therefore the Church in the Collect upon the
eleventh Sunday after Trinity, (which also I found observed by Aquinas) says;
God which declarest thy Almighty power, most chiefly in showing mercy, and
pity: And so Christ himself, Mar. 10.25.
that knows all things, showing how hard it is for a rich Man to enter into
eternal life, does seem to show as much: and thereupon his Disciples were
astonished out of measure, saying among themselves; verse 26.
Who then can be saved?

Tantae molis erat caelestem condere gentem. So hard a thing it was, to pardon
sin; though we poor blinded fools, That God is able to forgive sins.
do esteem it nothing to sin.

But yet against despair, that it is not impossible with God to remit all
sins; our Savior brings this reason, because all things are possible with
God: Mar. 10. v. 27.
and the blessed Apostle Paul disputing of the incredulous Jews; and saying,
that they also if they remained not in unbelief, should be ingraffed again
into the Olive tree, does frame his argument, from the power of God; saying,
Romans 11.23.
That God is able to graffe them in again: for seeing that as a bough which is
cut off, cannot graffe it self into the tree again; so no more can a man,
dead through sin, revive himself any more, nor an infidel cast off his
infidelity, and pour faith into his own heart again: therefore the Apostle
confesses, this is not of our selves; and shows that indeed all graces: our
Conversion, our Faith, our Perseverance, and all else, are scited in the sole
Will and Power of God: because he alone, does vinifie the dead, and call those
things which are not, as if they were; that is, to cause those Men, which are
dead through sin, to be revived again by grace; and those things which are
not at all, in rerum natura, to have their existens and being his only word,
without any labor or pains, but as easily, or easier then we do call the
things that are; whereof both is, entis simpliciter ex non ente productio;
Parraeus in Romans C. 11.
a production of being out of nothing, says Parraeus: and therefore is
impossible to be effected by any created power; but not with God: because all
things are possible with him: and therefore is he able, Mar 10.27. Esaias 1.18.
to make our sins that are as red as Scarlet, to become as white as Snow.

Thirdly, For the Vbiquitaries: they do conclude that by the omnipotent power
of God, the man Christ Jesus, by reason of the communication of the properties
of the one nature unto the other, may be, and is omniscient, omnipresent, i. e.
every where, in all places, even at one and at the self same time: for thus
Mentzerus reasons against Sadeel; He that is omnipotent, Mentz contra Sadeel.
p. 269.
can be present where he will; but the Man Christ Jesus, or Christ as man is
omnipotent; therefore Christ, as man, can be present where he will; in the
Church, in the Sacrament, in the midst of his enemies, or in any other place,
where he pleases: whereas Sadeel, on the other side says, that if God should
intend and endeavor to extend all the nerves and synewes of his omnipotency,
The error of the Vbiquitaries.
yet can he not make one numericall, and natural Body, to be in many places at
one and the self same time: which in very deed is most true, as hereafter I
shall show unto you.

Fourthly, For the Pontificialls; The error of the Church of Rome about Gods
power, to prove transubstantiation.
Bellarmine does most stoutly withstand us, and to establish his opinion of
Transubstantiation he says, (but most falsely) that God can make the true and
natural body of Christ, though finite and numerically one, to be substantially
present in all those places, whersoeuer their Mass is celebrated; and to be
orally received, and eaten of all those Men, that do communicate; whosoever
those Men should be: and so the rest of them taught herein, by that
Arch-heriticke the devil, do strive with all their might, to confirm the
probability (for the verity they shall never do) of that opinion, from the
omnipotent power of God. Augustine: in Johan.
And truly this is nothing else, but most cunningly to hide their true faults,
and false errors, under the pretext and veil of the power of God. Miserable
men (herein I assure my self) qui dum volunt esse mali, nolunt esse veritatem,
qua condemnantur mali, who while they desire to be in error, do wholly oppose
the light of Truth, whereby their errors are reproved, and do bring their
subtilties, and fallacies, into the Church of God; intruding falsehoods into
the room of Truth, and bare names, accidents without any subjects, (even as
Ixion embraced a Cloud for Juno) to be received of us for true and real
things: and because we will not yield to be thus seduced, and to be made
fools, they call us Fools, and Heretics, full of Heresies, and I know not
(as I care not) what. But it is easier for them, to call us then to prove us
so: and they are but parties and not judges of this controversy, and parties
must not be Judges, in the same case wherein they are parties: And therefore
we will not judge of them, least we should be judged; neither will we give
them any other names, then the members of the Church of Rome, the patrons and
defenders of her doctrines, and such as beseems Modesty and Christianity:
for we know the spirit of Christ is a spirit of Love, not of hatred, a spirit
of Meekness, not of harshnesse, and a spirit of Peace, not of strife and
contention: but according to true reason, and the judgment of all antiquity,
and especially the divine verity of the most holy Scripture (whose property
is, iudicium (...), and infallibile, to give an absolute and infallible
judgment of truth,) we will by Gods help, discuss this point, of the power
of God: because the knowledge, of this point, is so exceedingly necessary for
the Church of God.

CHAP. II. How many ways the power of God is to be considered, and how far
the absolute power of God extends.
FOr the second point, that is, how far the power of God extends; we must
first note, the difference betwixt (...) and (...), Power and Authority; for
Authority is that which is established by right: and of this our Savior
speaks, when he says, Mihi data est omnis potestas, Matthew. 28.18.
All power is given unto me, in Heaven and in Earth; i. e. all authority over
all creatures, both in Heaven and Earth: and of this I am not to speak in this
place; it was formerly expressed in the word, Lord: But Power is that faculty
of doing any thing, which consists in strength, and might, Wolfg. Muscul: de
omnipot. dei.
as Musculus says: and this is that which I am to speak of; And it is either,
1. Passive. 2. Active.


First, A passive Power is nothing else, Power is either Active or Passive.
but ens in potentia a being in power; or else a power to be such and such a
thing; and it is opposed to the act; And this we utterly deny to be in God;
because God is, (...), uniform, having himself by himself always alike, and
the self same manner, and never receiving any ways, any change or alteration,
being without any shadow of turning, James. 1.17.
as the Apostle says.

Secondly, An active power is that, What Active power is.
whereby such and such acts are fully done and accomplished; and this also (if
we speak properly) is far from the nature of God, because God is a mere,
and a pure act: and nothing aduentitious can be said to be in God; But to
retain the usual manner of speaking, for our better understandings sake; we
say that an active power is in God; But then we must further note that an
Active Power is either, 1. Accepta, received, Or 2. Innata, inbred.


The first is of the Creature, the second is of the Creator: That subsisteth by
another strength, so long as it does endure, as our Savior shows, Without
me you can do nothing; because he gives the power of working; This never
subsisteth by any other strength, but by it own proper might for ever: That,
is particular and limited: particular, because no creature is so powerful,
that it can universally work all things, (God giving not such a perfect power
unto any man, save only unto his only begotten son Jesus Christ,) and
limited, because, to do infinite things, is impossible for any creature; and
because those things which are possible for them to do, are not so possible
unto them, as that they can perform any jot of them, John 15.5. That the power
of the most powerful creatures is limited.
beyond the measure of the limitation given of God: and therefore the power of
Kings, Monarchs, and Potentates; yea, of the very Angels, and Devils; as it is
given them from above, so it is limited, how far it shall go: They may slay
the bodies, but they cannot touch the Souls: and they can for a while, and in
some measure, execute their rage and tyranny against the Saints of God; but if
they could do as much as they would do; not a Righteous man should be left
upon the face of the Earth: and therefore often times, either by death, or by
some singular judgment of God, their power is terminated, and sometimes turned
to their shame and confusion.

The Second, that is, the Inbred power of the Creator, is to be considered
either, 1. In respect of the inward acts and Operations Of God. 2. In respect
of the outward acts and Operations Of God.


First, The power of God, considered in respect of his inward operations, is
that, whereby God does inwardly understand, love, and work for ever and ever,
because he cannot, non (...), not to work, by reason of the necessity of his
immutability, those things which are called, (...) i. e. aeternorum, the acts
of eternity; and this power is likewise twofold.

The power of God in respect of his inward acts is twofold: 1 Special.
1. Special to each person. 2. Common to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
First, The special power is that which pertains unto one person, and not
unto the other, as potentia (...), the power of begetting is proper unto the
Father, and not to the Son, nor to the Holy Ghost: because this Power is his
Power, as he is a Father, and not as he is God; therefore it is proper and
not common; because that for the Father to beget, and not to be begotten, and
for the son to be begotten, and not to beget, and for the Holy Ghost to
proceed, and not to beget, nor to be begotten, are, Proprietates (...),
personal proprieties; whereby the persons of the Godhead are distinguished
betwixt themselves.

Secondly, the common Power, 2 Common.
is that which does appertain to each person in general, as well to the one,
as to the other: as the Power of working those internal operations which are
common unto the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; such as are, those acts
of loving each other, understanding each other, and the like.

Secondly, the Power of God considered, All the outward actions of God, are
com^ on to each person of the Godhead.
in respect of his outward operations, is that, whereby God created all things,
governs all things, and can do all things, whatsoever pleases him. And this
is so common to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, that it is most
rightly said, that opera trinitatis ad extra sunt indiuisa; The outward works
of the Trinity are indivisible, that is, common to each person: And therefore
this Power of God in respect of these outward operations, though in our Creed
it is ascribed unto the Father; lest that, because he is called Father, we
should imagine, some defect and impotency to be in him; as to the Son, we
find Wisdom ascribed; lest that because he is called Son, we might conceit
some ignorance, or in experience to be in him: yet, as the wisdom of God,
Genesis 1.2. John 1.3. Heb. 1.2. Job 26.13.
so is this Power of God, and the works of this Power, common to each person
of the Deity: as we may see in the first of John and the third, Heb. 1.2. Gene.
1.2. Job 26.13.

And we find this Power of God, to be 1. Proper unto God. 2. Absolute in all
things. That the power of God is so proper unto God, as that it cannot be
communicated to any creature.



First, It is proper, yea, so proper unto God alone, as that it cannot be
communicated to any creature: no not to the humanity of our Savior Christ:
because the humanity, existing and hanging upon the cross, was not able to
help it self; but was feign to cry unto his Father, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? And therefore Aquinas does most truly conclude, that the
soul of Christ was not capable to receive into it self infinite Power; no
more then a creature is able to contain or comprehend his Creator: and yet I
confess with the Apostle, that in him, Coloss. 1.9.
i. e. in the person of Christ, dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily:
yea, and that the man Christ Jesus, received grace, not by measure, Sed vsque
ad plenitudinem, but even unto the fullness, i. e. so much as a creature is any
ways capable of: because the Godhead did Communicate such perfections unto the
humanity, as the condition of a creature could possibly bear: yet is it
manifest, that all those perfections, and excellencies, wherewith the manhood
of Christ was endowed, and innobled, were all of them created excellencies;
because no attribute of God, can be Communicated unto any created substance;
because every attribute of God, is God himself: but whatsoever is given, and
bestowed upon any creature, must needs be a created thing: and therefore
neither the wisdom, nor the power, nor the goodness, which are attributed unto
God, as they are the essential properties, nay, the very Essence of God it
self, can be any ways communicated to any thing; but that which is
communicated unto us, must needs be some other thing from them: as the
goodness which we have, is a created goodness, and not that, nor any part of
that goodness, which is in God; and therefore, though the Power, Wisdom, and
goodness of God, (as they are God himself) are indissolubly united by a
personal union unto the humanity of Christ, innobled with all possibly created
excellencies; yet are they so proper unto the Deity, as that they cannot be
communicated, to be the Essential properties of it; or of any other creature
whatsoever: and so the very names of them, that they are the properties of God,
does sufficiently show, that they cannot be the properties of any other thing.

Secondly, as this Power of God, is proper unto God alone, so it is absolute,
because it is not so limited, by the universal Law of Nature, That the Power
of God is absolute in three respects.
as if beside, or above it, God could not do any thing that he would; but it is
plenary, and universal; because nothing is impossible unto him, but that
without all limitation, or determination, he can do all, and every thing,
which, howsoever and whenever it pleases him. And it is called absolute, or
omnipotent in three respects:

First, because he can do whatsoever he will do: First, he can do what he
will. Psalm. 135.6.
for whatsoever pleases the Lord, that did he in Heaven and in Earth, and in
the Sea, and in all deep places: and the Wise man says, that he can show his
great strength, at all times, when he will: and it is worth the observing,
that as he can do what he will; Sap. 11.21.
so he c n do it, as he will; he need but say the word, and they are done. Let
there be light, and there was light: Genesis 1.3.
He can do any thing without means, with means, with small means, and many
times contrary to the nature of the means that he usually uses. Without
means, as in creating all things of nothing; with means, Hosea 2.21.
as to fructify the earth, by the dropping of the clouds; Psalm. 77.20.
with weak means, as to lead his people out of Egypt, by the hands of Moses
and Aaron; and by the foolishness of Preaching, 1 Cor. 1.21.
to save those that believe: and contrary to the nature of means, Sap. 19.20.
as when to let Israel pass through it, he caused the red Sea to stand upon
heaps; and to preserve the three children, Dan. 3.27.
he made the fire to forget his own virtue, and not to singe an hair of their
head: so absolute is his Power, that what he will, and as he will, he can
easily bring to pass.

Secondly, his Power is said to be absolute, Quia est (...): Secondly, he can
hinder what he will not. Genesis 11.8.
because he is subject to no hinderance; he can easily hinder whatsoever is
intended against his will; as he did to build the Tower of Babel; and Saul to
persecute his poor Church; but none can hinder him, to do whatsoever he will:
for as the Prophet Esaias says, There is none that can deliver out of his hands,
Esaias 43.13.
and if he will work, who shall hinder it? no counsel, no strength, no
endeavor of any created thing, can any thing prevail against God; and
therefore Daniel says, that the Throne of God was like a fiery flame, and his
wheels like burning fire: to show that against God there is no resistance,
says Amandus Polanus. Polan. tom. 1. p. 513.
And Saint Augustine says, that in this respect God is said to be omnipotent:
Quod faciat quae vult, and non patiatur quae non vult. Because he does what he
will, and suffers nothing to be done that he will not: None can hinder him to
do what he will: but he can hinder any thing that he will not; and therefore
Solomon says, Many devices are in a man's heart, Prou. 19.21.
but the counsel of the Lord shall stand: that is, let men plot what they
will, nothing shall be effected that God will not.

Gods Power to b^ considered two ways.
Thirdly, his Power is said to be absolute, because he can d^e more then either
he does, or will do: for we must understand that the Power of God is to be
considered, either 1. (...). absolutely, or 2. Ex hypothesi, relatiuely, as it
has respect and relation unto the will and Wisdom of God. Goclen. disquit.
Plot os. p. 133.



In the first sense, the absolute Power of God, is that whereby God can simply
do, whatsoever has the possibility of being; and therefore by this Power, God
could and can do many infinite things, more then he does, and more then he
has reueiled unto us, that he will do: as by and by I shall declare unto you.

That the will and decree of God, is the rule and measure of the ordinary Power
of God.
In the second sense, the hypotheticall or conditional Power of God, which is
called the Actual Power of God; and unto which pertains the ordinary Power
of God, (whereof Scaliger speaks, Exercitatione, 365. Sect. 8.) is that
whereby God can do only what he will: and not those things which he will not,
and so his Power exten^s it self no further then his will; nor his will any
further then his Power; but as Saint Ambrose says, Voluntas eius potestas
cius; his will and his Power are both alike: And therefore it is apparent that
God by his absolute Power, can do a great deal more then he does, or can do
by his ordinary Power; because by that he can do all things that are possible
to be done; but by this he can do but only those things which he wills, and
has decreed to be done. To make it more plain: God could of these stones
raise up children unto Abraham: Matthew. 3.9.
says John Baptist; that is, by his absolute Power; but he could not do it,
by his ordinary Power; because he would not: So the Father could have been
incarnate, and made man by his absolute Power; because this does neither
destroy his nature, nor imply a contradiction: but he could not do this by his
hypotheticall or conditional Power: because it repugneth with the decree of
Gods will: so he could and can create a thousand worlds, by his absolute Power;
but he cannot do it by his ordinary Power; because he wills no more: and to
say all in a word, God can do only these things which out of his goodness
and wiseddme (which is the rule, by which the ordinary Power of God is guided)
he has from all eternity decreed, that he would do by his limited and
ordinary actual Power; but he can do not only this, but also all things
else, that he can will, and many thousand times more then either he does, or
wills to be done, by his absolute, and illimited power. This is the truth;
you shall hear the proof. For,

First, Our Savior Christ himself says unto Peter, That God by his absolute
power can do more then he does, or ever did. Matthew. 26.53.
Put up thy sword into his place: Think thou, that I cannot now pray to my
Father, and he shall presently give me more then twelve legions of Angels? And
therefore it is apparent, that both he could have asked his Father, and that
his Father could have supplied him; and yet neither of them would do that which
they were able to do.

Secondly, the Fathers do thus explain this Truth: for, Saint Augustine
says, Consequens est, vt quod est, esse potuerit, etc. Aug in Enchirid. ad
Laurent. c. 95. and in l. de not. and great. c. 7.
It is consequent that that which is, might be; but it is not consequent, that
that which might be, is: for, because the Lord raised Lazarus from the grave,
it is without doubt that he could do it; and because he did not raise Judas,
i. e. spiritually from sin, shall we say that he could not do it? therefore
he could, but he would not: for, if he would have done it, he might with the
same power, have raised him from sin, as he did the other from his grave:
because, John 5.21.
the Son quickneth whom he will. So Tertullian in his book against Praxeas,
says, Tertul. contra Prax.
Non quia non potest facere, ideo credendum est illum non fecisse, etiam quod
non fecerit; sed an fecerit requirendum; We must not therefore believe, that
God has not done those things which he has not, nor will not do, because he
cannot do them; but we must enquire what he has done, or will do; for
assuredly he could, if he would, have given unto man, wings to fly withal, as
he did unto the birds of the air; he could presently destroy Praxeas, and all
other Heretics whatsoever; and yet he does not do it, because he can do it;
1 Cor. 11.19. Luke 24.46.
for there must be Heretics and it behooued Christ to have suffered: In this
respect, may any thing be said to be hard for God to do, that is, whatsoever
he will not do; not because he cannot do it; but because he is not willing
to do it; Quia Dei posse velle est, and non posse nolle est: because that to
be able with GOD, is to be willing; and not to be able, is to be unwilling;
because he can do whatsoever he will do. Damasc. ad Calcem. l. 1.
And so Damascen says: (...). He can do whatsoever he will, but wills not
whatsoever he can; for he can consume the world, but he wills it not.

And so we see that God can both will and do much more things then he did, or
does, or will do, by his absolute and illimited Power.

Anselm. in l. qui dr: cur deus homo. The saying of diverse Authors reconciled
by this distinction of Gods ordinary and absolute power.
And this distinction well observed, does make way to reconcile the writings and
the opinions of diverse, both ancient and modern Writers, in many points,
concerning the power of God: for whereas Anselmus thinks it was so needful
for humane kind, to be repaired by the passion of Christ, as that otherwise it
could not possibly have been redeemed; because no mere, or bare creature
could possiby effect so great a repairation; It is most true of the ordinary
Power of God, and in respect of the necessity of conueniency, and the appointed
ordinance of the Divine wisdom; because God had decreed it so to be: and
therefore it could not otherwise be. And whereas Scotus says, Aliter potuisse
(...) fieri, That the ransom of man's redemption, might have been otherwise
paid, Quam per (...) mortem, then by death of him that was both God and Man: so
that which Saint Augustine says, Alium modum redimendi hominem, Deo non
defuisse; that God could otherwise have redeemed man, if it had pleased him; it
is most true, if we understand it of his absolute Power; to which all things
are subject, as Saint Augustine speaks. Aug. l. 13. de Trinitate.
And so in like manner that saying of Damascen, (...); That it is impossible
for nature to subsist, if you take away the natural proprieties thereof, is
true; if we understand it of Gods ordinary Power; but it is false if we
understand it of Gods absolute Power: because that whatsoever is created, is so
created; that any thing may be made of any thing, by the absolute power of God:
as blood may be made water, Psalm. 78.45. John 2.9. Dan. 3.25.
and water wine; the fire, not to burn, and the water not to quench: for
though the ordinary power of God is limited and guided by his will, to do all
things according to his prescribed rule; yet is his absolute power so free, and
so large, that as his will can will any thing that is willible; so can this
power do any thing that is possible, or has the possibility of being.

But now we are come into the greatest depth of this Doctrine to know how far
this absolute power of God extends; Of the extent of Gods absolute Power.
or to know what are those things which by this absolute and unlimited power of
God, may be effected: for,

Some affirm, or rather faigne, that by this absolute power of God, all things
simply may be done, which can be either spoken or imagined; yea, even those
things which are impossible in their own nature to be done, and do imply the
greatest contradictions: as they which do contend and strive to prove, that God
can make a humane and a natural body to be every where: The erroneous conceits
of many men about the absolute Power of God.
and that bread should be bread, and yet transubstantiated into flesh, and that
accidents should subsist without their subjects: and so the greatest part of
the vulgar sort, which think that God is therefore called Almighty, because he
can do all things that can be imagined: Nam qui dicit omnia, excludit nihil;
for he which says all things, excepteth nothing: and if there be any thing
which he does not do, that this happens; because he will not, and not because
he cannot.

But such fictions are to be rejected, and the blasphemies of them which
attribute such an absolute power unto God, as that he can sin, and lie, and
do all things else, without order, without reason, without truth, and without
Justice, are to be execrated and accursed: because the Apostle says himself,
there be some things which God cannot do: as God which cannot lie, Titus 1.2.
which cannot deny himself; 2 Timothy 2.13.
and therefore others of a sounder judgment, for the more fully expressing the
truth of this point, have used diverse forms of answers: but they all fall at
last to the same end: as,

First, some say that God can do all those things which neither signify
imperfection, nor imply a contradiction; To sin, to sleep, to walk, and such
like, do argue imperfection in them that do them; and to cause those things
which have been done, not to have been done, or the things that are, not to be,
does imply a contradiction. How diverse men have explained this point.


Secondly, others say that God can do all those things which are nothing
derogatory to the Power of God: but all those things which denotate a privation
of power, Et quae (...) potius quam (...) significant, and which show an
impotency rather then omnipotency, must needs be derogatorie to the Power of
God: So, to sin, is a sign of weakness; because it signifies a privation
of rectitude in any action; So to move, because the mouer cannot be every
where; and to suffer, because the sufferer cannot resist; and to die, because
we cannot live; and such like, they do all show impotency, and weakness in
the doers: and therefore, Gods not being able to do these things, does
sufficiently argue the infiniteness of his Power; Aug. l. 1. c. 1. de Symbolo.
Jdem de Trinitate l 15. c. 15.
for if he could sin, or die, ^eceiue, or be deceived, then could he not be
omnipotent, says Saint Augustine; Ideo magna Dei potentia mentiri non posse;
And therefore it is from the greatness of Gods Power that he cannot lie, that
he cannot deny himself, says Saint Augustine.

Thirdly, Others do more briefly say, that God can do all those things which
are not repugnant to the nature of God; and this answer they do collect out
of Saint Augustine, Idem in l. de spiritu and litera.
where he says, that God cannot do any injustice, because he is Justice it
self; neither can he deny himself, because he is faithful, as the Apostle
speaks; nor die, because he is life; nor he, because he is Truth; nor sin,
because he is the chiefest goodness; nor do any corporal acts, such as are
to walk, to move, to eat, and the like, because he is an immovable Spirit,
and the purest act, with whose nature, no corporal act can square, to fall on
him. And so as Saint Augustine says, in another case, Alij atque alij, alijs
atque alijs loquendi formulis vsi sunt; Diverse men have framed diverse answers
unto this point, and I out of them all, do with the most learned Zanchius say,
Zanch. de natura Dei.
that God can do all those things, Quae neque apud deum, neque sua natura
simpliciter sunt (...): Which are neither contrary to the Nature of God, nor
yet of their own Nature simply impossible to be done.

What things are repugnant to the Nature of God.
First, of the first kind are all those actions, which though they may be done
of the creatures; yet have they no place with God; and such are to sin, to
move, to die, to walk, to eat, and all other humane acts; and so whatsoever
does repugne the nature of God, or be any ways contrary to his essential, or
personal properties: because, to be able to do these things, were to euert
and destroy the nature and properties of God: And therefore God cannot imagine
any folly; because this does contradict his Wisdom: August. ser. 119. de temp.
he cannot suffer any sin to go unpunished, because that is contrary to his
Justice; neither can he lie; because that is contrary to his Truth; neither can
he do, but he must be just good, wise, pure, invisible, incorporeall, and so
forth; not only because that to be able to do this, would argue a defect of
power; but especially because the denial and sublation or taking away of these
properties, is the negation and destruction of the Essence of God: (...); For
the taking away of the essential properties, Theodor. Dialog. 3.
is the abolishing of the nature; says Theodoret: And therefore these, and the
like things, which do repugne with the essential, or personal properties of
God, cannot be done, on Gods part, nor by God, though they may be done by the
creatures; because in very deed, he cannot by any means will to do these
things: for none can naturally will, That God cannot will those things that are
contrary to his nature.
to be contrary to that which naturally he wills to be; as no man can
naturally will himself to be miserable; because every man naturally wills
felicity: and therefore seeing God is naturally Wise, True, and Good, it is
most absolutely necessary, that he should always Will Wisdom, Truth, and
Goodness; and cannot possibly Will the contrary, as Theodoret does most
excellently say; Dominus Deus nihil vult eorum, quae non sibi suapte natura
insunt, potest quaecunque vult, and vult quae naturae suae apta and
conuenientia sunt: God cannot will any of those things, which are not naturally
agreeable unto him; he can do what he will, Jdem quo supra.
and he can will whatsoever is apt, and agreeable to his nature.

Secondly, Of the second kind, are all those things, How contradictories do
destroy each other.
which implie a contradiction: as for a thing to be, and not to be together,
because all such things (...) and (...), sunt (...), are simply, and absolutely
impossible; as contradictorily repugning, and so destroying one another; and
therefore can no ways be done: Quia res talis, non potest habere rationem
factibilis; Because, such a thing, has not the reason, nor way, nor
possibility of being done, as Thomas says: and therefore we do say that God
can neither do, nor will contraries, as good and evil; (which in a nature
absolutely, and every way simple, cannot subsist: Trelcatius in thesi de Deo.
and Amand: Polan: in Synt:
) nor yet contradictories, as to make a thing to be, and not to be; which in
the essence of God; void and clear from all falsehood, and most perfect in
all truth, can have no place; says Trelcatius.

And so we do affirm, that God cannot make, that a triangle should be a
triangle, and yet not to have three angles, or corners; or that a triangle
should have three angles, and not three angles; that that which is, while it
is, should not be; that those things which have been made, How all antiquity
teaches that God cannot do contradictories. Mark 10.27.
should not have been made; that a body should be a true natural body, and
yet destitute and free from all those natural proprieties, which do as it
were constitute, the very being of the thing; and without which the very
diffinition of the thing, is taken away: and all other such things, which do
simply implie a contradiction. And we find all Men, in all ages, to have
confessed, and to have taught the same truth; for venerable Bede, expounding
those words of Mark, All things are possible with God, says; it is not so to
be understood, that the covetous and proud men, can with their pride and
covetousness, enter into the kingdom of Heaven; because this is impossible
unto God; because neither the Covetous, nor the Proud, as God himself does
testify, by the mouth of his Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
shall inherit the kingdom of God; but that it is possible for God, (as often
it has been done, and we daily see it to be done) so to work, in the hearts
of these wicked and ungodly Men, that by the preaching of his Word, and the
working of his spirit, they should be converted, and weaned from the love of
worldly things, and be inflamed with the longing desire of Heavenly things;
Venera. Bid in. Marc. C. 11.
Et a perniciosa superbia, ad humilitatem saluberrimam reducantur, And be
reduced from their aspiring, and pernicious pride, unto that most wholesome
practice of humility; in which words, he plainly shows, that God cannot
do those things which do implie a contradiction: So S. Augustine, against
Faustus the Manachie, and in many other places, and so Aquinas, The most
horrible impieties of them, which say God can work all contradictories.
and all Schoole-Diuinitie, do all of them teach the same truth: And they
that say otherwise, do but mock both God and Man; and take away all truth
from Divine and Humane things, and lay open a most insufferable and
vnrepairable gappe, for all wicked Heretics: for God which is immutably and
infallibly true, and (...), and the very truth it self, can neither will,
nor suffer, that an affirmation should be a negation, that an yea should be a
nay, or that truth and falsehood should be mixed together in the very
selfsame simplest subject: as this is fire, and not water, and this very
selfsame thing, is water, and not fire, at the same time, and in the same
respect; or this is bread, and not flesh; and this is flesh, and not bread,
that is, one thing to be two distinct things, at the selfsame time, and in
the selfsame respect; I say it is impossible for the truth of God to do;
Aug. cont: Faustum. l. 26. c. 81
as Saint Augustine does most excellently and largely show against Faustus
Manichaeus.

And therefore, I cannot sufficiently wonder, who has bewitched our
Vbiquitaries, which do so stiffely contend, that the Body of Christ remaining
a true body, and yet notwithstanding may be, and is, every where, illocall,
invisible, and so forth: for if these things be not merely contradictorie,
That every true natural Body must be local.
I know not what are: because every true body has his quantity, and is
defined, and hedged by the bounds and limits of his quantity; and because
every body is limited with the bounds of his ternarie dimensions, length,
breadth and depth; and so measured and finite: and the taking away from any
body, the proper passion of a body, namely the possessing of one place, must
necessarily include, the destruction and abolishment of the form, nature, and
essence of the body it self; for as much as the property of occupying one
place, flows of necessity, from the very form and nature of a body; and
cannot, by Gods power, be separated therefrom, without destroying the subject
it self, on which it depends. And that this confining of a body to one
place, is a true property, or proper passion of a body, it is evident, because
it suiteth with bodies, universally, only, and always, and is reciprocated
with a body, (as the Schools speak:) and therefore, it must necessarily
follow, that every body must be local, and no humane body can be illocall:
for if you take away the localitie, or place from a body, you must first take
away the quantity and the limits of his trinarie dimensions, and you must take
away, the definition of a body: and so of necessity a body shall be no body:
and therefore S. Augustine, Aug. in ep. ad Dardan.
does most rightly say, Toll locorum spatia corporibus and nusquam erunt, and
quia nusquam erunt, non erunt: take aw^y the spaces of places from bodies, or
bodies from places, and they shall be no where, and because no where, not at
all: but to be, and not to be at all, is so contradictorie, as I know nothing
more: and therefore, for the body of Christ, to remain a true body, and to be
every where, or in diverse places at the same instant, is a thing impossible to
be done: God himself by all his power cannot do it, and that not by reason of
any want of active power in God, but by defect of a passive power in the
creatures, which cannot suffer their essential, and concomitant properties, to
be torn away from the maine stock, without the destruction of the whole
nature, and essence of the subject.

Furthermore, seeing that contradictories cannot be done, because they take
away all the reason and possibility of being; That no creature can be made
capable of Infinitenes or of infinite perfections.
it must needs follow that God in this respect cannot make an Angelical
nature, or the soul of Man, or any body, or any other created thing, to be
actually infinite: because no creature is capable of Infiniteness, but is ever
shut up, and bounded within his limits, and is ever distinguished from his
Creator, by this perpetual and immutable condition, To be finite: and
therefore a creature which is produced from nothing unto his being, is not
capable to be Coeternall unto his Beginning or Maker, Damasc. de fide
orthodox. C. 8.
as Damascen does most rightly s^y.

And here I cannot silently pass, a most memorable saying of a late
Schoole-Doctor, which is this, Communicauit Deus creaturis eas perfectiones
quas conditio creaturae ferebat, etc. God has communicated unto his creatures,
all such perfections, as the condition of a creature was able to bear, but
those perfections which exceeded the state and condition of a creature, that
is, which suffer not a creature to be a creature, (as to be every where,
Infinite, Omniscient, and such like,) God neither ought, nor could communicate
unto his creatures; he ought not, because the creature had been then, in all
things, aequall to his Creator; and he could not, because then he should have
made his creature to be a God; and so there should be two Infinites, and two
Gods, which is impossible: and this not being able to do these things, does
most manifestly show, the most incomprehensible excellency of God; to whom no
creature, either in essence, or perfection, or in virtue, or in continuance, or
in any such things, can be equal: and it shows also the defect of every
created thing, that it has not the reason of the possibility, or capacity to
be made such a thing, that is, infinite; to be made a God.

And therefore, hence likewise it must needs follow, that the omnisciencie, and
omnipresencie of the body of Christ, Casman: Phischolog: part 2. p. 13.
cannot stand: for seeing the essential properties of God, (as is his infinite
vbiquitie) are the very essence of God; and that neither these properties,
without the essence, nor yet one essential property, without the others, can
indeed be communicated to any other, and that (as the Prophet testifyeth) God
will not, nay, cannot, Esaias 42.8.
give his glory unto another, by reason of the incapacitie of every creature,
to receive or comprehend in himself his Glory; that is, his Dietie: and the
inability of God, That it is impossible for the body of Christ to be every
where at the some time.
to make a creature to be a God: therefore it is impossible, that the Body of
Christ, should be endued with this infinite vbiquitie. And seeing, that God is
essentially infinite, and so every where according to his essence, wholly in
every place; and that that which is of the essence of God, cannot be in any
creature, no not in the humane nature of Christ; therefore neither the
omnisciencie, nor the omnipresencie, nor any other essential property of God,
can be in the humanity of Christ; for that nature which is never transferred
into the essence of another, can never obtain the essential properties of the
other into it self; but the humane nature of Christ, though it be capable of
the infiniteness of the Word, by inhabitation, and personal union, yet was it
never changed into the essence of the Word; neither did it ever receive into it
self, as into a subject of inheriencie, the essentiali properties of the Word;
Quia propria non egrediuntur sua subiecta, because proprieties do never pass
their own subjects; and a created thing (as I said before) cannot possibly
receive into his essence, infinite proprieties; otherwise it should be a
creature, and no creature; a creature because a humane body, and no creature,
because omniscient, omnipresent, and infinite, which is most absurd, which is
incredible, and which is impossible.

And so you see all those things which are said to be impossible to be done, An
observation about the phrases of being able, and not being able to do things.
Zan hius de potentia Dei.
or which God cannot do; touching which, we must note this one thing,
concerning the phrase of being able to do things, that there are many things,
which though in respect of the name, may seem to express some power, yet in
respect of the thing it self, it plainly shows a great defect; as, to be
able to suffer, to be able to dye, and such like; according to the form of
speaking, they do seem to express some power, but in very deed they do
show a defect of power: so, not to be able to dye, not to be able to suffer;
according to the phrase of speech, they do seem to deny a power, or to show
an impotencie, whereas indeed they show the greatest power; and therefore
those affirmations, to be able to die, to be able to suffer, in regard of the
substance of the matter, have the force of negation, because they deny him to
be impassible which can suffer, and him immortal which can die; and those
negations not to be able to die, not to be able to suffer, have the force of
affirmations; because they affirm him to be eternally life, which cannot die,
and to be the purest act, which cannot suffer: And therefore we say, that God
cannot do those things, which imply and signify a defect of power, and which
is infirmity, and not power, to do them: for there is nothing which God cannot
do, which is of power to do; and there is nothing which he can do, which is
of infirmity to do it, Bonauent. Ser. 35.
says Bonauenture. And so much for this point, how far the power of God
extends.

CHAP. III. The proof of Gods infinite power, and the answering of the
chiefest objections that are made against the fore-shewed truth of this
Doctrine.
Having well considered, and understood all the premises, it will not be hard
for me to prove unto you the most infinite and absolute power of Almighty God;
that is, how mighty and how powerful he is in all things: for,

First, the Scriptures are most copious in this point. The Prophet David says;
How the Scripture shows the power of God. Psalm. 93.5. Psalm. 89.9.10.14.
The waves of the Sea are mighty, and rage horribly: but yet, the Lord that
dwells on high, is mightier. And again, he says, O Lord God of Hosts, who
is like unto thee? for thou rulest the raging of the Sea, and thou stillest the
waves thereof when they arise; thou have a mighty arm, strong is thy hand, and
high is thy right hand. This shows him to be mighty, and we can show him to
be Almighty; for though the Hebrews have no word that signifies Almighty, yet
do the Greeks elegantly, and with a full significant word, call him (...), He
that can do all things, Wolf. Musc. de omnipot. Dei. p. 402. Genesis 17.1. Exodus
15.3. Genesis 18.14.
as Wolfgangus Musculus says: And therefore in the vulgar version we read,
Ego Deus omnipotens, I am the Almighty God; And again, Omnipotens nomen eius,
Almighty is his name: And therefore the Angel said unto Abraham; Numquid Deo
quicquid est difficile? Is any thing too hard for the Lord? And the Angel
Gabriel says unto Mary, Non est impossible apud Deum omne verbum; that is,
Luc. 1.37. Bernard. hom. 4. sup. Missas.
No word is impossible with God: That is, (says Saint Bernard) whatsoever God
says, or will command; that he can easily do. If it were as easy for men to
do, as it is to say what they will, then should no word be impossible unto
them neither: but there is a great deal of difference betwixt speaking and
doing amongst men, as Ajax says; Satius est contendere verbis, Ouidius Metam.
l. 13.
quam pugnare acie: But with God it is all one, to do, as to say; to say, as
to will. And so Euthymius interprets it; Whatsoever the Lord says, that is not
impossible for him to perform; because he did but speak, and they were made;
he commanded, and they stood fast. Psalm. 33.9.
But others, putting thing, in stead of word, do more rightly interpret it,
saying, that with God nothing shall be impossible. Barrad de annunt. Angel. l
7. c. 9. Page 332.
And so our last Translation has it, because the Hebrew word Dabar, does
signify both word, and thing, says Barradius: And our Savior plainly says,
All things are possible with God; And therefore it is apparent, that he is not
only strong, and mighty, ^ar. 10.27.
but also strength it self, and Almighty.

Secondly, not only the Word of God, The works of God do show the power of
God.
but also the works of God, do sufficiently prove the power of God: And not
only his wonders which he did in Egypt, and at the Red Sea; but also all
other works which he did from the beginning, and which he now does, do most
apparently show him to be a most Omnipotent God: For as the Prophet David
says, The Heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm. 18.1. John 5.36.
and the Firmament shows his handy work. And the works that I do, they
testify of me, says our Savior. Of these works of God, Saint Hillary says;
If there were none other reason, yet this it self would serve, to show how
wonderful, and how worthy of all praise, are the works of God; that they are
mightily effected, and most powerfully done by him, which is not only said, to
do a thing, but mightily to do it: for he could, and can with his sole word
produce any thing out of nothing, by creation; to continue the species, or any
kind of things by propagation, and to change any complete substance into
another, by his powerful operation; as he did Lots wife into a pillar of salt:
Genesis 19 26.
yea, he could, and can work all natural things, supernatural things,
miracles, and wonders (as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 72.18.
Which only does wonders;) and impossible things in Nature; i. e. such as do
exceed the usual and ordinary course of Nature, Josua 10.12. Dan 3.27.
as to make the Sun to stand, the fire not to burn, the heavy Iron to swim
upward upon the top of the water; and of stones to raise up Children unto
Abraham: Math. 3.9.
because the order, and the Law of Nature, is in all things to give way unto
this God of Nature, which can do any thing that implies no contradiction, or
repugneth not with the definition of the thing, as Aquinas says.

How the power of God appears at all times.
And this power of God appeared in the beginning, when God created all things of
nothing; it appeared ever since, and will appear until the ending, by
preserving them that they turn not to nothing; Quia fundauit Deus mundum supra
nihilum, vt fundaret se mundus supra Deum: For God established the World upon
nothing, that the World might rely, and settle it self upon God: And
therefore the Prophet David says, The Earth is weak, and all the Inhabitants
thereof: Psalm 75.4.
he bears up the pillars of it; and it will appear in the end of all things,
when God shall burn the world, raise the dead, bless the good, and condemn
the bad into everlasting fire.

Thirdly, the Fathers do most excellently extol (for they cannot fully
express) this power of God: For Saint Hillary says, Hilar. in Psalm. 144. p.
635.
Haec Dei prima and praecipua laudatio est, etc. This is one of the chiefest
commendations of God, that he has no mean, nor measure in him; for his power,
his virtue, his Majesty, How the Fathers do extol the power of God.
cannot be contained in place, determined by time, expressed in words, nor
conceived in our best understandings; our sense is too narrow, our wit is too
blunt, and our tongue too mute, to perform so great a task; because as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 145.3.
There is no end of his greatness: And therefore Saint Augustine says
excellently well, Demus Deum multa posse, and nos intelligere non posse; That
we must grant, that God can do many things, Aug. ep. 3. ad Volusian.
which we must confess, we can neither search out the cause, nor understand
the things; because the power of God is not to be straightened within the compass
of our shallow apprehensions: How great a sin it is, to say any thing
derogatory to the Power of God.
And therefore we ought to take great heed, that we neither say, nor conceive
any thing derogatory, to the power of God: for if it be ordained by humane
Laws, that he which should offend the Majesty of a King, though but a man,
should leese his head for his offense; Quis finis contemnentium diuinam
omnipotentiam erit? Bernard. in cant.
What should become of those that contemn, or speak against the Divine
Omnipotency of God? says Saint Bernard.

Fourthly, the very Heathens, Poets, Philosophers, and all of the learneder
sort, have confessed as much as is sufficient to prove the Omnipotent power of
God: Homer Odyss. 3. p. 65.
for Homer brings in Minerua speaking unto Telemachus, and saying, (...); Which
is as much, as if she said; That God can do what he will, and none can
hinder him: because, as one says; Ille potest solis currus inhibere volantes,
How the very Heathens have extolled the Omnipotency of God.

Ille velut scopulos, flumina stare facit.


He can hold still great Phoebus wayne, as he did in the days of Joshua, at he
did at thered Sea. And stoutest streams he can restrain.

For though (as another says) Astra regunt mundum, These sublunary Creatures
are generally guided by the influences of the higher Orbs; yet to conclude the
verse, he says, Sed regit astra Deus, The God of Heaven does rule the Heavens;
and rides upon the same, as upon an Horse: And therefore an Indian
Gymnosophist, being demanded by Alexander what God did, answered; What he will,
Et quod nulla creatura facere potest; And what no mortal man, nor any other
creature can do: for they daily saw how by his strength unlikely matters have
come to pass, the greatest imaginations have been dissolved with a blaste,
and dying hopes have been revived from their graves: and therefore they all
concluded, that, Ludit in humanis, diuina potentia rebus.

It was an easy matter for Gods power, to deal with all Creatures as he
listed; and,

How the very Devils have confessed the Power of God
Fifthly, the very Devils do acknowledge, and confess, and obey the power of
God; For, Apollo being demanded of one, by what means he might withdraw his
wise from Christianity; He answered, That he might easier fly through the
Air, or write in the Sea, then pluck her away from Christ; because God was so
powerful to preserve her, Heydelf. de Deo: c. 2.
and the Devil so weak to strive against him; and being requested by Augustus
to inform him who should succeed him in his Empire, he said; Peucerus de
Oracul. p. 251.
(...),
(...), etc.


The Hebrew Child has enjoined me to silence, and I must henceforth obey his
voice: And so the Scripture says; That the unclean Spirits were obedient unto
Christ; and as the wind and the waves, so did they yield, and do whatsoever
Christ commanded them. Much more might be said to confirm this point; Quid
satis est cui Roma parum?
but all is but to light a candle before the Sun: And therefore seeing I am
no ways able to speak what I ought, to express this truth; I will proceed,
to see what the sons of darkness can say against this truth. And as I
distributed the adversaries into four Classies, so I find their objections to
be fourfold.

The Objections that are made against the truth of Gods Power, answered. Sol.
That there be three sorts of Agents.
First, the Naturalists say, that Ex nihilo nihil fit, Of nothing, nothing can
be made: And therefore God is not so powerful, as to be able to produce things
of nothing, and to create this Universe out of no subsistent matter.

To this I answer, that there be three sorts of workers; 1. The lowest. 2. The
middlemost. 3. The highest.
or else 1. Artificers. 2. Nature. 3. God.


First, Artificers can do nothing, but of some body composed of the first
matter, and a substantial form, into which they do induce an accidental
form; as the Baker out of his Dowe makes Bread; or the Potter out of his
tempered clay, makes his Potts.

Secondly, Nature, or natural Agents, can likewise produce nothing into being,
unless there be first some matter, or subject, whereunto it induces a
natural form; so from any natural seed, is composed the fruit of each seed
in his kind, as, from the seed of man is ingendered man: and so of all other
things whatsoever.

And in these two sorts of Agents, the axiom is most true, That God can
produce any thing of nothing.
that of nothing, nothing can be made; but of the third agent, that is, God, it
is most false: for as he did create all things of nothing, so he can yet as
easily of no being, produce any being; as he can change any complete being,
into another. And therefore, to argue from the creature, unto the Creator, or
from the faculty of the inferior agent, unto the faculty of the superior; as
the Artificer cannot do it, therefore Nature cannot do it: or Nature cannot
do it, therefore the God of Nature cannot do it; is most absurd and foolish:
Every Child can perceive the weakness of this childish reasoning.

Secondly, desperate men do object against their own souls, that Gods
Justice is so strict, that it requires every sin, and the least sin to be
punished with eternal death; and their sins are not only few, and small,
but most infinite in number, even as Manasses says; My sins are more
innumerable then the sands of the Sea: and most heinous for quality, even as
Caine says; My sin is greater, Quam vt venia merear, Genesis 4.13.
Then I can deserve pardon; or, they be greater then can be pardoned: And
therefore say they, God cannot pardon our sins; but we must die, and die
eternally for our sins.

To this I answer, first, Sol.
that it had been very good for them they had reasoned so before they had
sinned; for that perhaps might have preserved them in the fear of Gods
Justice, and now from the despair of his mercy: But seeing they did not, I say
secondly, that it is most true, that the least sin of man can never be
pardoned, without an intermedium, a means wrought, That no sin can be
pardoned without satisfaction.
or interposition of satisfaction, betwixt the sin of man, and the justice of
God; therefore did the wisdom of God devise and decree, that by the death of
one righteous man, in whom there should be no sin, and who for his worth
should be of that inestimable value, as to be infinitely more then
counteruailably sufficient to pay for all sins, the Justice of God should be
satisfied, and every sinner that would lay hold upon his death, might thereby
be freed from all his sins, of what number, or nature soever they be: And to
this end he sent his only begotten Son, Gal. 4.4. That the death of Christ
is a sufficient satisfaction for the greatest sins.
made of a Woman, and made under the Law; to die for our sins, and to redeem
us that were under the Law, from the eternal curse of that Law. And his death
is of that inestimable value, that Saint Cyprian says, Modicam guttam
sanguinis Christi, propter vnionem hypostaticam pro redemptione totius mundi
sufficisse; 1. Circumcisione. 2. Oratione. 3. Flagellatione. 4. Coronatione. 5.
Clauorum in fixione. 6. Lancea.

The least drop of his blood, by reason of that hypostaticall union with the
Godhead, had been sufficient to make satisfaction for all the sins of the
whole World: And yet we read, that he shed his blood, not once, but often,
six several times at least; and that not sparingly, but abundantly, it
trickled down to the ground; In which respect the Psalmist says, Luke 22.44.
Psalm. 130.7.
that with God there is Copiosa redemptio, Plenteous redemption; or
satisfaction enough in store, to pay for the sins of any one, be they never
so great, be they never so many: And therefore there is no sin so great, no
sins so many; but God can, and that without any impeachment of his Justice,
easily remit it, if we can but lay hold upon the death of Christ; and he can
work this faith in us, to believe in Christ, if we can but believe he can do
it, as our Savior showed unto him, that came, and said; Domine, si quid potes,
Sir, if thou can do any thing; Mark 9.23.
saying, Si potes credere, If thou can believe, thou may easily see that I
can do that which thou requirest, and all things else whatsoever they be; they
be possible for me to do them; only believe, and thou shall see it.

Thirdly, the Vbiquitaries say, he that can do all things whatsoever, can
make the Body of Christ to be in every place wheresoever, but God can do any
thing whatsoever; Ergo. He can make the Body of Christ to be every where, and
so inuest the manhood of Christ with Divine properties.

I answer to the minor proposition, Nam qui indefinite deum omnia posse dicit,
non tantum bona sed etiam horum contraria mala quae diabolo conueniunt
comprehendit. Theod. Dialog. 3.
that he can do any thing, that is possible to be done, or that has the
possibility of being, but not all things whatsoever they be: For he that says,
God can do all things simply, and indifinitely; he comprehends not only
the good, but also all the contrary evil, which are properly belonging unto
the Devil, and not to God, says Theodoret: And therefore I say, that there be
two sorts of impossible things which God cannot do.

First, some things, ex hypothesi, in respect of the constant truth of Gods
decree, and the immutability of his will; God can do nothing contrary to what
he has decreed.
and thus God could not conceal from Abraham, what he intended to do unto the
Sodomites, nor do any thing unto Sodom, until Lot was delivered from them:
because God had decreed, to reveal all that unto Abraham, and to preserve that
righteous man, from the destruction of the Sodomites; and thus all things are
said to be impossible for God to do, which do contradict the Eternal
purposes and decrees of God; because he is a God that changes not, Mal. 1.
and that cannot alter the things that are gone out of his mouth.

Secondly, some things are simply impossible for him to do, God can do
nothing that is contrary to the nature of God.
Propter constantem Dei naturam, By the reason of the constancy and
immutability of Gods Nature; Thus God cannot be said to do any humane Acts,
because he is an Eternal Spirit; nor to sin, because he is the chief good,
nor to do any contradictory, because he is Truth it self. As I showed unto
you before.

But against this, it may be objected: First, that God can do to draw nigh
unto us, James 4.8.
and to depart from us; and so to perform many other such like humane acts.
Ergo, these things are not impossible for God.

To this some men do answer, Sol.
that humane acts are not to be ascribed to Gods Nature, because he is an
incorporeall substance; and yet they are not to be secluded from his Power, but
are all performed through it; because God works all things in all his
creatures: for, in him we live, and in him we move, Act. 17.28.
says the Apostle. But indeed, when these, or the like things are spoken of
God, they are to be understood metaphorically; as the Sun is said, to enter
into the house, when his heat and beams do shine therein; so God is said, to
draw near unto us, when we do perceive the influence of his grace and
goodness: All humane Acts are done by the power of God, not by the Essence of
God.
and so I say, that although humane acts are done of us, through the Power of
God; yet they cannot be done by the Essence of God.

Secondly, they may object that God can do evil; First, because Potest Deus
and studiosus praua facere; Arist. Topic. l. 4. c 5. Genesis 22.2. Genesis 11.2. 2 Samuel 16.10
secondly, because God commands many evils to be done; as Abraham to kill his
son, the Israelites to rob the Egyptians, Shemei to curse David, and such
like; and thirdly, because the Apostle says, that he works all in all. Ergo,
He can do evil.

Sol.
To these I answer; First, that the Philosopher says this, not positiuely, but
according to the opinion of the vulgar: or,

That whatsoever God does or bids to be done, is no sin.
Secondly, I say, Quod potest Deus praua facere, sed minime praue; That God can
do those acts, which done of us were evil, but done by him are no ways
evil: for sin is the offending of his will; or, the not obeying of his
command: and therefore whatsoever God wills, is no sin: and whatsoever God
bids, or wills to be done, is no sin; nay, if Abraham had not done it,
he had sinned; because he had not obayed Gods command. And thirdly, to the
words of the Apostle I say, that in every sin there is two things to be
considered, 1. The Act. 2. The deformity of the Act.


First, for the Act, we confess, that to do any natural Act, we do receive
power and ability from God: for, in him we live and move, Act. 17.
as the Apostle says.

Secondly, for the deformity of the Act, which is indeed formale peccati, i. e.
the sin; we say this is wholly from our selves: Quia peccare est deficere in
agendo, vel aberrare arecto scopo: Because the sin is a deficiency, and an
erring from the scope or will of God: and God is the efficient cause, or the
cause of the efficiency, and not of the deficiency of any thing; And therefore
he cannot be said to work the sin, though he gives the power to do the Act.

Ob.
But you will say, that he can do whatsoever he will, but he wills the
sin, for if he were not willing, no sin should be; Therefore he can do the
sin.

Sol.
I answer, that we may be said to will a thing, two ways.

1 Properly, for it own sake, because it is desirable; and thus, God only
wills good. 2 Improperly, for some other good, that may arise from that thing
that is willed; so a man wills many times the loss of a limb to save his
life: And thus God may be said to will evil, not properly for it own sake,
Aug. de cor. and great. c. 7.
but in respect of some other good, that may from that evil accrue: So he
willed that Judas should be elected, Ad opus damnabile, vt per illud, opus
venerabile (i. e. mors Christi) compleretur, To perform a damnable work, that
by the same a most comfortable work might be effected: and so he willed the
death of his Son, that he might be the Savior of all his servants: and this
is rather to be called a voluntary permission, then an effectual willing of
sin.
Thirdly, they may object, that he can work contradictories; of it self, can
more easily do that which is impossible by accident: but to make those things
which have been, not to have been; is only impossible by accident: and
therefore, God can make them, not to have been; and if he can make those things
which have been, not to have been, he can work contradictories.

To this I answer, Sol.
that he can reduce all things into nothing as he has created all things of
nothing; and that he could, not to have made any thing of those things that he
has made; because he is, liberrimus agens, so free an agent, as that he might
have chosen, whether he would have done any thing or nothing; but now being
done, I say that he cannot do, but that they have been done: for as it is most
true, That it is simply impossible to make those things which have been made,
not to have been made.
that Quaedam habuerunt rationem possibilium, dum erant fienda, iam autem
deficiunt a ratione possibilium, dum sunt, facta; As some things have had the
possibility of being done, while they were to be done, and have now lost the
possibility of being done, being already done; So it is as true, that God had
the possibility of not doing them, before they were done: but now he has not
the possibility of causing those things, which have been done, not to have
been done: and therefore though for that which has been, not to have been,
Quod factum est infectum fieri non potest.
may in some respect be said, to be impossible by accident. Yet, if we consider
a thing past, in respect of its being past, and not to have been past; it is
not only impossible of it self, but absolutely impossible; yea, Magis
impossible quam mortuos sustitare, A great deal more impossible to do, then
to raise all the dead, says a Father. And therefore S. Augustine says
excellently well, that if any man would say, If God be omnipotent, let him make
those things not to have been done, which have been already done; Aug. contra
Faustum Manic. lib. 26. c. 8.
He should consider that this is all one, as if he should say; If he be
omnipotent, let him bring to pass that those things which are true may be
false; even in the same respect for which they are true, which is impossible
for God to do.

And so you see, that notwithstanding all that can be said, it is most
apparently true, that although God can do, Omnia possibilia, that is, not all
things that are possible for him to do, as a man may be said to be able to
do, what is possible for a man to do; for this were but a circulation, to say
God can do all things that he can do, or that are possible for him to do;
but simply and absolutely all things that are possible to be done; yet, that
he cannot simply and absolutely do all things whatsoever; as especially those
things which are repugnant to his Nature, or do imply a contradiction.

Ob.
But then the Vbiquitaries will object, that for the Body of Christ to be in
every place, is no contradiction; for they do not say, that it is
circumscribed in one place, and uncircumcised in every place, which indeed is
contradictory; but they say, that as the Deity is limited to no place, but is
unlimited in every place; so is the body of Christ, by reason of the
hypostaticall union; John 1.14.
(the word being made flesh) not bounded to any one place, but every where, in
every place wheresoever the Godhead is; and herein (say they) there is no
contradiction: no more then to say that God is every where, which is none at
all.

Sol.
To this I answer, first, that to prove their Vbiquity, from the union of the
word with the flesh, is, Fallacia non causae vt causa, A fallacy, when that is
alleged for a cause, which is indeed no cause; for that hypostaticall union
does not make that one nature should be the other, nor that one nature should
be as the other: but that each one of them should entirely preserve their own
properties; else had the Divine nature been passible, and the humane nature
impassable; which is most absurd.

Secondly I say, that a thing may be said, to be every where, either, 1. Per
se, by it self, and so nothing is every where but God. 2. Per accidens, in
respect of some other thing: and thus the Body of Christ, How, and in what
fence, the body of Christ, may be said to be every where.
in some sense may be said to be every where; because it is united to that
Dietie, which is every where: and further I say that a thing may be said to
be, or to do by accident Two ways.
1. Properly. 2. (...)


First, That is said to be, or to do properly by accident, which has
another virtue, properly communicated unto it; as water made hot, has the
heat of the fire communicated unto it.

Secondly, That is said to be, or to do improperly by accident, which is only
joined unto that, which is of it self.

In the first sense we say that the body of Christ is every where, that is, in
the word, but not in himself; and so we yield the Soul of Christ to be
omniscient, and the humanity omnipotent, in the word, but not in it self, And,

In the second sense, we find the Church, by reason of our spiritual
conjunction with Christ, to be called Christ, and to be said, to have risen
with Christ, and to fit with Christ in the Heavenly places. And again, I say
that whatsoever is either in one place, or every where must be either 1. In
substance, without quantity, as the Angels. 2. In quantity, as all corporal
things. 3. Or in Virtue and quality, as the Sun, by his virtue,
and powerful operations, may be said, after a sort to be every where; and
thus the Body of Christ in respect of the Hypostaticall union, propter virtutem
seruatricem, by reason of Salvation, it works every where, may be said to be
every where; but to say, that the Body of Christ, as it is a body quantatiue,
or limited with the bounds of quantity, is every where, I say it is
impossible; because nothing that is quantatiue can be infinite, but is
measured, and bounded by place alone, Quia numerica vnitas corporis finiti non
potest consistere sine continuitate, because (as Julius Scaliger says) the
numericall unity of a finite body, Scal. extra: in Card:
cannot consist without continuitie, e. i. except it be always contained in
some place, and we find all the Fathers of this judgment, as Cyrillus
Alexandrinus in Dialog: de trin: l. 2. Tertull: de trinit. p. 610. Ambros in
luc: l. 10. c. 14. Vigilius l. 4. contra Eutychet: Fulgentius. l. 2. ad
Trasimundum, and many others, which that thrice worthy Zanchius, Zanch. l. 2.
c. 6. de not. dei. p. 107. etc.
together with their sayings and arguments, does set down at large.

And therefore, though to say, that that which is no quantity, nor
circumscriptiuely local in one place, (which is only proper unto the
Godhead) is in every place, is no contradiction; yet seeing the Body of Christ
is a true natural body, and that every true body, whiles it remains a body,
must consist of his certain and limited dimensions: and therefore of
necessity must be local in one place, and cannot possibly be in every place;
to say that this is every where, is the greatest contradiction that may be: for
to say that that thing which is, and must be in one place, is in every place,
is such a contradiction as I know nothing more; and therefore if they will
prove him to be every where, they must first disprove him to be a true and a
natural body, and so prove the Body of Christ to be truly and really made a
God: And indeed so they seek to do. For,

They say, that although he assumed a true body, yet it follows not, that it
must still retain his true dimensions: but that now, by reason of its
glorification, it is freed from those necessary conditions of a Mortal body,
and really endued with these Divine properties; and this is no more
contradiction, to say that God can disrobe a body of its natural properties,
and to indue it with supernatural faculties; then it is to say that God at the
day of Judgment, will change our Mortal bodies, to be Immortal, and cause
this corruption to put on incorruption, as the Apostle speaks: 1 Cor. 15.
and therefore, God can make the body of Christ to be every where.

That the glorification of a body does not take away the dimensions of a body.
To this I answer; first, that the glorification of any body does no ways
disrobe him, or free him from the essential properties of that body, in
respect of its quantity or substance: for that were, to make a body to be no
body; but only in respect of the qualities, whereof those that are ill, shall
be quite abolished, and those that are good, shall be more fully perfected:
and therefore I say that the bodies of the Saints glorified, or clarified,
shall be but changed in qualities, as endued with agility, and subtilitie,
perfection, and immortality, and shall no ways be changed in substance, but
shall still remain the same quantatiue bodies, bounded and limited with their
natural dimensions: for otherwise, how should Job see God with the same eyes
that he had, Job 19.27.
while he lived? or how should we believe the happiness and felicity of our
bodies, if our bodies be so changed, as to be no bodies at all? they shall
therefore be endued with most unspeakable perfections, and most perfectly
clarified from all imperfections, but they shall not be disrobed of their
natural proprieties.

Secondly, I say that the Body of Christ, That the body of Christ was a
glorified body from the first moment of his conception.
though in some things it is otherwise now then it was before his resurrection,
and ascension, as to be impassible; for now, Christ being dead dies no more,
says the Apostle, and to be more apparently glorified, being then as it were
vayled from our eyes, that we could not see the true glory which indeed it
had; yet was it truly a most clarified and glorified body from the first
moment of his conception: for it was freed from all corruptions, and endued
with all possible perfections; and as the Apostle says, Colloss. 2.9.
The fullness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ bodily: And therefore how could
it be, but that a body united to the Godhead, should be a body glorified from
the first moment of that Hypostaticall union? and so it appeared at his
transfiguration on mount Thabot, Matthew. 17.2.
which was not an imposition, or donation of more glory unto the body of
Christ, then it had before; but a translation of the veil, which covered his
Glory, by reason of their inabilitie to behold it, and a reueiling of his glory
unto them; and yet we must needs confess, (unless we will fall into
damnable heresy) that this glorified body of Christ, was then quantatiue and
limited, with the bounds of his dimensions; else how could the Prophet say,
that a Woman should compass a Man? or how could the Evangelist say, that he
was laid in a manger, that he walked from one place to another, that he was
nailed to the cross, Luke 12.16. John 19.18. Matthew. 27.60.
that he was laid in his grave, and so forth, if his body was not limited in
any one place, but incircumscriptiuely in every place?

Therefore it is most manifest, that the Body of Christ though glorified in
Heaven, is still a true Physical body, limited with his dimensions, and
locally seated in his appointed place: and therefore also, seeing to be in one
place, and to be in every place at the same time, and in the same respect, is
such a palpable and gross contradiction, I conclude that it is impossible,
that God should be able, to make the Body of Christ to be every where, in
Heaven and in earth both at once.

What the Jesuits say to prove Transubstantiation
Fourthly, The pontificialls and Jesuits do object, that to transubstantiate
bread into flesh, or to make the Body of Christ, to be in all those places
where the Mass is celebrated, and received of all those that do communicate,
does no ways implie a contradiction, Bellar: de Euch: l. 3. c. 4. p. 7. 297.
in 8^^.
Quia ad esse circumscriptiue in loco nihil requiritur nisi vt locatum sit
commensuratum suo loco, and non vt sit alibi in alio loco, For that it is
enough to show the verity of a body, that it be circumscribed, and limited
with its place, and time; and not that it cannot be in many places, so it be
circumscribed in every place where it is, says Cardinal Bellarmine: and
therefore God can make the body of Christ, to be in many places, though not to
be in all places: for to be in many places, does include that he must be
prescribed, and limited in all those places where he is, which is agreeable to
the definition of a true Physical body, but to be in all places, does
necessarily conclude, that he must be unlimited and indefinite; which is
altogether contrary to the definition of a true body: and thus; Clodius
accusat Maechum, Catilina Caethegum: Ephraim will be against Manasses, and
Manasses against Ephraim, and both against Judah.

Sol.
But to this I answer. First, That to prove the vbiquitie of the body of
Christ, That we must not argue from the power of God, unless we can prove it
from the will of God.
or the transubstantiating of the bread into the flesh of Christ, or any other
point of Divinity, Non licet theologice, and positive argumentari, ab
omnipotentia Dei, nisi praecedat voluntas Dei, It is no ways sufficient to
argue Theologically and positiuely, from the power of God, that he can do such
a thing, unless we have some testimony of the Will of God, that he has
done, or will do, such a thing: for the secret things belong unto the Lord our
God, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but those things which are reueiled, belong to us, and to our Children for
ever.

Secondly, I say, that in this their assertion of transubstantiation, That
there is a double contradiction in the doctrine of Transubstantiation.
there is a double contradiction, which is impossible by all the wit of man to
be reconciled.

First, that Bread still remaining Bread, should be notwithstanding
transubstantiated into Flesh.

Secondly, that the Body of Christ numerically one, and locally in Heaven,
should be notwithstanding many thousand complete bodies, and in many thousand
places all at once: and what greater contradictories, can there be then these?
for,

First, we confess God can produce any thing of nothing, God can change any
substance into another substance. Genesis 19.26. John 2.9. Matthew. 4.3.
and reduce any thing into nothing; and he can change any thing into any thing;
as to make stones Bread; Bread flesh; Lots wife, a pillar of salt, or any such
like thing: for we see God has done it, and Christ changed the Water into
Wine; and the very devil knew he could do it, when he said unto our Savior,
If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But that
God should change one substance into another; and yet, that this thing which is
said to be changed, should remain still the same thing which it was, before it
was changed; and be also the substance of the thing into which it was changed;
it is so impossible, as that there can be nothing more: for when the Lord
changed one substance into another; Exodus 4.3.
as Moses his rod into a Serpent, or Lots wife into a pillar of Salt, or the
Water into Wine: Neither of these, That the substance changed cannot be what it
was, and what it is both at once.
were both the things at the same time: but when Moses rod, was a rod, it was
no Serpent; and when it was a Serpent, it was no rod; so when Lots wife was a
Woman and Lots wife, she was no pillar of Salt; and when she was a pillar of
Salt, she was no more a Woman, nor Lots wife; and so when the Water was Water,
it was no Wine, and when it was Wine, it was no Water: and therefore to say
that the bread remaining bread, should be transubstantiated or changed into
Flesh, and so for the same substance at the selfsame time, to be two
several and distinct things, Bread and Flesh: I say that, as it is incredible
for us to believe it, so it is impossible for God to effect it. For if these
things be not direct contradictories, I know not how any man can name any
contradictories in the world.

But to this they answer, that they do not say that the same thing is both
Bread and Flesh, for they all know that this is impossible to be done: but they
say that the substance of the bread is vanished and reduced into nothing, which
God can do, as we all confess; and that the sole substance of the Flesh is
there remaining, to be received of the believer, of the Communicant, be he
faithful or Infidel; yea, of Rattes, Kattes, Dogs, and Serpents, if they
can come by it.

I answer, that I do admire the subtilty of Satan, to sow such seed of strong
delusions, to deceive simple souls: and the more I follow these sophistical
shifts, the more I do abhor these vile deceits: for I beseech you mark what
absurdities, what contradictions, what impossibilities do still more and more
accrue: for,

The most ridiculous absurdities that must follow the doctrine of
transubstantiation.
First, the substance of the Bread is gone, Nihil est, It is reduced to nothing;
and yet behold, the color of it is there, the form of it is there, the taste
of it is there; thine eye sees it Bread, thy hand feels it Bread, thy mouth
finds it Bread, and yet it is no Bread. I would feign know what Aristotle, or
all the School of Philosophers would define this to be; Bread, and no Bread;
Bread in the judgment of all the world; and no Bread in the judgment of all
the Jesuits of the world: a strange thing that God should work such strong
delusions. I find that Satan did them often, but never that God did ever the
like: and yet this is not all: for here must be Flesh to, though neither seen,
felt, heard nor understood: If it be so, let all men judge; For I blush to say
more in a point so clear.

Secondly, we confess, that as God can produce any substance of nothing, so he
can multiply any one thing into a thousand things; Matthew. 14.17.
as he did the five loaves to feed five thousand men, besides women and
children: but that he should make that which is numerically one, Mar. 6 36.
to be five thousand things, and yet to be but one thing, John 6.5.
at the very same time that it is five thousand things; and that that one thing
should be, but in one place, and yet at the same time should be in five
thousand places; we say there cannot be a greater contradiction: How Christ
multiplied the loaves of Bread.
for as when the loaves were multiplied, if he multiplied them in number, he
did not multiply them to be more then five; and yet to remain but five; or if
he multiplied them in quantity (which I rather think) he did not make them to
be of a greater quantity, and yet to remain of the same lesser quantity that
they were before; for this is merely contradictory; to be more in number then
five, and yet to be but five: or to be augmented in quantity, and yet to be but
the same in quantity; but when any part thereof was diminished, he still
multiplied the remaining quantity into the same quantity as it was before, or
greater; as he di^ the meal in the barrel, and the oil in the cruse of the
Widow of Sarepta, in the days of Elias. 1 King 17.16. That it cannot be that
one body should be but in one place, and yet to be in a hundred places at the
same time.
And herein is no contradiction: even so, if God should multiply that one body
of his Son, to be five thousand bodies, it cannot be, that it should be one
and five thousand both at once, or if he should cause that body which is in
one place, to be in five thousand places all at once: it cannot be, that it
should be in five thousand places, and yet but in one place; as every child
almost may easily perceive.

And therefore seeing it is apparent, that Christ has but one true, natural,
and Physical body, else we shall make Christ to be no Christ; and that it
cannot be, that that one should still remain one, and yet be five thousand
millions of bodies; and that that one must still remain in one place, Act.
3.21.
as Saint Peter shows, and yet should be at the same time, in many millions
of places; I hope it is as plain, that these things are merely contradictory,
and so simply impossible to be done; as that the Sun does shine at noonday.

But they instance, D. Hall relates it.

How they relate lies to boulster up their errors.


that one Xauier (as Tursellian reports it) was at the same time seen, both in
a Ship, and in a Boat: and I read it alleged out of Bellarmine, that he
relates the like of Saint Antony of Padua, that he was seen Preaching in a
town of Italy, and at the same time was seen in another place; and therefore
a body may be commeasured to its place, and yet be in other places at the same
time.

To these Instances I say, not only with Plautus, Plaut. Amphyt.
Tun'id dicere audes, quod nemo vnquam homo vidit, nec potest fieri, tempore
vno, homo idem duobus vt locis simul sit? How dares any man say, that which
never any man did see, nor can be; that at the same time, one man should be in
two several places? but I say also with Aquinas of the locality of Angels,
Thom. in Mag. l 1. d. 32. q. 1. art. 1.
that by the same reason, that he might be in two places, he may be in a
thousand places at once; and therefore if Xauier or Antony was in one place, it
must needs be the Devil that was in the other place, to teach such lies to
delude the credulous.

But yet still they will reply, that we must not conceive of Divine things, and
especially of Gods Power, by the rule of humane reason; For subtle Philosophy,
does many times obscure pure Divinity; and Aristotle's Books of Nature, have
caused many a Doctor to corrupt the Scripture: for he made Aetius to follow
Arrius says Socrates: Socrat. l. 2. c. 28. Eccles. hist.
and therefore we must attain unto the knowledge of these things, not by the
reason of man, but by the rule of Faith, That Faith sees what Reason cannot
conceive.
which Philo calls Fidem oculatum, so well-eyed, and so sharpe-sighted, that
as the Eagles eye, being aloft in the clouds, can notwithstanding epsy, Sub
frutice leporem, and sub fluctibus piscem, Under the waves a Fish, and under
the shrubs a Hare; so Faith, here in earth, can notwithstanding search into the
deep things of God in Heaven, and can most perfectly see those things which
humane sense can no way perceive.

Aug. ep. 3. ad Volusian.
To this I answer with Saint Augustine, that we confess God is able to do,
as he has done, many things which we are not able to understand: in all which
we believe them, without searching the reason of them; because in such things
(as Saint Augustine says) Ratio facti, est potentia facientis; The whole
reason of the deed, is the Power of the doer; but, as for the joys of Heaven,
though it passes all understanding to know positiuely, what excellent things
are there, yet negatiuely we do certainly know what is not there; for there
is no sorrow, no sickness, no evil; and as we know not perfectly what God
is, yet we do certainly know what he is not, for he is not the Sun,
Danaeus Isagog. de Deo.
the Moon, nor any other creature whatsoever: Even so though we know not, the
height or greatness of Gods Power, what infinite things he can do, above what
we can speak or think: yet we know many things that he cannot do; which I
have showed unto you before. And therefore that bread should be
transubstantiated into flesh, and yet remain bread; that accidents should
subsist without their subjects; that Christ should sit in Heaven, and lie in
the Bread which we do eat; that he should be visibly there, and inuisibly
here: and that he should be one, and many; continued, and discontinued; entire
in one one place, and at the same time entire in a thousand places; and such
like assertions, which do overthrow, We believe not the assertions of the
Jesuits, not because we know not how they may be done, but because we know
they cannot be done*
not only the humanity of our Savior Christ, but also the order of things,
and the very principles of Nature, and do exceed the bounds of all sense and
reason, and repugne indeed the very truth of God; we can in no ways believe
them, not because we know no reason how they may be done, for so we believe
many things, as all the mysteries of our Faith; but because we have many
reasons, even out of the Word of God, to assure us, that these things cannot be
done: And so much for the chiefest objections that are usually made against the
truth of this Doctrine of Gods Power.

CHAP. IV. Of the useful application of this Doctrine of Gods Power.
YOu have seen the truth of this Doctrine of the Power of God; it may serve
for many especial ends: As first, for the confutation of a world of errors,
and the cutting down of many infinite heresies, especially those whereof I
have already spoken; and therefore I need not say any more of them in this
place.

Secondly, this Doctrine of Gods Power, A great comfort to the godly, that God
is able to deliver them. Math. 10.16. Dan. 3.17.
may serve for the consolation of the godly: for they are environed with many
enemies, they are sent as Sheep into the midst of Wolves, and they are hated
of all-men for Christ his sake; but (as the three Children said,) We know that
God is able to deliver us from the burning fiery Furnace, and from the hands of
all that hate us, and to preserve us blameless until the day of the coming
of Christ: And therefore though we be beset with enemies on every side,
Bosquier. de incruent. victor Christi. p. 567.
especially the World, Tanquam Syrena dulcis, Like the alluring Mermaides; The
flesh, Tanquam Dalila blandiens, Like a false flattering Dalila; and the
Devil, Tanquam Leo rugiens, Like a roaring Lion, that do seek by all means
to destroy us; Presentemque viris intendunt omnia mortem: Virgil. Aeneid. l. 1.
Revel 2.10.


Yet, we need not fear any of those things, that we shall suffer: Quia non
plus valet ad deijciendum terrena paena, quam ad erigendum diuina tutela;
Because all the power of darkness is not so able to suppress us, as our
gracious God is to support us: for otherwise, Si Diabolus nocere posset,
quantum vellet, aliquis iustorum non remaneret; If either Satan's malice, or the
hatred of wicked men, or the fury of bloodthirsty Tyrants, might prevail
against the godly servants of Christ, so much as they would, then not a
righteous man could remain upon the face of the Earth; but God can put a hook
in their nostrils, and say unto them, as he says unto the Seas, Hitherto shall
thou goo, and no further: Romans 8.31.
And therefore, If God be with us, we need not fear who be against us; Quia
mayor est, qui est in nobis, quam qui est in mundo, 1 John 4.4.
Because (as Saint John says) He is greater, and stronger, which is in us,
then he that is in the W rld.

Even so we have the lusts of our own flesh, the messengers of Satan, 1 Pet.
2.11.
that do buffet us, and fight against our souls, and make us many times, when
it compells us to do the evil that we would not do, and to leave undone the
good that we would do; to cry out with the Apostle, Romans 7.19.
O wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from this body of death? or
who shall preserve us unto eternal life? And to say with the Poet, O terque
quaterque beati, queis ante ora patrum contigit oppetere;

O happy had we been, had we died before we had sinned; but if we cast our
eyes to look upon Gods Power, we may be presently comforted, because the
Saints of God, though they be shaken, and sifted, and winnowed, like wheat,
yet are they kept, not by their own strength, for so they should soon fail,
1 Pet. 1.5.
but by the Power of God (says Saint Peter) through faith, unto salvation: And
this indeed is the sole comfort of all Christians, that we shall never perish;
John 10.28.29.
because our Father which gave us unto Christ, is greater then all, and none is
able to take us out of his Fathers hands. This is that Foundation which
remains sure, and therefore happy is that man, which buildes upon this
Foundation.

Thirdly, this Doctrine of Gods Power, may serve for the reprehension of the
wicked: for he can destroy all the workers of iniquity, Math. 10.28.
and cast both body and soul into Hell fire; And therefore will ye not fear
to offend so great a God? Remember, I beseech you, what he has done to the old
World, to Sodom, That the wicked should fear to offend thi^ powerful God.
Deuteronomy 29.19.
and Gomorrah, to Cora, Dathan, and Abiram, to Pharaoh, Judas, and many more;
remember that he can do whatsoever he will do; and remember what he says.
He will do unto them that hear the words of the curse of the Law, and yet
will bless themselves in their hearts, saying; We shall have peace: And let
these things move you to be humbled before the mighty ^and of God; and to cause
you here to fear his power, 1 Pet. 5.6.
that herea^ter you may not feel his anger: For, Heb. 10.31.
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; and they
that now go on in sin, and make but a sport of iniquity, without either
believing his truth, that he will punish sin, or fearing his power, that he
can punish them, shall then find and feel, that it had been better for them
never to have been borne; or to have had a millstone hanged about their necks,
and to have been cast into the midst of the Sea, then to have broken the
least Commandment o^ this powerful and Almighty God. And so much for the
first attribute of God here expressed, that is, his Power: and now follows
the second attribute, which is, Gods Goodness.

CHAP. V. Of the Mercy of GOD, and wherein the same chiefly consists.
YOu have heard of the Power of God, 2. Attribute. i. e Gods goodness.
we are now to see how God proclaims his Goodness; according as he had
promised before, I will make all my goodness to pass before thy face. Exodus
33.9.
A Doctrine far more comfortable then the former: for not he that can, but
he that will help us, is best unto us; and he that is willing to do what he
can, though it be but little, is far more dear unto us, then he that can do
much, but will do nothing: but the power of God shows that he is able, and
this goodness of God proves that he is willing to relieve us; and therefore
the goodness of God is the anchor of our hope, and the foundation of all our
comfort; and it is well coupled with the former attribute: for in vain were
his willingness to help us, unless he were able, and in vain were his
ability to help us, unless he were willing; the former being but a
fruitless wish, and the latter but a graceless power: Prou. 25.11.
but both joined together, it is like apples of gold in pictures of silver; And
therefore, as before he had showed his power, that he was able to help us, so
now he shows his goodness, that he is most willing to relieve us: And to
show how plenteous his goodness is, he expresses the same by seven special
and several particles. I will handle them by Gods help, as they lie in order.

The first particle of Gods goodness here expressed, is, that he is
Merciful: Touching which, we must understand, that Mercy in God, is no
passion, nor any grief of mind, conceived through the misery of another;
Cicero in 4. Tusc. Senec. de clem. Aug de ciuit. Dei. l. 9. c. 5. Jer. 31.20.
(as mercy is commonly defined to be) unless you understand it, per (...),
improperly spoken, only for our better apprehension; as when he says, My
bowels are troubled for Ephraim: Or as it is ascribed to the Son of God
Christ Jesus, who does indeed condole our miseries, and sympathize in our
afflictions; because he is man as we are, and subject to all like passions as
we be, sin only excepted: Heb. 2.17.
But mercy in God, signifies a propensitie, and a readiness of mind, to
help not only the misery, but also the wants, and all the defects of man.
Mouet enim pium iudicem, fragilitas considerata peccantium: Cassiod. in Psalm.
What mercy in God signifies.
For he remembers that we are but dust; and therefore he pittieth our
frailties, and he helps our infirmities; yea, he cries and calls, and
seeks after us, when we by our sins do run away, and fly apace from
him: For,

When Adam by the wisdom that he got by the Serpent, had found him a way to
run away from God, and so to fall into the depth of despair, and as a man
without help, without hope, void of grace, and full of sin, to become free
amongst the dead, excluded from God, and exiled from the Land of the living, a
slave of Satan, which makes me abhor to think of it, and a firebrand of
eternal destruction, which makes me tremble for fear of it; yet then behold
the neuer-dying mercy of the God of all mercy, did presently find the means
to bring him back again by repentance, and to make him an example of his
mercy, to many babes that were as then unborn; for he that does neither
slumber nor sleep, would not suffer him to lie and sleep in sin; but
presently runs after him, that was running from him; and cries, Adam where
art thou, Gene. 3.9.
and what is become of thee? and he did this; not because he knew not where
Adam was, which knows every thing; but because he would have Adam to know
where himself was, in a state, destitute of all grace, and replenished with
all miseries; that so finding himself in the depth of such miseries, he might
the more earnestly seek unto God for mercies.

So he did to David, Examples of Gods infinite mercies, in the speedy seeking
after his Saints when they h^d sinned against him. 2 Samuel 24.10. Jonas 1.4.
when David had offended him in numbering Israel, he stirred up his heart, that
it presently smote him, that he might not be smitten of God; so to Jonas, when
he began his journey to fly from God, he sent the winds to fly after him,
and as a purseuant to arest him, and to bring him back again to him, who
otherwise would have posted to hell: so to Peter, when he denied his Master,
and swore that he knew him not, to whom a little before he had sworn that
he would die with him; he looked back upon him, to bring him back again to
repentance, and he caused, the Cock to crow, Matthew. 26.74.
the dumb Beast to cry, unto him, to send him out, to cry unto God for
mercy, and to weep so bitterly for his sins, vt lachrymae lauarent
delictum, that God seeing his sorrow and tears, might be inclined to hear
his prayers; and so he does unto us all, when we do fall, and sin, and
sleep and sin, he sends his Preachers still to call us, and his own spirit
into our hearts, to move us to repentance, not to be repented of, and to
promise to show compassion on us, and to receive us into his grace, if we
would show our contrition, and promise to leave and to forsake our sins.

O then, that this merciful seeking of us, That the goodness of God seeking
after us should move us to seek unto God.
would make us to seek unto him, while he may be found; and that this calling
after us, to recall us from our miseries, would make us call unto him for
mercy: for if we do seek and pray for Grace, we may assure our selves,
that our Salvation is nearer then we think; but if we still continue in
sin, we may be sure our damnation is nearer then we fear: for the day of
grace passes away, and the night of death comes, when no man can work: and
therefore while it is to day let us hear his voice, John 9.4.
so lovingly calling us, so carefully seeking us, and so mercifully offering to
receive us, to kiss us with the kisses of his mouth, to deliver us from the
shadow of death, and to bring us unto the land of everlasting life; such is the
neuer-dying streams of the mercy of God; it is like a boundless Ocean, there
is no end of his goodness: and therefore Saint Bernard in admiration thereof,
cries out unto God: saying, Quam dives es in misericordia, and magnificus in
iustitia, and munificus in gratia, Domine Deus noster? O how rich art thou in
Mercy, how magnificent in Justice, and how bountiful in Grace, O Lord our God?
Nam tu munerator copiosissimus remunerator aequissimus and liberator pijssimus.
For thou art a most liberal bestower of Heavenly gifts, thou art a most
righteous rewarder of humane works, and thou art a most gracious deliverer of
all that trust in thee; Yea, and besides all this, Tu gratis respicis humiles,
tu just iudicas innocents, and tu misericorditer saluas peccatores; thou
do freely exalt the lowly, thou do justly deliver the innocent, and thou
do most mercifully save those sinners that do put their trust in thy
sufferings: and therefore, Quis similis tibi? O Lord, our God, who is like unto
thee, that when there was not a righteous man upon the face of the earth,
August. in p. 48
not one that did good, no not one, thou sentest one from Heaven, that by him
we might be all brought unto Heaven? So great is the Mercy of God toward us
poor wretched Men.

And it is observed by Divines, that the Mercy of God consists chiefly in
these three things, viz.

In Wherein the mercy of God does chiefly consist.
1. Giving of Graces. 2. Forgiving of sins. 3. Qualifying punishments.


The first, extends it self unto all creatures; the second unto his Saints;
and the third both to Saints and sinners; both to the best of Men, and to the
worst, both of Men and Angels.

For the first, the Prophet David says, the earth is full of his mercy,
quoniam bonus est vniuersis; because all creatures taste of his goodness;
Psalm. 147.9.
He opens his hands, and fills all things living with plenteousnesse, and
he feeds the young Ravens that call upon him: and therefore, omnia in te
sperant domine, the eyes of all things do look on thee O Lord, and thou
give them their meat in due season.

For the second, that is, the forgiving of sins, Many particular points to be
considered in the forgiving of sins.
we shall the better understand it, if we do, though but briefly, consider
these few particulars; as

First, Who forgiueth; God omnipotent, who has no need of sinners, Et qui nec
melior si laudaueris, nec deterior si vituperaueris, Aug. in Psalm. 1 Who
forgiueth.
and which is so eminently good, and so immutably blessed, as that all which
thou can do, cannot better him; Quia sum and perfectissime bonus; because
he is so good that he cannot be better; nor any thing that thou can say or
do, can make him one jot the worse, as Saint Augustine speaks.

Secondly, What he does forgive; crimen laesae maiestatis, 2 What God
forgiueth.
sin, horrible sin, and high treason against himself; a thing so heinous,
that it would require a whole treatise to express it.

Thirdly, To whom he does forgive this; 3 To whom he forgiueth.
to his own creatures, and servants, that do (...), rebel and make war
like those slaves (whereof Iustine speaks) that made war against their
Masters, against him that made them, Psalm. 69.9.
that feeds them, and that blesses them, even then when they curse him.

Fourthly, How he does forgive all this; 4 How he forgiueth.
by laying all upon his Son, The rebukes of them that rebuked thee, are
fallen upon me, says Christ; yea by slaying his innocent Son, to save us
his wicked servants: for the Scripture shows, that the Son of God was made
the Son of Man, that the sons of sin, might be made the sons of God;
the Lord of glory was vilified, that the sons of shame might be glorified,
and the Lord of life was delivered unto death, that the sons of death might
be restored to life: and thus as the Christian Poet says, -- Deus emit
sanguine seruos
Mercari exiguo nos piget aere Deum.
God shed his blood, to purchase those,
That for his love give not a rose.
So strange is man's ingratitude unto this most merciful God.

Fifthly, How often he does forgive us; every day, 5 How often he forgiueth.
and that many a time God knows, and none knows but God, for who can tell
how often he offends? septies in die cadit iustus, Prou. 24.16.
the just man falls seven times a day, says Solomon; and if the just man
falls seven times, then certainly the wicked falls seauenty times seven
times, by their lewd thoughts, wanton looks, idle words, cursed oaths, wicked
lies, and sinful works.

6 After what manner he forgiueth.
Sixthly, After what manner he forgiueth all this; so a^ that he forgiueth all,
never to recall them, never to remember them; for as the Distich says, Larga
dei bonitas, veniam non dimidiabit,
Aut nihil aut totum, te lachrymante dabit.


He forgiueth all, or none at all: Et semel remissa nunquam redeunt, and sins
once remitted are never after questioned: for I the Lord change not, Malac. 3.6.
and my gifts are (...), without repentance; and therefore sins once remitted
are never after to be found: Iere. 50.20.
for the iniquities of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none;
and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found, Esaias 44.22. Ez^ch. 18.21.
but they shall ever be forgotten: for I will do^ away thy transgressions as a
cloud, and thy sins as a myste, and I will put away all thy wickedness out
of my remembrance, says the Lord: that is, they shall be clean forgotten, as
a dead man, out of mind, or as the thing that had never been.

Psalm. 77.10.
And yet the Prophet David says, quod non obliuiscetur misereri Deus, that God
cannot forget to be merciful, for though the wrath of the Lord endures but
the twinkling of an eye, Psalm. 136.
yet as the same Prophet says, (and that seven and twenty times in the same
Psalm) the mercy of God endures for ever; and so it is everlasting: and that
(as the Schools observe) two manner of ways:

The mercy of God is everlasting two ways. Gab. Biel. in sent. did. 1. q. 5.
First, Essentially, for God is mercy; quia in Deo nihil est quod non sit ipse
Deus, because the Divine essence, identificat sibi omnia quae sunt in diuinis,
does identifie to it self all things that are in the Dietie, and so God has
not things as qualities, but is the things that are spoken of him, as his
essence; and therefore mercy being of himself, and ever himself, it must
needs be eternity it self.

Aug. sup. Gen: l. 5.
Secondly, Relatiuely, as it respects the creatures, and makes impression on
them, Quia omnia priusquam fierent, in notitia facientis erant, because the
creatures had their being in God, according to his eternal purpose (as the
Apostle says) from all eternity; Ephesians. 1.4.9. and 11. v.
quia nihil noui accidit deo, because no new thought can happen to the mind of
God, and so ever they needed mercy, to continue and to accomplish that their
intended being; and therefore thus ex part ante, the mercy of God is
everlasting, because it is from all eternity: and now since they had their
being, and so long as they shall have their existence, in there natural
causes, they do and ever shall need his mercy; and therefore also thus, ex
part post his mercy is everlasting, because endless. And therefore, Let the
house of Aaron now confess, Psalm. 117.3.
that his mercy endures for ever, and Let the house of Judah now conf^sse, that
his mercy endures for ever, and therefore also, let us all confess, that (as
the Prophet says) he cannot forget to be merciful.

O most excellent argument of exceeding comfort, he can forget our sins, (as
I she^ed you before,) but he cannot forget to be merciful; Can a Woman forget
her own child?

Improbus ille puer, crudelis tu quoque Matter: Virgil: in Egl.
If she should, that child were very unhappy, and that Mother full of cruelty,
yet because some Progne-like have done it; therefore, Though a Woman should
forget her own child, yet will not I forget you says the Lord.

Well then, here is a comfort unto us all; That the chiefest and the surest
comfort of every man is to rely upon the mercy of God.
for if thou be a man full of sins, here is a God full of mercy; and in
very deed, this is our chiefest comfort; for be we Kings, Nobles, rich or
poor; yet after all our pomp and power, when we see our selves, and consider
our own sins; when death approaches and sickness seizes upon us, we
must all say with king David, Miserere mei deus; have mercy on me O God
according to the multitude of thy mercies, or with poor Bartimaeus; Marc.
10.48.
have mercy on me, O Jesus thou son of David. Et hoc tutissimum est, and this
is the safest course for all sinners, as Bellarmine wisely acknowledges, totam
spem, totamque fiduciaem in sola misericordia dei reponere: to place all our
trust and confidence in the sole mercy of our most merciful God: for
otherwise, who dares present his best works to be judged without mercy;
because (as Saint Augustine says) Vae laudabili vitae hominum, si remota
misericordia discutiat eam Deus, Woe to the purest life of the holiest Saint,
if God should discuss the same without mercy? And therefore after we have
gone with the prodigal child, Luc. 15.13.
into a far country of wickedness; after we have wasted all our goods, all
our graces, and have committed all our sins; yet let us not despair, Genesis
4.13.
and say with Caine, My sins are greater then can be pardoned, but let us
rather return unto our Father; and say with the prodigal child, Luke 15 21.
Father I have sinned against Heaven, and against thee, and I am no more worthy
to be called thy Son; Yet I pray thee make me as one of thy hired servants:
or else let us cry with Saint Augustine, Aug. l. Meditat.
saying, O bone Domine, noli attendere malum meum, ne obliuiscaris bonum tuum;
O good Lord, do not remember my wickedness, lest thou should forget thine
own goodness; but consider, O my God, that although, Ego admisi vnde me
damnare potes, tu non amisisti vnde me seruare soles, I have committed that for
which thou can damn me, yet thou have not forgotten that whereby thou art
wont to save me; and though my sins be many, yet thy mercies are more; and
the more thou forgiuest unto me, the more it will express thy goodness, and
the more bound I shall be, to be thankful unto thee: For he loves much, Luk
7.47.
to whom much is forgiven, says our Savior Christ.

How God qualifieth punishments. James 2.13. Niceph l. 17. c. 3.
For the third, that is, the qualifying of punishments, we find that in his
greatest anger against sin, mercy rejoices against judgment, and that (as
Nicephorus says) Vindicta gladium misericordiae oleo semper acuit, He steepeth
his sword of vengeance, in the oil of mercy; and he does always punish, less
then our iniquities deserve: Ezra 9.13.
as Ezra says. And this he does not only unto the elected Saints, but also to
the reprobates, and to the devils themselves. For,

First, Touching the Saints, it is apparent that their punishments do proceed
from mercy; for when they are afflicted in this life, Heb. 11.
they are chastned of the Lord that they should not be condemned of the world.

Secondly, touching the reprobates, both men and Angels, both here and
hereafter, the mercy of God abateth much of that punishment, which they have
most justly deserved. For,

Ruffin. eccl. hist.
First, Here God being not like unto Theodosius, that put all the Thessalonians
to the sword, for the offense of few; nor like that angry Goddess Pallas, --
Quae exurere classem
Virgil. Aeneid. l. 1.
Argiuum, atque ipsos voluit submergere ponto,
Vnius ob noxam. --
That would destroy the whole Navy of the Argiues, for the only offense of
one only Ajax, but (if it be lawful to use the comparison) as the Persian
General spared Delos for Apollo's sake: So God in this life, spares whole
multitudes of wicked men, for a few good men's sake; Act. 27.24.
as he spared the lives of all the people that were in the ship with Saint
Paul, for the love that he bare unto this blessed Apostle; and, as he would
have spared five wicked Cities; Genesis 18.32.
if but ten good men had been found therein; and sometimes he spares the
sins of the wicked, for the very love he bears to the persons of the
ungodly: and though they still sin against him, yet does he still spare them;
to see if his patience, Romans 2 4.
and long sufferance will at any time lead them to repentance.

Secondly, hereafter, Quia non datur summum malum, August. in Enchirid: cap.
12.13. That God in the strictness of his Justice might inflict more punishment
upon the damned souls then he does.
quoniam malum non inhaeret nisi in subiecto bono: Because the being both of
reprobates and devils, is ever good: therefore the mercy of God pittieth that
good, and cannot be severed from it; but still loves the same, even in its
greatest torments; and in that respect, does ever mitigate some part of that
torment, which the sinner justly deserved, and which God in the rigor of his
Justice might rightly have inflicted on him.

But you will say the Scripture teaches, that they shall be punished in
measure, and that they shall have judgment without mercy: And therefore how
can they be said then, to have the least jot of the mercy of God; Luke 16.24.25.
Dives being denied one drop of water to cool his tongue?

I answer, that they shall never be eased of the least jot of that punishment
that is once inflicted upon them; but I say, that God never imposes so much
torments on the damned, as in the strictness of his Justice he might justly
do; and yet are they said, to have judgment without mercy, because the
greatness of their insufferable pains, does swallow up all sense, and
perseverance of mercy, and makes them think that God could not possibly
inflict greater torments on them then they endure. Za^^h de not. Des. l. 4 c.
4. q. 4 p. 378.
Whereas indeed, (if they perceived it) it is most certain that they are not
punished, according to the height of that measure of punishment which their
sins deserved, and which God justly could inflict upon them; but that in them
also the Apostles words must take place, that mercy rejoices against judgment.

Psalm. 25.10.
And therefore, well might the Prophet David say, that all Gods paths are
mercy, Psalm. 145 9.
and that his mercy is over all his works; because there is no place which can
be imagined, wherein there is not some impression of Gods mercy: nor any
Creature, that can be named, which can say, that he does no way taste of the
mercy of God: for God pittieth his own works, even then when he punishes our
works, that is, our sins.

And yet here we must observe, that the mercy of God is twofold: 1. General.
2. Special.
For,

First, the general mercy of God, is that which extends it self toward all,
and over all Gods works; but

That God is only merciful to them that love him.
Secondly, the special mercy of God, is only extended unto the godly, and
wholly denied unto the wicked: for so the Lord himself says, I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy; that is, not upon all; but upon some, whom I
will, and who are those? the Scripture shows: Exodus 23 36.
for Moses says, Miseretur Iehoua seruorum suorum, The Lord will repent
himself, or be merciful unto his servants; Deuteronomy. 32.36. Psalm 103.3.
and the Prophet David says, that as a father pittieth his own children, so
will the Lord be merciful to them that fear him; Exodus 20.6.
and so God himself says, I will show mercy on them that love me; but they
that fear him not, that serve him not, that love him not, he will deal with
them in his fury; and his eye shall not spare them, Ezekiel 8 18.
neither will he be merciful unto them.

That the wicked have no part in the special mercy of God.
And therefore, though God be merciful unto the wicked, and shows many
singular effects of his mercy unto them; as to create them, and to preserve
them from many evils; yea, from many sins, which otherwise they would fall
into; and to bestow many gifts and graces upon them; yet have they no part, nor
portion in this special mercy of God; because (as the Lord himself says of
the wicked; Mal. 1.10.
) Non est mihi voluntas in vobis, God has no pleasure, he has no delight in
them.

And no marvel; for seeing the mercy of God springs from the love of God,
as may be collected from the words of those Jews, who seeing how Christ sighed
and mourned, and wept over Lazarus, John 11.36.
said presently, Behold how he loved him; and as the Apostle plainly shows
in the 3. of Titus, and the 4. verse: and 1 Timothy 1.2. It is most apparent that
where there is no special love of God, there can be no special mercy of God:
That God loves not the wicked.
but the special love of God, is only extended unto the Saints, and chosen
children of God; and not unto the wicked reprobates; as might be easily showed
from those especial effects of this special love of God; such as are their
eternal election, their effectual vocation, their singular preservation, and
the bountiful donation of many heavenly gifts and graces, which he gives not
unto the reprobates; (as I purpose by Gods help more fully to declare in some
other place:) and therefore the special mercy of God is only showed unto Gods
Elect, and none else: for, he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, Rom 9
18.
and whom he will he hardens.

Well then, That we should carefully examine whether we love and serve God or
not.
beloved Brethren (seeing the special mercy of God, pertains only unto the
Saints, let us all examine our selves, and if we find we fear not God, we
serve not God, we may assure our selves, that although we daily feel many
infallible arguments of Gods general mercy and favor toward us; yet are we
destitute of the least assurance of this special mercy of God; I know many
deceive themselves herein; Psalm. 69.23.
and make those things, which should be for their advantage, to be unto them an
occasion of falling: when as continuing in sin, they notwithstanding, do
appropriate unto themselves, this special mercy of God; which indeed is only
proper unto those Saints that fear him; for though after a general manner, he
is merciful unto all, to make them, and to preserve them, and to bestow many
blessings upon them: yet after this special manner, to forgive their sins,
and to bring them to eternal life; he is only merciful to them that fear
him; to them that love him; to them that serve him; as the Scriptures do most
plainly show unto us:

And therefore I would advise all wicked men, either to serve the Lord, or not
to think that they have any part in this mercy of God: for I do here
confidently assure them, that if they do still continue in sin, they shall
not taste of this Cup of mercy; but shall be forced to wring out even the dregs
of that red Wine of the wrath and indignation of God. Psalm. 75.8.
And so much of the first Particle of Gods goodness: Merciful.

CHAP. VI. Of the Grace of God: and what the same chiefly signifies.
What is meant by the word Gracious.
THe Second Particle of Gods Goodness, here expressed is, that he is Gracious:
a word, very large and ample in signification; and it is diversely taken: but
chiefly it signifies one that is, 1. Amiable. 2. Placable. 3. Liberal.


First, It signifies that affability and loveliness of person, whereby the
beholders are inflamed with the love and sweetness thereof; for when Christ is
said to have increased, in wisdom, Luke 2.52. First, he that is lovely, is
gracious.
and stature, and in favor, or in grace (as the original has it) with God
and man; the meaning is, that he grew to be more and more amiable, and beloved
both of God and men; and therefore we may say that a sweet, affable, amiabl^
man, is a gracious man.

Secondly, he that easily remitteth offenses is gracious.
Secondly, it signifies that readiness of mind, to forgive all the offenses
done against one, and to receive the offender into his favor again; for when
Noah, Mary, and other are said, inuenisse, (...) apud deum; to have found grace
with God; it signifies that they found him favorable unto them; both in
remitting of their offenses, Genesis 6.8.
and in receiving them into his favorable countenance; Luke 1.30.
and therefore, we may rightly say, that he which easily receives offenders
into his favor, is a gracious man.

Thirdly, a bountiful man is a gracious man. Genesis 33.5.
Thirdly, It signifies a bountiful giving, and bestowing of any gifts; for so
the Scripture shows, all the gifts of God, whether temporal or spiritual,
to be the graces of God; as Jacob said unto his brother, these be the children,
Quos Deus gratificatus est mihi, which God of his free grace, and favor gave
unto me; and so it is said of Barnabas that when he saw (...); the grace of
God, Acts. 11.23.
i. e. the gift of God bestowed upon the believers, he rejoiced: and therefore
a liberal and a bountiful man, may be truly said, to be a gracious man.

Now in all these respects, we find God to be most gracious. For,

First, It is said of Christ, That God is gracious in all respects. Psalm. 45.3.
that he was fairer then the sons of men, and that his lips were full of
grace; yea, so full of grace, that all men wondered at the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth: And indeed, howsoever he was contented to become
Sanguinolentus propter te; without form or beauty for our sake; Esaias 52.3.
Quando velauerunt faciem eius, when the accursed Jews, buffeted, and
bespitted his glorious face, yet was he always gloriesissimus in se, most
gracious, and glorious in himself: and so the Apostles testify, that they saw
his glory, John 1.14.
as the glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth: And
yet they saw the same but in part, because of the infirmity of their Flesh,
while they lived here in this life.

But Christ is the image of the Father, Heb 1.3. That God is of an
incomprehensible beauty.
and the ingraued form of his person; and therefore God must needs be gracious,
and amiable, yea, so amiable, so lovely, that it is no marvel the very Saints
and Angels do so vehemently desire to see the face of God, in Jesus Christ; and
do esteem it their chiefest happiness to be always contemplating upon the
same. And the reason why all men are not inflamed with the love of his
excellent Majesty is; because they know him not, they have not tasted how
sweet the Lord is; Quia ignoti nulla cupido: for if men did know how graecious
and how amiable the Lord is, they would with Saint Paul, long to be dissolved
that they might but see him.

Secondly, God is not only gracious in himself, That God is easy to be
reconciled
but he is also placable and reconcilable unto us; for though God be provoked
every day, yet does his wrath endure but the twinkling of an eye; and he is
ready to receive us into his fatherly favor, Psalm. 77.7.8.9.
if we would but be willing to be reconciled unto his Majesty: and therefore
the Prophet David examining this point, and saying, Will the Lord absent
himself for ever, and will he be no more entreated? Is his mercy clean gone
for ever, and is his promise come utterly to an end for evermore? Has God
forgotten to be gracious, and will he shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure? At last he concludes, Psalm. 77. v. 10.
that it was his own infirmity, that is, his unableness to return to God,
and not Gods unwillingness to be reconciled unto him; for the Lord is ever
gracious and ready to forgive us, if we were ready to receive his grace; yea,
he beseeches us to be reconciled unto himself, and not wilfully to refuse
his grace and favor, which he so lovingly offers unto us: And therefore, I
wish to God that we had but that grace, to accept his grace, when it is so
graciously offered unto us.

That God is most bountiful unto all his people. Ezech. 16.7.
Thirdly, he is not only ready to receive us into his favor, but he is also
willing to enrich us with all kind of graces; for though we be polluted in our
own blood; i. e. Loathsome in our selves, and odious in his sight; yet does he
wash v^ in the blood of Christ, and then indue us with his most excellent
graces, faith, hope, and charity, and all the other virtues and good things
that are in us: And though we be come naked into this World, yet does he clothe
us, Job 1.21.
and feed us, enrich us, and raise us to all that we have. And in this kind
he is not only gracious unto the godly, but also unto the wicked; for what
has any of them, which he has not received of the Lord? It is he that fills
the Barnes of Dives, as well as the Palace of David: And therefore Saint James
says; That (...), Every good giving; i. e. Every temporal gift, James 1.17.
(...).
(...), and every perfect gift, that is, Every spiritual grace, that is given
to bring us to perfection, is from above, and comes down from the Father of
Lights.

The difference betwixt the gifts that God gives to the godly, and to the
wicked. Math. 6.16.
But herein is the difference, he bestows temporal graces upon the wicked;
yea, many times more plentifully then to the godly; for he sees their desire
is only set on worldly things: Therefore, as he said of hypocritical Fasters,
They have received their reward; that is, Acceperunt suam, sed amiserunt meam,
They have what they would have, though they leese thereby what I would have
given them; which is a loss not counteruailed with any gain: So he deals
with the Worldlings, God gives temporal riches unto the worldlings.
He fills their hearts with his hidden treasure, and he gives them often
times, (especially to most of them) their hearts desire; that is, the riches,
and the vanities of this life; So foolish are they and ignorant, even as it
were a beast before him: But to the godly, who love not this World, nor the
things of this World, he shows himself gracious, after a more special
manner, in giving them his heavenly graces; that is, graces which will bring
them unto Heaven; and in giving them worldly blessings too, so much as he sees
needful and convenient for them: Because, Godliness has the promise of the
life that now is, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and of that which is to come.

And so you see, how God is gracious in all respects, amiable in himself,
placable unto men, and liberal unto all his Creatures; and in all these
respects, gracious after a special manner unto his elected Saints, and
Servants. Psalm. 107.8.15.
O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the Children of men; And that (as the Apostle says)
We would not receive the grace of God in vain: i. e. That we would not
vainly abuse the good gifts and graces which our most gracious God does so
freely and so graciously bestow upon us. And so much for the second particle of
Gods goodness, Gracious.

CHAP. VII. Of the patience and long sufferance of God.
THe third Particle of Gods goodness here expressed, is, that he is slow to
anger; that is, How slow the Lord is to revenge our sins.
that he is such a one, that although we by our daily sins, do give most
just occasions to provoke his wrath and indignation against us, to destroy us,
and to consume us from off the face of the Earth; yet the fire of his wrath is
not suddenly kindled, and his furious vengeance is not speedily executed: But
he is slow to anger, full of patience, long suffering, and in a word, such a
one as rejoices not to see the sin committed, that he may punish, but still
expects if the sinner will at any time repent and amend, that he may spare
him: For so the Prophet says; The Lord will wait, that he may be gracious
unto us, i. e. Esaias 30.18.
He does tarry and stay and look if at any time, or by any means, we will
forsake our sins, that he may stay his judgments, and be gracious unto us.
O most sweet and excellent saying: And therefore the Prophet adds; Blessed
are all they that wait for him. And the testimonies of Scripture that do
confirm this point, are almost infinite. Jonas says, That he knew God was a
gracious God, Jonas 4.2.
and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenting him of the
evil: Therefore he would not go to threaten destruction, because he knew God
was so ready to spare. And the Prophet David, Psalm. 78.
in the 78. Psalm, and in the 106. Psalm, and in many other places, Psalm. 106.
does most fully and plainly set down this truth.

Examples of Gods slownesse to punish sin.
But the examples of Gods patience, and long sufferance* makes it more plain:
For when Adam sinned, he came not presently, but staid to the cool of the
day, before he would call him to account; and when Adam was called, Gods wrath
did not appear to be kindled; for he said no more, but, Adam where art thou?
Genesis 3.9. v. 11.
And when he appeared, he said, but, have thou eaten of the tree, whereof I
said unto thee, that thou should not eat thereof, Jonas 4.8.
lest thou die? So when Jonas was angry unto death, for the gourd that sprung
in a night, and withered in another; the Lord said no more, but Jonas, do
thou well to be angry? So, when Judas betrayed the Son of God into the hands
of sinners, he said no more, but, Judas betrayest thou the Son of man with a
kiss? So when the old World had so defiled it self, that it made God sorry in
his heart that ever he made man; Genesis 6.6.
yet would he not suddenly destroy this Augaeum stabulum, but gave it 120.
years to repent: Verse 3.
So he gave to the Ninevites forty days, and to the Israelites in the
Wilderness forty years; throughout all which time, Psalm. 78.3.8.39.
he was so merciful, that he forgave their misdeeds, and destroyed them not,
nor would not suffer his whole displeasure to arise: So for Jericho, there were
more days spent in the destruction of the same, then in the creation of the
whole World: for the World was made in six days, but Jericho was to be
compassed seven days before it should fall. How God spared the whole World,
and so spares us, notwithstanding all our wickedness, to this very day.
And so for this whole World, notwithstanding the wickedness of so many
generations of men, it stands unpunished to this very day; as if judgment were
forgotten, or God were loath to be moved to be angry: And for our selves,
alas, how many times do we offend our God, neglect his Sabboath, blaspheme his
name, contemn his Word, and abuse his servants? and yet still God stays his
anger from us, and spares us, when we spare not him: And whence comes this?
but only hence, that our God is slow to anger; for, Si quoties peccant
homines, sua fulmina mittat Jupiter; If God should punish us as often as we
offend him, we should all perish, and soon come to a fearful end.

But it is observed by many Divines, (writing upon those words of the Prophet,
The act of punishing is least agreeable to Gods Nature.
that God should rise as in Mount Perasim, and should be wrath as in the vallie
of Gibson, that he might do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass
his act, his strange act;) that the act of punishing, is the furthest from God,
and least agreeable to the nature of such a sovereign goodness: for as the
motive of showing mercy, is within him; and therefore is he called (...); The
Father of mercies; as if mercy did as naturally proceed from him, Mercy
proceeds naturally from God.
as the Child does issue from the Father: So the motive of executing
judgment, and revenge, is without him, in our sins; and therefore is he
never called, the Father of vengeance, but is as it were compelled either to
punish us, or to be unjust in himself, Quia abyssus abyssum inuocat; because
the greatness of our sins does still cry for vengeance against the sinners:
God is compelled to punish.
And therefore many times when the Sword is drawn, and the hand ready to
strike, yet mercy steps in; and as the Angel cried to the four Angels, to
whom power was given to hurt the Earth, and the Sea: saying, Hurt not the
Earth, nor the Seas, nor the Trees, Apoc. 7.2.3.
till we have sealed the servants of God in their foreheads; Or, as the Angel
said unto Abraham, Lay not thine hand upon the Lad, Genesis 22.12.
neither do thou any thing unto him: So does mercy say to God, stay yet a
while, O Justice, and destroy them not, until I have tried them one year
more, whether they will bring forth any fruits of repentance, or not; for how
shall I deliver up Israel? Hosea 11.8.9.
or why should Ephraim be destroyed? Mine heart is turned within me, and my
repentings are ^indled together; And therefore, O do not execute the
fierceness of thine anger, but stay a while, to see what they will do; and so
mercy stays the hand of Justice, Our turning from our sins, does perfectly
turn away Gods wrath from us.
and many times gets the victory; and when it can move us to turn to GOD, it
turns all the weapons in the Armory of Heaven, like the Rainbow; which is a
Bow indeed, but without an Arrow, with a full bent, but without a string, and
with the wrong side toward us; as if now he meant to shoot at Christ for our
sins, and not at us, which are the sinners.

And thus, God which is ever ready and willing to show mercy and compassion, is
still loath and slow to suffer his anger to be kindled, to work our woe and
destruction: And both these are excellently represented unto us, in a twofold
passage of the Scripture; Luc. 15.10.
the one, in the Father of the prodigal Child, who runs to meet his
returning wandering son; to show unto us, Didacus stella in Luc. 15.
Quod non sit lenta neque tarda, diuina misericordia, ad subveniendum
compunctis cord: That the mercy of God is neither slow, nor slack, to help
and relieve repenting souls, but is always ready and willing to receive them
into his favor: and therefore, cucurrit, he ran, when he saw an occasion to
show mercy: Genesis 3.8. God is quick to show mercy, slow to punish.
the other in God, seeking Adam in Paradise, who walked with a slow pace, (as
the original word imports) to show how loath he was to be too quick in
indignation; and therefore ambulauit, He did but walk, and come with a slow
pace; because he is slow to wrath, yea, when nothing will prevail to recall us
from our sins, but that he must punish us; yet as a compassionate Judge
pronounces sentence against a malefactor with weeping eyes, Qui fruitur paena
ferus est, legumque videtur vindictam prestare sibi.
and a melting heart, even so God is grieved, and his bowels yearneth when we
are punished. And surely, this unwillingness of God, to punish us, should make
us all to be unwilling to offend him; and this his slownesse to anger, should
make us quickly to repent: For, the patience and long sufferance of God, is
used to lead us to repentance, says the Apostle. And so much for the third
particle of Gods goodness; Slow to anger.

CHAP. VIII. Of the superabundant Goodness of God.
THE fourth particle of Gods Goodness here expressed, What goodness is.
is, that he is, Abundant in goodness. Touching which we must note, that
Goodness is the perfection of things, for which they are desirable; and we
have learned of the Prince of Philosophers, Bonum id esse quod omnia appetunt.
Arist. aethic. l. 1. c. 1.
Perfectum id esse cui nihil deest; That perfection imports freedom from all
defects, and a fullness of all excellencies: but what is more perfect, or more
desirable then God? the very devils knew this, when persuading our forefathers
to offend God, they told them, they should become as God: and therefore God
must needs be good.

But Aristotle distinguishes good, to be twofold, Arist. l. 7. aethic.
as 1. That which is good in it self. That there is a twofold good.
2. That which is good unto others.
For there be many things, which are good in themselves, which are not good to
others; as all the creatures which God has made, are good in themselves; for
God beheld all that he had made, and lo, they were exceeding good, Genesis 1.31.
and therefore the very devils, in respect of their nature and being, That the
nature or being of all things is good.
as they are the works of God, must needs be good: but they are not good for
others; so (as the same Aristotle says) a man may be good in himself, and
good to himself; and yet not good to others, as he that is bonus vir, and
malus ciuis, a good man, but an evil governor: but God is good both ways, for,

First, He is good in himself; because his essence is most perfect, wherein
nothing is wanting that can be desired, and then which, nothing can be more
desirable: and,

Secondly, He is good to all things else; Psalm. 73. How God is good unto all
things.
the whole earth is full of his goodness; and so, the very creation of all
things, so admirably good; the sustentation and gubernation of them so
exceedingly well; and the donation of so many excellent gifts upon them;
especially the sending of his dearest Son to die for us men, do sufficiently
show the goodness of God. Nam si ista bona, dulcia and pulchra videntur, etc.
For if God were not good unto them, from whence have they received all the
goodness that they have? says Saint Bernard. And therefore I do wonder how
Marcion could say, that this God, which made all things, and preserves all
things, and which had made him a man, and not a beast, was not good: for reason
it self will tell us, that bonum est sui diffusiuum; it is the property of
good to diffuse it self unto others: and eo melius est, That thing is ever
best which communicates most goodness unto others.
quo latius se alijs communicate; and that good is ever best, which communicates
it self farthest unto others: as the Sun is therefore said to be the best
Planet, because it yeeldes most light unto all sublunarie creatures: but God
does so largely communicate himself unto all things; as that, whatsoever
strength, sense, life, moving, or being they have, they have them all
communicated, and conferred upon them, from this goodness of God.

And therefore we say that God must needs be good, yea, so good that he is
justly said to be abundantly good, that is, perfectly and absolutely good.

1 John 1.5.
First, Perfectly good, because that, as he is that light, in whom there is no
darkness at all; so he is that goodness, in whom, and from whom, as from an
efficient cause, there can be no evil at all; and therefore it is rightly
said, Genesis 1.31.
that whatsoever he did, they were exceeding good.

Secondly, He is absolutely good, i. e. good in all respects; bonum universal
non contractum: universally good, for all things, and unto all things: and that
by an inbred goodness in himself, and from himself: whereas the goodness of
all other things is but bonum particulare, good for some special end, and not
simply in all respects: and a goodness not inbred in themselves, but by
participation of the goodness of God, that is, received from him; 1 Cor. 3.8.
James 1.17.
as both Saint Paul, and Saint James do show.

And therefore well might our Savior say, that there is none good but God, no
not himself, as he was Man: because the goodness of his Manhood, Mar. 10.18.
was communicated unto him from the Dietie, and was no more then his humanity
was capable of: and therefore much less is any other creature good, i. e.
simply and absolutely good; but God is eternally good in himself, and
universally good to all things else.

Now this goodness of God, which is, extrase, extended from God unto his
creatures, is either That the goodness of God is twofold.
1. General. 2. Special.


The general goodness of God is seen in two things.
First, The general goodness of God, is chiefly seen in two things.

1. In the creating 2. In the sustayning
of his creatures.

In the creation he made all things doubly good.

First, Simply good, in respect of their being; for he beheld every thing that
he had made, Gene. 1.31.
and lo, it was very good, that is, so perfectly good, as that nothing more
can be desired, for the perfecting of the essence of any thing, nor the lest
jot can be subtracted from any thing without some want or missing of the same;
and so Galenus did ingeniously confess, Galenus de vsu pa^^ium.
when he considered the most admirable fabric, and composition of man's body:
and therefore though we confess, that God could, if it had pleased him; have
endued all creatures, with far more excellent gifts, then he did, in respect
of their accidental good; That God made every thing perfectly good in his
kind.
for he might have made Man so, that he could not have fallen; yet we say that,
Nihil in sua specie perfectius esse potuit, quam a deo creatum sit, nothing in
the world could be made more perfect, in respect of their essential good,
then God created them.

Secondly, He made all things relatiuely good; that is, That God made all
things good for some use.
good and useful in respect of some other things, as the Earth, the Sun, the
Moon, and the Stars, they are not only essentially good in themselves, but
they are also relatiuely good, for other creatures.

And thus we say, Hieron. de Medicis in Thom. p. 1. q. 23. artic: 3.
that although God made not every thing universally good, that is, good for all
things; because though God be good to every thing, yet non communicauit omnibus
omne bonum, he made not every thing, good for every purpose; as we see the
fire, which is good to heat, is not good to cool any thing; yet God made
every thing good in some respect, and for some use. And this is the reason why
many things, which are good in themselves, and good to some things, may
notwithstanding be evil and hurtful unto other things, as we see many times,
that feeds and nourishes one creature, which is poison and death unto
another: Aug. de ciuit. Dei. l. 11. c. 18.
And therefore if we see some men abstain from some things, which are good in
themselves, and good to many others; yet let us not presently condemn them for
superstitious, because that thing may be good for one, which is not good for
another, and if we see things, not good for us, or whose goodness we know
not; let us not by and by, with the Manichees say, God made them not; because
we know not to what end they are good: but rather, let us confess with Saint
Augustine, Omnia esse pulchra, in suo genere, that all things are good in their
kind, Jdem de Genesis contra Man.
although many things become hurtful unto us for our sins, and we know not
to what end many things were created, by reason of that ignorance which is in
us.

Secondly, God shows and extends his goodness unto his creatures by their
continual sustentation: and this also he does two ways; 1. Liberando a malo:
by freeing them from evil. 2. Largiendo bona: by enriching them with good.


For the First:

Evil is either 1. Of sin. 2. Of punishment.
And God delivers from both: for,

How the goodness of God withholdeth all men from falling into many sins.
First, Though God suffered Adam to fall into sin; yet had not God withheld,
and vpheld him, even in that very time of his sinning, no doubt but he had with
Satan, unrecoverably fallen away from God: and so ever since; did not God
withhold the sons of men, they would become more abominably sinful, then
the devils; and all their sins would prove to be, peccata clamantia; such
horrible and hideous sins, that the earth would not be able to bear them:
but God puts a bridle in their jaws, and a hook in their nostrils, and says
unto sinners, as he does unto the seas; Hitherto shall thou go, and no
further, Here shall thou stay thy proud waves: and this we see in Saul, Acts
9.1.
when he went, breathing out slaughters against the Church, God laid a block
in his way, and hindered him to run into the height of iniquity: 1 Kings
13.4.
and so he did to Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and to many other wicked men,
that would have become most intollerably wicked, had they not been hindered by
this goodness of God.

Genesis 3.17.
Secondly, Though God has cursed the Earth for the sin of Man, and has most
justly inflicted punishments, and miseries upon us all, and upon all other
creatures, for our sakes; yet is there not any creature, but had bin swallowed
up by his deserved miseries, How God suspendeth the punishments that we have
most justly deserved.
were it not preserved, and the just punishment thereof suspended, by this
goodness of God. I know men slightly deem of their deliverances, and do
seldom think of their preseruations: but if they truly weighed the same in
the balance of good consideration, they should herein find, abundant
testimonies of Gods goodness toward them: for if we would seriously observe
those abominable sins, and Luciferian pride, that reigns every where in
the world, we should not only adore with reverence, that infinite patience,
and long-suffering of God, that still gives them leave to walk after the lusts
of their own hearts; but we should also admire with all humility this
unspeakable goodness of God, that not only hinders the wrath of God to
consume us, but also withholdeth those plagues and punishments from us, which
otherwise, our sins would soon pull down upon us.

For the Second, that is, How God inricheth his creatures with all good things.
the good things which we receive from God: Non est dignus peccator pane quo
vescitur, neque lumine caeli quo illuminatur; the best of us, is worthy of
nothing, and yet God heapeth upon us beneficia nimis copiosa, multa and magna,
priuata and positiua; innumerable, admirable blessings; and his abundant
goodness, fluit acrius amne perenni, does most plentifully flow over all the
world; and none can say, he has not tasted of it: for the eyes of all wait
upon thee, O Lord: Psalm. 145.15.6.
and thou give them their meat in due season: thou openest thy hand, and
fillest all things living with plenteousnesse, and as Saint Paul says, Acts 17.
In him we live, and move, and have our being.

In this respect Saint Paul says unto the Lyconians, that God left not
himself without witness, in that he did good, Acts 14.17.
and gave us rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons; filling our hearts with
food and gladness: and yet such is the stupiditie, and sencelesnesse of men,
that although God should, as he does every day, shower down his goodness in
plenty upon them: yet if they have not wealth, and promotion, and every thing
else that they would have, they are ready to quarrel with Gods Goodness: but
alas, if we would but look within our selves, there is not one of us all, but
he should easily find a plentiful theme of Gods goodness: for be it, that
we have not such plenty of wealth as we desire; yet we have our health, our
limbs, our sight, our senses, and are these nothing? an diuitias bonitatis
contemnis? what, shall we contemn these things, that are better then all
wealth? Oh that we would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and show
the wonders that he does for the children of Men.

Neither does he only confine his goodness unto these temporal blessings;
but he does many times, bestow upon many of the children of this world, many
excellent gifts and graces of his spirit: as not only the calling of them from
their sins, and the showing unto them the way of Righteousness, by the preachers
of the word, Matthew. 13.20.
but also the working in them, of some joy, at the hearing of the same, and
some Faith to believe the same, and to bring forth some fruits of repentance,
Heb. 6.4.6.
and diverse other graces, which are common to some of the wicked, with the
Godly, and which are rightly termed by Bucer, initia fidei, the beginnings of
saving faith.

All which, are sufficient arguments of Gods goodness, and might be the
means to bring them unto Happiness, Zanch. de not. dei. l. 4. c. 1. q. 3.
these. 1.
but that, through their contempt, and diffidence, and abuse of Gods goodness,
by turning the graces of God into wantonness, they make them all, like the
untimely fruit of a woman, which perishes before it sees the Sun: or like
the grass upon the house top, that withers before it be plucked up.

How God is not alike good unto all men.
Secondly, Though it is most certain, that God is good unto all, yet is it as
certain, that he is not alike good unto all: but, as the master of a house is
good unto all that are under him; and so provides for them all, men and
beasts; yet is there a gradation of his love, and goodness toward them; in as
much as he loves his wife, and children, better then he does the rest of his
family; so God is good unto all, but in a more special manner, he is good to
some, rather then unto others: so among the Angels, he was good unto them all,
in that he made them, and endued them with most admirable gifts of nature; but
he showed more goodness, unto them which he preserved by his grace, that they
should not fall into condemnation, then he did unto those, which he suffered
to run into destruction; and so among men, 2 Timothy 4.3.
though he be the Savior of all men, and does good unto all men; yet is he
specially good to them that believe, or as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 73.1.
to them that are of a right conversation: And therefore (speaking of Gods
goodness toward men) we say, that although God be good unto all, in respect
of his general goodness; yet in respect of his special goodness, he is
only good unto his Church, unto his Saints, and chosen children: he is good,
to them that fear him and that put their trust in his mercy.

And this special goodness of God toward his Saints, is chiefly seen in
these two things; which he extends and exhibiteth unto them and not to others.

1. In the decreeing of our eternal election. Gods special goodness toward
his Saints, is seen in two things. Aug. de fide ad Pet. c 35. and cont. Jul.
Pelag. l. 5. c. 3. etc.
2. In the executing of this decree for our salvation.
First, God foreseeing all the whole race of Adam, in the state of sin, wherein
they had fallen, did before the foundation of the world, intend and purpose, to
assume into his favor, a certain number of men, out of all that mass of
corruption, on whom he would confer more special fruits of his goodness, then
he meant to do on all the rest; that they might be the special vessels of his
mercy and goodness, and made fit to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes.
And this election of some, and not of all, is sufficiently showed, in many
passages of the holy Scriptures: as in Ephesians. 1.4. Matthew. 20.16. where our
Savior says, God electeth some men and not all.
Many are called, but few are chosen; and Ioh. 13.18. I know whom I have
chosen, and so the Fathers, Schoolmen, and all; are all of the same
judgment, that God decreed to glorify some, and not all.

Secondly, As he showed his goodness toward them, more plentifully then the
rest, in thus purposing to save them, rather then the rest: so he does far
more plentifully show the same unto them, in the executing of this decree of
election; and in bringing of them unto eternal salvation. And this he does
two ways.

1. By effectually calling them, 2. By giving and conferring many singular
graces upon them.
First, though God sent his Son to die for all men, That God effectually
calls none but his Elect.
that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have life everlasting,
and sends his Preachers to call all men to believe in him; yet is all this
ineffectuall, to all those, that are not inwardly called by Gods Spirit; Quia
inanis est sermo docentis, nisi intus sit qui docet, For we find many called,
and often called by the Preachers of the Word, which yield not obedience unto
the Faith of Christ: Matthew. 20.16.
because (as our Savior shows) they are not chosen unto life. But whom God
has decreed to save, he does inwardly and effectually call by his Spirit; and
when we do outwardly Preach the Word, he does graciously open their hearts, as
he did the heart of Lidia, Act. 16.14.
that they should embrace and believe the same. And this Saint Paul shows,
when he says, that whom God did foreknow and predestinate, them he called, i.
e. Inwardly and effectually, and so powerfully that when he does so call them,
1 Samuel 3.10.
they do presently answer, Lo, I come; or with Samuel, Speak on Lord, for
thy servant hears. And thus he calls none, but those whom he has decreed
to save: for so our Savior says, That no man knows the Father but the
Son, and he to whom the Son reuealeth him, i. e. thus effectually by his
Spirit: And therefore God shows more goodness unto them then he does unto
all others, in that he does more graciously call them, rather then all others.

Secondly, when he has thus effectually called them, he bestows many
special and singular graces upon them, which he does not upon all others, as
chiefly, Of certain special graces, that God bestows upon his Saints.
1. The grace of Preservation. 2. The grace of Justification. 3. The grace of
Sanctification. 4. The grace of Glorification.


First, the grace of Preservation is that which keeps and preserves these
chosen, and peculiarly beloved Saints of God, from many evils both of 1. Sin.
2. Punishment.
For,

First, though (as I showed you before,) the goodness of God preserves the
wicked many times from committing many horrible sins, which otherwise they
would do; yet does he after a more special manner, guide the godly with his
counsel, Psalm. 73.24.
(as the Psalmist says) that they run not with the wicked into the same
excess of riot. How God preserves the Godly from many sins.
Fot seeing by nature, we are all equally indifferent, to all sins; how comes
it to pass, that we abstain from may abominations, and heinous impieties,
that wicked men do practice? is it from our selves? or from the goodness of
our Nature? or is it not rather from the goodness of God, that gives his holy
spirit unto us; that as he preserved Noah from partaking with the wickedness
of the old world, Genesis 6 9.
and Lot from following after the abominations of the Sodomites, Genesis 19.7.
Genesis 39.8.9.
Joseph from consenting to the lewd inticements of his Mistress, Elias from
the Idolatry of Israel, and the like; so he might preserve us from those lewd
actions that the wicked do? Aug. Soliloq. l. 16.
Saint Augustine makes it plain; For Tentator defuit (says he) Satan was
away, and time and place was wanting to do the deed; but this was thy
goodness to preserve me; the Tempter came in time and place convenient; but
then thou withheldest me from consenting; and so when I had will I wanted
ability; and when I had ability, I wanted opportunity and all this was from thy
blessed goodness that preserved me: To abstain from sins, is from God.
And therefore if we do abstain from drunkenness, lewdness, or any other
sin, let us not rob Gods grace, to ascribe it to the goodness of our
Natures, but let us truly acknowledge it to proceed from the goodness of God;
that preserves us rather then the rest; for had God preserved the wicked from
their sins, they would have abstained from them, even as we do; and had he
not preserved us, we should have run into the same excess of riot, even as
they do: Our abstaining from sin is not from our selves.

Secondly, he does not only preserve us from the evil of sin; but also from
many plagues and punishments, that he suffers other men to fall into: for so
the Psalmist says, that Misfortune shall slay the ungodly, Psalm. 34.16.
but GOD preserves the righteous that not one of his bones shall be broken:
And again he says, that although Gods plague should be so great, and so hot
against the wicked, as that a thousand of them should fall beside the
righteous, and ten thousand on his right hand; Psalm. 91.12.
yet it should not come nigh him: because God does so command his Angels, to
preserve them in all their ways that they dash not their foot against a stone.

Thus he preserved Noah out of the flood, Lot out of Sodom, How God preserves
the godly from many plagues and punishments. Wisd. 10 4.6.
Moses and Aaron out of the hand of Pharaoh, and the three children out of the
fiery furnace; and thus at all times he preserves his little flock, and
faithful children, out of many miseries and dangers. And we have in a large
measure tasted of this goodness: for as Noah had been drowned in the flood,
and Lot had been consumed in Sodom, had they not been preserved by this
special goodness of God: How mercifully God delivered us in Anno 1588. and
from the Gunpowder treason.
so except the same goodness had been on our side, When men rose up against
us, in 88. and in the Gunpowder Treason especially, it had not failed but our
souls had been put to silence; and we should have bin swallowed up of our
miseries. I need not instance any particular deliverance of private men, each
man does best know that himself: and for mine own part, I have so abundantly
seen the goodness of God herein, that I can never think, how graciously God
preserved me, so many times from so many, and so mighty enemies, Qui oderunt me
gratis, which hated me freely without a cause, (God he knows my simpleness,)
but exultauit cor meum, Psalm. 13.21.
and eructauit verbum bonum, O how plentiful is thy goodness unto them that
fear thee, and that put their trust in thy mercy?

If any man has found experience of the like, or any other preservation from
any evil; let him never think it is from any chance or fortune, but solely
from this goodness of God: for seeing we are all the sons of Adam, No man
privileged from common calamities.
all sinners; and that no man has a pattant of exemption, or a privilege of
immunity to be free from common calamities; and yet we see, one break his
leg, another his neck, one slain, another drowned, one diseased, another
disgraced, one leese his estate, another his liberty, a third his life, and it
may be unjustly too; and we our selves delivered from these, or the like
miseries; how can we choose but see the abundant goodness of God, in our
deliverance from these calamities, which we daily see incident to other men?

Ob.
But here it may be some will object, how does God show more special goodness
unto his Saints, by delivering them from plagues and punishments, rather then
the wicked; when as we see they are more commonly plagued and scourged then the
wicked be? as the Prophet David plainly shows unto us.

Sol.
I answer, that although God many times preserves his servants from the
punishments of the wicked; yet does he not always deliver them from all
afflictions; but does often menace them, The Saints in their afflictions do
most of all perceive the goodness of God.
and sometime whip them too, with the rod of correction. And yet this goodness
of God is no less seen to reflect upon them in these showers of adversity,
then at any other time in the Sunshine of prosperity. For,

When the wicked in their afflictions do gnash with their teeth and consume
away, 1 Samuel 28.7.
through grief and despair; and so grow worse and worse, as Saul did from
Samuel unto the Witch, and from the Witch unto the Devil. The godly in their
afflictions are more humbled, more dejected in themselves; and more earnest
suppliants unto God to help them, Premuntur iusti, vt pressi clament,
clamantes exaudiantur, exauditi, glorificent Deum. Quintus Curt. lib 8.
and to deliver them out of their distress, for the righteous are therefore
often pressed that they might cry, and crying might be heard; and heard, might
glorify God: And so (as Alexander was, Semper bello quam post victoriam
clarior; More famous in his war then in his Peace) the Saints of God, do
ever grow better and better in their afflictions, and as the Poet says;

Saepe tulit lassis succus amarus opem; They gather honey, not only with the
Drones from the Hiue; but also with the Be, from the Thistles: and as a Pearl
in the dark, they do show more luster, and more tokens of their goodness,
Faith, Hope, Charity, Patience, and many other graces, in their afflictions,
then ever they did or could have done in their exemption and freedom from all
miseries.

And all this is not, because afflictions and punishments makes them better,
but because God preserves them, and delivers them from all the hurts and
evils that otherwise these afflictions would bring upon them, as well as upon
other men; and gives them grace to make a right use of these their just
deserved chastisements: for so the Prophet says, Psalm 34.18.
Many are the troubles of the Righteous, there is their just deserts; but God
delivers him out of all, there is Gods goodness toward him; yea, more a
great deal in delivering him out of these troubles, then if he had preserved
him from the having of any troubles at all: For, as that man is to be commended
as most valiant, which has been in Wars, and receiving many wounds at the
hands of great and many enemies, has victoriously escaped them all; rather
then he which never fighting with any, has kept himself safe and free from
any danger; so he that delivers me from the hands of mine enemies, and
preserves me from fire and water, from all troubles and afflictions; does
show a great deal more love unto me, and more favor to deliver me from my
misery, then only to remain with me in my prosperity, etc.

And therefore if we be free from troubles; it is Quia bonus Deus Israeli, from
the goodness of God, that preserves us; if we be punished and afflicted,
repose thy trust in God, Forti animo mala fer, nec bis miser esto dolor.
and be not dejected to add grief unto grief; but think it is because it
is good for us to be afflicted; and if we be delivered from our afflictions,
and preserved from that poison of despair, and other evils, that they bring on
others; it is from this goodness of God, Romans 8.28.
which works all things together for the best for them that love him.

What the grace of Justification is.
Secondly, the grace of Justification, is that infused Faith, which he works
in the hearts of his Elect, whereby they do lay hold, and apply unto
themselves all the merits of Jesus Christ; and do by that imputative
righteousness of him, stand justified in the sight of God.

What the grace of Sanctification is.
Thirdly, the grace of Sanctification, is that, whereby we are heartily sorry
for all our fore-passed sins, and do every day endeavor more and more to
live in all holiness and righteousness, to the praise and glory of God.

What the grace of Glorification is.
Fourthly, the grace of Glorification is that, whereby we live holily in this
life, and shall live happily in the life to come: because (as Aquinas says)
God glorifieth his Saints; Per profectum virtutis and gratiae, and per
exaltationem gloriae, By making them holy here on Earth, and bringing them to
the happiness of Heaven. All these graces, and what grace soever else is
dependant upon any of these, are ^rought in the Saints by this special
goodness of God: Romans 8.30.
for, whom God did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them
he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified: This is the
golden way, and the royal degrees of Gods goodness, whereby the Saints of God
are saved. And therefore if any of us do find these graces in our selves, let
us not ascribe them to our selves, but to the grace and goodness of God: for,
this is the work of God, that ye believe in him, whom he has sent, Philip.
1.29.
says our Savior Christ: And it is given to believe, That if there be any
goodness in us, we should ascribe it all to God.
says the Apostle. And herein let us admire with reverence, and acknowledge
with all thankfulness his special, and his singular goodness toward us,
more then toward others, which perhaps naturally are as well, if not better
deserving then our selves: for had he bestowed faith and repentance upon them,
they would have believed on him, and served him even as we do; and had he not
bestowed these graces on us, we should have been poor and naked of all
goodness, even as they are.

But then here it may be objected, that if we do no good, but what God gives
us to do, and that the very reprobates would believe in God, and serve him, if
God would bestow those effectual and powerful graces upon them, which he
bestows upon his Saints: then it must needs follow, that the wicked are not
altogether so culpable, for the omission of those required duties; because God
gives them not the grace, and ability to perform them; Quia nullus actus
potest excedere potentiam agentis, Because no act can exceed the power of the
Agent: And therefore, whosoever limiteth the power, is the cause of the
intermission of the consequent act, and of the event that flows thereby; And
therefore, God circumscribing our ability, must needs be the cause of our
deficiency.

To this I answer, Sol.
that we ascribe all the goodness of the Saints unto the grace and goodness
of God, to magnify Gods goodness, and to vilify our own baseness; to show
that we have nothing in the World whereof to boast: And we think our Saviors
words sufficient to confirm this truth, where he says; A man can receive
nothing, except it be given him from above: John 15.5. That of our selves we
can do nothing that is good.
And again, Without me ye can do nothing. And we say that the wicked would
do these things, if God would give them, I say not sufficient, but effectual
grace to do them; because it is impossible, but the same measure of effectual
grace, should produce the same measure of effects: for if God would work in
them that sanctify which he does in his Saints, how could they resist his
will? Or is it possible that this will of man, should withstand the will of
God? no ways.

And I see no reason, why any man should except against this truth, but that
hereby they fear that imputation of injustice, which (as they think) must
needs light on God, if he should condemn them, for not serving him, and yet
not give them the grace or ability to serve him; or at least wise of
partiality, if he, without any manner of desert of the one more then the other,
should notwithstanding choose the one sort, and enrich them, and leave the
other sort, and condemn them.

But to this I answer, that if God should require such duties as are not due
to him, or command them to do that which they never received power from him to
fulfill, we might perhaps think him unjust in his demands; For, (...); Laws
must be made according to the rule of men's ability to perform them; or if God
did take away this power again from the Agent, then might he likewise be said
to be the cause of the deficiency of the subsequent act: but if God requires
nothing at our hands, God takes not the power of serving him from any man.
but that which is our duty to do, and what he made us able to perform; and
we through our own default, and wilfulness, Male vtentes potestate, Abusing
this ability, which God has given us, like those that spend their wealth on
whores, which they should employ to mainetaine their Wives and Children; have
lost this power, that we had received, and brought upon our selves an
inevitable impotency; the very Law of humane reason, will here take part with
God against us: Non habere excusationem, etc. that he has no excuse for
himself, which is the cause of his own impediment, as a Father says: And
therefore, seeing man lost the power of serving God, by his own fault in
offending God; and that God is not bound to restore it again: God, in not
giving it, is no efficient cause of their not serving him: but, as the Sun is
the cause of darkness, Non per se, sed per accidens, Not because properly it
effects darkness, but accidentally, by reason of its departure from us: So
is God only the cause, why the wicked serve him not; not because he works
any unwillingness in them to serve him; but because he denies his grace unto
them, whereby they might be enabled to serve him: and this denial of his
grace, is no injustice in God; because their own sins have made this
separation betwixt GOD and them, God is not bound to give the wicked power to
serve him.
and makes every man like unto Turnus soul, Fugit indignata per vmbras; To
hide himself from this shining light: And God is a debtor to no man, that he
should inlighten any, but whom it pleases him.

Secondly, I say that this extending of his special goodness unto some, and
not to others, is no accepting of persons in that sense, which the Scripture
says; God is no accepter of persons: For,

First, Saint Augustine tells us, that Ibi est acceptio personarum, vbi quae
aequalibus, ex aquo debentur, inaequaliter distribuuntur; There is the
acception of persons, What it is to be an accepter of persons.
where those things which are equally due to all men, are unequally distributed
to some men: but where those things which are due to none, are freely given
unto some, and unequally distributed unto those; yet herein is neither
partiality, nor iniquity: because as our Savior says; God may do with his
own what he will, Math. 20.15.
and give the same to whom he please: And thereby, Huic facit misericordia,
tibi non fit iniuria; He does but show mercy unto the one, and he does no
injustice to the other.

Secondly, the meaning of the holy Ghost, in saying that God is no accepter of
persons, is not, that he chooses not one man rather then another; for, so he
chose Jacob, and hated Esau; Mal. 1.2.
but that he chooses not any man in regard of the outward indowments, or
natural gifts, or any other thing, that is in that man rather then in other
men; as not Achitophel for his wisdom; not Absolon for his beauty; not
Sampson for his strength; God chooses no man, for the love of any thing that
is in man.
not Dives for riches; nor Jacob, for any thing that was in Jacob more then in
Esau: for whom he chooses, he chooses merely out of his mere grace and
goodness; toward the one, rather then the other: as he himself plainly
shows, I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy. Exodus 33.19.


And so you see, how abundantly God is good, eternally in himself, generally
unto all, and more especially unto his Saints: Oh then let us not be like the
Egyptians, that found out the streams of the River Nilus; but knew not the
springs from whence they issued. Let us not be ignorant of that spring and
Fountain from whence we receive so many benefits, That we should acknowledge
all our goodness to proceed from God.
and so many streams of goodness: for this were but like the Swine, to eat
the Acornes that fall on the ground, and never to behold the Tree from whence
they fall; or, to bear the name of God written in our hearts, by the Pen of
Nature, and yet to be like the Athenian Altar, wherein was engraven (...), to
the unknown God: but rather in all things whatsoever we have, or enjoy;
health, wealth, or prosperity, spiritual, or temporal grace; let us with
Saint James acknowledge the same, to descend from above, and to proceed unto
us, from this abundant goodness of God: And for the same, James 1.17.
let us ascribe unto God the honor due unto his name, to worship him with holy
worship. And so much for the fourth particle: Of the abundant goodness of God.

CHAP. IX. Of the superabundant truth of God.
THe fifth particle of Gods goodness, is, that he is abundant in truth. Now
truth (says Anselmus) is as Time, or as Light, which though but one yet is it
diversely distinguished: So Truth (says the Philosopher) is variously
considered: and that either Arist. aethic. l. 4. c. 7. and Moral. l. 1. c 33.
What moral Truth is.
1. Morally. 2. Physically.


In the first sense, (...), Truth is a virtue, euenly placed betwixt arrogance
and simulation; or as Cicero defines it, (and which Saint Augustine holds to be
the best definition of it) Veritas est per quam immutata quae sunt, quae
fuerunt, and quae futura sunt, dicuntur: Truth is that, i. e. (that virtue)
whereby things past, things present, and things to come, are immutably related
as they are. And this Truth, though it be in God, or rather from God, because
he always says and relates things immutably as they be; yet is it not in
him, as in us; because in us truth is a moral virtue, whereby, as by an
habit, we are propense and inclined to show forth the things as they be: but
in God, it is not as a quality, but an essential property, whereby he is, what
he is, and can no more leave to be, or to relate Truth, then he can leave to be
a God.

What Physical Truth is.
In the second sense, Veritas cuiuslibet rei, est proprietas sui esse, quod
stabilitum est ei: The truth of every thing, is the propriety of his being, or
(as Saint Augustine says) Verum est id quod est; That is true which is: Illud
enim omnes verum dicunt esse, quod tale reuera est, A^gust Soli^^que. l. 2. c.
5.
quale esse videtur, etc. For all men (says he) ^ffirme that to be true, which
is indeed as it seems to be; and that to be false, which is not as it seems
to be; as the Image of a man in a glass, seems to be a man, and is not; and
therefore though it be a true image of a man, yet is it a false man: And so he
is a false friend, which seems to be a true fr^end and is not. A most heavy
sentence against them, which say, They are Jews, Revel. 2.9.
and are not, but are of the Synagogue of Satan; which say they are Christians,
but serve not God; and which seem to be just, and honest men, but inwardly are
ravening Wolves; because they being not what they seem to be, do deceive
themselves, and the truth is not in them: And therefore, 1 John 1.6.
Nihil prodest illis nomen vsurpare alienum, and vocari quod non sunt; It will
avail them nothing to usurp a wrong name, and to be called what they are not:
for though they may deceive the World, yet Christ which is truth it self, and
knows all truth, will tell them at the last day, that he never knew them;
that is, Math 25.12.
to be true Christians, which they seemed to be, but were not.

And thus God is truth, and that two ways.

1. Essentially in himself. 2. Causally in all things.
First, God is essentially true, yea truth it self, as Moses, and as our
Savior says; quia est quod est, Deuteronomy. 32.4.
because he is that which he is, and that which he seems to be; and thus
properly nothing can be said to be truth, but God, because nothing is, or can
be said to be of himself, but God.

Secondly, As God is essentially truth, so he is causally truth: John 14.6.
The manner how all Truths do proceed from God.
that is, the fountain of truth, from whence, all other channells of truth do
flow: for this is the order of all verity.

First, The truth of all things is conceived, in the Idea and notion, or
practicke knowledge and understanding of God, from all eternity; because all
things had their being in the divine understanding, before they had their being
in themselves: then,

Secondly, This truth flows to the things existing in themselves: which are
therefore true, because they are adaequated and conformable to that truth
conceived in the mind of God, concerning them: then,

Thirdly, This truth of things passes to the understanding both of Men and
Angels, when the understanding is adaequated and conformable to the things
conceived, as they are in themselves, i. e. when we truly understand things to
be as they be: then,

Fourthly, This truth conceived in the understanding, proceeds unto
expression, either by words, or writings, when our expression of things, is
agreeable to that conception, which we have of them in our understanding, that
is, when we speak, or write, as we think.

And therefore, whenever our words do any ways swerve from our minds, and
understanding; they cannot be true: quia mendacium est contra mentem ire,
because a lie is to go against our own minds, or to say otherwise then we
think, says Saint Augustine; and a truth of words, is the adaequation and
conformity of the tongue with the mind and understanding; and whenever we
understand any thing otherwise then it is, there can be no truth in that
understanding; because the truth of the understanding, is the adaequation of
the same, to the things existing, and being in their natural causes, and
whenever things do any ways swerve from that aeternall notion and
conception of them, in the mind and understanding of God, they cannot therein
be true: because the truth of all things, consists in their adaequation, and
conformity to the truth, eternally conceived of them in the divine
understanding.

How the divine understanding, is the rule that measures all Truths.
But when our words are agreeable to our minds, our minds and understandings to
the things conceived, and those things to the mind of God; then are they true:
because (as the Schools truly teach) Intellectus diuinus est mensurans non
mensuratus, etc. the divine conception of things, is that which measures the
truth of all things, and is not measured it self by any thing; Et res
naturalis est mensurata and mensurans, and every natural thing, thus measured
by the notion of God, does measure the truth of our understanding, and our
understanding measured by the truth of things conceived, does measure the truth
of our words.

And so you see Truth to be primatiuely in God; as the light in the body of the
Sun; and thence to be derived, in res existentes; into the things wherein it
rests subiectiuely; like unto the light of the Moon, and the stars, which
they receive from the Sun; and so to pass into the understanding
terminatiuely, like the reflection of the light of the Moon, and the Stars,
upon these lower orbs; and lastly to our words, or writings, expressiuely like
unto the manifestation of things, by that light which shines upon them.

Now, this verum declaratiuum, this expressed truth, is to be considered two
ways: 1. Primarily. 2. Secondarily.


First, As it is directed by God, and guided by his Spirit, so as therein there
can be no co^mixtion of error; and in that respect it is called, the divine
Truth, because it is wholly Truth, and expressed by the Divine Spirit: for, as
Saint Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.21.
The holy men of God, spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost; This is,
Theological Truth, and it is wholly contained in the holy Scripture, Coloss 1.5.
which is therefore called, The Word of Truth.

And this Truth, though I might allege many other reasons, to prove the worth,
and the excellency thereof; yet is this sufficient in stead of all, that
(besides what Zorobabel says of it) it is in many passages of the Scripture
compared unto the Light, as the Psalmist says; Send forth thy Truth and thy
Light: And that especially in three respects; for, as the Light is 1. The
dispeller of darkness. The excellency of the divine Truth.
2. The shewer of things. 3. The effecter of generable Creatures.
So is Truth: for,

First, As the Light, when it arises, chaseth away all darkness, and
suffers not the same to adhere unto it; whereupon the Apostle says, 2 Cor.
6.14. Truth expels errors.
What agreement is there betwixt light and darkness? Even so, this Truth when
it shines, dispelleth, and drives away all errors and ignorance from the
minds of all wherein it rests: And therefore Father Zachary says, That
Christ, which is Truth it self, when he came to preach this Word of Truth;
came, To give light to them that sit in darkness, Luke 1.79.
and in the shadow of death: i. e. To disperse those mysts of ignorance and
errors, which had ouer-shadowed the whole face of the Earth.

Secondly as the Light when it shines, displayeth it self, and pierces every
transparent body, though never so solid, and makes all things manifest, what
they are; for in the dark, Ephesians. 5.13. Truth shows what every thing is.
there is no certainty of colors, white from black is scarce discerned; there
is no certainty of things, Gold cannot be known from Copper: but when the
Light shines, it presently shows what every thing is. Even so, though while
we are ignorant of Gods will, evil may be deemed good, and good, evil; yet
when this Truth of God shines: i. e. this Word of God is Preached, it makes
known every thing what it is; it shows the true God from the false, the true
service of God, from the false superstition of men; the true Church of Christ,
from the false Synagogue of Satan, and the true members of Christ, from the
false hypocrites of the World. Hence it, is, that the wicked cannot abide the
Truth, John. 3.19.
Because their works are evil; and by the preaching of the same, their works
are manifested to be so: And therefore Saint Paul says, That the Preachers of
Gods Word, are oftentimes become enemies unto the wicked, Gal. 4.16.
because they tell them the Truth.

Truth begets us unto God.
Thirdly, As the Light when it arises, does so heat, and hearten every thing,
that it is most truly said; Sol and homo generat hominem, The Sun and Man
begets a Man: Even so this Truth of God, and the Preaching of the same, is the
only means whereby we are regenerate, and begotten again, to be the Sons
of God; as the Apostle shows.

And this is that Truth, whereby God shows himself to be abundantly true;
because as Hugo says, In sacra Scriptura non solum bonitas est, quod
praecipitur; and faelicitas, quod promittitur; sed etiam veritas est, quod
dicitur: Whatsoever is said in the holy Scripture, 2 Cor. 1.20.
it is absolutely true, without any error; and the promises of God are as
sure, as if they were already performed: for he is yea, and Amen, i. e. True in
himself, true in his works, and true in all his words: And this Truth of the
Lord indureth for ever; for, He will not alter the thing that is gone out of
his mouth, neither will he suffer his Truth to fail: But when we forget both
him and our selves, Luke 1.72.
he will still be mindful of his promise, and remember his holy covenant.

And therefore, seeing that as the Light is so excellent a thing, the
firstborn of all visible Creatures, and the very comfort of every afflicted
heart, that dispelleth all darkness, discovers all things, and the
procreatiue cause of all Creatures; so is this Truth of God, What we ought to
do.
of that transcendent excellency, as that it is the best guide of our lives,
and the sole means to save our souls. It should teach us,

First, Comparare veritatem, To purchase this Truth, and to get the same unto
our selves by any means. First, to spare no cost to get that Truth. Matthew.
It is that Treasure ^id in the field, to gain which the wise Merchant sold
all that ever he had: no labor is too great, no cost is too dear, to gain
this Truth.

Multa tulit, fecitque puer, sudauit and alsit. Horat.
And as another says; -- Ardua quamuis
sit via, non metuit virtus inuicta laborem.


If the Gentiles did toil, and moyle, and sweat, and spare no pains to get a
little measure of humane learning, which did almost nothing else but puff them
up with pride; what pains ought we to take, to search and seek for this
Divine Truth, which is only able to save our souls?

Secondly, Retinere veritate^, to let pass this truth, Secondly, to hazard all
we have in defense of this Truth.
when once we have attained unto the same, by no means; but to keep it and to
retain it unto death: for so Solomon says, Buy the truth, but sell it not, i.
e. when you have gotten it part not from it: and this is no small task: Non
minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri: But it is as difficult a thing, to
retain it, as it is to find it: for seeing the truth is like the light, and
the light is many times obscured with clouds and darkness; so the truth is
opposed by error and ignorance; it is envied and hated by the sons of men;
and as Tertullian says, it has been ever seen, Juellus in Apol. ex Tertul.
Apolloget.
Veritatem in terris peregrinam agere, and inter ignotos facile calumniatores
inuenire; That the truth was entertained on earth but as a Pilgrim, and a
Stranger, that easily finds enemies in every place, and scarce friends in any
place: and so the Book of God, and the story of times does make it plain; how
the Professors of this Truth, were always persecuted; and the Truth it self
sought to be suppressed by the sons of darkness. Moses and Aaron were
withstood by Pharaoh, and resisted by Iannes and Iambres, and the rest of the
Sorcerers of Egypt. The Prophets were so vehemently and so generally persecuted
by the Jews, that Saint Stephen asks them, Acts 7.52.
Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? and Christ himself,
which was borne to this end, Vt testimonium perhiberet veritati, That he might
bear witness unto the Truth, John 18.37.
was resisted unto death; and so all the Martyrs and faithful witnesses of
this eternal Truth, can bear witness what they suffered in the defense of
Truth.

What is needful for us, if we would retain the Truth.
And therefore, if we would retain the truth, we have need of Patience, we
have need of Courage, and of a constant Resolution, never to suffer this
Heavenly Truth to be taken from us, until our selves be taken out of this
wretched life. Let us lay before us the examples of the Patriarchs and
Prophets, of Christ himself, of his holy Apostles, and of all his blessed
Martyrs, which thought not their lives too dear to defend this Truth; and let
us not be degenerate children of such worthy Progenitors, as transmitted this
Truth unto us with the loss of their lives.

That Truth at last will ever prevail.
And though we have need of Patience, to suffer much in the defense of Truth,
yet we may be confident, that Truth will prevail and get the victory; for as
no darkness can so swallow up the light, but that in its appointed time, it
will gloriously return again; so no power of darkness can so suppress the
Truth, but at last it will appear as the clear day. Because as the nature of
error is such, Cokus de iure regis Eoclesiastico.
that although none be to withstand it, yet as the smoke, at last it will
vanish of it self; so the nature of Truth is such, that although never so many
do oppugn it, yet at last it will prevail as Zorobabel says; and as the
Comicke says, (...); Time will bring out the Truth into Light at last: And
therefore seeing the Truth, is of that invincible power, that although it may
be obscured, yea, for a time with Christ himself be buried, yet it cannot be
extinguished, nor remain perpetually intombed, but that the time will come
wherein nothing is hid which shall not be revealed, nothing is covered which
shall not be manifested. We should arm our selves with confidence and sure
trust in God, which according to his Truth, will at last bring all Truth to
light, and save all them that put their trust in him.

But here me thinks I hear some saying, they would willingly spend their
lives in defense of Truth, if they could tell what were Truth: for now there
are so many Religions, so many Professions, and so many diversities of Opinions
in the world, that it is far easier for them to spend their life, then to
find out what is Truth.

I answer that as Claudian says, Saepe mihi dubiam traxit sententia mentem,
curarent superi terras, an nullus inesset rector. -- He was much distracted,
and knew not what to resolve, whether there was a Divine providence or not;
because when he saw the most admirable course of things, he said, Claud. l. 1.
in. Ruff.
Tunc omnia rebar consilio firmata Dei; He thought it was impossible, that that
could proceed, but from a superior cause: but on the other side, when (as the
Prophet David says) He saw the wicked in such prosperity, and the Righteous
hang down their heads like a Bull-rush; yea, and h^nged many times like the
wicked sons of evil doers; -- Rursus labefacta cadebat religio.
then he thought it could not be that there should be any God; because he
cared not (as he thought) for the righteous people: Even so I must needs
confess, that when I consider the sincerity of that Religion which we teach,
the sum of it plainly expressed in the Scriptures, and the end of it,
tending only to the glory of God: I do assure my self, that we have amongst
us the very Truth of God: but on the other side, when I consider Quomodo
commutauerunt veritatem Dei in mendacium, How many of us do change this Truth
of God into a lie, when they do live clean contrary to what they Profess;
and some of the best of us, even of the Teachers of this Truth, do lead our
lives, not only as they do, whom we daily condemn for such intolerable
corruptions, unbeseeming Christians; but also in many things, as Pagans who
know not God; It makes me often muse, and Nicodemus-like to ask, how can these
things be? John 3.
to have the Truth amongst us, and yet to have such pleasure in vanity, and to
seek after leasing: Psalm. 4.
For our Savior prays for his servants, that God would sanctify them
through the Truth: John 17.17.
and yet behold the fruits of our Sanctification. It was said of old, Mos est
praelatis praebendas non dare gratis; o Monachi vestri stomachi sunt amphora
Bacchi; vos estis Deus est testis turpissima pestis.

Sed been nummatis aut little sanguine natis.


And now the world says of some of us; We sell our Churches, we purchase
Lands, we raise our sons to worldly honors, we suppress whom we lift,
though never so good, we raise our friends though never so bad, and what not?
What should I say any more? what (say they) can Rome do more? or what more do
we then the Heathens do? or as our Savior says, Do not the Publicans and
Sinners even the same? and if these things be done in a green tree? If this be
the life of us that are as the light of the world, what shall we say of others,
which by Profession are lay secular men? I take God to witness, before whom I
stand, and by whom I shall be judged, that I have admired, and often grieved at
my heart, not only to hear, what perhaps the adversaries of the Truth, or
some lewd dissolute men that neither love God, nor his Ministers, but are ever
ready to speak the worst of all, for the offense of few, might falsely say
against us; but also to see how dissolute, how worldly, and how conformable to
the world, boon companions, fashionable to all Companies, a great many of us
do live: Nec Iouis imperium, nec Phlegetonta timent.

And therefore I wonder not, that the simple are brought to their nonplus to
see Truth and Wickedness thus linked together in the same persons:

Romans 1.18.
But when I consider what the Apostle says, that the Gentiles did hold the
Truth in unrighteousness; I must needs acknowledge that wicked men may have
the theoricke knowledge of the Truth, and teach this Truth unto others; and yet
be castawayes themselves; for so our Savior says, that many shall come in the
last day, and say, Lord open unto us, for we have prophesied in thy Name, and
done many great works through thy Name, to whom the Lord shall answer, I know
you not; depart from me you workers of iniquity.

Romans 3.3.
Besides, as the Apostle says of the Jews, What if some did not believe, shall
their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? God forbid: c. 10.16.
or what If all did not obey the Gospel, or that some of the branches be
broken off? Shall this hinder the salvation of the rest? God forbid; So I may
say of us: What if some of us, what if many of us, even the best of us, should
be, as the world says we are? should that prejudice the rest, and especially
the Truth of God? God forbid: I hope I may boldly say it, that the world cannot
say, nor any man in the world deny it, unless he puts on the face of the
father of lies; but, as we have had many Reverend and faithful Bishops, many
grave and painful Preachers, that have spent their strength in the expressing,
and sacrificed their dearest blood in defending this Truth; so we have still
many worthy and godly Bishops, and many holy and heavenly Ministers, Parcite
paucorum diffundere crime^ in omnes. Spectetur meritis quilibet apt suis.
that do most uprightly walk in the Truth of God, and shall these be
condemned and reproached for the offense of others? Shall all be blamed for the
offense of few? No, God forbid, let every horse bear his own burden: for
every man shall be judged according to his own works.

And therefore though as in the field of Gods Church, there are Tares as well
as Wheat; so in our Priestly dignity there are many amongst us, that are not of
us, (of whom I understand what I said before) that are like Statuae
Mercuriales, which show the way to others, but walk not one step themselves;
or like those skillful Cooks that dress good meat for others, but taste not
a bit thereof themselves; or rather that feed not the flock at all, but feed
themselves upon the flock of Christ: and gather wealth to themselves in steed
of gayning souls to God; yet let GOD be true, and every man a liar, and let
not the wicked life of some men, scandalize this eternal Truth of God: we have
it now amongst us: It was purchased by pains, preserved by blood, and most
gloriously continued to this very day: and I do assure my self, that as there
were seven thousand men in Israel which bowed not their knees to Baal: 1 Kings
19.18.
so there be many thousands of men in England, that if they wanted Ink to
defend that Divine Truth which we do Profess, would maintain the same with
their dearest blood; and I boldly set it down, that if Satan should be let
loose to persecute the Saints of God; I do unfeignedly wish my burning bones
might first give light unto all them that desire to walk in this Truth But we
have more cause to pray to God to defend the Defendor of this Truth: not only
by his Royal Authority, whereby we do enjoy this Truth in a blessed peace,
but also by his own Divine Pen and industry, whereby he showed himself,
Esse quod est; to be of the Truth indeed, rather then any ways in the least
manner to fear or suspect the disturbance of the same: for God, who is
abundant in Truth, will preserve his own Truth for evermore. And therefore
seeing that, though some of us be wicked, yea, though all of us should be
wicked and deprive our selves of happiness, which I hope our greatest enemies
will not dare to say: yet does not that make the Truth of God of none effect:
Let us be Gens Sancta, custodiens veritatem; a Righteous and a holy Nation,
Esaias 26.
to hold fast this Truth of God, not showing our selves like Rehoboam, that
found shields of gold, but left behind him shields of Brass; to receive the
clear Truth, from our fathers, and to leave the same darkened unto our
children.

Secondly, As the word of God is the primary and most absolute declared Truth,
wherein there is no possibility of error, Quia dicta Iehouae, dicta pura;
Because the words of the Lord are pure words; So the words of men, agreeable to
their understanding conformed to the Truth of things, John 8.44.
are secondarily the Truth of God; because as every lie is from the Devil,
though it should be uttered from the tongue of a Saint, as our Savior shows;
so every Truth is from God, though it were spoken from the mouth of a Devil;
because the Spirit of God is the Spirit of Truth, Et omne verum a quocunque
dicitur, a Spiritu sancto est, And all Truth (whosoever speaks it) does spring
from the Spirit of God, says Saint Ambrose.

Every Truth whatsoever, whosoever says it, proceeds from God.
A sufficient reproof for them that will not hear the Word of God, but from
the mouth of Saints: for we are not to respect who speak, or what they be that
speak, but what is spoken: and therefore if Balaams Ass should preach me
Christ, I would willingly be his disciple; for Saint Paul tells me, that none
can say, 1 Cor. 12.3.
that Jesus is Christ, but by the Spirit of God, and therefore he did not so
much care, who preached, nor how they preached, so they preached Jesus Christ,
because he knew that every truth must needs proceed from the Spirit of Truth.

that we should say nothing but Truth.
And therefore this should teach us to make much of Truth, and not only to
believe the Truth whosoever speaks it; but also to speak the Truth, every man
unto his neighbor, whatsoever comes of it; though it should be like
Cassandra's Prophecy, not believed; or, O dium parere, Beget hatred, as the
Comicke speaks: Quia dilexit Deus veritatem, because as all Truth is from
God; so God loves all Truth whatsoever.

Corruit in platea veritas.
And yet we see, Quod diminutae sunt veritates a filijs hominum, The Truth is
trodden down in the street, and the faithful are minished from among the
children of men; Psalm. 12.1.
we are all like the Cretians, always liars; and though the godly man keeps
his promise unto his neighbor, Psalm. 15.5.
though it were to his own hinderance; yet, now we seldom think of any
promise, unless it be for our furtherance to attain unto our own desires: so
far are we from Truth. But we must all love Truth, and follow after Truth,
if we would be children unto him that is abundant in Truth. And so much for the
fifth Particle of Gods goodness: Of Gods abundant Truth.

CHAP. X. Of the large extent of Gods mercy, and of the remission of all kind
of sins, and the useful application of the whole Attribute of Gods goodness.
THe sixth Particle of Gods Goodness, is, God is merciful to all men.
that he reserueth mercy for thousands, and that (as I understand it) two
manner of ways; 1. Extensiuely. 2. Successively.


First, he means that his Mercy is not like a carnal Patrons love, which
commonly reaches no further then his kindred; he can prefer none else: Nor
yet like great men's favors, which extends no further then their servants,
their greatness is no greater; but Miserationum Dei multitudo numerari, Basil
in regulis contract. q. 15.
and magnitudo mensurari non potest; The mercies of God are so many, that they
cannot be numbered, and so great that they cannot be measured: so that he has
enough in store, to help not only a few, but also many multitudes, thousands:
he has enough for all: being not like Isaac that had but one blessing; Genesis
27.38.
for he has many blessings for every one.

Secondly, Gods Mercy lasts for all times, even for ever and ever.
he means that his Mercy is not for any set Period of time, which is the
property of all other things, even of the greatest Monarchs: they have but
their time, and when that time is gone, they can do nothing, which a little
before seemed to be able to do all things: but Gods mercies are tied to no
time, but they continue from generation to generation: they are like a
springing well, that can never be dried; or like the Lamp that is fed with the
oil of immortality: And this the Word reserving, does most plainly show, that
he has mercy enough in store, not only for the fathers that believe in him,
but also for their children and for their childrens children, even unto a
thousand generations, of them that love him and keep his Commandments: Good
Parents do leave the best patrim^ny unto their children. Romans 11.28.
O then what a Patrimony do good parents purchase unto their children, to have
the Mercies of God reserved and laid up in store for thousands of them; and (as
the Apostle says of the Jews) to make them to be loved for their fathers
sakes? Most happy are those children which have such fathers as do fear God,
and keep his Commandments. And so much for the sixth Particle of Gods
goodness. Reserving Mercy for thousands.

Forgiveness of sins, our chiefest comfort. Rom 4.7.
The seventh Particle of Gods goodness is, that he forgiueth iniquity and
transgression and sin: Here is the last but not the least act of Gods
goodness expressed: For herein consists all our happiness, Blessed is the
man whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. And here by
these three words God understands three sorts of evil.

1. By Iniquity, is understood original corruption. 2. By Transgression, is
meant the outward and actual commission. 3. By Sin, is understood the height
of all abomination,
No sinner excluded from hope of pardon.
The custom of sinning, and the greatest sins:

For God depriues not these from hope of Pardon, if these come to him with
penitent hearts: and therefore, that none should despair of his goodness, he
shows that he can forgive all these, and forgiving these, he forgiueth all.

But here I must have leave to take away the veil from Moses his face, and to
look further then the Jewish Tabernacle; for as in Ezekiels vision, Ezekiel.
10.10.
Rota erat in rota, Gospel was in the Law; and Law in the Gospel; (as Saint
Gregory expounds it;) so here I find all this to be Gospel, and I see Jesus
Christ in every word; for in Christ, Coloss. 1.14.
we have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins: and so
of all the rest of these Graces, we have them all by Christ: for though the
Law came by Moses, yet (as Saint John says) Grace and Truth, yea, Mercy and
Peace, and all the other good that we have, John 1.17.
we have them all through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And thus by the help of Gods Spirit, we have thus far sailed through the
boundless Ocean of Gods goodness, and in all this we can show you no more
then little drops of rain, or small sparks of fire, What we should learn
from this doctrine of Gods goodness.
in comparison of the huge elements of fire and water; so great is his
goodness, and so unable is our small understanding to apprehend the greatness
of Gods goodness. It should teach us,

First, to be afraid to sin; for there is mercy with God, First, to be afraid
to sin.
that he may be feared, or if we have sinned, to make us presently to forsake
our sins and to be sorrowful for our offenses; for the mercy of God leads
us to repentance, says the Apostle. And herein is the difference betwixt the
wicked and the godly man's application of Gods goodness.

First, the wicked considers how gracious and how merciful the Lord is, as
well as the best; but he makes the worst use of this that possible can be, for
he says unto himself, Ezekiel. 18.32.
that the mercy of God is great, and he desires not the death of a sinner,
which is most true; but then he inferres a most damnable consequence, How the
wicked do abuse Gods goodness. Romans 2.5.
that therefore he may the more boldly go on in sin, or at least with the
less fear offend his God: and so he makes the grace and goodness of God, to
be as an horse to carry away his sins, or as his sole encouragement, to go
on in sin, and thereby he heapeth unto himself wrath against the day of
wrath; because (as the wise man says) Mercy and wrath come from God, and his
indignation falls down upon sinners. But,

Secondly, the godly considering the goodness of God, do thereupon
exceedingly fear to sin, because they are loath to offend so good a God, The
consideration of Gods goodness is a means to preserve the good men from sin.
that has been so gracious and so bountiful unto them; and if at any time
through their infirmity, they do offend him, they will presently return to
God, because they know God is ever ready to receive them; and so they make the
consideration of Gods goodness, to be a hinderance of their sinning, and
offending God; and to be a furtherance of their repenting, and return to God.
And I would to God we would all make this use of the Mercy of God, and say
with that Christian Poet, Ah miser, an summi quoniam propensa parentis
Ad veniam est bonitas, in scelus omne ruis?


Ah wretched men that we are; shall we abound in sin, because God abounds in
goodness? God forbid: for that were, to turn the grace of God into wantonness:
and to abuse his goodness for our destruction, and not to use it for our
salvation. And therefore the better God has been to us, the more we should
bleed to offend that God: we should call to mind, if we can, wherein God
wronged our names, that we should so often, at every word almost, abuse the
most sacred name of God; or when he was hard to us, that we should so hardly
deal with him, as by our sins we do, to render him evil for good, and
hatred for good will.

Secondly, never to despair of Gods Mercy. Romans 5.2.
Secondly, this Doctrine teaches us, never to despair of Gods Mercy, for where
sin abounds grace superaboundeth, i. e. though thy sins be never so
great, never so many, yet the Mercy of God is greater; and therefore thou art
deceived Caine, to say, Genesis 4.13.
Thy sin is greater then can be forgiven thee: for though my sin were
greater then ever has been committed, yet it is not greater then God can
forgive me; or though I were never so full of sins, yet is God more full of
mercies; because no sins of man can exceed the Mercy of God, Chrysostom. hom.
19. in Genesis
as Saint Chrysostom says: and therefore though my sins were never so many,
even as many as have been committed in the world, since the beginning of the
world; Esaias 44.22.
yet seeing the Lord can put them all away like a cloud, and though they were
never so heinous, even as red as scarlet, yet seeing the Lord can make them as
white as snow, I ought never to despair of the grace and Mercy of God, Quia
semper inueniam Deum benigniorem qua^ me culpabiliorem; Because I shall be sure
to find God more Merciful, then I am sinful, as Saint Bernard says;
Bernard. ser. 1.
Et quia vberior Dei gratia, quam precatio nostra, semper plus tribuens, quam
rogatur; And because God is ever re^dier to forgive, then we are to crave
pardon; and does always bestow more then usually we desire, as Saint Ambrose
says; Ambros. super Luc. l. 5.
Et deserentes se non deserit, And does not always leave them which forsake
him, as Saint Gregory says; Sed and impios quaerit, qui eum non quaerebant,
But does oftentimes seek for those wicked men, Greg. ho. 22. super illud, Ecce
caeperunt excusare, etc.
that never sought for him. And this is the chiefest end, and the rightest use
of the Mercy of God; for as Medicamentum propter vulnus, The salve is made for
the wound, and not the wound, because I have a salve; so the Mercy of God is
taught to heal our wounded souls, and not to encourage, us to wound our
souls with sin, says Saint Augustine.

But here it may be objected, Ob.
that there is a sin against the Holy Ghost, which cannot be pardoned, and
therefore all sinners cannot from hence conceive hope of pardon.

I answer, first, Sol. What the sin against the holy Ghost is. Beza ho. 28.
de pass. Dom. That sin is called irremissible, three ways.
that although we may partly know what this sin is, viz. A willing, witting,
malicious, total apostacy; yet I say we can never discern where it is, Sine
rarissimis inspirationibus, Without some rare and special inspiration, (as
Beza says) which few or none can now say he is sure of.

Secondly, I say that a sin may be called irremissible three ways.

First, Priuatiuely, when the sin by congruence of merit deserves damnation,
though by the congruence of Gods Mercies, it may be pardoned; and so are all
sins irremissible, if we consider their just desert.

Secondly, Contrarily, when the sin does not only deserve punishment, but
also opposes pardon, and refuses all the means of remission: and so is the
sin against the Holy Ghost irremissible, because it not only not seeks,
but also rejects and opposes pardon.

Thirdly, Negatiuely, That there is no sin in the world, but God can forgive
it.
when the sin can no ways be remitted, and so in my judgment is no sin
unpardonable. For though in regard of our impenitency, and perpetual
obstinacy, in resisting the holy Ghost, as S. Steven said of the stiff-necked
Jews, this sin shall never be forgiven, as our Savior says; yet in regard
of Gods infinite Mercies, which both for number and greatness, do exceed all
sins; and in respect of Gods power, which is able to do all things, and to
subdue all things unto himself; I say this sin, and all sins are
pardonable, and can be forgiven if we could repent, and ask forgiveness of
the same; else should our sins be more infinite then Gods mercies; which is
impossible: And therefore whatsoever thy sins have been, never so great,
never so many; sins of darkness, sins of Death, sins more in number
then the sands of the Sea, yet if thou have but that grace, to wish for grace;
(if thou do it from the bottom of thy heart,) despair not of the Mercy of
God, but call, and cry, and say unto him, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner; 1
John ^.7.
and the blood of Jesus Christ shall cleanse thee from all sin: Esaias 42.3.
for a bruised reed he will not break, and a smoking flax he will not
quench. O Lord, who is a God like unto thee?

What a heinous sin it is to despair of the Mercy and goodness of God.
It is said of Judas that he sinned more in despayring of the mercy of God, then
in betraying of his Savior Christ, for the betraying of his master, was but
the corruption of man, but the despairing of Gods mercy, was a denial of this
goodness of God: and so to make God cruel, at least not so good, as he was
evil; then which, a greater indignity cannot be imagined, against the Divine
Majesty: and therefore whatsoever our lives have been, as bad as Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 33.1.2. etc.
or worse then Manasses, yet let us us not add this unto all the rest of our
sins, which alone will prove unto us worse then all the rest, to despair of
the grace and goodness of GOD; Heb. 4.16.
but rather let us in the name of Christ, draw near unto the Throne of Grace,
and we may be sure, to find mercy against the time of need.

Thirdly, to imitate God in all these particulars of Gods goodness.
Thirdly, This Doctrine teaches us to Imitate God herein, in all these special
points of goodness. For though there be many inimitable works of God, wherein
it is a sin to attempt to do the like, as Mundos fabricare, mortuos
suscitare, and inter fluctus, ambulare, To create worlds, to raise the dead, to
walk among the waves, and the like, yet we are commanded to be holy as he is
holy, and to imitate him in goodness, that so we may be the Children of our
Father which is in Heaven. And therefore, First, to be Merciful. Luke 6.36.
Ovid. de ponto cleg. 9. Sta^^us in Thebaide.


First, we should be merciful, as he is merciful.

Regia (creed mihi) res est succurrere lapsis. And as another says, Pulchrum
est vitam donare petenti; It is a pleasant thing to be pitiful: But the man
of blood, or the son of cruelty, can never be the Child of the God of mercy;
for, Job 6.14. Matthew. 26.11.
he that has no mercy, has cast away the fear of the Lord, says holy Job.
And yet alas, mercy is now gone out of our Country; The poor are ever with
you (says our Savior) and never so many poor as now; That there is a great
want of Mercy amongst us.
for in Court and Country, in Church I am sure, we are almost all beggars, and
yet we may labor not only all night, with the Apostles, but all the days of
our life, and get nothing; because we have nothing to give, such is our time,
that if ever that saying was true, it is now true; Si nihil attuleris, ibis
homere for as: Most is sold, souls and all, little is given, either in Church
or Commonwealth; and all is spent upon our selves, and upon our friends, and
not upon the painful servants, or poor members of Jesus Christ. 2 Samuel 24.23.
It is said of Araunah, that being but a Subject, as a King he gave unto the
King; but we go like Princes, in soft rayments, and we fare like Kings, Luke
16.
daintily every day; and we give like bankerouts, not a bit to the poor, not a
penny to the painful: But, O beloved, Mutemus vitamsi volumus accipere vitam.
We must change this course of life, if ever we look for eternal life; And we
must remember the afflictions of Joseph, and put on the bowels of mercy and
compassion, if ever we be the Children of this God of mercy.

Secondly, we should be gracious, that is, amiable, 2. To be gracious.
and affable, and courteous one to another, rather like Titus Vespasian, that
was, Deliciae generis humani; The delight of mankind, delighting only in
doing good; and not like Cinicke Diogenes, or carping Zoylus, that were
unsociable, and unfit for any society.

Thirdly, we should be slow to anger; for, 3 To be slow to anger. Ecc^es. 7.11.
Prou. 14.29.
Anger rests in the bosom of fools: but, he that is slow to wrath, is of
great wisdom; because (as the Poet says,) -- Furor iraque mentem
praecipitant.

Wrath and fury do so blind the mind and judgment of man, Ne possit cernere
verum; That as Cato says, He cannot discern betwixt good and evil: And
therefore Euripides says, (...)
(...);


Whosoever precipitately fostereth anger, must needs fall into an evil end,
because nothing can more prejudice man in the whole course of his life, then
the poisonous weed of wrath, and the bitter fruits of hasty anger.

Fourthly, we should abound in all goodness; 4. To abound in all goodness.
for the more good we do, the more excellent, and the more god-like we shall
be: for good cannot proceed but from God, and cannot tend any where but to
God. And we are all Trees in Gods Vineyard, well planted, well fenced, and
well watered; for our Land is good, our Law is good, our Service and our
Sermons good: And therefore we should be good, and bring forth good fruits,
Math. 3.10.
meet for repentance; or else, we shall be hewn down, and cast into the
fire: for, though it be very true, that he is a good man, S. Chrysostom. in
sermon. de virt. and vit.
which does no evil; yet is it as certainly true, Malum esse non fecisse
bonum, That he is an evil man, which does not good; because there are
privative sins, not to do good, as well as positive sins, to do evil:
And therefore the Jewish Rabbines that have been curious to account all the
Commandments in Moses Law, Munster in precept. aff. and neg.
have found 365. negative ones, just as many as there be days in the year,
and 248. affirmative ones, just as many as there be limbs or bones in a man's
body; not only to teach us, Psalm. 103.1. and 35.10.
that all parts of man, at all times of the year, are to be employed in Gods
service, but also to show unto us, that we are not only to abstain from
evil, 1 Cor. 15.58.
but also to do good: because not only the riotous, and wastfull Steward,
that imbezelled his Masters goods, but also the idle, and thriftlesse servant,
that did no good with his Masters goods, shall be bound hand and foot, and be
cast cut into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
And so we read of Dives, that he is tormented in flaming fire, Non quia tulit
aliena, sed quia non dedit propria; Not because he did evil to any, but
because he did not good to poor Lazarus: Luke 18 11.
And therefore we should all strive, not only with the Pharisee, to be truly
able to say, that we thank God we are not Adulterers, Swearers, Extortioners,
Drunkards, Raylers, Liars, or such like; but also (as Saint Peter bids us) to
add unto our Faith, 2 Pet. 1.5.
Virtue; and to our Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to
Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly
kindness; and to Brotherly kindness, Charity; and so to go on, from one
grace unto another, until at last we do attain unto the perfection of
goodness: for assuredly to do good, will be our chiefest comfort, Romans 2.7.
in life, in death, and after death; for, glory, and honor, and peace, shall
be to every one that does good; and God himself will say unto him, Euge serve
bone; Well done, thou good and faithful servant, Math. 25.23.
enter thou into thy Masters joy.

Fifthly, we should love the Truth, and say the Truth, every man unto his
Neighbor; yea, and so accustom our selves to Truth, Vt mentiri lingua prorsus
ignoret, 5. To accustom our selves to say the Truth.
That our tongu^s should not know how to lie: for, as God is Truth, so Truth
makes us the Children of God: And therefore Pythagoras being demanded, wherein
men become likest unto God, answered, Cum veritatem exercent; Stobaeus Ser. 11.
When they accustom themselves to say Truth.

I do not know two more excellent things, Zach. 8. Veritatem and pacem
diligite.
and more comfortable for the life of man, while he lives here in this World,
then Peace and Truth; Peace to free us from all evil, and Truth to preserve us
in all good. And yet I fear me, we may now take up the Prophet Esayes
complaint, that Truth is fallen in the street; yea, and (as Jeremy says) Is
perished, and clean gone: Esaias 59.4.14. Jerem. 7.18.
for though (as Euripides says) (...). Truth is a simple speech, that requires
neither welt nor guard, yet now we do so cunningly and craftily adorn lies,
That there is a great want of practicing to say the Truth amongst us.
and falsehoods, that we make them pass currantly for Truth; and he that cannot
dissemble, and deceive his Neighbor, is accounted but a fool, that cannot
live in the World: So that now it is grown into a common speech, to say, We
know not whom we may trust; and we do verify that ancient saying, Multis
annis iam peractis,
Nulla fides est in factis
Mel in ore, verba lactis
Fell in cord fraus in factis.
Many years past and gone,
Faith in deeds there is none:
Honey in mouth, words sweet,
Gall in heart, deceit in deed.


But if we will have any part in this God of Truth, we must neither use to
speak a lie, nor to conceal the Truth: for, Qui veritatem occultat, and qui
mendacium prodit, vterque reus est; ille quia prodesse non vult, iste quia
nocere desiderat; Aug. in l. de Agon: christiano.
He that conceales a Truth, and he that inuenteth lies, are both alike culpable
in the sight of God; the one because he will not do good, the other because
he desires to do evil: And though Veritas odium parit; The Preachers of
Truth shall find little grace with men (as Saint Ambrose says) yet must we
not hide the Truth, for any fear; nor yet speak a falsehood, for any gain:
but in all things we must hold fast the Truth, Heraclid. in sua hist. Theat.
Zwing.
if we will be like unto this God of Truth. It is reported of one Idor an
Abbat, that for three things he was most excellent.

First, that he never lied at any time.

Secondly, that he never spoke evil of any man.

Thirdly, that he never spoke any thing, without great necessity.

I only wish we were all like him herein.

6. To abound in the works of mercy.
Sixthly, we should reserve mercy for thousands, that is, to abound in the
works of mercy, and compassion; and that toward all men, either in action, or
affection: for, where effecting means are wanting, God never reiects a
charitable meaning; whereas the doing of good, without good will, or a large
giving, with small charity, proves to be of no validity; because he gives but
externally some things without himself, and not internally, De semetipso; From
his heart: And thus our mercy should extend it self to thousands, because we
have always those before our eyes that have need of mercy; and that in a
double respect.

The outward works of mercy, are principally six.
1. Of a corporal necessity. 2. Of a spiritual misery.
The Schools avouch the first to consist chiefly in six points.

1. Visiting the sick. 2. Feeding the hungry. 3. Clothing the naked. 4.
Redeeming the Captive. 5. Intertayning the Stranger. 6. Burying of the Dead.
And for the second, I see not less forms of pity, then there be deeds of
Charity, or acts of iniquity: In the first respect, the rich may be merciful,
and show pity unto the poor; and in the second respect, the rich may be
pitied by the poorest men in the World; because none are more lamentable, then
those that are poor, and naked, and destitute of the true spiritual riches:
And therefore in both respects, we ought ever to show mercy and compassion,
unto our distressed Brethren.

Now in mercy there are two special acts. Sinners are the men that are chiefly
to be pitied.


1. To see their miseries. 2. To help their infirmities.
1. To see with our eyes, and then to help with our hands, or at least to
pity with our hearts: Dives saw Lazarus full of sores; and we see men now full
of sins, and yet he did not pity him, nor these will not be helped by us;
for, if either by reprehension, or instruction, or by the mildest manner of
aduising them, yea, or by most humbly requesting, the Spiritual Lords, That it
is dangerous to seek to redress the dangerous estate of great men.
and temporal Potentates of this age, to look into their miserable estate,
we would seem to pity them, or make any attempt to help them; they would
make us all to be pitied our selves: and therefore, only lamenting that any
of our Lords Spiritual should be so much temporal, as in any thing to follow
the steps of this world; and our Lords temporal so little Spiritual, in
seeking the Kingdom of Heaven as they use to do; I will turn my speech to
persuade all men, to remember the afflictions of Joseph, and to be merciful
unto the poor distressed members of Jesus Christ.

And although I might easily insert many motives, Motives to persuade us to be
merciful. Matthew. 18.33.
to persuade all men to be merciful, as, that it is a due debt, which we owe
unto our brethren, as our Savior shows, ought not thou to have had
compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee? and the great benefit,
that we shall reap, by being merciful; because He that has mecy on the poor
lends unto the Lord, Molissima corda humano generi dare se natura fatetur
quae lachrymas dedit.
and the Lord will recompense him, that which he has given, and many more
forcible reasons to persuade all men to practice Mercy; yet I will chiefly
commend this same, viz: that hereby we become most like unto our heavenly
father: for we say, that child, is most like his father, which does nearest
represent him in his face, and countenance; and the mercy of God is called the
face and countenance of God, as the Prophet David shows when he says, God
be merciful unto us and bless us, Psalm. 6.7.1.
and show us the light of his countenance and be merciful unto us, and
therefore in showing mercy we become most like unto God: and thereby we do
best please our heavenly Father, which reserueth mercy for thousands.

But now the merciful and pitiful men are minished from among the children
of men: they are dead, and gone, and unmerciful Naballs are stepped up in their
stead, who think all too little for themselves, and every little too much for
the poor. It might be easily proved that the most powerful men, are the
least pitiful unto the poor, and that they which have most money, have least
mercy: In former times they sold their lands, and gave the money unto the
poor, but now they sell the Poor, and beggar many, to buy them lands and
livings; and as the Prophet says, To join house to house, and land to land,
until there be no place for the poor to dwell among them. For behold the
Stranger, the Fatherless, and the Widow, how unmercifully they are dealt
withal; the Stranger is strangely looked upon, the Orphans goods is unjustly
detayned, and the poor Widows wrongfully molested. It is with us, as with
the fishes in the seas, whereof Alciat says, Pisciculos aurata rapit medio
aequore sardas:

That the little sprats, being under the water, are chased and devoured by the
great-ones; and if for fear they spring out of the sea, they are presently
swallowed of the Sea-mues; even so the poor are oppressed at home by their
rich neighbors, and if by Law, they seek to be relieved, they are presently
consumed by the greedy Lawyers; and so, pauper vbique iacet, they do herein,
but leap out of the frying-panne into the fire. But let these unmerciful men
take heed; for the Lord is the auenger of all such, and when their tears
run down their cheeks, they go up into Heaven, Ecclus 35 15. Psalm. 10.14.
and the Lord will hear their cry, and will help them. And therefore it were
well for us, if we would strive, Luke 6.36.
to imitate God herein, and to be merciful as our heavenly Father is
merciful.

And yet I must tell you, that although we must be merciful unto all, we must
know how to be merciful unto every one. For, as there is an undeserved misery,
Arist. rhet: l. 1. c. 8.
wherein mercy is always to be showed, so there may be a just calamity
wherein justice sometimes must be executed, and therein, as Saint Ambrose
says, est crudelitas parcens and misericordia puniens, to spare is cruelty,
and to pity impiety, because among Godly men, to spare wicked and unparalleled
varlets, Claudian de 6. consul. honorij.
-- Violentior armis
Omnibus, expugnat talis clementia gentem:


It would be the ruin of the righteous, and the cherishing of such serpents,
Natura me clementem, respublica seuerum fecit.
as would most maliciously poison us: and therefore Mercy and Truth must go
together; and so showing mercy, we shall be sure to obtain mercy.

Seauenthly, We should be ready and willing, to forgive one another, 7. To
be most ready to forgive one another.
even as God for Christ his sake has forgiven us. For how shall we think,
that God will write our sins in the Sands, if we will write our brothers
faults, in marble? or that he will forgive us a thousand pounds, i. e.
iniquity, transgression, and sin; if we will not forgive our fellow servant
an hundred pence, i. e. some small offense conceived, and conceited against us?
And yet now; -- Scribit in marmore laesus.

It is strange to see what memories we have, perpetually to keep in mind, the
least conceived indignity, done unto us; O we can never forget it; we will
forgive him, but we cannot forget him, he shall come into my Paternoster, but
not into my Creed; i. e. into my Prayer, but not into my favor; a strange
distinction, which Aristotle never found in all the books of Nature, That we
should forget whatsoever we remit unto our neighbors.
and I am sure, cannot be found in all the book of God: It was invented in
Hell, by that prince of subtle Sophisters, to bring many a soul into Hell;
for when God forgiueth our sins, does he not say, that he will blot them out
of his book? there is no reading of them any more, does he not say, that he
will put them out of his remembrance? There is not the least thinking of them,
to be in the least manner offended with us for them: and does he not say, he
will put them away as a cloud, Esaias 1.18.
and he will wash us as white as snow, and then will talk together, and walk
together with us, and be as loving, and as friendly unto us, as if we had never
offended him, there is not the least sign that ever he was offended with us;
and when he threatens the wicked abusers of his most holy name, does he say
any more but that he will not hold them guiltless? that is, Exodus 20.7.
he will not forget their abusing of him, but he will remember it, when they
think least of it, and have perhaps quite forgot that ever they did it: and I
think you will say, this is a fearful saying: and therefore to say I will
forgive him, but I Will think on him, is but a fruitless forgiveness of a
revenging mind, or at least of an unreconciled heart.

And therefore though I say not, we should repose trust of state or life in
mine adversary, without good tokens of sincere reconciliation: because (as
Solomon says) we must not too hastily, or unadvisedly trust a reconciled
enemy; yet I say that in our own hearts, and souls we must so forgive him
whatsoever is past, as never to remember it, never to think on it, as to be a
means, in the least manner, to disturb our charity toward him, to hinder
him of any good, or to do him the least evil whatsoever; but, as we are
toward all others, to be in as perfect love and charity toward him, as if he
had never offended us; yea, and to be so ready, and so willing to embrace his
love and society, as we are to embrace the love of any other, if we thought
his heart to be as upright toward us, as we know our own, 2 Kings 10.15.
to be toward him; as Iehu said unto Iehouadab. And thus if we be merciful,
and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in all goodness, and truth,
reserving mercy, to the uttermost of our ability, for all men, and be ready,
to forgive one another, even as God forgiueth us; and as in our daily prayers,
we desire God to forgive us; then shall we be happy and blessed, and be the
children of the most highest. And so much for the second attribute of God here
expressed, that is, his Goodness.

CHAP. XI. Of the Justice of God, how just is God in all his works, and
especially in the not absoluing or clearing of wicked unrepentant sinners.
3. Attribute, i e. Gods Justice.
WE have seen come small sparks of Gods boundless incomprehensible goodness,
we are now to consider the last part of his description, i. e. his Justice,
and severity against sin and sinners; an act never used until we abuse his
goodness; and therefore left last to be expressed; to see if by the first, we
will be reclaymed: if not, God will not be vanquished; but not holding the
wicked innocent, he will visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children,
and upon the childrens children, unto the third and fourth generation.

It is observed by divines, that God shows himself to work and to do
things in many respects, especially, 1. As the absolute Lord, and owner of all
things. 2. As the God or maker and preserver of all things. 3. As the Father,
and Husband, of his Church. 4. As the Judge, and Just rewarder of all men.


And in all these ways, Zanchius de iustitia dei. l. 4 c. 5. q. 2. p. 398.
God is said to be just and righteous: but his Justice, in all these manner of
working, is not the same: for,

First, As the absolute Lord of all things, whereby he chooses or rejects,
gives or denies his grace, to whom het will; the Justice of God herein, is
the Will of God, as our Savior shows, saying; May not I do what I will with
mine own? Matthew 20.25.
or as the Apostle says, Has not the potter power over the clay, of the same
lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor: Romans 9.21.
And in all these things there is no iniquity with God: but he is righteous in
all his ways, and holy in all his works; and his Will is the rule of justice:
and must needs be just, because he has, ius absolutum, a most absolute right
over all things: Whatsoever God does is just, and all things that are just, are
just because he does them.
and therefore all those acts must needs be just, which are done by him, which
is justice it self, and that pure fountain, from whence all springs of
justice do proceed: for it is a sure rule, that God cannot be said properly
to do things, because they are just, but that those things are just, because
he does them: therefore Abraham thought it a just thing to sacrifice his
son, because it was Gods Will to require it: so that in this respect, the
Will of God is the Justice of God.

Secondly, As the God of all things; that is, the Creator, Esaias 46.4.
Preserver, and guider of all things; the goodness of God is said to be the
Justice of God.

Thirdly, As he is the Husband of his Church, 1 Timothy 4.10.
and the Father of his Elect; the mercy of God, in giving Christ, and the
obedience of Christ in satisfying the Law for us, is said to be the Justice of
God.

Fourthly, As a Iust-Iudge; the Justice of God is, the distributing of reward
unto every man, according to his just desert; and so (...) Iustitia, is quasi
(...) bipartitio; a parting to every one his own due deserved portion; and it
is called iustia distributiua a distributive justice. And this is that which is
meant in this place when he says, that by no means he will make the wicked
innocent, but will visit the sins of the fathers upon the children and it is
here set down, two special ways.

Gods distributive Justice is here expressed two ways.
1. Negatiuely, by the negation of absolution unto the wicked, not making the
wicked innocent. 2. Positiuely, by the expression of the greatness of the
punishment which shall be inflicted upon them, but visiting the sins of the
fathers upon the children.
For the first, he says that absoluing he will not absolve the wicked; and
alas, We are all gone astray, Psalm. 14.2.4.
we are all become wicked, and there is none of us that does good, no not one:
and therefore what shall we do, if God will not do this fatherly favor, to
absolve us?

Nay, he said even now, that he would do it; that he would forgive iniquity
and transgression and sin: and therefore now with the same breath to say, he
will by no means clear the wicked, seems strange. Aug. de ciuitate dei. l.
8. c. 3.
I answer, that for the clearing of this point alij atque alij aliud atque
aliud opinati sunt, (as Saint Augustine says in another case) diverse men have
made diverse answers.

Some say that sins must be distinguished; as, into sins of humane
infirmity, and simple ignorance; as when we do the things we would not do,
or many times we do the things we know not to be evil: and these sins
God is always ready to forgive: because he remembers that we are but dust,
and cannot do the things we would do: or into sins of wilful ignorance,
when men will not understand, that they may do well; but do make a covenant
with death, Esaias 28.15.
and an agreement with hell it self, Job 2^.14.
and do say unto God, depart from us, for we will not have the knowledge of
thy ways: and into sins of obstinate malice, from whence proceed, those
horrid and horrible fearful sins, that do exceedingly provoke the wrath of
God: as

That idolatry is a most horrible sin.
First, Idolatry, which is either the worshipping of the true God, with false
worship, or the giving of the true-worship, only due to the true God unto the
creature, whether visible or invisible, whether inwardly conceited in our
minds, or outwardly exposed to our senses; for so the Apostle says, that
because the Gentiles knowing God, glorified him not as God, but changed his
glory into the Image of birds, beasts and creeping things; Romans 1.18.24.
therefore the wrath of God, was reueiled from Heaven, against their
vngodlinessse, Deuteronomy. 32.17.
and he gave them up to vile affections, Deuteronomy. 7.26.
to do those things which were not convenient: for this sin of Idolatry, is
so offensive unto God, that it is termed a service of the Devil: and
therefore abominable, and accursed by God, and most dangerous unto Man.

Secondly, a perfidious tempting of God, The doubting of Gods goodness toward
us, is a most horrible wickedness. Psalm. 78. etc. 1 Cor. 10.9.
as whether he be with us, or whether he can or will do what he promised for
us: for so the Psalmist says, that the Israelites tempted God in their hearts,
and spoke against him saying; Shall God prepare a table in the Wilderness? He
smote the stony Rock, so that the water gushed out, and the streams flowed
withal; but can he give bread also, or provide for his people? and therefore
the Lord was so wroth: that the fire was kindled in Jacob, and there came up
heavy displeasure against Israel; because they believed not in God, and put not
their trust in his help: for God is so able and so willing to help his own
servants, that none can doubt thereof, without horrible in^ignity offered him;
And therefore we should ever rely upon him, and never doubt of this infinite
goodness of God.

Thirdly, a murmuring against God, To murmr, or to be discontented with God,
a heavy sin. Genesis 4.5.
and complaining secretly as it were in our hearts, that he does either press
us sore with heavy yoakes and punishments; or that he deals not so gently and
so lovingly with us, as he does with others: for thus Caine murmured against
God, that he accepted the oblation of Abell better then his; and thus the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.10.
the children of Israel murmured against God, that he had dealt hardly with
them, in bringing them out of Egypt to suffer hunger and thirst in the
wilderness; and therefore they were destroyed of the destroyer: and therefore
we should beware of murmuring, which is nothing worth, and take heed of this
muttering against God; for there is no thought so secret, that it shall go for
naught, Wisd. 1.11. Job 13.15. Romans 8.28.
but we should with Job in all estates put our trust in him, though he kills us
knowing that he works all things for the best for them that love him.

Fourthly, an obstinate contumatious rebelling against God, To refuse to obey
God, a fearful sin.
as when we refuse to hear his word, and will not be obedient unto his laws;
but will say with the Jews, Let us break his bonds asunder and cast away his
cords from us: Psalm. 2.3.4.5.
for against these the Psalmist says; He that dwells in Heaven shall laugh
them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision; and then shall he speak
unto them in his wrath, and vex them his sore displeasure: And therefore we
should take heed of rebelling, and refusing to hear and to obey the Word of
God, least the wrath of God should be suddenly kindled against us, and consume
us.

To oppose the known truth, a most horrible sin. Number. 14.37.
Fifthly, Blasphemy against God, and the slandering of the Truth of his Doctrine,
especially when we oppose it fully, though we know it to be Truth most
certainly; as the spies that were sent to view the Land of Canaan did; and
therefore dyed by the plague, before the Lord: for this is a sin, of a
malicious wickedness, and a branch of that unpardonable sin against the Holy
Ghost; and therefore we should ever take heed to oppose the Truth against our
consciences.

Deuteronomy. 27. Disobedience to Parents a most fearful sin.
Sixthly, Disobedience, and dishonoring of our Parents; for so the Lord says,
Cursed be he that despises his Father and his Mother, and let all the people
say, Amen. And therefore we find heavy judgments inflicted upon Cham;
Absalon, and all other like children of disobedience; and the Lord requiring,
that upon the bare testimony of the Parents, saying, This our child is
disobedient, and will not be ruled by us; they should carry him out of the
City, and stone him with stones till he dyed.

Genesis 4.10. The shedding of man's blood, a most heinous sin.
Seauenthly, The shedding of Innocent blood, especially of those that are the
sons of God; for the voice of blood, as may be seen in Abell, is such a
shril, piercing, undeniable voice, that it will speedily ascend to Heaven and
never depart, until vengeance be powered out upon the sinners.

Oppressing the poor a fearful sin.
Eighthly, The oppressing of the poor, the fatherless and the Widows: for if
you hurt the Poor, and they cry unto me, (says the Lord) Et indignabitur
furor meus, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall wax hot, and I
will kill you with the sword, and your Wives shall be Widows, and your
children fatherless.

Untamed lusts, a most odious sin.
Ninthly, Unbridled wandering lusts, such as were the lusts of the Citizens of
Sodom, and of all those that give themselves, to do adulteries, whoredoms,
and following after strange flesh: for the Lord hates all such lascivious
livers; and therefore destroyed of them three and twenty thousand in one day, 1
Cor. 10.8.
and wrought a most grievous slaughter upon the whole tribe of Benjamin, Judge.
19.25.
for that one foul abuse offered unto the Leuite^ Wife.

Tenthly, Sacrilege and profaning of holy things; for this is a robbing of
God, (as the Prophet shows; Mal. 3.8. Sacrilege a fearful sin.
) and such a high transcendent sin, as that I could far easier fill whole
volumes of most fearful examples of Gods vengeance, executed against
sacrilegious persons, then find you one man, either in Divine or humane
stories, that wronged and robbed the Church of God, and escaped unpunished, both
in himself and his posterity, unto the third and fourth generation.

Eleuenthly, Continual swearing a most dangerous sin.
Continual swearing and profaning of the blessed Name of God; for of all the
sins forbidden in the Commandments, this only, with Idolatry, is forbidden
with sub paena, with a curse, yea a grievous curse denounced against us, if we
will not shun it: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his
Name in vain.

These and such like lewd and wicked sinners, they say, God absoluing will not
absolve; because the doers hereof, have no love of goodness, no care of
godliness, no sense of sin, no remorse of conscience; and therefore is the
Wrath of God so exceedingly kindled against these sinners, sinners (...), these
grievous, huge, and horrible sinners, that he will never forgive them, without
exceeding great repentance.

Indeed I confess, that such grievous sinners are in a grievous case; and that
it is not likely, God would have used such fearful threatenings, but against
heinous sinners; yet I told you before, that no sin was so great, but the
Mercy of God is greater, and able to forgive, if they be able to repent. And
therefore,

Others say, that the former clause, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and
sin; is to be understood of the sins of Gods Elect, be they great, or be
they small, he forgiues them all; and this latter clause, not making the wicked
innocent, to be understood of the sins of the Reprobate, of what quality
soever they be: for, he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, Exodus 33.19.
and whom he will he hardneth, etc.

And I yield this to be true in it self; but, because God only knows
absolutely, How both sentences are reconciled.
Ex priori, from the causes, infallibly, who are his; and we know it only, Ex
posteriori, by the effects of Gods favor: and the fruits of his Spirit; if we
would be assured of the remission of our sins, and would more certainly know
how both these sentences may be reconciled; I say briefly, that the first
sentence, is to be understood, of the penitent and amending sinners, of what
quality soever their sins have been; and the latter clause of continual
unrepentant transgressors: for, God will pardon any sin if you be sorry for
it, and forsake it; but no sin if you continue in it. For God shall wound the
head of his enemies, Psalm. 68.21.
and the hayrie scalpe of such a one as goes on still in his wickedness,
says the Prophet. And therefore if any of us have sinned, yet let us not
continue in sin; for mercy and wrath come from God, and if we continually
sin in the time of grace, we shall suddenly be destroyed in the day of
vengeance; Quia non delinquenti sed peccata relinquenti misericors Deus est,
Because God will not be merciful unto them that offend of malicious
wickedness, Rom 3.8.
and do still go on in sin, that grace may abound, whose damnation is just,
as the Apostle speaks.

But thou will say, thou hopest God will give thee grace to repent, and thou
meanest to leave thy sins, before thou be compelled to leave the world: It
is true (beloved) that our sins shall be pardoned, whensoeu^r we repent: but
we cannot repent, That men cannot repent when they will.
whenever we will; because repentance is the gift of God; and we have not God
at our command; but as a Father truly says? Qui dat paenitenti veniam, non
semper dat peccanti paenitentiam; God which always pardons the repentant
sinner, does not always give repentance unto sinners; but as they neglected
him, Romans 2.5.
so he rejects them, and suffers them to heap unto themselves wrath,
against the day of wrath.

And therefore, though God be slow to anger, and suffers long: yet he is full
of Justice and will not suffer ever; but at last the fire of his fury will be
kindled, and then, Furor arma ministrat, His wrath will quickly afford him
weapons: and as Lactantius says, Tarditatem irae grauitate supplicij
compensabit, He will requite the slownesse of his wrath, with the severity of
his vengeance; for as the old distich says, Ad veniam tardus Deus est, Serior
esse solet vindicta Jeuerior.
ad praemia velox
Sed pensare solet, vt grauiore moram.


God uses to come to punish on leaden feet, but he pays home with iron
hands: he will reach them far, and he will smite them full. And therefore,
To day if ye will hear his voice, Psalm. 95.8.
harden not your hearts, and defer not your amendment till to morrow; for,
Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit; If thou will not do it to day, it
will be far harder for thee to do it to morrow; and if thou will not do it
at all, thou art in a most fearful case; for, God absoluing will never absolve
thee, that is, he will never forgive thy sins, because thou will not forsake
thy sins. And so much for the denial of pardon and absolution unto the
wicked.

CHAP. XII. Of a twofold visitation of God, and the full opening of that
point, how God does, and that justly visit the sins of the Fathers upon the
children, and yet punish none but for his own sins.
FOr the second, GOD says, not only, that he will not absolve the wicked, but
he adds further, that he will visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children. Touching which we must first observe; that visitare est post longum
tempus recordare; To visit is after a long time, to call to mind, to
remember, That there is a twofold visitation of God.
and to see those things again, which we seemed to have quite forgotten: and
we find a twofold visitation of God.

First, when he seems to forget our miseries, to sleep in our afflictions,
even sometimes, until we be almost overwhelmed, with the raging waves of this
world, Matthew. 8.24.
as the Disciples were with the waves of the Sea: Yet at last, when he sees
his time, First, God visits the afflicted.
and not when we think it sit, he will awake, as a Giant out of sleep, and he
will assuage the winds, and rebuke the Seas, and deliver his people out of all
their miseries: thus he remembered Noah, Genesis 8.1.
thus he visited his people that were in Egypt, Exodus 3.7.
and thus when we seem to be forsaken of God, because we are despised among
men; Luke 1.68.
he will, when he sees time, visit us, and redeem us o^t of our distress.

Secondly, God visits the wicked.
Secondly, When God suffers the wicked to go on in sin, and to pass from
one wickedness to another; and yet still to flourish like a green Bay Tree,
to build them houses, to enlarge their possessions, and to have all things at
their desire; he seems to forget their impieties, or to have taken no notice
of their wickedness; yet at last (as the Prophet speaks) when they least
think of it, He will visit their iniquities with the rod, Psalm. 89.32. Psalm.
50.21.
and their sins with scourges. Yea, he will reprove them, and set before
their faces, the things that they have done: and then he will severely punish
all their sins, and that two ways: 1. In themselves. 2. In their children.


First, It is just with God, (and so it seems just with men) To render
vengeance to them that fear not God: For this cause we find, 2 Pet. 2.4.
He spared not the Angels that offended; Nor any man that sinned: but thrust
Adam out of Paradise, destroyed the whole world by the deluge, God will punish
sinners.
Sodom and Gomorrha with fire and brimstone, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Saul,
Nabuchadnezzar, Judas, Herod, and many more he has most severely punished, for
their sins; Ezekiel 18.
and so in brief he says of every one, The soul that sins, that soul
shall die. And therefore this should teach us.

First, Not to frame unto our selves a God, all of Mercy, and not to sing of
mercy alone, but of mercy and judgment together; that as we are to love his
mercy, to be filled with grace; so we might fear his Justice, to preserve us
from sin. For these be the two feet of God (says Saint Bernard) whereupon
he walks all his ways, That we should as well fear Gods Justice as hope
for his Mercy.
and these be the two wings of a Christian, whereby he may fly up into heaven;
Therefore seeing the one without the other, is unavailable to support us, let
us not separate those which God has here and every where else joined together;
but let us embrace Gods goodness to keep us from despair, and let us fear
Gods Justice to preserve us from presumption.

Secondly, This teaches us to expect a day of retribution, for seeing the
Justice of God requires that wicked men should be punished (as the Apostle
shows) and that here many of them do scarce taste of Gods anger, it must
needs be, That the Justice of God requires, there should be a day of
retribution. 2 Cor. 5.10. Rom 2.5. 2 Pet. 2.11.
that all must appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether
it be good or bad: and therefore what manner of men ought we to be in holy
conversation and godliness?

Secondly, God will not only punish wicked men in themselves for their sins,
That God punishes wicked men in their children.
but he will also punish them in their children; Tanquam in carne sua
charissima, As in the dearest things that they love: for he will visit the
sins of the Fathers upon the children. And so punishing their children he
plagueth them; because every man herein is like the woman of Canaan, who said
unto our Savior, Miserere mei Domine, O Lord be merciful unto me, my daughter
is grievously vexed with a devil. Matthew. 15.22.
(...); Basil. sell. ser. 19.
For that the Devils being in her daughter, was a torment, and a misery unto
her self; Simon de Cassia in Euang. l. ^. c. 24.
Quia amor natorum dolorem traijcit in parents; Because the love which the
parents bear unto their children, does transfer the grief of the children
unto the parents: and therefore does God punish a wicked man, both in himself
and in his children.

But although it be Just with God, to visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children; yet this seems strange with men, especially considering the Prophet
says; Filius non portabit iniquitatem patris: The son shall not bear the
fathers sins, neither shall it be said any more, Ezekiel. 18.
that the fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on
edge; but every man shall bear his own sin, and the soul which sins,
that soul shall die. And therefore to reconcile this clause of the Law, with
that of the Prophet, we must discuss this point more at large.

Saint Augustine disputes it, How it stands with Gods Justice to punish the
fathers sins upon the children.
how the child should bear his fathers sins, but he does not directly (as I
find) conclude it.

Saint Gregory concludes it, that if a child follow the sins of his fathers,
he shall not only be punished for his own sins but also for his fathers
sins: but he did not sufficiently dispute it. And therefore that we may
rightly conclude upon sure premises, I must with the Schools distinguish, 1.
Of Fathers. 2. Of Sins. 3. Of children. 4. Of Punishments.


First, Fathers are either proximiores, those that beget us, or remotiores
those from whence we are derived, as Adam: That the sin of Adam, was not
only imputed, but also derived into his posterity, experience it self makes
it plain; and the reason is, (as Aquinas truly says) because Adam now stood,
not as a personal man, but as specificall, i e. as one bearing in himself (as
the stock of a tree does bear all the branches) the whole species, or race of
all mankind: and therefore, if this root had continued holy, Rom 11.16.
the branches had been likewise holy: but he sinning, he produced a most
sinful offspring like himself: because an evil tree could never bring forth
good fruit; Matthew. 7.18.
but in every other man, there is only the person of this or that individual
man; Sins are not traduced from the Parents unto the children.
and therefore the Schools conclude; that no actual sin can be traduced
from the next fathers unto the children: not virtue from the good, not vice
from the bad; for so experience shows, that a good man does not always beget
a virtuous child, nor a drunkard always beget a drunkard, but sometimes the
clean contrary; as when the son of a miserable wretched niggard, proves to
be the most dissolute prodigal spend-thrift in the world; (else would they
ingrosse the whole world to themselves and their posterity) or when an evil
man begets a most virtuous and a godly child, which does not vnusually
happen among men.

And yet we say, that seeing in every child, there is the elementall seed of
all vices, which we have naturally and originally traduced from Adam, there be
two especial things which do commonly cherish and preserve the immediate and
next fathers sins in their children, Two things that further the sins of
the Parents to continue in the children.
that is, 1. Inclination. 2. Immitation.
For,

First, seeing we receive our whole substance from our parents, we are
naturally inclined to follow either the virtues, or the vices; Sepesolet
similis filius esse patri.
either the good qualities, or the bad qualities, of the same substance from
whence we are produced: as the child of a good father to be good, and the child
of a vicious father to be evil.

Secondly, seeing children are like Apes, apt to imitate, Children very apt to
imitate their Parents vices.
and the examples of our Parents, are like Spurs to drive their children on,
to follow what they see, the good carriage of a godly father, is a great
incitement and a most effectual means to work goodness in his children, and
the bad example of wicked Parents, is as a hammer to drive sin and
wickedness into their children: for we see, Quo semel est imbuta recens
seruabitodorem testa diu --

Whatsoever virtues or vices do take root in our bones, when we are children,
will hardly be rooted out of our flesh when we are men.

And if to these two we add instruction, either in good or evil things; I
know nothing more that can be said, to make a perfect man, or a perfect sinner.
These be the inducements and the causes, why wicked men, have commonly wicked
children: (unless they be prevented by Gods special grace,) and we daily see,
that in these respects, Quis tulcrit Gra^^um de seditione loquentem?
not only families to be of like conditions with their Progenitors, as the
Grachi to be seditious, the Iulij ambitious, the Tarquins proud and lascivious,
the thildren of Idolaters to be Idolatrous, and so of the rest; but also
Nations and Countries, to be inclined and much adicted, and as it were endued
which hereditary vices, and that not only in respect of the climate, which I
confess may somewhat move the same, but especially in respect of their
inclination, and pronesse of imitation, to do what their Parents do. For so
we see, how generally it is for men to say, My fathers were so, and therefore I
will be so. And so the Psalmist says, Errauimus cum patribus, Men are apt to
err with their Fathers. But,

Secondly, we must note, This threatening extends but to the great sins of
grievous sinners.
that God does not threaten to visit all the sins of the Fathers upon the
children, but the great and grievous sins of heinous transgressors, as
Idolaters, Blasphemers, Disobedient to Parents, Sacrilegious persons, and
Dispisers of godliness, and the like: for so the Lord himself here
intimates, saying, That he will visit the iniquity, not the iniquities; that
is, Non quamuis iniquitatem, sed eam qua spirituale coniugium dissoluitur, Not
every kind of iniquity, but that whereby the spiritual marriage betwixt God
and us is dissolved, and so makes all our Children, Tanquam meretricios partus;
As the Children of an Harlot, which has broken her faith with her Husband: And
so he expresses himself more plainly, in his Law, saying; That he will
visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth
generation, of them that hate him: And therefore, not of all that do offend
him, but of those that hate him; like the man that will not; with the Jews,
put away his wife for every cause, but for adultery or some like grievous
crime; whereby he is justly provoked to forsake her, and all her brood: Hosea
1.2. c. 2.2. and Ezech. 16.22, etc. This threatening holds not against all the
Children of wicked men.
And so the Lord shows the same at large in Hosea, 1.2. and c. 2.2. and
Ezech. 16.22. etc. And yet,

Thirdly, We must observe that this holds not in all the children of those
that are exceedingly wicked; but as a man renouncing his wife, and children,
may notwithstanding retain some one, or more, which he likes; so does God,
sometimes, accept, some children of some wicked parents; for so we find
Abraham was faithful, though his father Terah, was Idolatrous; and King Josias
was religious, though his father Amon was most impious: and therefore Saint
Gregory and others have distinguished, that this threatening only holds in
those children, which do naturally suck, and willingly imitate there Fathers
vices: But I find this too short of the whole truth, because God many times
visits the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, which not only imitate
their Parents in the like sins, but do perhaps follow after clean contrary
sins, as I showed unto you before. And so the Apostle says, that because the
Gentiles became Idolatrous, and regarded not to know God, but ran a whoring
after other Gods, and so committed spiritual fornication against him;
therefore God gave them and their posterity over, to become so horribly
vicious, as to burn in lust, Romans 1.24.
and vile affections one toward another, and so to commit carnal fornication
and abomination among themselves, and to do those things that were not
convenient.

This threatening is not only against those that imitate their Parents vices.
And therefore I say, that this threatening holds not so much, in those which
give themselves to imitate their Fathers vices, as in those which God in
justice thinks good to punish for their Fathers offenses: for, in that he
says, I will visit the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children; that is, I
will punish the Fathers sins in his Children, I see not how the Child can
any ways by declination from his Fathers sins, escape this infliction laid
on him by God; because (as I collect it) this punishment is not so much
attracted by the Childrens imitation, as inflicted by God for the Fathers
transgression, and is rather a punishment of the Fathers sin laid upon the
Child, then a punishment of any sin committed by the Child: And therefore
he does not say, He will visit those that imitate their Fathers sins, but he
will visit the sins of those that hate him upon their Children; and yet (as
I said before) this does not hold in all, for we see often many godly Children
of wicked Parents: Neither does this threatening pass at most, or in the worse,
but to the third or fourth generation; and sometime he stays his hands at the
first, and gives plentiful graces to the immediate Children of most Idolatrous
and impious Parents; as we see in Josias, and others before cited: for, Exodus
33.19.
he will have mercy, upon whom he will have mercy. And therefore this
threatening can be understood of none else, but of those Fathers, which are so
odious to God, as that he thinks just to punish their posterity, for their
sins: And of those Children of them Fathers, which God in his secret and
unsearchable council thinks fit, thus to punish for their Fathers faults. And
so we are come to consider the punishment to be inflicted, or the manner how
God does this, and yet remains just: for,

Fourthly, we are to understand, that all punishment, is (as some say) either
1. Paenall. 2. Criminal.
or,

To speak more plainly; all punishment is either, 1. Corporal. 2. Spiritual.


For the first, That for the Fathers sins, the Child should be temporally
or corporally punished; there is no question of it: for so we find David
sinned, and the Child begot in Adultery, suffered for it: And for Salomons
sins, Rehoboam lost ten Tribes of Israel. And thus not only those Children
which imitate their Parents-sinnes, but also those that never actually
offended, are many times unquestionably punished for their Fathers faults; yea,
and many times, many other righteous men, The godly are many times corporally
punished, in the punishment of the wicked.
are thus punished in the punishment of the wicked; as those Children which
perished in the deluge, and in the destruction of Sodom, and many other men
and Infants that dyed at the besieging of Jerusalem: And this seems to be no
injustice in God, because otherwise we must take away all justice from men: for
we find it usual in all Nations, for great offenses; as, Crimen lesae
maiestatis, Treasons, murders, and such like, to deprive the Children of their
Fathers goods, or Lands, by reason of their Fathers evils: nay, not only the
Children, Quint. Curtius de rebus gestis Alexandri.
but even all the kindred of a Traitor, were thereby tainted, and disparaged by
the Macedonian Law: And therefore we must abridge God of that which we see just
in man, or else we must yield it is just in God to visit and to punish the
sins of the Fathers upon the Children. But,

For the second, That for the Fathers sins the Child should be spiritually
punished, or inflicted with criminal punishments, it seems more then
strange; and therefore Aquinas, and many others, thinking thereby to reconcile
this place of the Law, That God will visit the sins of the Fathers upon the
Children: And that of Ezechiel, where God says; The innocent Child shall not
bear the iniquity of his wicked Father, do say; that God here does understand
it of temporal punishment, or corporal castigation, which God often times
lays upon the Children for their Fathers sins: But in Ezechiel, God means
that he will not spiritually punish, or eternally plague the Child for the
Fathers sin. And,

I confess, that that place of Ezechiel is to be understood, that God will not
eternally punish the Child, simply for the Fathers sin; for God uses not to
punish any one man, for the sin of any other man: But as the Lord says
himself, The soul which sins, Ezech. 18.4. A difference betwixt
spiritual, and eternal punishment.
that soul shall dye; yet I say, that in Ezechiel he denies not what here he
affirms, and that he means the same thing in both places, if both be
rightly understood: for I make a great difference between a spiritual and an
eternal punishment; that God will eternally punish the Child for the Fathers
sin, I utterly deny; but that he will spiritually punish the Child for the
Fathers sin, I see neither place denying it: For as here he does not say,
that he will eternally punish the Child for his Fathers sins; so there he
does not say, that he will no way spiritually punish the Child for the
Parents faults: but, as here his meaning is not, that he will inflict any
positive evil upon the sons of the wicked, for the wickedness of their
Parents; but that for the iniquity of the Parents, he will shut his hands, and
withold his grace from their Children: and so willingly and justly suffer
them to commit the like, or worse sins, then their Fathers did; because we
being all naturally borne in sin, inclined and prone to all evil, if God
does not by his sanctifying and preventing grace preserve us, we shall be sure
enough of our selves, without any intrusion or infliction of any positive evil
from God, to fall from one wickedness to another, and to commit all sins
even with greediness: So there his meaning is not, to deny the withholding of
his grace from the Children of the wicked, (which is all that here he
threatens) but that he will not inflict any positive punishment upon them, for
their Fathers sins.

And therefore though God says in Ezechiel, that he will not punish the
Children for their Fathers faults; i. e. by any positive punishment; yet does
he not deny, That God denies his graces unto the Children, for the Parents
sins.
but that the privative punishment of denying his grace unto them, for their
Fathers sins, should be inflicted upon them: and that suffering of us to
sin, or not hindering of us to sin, justly inflicted upon us for our
Fathers sins, is a most lamentable, and a most fearful thing; because such
Children, so justly refused to be helped by GOD, and so deservedly left in the
council of their own hands, shall be sure of sins enough of their own, to
be plagued for; that they shall never need to say, Ezech. 18.2.
The Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge:
or that they are punished for their Fathers sins. And so you see, how God
visits the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, and yet punishes every
man, but for his own sins.

The first he does by a spiritual desertion, and denial of grace unto the
Children, for the Fathers sins; and

The second he does by a positive infliction of punishment upon every man,
according to his own sins: for,

As he promises to bless the Children of the godly, for the love that he
bears unto their Parents; (as he says unto Abraham, Genesis 17.7.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee.) So he denies his
grace many times unto the Children of the wicked, for the very hatred that he
bears against their Fathers sins; as most innumerable woeful examples do
make it plain: for you see the Jews forsaking God, to be forsaken of God, to
this very day; and that blood of Christ, which their Fathers spilt, to remain
upon the Children of so many generations: And we see so many Nations of men
suffered, Luc. 1.79.
To sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death; as the seven Churches of
Asia, and many other famous places of Greece, and other Countries; because
their Forefathers have forsaken their first love, and through their
negligence, have extinguished the light of Truth. And being thus left of God,
and deprived of grace, what can be left in them, or derived from them, but the
fruits of that natural corruption which is ingraffed in all men?

And therefore as it is truly said of all the offspring of Jeroboam, that
being bereft of grace, and left unto themselves, (even for their Fathers
sins) They walked in the ways of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 15.34.
the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin; So we may say of the Children
of wicked Parents, that being left as they were borne, in their pure naturals,
for their Fathers impieties, they do imitate the same works, and tread in the
same steps, or worse, (...).
then their Fathers did: And so it falls out true, that as an evil Crow
brings forth an evil egg, so evil Parents, do bring forth for the most
part, evil and wicked Children: God in justice visiting the iniquity of the
Parents upon the Children, unto the third and fourth generation.

And so you see, how God visits the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
Children, Why God withholds his graces from the Children of the wicked.
by withholding his grace from them; and how just it is with God to do the
same, because he is a debtor to no man: and the reason why he deals thus
with the sons of men, is,

First, To show the height of his hatred against sin; fire is kindled in his
wrath, and it shall burn to the bottom of hell; and if his wrath be kindled,
yea, but a little, Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. Psalm. 2.12.


Secondly, To punish the offenders, (as I said before) in their dearest flesh;
to see, if their love to their Childrens welfare, will make them any ways
fear to sin; for we see many men so obdurate, and so hard-hearted unto
themselves, as that they care not what is done, or what becomes of themselves;
but as David was much moved, when he saw the people smitten for his sins; 2 Samuel 2^.17.
and as Jacob halted, when the Angel smote him on the thigh; Genesis 32.31.
so are we many times more grieved to see, and more afraid to hear, that our
Children, and the fruits of our loins, shall be punished then our selves. And
therefore, seeing that fearful curse of the Prophet, To serve God, is the
greatest good that we can do unto our Children.
Let the iniquity of his Father be had in remembrance, and let not the sin of
his Mother be done away; does light so heavily upon the Children of the wicked,
it should teach all Parents that love their Children, To fear the Lord; and to
strive more to get Gods blessing, rather then the greatest patrimony unto our
Children: for they may assure themselves that (as the old verse says) De male
quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres.

If they have enlarged their substance by wicked means, it will be the only
means to cut off all their posterity; as may be seen in Saul, Achab,
Jeroboam, and the like: but the blessing of the Lord perpetuateth the same: And
therefore, as some for the love that they bear unto their Children, will give
themselves unto the Devil, by committing all sins, in oppressing others, to
enrich them; so let us, if we love our Children, cease to sin: for this will
free our selves from woe, and bring the best blessing unto them; and

Secondly, It should teach all Children to be humbled, and to pray to God with
our lyturgy, saying, Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our
Forefathers; but spare us good Lord spare thy people, and give us thy grace,
and forgive us all our sins, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

And thus I have showed thee, O man, Quid sit optimum, What is the chiefest
good; and what we may learn concerning God, that he is an Omnipotent eternal
being, good unto all, specially unto his Saints, and just unto sinners: And
now, Quid nisi vota supersunt, What remains but to apply all this unto our
souls, to believe in him, to love him, and to fear him, and to praise his
name, his blessed name for evermore: for, it is a good thing to sing praises
unto our God; yea, and it becomes well the just to be thankful: Psalm. vlt.
Verse vlt.
And therefore praise thou the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me
praise his holy name; and let every thing that has breath, praise the Lord,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen, Amen.

A Prayer.
O Eternal God, whom to know as thou art, is impossible, as thou have revealed
in thy Word, eternal life; we most humbly beseech thee, to open the eyes of
our understanding, that we may see thee at all times, in all places, and in
all our actions; and give us O Lord thy heavenly grace, that seeing thee, we
may love thee with all our hearts, fear thy power, extol thy goodness, and
admire thy justice, to preserve us from all sins, and to retain us in thy
ways, to thine eternal glory, and to our endless comfort. Amen.

IEHOVAE LIBERATORI.

FINIS.
The Third Golden Candlestick, HOLDING The Third greatest Light of Christian
RELIGION.
Of the Incarnation of the WORD.
JOHN. 1.14. (...). And the Word was made Flesh.
I Have described in my foremost Treatise, (O Theophilus, The coherence of this
Treatise, with the former Treatises.
O dearly beloved of God) the miserable estate of that poor man that was
eiected out of Paradise, and left half dead, between Jerusalem and Jericho,
betwixt Heaven and Hell; being already excluded out of Heaven; but not fully
thrust and intruded into Hell: and in my next Treatise I have showed unto thee
a poole of Bethesda, John 5.2.
and brought unto thee a good Samaritan, that is only able and willing to
heal all thy maladies: but as yet thou want an Angel to stir the Waters;
and this good Samaritan has not alighted: and therefore I must now show you
how to apply the salve unto the sore, and how the Angel of the Covenant, Jesus
Christ alighted and descended from the throne of his Majesty, which is his
horse; for he ^ideth upon the Heavens, Psalm. 68.4.
as upon an horse; to relieve this poor distressed and afflicted man. And this
by Gods help I shall do out of these words; The Word was made flesh: for here
is the (...), Esaias 7.14.
the salve laid unto the sore; here is Emmanuel, God with us; the blessed God
which I have described in my last Treatise, united and made one with us, which
in my first Tract I have showed, to be so miserably afflicted: and therefore we
may now rejoice and be assured of our health, and salvation, because the Word
is made flesh.

CHAP. I. Of the excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ.
God has fixed many impressions of his goodness in the creatures.
Whosoever will religiously and seriously observe those manifold impressions of
the Divine goodness, which the Lord God has not slightly planted in the
natures of all living creatures, for a short space to be preached, but has
also indelibly fixed in the memory of all ages, most seriously to be
considered; he shall surely find sufficient matter of reverence, love and
admiration; but he shall be never able, sufficiently to comprehend the
excellency of so huge an Ocean of goodness, within the straight and narrow
compass of his understanding. This were but with Saint Augustines Boy, to
empty the Ocean Sea with an Oyster-shell, into an hole: and therefore the
serious and continual contemplation of such plentiful and farre-spread
goodness of God, did so invade and fill the thoughts of that Kingly Prophet
David; that being as it were ravished or wrapped in an extacie, at the
inexplicable expression, and inconceivable consideration of the same, he
breaks forth into these heavenly acclamations: saying, O Iehoua, In coelis
est benignitas tua: Psalm. 36.5.6.7.
O Lord our Governor, How excellent is thy Name in all the world? thou that
have set thy glory above the Heavens, thy faithfulness reaches unto the
clouds; thy righteousness is like the strong mountains, Psalm. 147.
thy judgments are like the great deep, thou sauest O Lord, both man and
beast.

But I will not suffer my speech at this time, to enter into that infinite
Ocean of Gods goodness, whereby he gives food unto all flesh, feeding the
young Ravens that call upon him; and whereby he adorneth the fields with all
kind of fruitful trees and pleasant flowers, and all flowers with sweet smells
and delicate colors; neither will I enter into any part or parcel of his
excellent providence; whereby he governs the whole world by his wisdom,
sustaineth all things by his power, and relieueth all things by his goodness:
for this is too large a field for me to post over in so short a space, as is
now allotted me to speak: and therefore I will rather bathe my self in those
fountains of Gods admirable love, whereby he embraced Mankind, the Epytome of
the whole world, and especially the Church of Christ; the epytome of this
epytome, before it was created, and pittyed the same when it was fallen, and
promised to restore it, and to revive it when it was dead; and to show his
mercy unto it, Gods promise touching the Incarnation of the Word Genesis 3.15.
when it was in misery: for he said first in Paradise, that the seed of the
woman should break the Serpents head? And afterwar^s to Abraham, that in his
seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed; and then to David, Genesis
22.18.
that of the fruit of his body he would raise one to sit upon his seat: And so
more and more clearly unto the rest of the succeeding Prophets; and I will
chiefly insist upon that chiefest token of Gods love, Psalm. 132.12.
and that greatest argument of Gods goodness toward us, the most merciful
fulfilling of these gracious promises so much desired, and so long expected by
all the blessed Patriarchs and Prophets, and all the rest of the holy men of
God: for when the fullness of time came, God sent his Son made of a woman,
Gal. 4.4.
made under the Law to redeem them that were in bondage under the Law, that we
might receive the adoption of children. And this my Text does fully and
plainly show unto us. (...). And the Word was made flesh.

The most excellent speech that can be uttered, is ever measured (says
Fulgentius) by these two properties, breuity, and suauitie; and here is both in
this Text; few words, full of matter, and the sweetest matter that ever was
heard; God made Man: and therefore I may say of these words, that they are all
in all, and (as Saint Hierome says of the Catholic Epistles of Saint Peter,
Hieron. ad Paulin.
Saint John, Saint James, and Saint Jude) Breues esse, pariter and longas; That
in these few words are contained all words, all things, all matters. For the
sum of all knowledge is Divinity, this is the Lady and Mistress; all other
Arts and Sciences, are but servants, like Penelopes handmaides, helps and
means to bring us to the speech of this chaste mistress; the sum of all
Divinity, is the Scripture: for this is sufficient to make the man of God
perfect, 2 Timothy 3.17. Romans 1.16.
being instructed to all good works: the sum of the Scripture is the Gospel;
for the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that
believes, and the sum of the Gospel is, (...), This word, that is made
flesh: for these things, ( i e. the Gospel) are written, That you might
believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, John 10.31.
and that in believing you might have eternal life.

Christ the Word, the sum of all things.
This is Verbum abbreuiatum, That contracted word, into which all words are
reduced, as the Rivers into the Seas: from this Word they came; unto this Word
they tend; and within this Word they are all contained: for he is the First,
he is the Last, he is a Legis, and o Euangilij, The beginning of the Law, and
the end of the Gospel; Velatus in Veteri, reuelatus in Nouo Testamento: Veyled
and shadowed in the Old, reueiled and exhibited in the New Testament; All the
men of note, and all the names of dignity, were but types of this eternal Word.
promised in that, preached in this; there showed unto the Fathers in Types,
here manifested unto us in Truths: for the Tree of Life, the Arc of Noah, the
Ladder of Jacob, the Mercy seat, the Brazen Serpent, and all such mystical
Types, and typical Figures that we read of in the Old Testament; what were
they else but Christ; obscurely shadowed before he was fully reueiled; and so
all the men of Note, Noah, Isaac, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Joshua, Sampson, David,
Solomon, Kings, Priests, Prophets, Titles of Dignities, Names of Honor, or
whatsoever else was ascribed to them to express their Sovereignty; Omnia in
figura contingeba^t illis. 1 Cor. 10.11. Esaias 9.6. Aug. in Soliloq. c. 31.
they were only used to express those transcendent excellencies, which these
personal types did adumbrate, and show most properly to belong unto this King
of Kings, This mighty Counselor, and this Prince of Peace. For, as Saint
Augustine tells us, that having gone through all creatures, and inquired of them
for God, each one of them did answer, I am not he, John 1.20.
Sed per ipsum sum, quem quaeris in me, But I have my being from him whom thou
seek in me; so if we would run over the whole classie of the Patriarchs
and Prophets, to inquire for Christ, we should find that they would every one
of them answer with John Baptist, I am not the Christ, but do look and
expect for him, and trust in him as well as you.

And to speak all in a word, the whole word of God contains nothing else but
this Word God: for the world being not worthy, and our weakness being not
able to behold the brightness of his coming all at once; and so God himself
being not willing, suddenly in an instant, Christ would not roueile himself
unto the World all at once.
to show wholly so rich a Jewel, he did at sundry times, and in diverse
manners; sometimes in types, sometimes in prophesies, before his Incarnation;
sometimes in parables, sometimes by similitudes, and sometimes by his miracles
in the time of his Apostles, before his Ascension, and since that time,
plainly with open face, reueile himself, and cause himself to be preached
unto all people: so that in very deed, we might (if we had our spiritual eyes
always opened) Behold and find this word God, either covertly shadowed, or
else plainly expressed almost in every page, in every verse, in every line, in
every word of the whole Word of GOD.

And therefore unhappy is that man, To know Christ, is the only thing that
makes us happy.
which (though he knows all things else) knows not this Word: but happy and
blessed is that man, which knows this Word, though he know none other words
in the world: and he that knows this Word, and knows all other things
together with this Word, is never a whit the happier for the knowledge of all
other things; but he is only happy for the knowledge of this only Word: for
this is eternal life, to know thee, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ: John
17.3.
and as one truly says; Haec est nobilissima scientiarum, and scientia
nobilissimorum, scire (...), factum carnem; This the noblest of all Sciences,
and the fittest Science for the noblest men, to know that the Word was made
flesh: Nam omnia habemus in Christo, and omnia in nobis Christus: Because we
have all things in Christ, and Christ is all things unto us, especially, 1. His
life is our chiefest direction. 2. Himself is our only consolation.
For,

Aug de vera religione.
First, Tota vita Christi in terris, per hominem quem gessit, disciplina morum
fuit; The whole life of Christ which he spent here on earth, was, and is a
pattern for all Christians, says Saint Augustine, Christ despised all worldly
vanities.
Nam omnia bona mundi contempsit; For he d^spised all the pomp and vanity of
this world; he was borne poor; his Inn was a Stable, his Cradle was a Manger,
and his covering were poor swaddling clouts: he lived poor; for he had not an
house to put his head in, and he dyed poor. Saint Augustine when he dyed made
no Will; because he had no wealth, but his books; which he gave to the common
Library; Posidon: in vita August.
says Possidonius; but Christ was poorer; for he had no goods, but his
garment; this was all the Soldiers got by him; to teach us, in his mundanis
faelicitatem non reponere, That we should not greedily seek, nor childishly
place our delight, in these vain and worldly toys, but if riches increase,
not to set our hearts upon them Et omnia mala sustinuit; Christ suffered all
miseries.
and he suffered all the sorrows of this world; hunger, thirst, cold, and
nakedness, lyings, slanders, spittings mockings, whippings, death it self; to
teach us, Vt nec in illis quaereretur faelicitas, ita nec in istis infaelicitas
timeretur; That as we should place no felicity in the vanities of this life;
so we should not fear all the miseries of this life; Judge 6.12.14.
but to say with Debora, March valiantly, O my soul, and with the Angel unto
Gideon, Go on thou mighty man of War, and pass through all the ranks of
miseries: for, -- Dabit Deus his quoque finem.

God will make an end of these things; and will bring his people unto rest,
which shall continue without ending: and therefore Saint Bernard says,
Incassum laborat in acquisitione virtutum, qui eas alibi quam in Christo
quaerit; That there is no way in the world for us to attain unto any
goodness; Christ the most perfect pattern of all virtue.
but only through Christ, nor to learn any true virtue, but only from the
example of Christ. For,

If thou would learn humility, Let the same mind be in thee which was in
Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5.6.7.
who being in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, yet did he make himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of
a servant: If thou would learn truth and uprightness; set the example of
Christ before thy face, for in him there was no sin, 1 Pet. 2.22. Bernard
ser. 2. super Cantic. Prudentia vera in eius doctrina, iustitia in eius
misericordia, temperantia in vita, and fortitudo in eiusdem p^ssione
reperiuntur.
and in his mouth was found no guile; and to be brief, if thou do seriously
look, thou shall easily find that (as Saint Bernard says,) True Wisdom is
found in his Doctrine; Righteousness in his Mercy; Mercy in his Justice;
Temperance in his Life; Truth in his words; Fortitude in his sufferings; and
all virtues in all his actions. All the Aethicks of Aristotle, all the morality
of Seneca, and all the wisdom of Greece, can no ways describe virtue near
so perfectly; as we see it expressly portrayed in the lively example of our
Saviors life.

And as there is no way for us to find true virtue, The knowledge of Christ
the only means to suppress all vices.
but only in him which is virtue it self: so there is nothing in the world,
that is so available to suppress all vice, as is the true knowledge of Jesus
Christ: Nam haec irae impetum cohibet, superbiae tumorem sedat; For this will
refrain the violence of anger; when they consider how he suffered all violence
and villainies, Esaias 53.7.
and yet as a Sheep before his shearer was dumb, so opened he not his mouth:
This will allay the swellings of Pride; when they consider how he was the
noblest of all creatures, Psalm. 45.3.
and the fairest among the sons of men: and yet was he meek and lowly in
heart; Matthew. 11.29.
^his will heal the wounds of envy, it will stop the streams of luxury, it
will quench the flames of lust, it will temper the thirst of covetousness, and
it will keep thee from the itching desire of all filthiness; when we consider
how much he loathed these, how free he was from these, and how earnestly he
dissuaded us from these, and from all other vices whatsoever.

And therefore (says he) Ne mundi gloria seu carnis voluptatibus abducaris,
dulcescat tibi pro his sapientia Christus, Ne spiritu mendacij and erroris
seducaris lucescat tibi veritas Christus and ne aduersitatibus fatigeris
comfortet te virtus Dei Christus.
Lest thou should be with-drawne from God, through the pompous vanities of
this world, or the lustful and delightful pleasures of thine own flesh, let
Christ, the true wisdom of God, wax sweet unto thee; Lest thou should be
seduced by the spirit of lies and of errors, let Christ the true light shine
unto thee; and lest thou should be wearied and wax faint under the burden
of adversities, let Christ the power of God refresh thee.

Secondly, As all Christ's actions are our instructions, so is Christ himself
all our consolation; Nam cum defecerit virtus mea, non conturbor; For if I see
mine own strength and goodness fail me, yet I need not be disturbed, I
need not be dejected; Quia quod ex me mihi deest vsurpo ex visceribus Domini,
Because whatsoever wants in my self, Whatsoever we want, Christ alone is
all-sufficient to supply our need.
to help my self, I may freely and boldly assume it, to supply my wants, from
my Lord and Master Jesus Christ: for as that servant need not want, that has
free leave to use his Masters full purse at his own command; so need not they
want any grace, that have the grace of Christ, because (as I told you before)
Omnia habemus in Christo and Christus omnia in nobis; We have all things in
Christ, and Christ is all things unto us.

If thou art sick with sin, and thy soul wounded, or poisoned unto death,
and would be healed; Christ is thy best, and alone Physician; only he, and
not one but he, can cure thee: If thy soul does hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and would be satisfied, Joh. 6.35.
he is the Bread of Life, and the Fountain of living waters, Whosoever eats
him, shall never hunger; and whosoever drinks of him, C. 7.38.
shall never thirst: for, out of his belly shall flow rivers of waters of life.
If thou art as naked of all goodness, as thou were of all clothing, when thou
came out of thy Mothers womb, and would be adorned with the best robes of
virtue; Christ is the garment of righteou^nesse: And if thou do put on the
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13 14.
(as Saint Paul advises thee) then all thy garments will smell of Myrhe, Aloes
and Cassia, it will be like the smell of a pleasant field, Genesis 27.27.
which the Lord has blessed; or whatsoever thou want, and would have,
thou may fully and freely have the same from him: Vita ab errore, gratia a
peccato, and mors a morte liberabit; His life will preserve thee from error, if
thou will follow it, his grace will free thee from sin, if thou will receive
it, and his death will deliver thee from eternal death, if thou will believe
in it.

And if thou be simple, he is thy wisdom; if thou be sinful, he is thy
righteousness; if thou would be holy, he is thy sanctification; if thou
be the slave of hell, and held captive by the Devil, Ephesians. 4.8.
he is thy redemption that has led captivity captive: And to comprehend all
in a word, This word is, All in all; Vt qui omnia propter Christum demittit,
vnum inueniat pro omnibus, Christum: That he which forsakes all for Christ his
sake, might find all in Christ, and Christ in stead of all, far better then
all unto his soul; And so might joyfully sing with the Psalmist, The Lord is
my portion, and I have a goodly heritage; the Lord is my Shepherd, and
therefore I can want nothing: For, Psalm. 23.1.
(as Seneca said unto Polibius) Fas tibi non est, saluo Caesare de fortuna
conquaeri, quia hoc incolumi, nihil per didisti; It is not fit for thee to
complain of Fortune, for want, or poverty, or any other adversity, so long as
thou have the favor of Caesar, Nam in hoc pro omnibus, hic tibi omnia est,
ideo non tantum siccos sed and laetos oculos esse oportet.
and him so friendly unto thee; for that having him, thou have lost nothing,
which thou can not soon and easily recover again, because he and his love
is better then all things unto thee; and therefore thou should more rejoice
in having him, then grieve for the leesing of all things else: Even so may I
far better say the same unto all Christians; What matter though we want, or
leese all the things of this World, if we have, and enjoy Jesus Christ? for
all the accessions, and accumulations of worldly things, can add nothing unto
the felicity of a Christian; and all the defects, or wants of the same things,
can detract nothing from the happiness of him that has Jesus Christ: for
whosoever has him, has all things, and whosoever wants him, has nothing.
For,

All our knowledge is but heathenish Science, All the things of this World
without Christ, will avail us nothing. John 14.6.
able to make us proud, not to make us happy; If this word be not Obiectum
adaequatum, The chiefest, yea, and sole object of the same; all our faith in
God, is but ungrounded confidence, if it be not grounded upon this word: for,
No man comes unto the Father, but by me; All our righteousness is but as
Pollutio panni, Menstruous cloutes, if it be not washed in the blood of this
word: For, 1 John 1.7.
It is the blood of Jesus Christ, which cleanses us from all sin; And all
our patience, temperance, chastity, and all other virtues that either Nature
planted, or education effected in us, are but Splendida peccata, Glittering
gilded sins, unacceptable unto God, and unprofitable unto our selves, able
to make us prouder, not better; if they be not guided by the grace, and
directed to the glory of this everlasting Word. For as the Bird cannot fly
without her wings, nor the body move without the soul; so no more can any man
do any thing that is good and acceptable unto God, without the help of this
heavenly Word: For, Without me, you can do nothing, says our Savior Christ;
but in him, God is well pleased, John 15.5. Philip. 4.13.
not only with himself, but also with all us; and through him, We can do all
things, as the Apostle says.

And therefore, as Duke Ioab when he had fought the field, and got the upper
hand of his enemies, did send for David to carry away the credit of the
victory; so the Prophets, the Apostles, and all the holy men of God, in all
their heavenly words, miraculous works, That if there be any goodness in us,
we should ascribe the glory of it to Jesus Christ.
pains, and preachings, would never suffer any part or parcel of the credit
to rest upon themselves, but did most forcibly repel it, and most faithfully
acknowledge it all to belong unto this Omnipotent Word: So Saint Peter after
the healing of the poor lame Cripple, said unto the people (when he saw them
ready to adore them for so admirable a miracle) Why look you so earnestly on
us, Acts 2.12.16.
as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to walk? No,
no, it is not so; but it is The Name of Jesus Christ, and our faith in his
Name, that made him perfectly whole; i. e. He is the Author, we are the
Instruments, and our faith is the means whereby this man received strength;
and therefore do not you ascribe the honor of this work unto any of us,
which of our selves can do nothing; but ascribe it unto the Name of that
Almighty Word, which of himself can do all things. So Saint Paul, after he
had said, that he had labored more then all the rest of the Apostles, least
any man should think that he did assume the honor of that diligence unto
himself, and not ascribe the same unto Christ; he presently adds; and yet it
was not I that did it, but the grace of God which was in me: And so all the
Saints of God, after all their voluminous and laborious works, they conclude
all with Laus Christo, Let all the praise be given to Christ.

And as they referred all the honor of their own actions unto Christ, because
they were all done by the grace and power of Christ; so did they desire nothing
in the World but Christ: They forsook all, Math. 19.27. The Saints desired
nothing but Jesus Christ.
and followed him; and still cried unto him with Saint Augustine, Da mihite
Domine, Take away all from us, and spare not, so thou give thy self unto us;
that leesing all, we may leese nothing at all, because we gain thee, which art
the greatest gain in the World: So Saint Paul says, He trampled his own
righteousness, and all his own goodness vnderfeete, Phil 3.8.
that he might find the righteousness of Christ; he deemed all the riches,
and all the other things of this World, but as dung and dross, 1 Cor. 22.
and loss vnt^ him, that he might gain Jesus Christ; and he desired to
understand nothing, to know nothing, to remember nothing, to have nothing, but
Jesus Christ, and him crucified: And therefore well might Saint Augustine call
him, the best Child of grace, because as Saint John, that best beloved
Disciple, was the most loving unto his brethren, and did most of all express
the love of God to men, and require the love of men to God; so did this chosen
vessel of grace, best of all suppress the pride of man, and extol the grace
of Christ. So did Saint Augustine in his time, that was, Strenuus defensor
gratiae, A most valiant Champion to fight for grace; so did that worthy
Zanchius in these latter times, and so will all Christians do, that do love
Jesus Christ ascribe all good to him, and nothing to our selves, Quia nostrum
nihil est, Because nothing that is good, is of our selves.

I read of one Johannes Alexandrinus, a most excellent holy man, that when he
had distributed all that ever he had unto the poor, he fell down upon his
knees, and thanked God, that now having nothing left, he desired nothing else,
The Authors earnest and hearty wish both for the Clergy, and Laity.
but his Lord and Master Jesus Christ. Oh that it might be so with every one of
us, that this word, which did all good unto us, took all infirmities from us,
suffered all punishments for us, and finished all the works of our redemption
to us, might be all in all, within us all!

First, That we the Preachers of Gods Word, would leave our iarring, and our
iangling about shadows, That we should not contest about trifles.
about things of nothing; An ater sit contrarius albo, As, whether it be better
to wear a white Surplesse, or a black Gown, in the administering of the
Sacrament: Much like the contention in Rome betwixt the Augustine Friars, and
the vulgar Canons, whether Saint Augustine did wear a black weed upon a
white coat, or a white weed upon a black coat; for by this means, in stead
of bread, we shall give our Children stones, to throw at one another; and in
stead of fish, we shall give them Scorpions, to sting one another: And
therefore I wish, that we would all leave these things, and would be,
Pythagorice mundo, and Ciceronice Christo; Mute unto the World, mute unto all
worldly vanities, and use all our words, all our eloquence, to express the
excellency of this super-excellent word: And so by the help of this word, to
preach of this word, and to write of this word, to the eternal praise and
glory of this word; that is, to preach not our selves, but him; not for our
own gain, but for his glory.

That we should employ all our strength, to express the glory of Christ.
It is reported of Saint Bernard, that having made with great art and study, a
most curious elegant Sermon, he passed home without any applause; and the next
day, making a plain, conscionable, and comfortable Sermon unto his Auditors,
he received many a blessing from those well-edified hearers: And being demanded
by one of his Colleagues, how it happened that his most learned Sermon, was so
strangely neglected, and his far more plain one, so joyfully embraced; he
most humbly answered, Heri praedicaui Bernardum, hodie Iesum Christum;
Yesterday I preached my self, to show my wit, and my learning; to day I
preached Jesus Christ, to show his grace, and his goodness. I wish that none
would preach Saint Bernard, that is, preach a Sermon rare and seldom, filled
with words and fine phrases, to gain unto themselves credit, and thereby
preferment, as the only rare Scholars of our times; and so they are rare
indeed, for they are but seldom seen to preach; like the Swallows, that come
but once a year: but that we would preach Jesus Christ, to gain souls unto
the Church of God. And I confess against my self, that when I took greatest
pains to make, and compose a Scholler-like Sermon, (as I thought) and saw the
same unregarded; and when with less diligence, but with good conscience, I saw
other of my poor labors most acceptably received, That we should preach Jesus
Christ, and not our selves.
I deemed it was for want of judgment in mine Auditors; whereas now I perceive
it was an error in my self, that I did not always so, as might best tend for
edification; and not so, as might any ways savor of ambition: Because our
chiefest care should be, not to spinne a fine thread, but to win a fair soul
to Christ. And therefore that is an excellent rule, which Saint Augustine gives
unto all Preachers, Non delectent verba vestra, sed prosint; quia sapientes
verum magis amant in verbis quam verba; That our words should not so much
delight the ears, as our matter edify the souls of men: because all wise
Christians, do love the truth, and excellency of the matter, rather then the
fluent elegancie of the words: though I deny not, but (as the Poet says,) est
aliqua gloria frondium, an excellent matter expressed in fit and decent words, is
like apples of gold in pictures of silver. And therefore O my Soul so preach
thou the Word of God, that whatsoever men think, or say of thee, this Word
God, at last, may say unto thee; euge serve bone, well done thou good and
faithful servant, enter thou into thy Masters joy.

Secondly, I wish that all hearers, would think of nothing, speak of nothing,
hear of nothing, love and long for nothing, but for this only one thing: that
they would villifie and nullify all things else, to magnify and to omnifie
the excellency of this excellent Word: that we would prize, and value him,
above all things; that we would love him, and long after him, until we
languish, and be compelled to cry with the Spouse; Cantic. 2.5.
Stay me with flaggons, and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love; and
that we would so inquire after him, as men undone without him, and rather be
contented to want all the world, then to want this Word, which made the world
of nothing, and still preserues the same, that it turn not to nothing: for I
do much fear, that if we could see the hearts of men, we should find many of
them, not as we would, but rather (as Saint Bernard calls them) sine Christo
Christianos: such as have this word Christ often in their mouths, to swear
and blaspheme him, but not in their lives to yield any service to him. Mammon
is their chiefest god; and this God, which is the first and the last, is the
last and the least in all their thoughts: all their delight is in filthy
communications, and leaude words, all words that may do hurt, but they have no
delight in this word God: The wise Merchant, Matthew. 13.46.
sold all that ever he had, to gain this inualuable Pearl, but as many a fool
will leese his best friend, rather then his basest jest, so will the foolish
worldlings sell this, and leese all that belongs to this, rather then they will
leese their vain and wanton pleasures: So foolish are they and ignorant, even
as it were beasts before him.

I have read of Honorius a Roman Emperor that when one told him Rome was lost,
he was exceedingly grieved, and cried, alas alas, for he supposed it was his
hen, so called, which he exceedingly loved, but when it was told him, it was
his Imperial City Rome, that was besieged by Alaricus, and was now taken and
lost, then his spirits were revived, that his loss was not so great, as he
imagined: we may well think this, to be a simple and a childish disposition:
and yet our selves are worthy of the same condemnation, for if we leese a
little wealth, a little pleasure, a little vanity, things of themselves good
for nothing, because of themselves they can make nothing good; and then (as the
proverb goes) that is too dear of a farthing which is good for nothing; yet
for these trifles, we will vex, and fret, weep and wayle, Zechar: 12.11.
and our mourning will be, Like the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddo: but when we leese our souls, in the deserts of sin, and when we
leese our God, for sin, then with the Israelites, we sit down^ to eat and
drink, and rise up to play. Exodus 32.6.


But seeing (as the Emperor Seuerus said) though we be all things, and have
all things that the world can afford us; yet all things will avail us nothing,
without this thing, because (as I said before) Christ is all things; and all
things without Christ are nothing: seeing with Ixion they do embrace, a cloud
for Juno, a shadow for the body, trash for treasure, and a short momentarie
dream of pleasure, in stead of the true and eternal rest, which seek their
rest, but not in Christ; and seeing (as he says himself) it is eternal life
to know him, with his father, John 17.3.
to be the true and eternal God; I will therefore crave your Christian
patience, and desire your careful attention to hearken unto the several parts
of this text, and to retain in your memories, those chiefest observations,
that I shall collect from the same, all I cannot; and as I would I cannot, I
must ingeneously confess it: Nam mysterium singulariter mirabile, and
mirabiliter singular, for it is a mystery singularly wonderful, and
wonderfully singular; and indeed the mystery of all mysteries: and therefore,
Si profundum in profundo non reperiam, humanam fragilitatem non diuinam
potentiam confundo: If I do not handle the same, as I ought to do, I shall
but bewray mine own human frailty, and no ways impeach or disparage this
divine verity. And because, as it is the first, the greatest, the chiefest,
and the comfortablest point of all Christian Religion; so it has been, and
is, and (I fear) ever will be, most chiefly oppugned, and depraved on all
sides, by all sorts of enemies, and wicked Heretics: therefore, as this mine
introduction is somewhat large, yet not to large, either preparation, or
expectation, for so great a matter as follows after; so you must give me
leave, to insist the longer about it: and not Myndus-like to suffer my porch to
be greater then my town. And if I shall seem harsh in the prosecution, and
not give full satisfaction unto your desires, and expectation; you must know
that they are points to inform the judgment, and apprehension; and not to
move or to inflame the affection: and therefore harder a great deal, and more
painful for us, to handle them, then to treat of any moral points of
exhortation; and though they be less delectable, for the present; yet are they
far more profitable, for the future time; especially unto them, that will
most seriously consider them, and most carefully remember them. (...). And the
Word was made flesh.

In which words (as you may easily see) the holy Evangelist sets down, the
incarnation of this eternal Word; and I for the fuller explanation of the
same, The whole treatise divided into two parts.
must desire you to consider these two things.

1. The sum and substance, of this Words Incarnation. 2. The chiefest
cirumstances, requisite for its explanation.
The 1. is here fully expressed.

The 2. is from the other Evangelists, plainly collected.

Touching, the first, here are three especial things expressed.

1. The thing that was made, (...), the Word, 2. The thing that it was made,
(...), Flesh. 3. The manner of his making, (...), it was made.
Or playner thus, 1. Who was made. 2. What it was made. 3. How it was made.
the Word Flesh. (...). Not created, not changed, but made; for the Word was
made Flesh: and of these by Gods help in order.

CHAP. II. Of the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Divine Essence.
The first branch of the first part.
FIrst, We must consider, who was made (...), the Word was made: for the
understanding of which point, we must know that the divine Essence is only
one impartible and indivisible. For so the Scripture teaches us, Deuteronomy. 6. c.
32.
hear O Israel the Lord thy God is one God: and therefore know you that I am
God alone, and besides me there is none other says the Lord himself, 1 Cor.
4.8.
and so Saint Paul says, we know that there is none other God but one.

Athanas. in Symbolo.
Secondly, So the Fathers teach us: for though the Father is God, and the Son
is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, yet are there not three Gods, but one God,
says Athanasius: and these three are one, if you consider the Divinity; and
this one is three, if you consider the propriety, Nazin. orat. 3. de Theol.
Amb. de fide. l. 1. c. 2.
says Saint Gregory Nazianzen; and so says Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine,
Saint Hillarie and all the rest.

Thirdly, So reason it self teaches us: for God is summum cns, the first and
chiefest being, as himself profess^th, I am that I am, and we have learned
that of the prince of Philosophers, that there cannot be, but one chiefest
being; Quia ens and vnum conuertuntur, because that being, and one are all one.
Secondly, God is infinite and therefore but one, because that which is infinite
comprehends all things within the circle of it self. Thirdly, If there were
more Gods then one; Reason shows that there can be but one God.
then they must be either all without beginning, or one must proceed from
other, either by creation or generation: that they should be all without
beginning, is impossible; for then it must needs follow that there should be,
multa principia prima, disparata, in vna voluntate non conuenientia, many first
causes, and unequal beginnings, that could never agree, and be of the same
mind and will: and therefore, to say they should be all without beginnings,
is most absurd. If one be from the other, by creation, then is the second a
creature, and therefore but one God uncreated; and if one be from the other by
generation; then the first gave the second, either a part or his whole
substance: if a part, then is God partible, and may be divided, which cannot be
said of such spiritual indiuidible substance; and if the first gave the rest
his whole Essence, then have all the same Dietie, and so all must be the same
Godhead: And so An^isthenes says, it was the opinion of the best Philosophers,
Plures esse Deos populares vnum naturalem: That although the people worshipped
many Gods, yet indeed there was but one only God by Nature.

And therefore against the Valentinians thirty couple of gods, Jrenaeus contra
Valentin.
and all others that profess many gods; it must needs follow, even from
reason it self, that there can be no more gods but one, not specificall, but
numericall, i. e. so absolutely one, Tertul. l. contra Hermog. e. 17.
that he is one alone, besides whom there can be none other, and is therefore
called (...), only one; for we deny all number in the Deity, unless you
mean in the personal proprieties: and therefore Gregory Nissen says well,
Quod in multitudinem extendere numerum Deitatum, eorum duntaxat est, Nyssen. ad
Eustach. l. de trin.
qui laborant multitudinis deorum errore; That to extend the number of the
Deities into a multitude, belongs only unto them which do erroniously
maintain a multitude of gods: for the Catholic faith is this, that we
should worship the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in Trinity: that is,
Basilius Ep. 141. ad Caesarium.
the trinity of Persons, and the unity of Essence: because all number is to be
rejected from the Essence of God, says Saint Basil. For the Divine Essence is
so simple, and so numerically one, that no diversity can be given, whereby the
very persons do differ, in regard of the Essence: and therefore in respect of
this identitie, and unity of Essence in the three persons of the Godhead, our
Savior says, I am in the Father, and the Father in me: John 14.10.
Whereupon Saint Cyril adds further for the explanation of the same: that we
may not say that, the Father is from the Son, nor contained in the Son, nor
the Son to be in the Father, as we are said to be, and to live in God: for
that we are only by the effects of his grace, he in the unity of his essence,
i. e. we are one with God by grace: but the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost are one, by Nature; so that whatsoever the Father essentially is, the
Son is the same, and the holy Spirit is the same.

That the Essence of God is distinguished into three persons. Genesis 1.
And yet we must know that this one only one indivisible Essence, is
distinguished into three persons, which we call the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost: for so the Scriptures plainly teach us; as, Let us make man in our
image; and, behold the man is become like one of us, says the Lord himself;
to show that in this unity of Essence, there is a plurality of persons: and
again, the Lord rained upon Sodom, and upon Gomorrha, from the Lord out of
Heaven; Genesis 19.
that is, the Son rained from the Father, as Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Epiphanius, Cyprian, Irenaeus, Eusebius, Cyrill, Sozomen, the Council of
Smyrna, held in the year of Christ 336. Socrates Eccl. hist. l. 2. c. 30.
wherein Marcus Arethusius against the heresy of Photinus, and many others,
do so expound that place. And so the three men that appeared unto Abraham, and
that Heavenly harmony of Cherubims, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
Sabbath, Esaias 6.
do sufficiently declare the Trinity of persons in the Unity of Gods Essence.

Ob.
But then it may be some will say, these and the like places are too obscure,
to confirm the truth of so great a point.

Sol. Why God did not fully and plainly reueile the mysteries of the Trinity
at the first.
I answer, that God at first would not show this great mystery unto all, lest
that being so prone, as they were in the infancy of the Church, to fall into
Idolatry, they should shake off the service of the true God, and thereby be
drawn to worship many Gods, but the more his Church did increase in ability to
understand, the more did God reueile unto it, both this mystery of the
Trinity, and also many other mysteries of the Incarnation, Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus Christ: And therefore what he obscurely
shadowed in the time of the Patriarchs, he did more clearly show unto his
Prophets, and most plainly in the time of the Apostles, proclaim the same
unto all people: For Christ bad them go and baptize all men, Matthew. 28.
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, 1. John 5.
and of the Holy Ghost. And so Saint John says, there be three that bear
witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit: And yet these three
be but one, says the Apostle. For as in one Sun there are, the body of the
Sun, the Sun beams, and the heat; Aug. de Trinit.
the beams are begotten of the Sun, and the heat does proceed both from the
Sun and the Sun beams; but the Sun it self proceeds from none: Even so,
in the one Essence of God, there are the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost;
the son is begotten, of the Father; the Holy Ghost proceeds from both; but
the Father is of himself alone: and as the fountain begets the brook, Jdem
de verbis Domim.
and both the fountain and brook do make the Poole, and yet all three is the
same water: so the father is the Fountain which begets the Son, and from the
Father and Son proceeds the Holy Ghost; That there are certain similitudes
of the Trinity, to be seen in the creatures.
and yet is the Deity of all three, the same; in like manner, the fire has
motion, light and heat, and yet but one fire; and in the soul of man there
are three faculties, the vegetative, the sensitive, and the rational; and yet
but one soul; and in all other creatures we may behold certain glimpes and
similitudes, that do after a sort adumbrate and shadow out this ineffable and
inexpressable mystery: for by their greatness, we may consider the power of
the Father; by their beauty, we may see the wisdom of the Son: and by their
utility, we may note the goodness of the Holy Ghost. God left not himself
without witness, no not wholly of the manner of his subsistence, if not to
prove this blessed mystery, yet at least to illustrate it; Thom. p. 1. q 32.
art. 1.
and to prove (as Aquinas says) Non esse impossible quod fides praedicat,
That those things are not impossible which faith preaches.

But it may be some will ask (touching my former illustration) why is power
ascribed to the Father, Wisdom to the Son, goodness to the Holy Ghost,
whereas all and each of the three persons have the same power, wisdom, and
goodness?

Saint Augustine answers, that amongst the creatures, Resp.
it is wont to be observed that in a Father is found a defect of power, by
reason of his antiquity; in a Son is seen ignorance, by reason of his youth
and inexperience of things; and in the name of a Spirit, there seems to be a
kind of fearful vehemence; Esaias 52.
as Quicscite ab homine cuius spiritus in naribus eius;

Whose Spirit is in his nostrils: and therefore least the like might be thought
to be in these Divine persons; we find power ascribed to the Father, wisdom
unto the son, and goodness unto the Holy Ghost; whereas indeed, each one of
them is of the same power, wisdom, and goodness, as the others be.

And although the Essence of God can neither be divided nor distinguished; yet
the three subsistences, or the three diverse manner of being, in the Divine
Essence, which we call the three persons, The three persons are distinguished
one from another two ways.
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, may be distinguished two ways.

1. By their personal actions. 2. By their nominall relations.
First, the actions of the persons are either 1. Outward or 2. Inward.


The outward works of God are common to each person of the Trinity.
First, all outward actions, are called communicable: because although after a
sort, they are appropriated to each person, as the Father to send the Son, and
to create the world; the Son to be sent to be Incarnate, and to redeem
mankind, and the Holy Ghost to appear in the form of a Dove, and like cloven
tongues of fire, and to work in our hearts, for our consolation and
sanctification; yet, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indiuisa: these outward
works of the Trinity, are so indivisible, that we cannot so properly ascribe
them to any one; but we find that they may be likewise ascribed to any other:
for as Nazianzen truly affirms of the three persons themselves, Non
possu^tria discernere quin subito ad vnum referar, nec possum vnum cogitare
quin trium fulgore confundar; So may we say, of their outward operations; that
although they be affirmed of one, yet may they presently be referred to all
three; and so we find them in many passages of the holy Scriptures: as
redemption and sanctification to the Father, Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 1.2. Creation
and Sanctification to the Son, John 1.3. 1 Cor. 1.2. And creation and
redemption to the Holy Ghost, Psalm. 33.6. Ephesians. 4.30.

And besides; these outward operations are transient and voluntary: for that
God in these things is, Liberrimus Agens, A free Agent, so that he might have
chosen, whither to do them, or not do them; and therefore in all these
works, Election, Creation, Gubernation, Redemption, Sanctification,
Glorification, there can be ascribed none other cause, but quia voluit, because
he would; for whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in Heaven, and in Earth,
in the Sea, and in all deep places. And therefore these outward actions, and
so likewise those names, which are given unto these persons, in regard of these
actions, as Creator unto the Father, Redeemer unto the Son, Comforter and
sanctifier unto the holy Ghost, are not altogether sufficient, to express the
differences of these persons.

Secondly, the inward actions of these persons are 1. Permanent. 2. Necessary.
3. Incommunicable.


First, they are so permanent, The inward actions of God are ever in doing.
that as the Sun does always beget his beams, and both Sun and beams,
do send forth the heat; so the Father from all eternity ever did, and now
does, and ever will beget his Son: and both Father and Son, do spire and
breath forth the Holy Ghost: and therefore Origin says excellent well, Origin.
hom. 6. in Ierem.
Saluator noster splendour est gloriae; splendour autem non semel nascitur, and
deinceps desinit nasci, etc. Our blessed Savior is the brightness of Gods
glory: Sed quotiescunque ortum fuerit. lumen ex quo splendour oritur, toties
oritur splendour gloriae. Luke 12.
but the brightness of glory, is not once begotten, and then afterward leaves
to be begotten; but as often as the light rises from whence the brightness
springs, so often does the brightness of glory arise. And our Savior (says
he) is the wisdom of God, but the wisdom of God is the brightness of that
eternal light; Et ideo saluator semper nascitur, The Father does ever beget
the Son.
And therefore as the Scripture says, Ante colles generat me, Before the
Mountains were laid, he begets me; and not (as some do erroniously read
it) Generauit me: He has begotten me; So the truth is, that the Son of God
is ever begotten, and the holy Spirit ever proceeding.

Secondly, these inward actions are no voluntary operations, The inward actions
are necessary.
I mean such, as that the Father might either beget the Son, or not beget
him, and the Father and the Son, might either spire forth the Holy Ghost, or
not spire him forth; but they be so absolutely necessary, that they cannot
otherwise be; Cyrillus l. 1. c 3. thesauri.
because it is the property of the nature of God the Father, to beget God the
Son, as it is for him to be a God; so that he can no more relinquish or leave
to beget the Son, then he can leave to be a God, as Saint Cyril shows. And,

Thirdly, these inward actions are so incommunicable, The inward actions are
incommunicable.
that whatsoever is proper to the one, can no ways be ascribed to the other,
Quia hoc est proprium patris, quod solus est pater; and quod ab alio non est
nisidse: For this is the property of the Father, that he alone is the Father,
Et hoc est proprium filij, quod a patre genitus est solus a solo; and hoc est
proprium spiritus sancti, quod nec genitus nec ingenitus est, sed a patre and
filio, aequaliter procedeus.
and that he is not from any other but only of himself; and this is the
property of the Son, that he alone is begotten of the Father alone, coequall
unto him and coessentiall; and this is the property of the Holy Ghost, to be
not made, not begotten, but from the Father and the Son equally proceeding.
And therefore we say, that these incommunicable and proper operations of the
persons do so make the true and real distinction of the persons, that the
Father cannot be the Son, nor the Holy Ghost; that the Son cannot be the
Father, nor the holy Ghost; and that the Holy Ghost cannot be the Father nor
the Son; so that in a word all three is the same Essence; and yet neither of
the three can be the person of the other.

Secondly, from these inward operations of these persons do proceed, the
nominall relations, of the one unto the other; as father, Son and Holy Ghost,
which do likewise make a true, real distinction of the persons; for the
Father is not a name of Essence but of relation unto the Son; and the Son
is not a name of Essence, but of relation unto the Father; and so the Holy
Ghost proceeding, is not a name of Essence, but of relation to the Father, and
the Son; and therefore these names are so proper to each person, that the
name of the one cannot be ascribed to the other. But you will say that the Son
is called Father as Esaias 9.6. Sol.
he is said to be the Father of eternities.

I answer that the name of Father is taken two ways 1. (...), Essentially. 2.
(...), Personally.


Ob.
First, Essentially and so in respect of the creatures, each person of the
Trinity, may be rightly termed Father.

The name of Father is taken two-wayes.
Secondly personally, and so the first person only is Father: because he only
does beget his son.

And thus you see, that although the Divine Essence, is only one, yet that
there are three persons in this one Essence; not that the Essence begets either
Essence or person; but because the person of the Father begets the person of
the Son, and both Father and Son do eternally spire and send forth the
person of the Holy Ghost. Athana. 2. Dialog. de Trinit.


But for the manner, how the Father begets the Son, or how the Father and
the Son do spire and send forth the holy Spirit; I must answer, as Galenus
did, Galenus. l. 15. de vsu partium. (...).
in a point far inferior to this, which is of infinite profundity: How this
is done, if you enquire, you will be taken for one that has no understanding,
either of your own infirmity, or of the power of the Creator. And the Fathers
do often dehort us from the curiosity of explaining the manner of divine
mysteries: for, that worthy Nazianzene says; You hear the generation of the
Son, (...). Nazian. orat. 1. de theolog. (...). That we should not enquire
too far into the manner of Divine Mysteries.
be not curious to know the manner; You hear, The Holy Ghost proceeds; be
not busy, to enquire how: And in another place he says, Let the generation of
God be honored with silence; it is much for thee to have learned, that he was
begotten; As for the manner how, we grant it not to be understood by Angels,
much less by thee. If the Fathers of the Council of Lateran had followed the
council of this Father, they had never gone so far, to enquire how Christ is
in the Sacrament, and so positiuely to conclude it, to be, by that unheard,
unknown, incredible, and impossible way, of transubstantiation: And therefore
if we would not err with them, or beyond them, in this point, far more
difficult then that; let us not be too curious to enquire how these things can
be, but let us faithfully believe them to be, a Trinity of Persons, in the
unity of the Divine Essence; and each person to have the whole Divine Essence
so communicated unto it, as that all the three persons must needs be
co-eternall, co-essentiall, and co-equall.

But because the second Person, which is the Son, and which the Evangelist
here means by the Word, (as hereafter I shall show unto you) was incarnate,
and made flesh; you must give me leave to insist chiefly upon that person, and
to discuss these three especial points concerning the same.

1. Touching this person, how excellent he is. 2. Touching this name here used,
why he is called (...), the Word. 3. Touching this work, why he was
incarnate, and made flesh.
For the first, I will only show these three things.

1. That for time he is God, Three things handled touching the person of the
Son.
co-eternall 2. For nature, co-essentiall: and 3. For dignity, co-equall
unto his Father.

CHAP. III. Of the Coeternity of the Word with his Father.
That the Word was, before he was made flesh.
FIrst, That this Word was, before he was made Flesh, the words (...), and
(...); the first used here, and the second in the fourth Chapter to the
Galathians, does make it plain; for that they signify one, that first was,
and afterward was made, that which he was not: And therefore he does not
say, that the Word was made first, and then was made Flesh, but that the Word,
which in the beginning, and before all beginnings was, in the fullness of time,
was made flesh: And this may be further proved, by almost infinite arguments;
as,

First, He is the Son of the Father, the wisdom and the power of God; and
therefore either the Father was without a Son, (and then he could be no
Father) and God was without his wisdom, and without his strength, or else he
was never without his Son; but to say that God was without his wisdom, or
without his strength, Aug. ep. 6.6.
is most absurd: Ergo, Non ex tempore genitus est, qui cuncta tempora condidit;
And therefore he was not begotten in time, which created all times, says Saint
Augustine.

Secondly, He is God: for, Si Dietas verbi non nostrae est insita carni, tum
Christus falsi corporis vmbra fuit; Either Christ is God, or he is no man, nor
any Savior of man: and he is no titular God, but by Nature God; he is the
true Iehoua, which was, which is, and which shall be: And therefore
everlasting* for, thou art God from everlasting, and World without end. But,

That Christ is a true God, is proved.
That he is a true God, both apparent Scriptures, and unanswerable reasons
drawn from Scriptures, do make it plain. For,

First, from Scriptures.
First, The Scriptures call him the true Ieheua, as we may see by the collation,
and comparing of these places, viz. Exodus 3.2.13.4.14.24.20.2. and Acts
7.30.32. 1 Cor. 10.4.9. etc. And so the Scriptures call him God, as Genesis 32.28.
Psalm. 45.7. Esaias 7.14. Matthew 3.3. Heb. 1.8. And therefore Saint John says;
(...). And the Word was God; And Christ himself says, John 17.3.
This is eternal life to know thee to be the only true God, and whom thou
have sent Jesus Christ; For these words are thus to be expounded, that they
know thee, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, to be the only true God,
because these two persons, are but the very selfsame Essence: So Thomas says
unto Christ, My Lord, and my God. John 20.28.
And so we find the same truth expressed, Acts 20.28. Romans 8.5.1 John 3.16. 1
John 5.20. 1 Timothy 3.16. Psalm. 47.6. and in many other places of the Scripture,
which we may obuiously meet, Secondly, by unanswerable reasons drawn from
Scripture. First, from the incommunicable properties of God.
and would be here tedious to relate.

Secondly, We may show the same by infallible and unanswerable reasons, drawn
from Scriptures; as,

First, From those incommunicable properties of the Deity, which are properly
ascribed unto him; as,

First, To be Omnipotent, John 3.31. Heb. 1.3. Philip. 3.21. Apoc. 1.18.

Secondly, To remit sins; not only instrumentally, as the Ministers do; as
we see in Matthew 16.19. John 20.23. But absolutely by his own proper power and
authority, as we see in Matthew 9.6. Mar. 2.5.7.9. Luc. 5.20.

Thirdly, To be in many places at the same instant, as Matthew 18.20.28.20.

Fourthly, To have the same equal power with the Father, John 5.17. c. 16.15.

Fifthly, To raise himself from the grave, Romans 1.4. Ioh. 10.18.

Sixthly, To send forth, and to give the Holy Ghost, Zach. 12.10. John 16.7.

Secondly, From those relations that he has with God, Secondly, from the
relations that he has with God.
as to be (...), The only begotten Son of God; John 1.18. To be the Image of
the Father; John 14.7.8 9. 2 Cor. 4.4. Coloss. 1.15. And to be the very form
of God: for the Apostle says, That He being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God. Therefore he must needs be true God.

First, Because the form of God, is most simple and essential, and not
compounded, or accidental; for that in God there is no composition, no
accidents; Et nihil est in Deo, quod non sit ipse Deus: Nor any other thing,
which is not God; Gabriel: Biel. super 1. sentent. did. 1. q. 5.
Because the Divine Essence, Identificat sibi omnia quae sunt in Diuinis; Does
identifie, or deifie all things that are in the De ty.

To be the form of God is to be a very God.
Secondly, because the word (...) one existing and being in the form of God,
does plainly signify the very nature of God: for as his being in the form
of man, proves that he was a very man, so his being in the form of God, and
his just, and lawful thinking, that it was no wrong, or robbery to be equal^
with God; does most substantially prove that he was a very God by nature;
before he was incarnate and made man: for who can be in the form of God but
very God? or who can rightly be aequall with God, Esaias 40.18.
but God? For to whom will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare
unto him? says the Prophet: and therefore Saint Basil says, that to be in
the form of God is as much, Basilius l. 1. cont. Eunomium.
as to exist in the essence of God; for that, as to take upon him the form of
a servant signifies that our Lord was made partaker of the humane nature; so
by saying that he was in the form of God, he ascribes unto him the
propriety of the nature of God: Colloss. 1.15.
and so discussing the words of the Apostle, which is the image of the
invisible God; he says, that this image was not made with hands, Ambros. l. 7.
Ep. 47. Aug. l. de fide ad Petrum, and l. 1. c. 1. de trinit: Hi^ar. l. 12 de
trinit: Lombard l. 3. did. 5.
neither was it the work of any art or cogitation; but a living image, yea
life it self; retayning the identitie of the Godhead, not in the similitude of
any figure, but in the substance of the same, and so Saint Ambrose, Saint
Augustine, Saint Hillarie, Pet. Lombard, and diverse others do most truly
interpret this being of him in the form of God, to prove him to be a true and
eternal God.

Thirdly, From those Epithets which are ascribed unto him, and are only
agreeable to the Divine nature, Thirdly, from the Epithets ascribed unto him.
as

First, To be the author of our Election, John 13.18.

Secondly, To know the secrets of our hearts, Matthew. 9.4.5. Mar. 2.8. Luke 5.22.

Thirdly, To Illuminate us. John 1.9.

Fourthly, To hear the prayers of them that call upon him. John 14.14.

Fifthly, To Judge the quick and the dead, John 5.22.

Sixthly, To give unto his servants everlasting life. John 5.24.

Seauenthly, To be truly rich and so able to do, and to bestow these great
rewards upon his servants; for he that is truly rich must needs be the true
and eternal God: but Christ (says the Apostle) is rich for he being rich for
our sakes became poor, 2 Cor. 8.9.
therefore he must needs be the true God. That Go dis truly rich, it
appearth hence, that he only is El shadai, a God of all sufficiency, and
therefore he says, Psalm. 50.12.
If I be hungry I will not tell thee, for all the world is mine, and all that
therein is, and he only may most truly say: Mill meae siculis errant in
montibus agnae;

All the beasts of the forest are mine, and so are the cattle upon a thousand
hills:

Neither is he only rich in temporal riches; Romans 2.11.
but in spiritual gifts, and graces also: for Saint Paul speaks of the
riches, of the Benignity and Lenity and long sufferance of God, and in Ephesians.
1.18. He speaks of the riches of his grace, where he calls God rich in
Mercy, or rich in glory; and Romans 11.33. He cries out O the deepenesse of
the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God: and therefore it is most
plain, that God is truly rich. And that none else is rich, but God; it may
be as easily confirmed: for that every man, if he does but consider his own
estate, may say with the Prophet David, I am poor and in misery, and our
wants are a great deal more then our wealth: and what we have we have not of
our selves, but we have received them from God, for what have thou that thou
have not received says the Apostle? 1 Cor. 4.7.
and what thou have received is properly none of thine: and therefore as thou
came naked, and broughtest nothing into the world, so thou shall return
naked, Job 1.21.
and carry nothing out of the world again.

But against this you will object that the Scripture says, Ob
Abraham, Lot, Job, and diverse others were very rich: and yet no Gods; and
therefore, that every one which is rich is not a God.

I answer first, that these men were not truly rich, Sol. No man in this
world is truly rich.
but were so thought to be in the opinion of men; and therefore so called
after the manner of men: for he only is a rich man, qui nihil quaerat, nihil
appetat, nihil optet amplius, which neither does, nor can seek, nor wish, nor
desire, any more then he has, as Cicero says; but none of these were such;
for Abraham and the rest of them did profess, that they were pilgrims and
strangers here on earth; and therefore sought their country above in Heaven.
Heb. 11.14.


And secondly, I say that these worldly riches are no true riches, but only
vain and imaginary riches: for they have made many proud, That the riches of
this life are not the true riches.
none better: if they had, why did the wisest Philosopher, so pronounced by the
voice of the Oracle, cast all his gold into the sea that he might be happy,
and the wisest among the sons of men, so pronounced by the voice of God, pray
as well against riches as poverty, Prou. 30.8.
and the best kings in this Island, and many other princes in many other
countries, besides the Apostles that forsook all to follow Christ, Matthew.
19.27.
change their princely thrones, for poor cells; and their kingly scepter, for
the divine Scriptures? and therefore he was a better husband then Philosopher,
that termed these riches, goods: but he mended the matter well that called
them goods of fortune; false goods ascribed to a false patron, for as there is
no goodness in them, so there is no fortune to give them; the meaning
therefore (as I take it) is this, Doctor Hall.
that it is a chance, if ever these riches prove good to any: for many times
they hurt the owners, and disquiet others, and as many time and ofnter too, the
worse men have them, and the best men want them; and yet they are never the
better for having them, nor the other never the worse for wanting them: for I
hear Saint Peter and Saint John (the eldest and dearest Apostles) say, gold
and silver have I none, and I read that Judas (the youngest and the worst
Apostle) bare the bag; and I read that the Devil said all these things will
I give thee, and they are mine to give; and that Dives was rich, and Lazarus
poor; and yet now the poor is made rich and carried up to Heaven, and the rich
is poor and sent down to Hell: and therefore it is apparent, that these false
goods can be no true riches, and so consequently that none is truly rich but
only God.

Now to prove that Christ is rich, besides the foresaid testimony of the
Apostle, our Savior himself says, all that the Father has, John 16.
are mine, and of the holy Ghost he says, he shall receive of mine and declare
unto you; and so the Evangelist says that of his fullness we have all
received, John 1.16.
and grace for grace: and therefore Christ being truly rich, enriched with all
the riches of the Dietie, power, strength, wisdom, goodness, mercy and such
like, he must needs be the true and eternal God.

Fourthly, from the proper works of God.
Fourthly, from the universal effects and proper works of God; for he that
created, and preserves, and governs all the things, that are created, is the
true and everlasting God; but this word, Created all things, and does still
sustain and govern all things, and therefore he must needs be the true God.

The mayor is clear of it self, Gene. 1.1.
because (as Moses says) In the beginning God created the Heaven and the
earth: And

The minor is confirmed, That Christ created all things. Psalm 45.7. Psalm.
102.25.
by the testimony of the Holy Scriptures, which says, Thy throne O God is for
ever and ever the Scepter of thy kingdom, is a right Scepter; and in an other
Psalm. he says, And thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the
Earth, and the Heavens are the works of thy hands; so the Evangelist says,
that all things are made by this Word, John 1.2.
and without this Word, was made nothing that was made; so Saint Paul says
that all things were created by him as well those things which are in Heaven, as
those things which are in Earth. Colloss. 1.16.
And so all the orthodoxe fathers do subscribe unto the same truth: for
Ignatius speaking of Christ, uses the very words of the Evangelist, that he
was in the world, and the world was made by him, Jgnatius in ep. ad Tarsenses.
Just. Mart: orat. 1. ad graecos.
and yet the world knew him not; and Justin Martyr says that by this Word both
Heaven and Earth, and all other creatures were created, and Irenaeus l. 2. c.
2. against heresies, Athenagoras in his apollogie for the Christians, Clemens
Alexandrinus, l. 1. Pedagogi. Tertullian in his Apollogetico, Saint Cyprian in
his second Book against the Jews; and many more; do largely, That Christ
governs all things.
and plainly prove, by inanswerable arguments, that all things were created by
this Word. And that Christ governs all things, the Author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews says, Heb. 1.2.3.
that he bears up all things with his mighty Word, and our Savior says unto
the Jews, my father works yet, and I work; John 5.17.
and Saint Paul says, that he is before all things, 1 Colloss: 17.
and that by him all things do consist.

Fifthly, from the prayers, which all Saints have made, Fifthly, from the prayers
of the Saints.
and that Divine worship which they exhibited, and which indeed is due to him;
for we are to pray to none but to God: because we believe in none, but in God;
and because none, but God can, at all times hear us, and at any time, help
us: John 5.23.
but prayers shall be ever made unto Christ and daily shall be praised, 1 Ioh.
2.22.23.
says the Psalmist; and so the Saints do, and ever have prayed unto him, Romans
14.11.
as unto the only God, Philip. 2.10.
which can deliver them out of their distress: and therefore this Word that
was made flesh, did make all flesh, and is indeed the true and eternal God,
as we may see in Proverbs 8.12. John 1.1. Apoc. 1.8. and as I have by these
inanswerable arguments sufficiently proved unto you.

The objections of the Arians against the eternal Godhead of Christ.
But against this eternal generation, and everlasting Godhead of this Son of
God; both the old Arians and the new vpstarte Ministers of Transiluania, that
like evil weeds did spring up out of Arius his ashes, do object, and endeavor
with the wit of hell to prove that this God of Heaven, was no God, before his
incarnation, and was made man: for

Luke says, he shall be called the Son of God; therefore he was not called
before his incarnation; Esaias 9.
and so Esayas says, that unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is
given, and he shall be called wonderful, the mighty God, and the prince of
Peace; and therefore as Magistrates are not called Magistrates, before they are
made Magistrates: so was not he called the mighty God, before he was borne
and given unto us: This was the opinion of Arrius and Seruetus, that the Son
of God was nothing before his incarnation, but only a decree in the mind of
God, to make this man Jesus Christ, and to replenish him with abundant gifts of
the Dietie.

Sol.
But to this Danaeus briefly answers, that these men say, he shall be called,
after the manner of the Hebrews, pro vere manifestabitur; Danaeus Jsagog.
he shall be truly manifested, and declared to be the Son of God; Christ
was a God from eternity, but he began to be a God existing in the humanity,
when he was made flesh.
so that, he shall be called, does not signify that he should then begin to
be, but that then he should begin, to be manifested, what he was before.
Besides, we may yield, that then he should begin to be, and to be called a
God, subsisting in the humane nature: for this may apparently be collected out
of the words, both of the Prophet and Evangelist: for in that the Prophet
says, unto us a Child is borne; this is to be understood of his humane
nature, and in that he says, unto us a Son is given, it is to be understood
of his Divine nature: Quia natus ex humanitate, datus ex diuinitate, datus qui
nesciret exordium, natus qui sentiret occasum; datus quo nec Pater esset
antiquior, natus qui and matre esset junior, and sic qui erat datus est, and
qui non erat natus est; Because he is borne in respect of his humanity, and
given in respect of his Dietie, for he was given, which had no beginning, and
he was borne, which should have ending, he was given, which was as ancient as
his father, and he was borne, that was younger then his mother; so he that
was, was given unto us, and he that was not, was borne unto us, as Eusebius
Emissenus says; and therefore this Son, that ever was a God, in respect of
his Divine nature; could not be called nor said to be a God, existing in the
humane nature, until this Son was given to be in carnate, and till this
Child was borne unto us; and so I say of the words of Saint Luke; that he
which was ever the Son of God, in respect of his Godhead, should now be
called the Son of God, existing in the Manhood.

Secondly, They object, that Saint John calls him (...), words before the
Creation, when first he said; Fiat lux, Let there be light: and therefore this
word before then could not be.

To this I answer, first, Sol.
that they do exceedingly corrupt the Text, in calling him, The Word of God:
for Saint John does not call him, The Word of God; but simply the Word, to show
the difference betwixt that Word of the Lord, which came unto the Prophets and
Apostles, and is left unto us in the Scriptures, or that was at any time spoken
by God, at the Creation, or since the Creation, unto the Patriarchs, or any
other servant of God; and this everlasting Word, which ever was, and is an
eternal God: And therefore Saint Cyril says, Cyrillus, l. 1. Thesauri That
Christ is no accidental, but an eternal essential word.
That he is not (...), seu (...), Any sound of the Air, which is breathed out
of the mouth of God, and is uttered by the help of the tongue; because God
has neither mouth, lips, nor tongue; neither is he, (...), nec (...), nec
(...), any inward, or inbred word, or significatiue voice, of any such
conceived words; because none of these, is any subsistent thing, but as it
were, an accident in the subject, which cannot be said to be in God: but he is
(...); The essential, substantial, and subsistent word, as hereafter I shall
more amply and plainly show unto you, when I come to discuss the reasons, why
he is called (...); The Word.

Thirdly, they do object, that the wisdom of God, says, Dominus creauit me
initium viarum suarum, ante secula fundauit me; Which according to the words,
is thus in English: Prou. 8.22.
God created me the beginning of his ways, before the Worlds he established me.

Sol.
I answer, that concerning this place of Solomon, I find diverse sorts of
expositions.

First, the Jews say, that by this Wisdom, is understood the Law, which was
created to be the beginning of Gods ways; and as they say, two thousand years
before the World was made; because in the thirtieth verse they find two iom:
that is, two days, which they interpret of two thousand years, because a day
with God, is as a thousand years.

Psalm. 90.4.
Secondly, the Samosatenian Heretics say, that this place is to be understood
not of Christ; but of that virtue of God, whereby he has wisely created, and
discreetly governs all those things that are created.

Thirdly, the Arians yielding that it was spoken of the Son of God, do say,
that it proves him to be made and created by the Father; and therefore not
eternally begotten of the Father.

That the Law was not created.
But against the Jews, I say, that it cannot be spoken of the Law; because the
Law is not created, but promulgated and showed unto us; to teach us to know
what is good and acceptable unto God; for if it were created, then it must be
created of nothing, and must be either a substance or an accident, and the
breach thereof would prove to be the offending of a creature, and not the
Creator, which is most absurd; and if it were created, yet that it should be
created two thousand years before the World was made, is more absurd; for that
it should be then created before any time, because time began when the World
was made; (as Moses shows:) And therefore, if the Law were created two
thousand years before the World was made, then Moses does not well, to make
Time to have his beginning, when the World began; and therefore the meaning
of those words, I was Deliciae eius, die, die; (which is an Hebraisme,
signifying Quotidie, daily, or always) is this; that Christ before all Worlds
was ever and always the only joy and delight of God, in whom (as he says
himself) he was well pleased, he was fully satisfied and contented.

Secondly, Against the Somosatenians, I say, that whatsoever is spoken of any
virtue, or any wisdom of God, must needs be spoken of Christ; Luc. 11.49.
because he is the virtue and wisdom of God, as Saint Luke shows: And
therefore the same things that are here ascribed unto that wisdom of God, are
elsewhere ascribed unto Christ, the Son of God; as you may see, John 1.1.
Heb. 1.2. Colos. 1.17. And so Justin Martyr, Justinus in Dialog. cum Tryph.
and Clemens Alexandrinus, do expound this place of Solomon, of the Son of
GOD.

Thirdly, Against the Arians, I find diverse answers. Whether the Arians
corrupted the Text.


First, Some think the Arians, as they used to do in other places, corrupted
the Text, and writ, (...) pro (...); i. e. Created me, in stead of possessed
me; but I think this could not be, because Just. Martyr, that lived before the
Arians were hatched, and Athanasius himself does read it, (...), Created me:
and therefore,

Secondly, Epiphanius, Saint Basil, Saint Hierome, and others, Epiphan. here is.
69 Basil. l. 2. contr. Eunom. Hieron. in ep ad Cypr.
do think that the vulgar Edition is not well translated; for that the Hebrew
word which Solomon uses, should not be translated (...), with a iota; but
(...) with an (...) in the midst of the word: The first is, He created me,
and the other is, he possessed me; and therefore Aquila translates it thus,
(...): And Tremellius, Whether the Hebrew word, be rightly translated (...),
created.
Iehoua possidebat me principio viae suae, or, ab initio operum suorum, as
others will have it; And so is the vulgar Latin, and our own last English
Translation: The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way; And if this be
true, then those ancient Fathers, Saint Athanasius, Saint Basil, Saint Cyril,
and others, that were much troubled about this place, might have easily
answered unto this objection of the Arians, if they had corrected the Greek
Translation, out of the Hebrew Text.

But the Jews contend, that the word in the Original, does as well signify to
create, as to possess, as Rabbi Shelomo Iarchi, upon Genesis 14.19. does
declare: for there Moses uses the same word which Solomon uses here; and
although our last English Translation reads it, Possessor of Heaven and Earth,
yet the vulgar Latin, and the Septuagint reads it, Creator of Heaven and
Earth: and therefore,

Thirdly, Fulgentius answers, Fulgent. in resp. ad hanc ob. Arrian.
that although Solomon should say, The Lord created me; yet could that make
nothing against the eternal being of the Son of God; for that we may easily
see Solomon speaks here of a twofold generation of the Son of GOD. That
Solomon speaks of a twofold generation of Christ.


First, Of his Incarnation, in these words, The Lord created me the beginning
of his ways; and then,

Secondly, Least we should with Arians imagine, that he was not, before he was
incarnate; He shows, that Ante colles genitus erat, Before the mountains he
was begotten, and brought forth; i. e. In respect of his Divinity.

First, of his incarnation, to be made man.
That in the first place he speaks of his incarnation, and this making of him
to be flesh, there follows none absurdity: for, though he speaks in the
present tense, or preterperfect tense, after the Latins; yet is it set down
for the future tense, after the manner of the Hebrews, who do oftentimes,
especially in things pertaining to God, set down the future tense, for the
present; because they are as certain to be done, as if they were already
done; as Tertullian observes: And the words immediately following, To be the
beginning of his ways; does make this exposition, the more apparently true:
for what is it, to be the beginning of his ways? Nisi quod ipse via nobis est
factus; but that he was made to be the way for us, to walk in? for he was
not made, that he should create new Creatures, but that he might renew those
that were lost: And therefore Saint James uses the like speech of the godly,
James 1.18.
saying, Of his own will begat he us with the Word of Truth, that we might
be as the first fruits of his Creatures; And the Prophet David uses the like
speech of himself, Psalm. 51.10.
when he says; Create a new heart in me O God. And therefore, to be the
beginning of the ways of God, is to be the first fruits of those that are
renewed, and not of those that are created; for if you look into the works of
Creation, you shall hear him say; Before the mountains were settled, and
before the hills, was I begotten.

Secondly, of his eternal generation, as he is God.
That in the second place, he speaks of his eternal generation, it is most
manifest; for he changes his phrase, and says, Ante colles genita eram,
Before the mountains was I begotten, as the Chalde paraphrase has it; or,
Filiata eram, I was sonned his son, as some translate it: for we must note,
that created and begotten, in the person of the Son of God, are to be
distinguished; or otherwise, if we make created and begotten to be the same,
we may say, that the World was begotten; which is most absurd: And therefore,
seeing he says, that this wisdom of GOD, was both created and begotten, and
that these two words, do signify two distinct and special things; we should
consider in what respect he is said to be created, and in what respect he is
said to be begotten, and then we should plainly see, that he is said to be
created, as he is the Son of man; and that he is said to be begotten, as he
is the eternal Son of God: for, here Solomon shows, that he is said to be
created, in respect of that nature, wherein he calls his Father Lord; for the
Lord (says he) created me: But he calls his Father Lord, in respect of his
humane nature; and never calls him Lord in respect of his divine nature: for,
he that is borne a servant of his Fathers handmaide, according to the saying of
the Psalmist; Psalm. 116.14.
O Lord I am thy servant, and the son of thine hand-maide; is also begotten
of his Fathers Essence, according to the saying of Christ; John 8.
I and my Father are one: And therefore, though he calls his Father Lord, in
respect of his humanity; yet does he never call him so, but always Father, in
respect of his Divinity; as I came from the Father; and we saw his glory, John
1.
as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father. And so you see, that
these words of Solomon, Naz. or. 4. de theolog. Athan. ser. 3. cont. Arr.
Cyril. l. 5. c. 4. 5. 6. 7. Thesauri. Aug. l. 1. c. 12. de trinit.
The Lord created me, are to be understood of his incarnation; and therefore
can prove nothing against his eternal generation: And this exposition of
Fulgentius is confirmed by Nazianzen, Athanasius, Saint Cyril, Saint Augustine,
and others. And yet,

Fourthly, Saint Hillary in l. de Synodis, Aquinas, l. 4. c. 8. contra gentes,
and Bellarmine, l. 1. c. 18. de Christo, do answer, that the eternal
generation of the Son of God, is sometimes called generation, and sometimes
creation; because it is so ineffable, that it cannot be fully expressed by any
one word; for generation signifies a production in the same substance, but
with a certain mutation of the begetter; How the Word may be said to be both
begotten and created.
but creation signifies a production of another substance, but without any
mutation of the Creator; and the Son of God is so produced, as that he
received the substance of the begetter: And therefore, in that respect, he is
said to be begotten; but he receives it without any mutation or alteration of
the begetter; and therefore in that respect, he may be said to be created: And
so he is sometimes said to be begotten, and sometimes said to be created, not
that any man should thereby deny his eternity, and think him to be a
creature; but that from both these words, we might receive what is fitting,
and reject what seems to be unfit, for the declaration of this ineffable and
inexplicable mystery.

David; Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee: And therefore, before
that day, wherein he was begotten his son, he was not his son.

Sol. The words of David are spoken of Christ, in respect of his manhood.
I answer, That the words, Inquire of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for
thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possessions:
do sufficiently prove, that these words are spoken of his incarnation, and not
of his eternal generation; for how should he, according to his Divinity,
demand the ends of the Earth for his possessions, when as he gives the
Kingdom of Heaven, which is a thousand times more then the Earth, to them that
love him? And therefore he which according to his Godhead, possesses all
things with his Father, according to the form of a servant, which he assumed
for our salvation; he requires of his Father, that he might have, The
Gentiles for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his
possessions: Act. 13.
And thus the Apostle does expound this place, in the 13. Chapter of the Acts
of the Apostles.

Apostle, that he is, The firstborn of every Creature; Coloss. ^.15.
and therefore created in the number of the Creatures.

Sol. That the words of the Apostle are to be understood of the humanity of
Christ. Romans 8.29.
I answer, That this is also meant of his humanity, for that the Apostle
speaks here of the Creatures restored, and not created; because he is said to
be, Primogenitus ex mortuis, The first fruits of the dead: for if he were
called, The first fruits of every Creature, according to his Deity; by what
testimonies can it be showed, that he is, The firstborn of the dead before
all Creatures; when as they could not be said to be dead, which were not yet
created? And therefore the Apostle says; That whom he did foreknow, he also
did predestinate, to be conformed to the Image of his Son, John 1.
that he might be the firstborn among many brethren; To show, that he which
according to his Deity, is the only begotten Son of God, without brethren,
is according to his humanity, etc. 3.
the firstborn among many brethren: for we must understand this difference
betwixt the first-begotten Son of God, and the only begotten Son of God:
that the first shows his humanity, whereby he became man, the first and
chiefest among many brethren; and the second his Divinity, John 1.
whereby he is the eternal Son of God, without any brethren; or otherwise
it were in vain to call him, the only begotten Son of God: for that he
gave power unto others, even as many as believe in him, to be made the Sons
of God: and therefore if he be not his Son by nature, then without doubt he
lost the name and the truth, of being the only begotten Son of God, after he
began to have many brethren.

But because none of his sons by adoption, Fulgen. in resp. ad ob. Arrian.
can be said to be the only begotten son of God; nor to be the Son of God,
^ather then the rest be; because the same name of sons, is acommodated unto
them all; although diverse rewards of retribution is promised unto them,
according to the diversity of their labors: therefore is Christ still said to
be the only begotten Son of God; because, though there be many sons of God
by grace; yet there is none but he alone his Son by Nature. And this
difference does our Savior Christ himself show unto us; when he says, I go
to my Father, and to your Father, John 20.17.
to my God and to your God; because he is otherwise my Father and my God, then
he is your Father and your God; for he is my Father eternally by nature, and he
is yours in time by grace: and therefore he that is first begotten in respect
of his manhood, among many brethren; is likewise still the only begotten
Son of God; in respect of his Godhead without any brethren. And so you see,
that maugre all the spite of Hell, it is most apparently true, that this Word
is the true God, for time, coeternall unto his Father.

CHAP. IIII. Of the coessentiality of the word with the Father, and the
objections that are made against the same sufficiently answered.
SEcondly, you have heard of the eternal Godhead of this Word, it follows
that I should show unto you how for nature he is coessentiall unto his Father:
touching which point Athanasius says, Non res quaepiam extrinsecus adinuenta
est filij substantia, neque ex nihilo inducta est, sed ex patris essentia nata
est, The substance of the Son is no outward thing, either found or created,
but begotten of the very Essence of his Father; even as you see the brightness
springing from the light, or the vapor from the water; Neque enim splendour
neque vapor est ipsa aqua, aut ipse sol, neque res aliena: For neither the
light is the Sun it self, nor the vapor the water it self; and yet they
are none other things, of another kind, then be the substances from whence they
spring: even so the Son issues from the substance of his Father; Et tamen
patris sustantia non perpessa est partitionem: And yet the substance of the
father a^mits no partition; for as the Sun remains still the same, Athanas.
in ep. cont. Eusebium.
and is no way lessened or diminished, in respect of those beams that flow
from him, so the Father suffers no mutation by having and begetting, Suam
ipsius imaginem filium, This his Son and eternal image: but remaining still
the same, he begets his Son of the same Essence: and we find not only all
the Orthodox fathers, but also the Scriptures plain enough, to confirm the same
truth; for our Savior says, I and my Father are one: And so S. John having
spoken of the Father, John 10.3^.
the Word, and the Spirit, 1 John 5.7.
says, That these three are one: And reason it self must needs confirm the
same; for seeing the Divine Essence is most simple, impartible, and
indivisible, and that the Father is God, (as none denies) and that the Son
is God, (as I have already proved) and that the Holy Ghost is God, (as all the
holy Fathers have as sufficiently confirmed) and yet that there are not three
Gods but one God; Athan. in Sym.
(as Athanasius shows) therefore it must needs follow, that all three have
but one and the selfsame Essence, and consequently, that the Son is (...)
Patri, Consubstantiall or co-essentiall unto his Father: and therefore also
hence it must needs follow, that (as Calvin says) our Savior Christ is (...),
A God of himself independent, as absolute as the Father is.

And yet for the better understanding of this point, how Christ may be said to
be (...), God of himself, Thom. p. 1. q. 33.
we must consider that, Aliud est habere essentiam Diuinam a seipso, How Christ
is God of himself.
aliud habere essentiam diuinam a seipsa existentem; It is one thing to have
his Divine Essence from himself, and another to have his Divine Essence
existing of it self; To say that the person of the Son, has his Divine
Essence, that is, his personal being from himself, we cannot; because it is
from the Father, the Father communicating his whole Essence unto the Son; and
therefore we say that the Son, Ratione (...), in respect of his personal
being, is not (...), God of himself, but God of God, and Light of Light; (as
the Nicen Council has it:) because the person of the Son existeth from the
person of the Father; but to say that the Son has his Divine Essence
existing of it self, Idem. ibid.
is most certain; Quia remota relatione ad patrem, sola restat essentia, qua
est a seipsa; for taking away the relation of the Son unto the Father, there
remains but the Essence, which is of it self: and therefore we say that the
Son, Quoad essentiam absolutam, In respect of his absolute Essence, is (...),
A God of himself, because the Essence of the Son, is the very same that the
Essence of the Father is: And so to this truth, set down by Calvin,
Bellarmine himself subscribeth. Bellar. de Christo.


But the old and new Arrians cannot endure to yield him to be (...), of the
same Essence with his Father, but rather (...), of some other such like
Essence, but not of the same substance, as Athanasius shows. Athan. in l. de
expositione fidej.
And therefore they do object,

First, against the Word here used by the Fathers, to express this truth.

Secondly, against the truth and true meaning of the matter, contained and
declared by this Word.

Ob. Idem in l. de decret Con. Nicen.
First, for the word (...), though first found out by themselves, yet of all
others, the Arrians could not endure it, as Athanasius witnesses; because (as
they said) neither (...), essence, nor (...), of the same essence, can be found
any where in all the Scriptures.

Sol. That the word Essence is plainly derived out of Scriptures. Rom 1.20.
To this Epiphanius answers, that although the name of essence in plain
term, is not found either in the Old or New Testament, yet the sense and
signification thereof, the Synonomie and aequiualencie of the same, is
obuiously found in many places: for the Apostle speaks of his eternal power,
(...), and Godhead; and what is (...), his Godhead, but (...), the very Essence
of God? Philip. 2.
and so he speaks, (...), of the form of God, but the form of any thing is
no less Philosophical then the Essence of that thing, and Saint Peter says,
(...) That we might be made partakers of the Divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1.4.
but the nature of God and the Essence of God, are both the same.

Besides, Essence is derived of esse, to be; and it is the abstract of the name
or Word, which in the concrete is called ens, being, but God is said to be both
ens and esse, Exodus 3.14.
the chiefest being, and to be, in the Scriptures: as ego sum (...), I am that
I am; and he that is, has sent me unto you: and therefore if the Scriptures
call him ens, the being, why may not we call him essence? for though it cannot
be well said, That abstract names are most agreeable to God.
that man is humanity, in the abstract; yet because God is most simple by
nature, we may as well speak of him in the abstract as in the concrete, nay
the abstract names are more properly agreeable unto him, then the concrete, as
to say that he is Truth, rather then true; Wisdom, rather then wise; justice,
Dionys. de Divine. nominibus.
rather then just; and so essence or being, rather then to be, as Dionysius
says.

And further we find the word Essence, used in the Scripture; for, where the
prodigal Child says, (...), Luc. 15.12.
Father give me the portion of thy substance, which pertains to me, he uses
the word (...), to express his fathers substance: and what is the riches or
the substance of God, but his Divinity? and therefore the word Essence is not
improper, nor altogether invented without Scripture to express the Nature of
GOD.

And for the word (...), coessentiall, or of the same essence, That the word
(...), of the same Essence, was not first used by the Fathers of Athanasius
time.
the fathers answer, that it was not first invented by the fathers of the
Nicen Council (as the Arrians falsely affirmed) for one of themselves denying
the Deity of Christ, said, that if they should yield Christ to be a true God,
then must it follow, that he is (...), of the same essence with God: whereupon
Hosius and the rest of the Orthodox fathers concluded that he was (...), of the
same essence with God: and it was used long before that time, (though not
controuerted;) by Dionysius Romanus, Dionysius Alexandrinus, Origin,
Theognostus, and others, as Athanasius affirms.

Secondly, they say that it was not so far fetched, as the words, (...), of
another essence, and (...) of the like essence, which themselves used to deny
the coessentiality of the Son of God with his Father: so free were they to
devise what they would to maintain errors, and so strict against the
defenders of the truth.

Thirdly, Luk 6. Deuteronomy 7.6.14.2.26: Ambros. l. 3. c. 7. de fide.
they allege that the Scriptures used the like words, as (...). And Moses
calls the children of Israel, (...): which we translate, a special people,
or a peculiar chosen people unto himself: a people, as it were, of the like
nature with God.

Fourthly, they affirm that although the word it self is not found in the
Scriptures; yet that the full sense and meaning of the word is plainly found,
Aug. tract. 79. In Joh. Cyrillus l. 1. de trinit.
as Saint Augustine does most excellently prove out of those words of our
Savior; I and my Father are one, John 10. And that it is derived from the
Scripture; for it is derived of (...) Essence, and (...) is derived of (...),
and the Lord says of himself, Ego sum (...), I am he that is, or, I am that I
am, Exodus 3. And therefore seeing this (...), their verbal wind shakes no
corn, nor cannot derogate any thing from the coessentiality of this word with
his Father, they proceed against the matter. And so

Secondly, they do object against the truth of the matter declared by this
Word. And

First, they argue thus. Whose wills are diverse, their natures diverse, but the
will of the Father, and of the Son, are diverse: for the Son says unto his
Father, Father, if it be possible, Matthew. 26.39.
let this cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will;
therefore their Essence must needs be diverse.

Sol. That Christ as he has two Natures, so he has a twofold Will.
I answer, that the proposition is to be distinguished; for whose wills are
diverse, having the same natures, their natures must be diverse; but in Christ
there are two natures, divine and humane; and therefore that his will is
diverse, or not the same will as his fathers is, in respect of his humane nature
(though it be always subject and agreeable to the same) we easily grant: but
that his will in respect of his divine nature, is any ways different, or
diverse from his Fathers will, we utterly deny: and we say not that the whole
person of Christ, but that Christ in respect of his divine nature, as he is the
second person of the Trinity, is co-essentiall unto his Father; and therefore
though the will of Christ, as he is the Son of man, be not the same, as his
Fathers will is; yet that does not prove the will of Christ, as he is the
Son of God to be not the same as his Fathers will is: because Christ has a
twofold will; the one as he is the eternal Word, and the other as he is made
Flesh.

same essence with God; but Christ, is the Mediator betwixt God and men, 1 Timothy
2.5.
says the Apostle: therefore he cannot be of the same essence with God.

Sol. That there are two sorts of Mediators.
I answer, that the proposition is to be distinguished: for it is true of such
a mediator, as Moses was, the Messenger of God to men; but it is false of such
a Mediator, as reconcileth wicked men to God, by appeasing his wrath, and
making satisfaction for their sins: for that no man can do so, but he that is
God by nature. Now Saint Paul shows Christ to be such a Mediator, as does
appease the wrath of God, and therefore he shows even thereby, that Christ
must needs be a God by nature, and of the same Essence with his Father.

God, but he is no Mediator nor Advocate with himself, therefore himself is
not of the same Essence with God.

Sol.
I answer, that the Name of God is to be taken two ways.

First, Essentially; and so Christ is a Mediator with God.

Secondly Hipostatically, for any person of the Godhead; and so Christ also is
Mediator with God, if you understand God for the person of the Father, not
excluding the Son, or the Holy Ghost; for otherwise it is false: because he
is not only Mediator with the person of the Father, but also with himself and
the Holy Ghost: So likewise in the conclusion, if you take God (...), for the
person of the Father, we yield Christ is not God, because God the Son, is
not, nor cannot be God the Father. And to the minor, I say, That Christ
reconcileth us to himself.
that Christ may be said to be a Mediator with himself; if we consider the
office of mediation; Nam sacrificij modum, non sicut vnus quidam ex nobis,
sacerdotibus affert seruiliter; For he does not seruilely, like some of us, or
any under the Law, bring the substance of our sacrifice unto the Priests, which
should first offer for themselves, and then for the sins of their people;
because he has nothing herein common with us, that he should receive it at our
hands, to offer it for us; but as he is our sacrifice himself, Cyrillus l. de
recta fide ad reginas.
Sic sibi ipsi conciliat and per ipsum, and in ipso patri, So he reconcileth us
unto himself, and through himself, and in himself, unto his Father, as Saint
Cyrill says.

Fourthly, they say: If he be of the same essence with the Father, with God,
and not in God, John 1.1.
says the Evangelist; but to be with God, signifies not to be in God, but
without him, as a book held in my hand, is with me, though it be not in me:
therefore Christ is not essentially in the Father, and consequently not of the
same essence with the Father.

To this Fulgentius answers diverse ways. Sol.


1. If all that is said to be with God, be without God, Fulgent. in resp. ad
object. Arrianorum.
and all that is said to be in God, be within him; then are we nearer unto
God then the Son of God; for here you see he is said, but to be with God, and
we are said to be in God: 1 Cor. 8.
for there is but one God the Father, by whom are all things, and we in him,
says the Apostle; but this is most absurd, to say, that we are nearer unto
God then the Son of God, and therefore it is as absurd to say that all which
is with God, is without God, and all that are said to be in him, to be within
him.

Secondly, He proves, that to be with God, or with man, does not always
signify to be without God, or without man; for it is said, that the ungodly
reasoned with themselves, Wisd. 2.1.
but when a man reasons, he does it within himself, and not without
himself, C. 4.1.
and it is said, that the memorial of Virtue is immortal, because it is
known with God, and with men: but it cannot be known with men, unless the
memory thereof be within men; John 14.15.
and so our Savior Christ says, If any man love me and will keep my saying,
my Father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with
him: but to abide with us, does not signify to remain without us, but to
dwell within us; as the Apostle shows, Ephesians. 3.16, 17.
when he prays that the Saints might be strengthened with might by the
Spirit in the inner man, and that Christ might dwell in their hearts by faith.

That to be with God and to be in God is the same.
Thirdly, He proves that to be with God, and to be in God, is aequiualent, and
the very same in many things: for Moses says, God is faithful, in whom there
is no iniquity, and David says, the Lord is righteous, and there is no
iniquity in him, and yet Saint Paul says, numquid iniquitas apud Deum, is
their iniquity with God? God forbid; and Saint James says, with whom there is
no variableness, nor shadow of turning, i. e. in whom there is no mutabilitie:
and therefore as the Evangelist says eere, The Word was with GOD, so our
Savior says elsewhere, John 10.38.
I am in the Father, and the Father is in me. And therefore it appears
plainly, that Christ is not with God as one man is with another, as Saint Paul
says that he remained with Saint Peter fifteen days: for so to be with one,
is to be without him, as a guest, by the affection of charity, and not to be
substantially in him, as the same, by the law of equity; but Christ is with
God, as the word is within the mind, or the council is within the heart, or
life it self within the soul; so that, as the soul cannot be without life,
no more can God be without this Word: And therefore also, we must observe, a
great difference, That we are not in God as Christ is in God.
betwixt our being with God, and in God; and Christ his being with God, and in
God; for when it is spoken of us, our natural union with God is no ways
meant; but either the power of the Creator, or the piety of the redeemer, is
always understood: and therefore it is said, that he gave us power to be the
sons of God, but this Word is not made, but naturally, and eternally begotten
the Son of God; and therefore though we be called sons, and he called
Son; we called Gods, and he called God; we said, to be begotten and he said
to be begotten; yet herein is the difference, that he is so naturally, and
essentially; we so called by grace, whereby it is given unto us to be made the
sons of God. And so much for the co-essentialitie of the Word, with his
Father.

CHAP. V. Of the co-equalitie of the Word with his Father, and the chiefest
objections made against the same, most clearly and sufficiently answered.
THirdly, You have seen, that this Word is co-eternall and co-essentiall with
his Father; it follows that I should speak of his co-equalitie with his
Father: and this point is as clear as the former; because in an essence most
simple, there cannot be so much as imagined, more or less: and therefore
Fulgentius says most excellently, that seeing Christ is from everlasting,
Baruch. 3.25.
because he is the eternal Wisdom and power of God, seeing he is
immeasurable, because he is great and has no end, and seeing he is most
highest, as Zacharias shows in his speech of John the Baptist, Luke 1.76.
that he should be called the Prophet of the most Highest, that is, of
Christ, he must needs be in all respects equal unto his Father; Nam quid
anterius sempiterno, quid maius immenso, quid superius altissimo? For what can
be before him, that has been before all things? what can be greater then
that, which is immeasurable? or what can be higher, then that which is highest?
and so Saint John says, that the Jews sought the rather to kill him, John
5.1^.
because he did not only break the Sabbath, but also said that God was his
Father, making himself equal to God.

But the Arrians do object, that Christ did not teach himself equal with his
Father, but that the Jews mistook him, and thought he did so.

I answer that this is false, for (as Saint Cyrill, Sol. That the Jews
rightly understood, that Christ taught that he was aequall with God.
Saint Chrysostom, Saint Augustine and others do affirm) the Jews did
rightly understand our Savior; and the Evangelist shows as much: for if they
had either mis-conceiued his meaning, or mis-construed his words, then surely
either Christ or the Evangelist, would have given us some notice thereof; that
so we might not err after them, especially in so great a matter: for so we
find, that when the Capernaits understood his words of an Orall eating of his
flesh; our Savior perceiving their error, how they misunderstood his words,
John 6.62.
said presently; the flesh profits nothing, and that the words which he
spoke, were Spirit and Life; and so when he said, John 2.20.
Destroy this Temple and I will build it up again in three days, and the
Jews thought that he spoke it of their stately, Material temple, v. 21.
that was forty six years a building; the Evangelist presently tells us, that
he spoke it of the temple of his Body; but neither Christ, nor the Evangelist,
do here give us the least intimation of their mistaking of his meaning; but
do rather approve their right apprehension of our Saviors words: and
therefore it must needs follow, that Christ taught himself to be aequall unto
his Father.

my Father is greater then I, John 14.20.
and therefore, Christ is not aequall unto his Father.

Sol. Basil: l. 1. in Eunomium. Nazian orat. 4. de Theol. Hilar. l. 9. de
trinit:
To this Saint Basil answers: that the Father is greater then the Son,
ratione principij, in respect of his beginning, for that there is noted a
certain kind of authority or maioritie in the Father, because he is the
beginning of the son, and does communicate his whole essence unto the son,
which the son does not unto the Father; that is, that the Father is the
beginning of the person of the son, but not of the essence of the son, as I
said before.

Others, would have the Father to be greater then the son, ratione nominis,
only in respect of the name, because the name of a Father seems to be
greater then the name of a Son.

How the Father is greater then Christ.
But Athanasius (in my judgment) answers best, that Christ is aequall to the
Father as touching his Godhead, but inferior to the Father, as touching his
manhood: for Christ says, I go to the Father, John 4.28.
because the Father is greater then I; and therefore he is inferior to the
Father in respect of that nature, wherein he goes to the Father; but he cannot
be said to go to the Father, as he is a God: for so he is always with the
Father; but he goes to the Father as he is a man; and therefore he is inferior
to the Father, as he is a man; and thus Saint Cyrill, Saint Chrysostom. Saint
Aug. and Gaudentius do expound it.

Thirdly, they do object that our Savior says, I came John 6.38.
but to do the will of him that sent me, therefore he that sent him, is
greater then he that is sent.

I answer first, that Christ has two wills; the one as man, Sol. That Christ
has two wills.
the other as God; and he came down, not to do his own will, which he had,
as he was man: but to do the will of his Father, that sent him, which was
also his own will as he was God: for having the same essence, he must needs
have the same will with his Father: and therefore as he was inferior to his
Father in respect of his humane will, so he was equal to his Father in respect
of his divine will.

And secondly I say that he was not sent, Per modum imperij; That the Father
sent not the Son by way of command, or superiority.
In respect of any superiority that the Father had, to command him; but by way
of consent; the Father being willing, to let his Son go, as the Son was to
be gone: so that misit, is no more then emisit, they were both willing, that
the Word should be made Flesh.

But they urge that he descended to do the will of his Father; Ob.
but he descended not as Man, but as God: therefore he was inferior to the
Father, not only as Man, but also as God.

I answer, that the descending of Christ, Sol. That the descending of of
Christ is the assuming of ^ur flesh.
is nothing else but his exinination, his incarnation and assuming the form of
a servant; for otherwise the Godhead can neither be said to ascend nor descend:
and so his son thus humbled, thus incarnate, did obey his Father, and perform
the Will of his Father; but not in respect of the form which he had in Heaven;
with his Father; but in respect of the form of a servant, which he humbling
himself, assumed in earth. And,

Fourthly, they do object that S. Paul says, that when Christ yet then, 1
Cor. 15.27.28.
the son shall be subject unto his Father, which has subdued all things
under him, and therefore the son is inferior to the Father.

To this some do answer, Sol.
that then the humane nature of Christ shall be swallowed up, and wholly
converted into the Dietie: but this cannot be; for that Saint Paul in this
very place shows the contrary; because the subjection argues a distinction:
whereas if it were quite swallowed up, there could be no distinction: and
therefore seeing there must be still a subjection there must be still that
nature remaining, which shall be subject to the other.

Nyssenus. Chrysostom. Cyril. and others.
Others will have this saying of the Apostle to be spoken of the whole Church of
Christ; or of Christ as he is in his members; so that the sense should be
this, then the whole body of Christ shall be so subject unto God, that not any
one member of the same, shall in any thing be contumacious or rebellious
against the will of God.

But although this may pass without absurdity, as being true in respect of
the matter; yet I do not find, that it agrees with the Apostles meaning in
this place: for he speaks of him, to whom all things are subdued; but all
things are subdued unto the person of Christ, considered in himself; an^ not
unto the whole body of Christ, or unto Christ considered in his members, as
both the Prophecy of David, and this place of the Apostle, make it plain: and
therefore Saint Ambrose Oecumenius and Theophilact, do expound it of the Son
of God absolutely considered; and that it signifies not a servile subjection,
any ways betokening an inferioritie, but an unanimous agreement of the son
with the Father, which shows their unity and equality.

That Christ in glory for ever and ever as man, shall be still inferior and
subject unto the Godhead.
But I like best of Saint Augustines and Primasius expositions; which do
interpret it of the humane nature of Christ, which then shall be truly
subject unto God; not because it was not subject before then, but with a more
emphasis the Apostle would give them to understand, that as ever before, it was
subject unto God; so then also, in that excellent glory, when all things are
subdued unto it, it shall be subject unto God: and the reason hereof is, (as
some of the Greek Fathers have observed,) because he writ unto the
Corinthians, which were but very lately converted unto the Christian Faith,
from the vain fables of the Gentiles, which taught that the Gods did contest,
and strive amonst themselves.

And therefore, least they should think, that Christ subduing all things, and
putting all things under his feet, would do unto his father, as they said
Jupiter did to his father Saturn, adibus and sedibus effugari, to drive him
out of house and home, he says, all things shall be subjected unto Christ,
excepting him, which has subdued all things unto him: and not only this,
(that all things shall be subject unto Christ, but the Father) but also; that
as now it is; so it shall be then, in that glory and triumph; after all things
shall be subdued unto the Man Christ Jesus, yet then shall his humane nature,
that is, Christ himself as he is man, be still subject unto God his father: so
that he which is, and ever was equal to his father, as touching his Godhead,
is and ever shall be, inferior and subject to his father as touching his
Manhood.

Many other objections they have, against the Dietie, coessentialitie, and
coequalitie of the Son of God with his father; but they are all so triuiall
that they deserve no answer: and are all deduced from those places that are
spoken of Christ, as he is a man; and misapplyed by them, to deny his
excellency, as he is a God; and therefore I need not proceed any further in
this point; but only to desire you from hence, to observe these few branches
of instructions, that do most naturally spring from this root; as, 1. The
greatness of Gods love. This doctrine, that the word Incarnate was a true God,
teaches us four special things.
2. The craftiness of Satan's dealing. 3. The perverseness of Heretics. 4.
The unthankfulness of men.


First, we see this Word, this Son of God, was not made flesh to dignifie or
to better himself; for he was before (as I showed you before) a God in the
best and highest degree, from everlasting, (...), a God of himself, How
greatly God loved us, that God would be made man for our good. A love like
himself, incomprehensible.
coessentiall and coequall unto his father: what therefore should he merit, or
wherein could he be dignified by his Incarnation, more then he was before his
Incarnation? Gloria eius augeri non potuit, nothing could be added unto his
glory; or if it could, his love to us could not be so great; for then it might
be said, he did it not only for our sake, but also for his own sake, that
himself might thereby be the more dignified and exalted: but seeing he was so
high before, that he could not be higher, so great that he could not greater,
and so good that he could not be better; it is most certainly apparent, that he
descended from the height of his dignity, unto the very depth of humility, to
be made flesh, only for our sake: and therefore we may well say, that greater
love then this cannot be; that he, which is the highest, chiefest, everlasting
God, should descend and be made the Son of Man, that we might be made the
sons of the immortal GOD through him.

How Satan has ever labored more to obscure the truth concerning the person
of Christ, then any other point of doctrine whatsoever.
Secondly, we may from hence see both the subtlety and the cruelty of Satan's
dealing, for he knows that this is the greatest benefit that ever man
received from God; the giving of this Word to be made Flesh, this his eternal
Son to be made man; Quia in creatione dedit te tibi Deus, Because in thy
creation, he did but give thy being unto thee; but in this his Incarnation,
he gave himself unto thee: and therefore Satan would feign obscure this
benefit, either by debasing the person, and persuading us to believe that he
was not so excellent as he was, i. e. not a God, or if a God, not so high, not
so excellent as his Father was; or else by corrupting the action, and
suggesting unto us, that he did not all for our sakes only, but chiefly for
his own merit, (as if he were ambitious of vainglory, which is blasphemy to
think) that he might thereby get him a name above all other names.

And this is his usual practice, to seek always at the chiefest, to corrupt
the greatest points, and to overthrow the strongest pillars of Christian
religion; Math. 4.3.
for he tempted Christ himself, and would feign have overcome him: for he
knew that if the Captain were once conquered, then all the Soldiers would
soon be vanquished; if the Shepherd were once smitten, then all the sheep
would be scattered; and so since the coming of Christ, he stirred up more and
greater heresies concerning Christ, either his person, or his offices; then he
did concerning any other point of Christian Religion; for as there is no point
so great, so weighty; no point more comfortable then this, concerning the
person of our Redeemer; because this is eternal life to know him to be the
true and eternal God: John 17.3.
So Satan did never bestow more pains about any point, to ouer-throw it, and
corrupt it; then he did about this same; as they that are but meanly read in
the Ecclesiastical stories, and counsels, may easily perceive: And therefore I
have ever thought no pains too great, no discourses too long, no time misspent,
that is spent to discuss this truth, and to dispell those clouds of errors
that do seek to obscure the dignity and excellency of the person of the Son
of God; Quia bonum est esse hic, For it is good to dwell on this Rock, and
here to build us Tabernacles, as Peter says, Iuvat vsque morari.

Thirdly, How maliciously Heretics have denied the Godhead of Christ.
we may from hence see the perverseness of wicked Heretics, for that it is
not enough for them, to offend God, but they will deny him to be a God, and as
the Athiests will be wicked (...), in the highest degree, by serching so far
into God, as to say at last, there is no God; so will they search so far into
the nature of the Son of God, that they deny him to be a God, until the
vengeance of God, does make them see their abominable sins: and therefore we
should all take heed, that the God of this world do not so blind our eyes, as
to make us to deny God our Savior.

Fourthly, How thankful we ought to be unto God for the giving of the Word to
be made flesh.
we may from hence consider how thankful we ought to be; and yet how
unthankful we are to God: for here we see, that more then this he could not
do for man, for the highest God to be made man, yea a man of sorrows (as I
shall by his help in my Treatise of his Passion show unto you) that we might
be made the sons of God and the heirs of joy; and yet we seldom or never
set this great benefit before our eyes, to be thankful to God for the same:
for if we did, how could we find in our hearts with the sight of this
goodness, to heap up such horrible wickedness, as we do against his
Majesty? to blaspheme his name, to abuse his Word, to despise his servants,
and to be to every good work reprobate; O beloved, remember what our Savior
says, If you love me keep my Commandments: John 14.15.
and if you be thankful to God, for this his great love to you, to be
vilified, and made flesh, and made of no reputation for you, offend not his
Majesty, and render not unto him evil for good, and hatred for his good will.
And so much touching the excellency of the person that was made flesh, he that
was the true and eternal God, co-essentiall and co-equall unto his Father.

CHAP. VI. Of the word (...), The word here showed by the Evangelist, to
express the person that was incarnate, and what it signifies, and why the
Evangelist uses it.
SEcondly, having seen the excellency of the person that was made flesh, we
are now to consider, the Word here used, to declare that person, (...), the
Word; touching which I will only discuss these three points.

1. What (...) signifies. 2. Why Christ is termed (...). 3. Why the
Evangelist says here, The Word was made flesh, rather then, the Son of God,
was made flesh.
What (...) signifies.
First, some say that (...) signifies reason, and that the Son is therefore
called (...), Reason, because as reason is most inward with us, so is the Son
with the Father, as Saint Basil, and Nazianzen say; or because he makes us
obedient to yield unto reason, as Origin says: others will have (...) to
signify definition, because Christ defines and expresses the whole nature of
his Father, Heb, 1.3.
he being the brightness of his glory, and the engraven form of his person,
as Nazianzen and Euthymius upon those words of the Apostle do affirm. Others
translate it sermo, (which I translate speech) as Prudentius.

Ades pater supreme, patrisque sermo Christ. So Beza, In principio erat sermo;
and so Tertullian, Saint Cyprian, Saint Hillarie, Saint Ambrose, Saint
Augustine, Saint Hierome, and diverse others: and some call him the voice of
God, according to that of the Psalmist, The voice of God is a glorious voice,
as Claudian, Christ potens, redcuntis conditor aevi,
Vox summi sensusque Dei, quem fudit ab alta
Mente pater. --


O mighty Christ, maker of the world, thou voice and sense of the highest God,
which the Father begets in his most inward mind.

But most commonly the Fathers, and almost all the School of Divinity,
following the vulgar Latin, do expound (...), to signify verbum, the Word;
because Sermo, speech, does seem to consist of many words: whereas a word does
altogether denotate, and declare unity.

But then it may be objected, Ob.
that none can express his whole mind by one simple word; and therefore that
speech is more likely to be the meaning of the Evangelist.

I answer, That man indeed, with one conceived word, Sol.
can hardly express his whole mind and wisdom; That as God is one act, so
he can express himself with one word.
but it is not so with God: for, as he is but, Vnus simplicissimus actus, One
most simple act; so he does apprehend, and understand all things, Vno ictu,
and vno conceptu; at one instant, and can express himself with one word: And
multiplicity of words, does show the infirmity of man, that with few words,
cannot express himself; but the unity and simplicity of Gods Word, denotes
the superexcellencie of God, that so briefly, and so easily, can do all things.

Secondly, We are to note, why Christ is termed (...), Why Christ is termed
the Word.
the Word: Touching which point, we must understand, that whatsoever speaks,
utters forth words; And we find that God, Angels, and Men, do speak,
though after a different and a diverse manner: for, though God being a Spirit,
wants mouth, lips, and tongue; and that the Apostle speaks hyperbolically
of the tongues of Angels, Zanch. l. 3. c. 19. de operibus sex dierum.
(as Zanchius notes) yet this is certain, that God and Angels do often
speak; as we read Genesis 1. Zach. 2. Esaias 6.2.3. Although the speeches, and
the communications of the Angels, be far unlike to ours, Hieron to. 7. p.
187. in c. 24. Jobi.
(as Saint Hierome says) and that we can neither know, nor understand after
what manner, they either do, or have heretofore spoken at any time, either
outwardly unto the ear, or inwardly in the mind of any man, as Saint
Augustine says: And therefore we say, that there is a Divine, Angelical, and
a humane word; And to each of these, i. e. God, Angels, and Men, we do
ascribe a twofold word.

1. One inward of the mind and understanding. That there is a twofold Word.
2. Another outward of the voice and tongue.
After the first manner, we are said to speak, when we do conceive certain
thoughts, and cogitations within our mind; As, Psalm. 53.1. Sap 2.1. Matthew. 9.
the fool has said in his heart there is no God, and, they said within
themselves, but not aright. And,

After the second manner, we are said to speak, when by any outward word,
Fulgent in resp. ad ob. Arr.
or voice, we do express, and declare our inward cogitations; And this is
said to be only the outward sign and voice of the inward word: for that the
inward conception of any word is most properly said to be the Word, as Saint
Augustine affirms.

Hilarious l. de Synod. How in some things the Word God resembles our outward
word.
Now Christ is not any outward vocal word, nor any transient voice of God, (as
diverse Heretics said he was) but he is the inward, essential, and permanent
word of God; as Epiphanius, Saint Basil, and Saint Augustine do declare: And
yet (as Saint Basil says) he has some certain similitudes and resemblances
with our outward word; for as the same springs from our inward mind,
(because the tongue utters what our mind conceiueth; Matthew. 12.14.
for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks;) So is the Word
God, begotten from the mind of the Father; and as the vocal Word, is the
lively Character of the inward thought, and does represent the image of the
same; so is the Word God, the living Image of the begetter, and the very
effigies, or the engraven form of his person, Heb. 1.3.
as the Apostle speaks.

But he has a far more propinquity and likeness with our inward and mental
Word, (as Saint Augustine teaches.) For,

The likeness of the Word with our inward word Aug de Trinitate. l. 15. c. 10.
etc. 11.
First, As a man conceiueth, and brings forth this Word in his mind, so does
the Father beget his Son by his understanding.

Secondly, As the Word of the mind is from our knowledge, our knowledge from
reason, and reason from the mind, immaterially produced, (...), without any
passion, or corruption; so is the Word God begotten of the Father, as Saint
Basil, and Nazianzene do declare. Nazian orat. 4. de Theolog.


Thirdly, As the mind does so beget the Word within in self, as that still
the same remains in the mind, Fulgentius ad Monimum.
(as Fulgentius notes:) So the Word God is so begotten of his Father, as that
he remains always with the Father, as, The Son which is in the bosom of
his Father, he declared unto us; and, No man has ascended up to Heaven, John
3.13.
but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of man which is in Heaven;
Nam cum ad terrena descendit coelestia non dereliquit: For when he descended
to the Earth, and was made flesh, he left not Heaven, but as the word of the
mind does always remain in the mind; so does this Word God, always remain
in the bosom of God.

Fourthly, as the conceived word of the mind, is the beginning of all working,
so is this word God the beginning of all creatures, for by it all things were
made, John 1.
and without it was nothing made that was made.

Fifthly, as the mental word is showed by the voice, so is the word God
manifested by the assuming of our flesh.

And yet because it is impossible to accommodate little, vile, How the Word God
differs from our word. Basilius contra Eun. Aug. Ser. 190. de tempore.
and terrene things, fully to express, or in all things to agree with divine
and eternal things, as Saint Augustine does most excellently declare, saying,
Cum Deus comparatur non potest comparari aequali scilicet comparatione, When
God is compared, he cannot be compared with any equal comparison: for, to whom
will you compare me, or what similitude will you make like unto me, says the
Lord? therefore we must note, that although in somethings, this word God is
like unto our inward word, yet in many things they do differ; As

First, our Word has a beginning of time, when we frame the same in our
understanding; but the word God has no beginning. Apoc. 1.8.
For he is a and o, the first and the last, that never had beginning, and that
never shall have ending, for thou art God from everlasting, and world without
end, says the Psalmist.

Secondly, our mind is before any of our words, but this word God, is
co-eternall unto his Father, as I have formerly declared.

Thirdly, Athanas. in Symbolo. Cyrillus de trinitate. Aug in Joh.
our word differs from the mind that produces it; but this word God is
(...), of the same essence with the Father: for, I and my Father are one, says
our Savior, i. e. one substance, though not one person, as I have likewise
showed unto you before.

Fourthly, our word is an accident, in the subject of our mind, but the word
God is a most perfect substance, and the cause of all beings, in whom and by
whom are all things; as the Apostle says.

Fifthly, our word of it self, can do nothing at all; but the word God can do
all things.

Sixthly, our word is a dead word, wanting life; but in the word God, there is
not only life, but he is life it self.

Seauently, our word is manifold; for we produce many thoughts and
intelligences; but the word God is only one; because God with one act does
understand himself, Aug. in Psalm. 61.
and all things else: and therefore Saint Augustine upon the Psalmist, Semel
loquutus est dominus, The Lord spoke once, expounds the same of the word
Christ. And so you see these differences betwixt the word God, and the word of
man; he that desires to see more discrepances betwixt them; let him read
Athanasius in his third Sermon against the Arrians.

Whether the Word be a name of person or of office.
But here it may be demanded, whether (...) the word, be a name of his person,
as he is God, or a name given him, in respect of his office of Redeemer, as he
is God and Man.

I answer that it is a name of his person, and that in respect of his Godhead
only: for it is observed, that none of the Evangelists, Malden. in John c. 1.
nor of the Apostles, does call him the Word, but only S. John; nor he
neither, does call him (...), the Word, after he had said, that the Word was
made flesh; to note unto us, that as Saint John only was specially set a part,
to declare the Deity of Christ; so he only calls him by that name, which is
only proper unto him, as he is God, and none else: and he calls him only so,
before his Incarnation; to show that he is the Word, as God, Why Saint John
uses this word (...), the word.
and not as Man.

Thirdly, we are to consider why Saint John says, the word was made flesh;
rather then the Son of God was made flesh; touching which, Theophilact and
Euthymius think that he says, The word was made flesh; Hillar. in l. contra
Constant.
least that if he should have said, the Son was made flesh, the Reader might
percha^ce imagine, some passible or carnal thing, as the Arrians dreamed; as
Saint Hillarie witnesses.

But this reason seems not solyd enough to me; because Christ has many other
names, besides this, as wisdom, light, brightness, and such like, which
signify neither passion, composition, nor corruption; as both Origin, and
Saint Basil have observed: and therefore others do allege these two
especial reasons.

First, because this word (...), was an acceptable and a known name, both to
the Jews and Gentiles.

Secondly, because it was the most proper, and the fittest name that he could
use, to make way to express that thing, which he was immediately to declare.

First, That this name of the Son, the Word, was the best known name of
Christ among the Jews.
It is manifest that there was no name of the Son of God among the Jews, so
generally used, and so well known as (...), the word; as it might be easily
showed out of the Chaldee paraphrase; for wheresoever that paraphrast thinks,
the Name of God should signify the Son, he always translates the same, and
reads it the word: the which without doubt he did; because he saw this word
and name of him, was vulgarly best known amongst them: for Philo the most
learned of all the Jews, and the most expert in the mystery of the Trinity,
Philo in l. de opificio mundi.
though he never calls Christ the Son, yet does he often call him the Word
in many passages of his Works.

Neither was his name (...), the word, only known among the Jews, but among
the Gentiles and Ethnicks also: That the Gentiles were not ignorant of this
Word,
for it is apparent that although the way to Heaven, was unknown unto them;
yet did many of them (especially of their Philosophers) dispute and deliver
many things concerning the true God; For Aristotle, or whosoever he was that
wrote those books De mundo, did find that in this rare piece of work, and
frame of the world, there is most excellent conueiance, without confusion;
great variety, concurring in unity; and diversity of all things, without
disorder; all which he attributes to the powerful working of the invisible
God; of whom the said Author conceiues, that for his power he is most mighty;
for his beauty most excellent; for his life immortal, and for his virtue most
absolute; and that (as Empedocles says) from him proceeded; All things that
were, that are, and shall be here,
Plants, men, beasts, birds, and fish in waters clear.
And entering into further consideration of Gods nature, he says, that although
God be but one, yet we call him by many names, as (...) and (...), Because we
live by him; (...), because he is of an immutable nature; (...), because
nothing is done by chance, but according to his most certain decree; (...),
because no man can possibly avoid him, or fly from him; (...), because he
abides for ever; and as for that fable, (says he) of the three Sisters of
destiny, Clotho filum bainlat, Lachesis net, Atropos occat.
Clotho that spinneth, Lachesis that draws out to a just length, and Atropos
that cutteth off the thread of man's life, it is to be understood of God only,
who is the beginning, mids, and end of all things; and to conclude, he says,
there is a Justice, that is never separated from God, which is, the revenger of
all transgressions committed against the Law of God, wherein every one must be
well instructed, that would be partaker of humane felicity and happiness.

All which does most apparently prove, that the Gentiles had so much knowledge
of the true God, as not only was able, I say not with Clemens Alexandrinus to
bring them to salvation, but to make them without excuse in the day of
retribution; because that they knowing God, glorified him not as God, but also
as does exceed the knowledge of many which make profession of Christianity, and
will no doubt rise in judgment, to condemn them in the latter day.

And as we see many of them understood many things concerning the most true and
everlasting God, so we find some of them have delivered some things concerning
this word, and Son of God: Heron. in ep. ad Paulinum.
for, though S. Hierome, speaking of this word, says, Hoc doctus plato
nesciuit; This word, eloquent Demosthenes was ignorant of it; 1 Cor. 1.19.
because it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, Aug. l. 5. c.
3. de haeresibus.
and cast away the understanding of the prudent; Yet Lactantius says, that
Zeno affirmed (...), the word, to be the maker of this universe; and that
Mercurius, syrnamed (...), thrice great, did often describe the power and
Majesty of this word; and Saint Augustine affirms that the said Trismegistus
did compose a book, whose title was, (...), i. e, the perfect word; and that
therein he left written, Monas genuit monada, and in se suum reflexit ardorem:
Which is as much as if he had said, the Father begat the Son, or the mind
begat the word, and from both proceeded the Holy Spirit, Idem l. 7. c. 9.
confess.
and l. 7. Confess. c. 9. he says, that he saw certain books of the
Platonists wherein he found, though not in the same words, yet the very
selfsame matter, proved by many reasons, that in the beginning was the word,
and the word was with God.

Saint Cyrill also says, that the Philosophers have affirmed the essence of
God to be distinguished into three subsistences, Cyrillus l 8. cont. Julian.
and sometimes to have delivered the very name of Trinity: and Theodoret does
affirm, that Plotinus and Numenius have collected, out of Plato, that there
are three eternities; Bonum, and mentem, and vniuersi animam, i. e. Goodness,
which answers the Father, that is the fountain of the Deity, the mind,
which signifies the Son, and the soul or life of this whole universe, Genesis
1.2.
which is the holy Spirit; that as in the beginning of the creation, he
presently moved upon the waters, to sustain the same; Clemens Alex. l. 5.
strom.
so ever since he spireth and preserves every living thing: and Clemens
Alexandrinus says, that Plato in his Epistle to Erastus and Coriscus, has
manifestly spoken of the Father and the Son; and so Eusebius likewise, and
Eugubius and many others have collected out of their writings, that this name
of the Son, (...), the word, Seneca Traged. Oedip.
was not altogether unknown unto the Gentiles; but that as Oedipus in the
Poets, knew that he had a Father, though not who he was; so they did conceive a
certain kind of knowledge and understanding, though undigested, and
imperfect, ouershadowed as it were with humane reasonings, concerning this
eternal word God, enough to save them, if they believed in him; or else to
make them without excuse, if they knowing, though not simply, Verum (...), sed
aliquid very (...), This true word, but something of this word, did neglect and
not seek further into the knowledge of the same.

And this knowledge they might attain unto, How the Gentiles came to have any
knowledge of the Word God.
either by 1. The illumination of God himself. 2. The divination of the
devils. 3. The tradition of their elders, 4. Their own exceeding diligence, to
seek and search after the knowledge of divine mysteries. For,


First, the Apostle says that (...), Romans 1.19.
what may be known of God, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, God has
showed it unto them; and as the Deity it self, 1 Cor. 13.12.
might be contemplated in his creatures, as in a glass; or read by them,
Basilius hom. 11. hexam.
as in a book, as Saint Basil says; So no doubt but he left therein certain
impressions of the Trinity of his persons, Ph. Mornaeus de veritate relig c.
5. Romans 1.16.
which though they could not fully attain unto the knowledge thereof, no more
then an unskillful Arithmetician can find, the just sum that cyphering
characters do import; yet they might perceive something thereby, and know,
that there was such a thing to be known. And thus much God himself might show
unto them, not as Clemens Alexandrinus thought, thereby to bring them unto
salvation; because (says he) Philosophy was unto them, as the Law was unto the
Jews, a Schoolmaster to bring them unto Heaven; but that (as the Apostle
says,) They knowing this God, and not glorifying him as God, nor seeking to be
saved by this God, might be without excuse in the sight of God.

August. de cognit. verae vitae. c. 37.
Secondly, The very Devils might make known the same unto them; for the Devils
believe that there is a God, and they know him to be but one God, (...): One in
himself, one in all things; and they know him to be (...), The most High, and
Omnipotent God; neither do they know the Father only, but they know Christ
also: for the evil Spirit said unto the Sons of Scaeua, Acts 19.15.
(...): Jesus I know, and they know him to be the Son of God, and God himself,
as Sozomen out of this verse of Sybill does declare.

O lignum foelix in quo Deus ipse pependit. I may thee call a happy Tree,
whereon a God to hang I see:

And they know the sacred mystery of the Trinity, for by them this disticke was
related unto a certain Egyptian, that desired to know this truth.

Serapis ad Thulem. Selneccerus. l. 1.
(...),
(...).
Principio Deus est, tum Sermo, and Spiritus istis
Additur, aequaeua haec sunt, and tendentia in vnum.
The Father, Son, and Spirit; all three
Are one God, of the same eternity.
Aug. in Expos. Ep. ad Romans
And so the Devils knowing these things, might suggest them, and reveal them,
though aenigmatically, and darkely unto the Sybilles, (which as Saint Augustine
says, were none of Gods Prophets;) from the Sybils they might be spread unto
their Priests; from the Priests, unto the Philosophers, Poets, and Orators; and
from them they might be divulged and spread unto the lowest rank of the vulgar
people. Neither must we think, that Satan did it with intent to do them
good, and to bring them unto the true saving knowledge of their Savior; but as
God by his true Prophets did foreshew the coming and incarnation of this Word;
so would Satan play the Ape, and by his Prophets teach them, (like as Oedipus,
Seneca in Oedipo.
blindly seeking his Father, did unfortunately slay his Father,) by seeking
thus after Christ, to worship himself in stead of Christ, and so to offer
sacrifices unto Devils, (as the Apostle says) and not to God.

Thirdly, They might by the continual tradition of their Elders, retain some
relics of that promise made unto Adam, That the seed of the woman should
come, Genesis 3.15.
and break the Serpents head: for we find by their rites and ceremonies,
their Priests and Sacrifices, and such like, that they had a kind of corrupted
Divinity still remaining amongst them; and that they did conceive some thing by
these outward things, that should expiate their sins, and appease the wrath
of God for them.

Fourthly, Their own great diligence, That the Philosophers were wonderful
diligent to attain unto all kind of knowledge.
might bring no small knowledge, and understanding of divine things unto them:
for they were exceeding great searchers of all antiquities, and most
wonderfully greedy of all kind of knowledge, and learning; and therefore they
did search into the Oracles of the Caldeans, Egyptians, and Hebrews, that so
much as they could, they might find out the truth both of humane and divine
things. And so Theodoret, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Justin Martyr, do plainly
affirm, that Plato read the Books of Moses, and the Prophets; and both Saint
Ambrose and Eusebius say, that Numenius a Platonist, was wont to say, (...):
That Plato was none else but Moses in the Grecian Tongue: And Saint Augustine
himself says, That Plato learned the Divine Scriptures, from the Prophet
Jeremy, Aug de Doct. Christa. l. 2. c. 28. Jdem de ciuit. Dei. l. 8. c. 11.
when the Jews were in their captivity at Babylon; but I find he retracted
this opinion in his eight Book and eleventh Chapter, De ciuitate Dei; for
there, by the computation of their years and times, wherein both of them
lived, he finds that Jeremy dyed, almost a hundred years before that Plato
was borne; (the captivity being in the time of Cyrus, and Darius, Kings of
Persia, and Plato borne but a little before Alexander, King of Macedon) yet
there he denies not, but that Plato, by his industry, when he traveled into
Egypt, might by some Interpreters learn the Scriptures: for, as yet the
Septuagint had not translated them into the Greek Tongue; and yet Aristobulus
(as Eusebius cites him) says, that certain parts and parcels of the
Scriptures, were translated by others before the Septuagint; out of which Plato
might learn many points of the divine Truth. Or if this knowledge was not had
out of the Hebrew Books, yet might he learn much, as Herodotus did in other
points, from the Egyptian Priests: for it is not likely, that the Egyptians had
lost all knowledge of Divinity; but that still there remained some relics of
that verity, which Joseph and the Children of Israel when they dwelt in Egypt,
did spread and leave amongst them; Psalm. 105.22.
for God sent Joseph to instruct the Princes of Pharaoh, and to teach his
Senators wisdom; not only to provide food for their bodies, but also for
the happiness of their souls.

All these things being well considered, it seems not absurd unto me, to say
that Plato, and other learned men among the Gentiles, were not altogether
ignorant of the knowledge of this truth, concerning this eternal Word. Nay,
they could not be ignorant of the same: That the Gentiles expected the coming
of a Messiah.
for it is well known, that the Gentiles did expect the coming of the
Messiah, as well as the Jews; though for want of the Divine Oracles, they had
not the knowledge of many particulars of his coming, so well as the Jews had:
And therefore he is called, Expectatio gentium; The hope and expectation of the
Gentiles: And so those many multitudes that became Proselites of the Jewish
Religion, those Sybils, and Prophets, Zoroastres, Baalam, and others, that
prophesied of his coming; Numb. 24.17.
and those Magi, that came from the East, To worship him as soon as ever he
was borne, do sufficiently prove that the Gentiles expected the coming of
this Word, Math. 2.1. etc.
before he was made flesh: And therefore seeing (...), the Word, was most
chiefly known, or likeliest to be known, both among the Jews and Gentiles,
and that the Evangelist desired to apply himself to both Nations, that he
might win and gain the more to Christ, he uses the word (...), and says;
The Word was made flesh. And,

Secondly, The word (...), was the fittest word, that he could choose, to make
way for him to express what he meant immediately to declare; for he intended
presently to say, that all things were made by him; but he could not call him,
by whom all things were made, by any fitter term then the Word; because all
men did know, that God made all things by his Word: for by the Word of the
Lord, were the Heavens made; Psalm. 32.
when God spoke the Word, and they were made, he commanded, Psalm. 148.5.
and they stood fast.

And so you see these few observations, touching (...), the Word here used by
the Evangelist, to express the person that was made flesh. Now seeing this
Word, What a shame it is for us to be ignorant of this Word now already
incarnate.
is the chiefest Word in the World, and was the Word best known to all the
best men of the World; Kings, Priests, Prophets, Philosophers, Orators, and the
like, it should put us ever in mind, never to neglect the knowledge of this
Word: for what a shame is this to us that we are so full of idle words, yea, of
lewd and wicked words; and this Word God, should be so strange unto us? and
that the very Heathens knew it, even before he came into the World, and we
should be so ignorant of it, now after he is come, and is preached throughout
all the whole World? that they were so diligent to find him out, and we so
negligent to accept him offered unto us, and preached every where, to every one
of us? without doubt, they shall rise in judgment against us, and condemn us.
And so much for this Word (...), here used, and why that word is here chosen by
the Evangelist.

CHAP. VII. Of the chiefest Causes, why this Word was made Flesh.
THirdly, We are to consider, why this Word was incarnate, and made flesh:
Touching which, I say, that,

First, Causa (...), Why the Word was made Flesh.
the impulsive cause in respect of us, was, our most woeful miserable case and
condition, wherein we lay all, deprived of the grace and favor of God: and
causa (...), the impulsive cause in respect of God, was, his great love, and
tender compassion toward mankind, so lying in misery, under the tyranny and
bondage of the Devil, and the performing of his promise, Genesis 3 15.
which he made unto Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that the seed of the
Woman should break the Serpents head; And therefore because he would not alter
the thing that was gone out of his mouth, Luke 1.72.
nor suffer his truth to fail; he remembered his holy Covenant, and the Oath
that he swear unto our Fathers, and at the fullness of time, he sent this Word
to be made flesh.

Secondly, The final cause, in respect of us, was the restoring of mankind
unto the favor of God again: And therefore we profess in our Creed, Council.
Nic.
that for us men, and for our salvation, he came down from Heaven, Matthew.
20.28.
and was made man; And so our Savior says, John 12.46.
that he came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom
for many: Aug. in Joh. and gloss. in 1 Timothy 1.
And Saint Augustine says, Non eum de coelo ad terram merita nostra, sed
peccata nostra traxerunt; It was not our goodness, but our wickedness, our
sins, our grievous sins, that brought down Jesus Christ out of Heaven. And
so Hugo says, Hugo in l. de sacrament.
Nulla causa veniendi fuit nisi peccatores saluos facere, toll morbos, toll
vulnera, and nulla est causa medicinae; There was no cause, that he should come
to us, but to save us; for where there is no wounds, where there is no
diseases, there is no need of medicines, there is no use of playsters; because
the whole need not the Physician. To show the error of Osiander, who said,
that if man had not sinned, this Word had been incarnate; because there was
nothing that could bring him out of Heaven, or to move him to be made man, but
only to bring us into Heaven, and to make us the Sons of God through him:
And the final cause, in respect of God, was his own glory; for he made all
things for his own sake, and he gave his Son for us, that we might ascribe
all praise and thanks unto him: And therefore the Angels said unto the
Shepherds, Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God on high, peace upon Earth, and good will toward men; And
reason good, that seeing we have peace with God, God should have glory, and
praise from us.

Why God decreed the Incarnation of the Word, for the salvation of man. Genesis
1.26.
But here first it will be demanded, (as Saint Augustine says) Quare non potuit
Dei sapientia, aliter homines liberare? etc. Why could not the wisdom of God
devise, and the power of God effect, some other way to deliver and save
sinful men, then by sending his Son to be made man, to be borne of a
woman, and to suffer such shameful things, of shameless sinners?

To this Saint Bernard frames this witty answer, that as in the creation of
man, God did as it were consult with his wisdom, how to make him, when he said,
Let us make man in our image; So after the transgression of man, there was (as
it were) a consultation in Heaven, what should become of man; for truth and
Justice stood up against him, and said, that man had sinned, and therefore man
must die, Cap. 2.17.
or else that they must needs be violated; for thou said (say they to God) In
what day thou eatest of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die
the death; But Mercy and Peace rose up for man, and said; Quo quisque est
mayor magis est placabilis ira.
regia (creed mihi) res est succurrere lapsis, It is a royal thing to relieve
the distressed, and the greater any one is, the more placable and gentle he
should be; and that God himself had said, he was the God of Peace, and the
Father of Mercies; and therefore they concluded, that although man had sinned,
yet man must be pardoned, or else they must needs be abandoned; therefore the
wisdom of God became an vmpire, and devised this way to reconcile them, that
as one man had sinned, and thereby destroyed all men; So, Vnus homo nobis
patiendo restituet rem, Bosquier. de pass. domini. ser. 13. p. 793.
One righteous man should suffer for all men, and so Justice should be
satisfied; and then all that believed in that man, should be pardoned, and so
Mercy should be showed. Then, all thus contented, God looked down from Heaven
upon the children of men, to see if there were any that would understand and
seek after God; Psalm 14.4.
but they were all corrupted, and become abominable; and there was none that
did good, no not one; and therefore the wisdom of God, that had found out
this way, was contented to perform this work himself; and to be made man,
that mercy might be extended, and to suffer death for man, that Justice might
be satisfied: and so in him, Mercy and Truth met together, Righteousness and
Peace kissed each other.

But Saint Augustine, Aug. de trinit. l. ^3. c 10. Gregor. moral. l. 20. c. 26.
and Saint Gregory do more solydly answer, saying; Omnia Deus poterat si
voluisset, That in regard of his wisdom, God could have devised another way,
and in regard of his power he could have performed the salvation of man,
without the incarnation of his Son. But, if he had done it otherwise, it
would, no doubt, have likewise displeased our foolishness: for God appeared
visibly (says Saint Augustine) that he might prepare us to invisible things;
and therein, he displeased the covetous man, How hard it is for the wisdom
of God to please foolish man.
because he brought not a body of gold; he displeased the lascivious, because
he was borne of a woman; he displeased the Jews, because he came so poor,
and the wise men of this world, because he erecteth his Kingdom by the
foolishness of preaching, and so he should have displeased man, what other way
soever he had invented to save man: for the wisdom of God is not sufficient to
satisfy the foolishnes of men.

Aug. de annunt. Domini. ser. 3.
And therefore he that knows all things best, Sic voluit ruinam vasis fragilis
reformare, vt nec peccatum hominis dimitteret impunitum, quia iustus erat, nec
insanabile quia misericors, So God would repair the ruin of frail and fickle
man; that neither the sin of man should escape unpunished, because God is
just, nor yet miserable man remain uncured, because he is merciful; and
although he could otherwise have saved man, Quantum ad potentiam medici, in
respect of the power and skill of the Physician; yet he saw there was no fitter
way to do it, Quantum ad medicinam aegroti, and quantum ad iustitiam Dei, In
regard of the state of the patient, to free him from sin, and to satisfy the
Justice of God. For it behooved the Mediator between God and man, Ne in vtroque
deo similis long esset ab homine, aut in vtroque homini similis long esset a
Deo.
to have something like unto GOD, and to have something like unto man, lest
that in all things being like unto man, he might be so too far from God, or
being in all things like unto God, he might be so too far from man; and
therefore Christ betwixt sinful mortal men, and the just immortal God, did
appear a mortal man with men, and a just God with God: 1 Timothy 2.5.
and so the Mediator betwixt God and men, was God and man Christ Jesus; and
fitly too, says Saint Augustine: Quia ille congrue satisfacit qui potest and
debet, Because that is most agreeable to reason that he should make
satisfaction, Two special reasons; why Christ was made man.
which ought and can satisfy, but we know that none ought to do it but man;
and none can do it but God: and therefore God was contented to be made man;
and that for these two especial reasons.

First, to show the greatness of his Love to man.
First, to show the greatness of his love; for he had seemed to have loved us
the less if he had done less for us: but now, Quid tam pietate plenum, quam
filium Dei pro nobis factum esse faenum? What can more commend the love of God
to man, then to see the word God made flesh for man? John 3.16.
and therefore the Evangelist to show the greatness of Gods love to mankind,
says, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that is,
to be incarnate, to be made flesh, and to suffer death, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Secondly, to erect our hope, that was already dejected, Secondly to erect the
hope and to strengthen the faith of man.
and to strengthen our faith which was always wavering: for we saw two things
that were to be done for man, and yet could not be done by any man but such a
one, as should be God and Man.

The first was a remoueall of that great evil which suppressed us.

The second was a restoring of that great good, that we were deprived of.

First, Magnitude mali, The evil that oppressed all men was fourfold.
the greatness of that evil which suppressed every man, and could not be
taken away by any man, consisted in four things.

1. The weight of sin. 2. The height of Gods wrath. 3. The power of death. 4.
The tyranny of the devil.
And these could not be abolished, by any creature, but only by him that
created all creatures, and can work all things mightily according to the
purpose of his own will.

Secondly, Magnitudo boni, The good that man lost was twofold.
the greatness of that good which was taken away from all men, and could be
restored by no man, consisted in two things.

1. The repairing of Gods image, here in this life. 2. The enjoying of the
blessed vision of God in the next life.
For, none could restore the image of God to man, but he that was the living
image of God, Heb. 1.3.
and the engraven form of his person: and the Kingdom of Heaven, none could
give, but God that gives it to all that love him: and therefore to take away
the evil, which we had deserved; and to restore unto us that good, whereof we
were deprived; God himself that made us, was contented to redeem us, by
taking our flesh upon him; Vt natura offendens satisfaceret, That the nature
offending might make satisfaction: and because satisfaction could not be made
without blood; for without blood there is no remission, Heb. 9.22.
says the Apostle; he was made flesh, that he might die, and shed his blood
for us; Aug. sermon. 101. de tempore.
Vt iniusta mors, iustam vinceret mortem, and liberaret nos just dum pro nobis
occiditur unjust: That so his unjustly inflicted death, might overcome our
justly deserved death, and might most rightly free and deliver us; because he
was most wrongfully slain for us, as Saint Augustine speaks.

word, that is the Son, should be incarnate and made flesh, rather then the
Father or the Holy Ghost.

Resp. Why the Son rather then the Father, or the Holy Ghost was made man.
Saint Augustine thinks that the cause pertained more specially unto the Son
then to the Father, or to the Holy Ghost, for that the Devil attempted to
usurp the dignity and authority of the Son of God, saying in his heart,
that he would be like unto the most highest, that is, the image of the Father,
and sought to intrude himself into his glory, to be the Prince of this world,
and the Head of every creature, which things were only proper unto the Son
of God; and therefore it behooved the Son to come into the world, to overcome
the Devil, that would have wronged him, and all other men that were to be
members of him.

But we find many other reasons, to show why the Word was made flesh, rather
then the Father, or the Holy Ghost: As

First, because it is the office of the Word to declare the mind of God
First, because the Incarnation of God was made for the manifestation of God,
but we declare and manifest things by words; and Christ is the word of the
Father, the wisdom, the knowledge and the interpreter of his Fathers will,
even as our word is the interpreter of our mind; as Origin and Clemens
Alexandrinus do declare: and therefore the word was rightly incarnate, that
God in him might be seen, and heard, and understood of us, according to that
saying of the Evangelist, that which we have heard and seen, 1 John 1.1.
and our hands have handled of the word of life, that declare we unto you: For
as he is (...), the word, in respect of his person, which is a name of relation
unto the mind, as Son is to the Father, so is he the word in respect of his
office, i. e. of his office, as he is the second person of the Trinity: for as
it is the property and office of the eternal mind, i. e. the Father to beget
the word, i. e. the Son; so it is the property and the office of the Word to
declare the Mind: but because this spiritual, invisible, and ineffable Word,
as he is God, could never be seen, nor heard, nor understood of us, therefore
was he made flesh, that he might be heard and seen.

And this the Apostle seems to show unto us, when he says, God heretofore at
sundry times, Heb. 1.1.
and in diverse manners spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets, but in these
last days he has spoken unto us by his Son; for this is all one, as if he
had said, that the word heretofore was uttered by other men's mouths, but now
after he was made flesh, he spoke and reueiled his Father unto us by his own
voice, and with his own proper mouth: for so Tertullian says, that he which
spoke unto the Fathers, was this word GOD; and so Saint Paul shows, when he
brings in God, saying, The Word is near unto thee, even in thy mouth, Romans
10.8.
and in thy heart, and then he expounds this word of Christ, saying, This is
the Word of Faith which we preach: for they preached Jesus Christ; and so Saint
John himself seems to show this reason, why he had called Christ the Word,
when he says, John 1.18.
The only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared: for this is all one as if he had said, This only begotten Son is
therefore the Word, because he declares the mind of God unto us: so when he
says, what we have heard of the Word of life. i. e. he is therefore the Word,
because we have heard him, and so when he says, There be three that hear
witness in Heaven, 1 John 5.7.
the Father, the Word, and the Spirit: for why should he say the Word, when as
the name of Father required that he should rather say the Father, the Son,
and the Spirit; but because the Son, as the word of the Father does bear
witness unto us of his Fathers will: and therefore seeing it was the office of
the Word to declare the mind of God, it belonged unto the Word to be made
Flesh, that he might be heard and seen of us.

But then it may be objected that the Holy Ghost should be incarnate, as well
as the Son: for Saint Basil says, Ob. Whether the Holy Ghost is termed the
Word.
that the Holy Ghost is called (...), the word, as well as the Son, and that
he is therefore called the Word, because he is the interpreter of the Son,
even as the Son is the interpreter of the Father; for he shall teach you all
things, says Christ: and to prove this, he cites those words of the Apostle,
that we should take the sword of the Spirit, which is (...), the Word of God;
and those words in the first Chapter to the Hebrews, that Christ bears up
all things with the word of his power, Basilius l 5. c. 11. contra Eunom. Sol.
or his mighty Word: that is his Holy Spirit, says Saint Basil.

To this Aquinas answers, that Saint Basil herein speaks improperly, for
that the Son of God alone, is properly called the Word; and that Saint Paul
by the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, does not understand the
Holy Ghost, but the word which came unto the Prophets, and was left unto us in
the holy Scriptures: and that the words of the Author to the Hebrews, are to
be understood of the command of Christ; as if the Apostle had said, that Christ
bears up all things, and governs all things by his mighty command, or
according a^ himself defines, Victorinus in l. aduers. Arrium.
and would have all things to be, as Victorinus says; or else that Christ
sustaineth all things by his mighty word, that is, after an Hebrew phrase, by
himself, which is the mighty Word of his Father, Maldonat. in John 1.
as Maldonate says.

Secondly, the Word was made flesh, Propter ordinem seruandum, Secondly,
because God would observe good order in all things.
because God which is the God of order, would keep good order in all things: As

First, that the world might be repaired by the same instrument by which it was
created; but the Father made all things by his Word, therefore he would redeem
mankind by his Word.

Secondly, that he which was the essential and uncreated image of God, might
restore that created image of God, which was corrupted in us.

Thirdly, that the natural Son of God might make us the adopted sons of
God.

Fourthly, that the Son by his example might teach us the obedience of sons.

Thirdly, because God would shun all inconue^iences that might arise, if he
had not been incarnate.
Thirdly, the Word was made flesh, Propter vitandum inconueniens; because God
would avoid all absurdities that otherwise might seem to ensue: for, if the
Father had been incarnate, then there had been two Fathers, and two Sons;
the Father in the Deity had been the Son in the Humanity, and the Son in
the Dietie had been the Father of the Humanity, and neither of them had been
of himself, without beginning; but he that was the beginning of the Son in
the Deity, had had his beginning from the Son, in the humanity; but now he
that is from the Father in the Deity, is likewise from the Father in the
humanity, and he that is the Son in the Deity, is likewise the Son in the
humanity: and if the Holy Ghost had been incarnate, then there had been two
sons, one in the Deity, and another in the humanity; Et nomen filij ad
alterum transiret, qui non esset aeterna natiuitate filius; And the name of
Son had passed to another, which was not a Son by an eternal nativity:
and therefore in all respects it was fittest, and agreeable to all reason, that
the Word should be incarnate, and made flesh, as Saint Augustine says.

But against this it will be objected, Ob.
that seeing Opera trinitatis ad extra sunt indiuisa, The outward works of the
Trinity are indivisible, and common to each person, so that whatsoever any one
of them does, it is done by each one; and that this is an outward work of the
Trinity, common to each person; each person being an agent in this action; the
Fathers power, the Sons wisdom, and the Holy Ghost his goodness, all
concurring in this incarnation: For,

First, how can the Creator and the Creature, That all three persons were the
makers of the flesh of Christ.
especially a creature relapsed from God, be joined together without great
power? the power of joining the disagreeing elements, was very great, and the
power of joining them to a created spirit, was greater, but hypostatically to
join a creature, disioyned from his Creator unto an uncreated spirit, must
needs be the greatest power that can be. And therefore this incarnation of the
Word could never have been done without the infinite power of God.

Secondly, how can the first and the last, be united together, without great
wisdom? for this Word was the beginning, yea, before the beginning of all
things, and Adam was the last of all Gods creatures: And therefore the Word
God, and the flesh of man could never be united without infinite wisdom.

Thirdly, how can the Creator communicate himself so nearly unto his
Creatures, without the greatest goodness that can be? for it was a great
benignity and kindness of God, to communicate himself unto all creatures by
his presence, and it was a greater kindness to communicate himself to all the
godly by his grace, but it is the greatest of all, to unite himself
hypostatically by his spirit, unto our flesh: And therefore this could not be
done without infinite goodness, and so in this respect, we find this work of
the incarnation ascribed to each person; for the Father sent me, says our
Savior; and I came into the world, says he of himself; and the Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall over shadow thee,
whereby thou may conceive, says Gabriel unto the blessed Virgin. And
therefore, seeing the whole Trinity was the Maker of this Word flesh, how can
it be but that the whole Trinity should be incarnate and made flesh?

Sol. That the Son only assumed our Flesh.
I answer that this work of the words incarnation, is to be considered, 1.
Inchoatiue. 2. Consummatiue. As it was inchoated and begun. As it is
consummated and finished.



In the first sense, it is common to all the three persons of the Trinity, for
it was made by them all three; but in the second sense, it was proper only
unto the Word; because it was assumed only by the Word, Aug. in Enchyrid. C.
38.
as Saint Augustine shows: for, as if three Maids should spinne and make a
garment, and then put it upon one of them to wear, all three should be the
makers, yet but one should be the wearer of the same: Even so, though the
Father did appoint Christ a body, and this body was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, yet neither the Father, nor the Spirit did assume that body, but only
the person of the Son of God: and therefore Saint Augustine says truly,
Idem. Ser. 3. de temp.
that, Impleuet carnem Christi pater and spiritus sanctus, sed maiestate, non
susceptione: The flesh of Christ was filled with the Majesty of the Father,
and of the Holy Ghost, but it was only united to the person of the Word.

Ob.
But then again it may be objected, that seeing the nature of the Father, and
the nature of the Son be the very same; for, they be both (...), of the very
selfsame essence (as I have sufficiently showed unto you before,) and the
whole divine essence, is in every one of them; therefore how can it be but the
Son being incarnate, the Father should be incarnate also?

Sol.
To this we answer briefly, that although the nature of the Father, and the
nature of the Son be the very same, yet, Aliter est in patre, and aliter est
in filio: This very selfsame essence is otherwise, or after another manner in
the Father, The divine nature limited in the person of the Son, was made
Flesh.
and after another manner in the Son; and therefore we say that the Divine
nature simply considered cannot be said to be incarnate; Sed natura diuina
determinata and limitata in persona filij, But the divine nature limited and
determined in the person of the Son: And this Saint Augustine does most
excellently express against the Jews, saying, O Iudae Cytharam respice, etc.
Behold, O Jew, the Harp, when it yields sweet and pleasant tune, there be
three things that seem to concur alike, the skill, the hand, and the string,
and yet there is but one sound heard: Ars dictat, manus tangit, chorda resonat,
The Art or skill directs, the hand touches, and the string only sounds;
Tria pariter operantur, they do all three work alike, and yet neither the
skill, nor the hand do yield the sound, but only the string: Sic nec pater,
Operatio in tribus constat, sed quemadmodum ad solam chordam soni redditio, sic
pertinet ad solum Christum carnis humanae susceptio.
nec spiritus sanctus susceperunt carnem, and tamen cum filio pariter
operantur; So neither the Father, nor the Holy Spirit did assume the flesh, and
yet they did all agree in the working and making of this flesh; but as the
string alone does yield the musical harmony; so the word alone did assume the
flesh; the work is seen in all three; but as the sound of the music
pertains unto the string alone, so the assumption of our flesh, pertayneth to
the word alone: and if any incredulous Jew, with Nichodemus demands, how this
Word should be made flesh of a Virgin without the help of man; let him tell me
how Aarons rod, Aug. de incarnat. Dom. cont. Iudaeos.
being a dry stick, could blossom and bear ripe Almonds, and I will tell
him how the Virgin did conceive and bear a Son; but he cannot tell the
former, though the lesser miracle; and therefore no wonder that I cannot
express the latter, which is so ineffable a mystery, says Saint Augustine.
And so you see the first Branch of this Text, touching the person, who was
made, the Word, the Son, the second person of the blessed Trinity, fully
discussed.

BRANCH II.
CHAP. I. Of Christ his apparition before his incarnation, and of the
conception of Christ; the manner of it, and the reasons why he was so
conceived.
2. Branch. Tres misturas fecit omnipotens illa maiestas in assumptione carnis
nostrae, ita mirabiliter singularia and singulariter mirabilia, vt talia nec
facta, nec facienda sint amplius super terram.
SEcondly, We are to consider what he was made, Flesh; for the Word was made
Flesh: Saint Bernard says, God did three works, three mixtures, as he
calls them, in the assumption of our flesh, so singularly wonderful, and so
wonderfully singular, that the like were never made before, nor shall be made
hereafter upon the face of the Earth; Coniunct a quippe sunt ad invicem Deus
and homo, matter and virgo, fides and cor humanum: For now are joined together
God and our Flesh, a Mother and a Virgin, a divine Faith, and a humane Heart;
for the Word, and Soul, and Flesh have met, and made but one Person. These
three are one, and this one is three, not by the confusion of substance, but in
the unity of person; This is the first and most super-excellent mixture, or
conjunction; The second is a Virgin, and a Mother, a thing so admirable and so
singular, that since the World began it was never heard, that she which
brings forth a Child, should be a Maid, and that she should be a Mother,
which still remains a Virgin; The third is Faith, and Man's Heart; Inferior
quidem, sed non minus forsitan fortis; an inferior copulation, but perhaps not
deserving much less admiration: For it is a wonder to see how the Heart of Man
can yield Faith and belief unto these two, and to believe that God should be
made Man, and that she should remain a Virgin, which had borne a Son; for as
Iron and a Gally-cup can never be coupled together, Bernard. Ser. 3. in vigil.
natiuitatis.
so no more can these two, unless they be glewed and coupled by Gods Spirit:
And therefore this is an excellent conjunction; the second is more excellent,
but the first is most excellent, that the Word should be made Flesh.

But to descend a little into more particular examination of the same. We must
observe, that he does not say, That there is a great difference betwixt Christ
his apparition in the shape of man, and the assumption of our flesh to be made
man.
The Word appeared in Flesh, but the Word was made Flesh; To note unto us a
special difference betwixt his apparitions in the form and shape of man, unto
the Fathers of the Old Testament, and his incarnation, and making himself man
now in the time of the New Testament: For it is most certain, that this Word,
at diverse times, did appear, and confer with the Fathers, in the visible
form and shape of man.

It is not improbable, nor to many men incredible, that he assumed upon him
the form and shape of Man, when he created man, and so made man not only in
his own Image, which he had as God; i. e. In holiness and true
righteousness, but also like unto himself, in respect of that form and shape
which he then assumed, and which he intended to be made himself thereafter;
for which cause it is said, that he made man in his own Image and likeness,
to show by these two words, That Christ diverse times assumed the form of a Man,
before he was made man.
that as he purposed to be made like unto this man, which he was now to make,
so this man should be made like unto him in a double respect; that is, both of
this form assumed, and of those Divine Excellencies wherewith he should be
endued. And this may be collected out of Moses, where he says; That Adam heard
the voice of the Lord God, walking in the Garden; For God, as he is a God, has
neither voice to speak, nor feet to walk, but assuming the form and shape
of a man, he did both walk and talk with him: And in respect of this bodily
presence of God, the man did specially seek to hide himself among the Trees
of the Garden, when he heard his voice, and not before. Genesis 3.8.


But to Abraham, it is apparent that he appeared two several times at least.

First, In the plain of Mamre, for Moses says, not only, Genesis 18.13.20.
that the Lord talked with Abraham, but he says also, that Abraham calls
him, The Judge of all the World; Verse 25.
which can be ascribed to none but Christ, which is the Judge of quick and
dead.

But against this it may be objected, Ob.
that the Apostles which are the best Interpreters of the Old Testament, do
interpret this of the Angels, and not of Christ; as the Author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews shows, saying; Be not forgetful to entertain strangers,
Heb. 13.2.
for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares.

That Christ is often called an Angel.
To this I answer briefly, that an Angel, being a name of Office, and not of
Nature, that signifies a Messenger, or one that is sent: Christ is oftentimes
called an Angel, because he was sent from God, to perform those Offices that
he did in those assumed forms, on the behalf of God; So he is called, The
Angel of the Covenant: Esaias 63.9.
And so Esayas says, That the Angel of Gods presence should save his people;
that is, Jesus Christ: for it is he, and none but he that shall save his people
from their sins. And therefore I say, that which appeared unto Abraham, was
none other but Jesus Christ, accompanied with two Angels; to show both the
mystery of the blessed Trinity, and the sovereignty of Christ over all his
Creatures; and therefore Abraham speaks to one, as to the Lord, and calls but
one of them the Judge of all the World.

Secondly, He appeared unto Abraham in his return from the Conquest of the
four Kings; Ieron. in Epist. ad Eust. Petrus Cunaeus de republ. Heb.
for though Saint Jerome, and diverse others old and new Writers, of good
esteem in the Church of Christ, do reject the judgment of one, which in
Saint Ieromes time did say, that Melchisedecke which met Abraham and blessed
him, was the Son of God; and that opinion of Origin likewise, who thought
this Melchisedecke to be an Angel of God, and says, that he was one of the
Inhabitants of Canaan, and a King of Shalem, and alleges for the confirmation
of his opinion, the judgment of Ireneus, Hippolitus, Eusebius Caesarensis,
Eusebius Emissenus, Apollinarius, and Eustathius, first Bishop of Antioch; and
though some of our latest Divines have imagined him to be Seth, the son of
Noah; yet if we search out this truth without partiality, we shall find this
man to be none other then Jesus Christ, the Son of God. For,

That Melchisedecke was no Inhabitant of Canaan.
First, it is not likely that he should be an Inhabitant of Canaan, and a King
of Salem: first, because it is certain that he must be a greater and a holier
man then Abraham; for the lesser is ever blessed of the greater. Secondly,
because S. Paul explaining the story of Melchisedecke, says, (...). He was
first, by interpretation, King of Righteousness, Heb. 7.2.
and after that also King of Salem, which is (says he) King of Peace: So that
although there was a town in Canaan called Salem, yet the Apostle shows that
he was called Melchisedeck, not because he was King of such a town, but
because he was indeed a King of Peace. Thirdly, because then, Verse 2.
there must be of necessity another everlasting Priesthood, beside the
Priesthood of Christ; For that this Melchisedeck had, neither beginning of
days, nor end of time, but remains a Priest for ever. Verse 3.
And whereas they that would have this Melchisedeck to be a mortal man King of
Salem, do answer hereunto, and say that he was not eternal; but is so said
to be, by the Apostle, to have neither beginning of days, nor end of time,
because the Scripture, especially there where he is named Melchisedeck makes no
mention of it; I say that this is a weak and simple answer; for how many
Levites, Priests, and worthy men, have we in Scripture, whose beginnings and
endings are not mentioned? and shall we therefore say that they were eternal?
Fourthly, because then, this Priest must needs be of a more excellent order
and perfection, then the Leuiticall Priesthood; and this is not like to be,
that in Salem, a town in the midst of Canaan, there should be now a more
excellent order, then that which God himself gave unto the Priesthood of the
Jews; and therefore I conclude, That Melchisedeck was the Son of God in a
humane shape.
that this Melchisedeck could not be any mortal man. And

Secondly, it is most probable, that it was none other then Jesus Christ.

First, because the Apostle says, Verse 7.
that he was greater then Abraham, which is said to be the Father of the
faithful.

Secondly, Heb. c. 5. v. 11.
because the Apostle going to speak of this Melchisedecke says, that he had
many things to say concerning him, which were (...), hard to be explained;
which certainly he would never have said, had he not understood this
Melchisedeck to have been some excellent and ineffable person.

Thirdly, because the Apostle says not, Verse 8.
whose death is not mentioned by Moses, for so he might be dead, though his
death is not spoken of: but he says, that David testifies of him (...), that
he lives, to show the difference betwixt this Priest and those Leuiticall
Priests which dyed.

Heb. 7 3.
Fourthly, because the Apostle says, that this Melchisedeck, was like unto the
Son of God, even as Nebuchadnezzer says, that the fourth man, which walked
with the three children, in the fiery furnace, was like unto the Son of God;
So here the Apostle saying that he was (...), Dan. 3.25.
like the Son of God, means no doubt that he assumed a body of the same
likeness and habit, and countenance, as afterward he meant to unite
personally unto himself; for that it is an usual thing in Scripture, to say,
that he which is, is like unto himself, as where the Apostle says, Phil.
2.7.8.
that he was found in shape as a man, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men, that is, he was made indeed a
true and a natural man.

Fifthly, because Abraham did give unto him Tithe of all, as perceiving under
that visible form, and shape of man an invisible Diety to subsist, to whom
Tithe is only due, and everlastingly due, because he is an everlasting Priest.
And therefore I say that this Melchisedeck was no mortal man, but the
immortal Son of God, which assuming this visible shape, did appear unto
Abraham and offered (as a type of our blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper)
Bread and Wine unto him, after his victory, over his enemies. And it may be
that our Savior had respect hereunto, John 8.56.
when he said, that Abraham saw his days and rejoiced, i. e. not only with
the eyes of faith, (as all the rest of the Patriarchs and Prophets did) but
also in a visible shape, which he assumed, like unto that whereunto he was
afterward to be united.

So that man which wrestled with Jacob was none other but the man Christ Jesus:
for himself said, that Jacob should be called Israel, Genesis 32.28.30.
a wrestler and preuailer with God; and Jacob called the name of the place
Peniel; because he had seen God face to face: And so that man which appeared
unto Joshua, and came as a Captain of the heast of the Lord, Josua 5.14.
was none other then Jesus Christ, as Peter Martyr does most excellently by
many arguments confirm.

Whereby you see Christ did heretofore assume unto himself humane forms,
wherein he appeared unto the Fathers, to be as a praeludium of his Incarnation;
but in none of these apparitions, and assumptions of such forms, was he ever
said to be made the thing that he assumed, or to unite himself hypostatically
unto any of the said forms: for those bodies he formed of the air, or of
nothing, and when he had finished the work, for which he had assumed them: Tum
redit in nihilum, quod fuit ante nihil.

Then it returned into that, out of which it was framed.

But now the Evangelist says, The conception of the Word.
that this word did not only appear, or assume unto himself our flesh for a
time, to discharge some special offices, and then to depose, and to lay aside
the same again, but that he was made flesh; that is, really made man: like one
of us (sin only excepted) and eternally to remain man for ever and ever.
And therefore that we may truly understand this point how this word was made
flesh, we must well consider these two especial things.

1. The manner of his conception. Two things to be considered for the
understanding of Christ's conception.
2. The matter or substance from which he was formed.
First, the word (...), made, here used, does plainly show unto us, (as both
Saint Chrysostom and Tolet do observe) Mirabilem eius conceptionem, non
virili virtute sed diuina potentia eum esse conceptum; His wonderful
conception, that he was made, not by any virtue of man's seed, but by the power
of Gods Spirit, who without any seed of man, did frame and make the man Christ
in the womb of his Mother: and therefore we are to observe.

Of this wonderful and divine conception.
1. The reason. 2. The manner. 3. The end.
First, Never any one was made, as Christ was made.
we read that mankind before Christ his coming was made three manner of
ways; First, without any man to be his father, or any woman to be his mother,
as Adam; Secondly, of a man without a woman, as Euah; Thirdly, of man and
woman, as all the offspring of Adam: but Christ after a fourth and a more
wonderful manner, was made of a woman, without the help of a man; and so we
never read of any other before him, nor of any other after him; for as the
Flowers (says Protagoras) Solummodo habent in coelo patrem, and in terra
solummodo matrem, Have only a Father in Heaven; that is, the Sun, by whose
heat and virtue they grow; and a mother only in earth, i. e. the ground from
whence they spring; so Christ, the flower of the root of Iesse, has only a
Father in Heaven without a mother; and a mother only in earth without a
father: and yet he is not another from his father, and another from his mother;
Sed aliter est a patre, and aliter est ex matre, But he is otherwise from his
father, and otherwise from his mother; that is, a true God, of God his father;
and a true man, of the Virgin his mother; of two natures subsisting in one and
the selfsame person. And the reason why he was borne of a woman, Ambros. in
Luc. 24. Why Christ was borne of a Woman.
(as Saint Ambrose says) was, Ne perpetui reatus apud viros opprobrium
sustinerent mulieres, Lest women should still suffer the reproach of perpetual
guiltiness and blame, in the sight of men, for their first transgression; for
her yielding unto the Serpent, and the seducing of her Husband, made her and
all her Sex to be deservedly subject unto much reproach: and therefore though
because the mankind is more noble, Christ would be made a Man, yet because
women should not be contemned, he was contented to be borne of a woman; Et sic
formam viri assumendo, Aug. cont. faust.
and de foemina nascendo, vtrumque sexum hoc modo honorandum indicauit; And so
he did sufficiently honor both sexes; the men, by assuming the form of a man,
and the women, by taking his flesh from a woman; that as a woman was the means
to make man a sinner, so she might be the instrument to bring him a Savior:
but he would be borne of such a woman that was a Virgin, because it became not
God to have any mother, but a maid; and it beseemed not a maid to have any
son, Barrad. l. 7. c. 10.
but a God, says Barradius. And so he was made of a woman, Why Christ was
borne of a Virgin.
of a woman that was a Virgin, and of a Virgin without the help of a man, and
that for diverse reasons; As,

First, because that woman was a Virgin by whom sin entered into the world,
Jrenaeus. l. 5. c. 19.
(as Irenaeus thinks) and all probability confirms.

Secondly, because God had promised, that the seeds of the woman, Genesis 3.15.
that is, of the woman only, without the help of man; should break the
serpents head: Esaias 7.14.
and therefore Esayas says, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son.

Thirdly, because he was to be most pure, without any the least spot or
contagion of sin; which he could not have been, if he had been borne after
the usual manner of men: for as Adam, so all the posterity of Adam begetting
Children, do beget the nature of man, John 3.6.
together with the guilt and corruption of nature: And therefore our Savior
says, Whatsoever is borne of flesh, (that is, after the usual manner of flesh
and blood) is flesh. i. e. fleshly, corrupted, and defiled.

Fourthly, Because this Word had a natural Father in Heaven, and therefore he
was to have none in Earth, lest thereby he should be said to have two Fathers.

Fifthly, Because he was to be a Priest, after the order of Melchisedecke, who
was without Father, and without Mother, to show that Christ should be (...),
without Mother as he was a God, and (...), without Father as he was a Man: And
so I might collect many other reasons, why this Word being to be made Flesh,
would be made of a Virgin; but I will proceed.

Secondly, Touching the Agent, Of the manner how Christ was conceived.
and the manner of the act, how this substance should be framed, and this Child
should be conceived without the help of man, Saint Luke does most plainly and
fully declare unto us, saying; Luc. 1.35.
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
ouer-shadow thee: Which words are not to be understood so, as if he were
begotten spermaticcos per concubitum, By any carnal effusion of seminall
humor, as Iansenius seems to imagine; nor of the Essence, or substance of
the Holy Ghost, as some Heretics have said: for so the Holy Ghost being God,
should have begotten him not man, but God; Quia omne generans generat sibi
simile, Because every begetter begets his like; and, John 3.6.
that which is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit. (...); But he was conceived by
way of manufacture, that is, by the handy work, or operation, or by the virtue
of the Holy Ghost, whereby the Virgin did conceive, as Iustine Martyr says;
Just. Martyr. Apol. 2. pro Christianis. Aug Ser. 3. de temp. Basilius. ser. de
natiuitate.
or else by the energeticall command and ordination of the Holy Ghost, as Saint
Augustine says; or by the benediction and blessing of the Holy Ghost, as Saint
Basil says* whereby that part of the Virgins blood, or seed, whereof the body
of Christ was to be framed, was so cleansed and sanctified, that in it there
should be neither spot nor stain of original pollution: (for otherwise the
seed of that blessed Virgin, before it was sanctified by the Holy Ghost, was
tainted and infected with sin;) and then was so composed and framed, that it
became a perfect Christ. The manner of Christ his conception, is ineffable.
And because we should not search too much into this mystery, to know the
manner of this conception; it is said, that the power of the Almighty should
ouer-shadow her: To teach us, that as we cannot perfectly see, nor know the
things that are covered or ouer-shadowed from our eyes; so we cannot perfectly
know the manner of this conception. Scio quod verbum caro factum est, sed
quomodo factum sit, nescio; miraris quia ego nescio, omnis creatura ignorant: I
know that the World was made Flesh, but how he was made, I know not; neither is
it any wonder that I know not, because every creature is ignorant of it,
Chrysostom. Hom. 5.
says Saint Chrysostom: And therefore as the Prophet David says of himself,
I am fearfully and wonderfully made; Psalm. 139 13.
So we may say of this Son of David, that he is most wonderfully made: for,

First, His Mother was sanctified with the fullness of grace, with the
ouer-shadowing of the Holy Ghost, and with the inhabitation of the Son of
God; And therefore Saint Bernard says, that she was, Sine pudore faecunda,
sine grauamine grauida, and sine dolor puerpera; Great with Child, without
breach of chastity; a Mother, and yet a Maid; a Woman, and yet escaping the
curse of all Women: for the Law had accursed them all; Virgins because they
were barren, Luc. 1.25.
and the married Wives, because they should bear in sorrow; Genesis 3.16.
but the blessed Virgin escaped both, Quia virgo genuit and dolorem non sensit;
For that she conceived without sin, and was delivered without pain; as
Saint Augustine shows, by the example of the Sun, that shines through a
glass, and yet breaks it not; and of the fire that Moses saw in the bush, and
yet consumed it not; but whether she felt any pains or not, I cannot tell;
only this we may be sure of, that the greatness of her joy and gladness, to
bring forth such a Son, might well swallow up the greatest pain and grief:
And as she conceived a Virgin, That the blessed Virgin continued still a
Virgin.
so she continued a Virgin, as all the most judicious Writers have affirmed;
for it is neither piety to speak, nor reason to think, that Joseph being so
just, and so godly a man, as the holy Scriptures do testify of him; and being
eighty years old, when he was espoused unto Mary, (as Epiphanius says)
should have any desire to know her, whom he knew did bear his Savior; or
that she especially should yield to the desire of any man, after she had
conceived, and brought forth a God.

Secondly, Though the substance and the parts of other men, in ordinary
generation be framed successively by degrees; for the seminall humor, first
becomes an Embryo, then a body inorganicall, then are the liver, heart, and
brain fashioned, and then the rest one after another perfected; and it is at
least forty days, That Christ was conceived a perfect man, in the first moment
of his conception.
before the body of any Child in the womb be fully formed; yet Christ in the
very instant of his conception, Quoad perfectionem partium, non graduum, In
respect of the perfection of all parts, was made a perfect man in body and
soul, void of sin, and full of grace: And so in a moment, Totam naturam
humanam vniendo formauit, and formando vniuit; He was perfectly framed, and
instantly united unto this eternal Word, perfect God and perfect man; because
it is the property of the Holy Ghost, Subito operari, To work instantly and
perfectly: And therefore Damascene says, (...); Damascen l. 3. c. 2. de fide
orth.
as soon as ever the Flesh of Christ was conceived, it was presently united,
and made the Flesh of this Word God: Aug l. de fide ad Pet. c. 18.
And Saint Augustine bids us to believe assuredly, Carnem in vtero non esse
conceptam, priusquam susciperetur a verbo; That the Flesh of Christ was not
conceived in the womb, before it was assumed of the Word: And so Saint Hierome
upon the words of the Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 3. Pet. Martyr. in Symbol. Amand.
Polan. Syntag. theol. de persona Christi, l. 6. c. 14.
where he says, that a Woman shall compass a Man; is of the same mind: And
not only the ancient, but also the modern Writers do most of them agree in
this same point.

And therefore when we consider how wonderfully and inexplicably this Word was
made Flesh; how a Star gave light unto the Sun, a Branch did bear the
Vine, a Creature gave being unto the Creator; how the Mother was younger then
what she bare, and a great deal lesser then what she contained; and how this
Child was suddenly made, perfectly made, holily made, without the help of
man; we may well say with the Apostle, that great is the mystery of
godliness: 1 Timothy 3.16.
And we should say with Saint Augustine, Rem credo, modum non quaero; I do
most faithfully believe the matter, but I will not curiously search into the
manner of his conception.

Christ was conceived of a Virgin, that he might be free from all sin.
Thirdly, Touching the end, and final cause of this his extraordinary and
miraculous conception; It was, as I have partly showed before, twofold. First,
That he might be pure, and free from all original sin; because it was
requisite, that he which should save sinners, should be himself free from all
sin.

Ob.
But against this it may be objected, that all those which were descended from
Adams loins, did sin in Adam; for if the root be holy, Romans 11.16.
the branches are likewise hol^; but if the root be rotten, the branches must
needs be corrupted: And Saint Paul says, That by one man sin entered into
the World, Romans 5.12.
and by sin death; and so death went over all men, because all men had
sinned: But Christ according to the Flesh, descended from the Ioynes of Adam;
for so Saint Luke fetches his Pedigree, Luc. 3. v^t.
even from Adam: and therefore Christ cannot be quite free from all the
contagion of sin.

Sol.
I answer, that the guilt of Adams sin, diffused it self only upon such as
were in him, both according to the substance of their flesh, That Christ
comes not from Adam after the usual manner of generation.
Et secundum rationem seminalem, and according to the carnal and usual way of
propagation, as Aquinas says: But Christ, though he came from Adam, according
to the substance of his flesh, yet was he not produced from him according to
the ordinary way of natural generation; for he was conceived of the Holy
Ghost, and borne of a pure Virgin, who never knew man carnally at any time: And
therefore it is most true, which Saint Peter says; 1 Pet. 2.22.
That he did no sin, neither was any guile found in his mouth: Heb. 7.26.
and that also which Saint Paul says, He was pure and undefiled, separate from
sinners.

Secondly, He was thus conceived in all purity, that he might thereby hide and
cover our impure conception from the sight of God: for he was conceived after a
new manner, that he might take away that sin which humane generation
attracteth, and gets, by the accompanying and coupling of sinful flesh.
And so Saint Augustine says; God was in carnate in the womb of his Mother a
Virgin, Aug. de fide ad Petrum. c. 2.
without any carnal copulation with any man, and without any lust of the
conceiving Virgin; that by the God man, which (being conceived without any
lust) the inuiolate womb of the Virgin has brought forth, that sin might be
washed away, which all other men that are begotten with man's seed, are
infected withal; because the condition of our birth is such, that our Mothers
cannot perform that work of fruitfulness, unless they first leese the
virginity of their flesh; and so with the emission of seed, That it was not
the purity of the Virgin, but the working of the holy Ghost, that caused Christ
to be conceived without sin.
send forth an infection of sin, which corrupts both the begetters and the
begotten: And therefore hence it is apparent, that seeing he was not only
sanctified by the Holy Ghost, that he might be holy, and without stain of
sin, and so fitted to be united to the person of the Son of God, but was
also made by the Holy Ghost without any help of man; we need not run with
the Franciscan Friars to the purity of his Mothers conception and birth, to
make him pure, and without sin: for indeed, it is the manner of his
conception by the Holy Ghost, and the sanctifying of that substance which he
assumed of his Mother, and the purging of it from all disposition or
inclination unto evil; and not the purity of his Mothers conception, or her
want of original corruption, that frees our Savior Christ from all imputation
of original infection: And therefore though we acknowledge her the most
blessed amongst Women, and sanctified above the ordinary degrees of any other
man, or woman; Romans 5.12.
yet to say that she was no ways tainted with original sin, I dare not
affirm; because both the Scriptures, Luc. 2.48.
and those fruits that we read of, which do spring from this natural root,
John 2.4.
do sufficiently seem unto me to contradict the same. And so you see the
manner how the substance of his manhood was conceived.

CHAP. II. Of the matter whereof the Flesh of Christ was formed and that he had
a true natural Body.
SEcondly, We are to consider the matter from which the Flesh of Christ was
composed; for as there are diverse kinds of bodies, celestial bodies, aeriall
bodies, and terrestrial bodies: So there are diverse kinds of Flesh; for all
flesh is not the same flesh, 1 Cor. 15.
but there is one kind of flesh of Men, another flesh of Beasts, another of
Fishes, 1 Cor. 15.39.
another of Birds; And therefore to express what kind of flesh he took,
Gal. 4.4.
Saint Paul says; He was made of a Woman: that is, of the flesh and blood and
substance of his Mother; and so he says, That he was made of the seed of
David: Romans 1.3.
And therefore it must needs follow, Heb. 4.15.
that he was made in all things like unto his brethren, sin only excepted;
for the seed of the Parents, is the first matter and substance whereof the man
is made. And if it be true what Aristotle and the Philosophers do affirm,
that Semen patris in substantiam fatus non cadit, sed ad menstruum mulieris se
habet tanquam artifex ad artificium; The seed of the man does not fall into
the substance of the Child, but does so dispose the seed of the woman, as a
workman frames and disposes his work, to make the same into the form of
man, (as this is most probable to be true, although Galenus and the Physicians
say the contrary,) then have we no reason at all to think that he took not
all the whole nature of man, because he had another worker to dispose and to
frame the same substance into the form of man, seeing he was made of the same
whole substance as all other men are made of; and especially, seeing he had a
far more excellent agent to work the same, then any seed of man can be: for
seeing, Ibi potior effectus, vbi nobilior est causa; The effect is ever better
where the cause is more excellent: Reason it self shows, that we have no
reason, to think that he was defective in any thing, that pertained to the
perfection of humane nature, or of the natural properties of the same. And
therefore seeing he was made of a woman; i. e. of the seed and substance of
the woman, as all other men be, differing only in the manner of his
conception, or in the agent and worker of his substance, which made him free
from all sin, (because to the same end he was conceived by the Holy Ghost)
which all other men could not be, (because they are conceived by the help of
man's seed,) it is most apparent, that he assumed, 1. All our humane nature,
that is, a true humane body, and a reasonable humane soul. 2. All our natural
properties and infirmities, sin only excepted.


That Christ was made a perfect man.
First, That he was a perfect man, of a reasonable soul and humane flesh
subsisting, it may be thus confirmed.

First, because he is a perfect Mediator: for he cannot be a perfect Mediator
except he be a perfect man: but the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 2.5.
that there is one Mediator, i. e. one perfect and absolute Mediator betwixt
God and man, even the Man Christ Jesus; therefore he must needs be a perfect
man.

Secondly, because he is a Priest; for every Priest by the Law was to be
perfect in all parts, or if he was maimed in any part, he was to offer no
sacrifice unto GOD; but Christ is a Priest for ever; therefore he must needs
be a perfect man, Psalm. 110.4.
wanting neither soul nor body.

Thirdly, because he is our sacrifice; for the Law requires that every
sacrifice should be perfect, and to want no part, nor to have any blemish at
all; but Christ is our sacrifice, and has offered up himself a sweet smelling
sacrifice unto God for us: and therefore he must needs be perfect, without
defect, without blemish.

Fourthly, because the whole nature of man, that is both body and soul, was to
be redeemed, for that both body and soul were captiuated unto Satan: Matthew.
18.11.
but the Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost: Therefore,
he must consist both of body and soul; Fulgent. l. 1. de Mysterio redemption.
ad Trasim. That Christ had a true humane body.
for seeing the divine pity was contented to deliver all, it behooved the
divine Majesty to assume all: says Fulgentius.

And more particularly, that he had a true and a perfect humane body it may be
thus proved, and showed unto us.

First, by the Scriptures of the old Testament, for the Lord said in Paradise,
Genesis 3.15.
that the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head: and afterward unto
Abraham, Genesis 22.18.
in thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed; then to Isaac, for
in Isaac shall thy seed be called; then to Jacob, for Jacob have I loved, c.
21.12.
and Esau have I hated; then to Judah, for the scepter shall not depart from
Judah, until Shilo come; then to Issay, Malach. 1.2.
for a rod shall come out of the root of Issay; and then to David, Genesis 49.19.
for I will cause the branch of Righteousness to grow up unto David: Esaias 11.1.
and because he was the best and the worthyest of all the Kings of Israel, for
he was a man according to Gods own heart, Et rex super vniuersum Israel; Jer.
23.5.
and a King over all Israel; therefore all the Prophets after him, do still
play upon his Harp, and always inculcate upon this point, that the Messiah
should come of the seed of David: for the Lord had sworn unto David, Psalm.
132.12.
saying, Of the fruit of thy body will I set one upon thy throne; and therefore
the Prophet Esaias says, that there should come forth a rod of the stock of
Issay, and a graffe should grow out of his root; and the Prophet Jeremy says,
that he would raise unto David a righteous branch; Quo supra.
As I said before. And therefore seeing he is the seed of Abraham, the seed of
David, That Christ was made of the very substance of his Mother.
the fruit of David's belly, the rod of David, and the branch of David; it is
most apparent that he took upon him the substance of David; for who can deny
but that the seed, the flower, and the branch is of the same nature and
substance that the tree is of, which bears the flower and the branch? why
then should we be more cruel against our Savior Christ, which is the branch
of David, and the flower of the Virgin his Mother, the^ we are against the
flowers of the field, by denying that unto him, which we yield unto them; for
seeing he is the flower of the Virgin; therefore it is apparent, that as the
flower of a rose cannot spring forth of a Vine-tree, so no more can the flesh
of Christ, take his original of any other thing then the body of the Virgin.

Secondly, this may be proved by the Scriptures of the New Testament, for the
Angel Gabriel said unto Mary, that she should conceive and bear a Son, and
Elizabeth says of that son, Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, but what is
it to conceive, but to administer part of her substance unto her son? and
what is it to be the fruit of the womb, but to be of the same substance as his
mother was of? for how can that be called the fruit of a tree, that never had
the nature of a tree; for I would suppose it to be madness, to call a
Pomegranate the fruit of the Orange tree; and therefore it was as great a
madness to call Christ the fruit of Mary's womb, if he had brought his body
with him, either from Heaven, or from any other place; and the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews says, Heb. 2.14.
That for as much as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he
himself also took part of the same: And again, Heb. 10.5.
he brings in Christ himself, saying; Sacrifice and offering thou would
not, but a body have thou prepared me: And therefore, when the Apostles thought
that they had seen a phantasme, Luke 24.39.
or a Spirit, he said unto them, Handle me and see, because a Spirit has not
flesh and bones, as you see me have: and above all, Gal. 4.4.
the words (...), used by Saint Paul, and (...), here used by the Evangelist,
which signify to take our nature upon him, and to be made flesh, if they be
diligently marked, and well understood, do make it most apparently plain;
that the Son of God took unto himself personally, the true nature of man,
and the very substance of his mother: for the Apostle does not say, Factus de
muliere, sed factus ex muliere; Made in a woman, but made of a woman, (as
Nicolaus de Gorram well observes) even as the bread is made of the wheat, and
Wine of Grapes: and therefore though Christ had his Principium formale, His
formal beginning from the Holy Ghost, yet it is most certain, that he had
Principium materiale, his whole matter and substance from the body of his
Mother.

Thirdly, the same truth is confirmed by the uniform consent of all Orthodoxe
antiquity; as the great Council of Chalcedon, that had in it 630. Bishops;
Fulgentius l. 2. de persona Christi.
the Council of Lateran, the Council of Toledo, Tertullian, in his book De
Carne Christi, Fulgentius, Saint Basil, Saint Augustine, Venerable Bede, and
diverse others, whose pithy sayings, Basilius in l. de hum. Christi generat.
and unanswerable arguments to confirm this point, I might here allege; but
that Theodoret, Leo, Vigilius, and Gelasius, have so fully collected what the
Fathers before them had written hereof, Aug de trinit. l. 13. c. 18.
that more proof need not be required, and more excellent arguments cannot be
composed, for the manifestation of any truth; Beda in 11. Luc. l. 4. c. 48.
and therefore not willing to write Iliads after Homer, I refer my Reader
unto them: if he desires any further comprobation of this point.

And yet for all this, Macedonius and Valentinus affirmed, L. 2. de trinitate.
L. de diuina may. humanitatis Christi.
that Christ brought with him a celestial body from Heaven, and that Dog
Seruetus, and his fellow Memnon taught, that the Body of Christ was begotten of
the substance and essence of his Father; and so Apelles, Marcion, and
Apollinaris, avouched that he had an aeriall body, and a syderiall flesh: So
Gasper Swenkfeldius says, that Christ in respect of his humanity, is a true
God, as if his very flesh had been begotten of God, as Seruetus said; Bucanus
lo. 2. p. 21. Loc. com.
so Manichaeus says, that he had but an imaginary body; a phantasme only in
show, and no true body in substance, and so the Anabaptists of our time do now
avouch it, that he took not upon him the very nature of man, nor the very
flesh of the Virgin; but that he had only the show and phantasme of a man,
which passed the womb of his Mother, Cochlaeus in l. de erroribus. Monaster.
Anabap.
as water passes through a Conduit: and this is one of their most principal
points, as Johannes Chochlaeus witnesses. And therefore to maintain their
damnable errors, to obscure this clear light of verity, and to show
themselves Grand Captains of that Arch-Hereticke and adversary of Christ and
all Christians, the Devil, they do object,

No man ascends into Heaven, but he that descended from Heaven, John 3.13.
the Son of Man which is in Heaven: And again, speaking of the Jews, he
says, You are from below, John 8.23. 1 Cor 15.47.
I am from above, you are of this world, I am not of this world. And that Saint
Paul says, The first man is of the Earth Earthy, but the second Man, i. e.
Christ was from heaven heavenly; and therefore (say they) he had the substance
of his flesh from Heaven and not from the substance of his Mother.

Sol.
I answer that all these and the like places, are spoken of the whole person of
Christ, to whom the properties of each nature, in respect of the communication
of properties (which hereafter I shall more fully declare unto you) may be
fitly ascribed; and they teach us, that the Son of God descended from heaven,
not by any change of place, but by his voluntary humbling of himself, That we
must not refer that to the body of Christ which is spoken of the whole person
of Christ.
to receive the form of a servant, and that he was conceived after a Heavenly
manner, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, and not after any Earthly
generation; and therefore they do impiously and most falsely refer that to
the substance of his flesh, which is indeed spoken of the whole person of
Christ, and of the heavenly manner of his conception; for though it be true
that I should say, I am a reasonable creature, which does both hear and
understand; yet does this no way prove, that my Body alone without the soul,
is such, or can do either of these; even so, though Christ says, that he
descended from Heaven; because he was a God that ever was in Heaven; yet that
does no way prove that his flesh which he assumed on earth, descended from
heaven: because he had that from his Mother, and brought it not down from
above.

And that he is not of this world, but from above, or from Heaven heavenly, is
nothing else, but that he is not worldly minded, or swayed with the lusts of
the flesh, or any ways earthly affected; and this (though in a far inferior
degree to him) he says of the Apostles, You are not of this world, John 15.19.
because (as Saint Paul says of all Christians) they mind not the things of
this world, but have their conversation in Heaven? Phil. 3.30.20.


Secondly, they say that in what body he appeared to the Fathers like body to
the Apostles, and Disciples in the New Testament; but he appeared unto the
Patriarchs in no true body, but only in the show and shape of a body;
therefore he appeared in no true body to the Apostles.

To this I answer, first, that the minor is false, Sol. That Christ appeared
to the Patriarchs in a true body.
for he appeared unto the Fathers in a true body, as may be easily proved from
those actions, of eating, drinking, walking and such like; and when he had
ended that business, for which he was sent of his Father, he deposed that
body, which for that end he had assumed; and so he laid down his body again;
because he had not as yet, really and hypostatically united himself unto the
same.

Secondly, Christ in former times did but assume a body for some special end,
now he was made flesh to remain man for ever.
I say that if it were so that he appeared unto the Fathers in a phantasme, yet
it follows not that he did so likewise unto the Apostles; for before, he
assumed it only for a time, to perform some one special act; but now he is
made flesh, which he has really united unto himself for ever, to perform the
greatest work in the world, the redemption of mankind: and therefore S. John
to express the truth thereof so fully as words could do it, says, that
himself and the rest of his fellow Apostles did bear witness of that which
they saw with their eyes, and heard with their ears, 1 John 21.
and their hands had handled of the word of life: and that this word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us; John 1.14.
which was never spoken of any of the forms that he assumed in the Old
Testament. For though we read that he appeared unto the Fathers at sundry
times, and in diverse forms, Heb. 1.1.
yet we do never read, that he made himself of no reputation, by taking
those forms upon him; Phil. ^.7.
or that therefore he was made to be the things that he appeared to be; because
he never assumed them unto himself, as to unite them personally unto himself.

true natural body, but only the show, and likeness of a body: for Saint
Paul says, Phil 2.78.
that Christ took upon him the form of a servant; and that God sent his Son
in the similitude of the flesh of sin, Romans 8 3.
or of sinful flesh: and Saint John saw one walking among the seven golden
Candlesticks, Revel. 1.13.
which was like unto the Son of Man; therefore he assumed no true body, but
only a show and a likeness of a body.

Sol.
I answer that these words, and the like, do give them no such ground, nor any
show of reason, to build any such conclusion thereupon: for the Scripture
says, that Adam did beget Caine, Genesis 5.3. Christ in regard of his mean
condition did appear like a sinful man, but was without sin.
Abel, Seth, in his own image and likeness; but we might justly account them
very foolish, that would hereupon infer, that neither Caine, or Seth had not
the very nature of Adam; but only a bare shadow, and similitude thereof: and
therefore the Apostle in saying that he was sent, in the similitude of sinful
flesh, gives us to understand, that he was conceived and borne without sin;
and yet to have flesh like unto sinful flesh; because, though it was without
sin, yet it seemed to be full of sins, by reason of the punishment that he
was contented to undergo for our sins. And this is most excellently declared
by Tertullian, Tertul. in l. de carne Christi c. 17.
where he says, that Saint Paul affirms Christ to be made in the similitude
of sinful flesh; not that he took the likeness of flesh, or the image of a
body, and not a true body; but that he would give us to understand, that Christ
took upon him true flesh in the similitude of sinful flesh; Quia similitudo
ad titulum peccati pertinebit; Idem l. 5. contra. Marcion.
Because the word similitude is to be referred to the iniquity of sin, and
not to deny the verity of his substance; for he would not have added the word
sin, if he had understood and meant that the word similitude, should be
referred to the substance of his flesh, to deny the verity of the same; but
when he thus frames his speech, saying, That he came and took upon him the
likeness of the flesh of sin, or of sinful flesh, Et substantiam
confirmauit, i. e. carnem; and similitudinem ad vitium substantiae retulit, i.
e. peccatum: He does confirm the verity of his substance, that is his flesh,
and he refers similitude to the vitiousnes of the substance, i. e. sin,
which in the sight of the Jews he seemed to have, though in very deed he had
none: So Cassianus says, Cassian. collat. 22. c. 11.
that Similitudo non ad carnis veritatem, sed ad peccati imaginem referenda
est; The word similitude has relation not to flesh, to deny the truth
thereof, (for that was true flesh) but to this word sinful: Quia in veritate
corporis sed sine veritate peccati, suscepit dominus speciem peccatoris;
Because that in the true nature of man without any sin, he appeared (and was
so esteemed of many) like a sinful man, Amb. de spiritu Sancto l. 3. c. 9.
says Saint Ambrose.

And so when the Apostle says, that Christ was made in the similitude of Man,
he does not mean so to refer the word similitude, Ad naturam humanam; as
that we should understand him, to be made only in the likeness of our humane
nature; The manhood of Christ seen by the sufferings of Christ.
but by the similitude of man he understands, Conditionem abiectam, that
abject and mean condition of man, whereby Christ was made like unto all other
men; and therefore Saint Paul does hereby more confirm the truth of his humane
nature, then any ways weaken the same; Justin Martyr. in expos. fidei.
because (as Justin Martyr speaks) Deus quidem intelligitur ex prodigiorum
operatione, homo autem ostenditur, ex aequalibus nostrae naturae
perpessionibus; His Godhead is sufficiently seen by the working of his
miracles, but his Manhood is chiefly seen by the like sufferings and
infirmities of our nature.

And to that place of the Apocalypse, I say that Saint John saw him in a
Prophetical vision, his body being in heaven and not on earth, and therefore
this of all other is alleged most improperly to deny the truth of that flesh,
which Saint John of all other had so plainly declared unto us. And so you may
see that neither these places, nor any other place, though never so much
wringed, and wrested from the true meaning of the Holy Ghost, no nor the gates
of Hell it self, can disprove the truth of this point; that Christ has a true
and a natural body.

CHAP. III. Of Christ his true and perfect humane Soul.
That Christ had a true reasonable humane soul.
AND further we must consider, that as he had a true humane body, so he had a
perfect reasonable soul; for,

First, The testimonies of the Scriptures are most plain and pregnant herein;
As, My soul is heavy unto death: Math. 26.38.
And again, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.

Heb. 2.17.
Secondly, Reason it self confirms it; for, He was made in all things like
unto his brethren, Sin only excepted; and he is, The Shepherd of our
souls: 1 Pet. 2.
And therefore he must needs consist of body and soul.

Thirdly, The whole School of Divinity, did ever teach the same Truth: for
Nazianzene says; Quod non assumpsit non salvabit, Either he had a soul, or he
will not save a soul; And Saint Augustine says, Aug de tempore. Ser. 145.
Totum suscepit vt totum liberaret verbum: The Word took all upon him, i. e.
both body and soul, that he might save both body and soul. And so Fulgentius
does most largely and excellently prove this point, in his first Book, De
Mysterio Mediatoris, Fulgentius de mist. med. ad Tras. l. 1.
unto King Trasimund, where I refer my Reader to a most elegant, and learned
discourse of this matter.

Ob.
But against this, many of the Arrians and Apollinaris do object, (as
Nazianzene, Athanasius, and Saint Cyrill do affirm) that Christ had no humane
soul, John 1.14.
but only a living flesh, because the Evangelist says; That the Word was made
Flesh: And Saint Paul says, Romans 1.
That he was made of the seed of David, according to the Flesh.

Sol.
To this I answer, that it is an usual thing in Scripture, to speak
synechdochically, and sometimes, totum denominare ex part praestantiori, to
put the soul for the whole man; as seventy souls, that is, seventy men went
down unto Egypt; and, the soul that sins, Exodus 1.5.
that soul shall die; and, let every soul be subject to the higher Powers:
Ezech. 18.20.
and sometimes, totum denominare, ex part minus praestantiori, Romans 13.1.
to put the body for the whole man; as, all Flesh. i. e. all men had corrupted
their ways before God; and, Genesis 6.12.
all flesh shall see the salvation of God; and, to thee shall all flesh come;
that is, all men. And therefore he was made Flesh, signifies, Athanas in Sym.
that he was made Man, of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh subsisting.

And the reason why the Evangelist says, He was made flesh, Why the Evangelist
says, he was made flesh, rather then he was made man.
rather then, He was made man, is diversely rendered by the Fathers: For, some
say, it was to show what part of Christ was made of his Mother; that is, his
Flesh; for his Diety was increated, and his soul (say they) was created of
nothing, and his body only was made of his Mother: And therefore he says,
The Word was made Flesh. But this cannot satisfy them which believe the Soul
to be ex traduce, by traduction from the Parents: And therefore,

Secondly, others, with Theophilact say, the Evangelist says, The Word was
made Flesh, to express the greatness of Gods love, who for our sakes would be
contented to be made the vilest thing: for, all flesh is grass. Esaias. 40.6.


Thirdly, others, with Saint Augustine say, It was to show the greatness of
Christ his humility; Ex part ignobiliori, to be named by the meanest name, and
the basest part of man; he was contented to be made flesh, for so we find,
that in this respect, i. e. to show the greatness of his humility, though he
was the Son of God, yet most commonly would he term himself, The Son of
man; to show us, how he debased himself, and was well contented with the
meanest and most abject titles, for our sakes; and to teach us by his example
not to stand so much upon our dignities, but to humble our selves, that we may
be exalted.

Fourthly, others, with Saint Cyrill say, It was for our greater confidence,
that we should not doubt of Gods love and favor toward us, because our flesh,
which was the part most corrupted, is now united unto God; and because Christ
is now become our brother, and our kindred, according to that of the
Evangelist, Behold thy Brethren, and thy Kinsmen stand looking for thee; Mar.
3.32.
for that, Consanguinity is in regard of flesh and blood.

Fifthly, others say, It was, Vt infimum summo poneret; that he might put the
highest and the lowest together: for he had called Christ the Word, which
shows the highest power of God; for thy Word is Almighty, Heb. 1.
and he bears up all things by his mighty Word: And therefore as he had set
down his Deity by (...), the Word, which declares his greatest power, so he
would show his humanity by (...), Flesh; which expresses our greatest
infirmity: for, as Summa dignitas in verbo, the greatest dignity is expressed in
the word; So, Summa infirmitas in carne, the greatest infirmity is showed in
the flesh: And therefore he says, The Word was made Flesh; to declare unto us,
Quantus Deus quantillus factus est homo, How great a God, was made so mean a
man. All these reasons are very good, and may well stand all of them, to show
why he says; The Word was made Flesh, rather then, He was made man. Yet,

Tertul. l. de carne Christi. Jrenaeus. l. 3. c. 11.
Sixthly, I like best of Tertullians reason, alleged also by Irenaeus, Saint
Chrysostom, and others, that the Spirit of God foreseeing what Heresies would
follow after, and soon creep to invade the Church of Christ; did therefore
purposely here, and in many other places, set down most evident and
unanswerable arguments to convince them whenever they should arise; that so
the light of Truth might be cleared, and the mouth of all wickedness might be
stopped: God before heresies came, provided for us, that we might be preserved
from them when they came.
And therefore I say, that the Pen of the Evangelist was here directed by Gods
Spirit, to say, The Word was made Flesh; not because he had not a soul, but to
assure us against Marcion, Macidonius, Valentinus, Manichaeus, and others, that
Christ had a true and a natural flesh, assumed from the very flesh and
substance of his Mother, and united unto his Godhead. And so you see that
Christ had not, Ideam humanae naturae. An imaginary pattern of humane nature,
but the whole nature of man, In vno indiuiduo, Consisting both of body and
soul.

CHAP. IIII. Of Christ his being subject to all the humane infirmities that are
without sin.
SEcondly, As Christ had all the parts of a true man, That Christ was made
subject to all our humane fraileties, which are without sin.
that is, body and soul; so he had all the properties that do concern man's
nature, or do belong either to the soul or to the body of man; as length,
breadth, thickness, understanding, will, affection, etc. and all other
infirmities that we have, sin only excepted: for, as in the creation of man,
God made man like unto himself, by stamping in him the Image of his own
nature; so in the assumption of our flesh, this word made himself like unto
us, by taking upon him the infirmities of our nature: So that as God said
heretofore, in a pitiful derision, Behold, the man is become as one of us; so
now we may say in a joyful exultation, Behold, Genesis 3.22.
our God is become as one of us; of the same nature, and subject to the same
infirmities as we are; as the Apostle says of Elias, Jam 5 7.
He was subject to the like passions as we are.

But is it possible (may some man say) that he which came to destroy the
works of the Devil, Ob.
and to swallow up death into victory, should disarme himself of strength and
power, and be clothed with our weakness and fraileties?

To this the Prophet answers, Sol.
That Gods ways are not as our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts; Esa
55.8.
for we find many times God working one contrary out of another, as creating
all things of nothing, bringing light out of darkness, Genesis 1.1.
making his power known through weakness, and by the foolishness of
preaching, destroying the wisdom of the wise, That God many times works one
contrary out of another.
and saving those that believe in him: And therefore as David laid aside the
Sword, and brigandine of Saul, and took his staff and slender sling, when he
went to encounter great Goliath; So Christ the Son of David did assume the
infirmities of our flesh, (a slender staff to rely upon) that so, not by his
strong arm, but by his weak, yet holy arm, he might get unto h mselfe the
victory.

And it was requisite (says Saint Ambrose) Vt infirmitates nostras susciperet,
That he should take upon him our infirmities.

First, To demonstrate the truth of his assumed humanity; for else, Ambros. in.
Luc. l. 10. c. 22.
Quomodo discipuli crederent fuisse hominem, nisi humanas infirmitates
comperissent; How should his Disciples believe him to be a man, if they had not
found and seen him touched with the infirmities of man? And,

Secondly, To strengthen, and underprop the weakness of our declining Faith;
for, Vt patientem docere non potest, qui subiectus passionibus non est, As he
can never teach a man how to be patient, which was never troubled with any
passions himself, says Lactantius; Lactant. institut. l 4. c. 16.
so he can never so well succor those that are afflicted, which never has
been afflicted himself: But now, seeing we have a High Priest which is
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, we may with boldness accede unto
the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4.14.
and assure our selves to find mercy in the time of need.

And yet here we must distinguish and understand, that all the infirmities and
the defects of our nature, are either, 1. Culpable and blameworthy. 2.
Inculpable and blameless.


Or else, 1. Sinful without pain. 2. Painful without sin.


That infirmities are of two kinds.
The first, are (...), damnable and odious in the sight of God, (as Damascen
calls them:) The second are Miserabiles, Miserable, and to be pitied before
God and Man, as Saint Augustine says.

1. Sinful. 2. Painful.

Those of the first kind, he was absolutely free from; because he was
conceived without sin, borne without sin, lived without sin, Christ took
none of our sinful infirmities.
and died without sin: And therefore let not the covetous man, whose desire
is as large as Hell, think that Christ took upon him the insatiable affection
of covetousness, nor the ambitious man imagine, that he was tainted with an
aspiring mind, nor any man suppose, that this immaculate Lamb, was any ways
blemished with inordinate affection; for, he was a true Israelite, in whom
there was no guile.

Those of the second kind, we say with the Schools, that they are either 1.
Detractabiles. 2. Indetractibiles.
that is, either 1 Personal. 2 Natural.


First, personal or proper to some men; That those infi mities which are not
sinful, are either, 1 Personal. 2 Natural.

as to be affected with malady, infeebled with infirmity, or disfigured with
deformity: or else,

Secondly, natural or common to all men; as to be borne weak; and to live
encompassed with humane frailties.

Those that are personal, we say not that he took; for though many of us, be
wholly corrupted from the sole of the feet, Esaias 1.6.
unto the Crown of the head; That Christ took no personal infi^mities upon
him.
yet the body of Christ being framed by the Holy Ghost of the purest Virgin
blood, was proportioned in most equal Symmetry and correspondency of parts;
and therefore he was Speciosus forma prae filijs hominum; fairer then the sons
of men, wholly pure, more pure then the body of Absolon, 2 Samuel 14.
in whom there was no blemish. So Cassiodorus says, Cassiod. in Psalm. 45.
Forma eius lactei coloris decore illuxit, and insigni statura, prae-eminuit;
His body of the best composed stature, did excel all other men; and so Saint
Hierome says, that his countenance, carried hidden, and vayled in it, a
starre-like shining brightness, Matthew. 19.27.
which being but a little reueiled, it so ravished his Disciples hearts, that
at the first sight thereof they left all, and followed him, and it so
astonished his enemies, that they stumbled and fell to the ground: But,

Those that are natural or common infirmities, That Christ took all the
infirmities which are common and natural infirmities. John 18.6. Heb.
2.17.4.15.
we affirm that he had them in all things, like unto us.

First, because he was to be in all things like unto his brethren, sin only
excepted.

Secondly, because the prayer of Christ, in the garden of Gethsemane proceeded
from the infirmity of his humane nature; as most Interpreters do affirm.

Thirdly, because an Angel from Heaven appeared unto him, comforting him; for
his Divine virtue had no need to be strengthened, but his humane infirmity
required to be assisted.

Fourthly, because all ancient antiquity, and the modern unanimity of all
Divines, have ever taught and maintained this truth: for we confess says
Damascen, that Christ took all the natural Passions of man which are without
sin; Damas. de fide orthodoxa. l. 3. c. 20.
Et scire mihi prodest (says Saint Ambrose) Quod propter me suscepit Christus
omnes infirmitates meas; Ambrosius de fide ad Great. l. 2. c. 4.
And it avails me much to know that Christ took all mine infirmities upon
him: and Friar Discipulus says, that every man was subject unto twelve
natural defects and infirmities: whereof (says he) our Savior Christ has
undergone ten of them, and has suffered the same, even as we do.

First, Cold, Secondly, Heat.
Two infirmities incident to every man, and denied by no man to be in Christ:
else could he not be a man.

Matthew. 21.18.
Thirdly, Hunger, as when he came to the Fig Tree, and would have eaten.

John 4.7. and C. 19.28.
Fourthly, Thirst, as when he asked Drink of the woman of Samaria, and cried, I
thirst, upon the Cross.

John. 4 6.
Fifthly, Weariness, as when he sat by the Well to rest him.

John 19.17.
Sixthly, Weakness and Pain, as when he was not able to bear his Cross any
further: but was feign to have Simon of Cyren to help him. Matthew. 27.32.
(And these six were infirmities of his Body, the other belonged more properly
unto his soul, and must be warily distinguished: if we would truly understand
them, as they are in him.)

Matthew. 26 38.
Seauenthly, Heaviness and Sorrow, as when his soul was heavy unto death, Luke
19.51.
and when he wept for grief, over the City of Jerusalem.

That there is a twofold sorrow.
But here we must distinguish, and know, that this heaviness and sadness of
Christ, was in him as an affliction, and not as a transgression; and that it
was in his sensual and not in his rational will; or if in his reasonable
will, that he was sorrowful, because he would be sorrowful; John 11.33.
Et turbatus quia turbauit seipsum; And was troubled because he troubled
himself: and therefore his sorrow was, Subiacens, non praesidens; turbans, sed
non perturbans eum; Ruled by reason, and not ouer-ruling reason, and so only
disturbing, Mark 6.6.
but no ways disordering him.

Eighthly, Shamefastness, and admiration; as when he marueiled at the
infidelity of the Jews, 1 Kings 18.
even as Elias was ashamed of the iniquity, and wondered at the stupiditie of
the Israelites.

But here also we must know, that it was externally moved, by the sins of
others, and not internally procured by any act of his own.

Heb. 5.7.
Ninthly, Fear, as when his Father heard him, in that which he feared: and in
this, as through weariness he willingly fainted, so through fear he was
exceedingly astonished.

But here likewise we must distinguish that his fear was, That there is a
twofold fear.
Filialis, non seruilis; A filial fear, adjoined with Hope, and not a servile
fear proceeding from despair, that is, not a sinful, but a pious fear,
which might move him in his considerations, but no ways remove him from his
godly intentions.

Tenthly, Anger, as when he looked angerly upon them; and so, when he drove the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple. Matthew. 21.13. That there is a twofold
anger.


But yet still we must distinguish, that his anger was stirred up, and moved;
Per zelum, non per vitium; through a godly zeal, and not through any
inordinate affection; and it was nothing else in him, but Voluntas vindicatiua
malefacti; A desiring will to punish the sin; and not a sinful passion to be
revenged on the person of the sinner; as Bonauenture says.

These are the ten infirmities which Discipulus says, were in our Savior
Christ; thus, and after this manner, as I have showed you.

The other two which he denies to be in him, are 1. Sin. 2. Ignorance.


For the first, that is, Sin, we all know that he had none.

For the second, that is, Ignorance, we must distinguish that it was either 1.
Crassa. 2. Mera.


That is, either 1. A sinful ignorance. 2. A simple ignorance.


The first we call Ignorantia prauae dispositionis; That there is a twofold
ignorance.
An ignorance of a wicked disposition, as when men know not, or will not know
the things that they ought or might know: and this we say was not in Christ,
because it is sinful, and the cause of many sins.

The second we call, Ignorantia merae priuationis; An ignorance of mere
privation; Et ignorantia negatiua, seu nescientia plurimorum; and a negative
ignorance, or the not knowing of many things, which are not of absolute
necessity to be known, and this ignorance we say was in our Savior Christ.

First, because Adam had the same, in the state of his innocence for he was
ignorant of many things that God did know, Jgnatius in ep. 2. ad Trallian. That
Christ was ignorant of some things.
and he knew not that he should be seduced by the Serpent.

Secondly, because he did increase in wisdom and knowledge, i. e. in his
acquisite and experimental wisdom; and not in his infused or divine
wisdom; for he had them perfect from the very first moment of his conception:
Damasc. l. 3. Nazian. l. 2. de fill.
and therefore by his acquisite and experimental wisdom, he learned some
things, that he knew not before.

Thirdly, because he knew not, that there were no Figs on the Fig Tree,
until he went and saw there was none; and he knew not the hour and the day
of judgment.

Polanus in Sympho. Catholica thesi. 7. c. 9. Scotus in sent. did. 14. q. 1.
and 4
Fourthly, because all ancient Orthodoxe Fathers do confirm the same truth, as
Amandus Polanus shows.

And yet we say, that although Christ knew not these things; Ex natura
humanitatis, by the manhood; yet he did know them in natura humanitatis, in the
manhood: for the Schoolmen do well distinguish of a twofold knowledge in
Christ: 1. In verbo, in the word, whereby he sees all things as in a clear
Crystal glass. 2. In genere proprio, in each proper nature, whereby he sees
all things as they are in themselves, and from himself.


In the first sense, we say, the man Christ Jesus knows all things, because
he is hypostatically united unto that eternal word, which made, and sees, and
knows all things. And,

In the second sense, we say that the knowledge of Christ is twofold, 1.
Infused. 2. Acquisite.


First, the infused knowledge at the very instant of his conception, was
granted and powered into his manhood, so much as a finite creature could be
capable of. But,

In what sense Christ may be said to be ignorant of any thing.
Secondly, the acquisite knowledge did increase daily more and more, as his
experience acquainted him with many things, that practically he knew not
before: and in this respect, we may lawfully say, that Christ was ignorant of
many things in his youth, which afterward he learned in his age. And so you
see, that as Christ assumed our nature; so he assumed all our natural
imperfections, that are void of sin, though they were full of pain.

But here we must observe that he assumed them all (as Saint Augustine says)
Non miseranda necessitate, sed miserante voluntate; Not by any imposed
necessity, but by a voluntary assuming of them; to deliver us from them:
because he freely subjected himself unto them, when no Law could have
compelled him to undergo them. And thus I have showed you how this word was
made flesh: that is, a true, and a natural man, in all things, like unto his
brethren, sin only excepted.

CHAP. V. Of the comfortable instructions that we may collect from this
Doctrine of the incarnation of the Word.
YOu heard what the Word was made, Flesh: What we may learn from this doctrine
of Christ his Incarnation.
and from thence we may learn many comfortable, excellent lessons, for our
instruction: especially in respect, 1. Of God. 2. Of Christ. 3. Of our Selves.


First, in respect of God, we may see, and we ought seriously to consider it;
first, his great love and charity toward us; First, Gods love to man.
that he should give his only Son to be made flesh for our sake: and
therefore seeing he gave his Son for us, and that while we were yet sinners,
while we were yet enemies unto God, how can it be, but that he should give us
all things together with his Son, especially now being reconniled unto him
through his Son? Romans 5.10.
for in him he is well pleased, and through him he cannot be offended with us:
and therefore Christ to show how dearly God loves us through him, says,
Whatsoever you ask the Father in my Name, it shall be given you.

Secondly, we may from hence see the faithfulness and truth of God in
performing his promise, Luke 1.73.
and the oath that he swear unto our Fathers, Secondly, that God is a true
performer of all his promises. Numb. 23.19.
touching the giving of this Word to be made Flesh: and therefore we may
assure our selves, that whatsoever he says, shall come to pass: for, he is
not as man that he should lie; or as the Son of Man, that he should alter the
thing that is gone out of his lip^.

Secondly, in respect of Christ, we may from hence see these two things.

First, Christ's perfect obedience.
First, His great obedience, in that he was contented in all things to submit
himself unto his Fathers Will; and therefore we that do believe in Christ,
should herein follow the example of Christ, to be obedient unto our heavenly
Father.

Secondly, how Christ humbled himself.
Secondly, his rare and singular humility, in that he being the Son of God
and the eternal Word of God, that could have commanded all the Angels, and by
his stretched-out-arme, without the assumption of our weakness, have made all
his enemies his footstool, was notwithstanding contented, Exininare seipsum;
to empty himself, as it were of his divine riches, and to clothe himself
with our humane nakedness, and so to become the Son of Man, and to be made
flesh, i. e. a vile, a base, and an abject thing for us: Psalm. 144.4.
for man is like a thing of naught, his time passes away like a shadow; And
therefore we should not lift up our horns on high, Phil. 2.
nor speak with a stiff neck; but we should labor to have the same mind in
us, which was in Christ Jesus; and learn of him to be meek and lowly in
heart. Matthew. 11.
It was an humble speech of King David, when he said, I am a worm and no man,
a very shame, Psalm. 22.6.
or scorn of men, and the outcast of the people: He was lowly in his own
eyes; and did imitate herein our Savior Christ; who (as I showed you before)
was not only contented, to be made a true man, but also in the judgment of
the World, to become no better then one of the basest of the people; so rare a
pattern of humility, did he leave unto us: And yet now as the Poet says,
Maxima quaeque domus seruis est plena superbis.

How far we are from true humility.
Every man is full of pride, and as the proverb is, every Jack will be a
Gentleman.

Proijcit ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba. It is strange to see how we strout
our selves, and speak great swelling words, magnifying our selves, by
contemning others, swaggering them out of countenance, and thinking our selves
to be gods and not men, and with the Church of Laodicea, to be rich and want
nothing, to be wise and valiant; Revel. 3.17.
and neither our manifold sins, which are as the sands of the Sea, nor our
miserable estate, which is most frail and feeble; so weak, that a little
sickness will even us down with the dust; can humble us before the mighty
hand of God: so far are we from learning true humility. And,

Thirdly, we see from hence our Saviors love, Thirdly, the great love of
Christ. Bernard ser. 1. de Epiphan.
and his abundant great charity toward us; for, quanto pro me vilior tanto
mihi charior; The viler and baser he made himself for me, the dearer he showed
that he loved me; but how could he ever debase himself more then he did? not
only to appear for a time in the visible shape of a man, but also to assume
for ever, the true nature of man? and, though we be loath to take his sweet and
easy yoke upon us, yet he willingly took our heavy and bitter yoke on him:
for he took our infirmities, and carried all our sorrows: Esaias 53.4.
and therefore, O thou sweet Jesus, that use to clothe thy self with the
clouds, as with a garment, and now clothest thy self with my natural
nakedness, that I might be adorned with thy supernatural riches; we beseech
thee inflame our spirits with the love of thee, that nothing but thy self may
be dear unto us, because it so pleased thee, to vilify thy self for us.

Thirdly, in respect of our selves, we may from this doctrine of the words
incarnation, collect unto our selves, these singular comforts: As,

First, generally, what fruits and benefits we have, What great benefits we
receive by the incarnation of the Word.
from this incarnation of the Son of God; Beneficia nimis copiosa, multa and
magna, priuata and positiua; and they are exceeding great blessings,
innumerable and inualuable; as repentance, remission of our sins, Grace,
Faith, Righteousness, Wisdom, Sanctification and Redemption; and in a word,
whatsoever blessing, grace, or goodness we have, we have the same from this
incarnate Word; for, Collos. 2.3.
in him are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; and from his
fullness we all receive, and grace for grace. John 1.16.
For neither his Deity only, Quia non debuit, Because he ought not; nor his
humanity only, Quia non potuit; Aug. c 12. hom. de ^vibus.
Because that could not; was sufficient to be a Mediator betwixt God and man:
Sed inter diuinitatem solam, and humanitatem solam, mediatrix est diuina
humanitas and humana diuinitas Christi; but between the bare humanity, and the
bare divinity, the divine humanity, and the humane divinity of our Savior
Christ does mediate for us unto God; and therefore by reason of this
Incarnation of the Word God, we are made Kings and Priests, and a peculiar
people unto God, Revel. 1.7. How Christ has performed all things for us.
even for ever. For this Incarn^^e Word, this God and Man Christ Jesus, has
performed all things that are necessary for our salvation; he lived for us, he
dyed for us, he rose again for us, and he became the Physician and the
medicine both of our original and actual sins: For against the corruption,
and guilt of original sin, the pure birth and undefiled conception of
Christ, is a sufficient salve; and against the guilt of actual sin; the
Sanctity, and innocent life of Christ, that was without any spot of sin, is
a sufficient remedy; and against the punishment, either of original or of
actual sins, the most precious death of Christ is a sufficient satisfaction;
Quia iniusta mors iustam vicit mortem, Aug. ser. 101. de tempore.
and liberauit nos just, quia pro nobis occisus est unjust; Because his
unjust death, has justly overcome our death, and he has most justly delivered
us, because he was most unjustly slain for us. That good examples, are means
to further godliness.


Besides, the Word being made flesh, we have his life, as a most perfect
pattern to frame our lives thereby; for we are all like Apes apt to imitate;
and we say the life of our Minister would more move us to godliness, then his
doctrine; and no doubt, but it would do much to them that hate not their
Minister, because he will not be as deboyst as themselves: for a good example
to good men, is as a light set upon a Candlestick, that all they which come
into the house, John 3.19.
may see the light; although to evil men, Christ an infallible pattern for
men to imitate.
it moves them to the more indignation and wrath; because it makes their sins
appear the more exceedingly sinful, and will be a just witness against them
in the day of wrath; for that seeing the light of a good life, shining amongst
them, they hated the same, because their deeds were evil: And therefore, if we
would be led by examples, and would not err; let us lay the the example of
Christ before our face: for this is a true looking glass, that is ever laid
open before every man, and will never deceive nor flatter any man: and it is
not only a pattern for our practice, but the continual inspection and
looking into the same, is also in some measure an efficient cause, Cyrillus l.
4. c. 5.
and impulsive motive to incite us to the imitation thereof, and to the
performance of all godliness: because Christ is the giver of all such graces,
whereby men do live a godly life: as the Apostle shows. 1 Cor. 4.7. That we
may boldly come to God.


Moreover, Christ having united his Deity with our humanity, and having so
well tempered his Majesty with humility we may the more confidently and boldly
draw near unto the throne of grace; for that as his Deity confounds, so his
humanity comfort our faint and feeble souls; and as his Majesty amazeth,
so his humility animateth us to come unto him; and to seek of him whatsoever
is needful for us.

And further, this Word being made flesh; Naturam humanam nobilitauit; He has
so innobled our humane nature, (as Saint Augustine says) that we, which were
worms and no men, are now, (...), pertakers of the Divine nature, and as it
were Gods and no worms: so that now, 2 Pet. 1.4. That we attain to a far
better state in Christ then we lost in Adam. Bernard ser. 1. de Epiphan.
our nature being repaired, it is exalted far above the dignity of its first
original: and it has obtained to a far better state in Christ, then it had,
and lost in Adam; because Adam was but is the image of God, but we are joined
and made one with God; as Saint Bernard says: and therefore, foelix culpa,
quae talem meruit redemptorem; happy was that fault (as it happened unto us)
which brought forth such a Savior; to be made partaker of our flesh, that we
might be partakers of his Spirit, as Saint Gregory speaks.

Secondly, and more particularly, That both our bodies and our souls shall be
saved.
in that he was made a true and a perfect man, consisting both of body and
soul, we may assure our selves of the salvation both of body and soul; for as
our sins deserved damnation unto both; so the assuming of both by this Word,
has brought deliverance unto them both.

And in that he was made subject unto all our humane frailties, passions, and
miseries, being made in all things like unto us, sin only excepted, Heb.
2.17. c. 4 15.
we may (as I have already touched before) conceive thereby an exceeding
comfort: for as Queen Dido said unto the distressed Trojans; Haud ignara mali,
miseris succurrere disco.

Experience of miseries has taught me to succor all those that are
miserable; even so, Christ having felt all infirmities, We may be sure of
comfort in distress.
and suffered more miseries then any of us can endure, will be merciful and
compassionate toward us, when he sees us in distress; for, he became like
unto us, that he might be merciful unto us; and he was tempted and suffered,
that he might be able to help and succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.17, 18.
says the Apostle: And therefore, seeing we have not an High Priest, which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but is a pitiful and a
compassionate Redeemer, if we be inuolued in miseries, and do suffer all
kinds of infirmities, wants, scorns, sickness, pains, or whatsoever else,
let us go boldly unto the Throne of Grace, and beg confidently his mercy and
grace, Heb. 4.16.
to help us in the time of need; for as he which in our Creation formed us,
according to the Image of God, was contented now by his incarnation, to take
upon himself the Image of man; So we which by our transgressions made our
selves like unto the Devil, shall be most happy and blessed; if as Christ
became like unto us in flesh, so we do endeavor to become like unto him in the
graces of his most blessed Spirit. And so much for the second point, that he
was made, Flesh.

BRANCH III.
CHAP. I. Of the distinction of the two Natures of Christ, how each of them
remains entire, inconfused; and the objections made against this truth
sufficiently answered.
Branch 3.
THirdly, We are to consider, how this Word was made, and still is, Flesh; which
manner may be collected out of this word (...): He was made Flesh. Touching
which, we must well observe these two special points, Two things to be
considered.
1. The distinction 2. The union
of the two natures, the Word and the Flesh; that is, the Deity and the
humanity of our Savior Christ.

First, The distinction of these two Natures, is most excellently showed by
Saint Paul, where he says, That in Christ there are two distinct natures.
Romans 1.3.4.
that Christ was made man, (...), according to the flesh, and declared mightily
to be the Son of God; (...), according to the Spirit of Sanctification: for
that according to his humane nature only, he was made of the seed of David,
which according to his divine nature was declared still to be the eternal
Son of God; So that here Saint Paul shows two natures to be in Christ; that
is, his divine and his humane nature, still remaining entire after his
incarnation: because, as he was made only of the seed of David, in respect
of his manhood, (for that his Godhead was not made of the seed of David;) so
was he declared only to be the Son of God, in respect of his Godhead; for
that his manhood was not the omnipotent, and the eternal Son of God.

But against this place of the Apostle, Ob. The most blasphemous subtilties of
Heretics, to deny the truth of the two natures of Christ.
the Somosatenian Heretics do affirm, that Saint Paul means not hereby,
to show a twofold nature to be in Christ, but a twofold nativity; i. e. a
carnal and a spiritual, which we find to be in every faithful Christian:
for to be made of the seed of David (say they) according to the Flesh, does
show his carnal generation, and to be declared to be the Son of God
according to the Spirit of Sanctification, is to show his spiritual
regeneration.

The first they seek to confirm, out of those places of Scriptures, where the
Apostle says, The Jews were his Kinsmen, according to the flesh; and where
he calls them, Romans 9.3.
Israel according to the flesh: for herein (say they) the Apostle means by
these words, according to the flesh, nothing else, 1 Cor. 10.18.
but according to the vulgar and common sort of generation; And therefore to be
made of the seed of David, according to the flesh, is nothing else, but to be
made of him, according to his carnal generation. And,

The second they seek to confirm, out of the words of Saint John, where he
says, That the faithful are not born of blood, John 1.13.
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God; And
therefore, as these phrases and limitations, according to the flesh, It is a
horrible thing to say, that all those phrases which are true of vs' must be
likewise true of Christ, in the same sense considered. Romans 1.2. Sol.
and according to the spirit, do signify the double nativity of every
faithful man, and do no ways prove a double nature to be in any man: Even so
in Christ they signify the same things, that is, two natiuities; but not two
natures.

To this I answer first, that this phrase (...), according to the flesh,
neither in the place urged by me, nor in any other place alleged by them, does
signify the common and carnal generation; but does imply a difference and
distinction betwixt kindred according to the flesh, and kindred according to
the spirit: for otherwise all Israel was in respect of their common generation,
kindred according to the flesh; And therefore the meaning of the Apostle is, to
show, that although all of them were the children of Abraham, according to the
flesh, yet that but few of them were the Children of promise.

Secondly, I say, that the miraculous and singular birth of Christ, is not
insinuated so much in the words, according to the flesh, as it is plainly
showed in the word made; for the same being in the original (...), and not
(...); it does most apparently show, the extraordinary making of his flesh; not
after the usual and common sort of carnal generation by any humane seed, but
by a supernatural generation, through the virtuall operation of the Holy
Ghost, Tertul. l. cont. Prax. Iraeneus l. 3. c. 32. Vigilius l. 5. contra
Eutychet. Aug. l. 1. c. 5. de trinitate.
as Tertullian, Irenaeus, Vigilius, Saint Augustine, and others have observed.

Thirdly, I say, that there is a great deal of difference betwixt the twofold
generation of the faithful Saints, and the twofold generation of Christ; for
when they are said to be borne of the flesh, and of the Spitit, we confess,
that not two natures are thereby signified, That Christ was so borne, free from
all sin, that he needed no further sanctification or regeneration.
but two beginnings of their diverse births: But this cannot be said of Christ,
because he was so sanctified in the first moment of his conception, that he
needed not any second regeneration; neither is he said to be borne of the
spirit, in respect of any regeneration, as we are; but declared to be the Son
of God, according to the Spirit: that is, manifested to be a true God,
according, or in respect of his own sanctifying Spirit; that is, his Godhead.
And therefore, though such a limitation might prove a double generation in the
rest of Gods Children; yet this cannot show a double generation of him in whom
there is no double generation, in respect of his manhood; but it must needs
show plainly two natures to be in Christ: for all other faithful men are the
Sons of God, by adoption and grace; but Christ is the natural and the
essential Son of God his Father; He being the brightness of his glory, and
the engraven form of his person: Heb. 1.3.
And all other men are so borne, that except they be borne again, they cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; John 3.5.
But Christ was so conceived and borne, that there was neither need, nor any
possible way of any further sanctification of his person; because that in him
dwelled the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

But this truth of the two natures of Christ, may be confirmed by most apparent
and unanswerable arguments; for the Jews said, that he did not only break
the Sabboath, but also said, John 5.18.
that God was his Father, making himself equal unto God: And Christ himself
said, I and my Father are all one; John 10.30.
And therefore the Pharisees did rightly collect, that Christ by these words had
affirmed himself to be a God: And yet he says, John 14.28.
My Father is greater then I; but it cannot possibly be, that Christ according
to the same nature, should be equal, nay, one with the Father, and yet
inferior to the Father: And therefore it must needs follow, that he has one
nature, according to which he is equal to his Father, and another nature, in
respect whereof he is inferior to his Father.

Besides, our Savior says, Before Abraham was, I am; John 8.58.
And yet Saint Luke says, He was borne in the days of Augustus Caesar; Luc.
2.7.
but it cannot be, that, Idem secundum idem, The same one, in the same respect,
should be before Abraham, and after Abraham: All Orthodoxe antiquity confessed
two natures to be in Christ.
And therefore he must needs have two natures in him, according to one
whereof, he was before Abraham, and according to the other, he was after
Abraham.

And further, Vigilius l. 2. cont Eutych. Philip. 2.
we find the same confirmed and confessed by all antiquity, for Vigilius
writing upon those words of the Apostle, who being in the form of God, took
upon him the form of a servant, says; Mirum est, etc. It is a wonder to
think, why some are afraid to say, that Christ had two natures, when as the
Apostle says, that he had two forms: and the great oecumenicall Council of
Calcedon, wherein were 630 Bishops, Council. Calced. Act. 5. in Symb. fidei.
left this confession unto all posterity; Confitemur in nouissimis diebus,
filium Dei vnigenitum in duabus naturis inconfuse, immutabiliter, indiuise,
inseparabiliter agnoscendum, nunquam sublata differentia propter vnionem: We
confess, that the only begotten Son of God, which came in the last days to
be incarnate, is now to be acknowledged, to be, and to subsist of two natures,
(i. e. Divine and humane) inconfused, immutably, inseperably, and vndiuidedly
united together; and that the differences or distinction of these natures, is
never to be abolished and taken away, by reason of the union of the same.

All the actions of Christ do manifestly show the two natures of Christ.
And so in very deed, we find all the actions of our Savior Christ while he
lived here on earth, to make inanswerable proof of the same truth: for, as
Saint Augustine says, Iacebat Christus quantum ad carnem mortuus in sepulchro,
mortuos suscitans in inferno, vitam tribuens vniuersis in caelo: Christ
according to the flesh lay dead in his grave, yet did he then in Hell ( i. e.
in respect of his soul) according to his Godhead, raise the dead here on
earth, Aug. sup. Mat. 5. contra Foelicem.
and give life to all them that were in heaven; Quia vt nec mundum dimittens ad
coelum ascendit, ita nec coelum deserens venit ad nos; sed vno atque eodem
tempore totum totus impleuit: Because that as now he has not left the world,
though he be ascended into Heaven; so then he did not leave the Heavens, when
he came to be made flesh on earth; but was wholly at one and the selfsame
time, in all places, replenishing and filling all things; And Gregory
Nazianzen does most excellently show, how the properties of both his natures
concurred together, and might be easily discerned in him, from the very
beginning of his days, Luc. 2.7.
to the last end of his being here on earth: for he is borne of his mother, and
wrapped in swaddling clouts, as being a man, but a star does manifest him,
Matthew. 2.11.
and the wise men adore him as being a God; Matthew. 3.16.
he is baptized in Jordan, as being a man, but the Holy Ghost descends upon him
from Heaven, as being a God; he is tempted of the Devil, Mar. 1.12.
as he is a man, but he ouercomes and expels the Devils, John 4.6.
as he is a God; he travels and is thirsty, he is hungry and is weary, as he
is a man, but he refreshes the weary, he feeds the hungry, John 7.
and he gives drink unto the thirsty, as he is a God; Matthew. 24.26.
he sleeps in the ship, and his Disciples awake him, as he is a man, but he
rebukes the winds, and stilleth the rage of the Seas, Matthew. 8.20.
as he is a God; he is poor and needy, and has not an house to put his head
in, as he is a man, but he is rich and mighty and cannot be contained in the
heavens, as he is a God; he his sorrowful and sad, he weeps, and he prays,
as he is a man, but he hears our prayers, and comfort the sorrowful,
Matthew. 26.
as he is a God; he is subject to infirmities, as he is a man, John 14.
but he heals all our infirmity, as he is a God; he is whipped and
crucified, as he is a man, but he renteth the veil of the Temple, Esaias 53.
and causes the Sun to hide his face for shame to see him crucified, as he
is a God; he says, Eloi, Eloi, Lamasabachthani; My God, my God, Matthew. 27.46.
why have thou forsaken me? as he is a man, but he says unto the thief, This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise, as he is a God; Luke 23.43.
he dies and is buried, and lies in his grave, as he is a man, but he
overcomes Death, and destroys the Devils, Matt. 27.50.60
and raises himself unto life again, as he is a God; and being risen, he
appears unto his Disciples, and eats and talks with them, Luke 24. v 15. 31.
as he is a man, but he vanishes out of their sight, and ascends up unto
Heaven, as he is a God, and so now; the Heavens do contain him, and he
sits there on the right hand of God, Psalm. 68.4.
as he is a man, but he sustaineth the Heavens, and rides upon the same, as
upon an horse, as he is a God; and so Fulgentius says, Fulgent. ser. de
Epiphan.
Iste puer in praesepi quidem paruulus collocatur, sed magnus in coelo
mirabiliter operatur: permittit se manibus in terra portari, sed praecipit sibi
coelestia famulari: That little child is laid in a cratch, i. e. as he is a
man, but he does wonderfully work in heaven, i. e. as he is a God; and he
suffers himself to be carried in their arms, as he is a man, but he
supporteth all things, and commands all the host of Heaven, to do him
service, as he is a God.

And therefore it is most apparent, that the person of Christ so subsisteth; Vt
cum in homine Christo, videtur veritas hominis, Idem de persona Christi l. 2.
ad Tamrisi.
in eodem Deo Christo, cognoscatur paternae veritas deitatis; as when we see
the verity of the Manhood in the Man Christ Jesus, we must know and
acknowledge the eternal Deity, in the same God Christ Jesus: because he is
still a perfect God, and a perfect man, and of these two natures subsisting in
one person inconfused.

But against this, Eutyches and his followers, What the Eutychian heretics
say against this truth.
have and do most impiously affirm, that in Christ after his Incarnation,
there is but one only nature, made of the Word, and of the flesh by the
conversion of the Deity into the humanity; because the Evangelist says, that
the Word was made flesh, even as when the Water was made Wine, it was no more
Water, but was presently converted into Wine; Nazian. in Ep. ad Clidonium.
or else by the conversion of the flesh into the Deity; because Gregory
Nazianzen, and Gregory Nyssen say, that Caro Christi est deificata, the flesh
of Christ is now deified; and to confirm the same, they do object;

Ob. 1. Council. Call. act. 1. post Ep. Cyrilli.
First, the authority of some ancient Fathers, alleged in the council of
Calcedon; for Eustachius affirms that Saint Cyrill writ, Non oportere
intelligere in mysterio incarnationis duas naturas, sed vnam naturam dei verbi
incarnatam; that we must not understand in the mystery of the Incarnation two
natures to be in Christ, but one nature of the word God incarnate and made
flesh.

Sol. How the Word may be said to be incarnate, or made flesh. James 1.17.
I answer that the nature of the Word may be said to be incarnate, if it be
rightly understood; i. e. Non per conuersionem in carnem, sed per vnionem cum
carne in vna hypostasi; Not by the conversion of it into flesh, which could not
possibly be; because God is immutable and without any shadow of turning, but by
the uniting of the same, with the flesh in the same subsistence; so the words
of Nazianzen and Nyssen do only show, the union and conjunction of the flesh
with the Dietie; and not the conversion of the manhood into the Godhead: and
for the words of Eustachius alleged out of S. Cyrill, I say that they be none
of the words of Eustachius, but of Dioscorus, or some other Eutychian
Heretic, that has most impiously and falsely inserted that sentence, among
the words of Eustachius.

Ob. 1.
Secondly they do object, that S. John says not, that the Word did assume
flesh, but was made flesh; and therefore as the water that is made wine, has
no more two natures, but only one; because the nature of the water, is
converted into the nature of the Wine; so the Word, though before his
incarnation, he had a nature different from the flesh; yet now being made
flesh, he has only the same nature with the flesh.

Sol.
To this Theodoret answers, that the flesh was assumed of the word; and he
proves the same out of these Scriptures, where Saint Paul says, Phil. 2.7.
that Christ being in the form of God, did take upon him the form of a
servant; And again, where he says, that he took not on him the nature of
Angels, Heb. 2.16.
but he took on him the seed of Abraham; And again, Saint John himself, in
this very Chapter and verse, immediately after he had said, that the Word was
made flesh, does add; That Christ did assume our flesh.
(that we should not think it to be made by the conversion of the Word into
the flesh;) Et habitauit in nobis; And he dwelt in us; for this is all one as
if he had said, the Word was made flesh, because that having assumed and united
our flesh unto himself, he began now to remain and to dwell in our flesh for
ever.

But the Holy Ghost foreseeing that Nestorius would affirm Christ to consist
of two persons, Why the Evangelist says the Word was made flesh.
as if the divine person had assumed the humane person, (which is most
blasphemous) therefore he directed the Pen of the Evangelist to write, the Word
was made flesh, and not to say, the Word assumed the flesh, to show that he is
no more twain but one Christ.

And yet least we should fall into the error of Eutyches, to say that Christ
after his incarnation had but one nature, because he had but one person, he
adds, and he dwelt in us: to show unto us that he is not so made one, by the
conversion of either nature into the other, but that still each nature
remains whole and entire, without confounding either the substance, or the
properties of either nature, for the humane nature of Christ is not deified by
the conversion of the flesh into the nature of the word, Aug. de heresibus
here is. 55.
nor the Word made flesh by the conversion of the same into the nature of flesh
(as Apolinaris taught;) but the flesh is said to be deified, How the flesh is
said to be deified, and the Word incarnate.
and the Deity is said to be incarnate and made flesh, by reason of the union
and conjunction of the flesh with the word in one person; even as the soul and
body remaining still two intyre natures, without the conversion of either into
the nature of other, are united together, to make one person, i. e. one man:
and therefore Saint Augustine says, that his divine nature was not consumed,
when his humane nature was assumed: Humana quippe natura accessit, diuina non
recessit, homo factus, Aug. ep. 120.
naturam suscipiendo nostram, non amittendo suam; Because the humane nature was
adjoined, and the Deity was not abolished; but he was made man by taking our
nature upon him, and not by leesing or casting his own nature from him; How
Christ notwithstandin^ his incarnation remains still what he was before.
and the duine Poet Prudentius says. I Would manet quod semper erat, quod non erat
esse incipiens.

What he was, he always is; but is otherwise for our bliss; And so the common
distich has it.

Sum quod eram, nec eram quod sum, nunc dicar vtrumque: ignoras, nisi me stirpe
ab vtraque tenes. I am what I was, but I was not, as I am: for now I am both
God and man, and thou know me not, if thou know not, me to be of both
these natures: Nazian orat 3. de Theolog.
and so Gregory Nazianzen says, Permansit quod erat, and assumpsit quod non
erat; He remained what he was; and he assumed what he was not; because the
Word was made flesh; Non deposita, sed seposita maiestate; Not by cancelling or
laying away, but as it were by concealing and laying aside, for a time, the
most glorious appearance of his divine Majesty: Emyssen. hom. 2. de natiuit.
as Eusebius Emyssenus does most briefly and excellently declare.

How one thing may be made another thing three ways.
And that we might the better understand, how this Word was made flesh,
Euthymius shows, that one thing may be made another thing three manner of
ways.

First, When one thing is turned, and changed into another thing, John 3.9.
as when the meat that we eat, is turned into blood; the milk into cheese;
Genesis 19.26.
the water into wine; Lots wife into a pillar of Salt; and such like; and thus
the Word was not made flesh; because without any change, he remained still,
what he was before.

Secondly, when some accident only is added unto the substance; as when the
brass or stone, or any other metal, is made a statue, or receives any other
impression: And thus likewise, the word is not made flesh, because the diety is
incapable of any other form but the form of GOD, and no accident can be in
GOD.

The Word is made flesh, not by changing either nature into the other, but by
uniting the one to the other.
Thirdly, when one substance is adjoined unto another, and yet is not
transferred or changed into the nature of the other; as a Soldier putting on
his armor, is made an armed man; or a man wearing on his garments, is no more
a naked but a clothed man: And so the Word is now clothed with our flesh, the
same Word, but after another manner; before, only subsisting of the Deity;
now, of both natures; being made flesh, not as water is made wine, but as Aaron
was made Priest, and David King, not by changing him into a Priest or King, but
by beginning to be what they were not; and not leaving to be what they were:
or, because this does not so fully show it, the Priestly or Kingly dignity,
being but an accidental title conferred upon these persons, as a naked man is
clothed and made an apparelled man; or a Soldier harnessed, and made an armed
man, when all his harness is put upon him; as Theodoret, Theodoret in Dialog.
Saint Augustine, and others do declare. And so you see that in our Savior
Christ, the two natures do still remain entire, inconfused.

CHAP. II. Of the union of these two natures of Christ, in one and the
selfsame person, and some objections answered.
SEcondly, touching the union of these two natures, the Deity and the
Humanity, we must know, that although this eternal Word, the Son of God,
was so made flesh, i. e. a perfect man, of the seed of David, as that still
each nature remains entire and inconfused; yet we must not imagine that he is
therefore two sons or two persons (as Nestorius thought;) but that he is one
only person, consisting of both these natures: And because this point of the
union of these two natures, is not of small moment, but is a point full of
comfort, much opposed, and of great difficulty; I will divide all that I mean
to say concerning the same unto these three principal heads.

First, The truth hereof shall be confirmed, Three things handled concerning
the union of both natures in Christ.
and the objections of our adversaries shall be answered.

Secondly, The manner of this union, wherein it consists, shall be showed.

Thirdly, The chief benefits and effects thereof, shall be declared.

First, for the union of these two natures: A very good simily of Justin
Martyr, to express the manner of the union of the two natures in Christ.
the Word and the Flesh: Justin Martyr says, Sicut post vnitionem primigenij
luminis cum solari corpore, etc. as after the collection, and the unition of
the light, with the body of the Sun; no man can pluck them asunder, neither
does any man call the one, a part, the Sun, and the other the light, but both
of them jointly together we term the Sun: even so after the unition of our
flesh, with this true light the Word. No man will call the Word apart, to be
one Son of God, and the Son of man to be another: but he will understand
both these together, to be one, and the selfsame Christ; as by the name of
Sun, we understand both the light, and the body which contains the light:
and as the light and body of the Sun are two several natures; so there be in
our Savior Christ, two distinct and several natures; Altera nostra, altera
nobis superior: The one is ours, the other is Gods; and as the light is
actually in the Sun, so that none can separate it, from that body wherein it
is fixed, and contained; Hoc exemplo diuinae vnitionis adducto, nos ad magis
cognitionem confugimus, si non omnino ipsa veritatem assequuti, certe quandam
similitudinem quae p^escrutantibus sufficiat. Justin Martyr. de recta confess.
sieve de coessent. trinit.
yet we may easily discern the nature, and the propriety of each one from the
other; Sic in vno filio dei, vniuersam vim nemo seperauerit ab vnica filietate,
naturae tame^ eius proprietatem, ratione quiuis discreuerit: So in that one
Son of God, no man can separate his whole virtue, i. e. of the Word and
Flesh, from that only Sonneship, and yet in our understandings we may discern
the different propriety of each nature. And so (says the Father,) By this
example, we fly unto the more holy cogitation of the divine union of these two
natures: and if hereby we be not altogether able to attain unto the truth
thereof, (as what can be fully sufficient to express so great a mystery?) yet
certainly we have herein a most excellent similitude, which will greatly help,
and contentedly suffice the godly and moderate searchers of this truth.

The unity of Christ his person most clearly proved from Scriptures.
But indeed the holy Scriptures do of all other writings, most fully and
clearly show that these two natures do make but one person in our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ: for when Christ asked his Apostles, whom do men say that
I the Son of man am? Saint Peter answered, that he was Christ, the Son of
the living God; Matthew. 16.13.
therefore he is but one person; because Saint Peter confesses the Son of
man to be the Son of the living God: Verse 16.
And the Angel said unto the Virgin, that holy thing which shall be borne of
thee, Luke 1.35.
shall be called the Son of God: therefore he is but one person, because he
which was born of the Virgin, was and is none other, but he that is truly
called and is the true Son of God: And Saint Paul speaking of Christ, as he
was the eternal Son of God (...), Romans 2.3.
in respect of his Godhead, and as he was the son of David, (...), in respect
of his Manhood, yet does he not say of his Sons, as of two; but of his Son
made and declared to be his Son; to show unto us, that as before his making,
so now after his making, he is still but one Son, one person of the two
distinct natures subsisting. John 20.31.


And Saint John more plainly says, that these things are written, that you
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God: that is, that Jesus
the Son of Mary, is that same Christ which is the Son of God: And in his
first Epistle he does almost nothing but confirm this truth; that is, 1 John
1.1.
that there is but one person in the God and man Christ Jesus. For Chap. 1. he
says, that which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have
seen with our eyes; therefore he must needs be but one person: for to see with
their eyes that word which was from the beginning, could no ways be, but only
in respect of the unity of the person. So Chap. 2. he says, Chap. 2. v. 22.
Who is a liar but he that denies Jesus to be the Christ? So Chap. 3. he
says, Chap. 3. v. 16.
In this we perceive the love of God, that he laid down his life for us. So
Chap. 4. he says, Chap. 4. v. 3.
Every spirit, Qui soluit Iesum, which loses or divides Jesus, i. e. to make
two persons of him, is not of God, and so in many other places, he does most
plainly show, that the eternal word, and our humane nature, united unto the
same word, is but one and the selfsame Christ, i. e. one Christ, one person.

And this is confessed by all antiquity; All our Creeds and all antiquity
confesses the same truth, touching unity of Christ his person.
for in the Apostles Creed, we say; that we believe in Jesus Christ his only
Son our Lord, which was conceived of the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin
Mary; and therefore he is but one person, because he which is said to be the
only Son of God, is said also to be borne of the Virgin Mary: the same is
said in the Nicen Creed: and in the Creed of Athanasius it is said, that
although Christ be both God and Man, yet is he no more twain but one Christ:
and that not by confounding of the substances, but by the unity of person, i.
e. by the uniting of both natures into one person: What should I rehearse any
more? for the third Council of Ephesus, the great Council of Chalcedon, the
Council of Lateran, and all the ancient Orthodoxe Fathers; as Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, Saint Basil, Saint Nazianzen, Saint Damascen, Saint Hillary, Saint
Ambrose, Saint Hierome, Saint Augustine, and the rest of them, have most truly
confessed, and most learnedly confirmed this truth; that although Christ has
two natures, the Word, and the Flesh, yet do these two make but one person,
one Son of God, one Savior of men.

What the Heretics have conceived, and most impiously thought, concerning the
person of Christ.
But against this, Cerinthus, and certain of the Pelagian Heretics, and
afterward Nestorius, seperating Jesus from Christ, or rather Christ from
Himself; have affirmed that Jesus was but mere man, having not only a humane
nature, but a humane person; and afterward to be made Christ, at the time of
his baptism, when the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a Dove;
and therefore they conclude, that as he consists of two natures, so he is
likewise two persons, which notwithstanding may be said to be one, in respect
of their co-habitation, affection, operation, and participation, as hereafter I
shall further show unto you.

Destroy this Temple, when he spoke of his humanity, and therefore the God
Christ, John 2.9.
and the man Christ, are two several persons: for he does not say, destroy
me, but destroy this Temple, and I will rear it up in three days: to show
unto us that the Temple and the dweller in the Temple, or the raiser up of the
Temple, are not the same, but diverse persons.

Sol.
To this I answer briefly, that this alleged instance may well prove two
natures to be in Christ, but not two persons; for the soul of man is said to
dwell in the body, as in a tabernacle, because the nature of the soul is
different from the nature of the body, and yet man has not two, but one
person, which consists of both natures, i. e. soul and body: for Job says,
that men dwell in houses of Clay, Job 4.19. 2 Cor. 5.1.
and Saint Paul says, if this earthly house of our Tabernable be dissolved.
And therefore Saint Chrysostom upon these words of Saint John, and he dwelt in
us, does most truly gather that in Christ there are two natures; but from
these, or from any other places, it can never be proved, that in him there are
two persons.

Son of Mary had an Angel to comfort him, Matthew. 27.46. John 12.27.
and said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And again, Father,
Saluifica me ex hac hora: Save me from this hour, and such like speeches,
which are not consonant, and agreeable to the Son of God; and therefore the
Son of Mary is one different and another person from the Son of GOD.

To this I answer with S. Cyrill, Sol.
that as there are many things which do agree with him, according to the form
of God, which cannot be agreeable to him, according to the form of a servant;
so there are many things that do agree with him, according to the form of a
servant, which do not agree with the Son of God absolutely considered;
because he is both, a true God, and a true man, so united together, as that the
properties of neither nature are confounded; (as hereafter shall be showed:
Cyrillus deff^nt. 4. Anath. contra. Theodor.
) and therefore all such sayings, and allegations which are said of him, or be
referred unto him, in respect of one nature, which are not properly agreeable
to the other nature; do only show, and most rightly prove two natures, but
not two persons, to be in our Savior Christ.

CHAP. III. Of the manner of the union of the two natures, and wherein this
union chiefly consists.
SEcondly, Wherein the Heretics have affirmed the union of both natures in
Christ to consist.
for the manner of this union of these two natures in one person, or wherein
chiefly it consists, herein rests the greatest difficulty: For,

First, the Nestorians and their followers say: that both these natures are
said to be one, by the unity of, 1. Co-habitation. 2. Will and affection. 3.
Operation. 4. Participation.


First, by the unity of Co-habitation, because the Word dwelled in the man
Christ, as in his choicest House and Temple, accocding to that saying of the
Evangelist; and he dwelt in us. John 1.14.


Secondly, by the unity of will and affection, because the will of Christ was
always agreeable to the will of God: and this they do illustrate by the
example of Man and Wife, which though they be two persons, Math. 19.5.
yet are they said to be one flesh, in regard of their marriage knot, and
especially in respect of their unanimous hearts; so the Son of God, and the
Son of Mary, are two persons (say they) and yet may be said to be one Christ,
in regard of that indissoluble spiritual conjunction, and affection that is
betwixt them.

Thirdly, By the unity of operation, because the man Christ, was the
Instrument, which the Word God used for the effecting of all those great works
that he did, while he walked here on Earth.

Fourthly, By the unity of participation, because the Word God, did impart unto
the man Christ, his name and dignity, that he should be called God, and the
Son of God, and should be worshipped of all Creatures, not for his own sake,
but for his sake to whom he was thus united.

How falsely the Heretics affirm the union of the two natures to consist in
the aforesaid points.
But how false and fained are all these subtle infernal distinctions, to
misteach the manner and the matter, wherein the true union of these natures
chiefly consists, it will easily appear, if we do but observe, that all
this may, and does agree with all the Saints, and faithful servants of God:
for,

First, God dwells in his Saints, as in his Temples; for, We are the Temples
of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16. 1 Cor. 6.19.
and the Spirit of God dwells in us, says the Apostle.

Secondly, The Saints are one with God, by will and affection: 1 Cor. 6.17.
Math. 6.10.
for the Apostle shows us plainly, that he which is joined unto the Lord, is
one spirit; and wishes rather, that Gods will may be done, then his own; as
they do daily in their prayers: Thy will be done.

Thirdly, That the Saints are Gods Instruments, (as be many times the wicked
also) whereby God works many excellent things, the same Apostle shows,
where he says; That although there be diversities of operations, 1 Cor. 12.6.
Romans 15.19.
yet, it is the same God which works all in all.

Fourthly, That the Saints are called, The Sons of God, and some of them also
said to be Gods, 1 John 3.1.
by the participation of many graces and titles which God has given unto them,
it is most plain; Psalm. 82.6.
for, I said you are Gods, and the Children of the most High: And so the
Apostle shows, Gal. 4.6.7. Gal. 4.6.7.
and so in many other places: And therefore seeing all the faithful servants
of God, may be truly said to be united unto God, in respect of the cohabitation
of God in them, and of their will and affection agreeable to the will of God,
and of the working of God in them, and the bestowing of his names, titles,
dignities, and graces upon them; and that the union of this Word with our
Flesh: i. e. of the Divine Nature with the humanity, is far otherwise, then
the union of the Saints with God; it must needs follow, that although it be
true, that there is a most perfect unity of cohabitation, affection, operation,
and participation betwixt the two Natures of Christ; yet this is not all, but
the union of them consists in a far more excellent respect then any, and
all of these. And therefore,

Secondly, Brentius, Smidelinus, What the Lutherans teach concerning the union
of the two natures of Christ.
and the rest of their Lutheran followers, do affirm, this union of both
these Natures, to consist in the communication of the properties of the Deity,
to the humanity of Christ; so as they are really transferred, and the humanity
invested with the divine properties: And therefore they do conclude, that in
respect of this real communicating, and transferring of attributes, the
manhood of Christ is omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent, and so forth.

But how gr^sse this error is, and how derogatory to the truth of Christian
Doctrine, it will easily appear, if we do but consider those intolerable
absurdities that of necessity must needs follow the same: for,

First, The absurdities that must needs follow the Lutheran Doctrine.
The Father and the Son should be hypostatically united one to the other, and
so be made one person; for that it is most certain, (as themselves must, and
do confess) that the Father has, and does communicate all his essential
attributes, and properties unto the Son, and therefore if the union of these
two Natures consists in the communicating of properties, the Father and the
Son must be united into one person; but this is most horribly absurd:
Therefore the other,

Secondly, The whole Trinity should be incarnate, because all the essential
attributes of the Deity, are common to the whole Trinity, and to each person of
the Trinity.

Thirdly, The two natures of Christ could not be hypostatically united, because
there are certain divine properties, which cannot be said to be communicated
to the humanity of Christ, as to be increated, to be infinite, to want
beginning of time, to be Ens independens, an independent being; and certain
things, which Christ in respect of his Flesh had not before his passion, and
resurrection: as to be impassible, immortal, and such like.

Fourthly, If this union consisted in the communicating of the properties, then
this transfusion of them must be reciprocal; that is, as the divine properties
are transfused into the humanity, so the humane properties must be likewise
transfused into the Deity: And then it must needs follow, that as
Omnipresency, Omnisciency, Vbiquity, and such like, are transfused into the
humanity; so passibility, mortality, and such like, should be really transfused
into the Deity: but it were most absurd to say, that the Godhead is capable of
humane fraileties; And therefore it is as absurd to say, that the Manhood was
invested with divine Excellencies as they are Divine: And,

Fifthly, If this were true, then the humanity should be no humanity at all,
because freed from humane fraileties, and invested with divine properties; And
therefore to express truly wherein this union consists.

Wherein the union of the two natures truly consists is showed.
Thirdly, We say, that the union of these two Natures consists in the
communicating of the subsistence of the Word, with the humane nature that it
assumed: i. e. of the very being of the Word with the being of our Flesh, so
that it is an hypostaticall or personal union; that is, such an union, as that
both natures do make but one person of Christ, even as the soul and body do
make but one person of man: Jn Ep. Alex. Concilij. anathem. 2.
for so says the Council of Calcedon, the Council of Lateran, the Council
of Toledo, Saint Cyril, and all the Oxthodoxe Fathers, that writ thereof. Si
quis non confitetur carni secundum subsistentiam vnitum Dei patris verbum,
anathema sit; Whosoever confesses not the eternal Word of the Father to be
united unto our flesh, according to his subsistence, let him be accursed.

And further we say, that the union of these two natures, i. e. the Godhead,
as it is limited to the second person of the Trinity, and the Manhood of
Christ, is, 1. Inconuertible. 2. Indivisible. 3. Inconfused. 4. Inseparable.
Six special things obseruable in the union of the two natures of Christ.
5. Substantial. 6. Ineffable.


First, Inconuertible, because neither the Divine Nature is turned into the
humanity, nor the humanity into the Deity.

Secondly, Indivisible, because the Natures are so united into one person, that
they can never be separated, unless we divide the person of Christ, which is
most heretical.

Thirdly, Inconfused, because the Natures remain still entire, without
confounding either their Essence, or their properties, or their wills, or any
other operations whatsoever; and therefore (excepting only his subsistence,
which is one, that we make him not two persons with Nestorius) we do affirm,
that in Christ there are two natures, two wills, two natural proprieties and
operations, entire and unmixed, that we may not confound them with Eutyches:
for since the natures are neither confused, How the properties of each nature
do remain entire, and inconfused to each nature.
nor transfused each into other, the properties also must needs remain entire
to either Nature, without that supposed transfusion of them each to other: for
that rule can never be disproued; Confundens proprietates essentiales,
confundit naturas, Confound the natural or essential properties of any
things, and you take away the nature of the things: And therefore in that one
and selfsame subsistence of Christ, there must needs be a divine and a
humane nature, a divine and a humane wisdom, a divine and a humane will; and
so of all other properties of each nature, they must be as well inconfused, as
indivisible.

And this Christ himself briefly shows, where he says, I lay down my
life, and I take it up again; John 10.17.
for though the actions of each nature, are inseparably joined together, in
respect of the person; that is, though the same person is said to do the
actions of each Nature, yet are the actions never confounded, but do still
remain distinct, and proper to each nature, as to lay down his life, is the
proper work of the humanity, and to take it up again, is the proper work of
the Deity: And this Damascene does explain, by the example of a fiery Sword,
wherein both the natures of the fire and of the Sword, and so likewise the
actions and proprieties of each of them, are preserved entire, to each nature;
Damasc. de fide orthodoxa. l. 3. c. 15.
Nam ferrum habet virtutem incidendi, ignis vrendi, For the Iron retains
still, and retains only the power of cutting, and the fire of burning; Even
so it is in the person of Christ, the Divinity does still retain the propriety
of working divine operations, and the humanity still retains the propriety of
working all humane operations. And Theodoret uses the same similie, though not
in the like words, Theodor. Dialog. 2. f. 166. An example showing how the two
natures though united, do remain inconfused.
yet to the very same effect, saying, Si ignis cum ferro comixtio, quae ferrum
ita ostendit, vt etiam ea faciat quae sunt ignis, eius naturam non mutat, ita
nec Dei cum corpore est mutatio corporis, etc. If the commixtion of the fire
with the Iron, does make the Iron not only to appear like fire, but also to
do the same things, (as to dry, to heat, and to burn) which the fire does;
and yet this fire changes not the nature of the Iron: Even so the union of the
Word with our Flesh, does not change the nature of our flesh, but as a man has
his soul and body both united, and inconfused; Ita multo magis Christus habens
diuinitatem cum corpore, habet vtraque permanentia, and non confusa: So much
more, Christ having his divinity united with our flesh, has them both
remaining entire, and inconfused.

Fourthly, Inseparable, because the Natures are so inseparably united, as that
the humane nature, which the Word assumed, can never be separated from the
same; And therefore when Christ died, Subtraxit visionem, sed non soluit
vnionem: The soul parted from the body, but the Deity was separated from
neither, as Leo says; For in respect of this union of the Deity, with either
part of Christ's humanity, Psalm. 16.11. When Christ died, and body and soul
were parted, the Godhead parted from neither of them.
the Man Christ says unto the Godhead, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell,
nor suffer thine holy one: i. e. my body in the grave, to see corruption: but
as a Tree cut in twain, the Sun cannot be cut, but that it may still shine
on either part; so the body and soul of Christ being parted, the Deity was
still united unto them both; and could never be separated from the manhood,
after he had once assumed the same into the unity of his person.

That there are three special kinds of union.
Fifthly, Substantial, for (as Bellarmine well observes) diverse things may be
united three manner of ways.

First, Essentially, as when of many things, is made one essence, after which
manner the matter and form, the kind and difference, are joined and united
together: And thus the union of these Natures in the words incarnation, is not
made; first, because that if it were so, then there should be in Christ but one
nature, and that should be neither divine, nor humane, but a certain third
kind of nature out of them both: And secondly, because that this essential
union is never made, but of imperfect natures; or if they be perfect, then is
it by a certain corruption, or conversion of them: but the natures of Christ
are perfect and entire, and therefore not essentially united.

Secondly, Accidentally, as when accidents are adjoined to the subject, or when
a substance is joined to a substance, but of that coupling arises nothing else
but an accidental form, as when of Timber and Stones we do compose and frame
a House; and thus also the hypostaticall union of Christ's two natures, is not
made, because God is no accident, nor the subject of any accidents.

Thirdly, Substantially, as when a substance, That the union of Christ his
natures is substantial.
which otherwise existeth of it self, is drawn to the being of another
suppositum; i. e. of another, of it self existing substance, and depends on
the same, as a part thereof: And thus is the union of the Word with our Flesh,
for we say, that the Word is substantially made Flesh; i. e. a true, and a
perfect man, whose being is no accident, but a substance.

Sixthly, It is ineffable, so absolutely perfect, That the manner of the uniting
of the two natures, is ineffable.
and so exceedingly mystical, that it can never be perfectly declared by any
man; for though the Fathers sought by many examples and similitudes, to
express and to illustrate the same, as by the union of the body and soul, of
a branch ingraffed into a Tree, of a fiery Iron, and such like; yet all come
too short, for the full expressing of this inexplicable mystery: And therefore
Saint Bernard compares this ineffable mystery, of the uniting of these two
natures, unto that incomprehensible mystery of the Trinity; and so indeed that
of the Trinity is greatest, and this of the incarnation is like unto it, far
exceeding man's capacity: for, his ways are in the Seas, his paths in the
great waters, Psalm. 76.19.
and his footesteps are not known. And so you see, how that these two natures,
do make but one person of our Savior Christ, and how they are really, though
ineffably, united in that one and selfsame subsistence of Christ.

CHAP. IIII. Of some of the chiefest effects and benefits of this union of
these two Natures of Christ.
The effects and benefits of the union, are of two sorts.
THirdly, For the effects and benefits of this hypostaticall union of these two
Natures, we must understand, that they are especially of two sorts.

1. Some in respect of Christ. 2. Others in respect of Christians.
First, Those in respect of Christ, are likewise threefold.

1. The benefit of the union of the two natures in respect of Christ, is
threefold. Esaias 53.12. 1 Pet. 2.22.
1. An exemption of all sin and corruption from Christ. 2. The collation of
ineffable graces into the humanity of Christ. 3. The communication of the
properties of each Nature to the person of Christ.
First, We find, that although Christ appeared like a sinful man, and was
numbered among the wicked, yet in very deed, he did no sin, neither was any
guile found in his mouth; for though, In carnis assumptione, condescendit mihi,
in culpae tamen vitatione consului^ sibi, 1. To free the manhood from all sin.
He assumed the true nature of man, yet by reason of his pure conception, and
of this hypostaticall union, he was conceived, and lived without sin; and so
as Leo says, Qui non alienus ab hominum genere, alienus fuit a crimine: He
took upon him the seed of man, but not the sin of man; he united himself
to our nature, but he shunned all the iniquity of our nature.

Secondly, The graces callated unto the humanity of Christ, by reason of this
union of the two natures, are very many, especially these six.

2. To enrich the manhood with these, and the like special graces.
First, His subsistence, and that in the second person of the Trinity, whereof
it self, as of it self, is destitute.

Secondly, An extraordinary dignity, in that it is a peculiar Temple for the
Deity of Christ to dwell in, and the place where the Godhead shows it self
more manifestly, and more gloriously, then in any other Creature whatsoever;
for though God shows himself by his providence, to be in all his Creatures,
and by his grace, to be after a more special manner in his Saints, yet is he
only most gloriously, eternally inhabiting, according to the fullness of his
Deity, by an hypostaticall union, in the humanity of Christ; for, In him
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily: Collos. 2.9.
And as now in this life, No man comes unto God but by Christ, so hereafter
in the next life, No man can see God, but in the face of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, A more near familiarity with the Godhead, then any other Creature,
(whether Men or Angels) either had, or have, or can have; for that to all other
Creatures he is adjoined only by the presence of his grace, or glory, but to
the humanity of Christ, he has personally united himself for ever: So that as
he said, My Father and I are one; that is, one essence, he may as truly say,
the Manhood and I are one; that is, one only person for ever.

Fourthly, An extraordinary measure, without measure, of habitual graces,
wisdom, understanding, holiness, and the like; such as dwells not in that
measure in any other Creature whatsoever, no, not in the very chiefest Angels
of God: for to all them were given grace by measure, but to the humanity of
Christ, Ephesians. 4 7.
was given grace without measure, John 3.34.
(says the Baptist) even so much as a Creature is any ways capable of.

Fifthly, A partner agent with the Godhead, according to its measure in the
works of redemption, mediation, and such like.

Sixthly, To be adored and worshipped with divine honor, not as it is
considered in it self, without respect unto the Deity, but as it is united
with the Godhead: Neque tamen creaturam adoramus, Athanas. Orat. 5. contra
Arrianos We worship not the flesh alone considered, but we adore the person
of Christ, which consists of the Word and our Flesh.
absit, sed dominum rerum creatarum, incarnatum verbum deum, adoramus; And yet
we adore no Creature, God forbid, but we worship and adore the Lord of all
Creatures, the incarnate Word God, Jesus Christ, says Athanasius. Nam veluti
si quis nostrum, etc. For as if any one of us should find a purple roabe, or a
Kingly Diadem, lying upon the ground; would he worship the same trow you? but
when the King is clothed, and decked with the same, he is guilty of death, that
despises, and refuses to worship and honor them, together with the King that
wears them: even so in our Savior Christ, we do not adore the sole and
bare humanity, Aug. de verbis Domini sec. Joh. Ser. 58.
but being united unto the Deity, whosoever shall despise to adore with divine
worship, that only Son of God, true God, and true man, he shall undoubtedly
suffer the pains of eternal death, says Saint Augustine.

3. To have the properties of each nature to be indifferently predicated of
the whole person of Christ.
Thirdly, For the communicating of the properties, we are to consider it,

First, In respect of those properties which are common to both natures jointly
considered.

Secondly, In respect of those properties which are peculiar to either nature,
severally considered.

First, The Office of a Mediator is ascribed to Christ, in respect of both
natures, Quia totus Christus secundum diuinitatem and humanitatem est Mediator
and Intercessor, because whole Christ according to his Deity and humanity is
our Mediator and Intercessor, says Saint Augustine.

Secondly, The peculiar properties of either nature, are said to be
communicated, when they are predicated, or spoken of the whole person of Christ
in the concrete, and largest extent; and this communicating of properties, is
nothing else, but a form of speech, whereby those things are spoken of the
whole person of Christ, which indeed are proper to either one nature, and not
to the other: for oftentimes it comes to pass, that by reason of the personal
union of these two natures, each one of them does interchangeably take the
concrete names each of other in predication, Acts 20.28.
as when it is said, That God purchased the Church with his own blood; not
that the Godhead shed blood, but because that person which was a God, did shed
blood, to procure redemption; not which it had as God, but which it had in
respect of the Manhood united unto it. So the Son of man talking with
Nicodemus, John 3.13.
is said, To be in Heaven, not that he was in Heaven, as he was man, while he
was on earth; but because that person, which was the Son of man, was by
something that was in his person, that is, his Deity, in Heaven: So Saint Paul
in the first Chapter to the Romans, Romans 1.4.
Verse 3.4. does give us a perfect pattern how to interpret all such alternate
predications; for there he says, That the Son of God was made of the seed
of David: but how? not according to his divine Sonneship or Deity, which he
had from all eternity, but in respect of his humane nature, which was
personally united unto the Son of God.

And therefore though it be most usual in the Scripture, to hear things
properly appertaining to the Manhood, to be affirmed of our blessed God and
Savior, and also things properly belonging to him as he is God, ascribed to
the man Christ Jesus; yet is it most heretical, to confound the one nature
with the other, as the Eutychians did; or to communicate properly the special
properties of one nature unto the other, as the Lutherans do: for in the
concrete, and not in the abstract, (as the Schools do speak) we say, 1 Cor.
2.8.
That they have crucified the Lord of glory; as noting that person which was,
and is the Lord of glory; and understanding it of his person, not in respect of
that nature whereby he was the Lord of glory, but in respect of the other
nature personally united thereunto, wherein he was passible, and might be
crucified.

And so speaking of his person, in respect of his other nature, we say, That
the man Christ is Almighty; because he is so in respect of his divine nature,
personally united unto his humanity; Pamas l. 3. c 3. 4 de fide orthodoxa.
Theodoret. in Dialog.
but as we may not say, That they have crucified the Godhead; so we may not
say, That the manhood of Christ is Almighty: for when any thing is affirmed of
Christ, in respect of that one nature which properly belongs unto the other,
the meaning thereof is not to inuest the one nature, with the properties that
are peculiar to the other; but thereby to show the truth and certainty of the
union of both natures in one person. And we have a good example hereof in man,
as he consists of body and soul, for we may truly say, that man is
heavenly and immortal, and that man is mortal and earthly: And again we may
say, that the soul sleeps, and the body hears, whereas to sleep, is the
property of the body, and to hear, is the property of the soul, and yet they
destroy the nature of man, that would either turn the one of these natures
into the other, or confound one of these with the other; or inuest the one
nature really with the properties that are peculiar unto the other: Even so we
may say, that God was borne of a Virgin, and the Virgin to be (...), the Mother
of God, that God suffered, and was crucified, and did redeem the Church with
his own blood; yet not simply, Acts 20.28.
S^d (...); but in this or that respect, that is, in respect of another nature,
which God has united unto himself; because God here, is a concrete Word, and
not an abstract, and signifies the person of Christ, and not the divine nature
of Christ; And so we say, that the man Christ is Almighty, Omniscient,
Omnipresent, etc. yet not simply in respect of his manhood, but in respect of
the person which is the same, God and man; or of the other nature, of the man
Christ Jesus: for that here man also is a concrete Word, signifying the whole
person, and not the humane nature of Christ.

And so in this respect, and after this manner, the special properties of each
nature, may be predicated and affirmed of the other nature, Quia vt Deus
propter vnitatem propria ducit humana, sic homo propter vnitatem propria ducit
diuina; Because that as the God Christ, Cyrillus de incarn. c. 26.
in respect of the hypostaticall union of the two natures, assumed all the
humane properties; so the man Christ, in respect of the same union, is partaker
of all the divine properties; as Saint Cyril speaks: But on the contrary
side, we may not say, that the Deity of Christ was borne of a Virgin; or that
Mary is the Mother of the Godhead, or that the divinity of Christ was
passible, and mortal; nor that the humanity of Christ is Almighty, Omniscient,
Omnipresent, or the like; because the deity and humanity, are abstract words,
i. e. such words as do note unto us the two natures of Christ, the one divine,
the other humane, and not the person of Christ.

And therefore if we do but rightly distinguish, between praedicata absoluta
et limitata; the things that are spoken absolutely in the largest sense, and
the things that are predicated by way of limitation in the strictest sense, we
shall easily see, that the communication of the properties of both natures, do
no ways prove such a real trans-fusion of the properties of each nature, into
the other, as that the humanity of Christ, should receive into it self from
the Deity, a power to be omnipotent, omniscient, or omnipresent in it self,
but as the natures are distinct, so the properties of each nature are still
distinct, without trans-fusion, or confounding the one with the other.

CHAP. V. Of certain objections and arguments, endeavoring to prove the
inuesting of the humanity of Christ with divine properties, answered; and the
effects of this union in respect of all Christians, showed.
ANd yet notwithstanding all this, and all else that has been spoken, by all
the most famous Divines of this latter time, the Lutherans say, that Christ did
such miracles in his natural body, and that there are such things ascribed to
the manhood of Christ, as do sufficiently prove, that his humane nature, is
really invested with the divine properties. For,

First, they do object that when the Jews would have thrown him down the
hill, he passed away inuisibly from amongst them all; therefore the man Christ
Jesus is invisible.

To this Ludolphus answers, that this happened not, Sol.
by making the Body of Christ invisible, Ludolphus p. 1. c. 65. p. 155.
but by the sudden striking of his enemies with such stupefied blindness, as
were the Sodomites when they sought for Lots door, until they were wearied.

Secondly, they do object that Christ came into the room Apostles were, the
doors being shut; therefore the body of Christ is void of that grossness,
incident to a natural body, and is now made invisible and inpalpable.

To this some do answer, that he came in, Sol.
the doors being shut i. e. at that time, when the doors are usually shut in
every place; but this could be neither strange to the Apostles, nor any
extraordinary act of Christ: Zanch. tom. 8. p. 389.
and therefore Zanchius does more truly answer, that this proves not any
mutation to be in the body of Christ, nor any inuestment of the same, with
Divine properties; but that by the omnipotent power of his Deity, he caused
the doors to go back, That the doors opened themselves to Christ.
and to open themselves unto him, to make way for the true and solyd Body of
Christ to enter in; as the stone was rolled away from the door of the
sepulcher, to make way for the same solyd body, to pass forth: And we read,
that to others he did the like to this: for, Saint Peter being in prison, Act.
12.10.
and the doors being shut, they opened themselves unto him, and he came forth;
and all the Apostles (if we believe Master Harding) came into the Chapel to
help Saint Basil to say Mass, though the doors, were shut: and therefore the
opening of the doors by the power of Christ's Deity does no way prove the
inpalpabilitie of his Body.

he walked upon the Sea like a Spirit, Mar. 6.49.
and therefore his Body was invested with the leuity and agility of the Deity.

Sol.
To this I answer that he walked upon the Seas, not by the alleuiating or
making light his body, or specially by the leesing of the properties of a true
natural body; but by the consolidating, and confirming or strengthening of the
waters, through the power of his Deity, to make them able to bear him up: and
so they were strengthened to bear up the body of Saint Peter, until Saint
Peter's faith began to fail.

the heavens must contain the Body of Christ until the restitution of all
things, Act 9.3.
as Saint Peter says; and yet that Christ in respect of his humanity, did
appear unto Saint Paul, Act. 22.6.
as he went toward Damascus; and therefore either the saying of Saint Peter
cannot be true, or Saint Paul did not see him, or else his humanity, by reason
of the union with the Deity, has obtained those Divine properties, to be
omniscient and omnipresent with the Deity.

Sol.
To this some do answer, that Christ might for that time, and to that end
frame a body of the air, to speak unto Saint Paul, as he did many times unto
the Fathers of the Old Testament; and so the Heavens did contain the true and
natural body, and he appeared unto Saint Paul in a body that he assumed for
that purpose.

Others think that Christ might for a short space of time leave the Heavens,
and descend into the Air to speak with Saint Paul; and yet the saying of
Saint Peter to be still true, thus understood, that the heavens usually, and
always without some rare and special dispensation do contain him, until
the restitution of all things.

But, it is unlikely that he would assume any created form upon him, after he
had once really united himself to our nature; and we have no argument to prove
that ever he did it; and it is not probable that he would leave his throne
void in heaven, for the least moment of time, after he was once seated in
that excellent Majesty: and therefore I think with Zanchius, that Christ
remaining in Heaven, might appear unto Saint Paul, as he did unto Saint
Stephen; the heavens were opened, and his eyes were endued with a most
excellent sharpness of sight, that he saw Christ standing on the right hand
of God: Act. 7.55.
for Saint Paul does not say that Christ appeared unto him on earth, That Saul
saw no body on earth, as he went to Damascus.
but that suddenly there shined round about him a light from Heaven; and that
he heard the voice of the Lord, saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? and all this might be without any presence of Christ's Body; for Christ
might speak in Heaven, and cause that same voice to be head here on earth,
Matthew. 3.17.
or he might frame a voice in the Air; as the Father did at the baptism of
Christ, where the voice was framed and heard, but no body seen nor assumed.

Fifthly, They do object that the Body of Christ does viuifie Godhead, and
therefore it is invested with the properties of the Godhead.

To this Damascen answers by this similitude, Sol.
Vrit ignitum ferrum, non naturali ratione, vstivam possidens actionem; How the
flesh of Christ is said to do divine operations.
sed ex union ignis ad ferrum, illud obtinet: That as a hot fiery iron will
burn any thing, not that it has naturally the faculty or propriety of
burning, but by reason of the union of the fire unto it; So the humanity is
said to do many things, not that it has any property in it self to do the^;
but being united unto the Deity, Damasc. de fide orthodoxa. l. 3. c. 17.
it is said to do the same; though indeed, as it is not the iron that burns,
but the fire that is united unto the iron; So it is not properly the flesh that
does any of these, but the Word unto which the flesh is hypostatically united.
And therefore it is apparent, mauger all that can be said against it, that
Christ by this communicating of properties, has neither lost the properties of
a true natural body, nor that his humanity is really invested with the
properties of the Deity.

Secondly, the benefits of the union of the two natures of Christ, in respect
of us. Esaias 1. Ephesians. 4.18.
Secondly, The other effects and benefits of the union of these two natures,
which are in regard of us, are, our spiritual union with God, and thereby the
enriching of us, with all those graces that do prepare us, and bring us unto
everlasting happiness: for our sins had separated us from God, and made us
aliens, and strangers from the life of God; they were, and are, like a
partition wall betwixt God and us; they keep us far from God, and make us
indeed to be (...), men without God in the world: but now as God made the
personal union of soul and body, for the constitution and continuation of the
whole and common nature of mankind; So he united the Word with our flesh, that
our nature might be restored in the person of Christ; and that they which
before were at variance, God and Man, might now be reconciled through this
union of God and man, in the person of Jesus Christ: for seeing Christ has
personally united our nature unto himself, he has thereby naturally united us
unto God; Quia natura nobis est (...), because by nature he is of the same
nature with us, and we are of the same with him, though we be not carnally in
him, but as we are ingraffed, Et consortes Christi per fidem; Basilius ^p 41.
ad Caesariens.
and pertakers of Christ by faith, as Saint Basil says.

And so now by reason of this uniting of our nature unto the Son of God, and
thereby our communion and fellowship with God; we receive (as all the members
do receive life and motion, by reason of their union with the head) all those
gracious motions, and gifts that are necessary for sustaining of our spiritull
life: and shall hereafter fully attain unto the blessed fruition of God for
ever. And so you see the particulars of this great mystery of the words
incarnation: How the word was made flesh.

CHAP. VI. Of certain reasons why these deep doctrinall points were so
largely handled.
NOw if any man does marvel, (as no doubt but many do, and blame me too
perhaps) that I should so largely treat of the eternity and divinity of the
word, against the Arrians, of the verity of his Humanity against the
Marcionists, of the distinction of the two natures against the Eutychians, of
the union of the natures against the Nestorians, Why the former points were so
largely handled.
and of the communicating of the properties against the Lutherans; seeing (as
Hyperius advises us) we should rather deal against the iniquity of the
times, and those present evils, that are raging and reigning amongst the people
in every place; then by needless mention of old buried heresies, to give
occasion unto any man to inquire into them; I answer, that I have done the
same for sundry and diverse reasons: As,

First, because these points concerning Christ, are the most principal points
of all Divinity, and the most comfortable for all Christians: for this is
eternal life, John 17.3.
to know thee to be the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.
The chiefest knowledge, is the knowledge of Jesus Christ.
And therefore I did ever love to be ever fishing in this Sea, to be ever
studying in these points, and I did never think, that I could either stay too
long, or speak too much, in discoursing about Jesus Christ.

Secondly, because the Apostle says, there must be Heresies, and that in these
our days, 1 Cor. 11.19.
we are as apt and as prone to fall into all sorts of Heresies; as ever were
men in any days, since the beginning of days; The Devil is most desirous to
keep us ignorant of this truth, or else to corrupt this Truth.
and that we know the Devil is more desirous to obscure this light, and to
corrupt the truth of this doctrine, concerning Christ, then any other point of
Divinity whatsoever: And therefore I think it were good, if this truth were
more fully handled, and more generally divulged unto all people then it is: not
only, that our armor might be in a readiness; but also that having oil in
our lamps, and our loins girt, and these points by continual hearing and
reading of the same, perfectly known and understood, we might be able to
quench the fiery darts of Satan, and to stop the mouths of all Heretics, if
at any time Satan should stir them up to speak against the truth.

By seeing the villainies of Satan, we ought the rather to detest him, and to
beware of him.
Thirdly, because it is not only our parts, only to set down ablative
directions, to confute or prevent errors; but, as we are to recite the long
fore-passed benefits of God, that we may see the greatness of his goodness,
and be thereby induced to show the more love and thankfulness to his Majesty;
so we are to relate the long fore-passed villainies, miseries, and Heresies,
whereunto that cruel enemy of mankind has plunged us, that so men may see,
and have it always before their eyes, what destruction and miseries he has
brought continually unto the sons of men, and may be hereby induced ever to
hate and detest that cruel fiend.

Luke 5.4.
Fourthly, because we are debtors both to the wise and unwise, and must
oftentimes launch forth into the deep, (as our Savior commanded Peter) if we
will catch a good draught of fish: The best way to teach us to lay a good
foundation.
for we find that popular exhortations, not grounded upon the sure doctrinall
points of instructions, are like roofes built without foundation; and therefore
Tertullian says, it is the property of Heretics first mouere, to persuade and
then, docere, to teach, and ever to spend more time in moral persuasions, then
they do in the fundamental points of divine instructions; but the true
laborers with Saint Paul, are most desirous ever to lay down a good
foundation: 1 Cor. 3.11.
and other foundation can no man lay better then this, to know Jesus Christ and
him crucified.

The doctrine of divinity is very deep.
Fifthly, because we are to show how Divinity is like a boundless Ocean, and of
an vnwadable depth, wherein the greatest Elephant may swim, and how great is
the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 4.16.
God manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into
glory; that so the people may see how laborious and painful is the calling of
the poor Ministers; 2 Cor. 2.16.
for who can express his noble Acts? (...)? or; who is sufficient for these
things? or to attain to the knowledge of any of these things, without seruent
prayers for Gods assistance, and indefatigable pains, with all diligence
continually; and that both Priests and People, should always strive and
labor, How deligent we ought to be to attain unto the knowledge of Jesus
Christ.
Et orando, and audiendo, and legendo, and been viuendo, vt intelligant? By
praying hearing, reading, and all other possible means, that they may
understand so much as their weak capacities can unblameably comprehend, both
of these and all other truths concerning Christ: for all knowledge without
this will avail us nothing: the knowledge of all moral virtues, of all
natural causes, of all Crafts and Sciences can never bring us unto eternal
happiness, but this is eternal life to know Jesus Christ: and therefore, for
mine own part; I had rather wear and weary out my self, in this difficult
study of Christ, then to bath my self in those fountains, or to be crowned
with the sweetest Garland flowers, of Philosophy or morality.

Sixthly, because hereby is seen, that greatness of Gods love to mankind, in
that he was pleased to open and to search the treasure of his wisdom, that he
might devise and find out, the means to save us, That no wisdom but that
insearchable wisdom of God could ever have found this way to save sinful man.
which of our selves could never so much as to have invented the way, much
less to effect the means: to help our selves: for if it be now so ineffable,
and so incomprehensible, that we can never fully understand, nor perfectly
attain unto the depth of these mysteries, how the Word should be incarnate,
and the two natures, so far in nature disagreeing one from the other, should
notwithstanding be united into one person, for the accomplishing of our
redemption, being already done, and so plainly showed by Christ, and unfolded
by so many faithful servants of Christ; how should we ever have invented, or
found out the way to effect so great salvation, before it was done? for many
can tell how to devise the way, and learn to know the means that might do
them good, but cannot tell how to effect the same: but we could neither
perform the work, nor yet devise the way how we might be reconciled unto God;
and therefore as the Psalmist says, The help that is done upon earth, God
does it himself; And he did it wholly himself: for when we could do nothing
to help our selves, no not so much as to imagine which way to do our selves
any good; God of his mere love was moved, through his wisdom, to find out
this means of uniting the Word with our Flesh, that we might be united unto
God again. O that we would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, Psalm.
107.8.
and show the wonders that he does for the Children of men; That we would
offer unto him, The sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and show forth his
praises from one generation to another.

Seventhly, Because hereby is showed the difference betwixt the Law and the
Gospel: for that the Fathers under the Law, did see these things darkely, and
beheld Christ through the grates and lattices; i. e. under the types and
shadows of the Law, as it were with Moses, in foramine petrae, through the
holes and clefts of the rock, to behold a few glympses of the glory of God;
but we with open face may see him, as in a glass; for now the veil is taken
away from Moses his face, Cant. 2.14.15.
all types are now accomplished, all ceremonies are abolished, and all the
mysts of darkness, The difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel.
errors, and Heresies are now especially dispersed; for that not only the
day star has appeared, but also, the Sun of Righteousness has risen, and
shines over the face of the whole world: and this great mystery of godliness
is, and has been long preached, unfolded, and most plainly showed unto the
Gentiles, as the Apostle shows.

Heb. 5.11.
And therefore it is a shame for us, if we be dull in hearing, and unapt to
understand all necessary truths: for though the Jews of old might be excused
for their ignorance, because they sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
Death; yet are we without excuse, because the clear light of truth is
continually preached unto us: and therefore it will be our condemnation, if we
love darkness more then light, John 3.19.
and desire rather to be still groping in the twy-light of morality, i. e. the
precepts of moral men; then to walk in the true light of Divinity; which is
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ.

And yet such is the misery of our days, and the dullness of our people, that
as the Church of Rome teaches implicit faith to suffice a man for his
salvation, i. e. to believe what the Church believes, though he know no more
what that is, then Baalams Ass understood her own voice; Numb. 22. 31.
So many amongst us (whom God has endued with sufficient capacities, to
understand many mysteries of faith, if they would apply their desire and
diligence to learn them) are contented with confused, or at the best, very
general notions: that Christ died for them, and that they hope by him to be
saved; That many men are very ignorant of the chiefest points of Christianity.
and if you enter into the particulars, concerning his person, they presently
frame unto themselves, false and erroneous conceits, thinking perhaps Christ to
be a man, by an humane person, and so are Nestorians; or to be a mere man, and
so are Arrians, or to have his natures confounded, and so are Eutychians; or
else the properties of these natures confused, and so are Lutherans; and so are
wrapped in many monstrous Heresies, not for want of means, but for want of
desire, or diligence to understand these truths.

But if any will be such; that is, not look upon the light for fear of
blinding his eyes, let him take heed of that fearful saying, Qui ignorant
ignorabitur; He that will not know Christ, 1 Cor. 14.38.
shall not be known of Christ: and yet I mean not that every one, especially
of the meaner understandings, should labor for perfect or exquisite knowledge
herein; or more then their capacities are able to comprehend, for as we must
not be too careless, so we may not be too curious in these unsearchable
mysteries: but my meaning is, that men should not satisfy themselves, only
with inuolued, implicit faith; or some general notions, concerning Christ;
but should labor, every man according to the measure of understanding that God
has given him, to learn and know, in some competent measure, the particular
mysteries of our faith. And so much for the first part of this Treatise; the
sum and substance of the words Incarnation.

Part. 2.
PART. II. The chiefest circumstances that are requisite to be known for the
understanding of this mystery, of the words Incarnation.
CHAP. I. Of the Ancestors and family from whence Christ descended. And what we
may learn thereby.
SEcondly, the chiefest circumstances concerning the words Incarnation, are
especially these three:

First, His family, from whence he was descended.

Secondly, His nativity, whereby he was declared: And

Thirdly, His testimony, by which he was approved unto the world, to be the
true Messiah.

First, for the family from whence Christ should descend. It was prophesied
long before, Matthew. 1.
that the Messiah should come of the seed and lineage of David; and the
Evangelists say, that Christ was borne of a Virgin, Luke 1.27.
whose name was Mary.

First, of a Virgin, to fulfill the prophecy of Esaias, Chap. 7.14 And that he
might be conceived without sin, because he was to redeem us from sin.

Secondly, of a Virgin called Mary that the verity of the Story might appear
most manifest, and that the certainty of his pedigree, might be the more
easily showed.

Ob.
But it may be objected that Christ was to be like Melchisedecke, without
Father, and without mother; and therefore the Son of Mary is not likely to be
the Christ, because he has a mother.

Sol.
I answer, that some affirmed Melchisedecke to have both a Father and a Mother,
Hieron. ad. Euagr.
and is thought by Saint Hierome and diverse others, to be Sem the Son of
Noah: but he is said to be without Father, and without Mother, because by that
name, and in that place where be is said to have come, and to have blessed
Abraham, there is no mention made of his Father, or of his Mother, or of his
beginning, or of his ending; but for mine own part, I answer, (as I showed
before) that this Melchisedecke was Christ himself, and that he may be truly
said to be without Father, and without Mother, if we understand the same
aright; for that as God, he has no Mother, and as man, he has no Father;
because Joseph was but his legal, and not his natural Father.

But you will say then, Ob.
that he could not come of the seed of David, because Mary was the Daughter
of Ioachim, Aug. contra faust. Man. l. 23. c. 3. 4. Luke 1.36.
a Priest of the Tribe of Leui, as the Manichees, and others have affirmed;
because the Scripture says; Behold, thy Cosen Elizabeth, which was the wife of
Zacharias the Priest.

To this diverse men do diversely answer: for, Sol.
Origin thinks that they were Cosens, not in respect of Tribe, but in respect
of Nations, as Saint Paul calls all the Jews his Kinsmen, according to the
Flesh; but then Elizabeth had been her Cosen none otherwise then all the rest
of the Jewish Women: Theophilact thinks they are said to be Cosens, Theoph.
in 1 Luc. Exodus 6.
because Aaron married the Daughter of Aminadab, of the Tribe of Judah; but
then it may be said, That this is farre-fetcht, and therefore might be soon
forgotten, too ancient a kindred, to make any great reckoning of it: Saint
Augustine thinks, Aug. q. 47. sap. Iudic. That Elizabeth the wife of
Zacharias, was of the Tribe of Juda.
that some Woman of the Tribe of Leui, was married unto some one of Christ's
progenitors, of the Tribe of Judah, that so Christ might descend both of the
Priestly and the Kingly stock: But the truth is, that Elizabeth was of the
Tribe of Judah, and was married unto Zacharias the Priest; for though it was
forbidden to all the other Tribes, to match with any that were not of their
own Tribe, yet was it lawful for the Priests to take Wives out of any Tribe;
and therefore Aaron married Elizabeth, the Daughter of Aminadab, of the Tribe
of Judah; 2 Chronicles. 22.11.
and Iehoida the Priest married the Daughter of King Iorom, and sister unto
Amasia King of Judah. That the blessed Virgin Mary was of the Tribe of Juda.


Or howsoever, let Elizabeth be of what Tribe you will, yet is it most
manifest, that Mary was of the Tribe of Judah; for as Saint Matthew sets down
the Pedigree of Joseph, so Saint Luke sets down the Pedigree of Mary; to
show unto us, that both Joseph and Mary were lineally descended of the Tribe of
Judah: for Hely, whose Son Joseph is said to be by Saint Luke, (because it was
the manner of the Jews, to continue their Genealogies in the Male kind) was
the natural Father of Mary, and but Father in Law to Joseph; even as Naomi
called Ruth her Daughter, being but her Daughter in Law: for Saint Matthew says
plainly, that Joseph's own natural Father was Jacob, and not Hely: And
therefore Hely was the natural Father of Mary, Damasc. l. 4. c. 15. Affrican.
apud Eusebium.
as both Damascen and Affricanus testify; and he was also called Ioachim, as
Saint Hierome witnesses: And therefore it is most apparent, that for his
Family, he descended lineally from Judah, and from the seed of David.

Q.
But then again it may be demanded, how he came of David, whether of Solomon or
of Nathan, both Sons of David.

Sol.
I answer, that Saint Matthew sets down the legal descent of Christ from
Solomon, That Christ came not of Solomon, but of Nathan the Son of David.
because he succeeded him in the spiritual right of the Kingdom, he being
the true King of the Jews; and therefore reckons fourteen Kings in his
Pedigree, and he omitteth three, that is, Ahazia, Ioas, and Amasia, either
because they were wicked Kings, and repented not of their abominations, (as
some of the other wicked Kings had done:) And therefore as their names were
odious in the Book of God, and it may be, blotted out of the Book of Life; so
were they not worthy to be once mentioned among the Ancestors of Christ; or
else he omitteth them, because he would bring his Pedigree to three fourteen
generations: But Saint Luke sets down the natural descent of Christ, and
so he came from Nathan, not him that was a Priest and a Prophet, as both Saint
Ambrose and Beda think, (for then he could not come from David, and it is
certain that he came from Judah, and not from Leui) but of that Nathan which
was the Son of David, and brother unto Solomon, not only by his Fathers
side, but also by his Mothers side, Ambros. in Luc. Beda in Luc. Damasc. l. 4.
c. 15. Paraeus in Romans
as both Damascen and Paraeus think: And yet Origin and Eusebius think, he
came of Solomon, because in Saint Matthew the words, He begat, are still
repeated, which are not so in Saint Luke; but to this we answer, that this
reason is not sufficient; because Saint Matthew says, Iechonias begat
Salathiel: where indeed Iechonias died without issue, as we may see in Jeremy,
the 22.30. Jerem. 22.30.
and Salathiel was the natural son of Neri (as Saint Luke plainly
affirms; and therefore the meaning of the Evangelist, in saying, that
Iechonias begat Salathiel, is no more, but to show unto us, that Iechonias
dying without heir, appointed Salathiel according to the Law, to succeed him,
and to be his lawful heir. And therefore, seeing all the posterity of Solomon
ended in Iechonias, whose right then passed unto Salathiel which lineally
descended of Nathan; it is apparent that our Savior Christ came of the seed of
David by Nathan, and not by Solomon.

And this teaches us, Psalm. 89 i 32.
that if our chidren forsake Gods Law and walk not in his ordinance, he will
visit their offenses with the rod, and their sins with scourges; yea, be
they as wise as Solomon, To serve God, is the only way to perpetuate our
posterity.
be they as noble and Heroike, as were all the Kings of the posterity of
Solomon, be they as dear unto God, as the signet upon his right hand; yet if
they forsake his Laws, he will cut them off. He told David this before, that
though he loved him never so dear, yet would he deal with his children, as
they would behave themselves in his ways: but they would not be warned;
Solomon first offended, and all the Kings of Judah excepting Ezechias and Josias
followed after, and were defective; and therefore they were cut off, and their
right passed unto Salathiel the Son of Neri: as I have showed unto you before,

And therefore if we would continue in Gods favor, let us go on in Gods
service, for he shall establish his posterity for ever, that establishes the
same in the fear of God: the seed of David shall never fail, because he
feared God; the seed of Solomon shall be finished, because he has offended
God: and therefore it is neither wisdom, nor power, nor wealth, nor any thing
else, but only the fear of God, that perpetuateth both our selves, and our
posterities; blessed are they that fear him. And so much for the family from
whence Christ descended.

CHAP. II. Of the time when our Savior Christ was borne, and of the place and
manner of his birth.
SEcondly, for his Nativity whereby he was brought forth and manifested unto
the world, we must consider these three especial points.

1. The time. of his birth. 2. The ^lace. of his birth. 3. The manner. of his
birth.
Gal. 4.4.
First, for the time when this Word was made flesh, Saint Paul says it was,
That there be three things that measure all durations.
in the fullness of time: for there be three things which measure all
durations; First, Eternity; Secondly, Mortality; Thirdly, Time.

The first is proper to God, which wants beginning and ending.

The second is proper to seules and spirits, which have beginning, but shall
never have ending.

The third is proper to all compound bodies, which as they had beginning, so
they shall have ending: Quia omnia orta occidunt, and omnia aucta senescunt;
Because all raised, or created things shall fall, and whatsoever increases,
waxes old.

After the first sense, the Word was never made in any time, but is the Father
of all times, and before all times.

After the second sense, the Soul of Christ was made in time, but to continue
ever immortal for all times: And

How Christ was made in time.
After the third sense, the Body of Christ was likewise made in time, and to
continue here, but for a time, in respect of his mortal condition, before it
was invested with the indowments of immortality.

And so both Body and Soul of Christ were made in time to subsist in the
person of him that made all time; and that time wherein he was made thus to
subsist, was in the fullness of time, says the Apostle: for as places, so
times have their fullness and their emptiness; some places are empty having
nothing in them but only air, and some are full of gold and pearls and
precious things: even so, some times are void of strange accidents, How time
has his fullness.
and sometimes are full of admirable occurrents; and in such a time, was the
Word made flesh; the Son of God made man: for now the time was full of peace,
full of plenty, and full of wickedness; the Devil had broken loose, and had
possessed the minds of most, and the bodies of many men, more then ever before,
or ever since, as some imagine; by reason of those multitudes that they read
of, to be really possessed with Devils in our Saviors time. And therefore
being so full of all unrighteousness, Romans 29.
he that was the fullness of grace, came; to root out the evil weeds of our
sins; John 1.16.
and out of his fullness, to offer us grace for grace. For,

First, he would not come before Adam fell, because that had been
superfluous, to seek the sheep before the sheep were lost.

Secondly, he would not come presently after; because thereby he would show the
greater love to mankind; for, though in some cases it be true, that gratia ab
officio quod mora tardat abest, delayed kindness, loses half his goodness;
yet herein, the long tarrying of Christ, before he came to be incarnate, was a
manifest sign of his greater goodness toward us, for these three special
causes.

First, that by the Law of nature, Why Christ stayed so long before he came.
and by the written Law of God, man might be convinced, and see his own
sins, and so be the more moved to seek his Savior.

Secondly, that he tarrying for a while, might be the more earnestly desired,
and make him, being obtained, to become the more acceptable unto us; Quia diu
desiderata dulcius obtinentur, because that things long desired, are more
sweet, when they are obtained, as Saint Augustine speaks.

Thirdly, that due preparation might be made, by the Patriarchs and Prophets,
before his coming, and the people made by them apt and ready to receive him,
and to embrace his coming; that so his coming, might be the more profitable
unto them; for they were sent to prepare, Matthew. 3.3.
and to make straight the way of the Lord: and therefore, as his tarrying now
from coming to judgment, is an exceeding great argument of his goodness,
because he does it to see, if his long patience will lead us to repentance; so
his long tarrying then, was a sure sign of his greater love, because he would
have us thereby to be fitted to make the better use of his coming; and yet,

Why Christ would not stay any longer then he did.
Thirdly, he would not stay until the last end of the world, Ne fides and spes
de promisso semine nimis tardatae perirent; Least staying so long, there should
be no hope left to expect him, no faith to believe in him, and no charity to
love him, when he should come. For though there was but a little goodness
then, God knows: Patrios ante dies filius quaerebat in annos: Yet there is a
great deal less now, all the world sees: Terras Astraea reliquit; For our
Savior told us, that toward the end of the world, The love of many should
wax cold, and faith should scarce be found upon the face of the whole earth.
And therefore seeing that to come in the beginning of the world, had been too
soon, and to tarry till the latter end had been too late, he came in the
fittest time, in the fullness of time, to be incarnate and made flesh.

The particular time of the Words incarnation.
And if we search a little further, to know more particularly what time was,
this fullness of time, we shall find it to be.

1. In the sixth Age of the world. 2. In the Reign of Augustus and Herod. 3. In
the tenth Month of the year. 4. In the shortest Day of the Month. 5. In the
first Day of the Week. 6. In the first Hour of the Day.
First, We must note, that as man, which is, (...), the little world; so (...),
the great and large Universe, has his times and his ages; for Damascen,
Lucidus, and others, (as Clicthouaeus collecteth) do affirm that the worlds
age is seauenfold.

How the world is divided into his several ages.
First, the infancy of it, from Adam to the flood; Secondly, the childhood of
it, from the flood to Abraham; Thirdly, the youth of it, from Abraham to Moses;
Fourthly, the riper and liuelier youth,, from the Law to David; Fifthly, the
manhood of it, from the Temple of Solomon, to the Captivity; Sixthly, the
maturity of it, from the Captivity of Babylon, unto Christ; Seauenthly, Aug. de
ciuit. Dei l. vlt. c. vlt.
the dotage of it, from Christ unto Judgment: but Saint Augustine, Saint
Chrysostom, Saint Isidore, Bid, Arrias Montanus, and others; though they say
the world does consist of seven ages, yet they do divide them otherwise, viz.

1. From Adam unto Noah's Flood. containing 1656. years. The division of the
worlds age.
2. From Noah's Flood unto Abraham. 293. or, 383. 3. From Abraham unto David.
941. 4. From David to the Captivity. 485. and 6. Months. 5. From the Captivity
unto Christ. 620. 6. From Christ to the day of Judgment. 1624. hitherto; and
how many more none can tell; As our Savior shewth; Of that day and hour
knows no man. 7. From the day of Judgment unto all Eternity, for ever and
ever.

And so according to this account, Christ was borne in the year of the world,
4085. but according to the seauenty Interpreters account, he was borne in the
year 5461. and according to our account, he was borne in the year 3948. and
so I find in the account of years; Alij atque alij aliud atque aliud opinati
sunt: Diverse men have diverse judgments; but in dividing the worlds age into
seven parts, I find most agreeing in the same judgment: and in affirming
Christ to be borne in the sixth age of the world, the latter end of the same,
That Christ was borne in the sixth age of the world, and why?
if we follow Damascens account, or in the beginning of the same, if we follow
Saint Augustines account: but which soever: it was in the sixth age, that there
might be a correspondencie betwixt the works of creation and of redemption:
Nam sicut primus Adam conditus fuit sexta aetate, ad totius creaturae
perfectionem: Because, that as the first Adam was made on the sixth day, to be
the complement and perfection of all creatures; so the second Adam was made in
the sixth age of the world, to restore all mankind unto their integrity.

And this teaches us, patiently to wait for the coming of Jesus Christ: for,
if God deferred the first coming of Christ almost 4000. years; but did at
last fulfill his promise, and came in his appointed time; we may assure our
selves, that he will do the like for his second coming, 2 Peter 2 4.
against all those that say; Where is the promise of his coming?

Why Christ was borne in the reign of Augustus and Herod.
Secondly, He was borne in the Reign of Augustus, the two and fortieth year of
his reign, as Tertullian and Saint Augustine say, and in the one and thirtieth
year of King Herod's reign, as Beda says: or the two and thirtieth year, as
Eusebius says.

And he was borne in the reign of Augustus, to show unto us, first, that as
Augustus was a temporal monarch, so Christ should be a spiritual Monarch, for
that as the world can no more bear two temporal Monarchs, then the heavens
can bear two Suns, -- Omnisque potestas impatiens consortis, erit -- so the
Church of Christ can have but one head.

Secondly, that as Augustus was the second Emperor; so Christ was the second
person of the Trinity.

Esaias 9.6.
Thirdly, that being borne when all the world was at peace, and yet taxed; we
might hereby see, that although Christ was the Prince of peace, Matthew. 11.29.
that immaculate Lamb, which was meek and lowly in heart; yet he should be
taxed for our sins, and burdened for our transgressions. Esaias 53.5.


And he was borne in the reign of Herod, i. e. Herod the great, to
distinguish him from Herod Antipa, and Herod Agrippa,: whereof, Ascolanita
necat pueros, Antipa Iohannem,
Agrippa Iacobum, mittitque in carcere petrum.
this first killed the children, the second John Baptist, and the third James
the brother of the Lord; to show unto us; as both Saint Chrysostom and Leo
observe, Chrysostom. in. Matthew. hom. 9. Leo hom 3. in Ep^ph. Josephus antiq. lib.
14. c 26. Phila de part. temp.
that this is that Shiloh, which was for to come, because a Prince (as Saint
Hierome reads it) or the Scepter should not depart from Judah, until Shiloh
came; but now Herod, Patre Idumes and matre ortus Arabica, being an Idumean,
having got the Scepter from Judah, by Augustus his means, and having in the
thirtieth year of his tyrannical rule, destroyed all the Sanhedrim, i. e. the
Eldership of seauenty Judges of the house of David, it must needs be the
Messiah must be borne.

Thirdly, Why Christ was borne in December.
He was borne in December the tenth month of the year, to show that he came
to make satisfaction for the 10. commandments: and to show, that as 10.
consist of the figure 1. and the cipher 0. so his person did consist of the
figure of his Deity, and the cipher of our humanity, as some Divines have
observed.

Fourthly, He was borne in the shortest day of this month, Three things
obseruable in this day of Christ's Nativity.
which was the five and twentieth day in the Winter Solstice, in which day,
three things are obseruable: first, the Cold is greatest; secondly, the Sun
is lowest; and thirdly, thence-forward the days begin to increase; So Christ
was borne in the coldest day, to teach us not to pamper up our untamed flesh;
he was borne when the Sun was lowest, to teach us true humility, and as when
the day is shortest, the Sun is in his Tropicke, so called of (...), to
turn; because now it turns toward us, and so increases the length of our
days more and more, Ambros. ser. 2. de Natiuit.
and ascends up into the Heavens higher and higher, so from the day of
Christ's Nativity, the favor of God is turned to us, our comforts are
increased, and the Kingdom of Heaven is enlarged: for as John Baptist says, I
must decrease, and he must increase; John 3.30.
so we find that after the birth of John Baptist, which was in the longest day,
as the Sun descended, so the observation of the ceremonial and judicial
Laws decreased; for the Law and the Prophets continued until John, but after
the birth of Christ, Matthew. 11.13.
which was in the shortest day, as the ^unne thence ascended, so the Kingdom
of Heaven increased more and more.

Fifthly, He was borne upon the first day of the Week, That Christ was borne
upon the first day of the Week, which is our Saboath.
i. e. upon the Sunday, as Rupertus, Antoninus, Bonauenture, Petrus de
Natalibus, S. Augustine, and others do affirm; Vt quo die dixerat fiat lux,
and facta est, eiusdem diei nocte oriretur in tenebris lumen rectis cord,
retinens ordinem mirabilium suorum: That upon the same day, as he said,, Let
there be light, and it was so; there should spring up light for them that are
true of heart; and therefore Saint Augustine says, that this day was ever
venerable; because that on this day, God the Father began to create the world;
on this day God the Son began to redeem the world; on this day God the Holy
Ghost began to sanctify the world, when he appeared on the Apostles, Act. 2.3.
like cloven tongues of fire; on this day, God made the light; on this day was
the true light produced, that lighteneth every one that comes into the world;
John 1.9.
on this day the children of Israel came out of Egypt; on this day Christ came
out of his grave; and like enough, that on this day Christ will come, to give
us an everlasting rest: and therefore we should always sanctify this day,
above all the days of the year; that when he comes, he may not find us
singing in the Tauernes, but serving him in his Church.

Tertul. l. 6. c. 9. contra Marc.
Sixthly, Tertullian, and Saint Augustine say that he was borne in the
nightime, in the time of darkness; because he came to dissolve the works
of darkness; Luc. 2.8.
and to prove this, they allege, not only what Saint Luke says, that the
Shepherds watched at night, Psalm. 190.
when the Angel came unto them, and told them, that Christ was borne, but also
the saying of David, where he says, Ante Luciferum genui te; Before the
morning, I have begotten thee. And Cardanus that great Astronomer, commenting
upon Ptolemies Quadripartite, and there treating of Christ's Nativity, he makes
the 11. degree of Virgo, to ascend in the 1. house about 10. of the clock, and
15. minutes; and therefore affirms CHRIST then, and at that very hour to be
borne; and not unlikely, that the Son of a Virgin, should be then borne,
when the heavenly figure Virgo did ascend.

That Christ was borne presently after midnight.
But I think rather with Saint Hierome, and Saint Bernard, that he was borne
about midnight, or presently after, because it is said, that while all things
were in quiet silence, and the night was in the midst of her swift course,
thine A^^^ghty word leapt down from heaven out of his royal throne; Sap.
18.14.
an^ (...) marvel, that the greatest light should be produced in the time of
greatest obscurity, and that he should come in medio noctis, about midnight,
which came to be the medium, and mediator, betwixt God and man: and as this
place of wisdom shows, that he was borne about midnight; so it may be
collected (as I take it) out of Luke, that it was rather presently after, then
either at that very instant, or at any time before; for the Angel said unto
the Shepherds, This day is borne unto you a Savior, Luke 2.11.
which you must understand, of the day artificial, which begins presently
after midnight, and not of the day natural, which begins with the light,
and so he may be said to be borne that day, though it should be but the first
hour after midnight.

And this should teach us, that our spiritual birth should begin betimes,
for you see Christ was borne betimes, the first hour of the day; he rose out
of his grave betimes, before the morning watch, and all to teach us, to serve
God betimes; and as Solomon says, To remember our Creator in the days of our
youth: Eccles. 12.1.
And not to put it off while to morrow, but to say with Saint Augustine,
Quamdiu cras, quare non modo finis turpitudinis meae? Aug. in Confess.
How long shall I say to morrow; and why should I not now forsake my
filthiness? For, Qui non est hodie cras minus aptus erit. He that is not fit
to day, shall have to morrow a harder way.

Secondly, For the place where the Messiah should be borne, the Prophet says;
Thou Bethlehem Ephrata, Micha 5.2.
art little among the thousands of Judah, out of thee shall he come forth unto
me, that shall rule my people Israel: But Saint Matthew says, Math. 2.6.
says, And thou Bethlehem in the Land of Judah, art not the least among the
Princes of Judah; for out of thee shall come a Governor, which shall rule my
people Israel: Of the place where Christ was borne.
Wherein we see they speak almost clean contrary, for Micah says; Thou art
little among the thousands of Judah: as if he said, Thou art but a little poor
Village, the least among thousands, and Saint Matthew says, Thou art not the
least among the Princes of Judah; As if he said, Thou art a great Princely
Town, the chiefest among thousands: for when we say a thing is not the least,
we mean that it is in the number of the greatest.

But to reconcile these places, I say, that Micah speaks of it, as it was
indeed, a little, poor, and ignoble Village so mean, that it is not reckoned
in the number of those Cities, Joshua 1^.
that fell by Lot unto the Tribe of Judah; but Saint Matthew speaks this, either
as a true Historiographer, relating not the saying of the Prophet, How the
Prophet Micah, and Saint Matthew are to be reconciled.
but the saying of the Scribes unto Herod; or else as it was in reputation, not
so much for the excellency of it self, as in this respect, that Christ the
Savior, refusing thousand greater Towns, should choose this to be borne in,
and so make this little, yea, the least, not the least blessed City.

And so you see the place that Christ was to be borne in, was a poor and a
mean scattering Village; it is like, it had not many Houses, or they did not
use half so much tippling as we do; for we read but of one Inn that was in
all the Town; and yet in this Town did Christ choose to be borne: And that
for three reasons.

Why Christ choose to be borne in Bethlehem. 1 Cor. 3.9.
First, in respect of the prediction that Christ should be borne in it.

Secondly, In respect of the present condition, a poor place, fittest for him
that made himself poor for us.

Thirdly, In respect of the mystical signification: for Bethlehem (says Saint
Gregory) signifies the House of Bread; and therefore he which is, Greg. hom 8.
in Euang. Chrysostom. hom, 1. ex varijs in Math.
The true bread of Life, was rightly to be borne in Bethlehem, as Saint
Chrysostom says. And this shows the difference betwixt Gods dealing, and
the World: for we aim at the brauest things, he at the meanest; and he
chooses the foolish things of this World, to confound the wise; and the weak
things, to confound things that are mighty, and base things, 1 Cor. 1.27.28.29.
and things that are despised, yea, and things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence.

Now the means how he came to be borne in Bethlehem, Saint Augustine
observes, Aug. de concord. Euang.
how Saint Matthew omitteth, but that Saint Luke declares the same: Augustus
would have all men to go into their own Cities, to be taxed; and therefore
Joseph and Mary went to Bethlehem, and while they were there, Mary was
delivered.

From whence we may see, the most admirable providence of Almighty God, who as
in the great work of Creation, made the Light out of darkness, Aug. in
Enchirid. c. 101.
so in the wonderful works of gubernation, he can fulfill his own will,
being good, by the wills of wicked men, that are not good: for Augustus thought
on nothing less, Of the admirable providence of Almighty God.
then to have Christ borne at Bethlehem; when he sent every one to their own
Cities: But behold how God disposes of this Edict for the fulfilling of his
promise; so God brings many things to pass, through unknown ways; and
there is nothing happens, but through his providence: we perceive it not,
while things are in doing, but we shall plainly see it, when they are done;
and therefore we should ever pray unto God, that he would guide, and direct all
our actions to his glory, and to our comfort; and then no doubt, but as this
long and tedious journey of Mary, did redound to her exceeding joy, so those
things which for the present seem harsh and bitter unto us, will in the end
prove to our great advantage.

Thirdly, For the manner of Christ his birth, it is recorded, Of the manner of
Christ's birth, how mean it was in many respects.
that it was very poor, and mean; meaner then ordinary; or extraordinary
base: for he was borne of poor Parents, they traveled on foot, they had not
an Ass to ride on; in a poor Town, little Bethlehem, which is by
interpretation, An House of Bread; but such a poor House of Bread, that there
was scarce any bread in the House: And then being come from darkness into
light, Non poterat verbum fari verbum; This word could not speak a word, but
he was wrapped in poor swaddling cloutes, it may be his Mothers rags; and
then laid in a poor lodging, even in the Manger; and so he was indeed made
lower then the Angels, for he was consorted, and laid among the Beasts that
perish: Quia non erat locus in diuersorio, Because there was no room in the
Inn, for these poor innocent people, among the drunken swaggering companions;
for these will be sure to have room: Et pauper vbique iacet, And the poor
shall be thrust out of doors: And yet Christ was well contented, he desired
no better, Why Christ would be born so meanly. Psalm. 22.6.
but chose indeed to come after this meanest manner.

First, To fulfill the Scriptures: for the Prophet David said in the person of
Christ, I am a worm, and no man, a very scorn of men, and the outcast of the
people: And the Prophet Esaias says, He should grow up as a root out of a dry
ground, i. e. wrinckled and almost withered for want of radical moisture, He
has neither form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no
beauty, Esaias 53.2.3.
that we should desire him; he is despised and rejected of men.

Secondly, To teach us true humility, Descendit quo inferius non decuit, vt
ascenderet quo superius non poterat; For he made himself of no reputation,
that he might be exalted, Phil. 2.9.
and have a name given him about all other names; to show unto us, Luke 18.14.
that Whosoever humbles himself, shall be exalted.

Thirdly, To condemn the courses and desires of worldly men: for they desire
nothing so much as wealth, honors, and promotions; and yet all the Monarchs of
this World, with all their pomp and power, with all their riches and
greatness, cannot reconcile one soul to God; They must let that alone for
ever: But Christ poor, stripped, and naked, has so pleased God, that through
him, God cannot be displeased with us; for it is goodness and not greatness,
to be void of sin, and not to be full of riches, that our God respects.

Fourthly, To procure true riches unto us; for so the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 8.9.
that Christ, though he was rich, yet for our sake, he became poor, that we
through his poverty, might be made rich.

Fifthly, To show the difference betwixt his first and his second coming, for
now he came in poverty, but then he shall come in majesty; Math. 16.27.
He shall come on the glory of his Father with his Angels: The Earth shall
burn, the Heavens shall melt, and all the powers of the same shall be shaken:
And therefore seeing (as Emyssenus says) Talis and tantus sit horror
venientis, quis poterit terrorem sustinere iudicantis? That coming of his
shall be so terrible, as that all the wicked crew of damned sort, shall
exceedingly howl and cry, and pray the mountains to fall upon them, and to
hide them from that fearful day; let us make the right use of this his first
coming, that we may escape the terror of his second coming: And so you see
the manner of his birth, weakly, poorly, and meanly.

That we should be well contented with any state.
And this should teach us, to be ever contented with our poor and mean estate;
for if the Son of God, who made all things, and whose all things are, All the
Cattle upon a thousand hills, was well contented, and made choice of this low
estate; why should we be discontented with the same? for we are unworthy of
the very Bread we eat, and of the very Light of Heaven, wherewith we are
illuminated, we are very base, and miserable beggars, begging of God the very
crummes that we eat, Math. 6.11.
saying; Give us this day our daily bread; and yet such is our pride, and
haughtiness, that we are ready to snatch it out of his hands, and not to stay
while he gives it us: Such is our disdain and discontentednesse, that the
daintiest fare will scarce please us, and such is our desire and ambition, that
every man still cries with the Daughters of the Horse-leech, More, more; Our
eyes are never satisfied with seeing, nor our ears with hearing, nor our
hearts with enjoying the vanities of this World.

But alas Beloved, Beware of murmuring, Wisdom 1. 11.
which is nothing worth; and let the same mind be in you herein, as was in
Christ Jesus: If you would be happy, remember how he came, Phil. 2.5. Math.
8.20.
poor and mean, remember how he lived, mean and miserable; for, He had not
an House wherein to put his head; We have more then that: and remember how he
was entertained, cold and comfortless; Math. 10.24.25.
for, He came amongst his own, and his own received him not: And therefore
seeing he found such cold entertainment in the world, why should we look for
any better, or be any ways discontented at the like? for, The Servant is not
above his Master; but it is enough for the servant to be as his Master is.

CHAP. III. Of the testimonies which prove that Christ the Messiah is borne.
THirdly, Of the witnesses that testify the birth and coming of the Messiah.
For the testimony and witness whereby he was approved, and confirmed unto the
world, to be incarnate, and made Flesh, for to be the Savior and Redeemer of
the World; I find the same especially to be twofold.

1. The Creatures. 2. The Creator.
First, The testimony of the Creature is threefold.

1. The Angels of Heaven. 2. The Stars in the Skies. 3. Men on Earth,
First, An Angel said unto the Shepherds, Luke 2.11.
Unto you is borne this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is, Christ
the Lord; And immediately there were not six Cherubims (as Esayas saw) nor
four and twenty Elders, Esaias 6.2.
(as Saint John saw) but a multitude of heavenly Angels, that by their heavenly
Halelu-iah did confirm the same: And therefore the truth hereof is infallible,
because the Angels though they be mutable by nature, yet they be now confirmed
by grace; Isidorus. l. 1. c. 12. de summo bono.
Ne a veritate voluntatem auerterent, That they cannot lie, nor fall away from
truth, as Isidorus says.

Secondly, The gentile Prophet Baalam, prophesied, that there should come a
Star of Jacob; Numb. 24.17. Justin. lib. 1.
And Zoroastres King of the Bactrians, a man excellent in all learning, (as
Justin says) left this as a tradition among the Gentiles, and afterward it
was more plainly published by the Sybils, that a Day Star should appear,
before the arising of the Son of Righteousness: And this was fresh among the
Gentiles, until the very coming of Christ; for Virgil (though misapplying the
same) says, Virgil. Egl. 4.
Ecce Dionaei praecessit Caesaris astrum.

Rightly applied thus, That the glorious Star long expected, should precede
and fore-shew the coming of the Savior.

Fulgent. fol. 657. in Octauo. Ser. de Epiphan.
Yet Fulgentius says, That Puer natus nouam stellam fabricauit; Christ being
borne, did of nothing frame this Star: And so indeed it is called, His
Star; his Star, because he made it, and his Star, because it bare
witness of him: for the Magi, the Wisemen being upon the Mountain
Victorialis, worshipping their God, Chrysostom. hom. 2. op. impf. in Matheum 2.
(as Saint Chrysostom says) a star did appear unto them, in the likeness
of a little Child, and so showed unto them, and to all others, that this
Child, and Son of God was borne.

Thirdly, Men, both Jews and Gentiles, did bear witness unto his birth.

Math. 15.24.
First, The Jews, because he was chiefly sent unto the lost sheep of the
House of Israel; Therefore immediately after his birth, the Angel told the
Shepherds, that Christ was borne: And the Shepherds when they had seen him,
that they might be sure of the truth thereof, Luke 2.17.
did make known abroad, the saying that was told them concerning that Child.

Why the birth of Christ was first revealed to the Shepherds.
And here one thing is very obseruable, that the Angels made choice of
Shepherds, to be the first partakers of this blessed news, and the first
proclaimers of our Saviors birth: That the great Clearkes and Scholars of the
Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees, that knew best Christ should come, and where
Christ should be borne, should notwithstanding be utterly discarded; and these
Heards-men be so graciously admitted, to see that, which so many Wisemen and
Prophets desired to see, Math. 13.17.
and have not seen.

To teach us, how much God favors holy and modest simplicity, and
disalloweth impious and scrupulous subtilty; These Shepherds that followed
their vocation, and kept their Sheep, did first find that good Shepherd,
that gives his life for his Sheep; because as the wool that has received the
die, and tincture of no color, is best capable of any color; so these
Shepherds, that were never before endued with any kind of humane wisdom,
were the fitter Subjects to be enlightened with this divine knowledge: And
those great Doctors of the Law, were excluded from these tidings of the
Gospel, because insolent presumption of our own knowledge, is that indeed,
which depraueth our affections, and depriueth our souls from saving grace.

Secondly, That the Magi believed this Child to be 1. A Man. 2. A King. 3. A
God.

The Gentiles were called to be witnesses of the birth of this Child, for the
Star appearing unto the Magi, it did cast forth three especial beams,
whereby the Wisemen did perceive that Child which was borne, to be

First, A Man; secondly, such a man that was to be a King; and thirdly, such a
King, as should be both God and Man: And therefore they addressed themselves,
both in their speech and actions, to testify as much; for,

First, In their speech unto Herod, they say, Where is he that is borne? to
show that he was a man; King of the Jews, to show that he was a King: for, We
have seen his Star, and are come to worship him; to show that he was a God.

Secondly, In their actions, they show the very same; Basil in sermon de hum.
Christi generat. f. 138.
for they offered unto him Myrhe, Gold, and Franckinsence.

First, Myrhe, to show that he was mortal; because they used to put Myrhe to
the bodies of the dead.

Secondly, Gold, to show that he was a King, that should have a Crown of pure
Gold to be put upon his head.

Thirdly, Franckinsence, to show that he was a God, Chrysostom. hom. 6. in c. 2.
Matthew.
Quia thus ad honorem diuinum concrematur; Because Franckinsence was used to be
burned in honor of God.

Et capitur minimo thuris honor Deus. And this is most manifestly showed, that
they believed him to be a GOD, by all the particulars of their actions. For,

Ammon. Alex. in harm. Niceph. li. c. 13.
First, Though Ammonius Alexandrinus, and Nicephorus think, that the Star
appeared two years before Christ his birth; that so they might make
preparation, for so long a journey; because these Magi were Kings themselves,
as Saint Cyprian delivers it from the tradition of the Church; Cyprian. ser.
de Baptis. Chrysostom. hom. 6. in 2. Matthew.
and Saint Chrysostom seems to consent; and Bosquierus labors to
confirm; yet I think rather with Saint Augustine: that these three wise men,
Iter vnius anni in tredecim diebus peregerunt. Did perform that journey which
was enough for a whole year, in thirteen days; because (as Remigius says)
Puer ad quem properauerunt, potuit eos in tam breui temporis spatio ad se
adducere; That child unto whom they hastened, might help and further them
forward to come unto himself, in so short a space: and therefore this their
diligence and speedy have to come to Christ, does sufficiently show that they
believed this newborn Babe, to be the true and eternal God.

Secondly, Their behauiours being come, does in a far plainer manner show,
that, puerum quem viderunt hominem, agnouerunt redemptorem; Chrysostom. quo supra.
the child which they saw to be a man, they did acknowledge to be their God;
for though they saw him dandled in the lap of his poor Mother, wrapped about
with silly clouts, and having not the least sign of any humane Kingly dignity,
yet they did homage unto him, as unto the King of Kings. For,

First, They fell down, to show their Humility.

Secondly, They worshipped him, to show their Faith.

Thirdly, They offered their gifts, to show their Charity.

Jn gremio pauperis matris positum, and pannis vilibus inuolutum, and nullum
regiae dignitatis humanae signum habentem.
Quid? adorant regem nuper natum, etc. And what is this, that they adore this
child newly borne, and sucking on his Mothers Breasts, and would not adore that
King which had been long ordained, and was most gloriously reigning on his
Kingly throne, what is the cause of this? Ille natus in pallatio contemnitur,
iste natus in diuersorio quaeritur; That he which was borne in the Palace
should be contemned, and he which lay in the Manger should be adored?

Saint Chrysostom, Maximus, Leo, Fulgentius, and all, do all agree, it was,
because the Wise men knew, that he Quem dixerunt regem Iudaeorum erat Creator
Angelorum, and quem viderunt paruum in praesepio, erat immensus in coelo; Whom
they had called King of the Jews, was the Lord and Maker of the Angels, and
whom they saw little and poor in the cratch, was rich and immeasurable in
Heaven.

Quod non capis, quod non vides, Fulgentius ser. de Epiphania Thom in hymn.

Animosa firmat fides,
Praeter rerum ordinem.
Their faith did show them that he was their God.

And so that star which sent forth these three forenamed beams of light
into the hearts of these Wise men, did send from thence by reflection, three
other beams of light, for our instruction: for here we see this star wrought
in them.

First, Illumination and Faith in their hearts; What effects the Star wrought
in the Wise men.
for when they saw him, they believed in him.

Secondly, Confession and Inquisition in their Mouths; for when they lost him,
they made diligent search and inquisition after him, saying, Where is he that
is borne King of the Jews. Deuteronomy. 6.16.


Thirdly, Diligence and Obedience in their Actions, for they made have to go
unto him, and when they came, they came not empty-handed: but they brought unto
him Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh.

Aurea nascenti fuderunt munera regi,
Thura ded^^e deo, myrrham tribuere sepulchro:
And so herein these Wise men, were wise indeed; not because they had all the
wisdom of the Gentiles; but because they did thus seek and find him, In whom
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Oh that it were so with
us; that we did know him, believe in him, go unto him, search and seek him,
and offer him our selves and ours, to do him service!

Pro myrrha lachrymas, auro cor porrige purum,
Pro thure ex humili pectore funde preces.
And we shall not need to fetch gold from Ophire, What we should offer unto
Christ.
but the gold of a pure Faith, which will abide the fiery trial, neither shall
we need to go to the Apothecaries, to buy their Frankincense, or Myrrh, but
the sweet perfume of devout prayers, and the bitter tears of godly sorrow, for
out ungodly sins: these are the most acceptable sacrifices unto Christ.

And as the forenamed witnesses, which were primitiae Martyrum, the first
fruits of his witnesses, both of the Jews and Gentiles, do testify this
truth unto the world; so to these are added, the testimony of John the Baptist,
for, he was sent to bear witness of that light: John 1.8.
and he testified and bare witness of him, that he was that Lamb of God, John
1.29.
which takes away the sins of the world. And because we should the better
believe him and his testimony herein, he shows how he came to know him to be
the true Messiah, even by the testimony of the Spirit of truth: for, I knew him
not (says he) but he that sent me to baptize with water. i. e. the holy Ghost,
said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on
him, the same is he which baptizeth with the holy Ghost: and I saw (says he)
and bare record that this is the Son of God. John 1.33.
And then the testimony of all the Evangelists, the Apostles, the Fathers, the
Martyrs, and all the holy Men of God, which have testified and sealed this
truth unto us, some with their words, some with their works, and some with
their dearest blood.

That God himself testified Christ to be his son. Matthew. 3.17.
Secondly, if these testimonies of the creatures be not sufficient to prove
Jesus the Son of Mary, to be the Eternal Son of God; we find God himself
the Creator of Heaven and Earth, testifying the same: for though the testimony
of John was sufficient, John 5.35.
to satisfy any man, because he was aburning and a shining light, in whom the
Jews themselves were willing to rejoice for a season, as our Savior
witnesses, yet Christ needed not to receive testimony from man, John 5.36.
because he had a greater witness then that of John, even the Father himself
which sent him, he bare witness of him, and with an audible voice he
proclaimed the same twice from heaven, saying, first at the River Jordan, and
then on Mount Thabor; Matthew. 7.5.
that he was his Beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased. John. 5.36.
And these are sufficient witnesses; Quia dicta Iehouae dicta pura; Because the
words of the Lord are pure words, as the Psalmist says. Or if any Athiest will
not believe these Divine Oracles, let him believe his own eyes; If he will
believe neither Angels, Men, nor GOD, let him believe himself, Matthew. 7.16.
for the very works, that I do, testify of me: for the works of every man
do testify of him, what he is; because that is a sure rule of our Savior, By
their fruits you shall know them: But then you must not understand their
works, as they are reported to be, for so we are, and may be many times
deceived; for, John came, Matthew. 11.18.
neither eating nor drinking, and they said he had a Devil; and, our Savior
came eating and drinking, and they said, behold a Glutton, and a Wine-bibber;
And the Prophet David says, They laid to his charge, things that he never
knew: So the Christians of the Primitive Church, that were as careful as men
might possible be for their lives, to lead a strict and an upright life; yet
is it incredible almost to think, what wicked reports were raised of them: and
therefore not the works of man, as they are by envy, or malice bruited to be,
for what will not envy say? but as they are in deed and verity, do manifestly
show what any man is: and therefore Christ says unto the Jews, If you were
the sons of Abraham, John 8.39.
you would do the works of Abraham; and Saint James says, James 2.18.
Show me thy Faith by thy Works; for the works of a man truly considered, is
an infallible argument to show what he is: so the works that our Savior did,
while he did live on earth, do sufficiently prove him to be both God and Man;
and so his very enemies testified, saying, He has done all things well, Mark.
7.37.
he makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak; and those that
doubted of him, whether he was the true Messiah, or not, said, John 7.31.
When Christ comes, will he do more miracles then these which he has done?
and the works that he does now, reigning in heaven, do sufficiently prove him
to be the Maker, Preserver, Heb. 10.12.13.
and Redeemer of men: for, he sits on the right hand of God, Romans 8.34. 1
Cor 15.35. Matthew. 11 6.
making intersession for his Saints, and ruling till he has put all his
enemies under his feet. And therefore I conclude, as I began, that the Word
was made flesh, and blessed is he that is not offended in him.

Why then, O thou incredulous Jew, will thou not receive thy Savior? is it
because he came poor, without any show of worldly pomp? why? that should make
all men the rather to embrace him, and the more thankefully to acknowledge him;
because that he which might have come in Majesty, Cum caelestibus, Attended on
by Angels, would come in poverty, and have his bed made cum iumentis, among the
beasts that perish, that so by his coming poor, we might be all made rich
through him; and therefore O Jew, I do advice thee, that as thy Fathers
accomplished the decree of God, in condemning him; so do thou according to the
will of God, in believing on him, and thou shall be happy; for, he that
believes in him shall never perish. To whom with the Father, and the Holy
Spirit, be ascribed all Honor, Thanks and Praise, both now, and for evermore.
Amen.

A Prayer.
O Eternal God, who, as in all things else, so more especially in giving thy
dearest Son, co-eternall, coequall, and co-essentiall unto thy self to be
made flesh, subject to our humane frailties, and in all things like unto us,
sin only excepted, have showed thy goodness, and thy love to man, to be
like thy self, infinite and incomprehensible; we most humbly beseech thee to
give us grace to know thee, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, to be the
only true God, whom to know, is eternal life, through the said Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

IEHOVAE LIBERATORI.

FINIS.
The Fourth Golden Candlestick, HOLDING The Fourth greatest Light of Christian
RELIGION. Of the Passion of the MESSIAH.
LVKE. 24.46. (...).

And thus it behooved Christ to suffer.


YOu have heard (dearly beloved) how miserably man is distressed by sin, The
coherence of this Treatise, with the former Treatises.
how he may be relieved only by the Mercy of God, and how this relief is
applied unto us, by the Incarnate Word; for he is the true Samaritan that does
help the wounded man; he is the blessed Angel that does stir the poole of
Bethesda, and give virtue unto the water, to heal our sores; to help our
souls: But alas, this Angel as yet, is but descended, and the waters are not
troubled: and this Samaritan is but alighted, and the poor semi-dead
Traveler, is not set up upon his horse, to be carried toward his Inn: that
is, he has not yet entered into the waters of tribulations to save our souls
from drowning in Hell; neither has he put our sins upon his back, that we
being freed from the burden, might walk on toward Heaven; this rests yet
behind, and this Tragedy is yet unheard: and therefore, though he much humbled
himself by his Incarnation; yet is that nothing; it is but the beginning of
sorrows, in respect of his sore and bitter Passion: For, to redeem our souls
from sin, the deep waters must enter into his soul, and all our sins must
be laid upon his back; and for our sins; It behooves Christ to suffer. Hic
labor, hoc opus est. And this is that which we are now to treat of. Thus it
behooved Christ to suffer.

CHAP. I. Of the manifold use and commodities that we reap by the continual
meditation of the sufferings of Christ.
Three things that move attention.
THere be three special things that do use to move attention.

1. An eloquent Author. 2. An important matter. 3. A compendious breuity.
And all these three do here join and meet together in this Text of
Scripture. For,

First, the Author of these words is Christ. Luke 11.49.
First the Author of these words, is Jesus Christ: the wisdom of God; Wisdom
it self, so incomprehensibly wise, that all men wondered at the gracious words
that proceeded out of his mouth.

Secondly, the sum of these words, is the Tragedy of Jesus Christ.
Secondly, the matter is the Tragedy of himself; the laborious life, and the
dolorous death of the Son of God: the chiefest Tragedy of all Tragedies; for
the Catastrophe hereof, has the effusion of blood, and the mourning, not only
of the Sufferer, or Parents and Friends, but of Heaven and Earth, and all the
whole world, far more doleful then the mourning of Hadadrimmon, in Valley of
M^gyddo.

The Actors of this Tragedy, are Kings, Vice-Royes, Dukes, Scribes, Pharisees,
Highpriests, Elders of the people; The Actors of this Tragedy.
the Apostles themselves, and others: all great. Christ the King of Kings,
Herod the great King; Pilate, the Viceroy, Annas and Cayphas, high Priests;
Peter and Judas, great Apostles; and those that were mute, as the Sun, the
Earth, the Stones, the Veil of the Temple, and the very Graves, did by
apparent signs, most dolefully bewail the nefarious death of the Son of God:
yea more, the Angels mourned, and the Devils trembled to behold the same.

The Theater on which it was acted, was Jerusalem, The Theater was Jerusalem.
the very midst and heart of the earth, as some imagine; according to that
saying of the Psalmist, Operatus est deus salutem in medio terrae, GOD has
wrought salvation in the midst of the Earth. Here is the place where it was
acted: -- Hic, hic, mors and vita duello,
-- Conflixere mirando.


Here life and death did strive for victory: and here the beholders were men of
all Nations; Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans: and the time was their most solemn
feast, wherein all did ^eete to eat their Paschall Lamb.

And therefore if there be any Theme that may challenge our ears to lysten,
and our hearts to meditate upon the same, it is this; for this is one of those
things that was once done, that it might be thought of for ever, that it might
be had in everlasting remembrance. And the continual meditation thereof is; 1.
Acceptable unto Christ. 2. Profitable for us.
For,

First, The continual meditation of Christ's passion what it does.
if the rod of Moses which wrought so many miracles in Egypt, and the Manna
which fed the children of Israel 40. years in the Wilderness; and the Book
of the Law, which was delivered unto Moses upon Mount Sinai, were to be
preserved in the Arc, First, It is most acceptable unto Christ.
as testimonies of Gods love throughout all generations; how much more should
we keep the remembrance of the Cross of Christ, of the Body and Blood of
Christ, and of the glad tidings of salvation, which we have by the death of
Christ in the Church of God for evermore? Our Savior gave but two Sacraments
unto his Church; and one of them is chiefly instituted to this end; for a
remembrance of his suffering: for, as often as you eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup, Luc. 22.
you show the Lords death until he come. 1 Cor. 11.1.
And the remembrance of Christ's death (says Saint Chrysostom) Est beneficij
maximi recordatio, Chrysostom. hom. 8. in Matthew.
caputque diuinae erga nos charitatis; Is the commemoration of the greatest
benefit that ever we received from God; and the chiefest argument of his Divine
love toward man: for though it was great love, to be clothed with the veil of
our flesh, and to take the infirmities of our frail and feeble nature; yet is
it far greater love, to be compassed with the shadow of Death, and to
undergo the penalty of our sinful nature. And therefore seeing the merciful
and gracious Lord has so done this marvelous work, Psalm. 111 4.
that it ought to be had in remembrance; I may well say with the Prophet; Lam.
1.12.
Have ye no regard, O all ye that pass by the way? Stay here and consider, and
behold, If ever there were any sorrow, like his sorrow, or any suffering like
the suffering of Christ? your business may be great, and your occasions
urgent, yet none so great, none so weighty as this; and none so acceptable unto
God as this: for if you must remember when he rested, how much more, should you
remember how he suffered?

Secondly, It is most profitable unto men, in three respects.
Secondly, As no work more acceptable unto God, so none more profitable for us;
for the serious meditation of the sufferings of Christ effects in us,
(besides many others) these three especial good. 1. It hinders us to sin.
2. It kindles our charity. 3. It erecteth our Hope.
For,

Orosius sup ep. ad Romans l. 6.
First, Tanta vis crucis vt si ante occulos ponatur, etc. So great is the power
and efficacy of the sufferings of Christ, that if it were always fixed in the
minds of the faithful, How the meditation of Christ's Passion drives away
sin.
so that they did intentiuely behold the death of Christ, no concupiscense, no
lust, no envy, no fury could overcome them; but presently upon the
consideration of Christ his sufferings, the whole host of the flesh, and of
sin, would fly away says Orosius, and Saint Bernard says, Bern. ser. 62.
in Cant.
Quid tam efficax ad curanda co^scientiae vulnera, necnon ad purgandam mentis
aciem quam Christi vulnerum sedula meditatio? What can be more powerful, to
cure the sinful wounds of our consciences, yea, and to purge our minds from
all sins, then the sedulous meditation of the wounds of Christ? for the
Passion of Christ shows how dearly it cost him to redeem us from sin, and
therefore it should make us afraid to sin: for when the Harlot Lais asked of
Demosthenes 1000. Dracmas, i. e. almost 24. pound of our money, or as some
report, 10000. Dracmas, i. e. 200. pound for one nights lodging, with her, he
wisely answered her, Non tanti emam paenitere; I will not buy repentance at so
dear a rate; so when Satan suggesteth us to sin, if we did but consider the
great price, that Christ did pay for sin, and must be paid before it can be
pardoned; for we are bought with a price; yea, with a great price, 1 Cor. 6.1.
says the Apostle; there is no doubt but it would be a great means to
preserve us from sinning: for it is most certain, says Origin, Origin in. c.
6. ad Romans
that the true consideration of the Passion of Christ, in the heart of a
Christian, is the chiefest munition to guard us against every sin; for, as
Vriah said unto King David, The Arc, and Israel, 2 Samuel 11.11.
and Judah, abide in Tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the servants of my Lord, are
encamped in the open field, Sap. 2.8.
and shall I then go down into mine house, to eat and drink, and to lie
with my wife? as thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do this
thing. So every good Christian man will say, My Savior Christ did wear a
Crown of thorns; and shall I say come, let us crown our selves with rose
buds? his hands are extended upon the Cross to embrace me, and shall I stretch
forth mine hands unto wickedness to disgrace him? he being ready to die, had
gall to eat, and vinegar to drink; and shall I being perfectly whole, say
with them in the book of Wisdom, Come, Wisdom 2.7.
let us fi^l our selves with Wine and pleasant ointments? He suffered his
breast, his side, and his heart, to be opened and pierced for me, and shall I
harden my heart, and shut the door of my soul against him? he was contented
to hear himself reviled and scorned for me, and shall I still scorn him,
and stop mine ears from hearing him, so graciously speaking, and so lovingly
calling me, by the mouth of his holy servants?

And, as Origin says, Pro me Dei filius iugulatus est, and iterum me peccare
delectat? The Son of God was slain for my sins, and shall I ever again
delight in sin? So will every true remembrancer of Christ's sufferings say,
the desire of money betrayed my Savior, and shall I ever after that, love
couetosnesse? my wanton pleasures, my vain delights, my swelling pride, my
greedy desire, and all my wicked sins, were the only cause of my Saviors
want, Chrysostom hom. 88. in Matthew.
of his bitter sorrows, and his shameful, cruel death: and shall I ever love
those sins that brought these sorrows unto him? no sure, I will not do it,
says every soul that thinks of this: Etiam si lapis esset; yea, though his
heart were made of stone, yet the true meditation hereof, would mollify the
same like wax; and cause him to depresse his pride, and to detest all sin,
says Saint Chrysostom; for as the destroying Angel could not hurt any of
them, whose doore-posts were sprinkled with the blood of the Paschall Lamb; so
the subtlety of Satan, that destroying enemy, can never prevail against them,
which have their minds and hearts always sprinkled with the true meditation
of the suffering, and shedding of the precious blood of Jesus Christ.

Gal. 6.14.
And therefore, as that blessed Apostle Saint Paul says; God forbid that I
should glory in any thing, The meditation of Christ's Passion cannot choose but
make us to love Christ.
save in the Cross of Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me,
and I unto the world; that is, whereby all worldly vanities and pleasures, are
become loathsome unto me, and I am become a hater and detester of them; as
being the cause of Christ his Cross; so I say unto every man; if ever Satan,
or the lust of the flesh, inticeth thee to sin; I pray thee do but this one
thing, before thou do the sin, call to mind and consider, what thy dear
Savior suffered for thy sins, and I doubt not but it will prove a most
wholesome antidote, and a most excellent preservative against sin. And,

Secondly, As the consideration of Christ's Passion, is a great means to
prevent sin, so it is of maine force to stir up our love, and to kindle our
affection toward Christ: as Saint Bernard says, Nihil est, quod eum ita nobis
amabilem reddit, quam calix ille, Bern. ser. 20. in Cantic.
quem pro nobis bibit; nothing in the world makes Christ to be loved of us more
then that Cup which he has drunk up for us. Quia amor amoris magnes, and
durus est, qui amorem non rependit; Because love is as a loadstone to draw love
again; and, greater love then this, has no man; that a man should give his
life for his friends; and therefore the remembrance of this cannot choose, but
cause us to love him again.

Euripides in Alceste.
It is reported -- subeuntem fata mariti Alcesten, -- that Alcestes was
contented, to undergo the destinies of her husband; for when Apollo had
obtained of the Fates, to spare Admetus life, if any one of his friends or
kindred would willingly die for him; and that all his friends refused the same,
his wife Alcestes redeemed his life with her own death: So was Pythias ready
to die for Damon, and Damon likewise for Pythias: and so the Codri for the
Athenians; and the Curtij for the Romans did willingly give themselves to die:
Sic fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit.

And surely these are arguments of great love; yet far far short of the
love of Christ. For,

First, these did it for them that loved them as much, Lactant. institut. l. 5.
c. 18.
and were as ready to do as much for them again: but Christ did it for us,
when we were his enemies. Romans 5.8.


Secondly, these owed so much unto their friends and country: for in that they
were, they were from these, and whatsoever they had, they had from them; and
therefore, Cicero. l. 1 offic.
Partem ortus nostri patria, and partem patres sibi vendicant: Our Country, our
friends, and our parents, do rightly challenge no small part of every man,
says Cicero: and as Lucan says.

-- Haec duri immota Catonis. Lucan. l. 2.

secta fuit. --
Nec sibi sed toti genitum se credere mundo.
It was Cato's mind, that he was not borne for himself, but to do what good
he could to others; but Christ owes us nothing, he is a debtor to no man: for
who has first given unto him, Romans 5 8.
and it shall be recompensed unto him again? And therefore seeing the love of
Christ to us was so great, as when we deserved no good at his hands; but
deserved so much evil, as is due to mortal and perfidious enemies; to suffer
so many things for us; how can it choose, but the remembrance thereof, should
exceedingly kindle our love toward him again? for who can behold and consider
the gr^^ price that was paid for his redemption, and not love his Redeemer? or
who can think of that bitter potion, which he drunk for our salvation, and
not be inflamed with the love of his Savior?

There be 3. things (says Mirandula) that do move us to love any one.

First, The virtues of the person. Mirand de morte Christi li. 1. c. 17.


Secondly, The benefits that we have received of him.

Thirdly, The good that we do expect from him.

But Christ is the virtue of God his Father, the chiefest good, and all
goodness; and although every virtue does challenge love, yet no virtue
deserves the same so much as liberality; and what greater bounty or liberality
can there be then this, to shed his precious blood, and to offer up himself
upon the Altar of his Cross, to deliver us from eternal death? and what
greater good can be desired, then that eternal happiness which he has
purchased for us, and which we do expect from him? And therefore who would not
love so good a Savior?

It is reported of Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, that he did so continually
meditate upon those great things, which Christ had done and suffered for him,
Jdem quo supra. c. 10.
that he was thereby brought so entirely to love him, as when he was demanded,
why he would not forsake and forget Christ, rather then suffer himself to be
torn and devoured of wild and savage Beasts? He answered, That he could not
forget him, because the sufferings of Christ, were not only words transient in
his mouth, or remoueable objects before his eyes, but they were indelible
Characters, so engraven in his heart, that all the torments of the Earth could
never race them out: And therefore being commanded by that bloody Tyrant
Traiane, to be ripped and vnbowelled, they found Jesus Christ written upon his
heart, in Characters of Gold.

Oh that it might be so with us, that we would ever set the sufferings of
Christ before our face, and with Saint Paul, desire to know nothing but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified; that so by the continual consideration of Christ
his great love to us, we might be induced to love him again.

The meditation of Christ's suffering, supporteth our hope.
Thirdly, As the continual meditation of Christ's suffering, suppresseth sin,
and kindles our love, so it supporteth our hope: for though I have sinned
grievously, and my conscience is much troubled, yet it shall not be ouer-cha^
(...) despair; Quoniam vulnerum Domini recordabor, and ^od ex me mihi deest,
vsurpo ex visceribus Domini: Bernard Ser. 61. in Cant.
Because (...) will remember the wounds of my Lord Jesus, and whatsoever is
wanting in my self, I will assume from the bowels of my Savior: for when my
wisdom fails, my righteousness suffices not, my holiness helps not,
the sufferings of Christ shall suffice for all: This shall be my last refuge,
this shall be mine only remedy, says Saint Bernard. Idem. Ser. 22. in Cant.
And so Saint Paul, after he had showed how, do he what he could, he served
with his flesh many times the Law of sin; and therefore cries out, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? He
says, I thank God, Romans 7.24.25.
through Christ our Lord; As if he should have said, Seeing I am so prone to
sin, and so unapt to goodness, I have none other refuge, but only to fly
unto the sufferings and merits of Jesus Christ: and I know that is sufficient
for me, in stead of all; for, as Israel sucked honey out of the rock, and oil
out of the flint stone, Deuteronomy. 32.13.
so do we suck all our comforts, and refresh our selves with those streams
of tears, and blood, that gushed out of that stony Rock Jesus Christ; And as
the high hills are a refuge for the wild Goats, Psalm. 104.18.
and the stony Rocks for the Conies; those poor silly fearful Creatures,
that have none other shift to save their lives, but to hide themselves in the
holes of the Rocks; so the poor silly simple souls of sinful men, have
none other place to hide themselves in from the wrath of God, Cantic. 2.14.
but only with the Dove (in the Canticles) In foraminibus petrae; In the
clefts of this Rock, in the secret places of his stayres, (as some translate
it,) that is, in the wounds and stripes of Jesus Christ: for, By his stripes we
are healed. Esaias 53.5.
And therefore, seeing the sufferings of Christ, is that precious balm of
Gilead, that sovereign salve, which is sufficient to heal every sickned
soul, to hinder us to sin, to kindle our love to God, and to erect our hope
in God; no man can treat, no man can hear of a matter more excellent, then is
the dilating of the sufferings of Christ.

Thirdly, Here is a compendious breuity, a theme short enough, but four
words; Ita oportuit Christum pati: 3. Here is abundance of matter in few words.
Thus it behooved Christ to suffer, or, Christ must thus suffer. And they be
certain in sense, and full of matter: And therefore you may easily remember
the words, because they be so few; and you should diligently muse, and daily
meditate upon the matter, and be thoroughly excited to an unwearied hearkening
or reading, and to a faithful retaining of the same, because so excellent, and
I may be truly excused, for my large preamble, and long perambulation upon the
same; because there is, Multum in paruo, Hieron. ad Demetriad.
A great deal of matter couched here, in a little room; even as the whole
World is expressed in a little Map. For though the men of Myndas might well
shut their large gates, Laertius. l. 6.
lest their little City would run out; yet huge spacious Cities must have
their Gates bigger then little Wickets, least their people should get neither
in nor out: And therefore though these words be but few, yet seeing herein
there is contained infinite matter, and an huge building; Centum sublime
columnis: for, what higher mystery, or what ampler discourse can we find,
then the sufferings of Jesus Christ? you must give me leave to insist a while,
to behold the stripes, and to search into the wounds of Christ; for I may not
shut a large foot into a little shoe, and I cannot enclose so many Iliads of
sorrows (as one did the Illiads of Homer) within the compass of a nut-shell:
And therefore, by Gods help, though I mean not to build Tabernacles, and to
stay ever in the expounding of that, which shall be ever in my remembrance; yet
I will Sistere gradum, Make a stop, and stay a while: To treat of these words
of Christ, Thus it behooved Christ to suffer. In which words (as the Holy Ghost
has set them down) I note these four especial points.

The division of the Text.
First, The person suffering, Christ; thus it behooved Christ. Secondly, The
suffering it self, it behooved him to suffer. Thirdly, The necessity of his
suffering, it behooved him to suffer. Fourthly, The manner of his suffering:
Thus it behooved Christ to suffer;
i. e. As the Prophets foretold, and as you have seen he did.

CHAP. II. Of the surpassing excellency of the Person suffering.
1. Part.
FOr the first, The excellency of the person; that is, the subject of any
action, does give the most life unto any matter: for the exploits of Kings, or
the deeds of Nobles, do of themselves crave attention, a hundred times more
then the story of any one of base condition. Consider we then the person, that
is to undergo this passion.

First, We shall find him to be a man; for so Pilate says, That Christ was a
Man.
Behold the man: And himself commonly gives himself none other title, then,
The Son of man; to show indeed, that he was a true man, as we are.

And this should move in us compassion; for humanity it self at the torments
of the very brute Beasts, is something touched; and Diogenes the Cinick^, in
this respect is said, Laertius l. 6. Bonauent. in vita. S. Francis.
to have redeemed many times the Beasts from slaughter: And Saint Francis
likewise is said, to have ransomed the poor Lambs from the Butchers hands;
because it grieved them, to see any Creature tortured; and therefore much more
should we be moved with compassion, at the passion of any man: for if one
member suffer, 1 Cor. 12.26.
all the members suffer with it, says the Apostle.

Secondly, Christ was not only a man, That Christ was a just man.
but he was also a just man; Non erat dolus in ore eius, There was no guile
found in his mouth: His enemies themselves confess it, Math. 27.19. Resolution
of Pilate Page 47.
Have thou nothing to do with that just man, says Pilates wife; and Pilate
oftentimes (as I have showed in my Book of the resolution of Pilate)
confessed, and by many arguments confirmed his assertion, that Christ deserved
no punishment at all; Luke 23.14.
and that he could not find (though he had most diligently searched) any
cause of death in him: and therefore to clear himself from the imputation of
injustice, Leo Ser. 3. de pass.
that he should ijsdem labijs eum mittere ad crucem, quibus pronunciauerat
innocentem, With the same lips send him to be crucified, whom even now he had
justified; he washed his hands in the view of the multitude, saying, I am
innocent from the blood of this just person: So Herod, Math. 27.24.
though he had derided our Saviors silence, yet dared he not condemn his
innocence; for, I have sent him unto Herod, and lo, Luc. 23.15.
nothing worthy of death is found in him, says Pilate; So Caiphas the High
Priest prophesies of him, whom he persecuteth, and absolueth him whom he
accuses, for he pronouncing the mystery of our salvation, said, It was
necessary that one should die for the people: John 11.50.
Therefore he must be a just man, or else he could not satisfy for the
sins of men: And so the Devil himself, though he violently persecuted, and
most maliciously accused yet be clearly justified our Savior Christ; for it
was he (as many of the ancients do conjecture) that told Pilates wife, and
incited her to tell her Husband, that the man thus maligned, and condemned as
nefarious, was notwithstanding just and righteous; for the Devil knew, that
since he first knew him, he knew no sin in him: And it may be that to this
our Savior alludeth, John 14.30. Talem vix reperit vnum, milibus e multis
hominum consultus Apollo, John 8.46.
when he says, The Prince of this World comes; Sed in me non habet quicquam,
but he has nothing in me: As if he should have said, When he searches, and
seeks, and sifteth what he can; yet shall he find no evil, no sin, no,
not the least cause of death in me. For he might justly say, Which of you can
rebuke me of sin? Quia ab omnibus accepit testimonium innocentiae, Because
he had the testimonies of all men, Iren. l. 4. c. 14.
of all sorts, as Irenaeus says, to justify him; God, Men, Angels, Devils,
Friends, Foes, Acquaintance, Strangers, and all justified him, that he was
void of sin, full of grace.

And therefore, as we have ever more compassion of them that suffer, and be
innocent, then of those whom we conjecture to be Malefactors; so the
consideration of Christ's suffering, being as the Dove, as innocent as
innocence it self, should move in us not only a commisseration of the
sufferer, but also a detestation of the persecutors: for who can hear, or
read, of the death of righteous Abel, by that wicked Caine; the burning of
Laurentius, by that Tyrant Decius; the flaying of Saint Bartholmew, by his
bloody enemies; or the dragging of Hippolytus with wild Horses, and such like
cruel and bloody Tragedies, without a detestation of such horribly wicked
Actors? And can we hear the sufferings of innocent guiltless Christ, without
a deadly detestation of those inhumane Butchers?

That Christ was a good man. Acts 10.38.
Thirdly, He was not only a just man, that did no hurt to any man, but he was
also a good man, that did good to every man: for, He went about (says the
Apostle) doing good; and that both in words and works: for, first, He often
taught them, in the Temple, in the Synagogue, upon the Mount, in the
Highways, in Houses, in all places; his goodness would not suffer him to
conceal any thing in silence, that might be any ways profitable unto his
hearers; but to dispell with all diligence, all mysts and clouds of errors,
from the inward eyes of the people, and to instruct them clearly in all the
heavenly mysteries of salvation.

Secondly, He cured the bleeding wounds of afflicted consciences, he reclaimed
and brought home many straggling sheep, and wandering sinners; he gave eyes unto
the blind, feet unto the lame, speech unto the dumb, ears unto the deaf,
bread unto the hungry, yea, many times he restored health unto the diseased,
and sometimes the dead unto their lamenting friends: And as Saint Paul says,
Who is weak, and I am not weak; 2 Cor. 11.23.
who is offended, and I burn not? So might our Savior more truly say, Who is
burdened, and I am not grieved at it? for he commisserated the corporal and
spiritual infirmities of all men, yea, he did not only pity them in us, but
he put them all upon himself, Et tulit in se vt a nobis tolleret, and took
them all upon himself, that he might take them all from us, as Saint
Chrysostom says. And therefore, if the people did so much condole the
natural death of Dorcas, Acts 9.39.
because she was so good a Creature, as to bestow some few clothes upon some
few poor distressed people; how much more ought we to bewail the shameful
and the doleful death of Christ, that did so much good, and never any ill, all
the days of his life?

Fourthly, He was not only Iustus and bonus, A just and a good man, or an
innocent man, void of sin, and a virtuous man, full of grace, but he was
also more honorable and noble then all the sons of men: for he was Christus,
That Christ is, 1. A King. 2. A Priest. 3. A Prophet.
Math. 2.2.
Anointed to be a King, a Priest, and a Prophet.

First, King; Simul natus, simul Caesar, He was a King by birth; Where is he
that is borne King of the Jews? He descended of the regal race, Saint Matthew
reckons fourteen Kings in his pedigree, and he was a King to his dying day,
Jesus of Nazareth, John 19.22.
King of the Jews; Pilate writes it, and he will not alter it: for, God
himself had spoken it, Psalm. 2.6.
I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.

Secondly, Priest; for, The Lord swear it, Psalm. 110.4.
and he will not repent it, that he is a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedecke. The noblest Order, and the royallest Priesthood in the World:
for this holy Priest was also a noble King; Esaias 9.6.
for he was King of Shalem, King of peace; even as Esayas calls him, The
Prince of peace.

Thirdly, Prophet; for, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise unto you: And he shall be a Prophet,
(...), in the highest degree, even the Prince of Prophets, and so great a
Prophet, that Whosoever will not hear him, he shall surely die.

Ier. 22.18.
And therefore if Jeremy takes up that mournful lamentation, for the death
of King Josias, and say, Alas for that noble Prince, ah my Lord, or, ah his
glory; and yet he came to an honorable death in the Field, without any shame,
and but little pain: then what shall we say, for the death of this King of
Kings, this Priest of the most High God, and this great Prophet of the Lord,
that was anointed with the Oil of gladness above his fellows? Psalm. 45.8.
The Lord had said, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm;
Psalm. 105 15.
yet we see Kings, the Anointed of God, are slain, and Jerusalem killed the
Prophets, and stoned those that are sent unto them: Luke 13.34.
But behold a greater then all Kings is here, Et quasi vnus e december milibus,
And such a one as ten thousand Kings are not equal unto him; and yet he is not
brought to an honorable death, of a Priest at the Altar, or of a King in the
Field, but to a most shameful and reproachful death, the most accursed death
of the Cross, among the wicked: O then let us consider, if ever such a person
came to such a death!

That Christ was a true and eternal God. Math. 17.54.
Fifthly, He was not only the highest among all the Sons of men, but he was
also the Son of the most High God; Pilate heard it, and feared; the Centurion
saw it, and confessed it, Truly this was the Son of God; And the very Devils
felt it, and proclaimed it, We know who thou art, even the holy one of God:
yea, the trembling Earth quaking, Luke 4.34.
the flinty Rock^s cleaving asunder, and the doleful graves opening
themselves, did by a visible voice confirm him to be a God: And so that
strange Eclipse that was seen at his death, and that unexpected darkness,
that vayled the face of the Sun for three hours together, because it was no
defect of Nature, (the Moon being at the full,) and the day being at the
midst, and therefore could not be any usual Eclipse, caused by the head or
the tail of the Dragon, (unless you mean that old Dragon, the Devil) it
made that great Philosopher Dyonisius, Dionys. in Ep.
then in Athens, to say, That now the World was at an end, or the God of Nature
suffered violence; so strange were these accidents, beyond the power of Nature.

The enemies of Christ ascribe that to him in mockery, which he was indeed.
Mat. 26.68.
Nay, the very enemies of Christ acknowledged him to be a Prophet, a King, a
God; for while the people play upon him, and contemn him, yet notwithstanding
they confess him to be a Prophet, saying, Prophecy unto us thou Christ, who
is he that smote thee: And as Saint Ambrose says, Compungentes coronant, and
illudentes adorant; While the Soldiers denied him to be a King, they Crown
him, they give a Scepter unto him, Ambros. 10.6.23.
and they put a purple garment upon him, which are the chiefest ornaments of
the greatest Monarchs; and while they all deride him, and deny him for their
Savior, they do in the mean time adore him as a God, and bow their knees
unto him, to whom all knees shall bow: And so the unspeakable wisdom of
Almighty God, did so hiddenly dispose of the sufferings of Christ, that his
very enemies should attribute that to him in mockery, which he was in deed
and verity.

And so you see the person suffering, a man, a just man, a good man, a King, a
Priest, a Prophet, a God; yea, that God, Ierem. 2.6.
which brought them out of the Land of Egypt, which led them through the
Wilderness, through a Land of deserts and pittes, and of the shadow of death,
and through a Land where no man dwelt, where no man passed through; Psalm. 78.24.
which fed them in the Wilderness, with the bread of Angels; which kept them
as the apple of his eye, which suffered no man to do them harm, but reproved
Kings for their sakes; and brought them into a wealthy place, and gave them the
Lands of the Heathen, and the labors of the people in possession: This is that
person which endures all this passion. And therefore be astonished O ye
Heavens, Ierem. 2.12.
and be ye horribly afraid at this, that this hateful and hated Nation, this
cruel and abominable people, this people void of wisdom, and destitute of
understanding, should not only forget that God which made them, but also
defile that glorious face in Mount Sion, with their stinking spittles, which
they could not behold upon Mount Horeb without great astonishment; yea, that
they should dare to murder him without fear, whose very name they durst not
utter without trembling, much like our godless people, that do abhor the
very name of the Devil, but will boldly imitate, and rejoice to do the works
of the Devil.

Oh that my head were full of waters, Ierem. 9.1.
and that mine eyes were a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and
night; for then I would bewail with the weeping of Iaser, this Vine of Shibma;
Esa. 16.9.
I would water thee O Heshbon, and Elealeh, and I would most fully show my
sorrow, because they have so fully showed their cruelty against the Son of
God.

That of all creatures, men are most subject to sorrow
But from hence we may see, who are most exposed to danger, and who be subject
to the greatest sufferings.

First, Man, because he is most sensible, most intelligible, and most deserving
miseries; and therefore of all other Creatures, man is chiefly borne to labor,
Esaias 53.4.
and he is full of miseries: You see Christ himself having taken our Nature,
he took our infirmities, and he carried our sorrows. [Oh sors grauis, o sors
dura, o lex dira quam natura promulgauit miseris; Homo nascens cum maerore,
vitam ducis cum labor, and cum metu moreris:] For this is the Law of Nature,
divulged and executed among all Nations, that every man should be borne in
sorrow, live in pain, and die with fear; And therefore Seneca says, That as,
Quicquid facimus de coelo est, Whatsoever noble act we do, it is from above:
So Quicquid patimur mortale est; Whatsoever we suffer, is but a sign of our
condition, and a praeludium, a fore-shew of our mortality: Nam quemcumque
miserum vides, hominem scias; For whenever we see any man in misery, we
must know that to be the property of humanity.

The more righteous men be, the more they shall be afflicted and persecuted by
the wicked.
Secondly, The just and righteous man, the best and godliest man, is most
subject to the greatest sufferings: It were no wonder, that man suffers,
because man sins; but that the just and righteous suffer, it seems
strange: for, as the Psalmist says, Iustus quid fecit, What has the righteous
done? And yet as Aristides was banished out of Athens, Iustus quia iustus,
Only because he was a just man; And as Christ says, Oderunt me gratis, They
have hated me fre^ly without any cause, or fault of mine, O God; so the
righteous shall be trodden as the clay in the streets, they shall be sure
enough to suffer, and there is cause enough for it, Quia inutiles nobis, and
contrarij operibus nostris; Because they are unprofitable for us, we gain
nothing by them, no pleasure, no profit, W^sed. 2.12.
no contentment, and they be clean contrarily disposed to all our actions, say
the wicked among themselves: And therefore though all men suffer, yet do the
righteous suffer most of all; for many (yea, and great) are the troubles of the
righteous, says the Psalmist; and though never so many, yea, though they
perish, yet no man lays it to heart, Esaias. 57.1.
says the Prophet.

Thirdly, Of all the righteous men, Kings, Priests, and Prophets, Kings,
Priests, and Prophets' most exposed to all dangers.
must be the chief in sufferings; Nam oportuit Christum pati, For it behooved
the Anointed of God to suffer: And these be Christi Domini, The Anointed of
the Lord; and therefore of all others, these are appointed to suffer for the
Lord.

Fourthly, Among these, the more godly they be, the more will godless people
afflict them: for Saint Paul was a chosen vessel, a most upright, and a most
excellent man; therefore he must suffer many things for my names sake, says
the Lord. Acts 9.16.
And Christ says of all his Priests and Preachers, Behold, I send you forth as
Sheep in the midst of Wolves; and you shall be hated of all men for my names
sake: What? of all men? that were a wonder, that good men, nay, the best men,
should be hated of all men; The best Kings and best Priests, are often hated.
for where saw you a good Preacher, and an honest man hated, or ill spoken of,
say the Worldlings? Yet behold it is true, for our Savior says it, You shall
be hated of all men; And there is great reason for it: for in all men there is
corruption, more or less; How it is that all men both more and less hate the
best men.
and they must be enemies to all corruption; they must reprove all the works
of darkness, all the sins and vices of men: And therefore it were more
strange, that they should be the true reprouers of all sin, and yet not be
hated of all men; for the more strictly a man is addicted to virtue, the more
he is rejected by the vicious; and the more he approues or tollerates sin
in them, either by not reproving the same in them, or by walking in the same
steps of good-fellowship with them, the more acceptable he is unto them;
though the less warrantable in the sight of God: And therefore it cannot be,
that any one of us should be a just and an upright man, and should not be hated
of all men.

I, But will the good and godly men hate them, who do confess their sins,
and do always strive against their own corruptions? The wicked men may hate
them, but surely the godly will not.

I answer, That the more godly men be, the less they hate them; yet because
in them, sin sticks so close unto them, that although they confess, and
detest it with their souls, yet has their flesh always some love and
affection unto the same; in so much that Saint Augustine in one of his
Meditations confesses, That in his spirit and soul, he did so heartily pray
against his sin, that his flesh and carnal desire was afraid God would
hear the prayers of his soul, and so deprive them of their delights; Gal.
5.17.
for in the best men, The flesh lusts against the spirit, and draws them
oftentimes to do what they would not do: And therefore as in the best men
there is still remaining natural corruption, so the same will still oppose it
self against all them, that will seek to dispossess this old Adam from
their souls.

And therefore, seeing Christ did suffer, Christians suffer, and that the more
godly they be, the more enemies they shall have; we should not judge of men,
and especially of the Preachers of Gods Word, according to their outward
appearance; of their enemies, crosses, and afflictions; but we should judge
righteous judgments: And we that suffer, may, and should rejoice and be glad,
that We are counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. And so much for
the Person suffering.


CHAP. I. Of the sufferings of Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane.
Of the sufferings of Christ.
SEcondly, We are to consider the sufferings of this Person, Jesus Christ. Thus
it behooved Christ to suffer: Well might it have agreed with his excellent
Nature, to have conferred benefits, and to bestow gifts on the Sons of men;
but to suffer torments, and to endure all indignities at the hands of sinful
men, is strange and admirable; so incompetible is the Person and the Passion of
Jesus Christ. And yet if we diligently observe all those Tragical Scenes that
are seen in the Records of the Evangelists, and mark all the doleful
passages of his whole life, even from the first hour of his birth, unto the
last moment of his breath; we shall find the same to be nothing else, but a
Map of miseries, or a tempestuous Sea of all calamities: for he was no sooner
borne, but he began to bear our sorrows; he was cast into a Cratch, That
the whole life of Christ was but a continual suffering.
the breathings of the Beasts perhaps did warm his cloutes, to preserve his
life; and he lived not long, but he suffered the effusion of his blood, and
the sharpness of circumcision: He was no sooner circumcised, but he was
designed unto the slaughter; Herod seeks his life, and he will slay all the
Children of Bethlehem, or he will put this Child unto the Sword: And therefore
in the midst of Winter, he must fly to Egypt to save his life; there he
lived a while, and he must needs live poor: for they that have nothing among
their friends, may very well be thought to have less among strangers; when he
returns, he must retire himself into corners, for fear of Archilaus; Matthew.
2.23.
and when he begins to show himself to the World, he must begin to combat
with the Devil; he is no sooner baptized, Chap. 4.2.
but he is tempted forty days together, without meat, without drink, without
sleep: and he can no sooner begin to publish the glad tidings of salvation,
but they presently accuse him of sedition; His friends say he is mad, his
enemies say he has a Devil: All seek his life, John 8.48.
and this is the sum of his whole life, Poverty and misery, hunger, thirst,
weakness, weariness, reproaches, lyings, slanders, and what not?

Yet all these sufferings were but flea-bitings, Christ's chiefest sufferings in
these three special places.
they were but tastes of that bitter Cup, whereof he sucked out the very
dregs and all.

1. In the Garden of Gethsemane. 2. In the presence of his Judges. 3. In the
Mount of Caluerie.
These were the places of his torments, and in all these places we must
consider, both the greatness of his grief, which is, Paena sensus, the pain
of feeling; and the smalnesse of his comfort, which is, Paena damni, the pain
of leesing: And therefore by Gods assistance, I will chiefly insist upon those
sufferings that he suffered in these places.

First, It is concluded of all Divines, That Christ suffered both in soul and
body.
that the sufferings of Christ was both in soul and body; sorrows of soul,
and pains of body: for, He has carried our sorrows, says our Translation;
our pains, says another: to show, that whether we regard his disconsolate
soul, or his tender body, it was a painful and a sorrowful suffering; so
painful, and so sorrowful, that as it was well-neere intolerable unto him,
so it is almost incredible unto us: for though at the bringing of Christ into
the world, to be the Savior and Redeemer of his Church, the Prophet Esaias
says, Esaias 52.7.
How beautiful upon the mountains, are the feet of them that bring these glad
tidings of peace? i. e. How ready is every man to embrace this news; yet when
he goes about to express the manner of our diliuerance, by such sorrows,
pains, and sufferings, Esaias 53.1.
he makes a stand, and says Who believes our reports? For,

The first degree of Christ's suffering was that he was made passible.
First, I told you before, that this sufferer was a God, blessed for ever; and
the Godhead is impassible: no sorrow, no grief, no pain could fasten upon
the Deity; and therefore how could our Savior suffer? To this the Prophet
answers, Sacrifice and burnt offerings thou would not have; (...); Leo Ser.
8. de Passione.
but a body have thou ordained me; (as both the Septuagint and the Author to
the Hebrews has it) Nam cum mortis aculeum, non possit accipere natura
deitatis; nascendo tamen, suscepit de nobis, quod pati posset pro nobis, For
seeing the Deity could not suffer death; The Word was made Flesh, that he
might go the way of all flesh, and make a passage unto his Passion, that so
he might really suffer, Hillar. de Trin. lib. 10.
and not appear to suffer, (as Saint Hillary, otherwise a most excellent
Author, does imagine:) And indeed Hoc primum tormentum, and magnum mysterium,
quod passibilis factus est; This was his first suffering torment, and an
unspeakable mystery, that he was made able to suffer torments.

That the Humanity only suffered.
And we say that Christ suffered, not in respect of his Divine nature; but in
respect of his humane nature; for though the Deity was in the sufferer, yet
was it not in the suffering; though it was in the Body of Christ's Passion; yet
was it not in the Passion of Christ's Body; but the humanity only suffered, and
the omnipotency of the Deity sustained the impotency of the Humanity; and while
the flesh groaned under the anguish of his Passion, Matthew. 26.39.
and cried, Father if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; and so
breathed out that mournful complaint; My God my God, Matthew. 27.46.
why have thou forsaken me? Yet then the Deity triumphed over all the
bitterness of death, and the enemies of our flesh. Damasc l. 3. c. 26. de fide
Orthodoxa.
And this is excellently expressed by Damascen, saying; Quomadmodum si quis
ignito ferro superinsundat aquam; Even as if a man should pour water upon a
red-hot-iron, that which is passible or capable to suffer by the water, that
is, the heat and fire, is extinguished; but the iron remains still sound, and
impassible; because the water has no power to corrupt it; even so the Humanity
of Christ may suffer pain and death, but the Deity inseperably united unto the
same, can notwithstanding suffer no manner of Passion. And,

Secondly, As it is a thing incomprehensible, (and therefore may well have a
quis credidit? who has believed our report?) that God should be made passible,
so it is a thing more incredible, Heb. 11.37.
that he being just, being King, being Priest, being God, should
notwithstanding really suffer; yea, so suffer, as to be destitute, afflicted,
and tormented; and so tormented, that the Prophet Esaias may fitly call him,
Virum dolorum, A man of sorrows; as if he had been wholly composed of
miseries; Lament. 1.12.
and the Prophet Jeremy truly demand, Si fuerit dolor, sicut dolor suus? if
ever there was any sorrow like unto his sorrow: Jbidem.
yet behold he was oppressed and afflicted, says the Prophet; and the Lord did
afflict him in the day of the fierceness of his wrath: And therefore, let
others wonder at the rising of this Sun; I admire his going down; let them
marvel, to see him laid in the cratch, I much more to see him nailed upon the
Cross; The consideration of Christ's suffering admirable.
and let them admire to see him sleeping betwixt two beasts, and I will much
more admire to see him suffering betwixt two thieves: But he was wounded for
our trangressions, and he was bruised for our iniquities, says the Prophet;
and therefore, let us the rather give the more heed unto those things that he
suffered for us; least the neglect and not regarding the same, shall add wrath
unto our souls, in the day of wrath.

Well then, seeing the Son of God was made passible, apt to suffer, and that
he knew his time was drawing near, that he must suffer, he went out of the
house, out of the City, Why Christ went out of the house before he was taken.
into the garden of Gethsemane, says the Evangelist.

First, He went out of the house where they had eaten the Passover.

First, Least his Host that had so kindly received him into his house, should
any ways for his sake be unkindly used of his enemies: so sacred a thing was
the law of guests among the ancients, that neither the Lodger, nor the lodged
would hurt each other if they met in the open fields, Valerius Maximus. l. 5. 1.
under the Colors of two deadly enemies: and therefore Lot offered his own
Daughters unto the Sodomites, Genesis 19.
rather then they should abuse those Strangers that were come under his roof:
and the Poet notes it, as an argument of the great perfidiousnesse of the most
corrupted latter age; Ovid. Met. l. 1.
Non hospes ab hospite tutus; That there was no truth betwixt the Host and his
Ghest.

Plutar. in Sert.
Secondly, Least (as Sertorius was found of Perpenna amongst his banquets, he
might be accused to be a Wine-bibber, and be said to be a boone-companion, and
be a president of ill example unto others; if he had been found in the Inn
amongst his Guests: for it is a great deal fitter to find a Scholar in his
study, then in the Tavern.

Why Christ went out of the City.
Secondly, He went out of the City, out of that famous City Jerusalem.

Theophil. in Mar. 14.
First, Least any commotion or tumult should be raised; so dearly did this
Prince of Peace, affect and seek to preserve the Peace of Jerusalem: for they
would have taken him many times, but they feared the people; therefore he goes
out of the City, that they may do it without fear, i. e. without fear of
sedition.

Secondly, To show that as they had shut him out of their hearts; so now, he
begins to depart out of their walls. Egressus est a filia Sion omnis decor
eius: Lament. 1.13.
and so all the glory of Sion is departed from them, and as the Poet says of
Troy: -- Ruit Ilium, and ingens
gloria Teucrorum, --
We may say the same of Jerusalem: Luke 19.44.
the time of her desolation draws near, and it must be made an heap of
stones: Because, Excessere omnes ad^tis arisque relictis, dij, quibus imperium
hoc steterat.
now God, which had been the vpholder of them, was gone out of their walls, and
departed from them: and therefore we should ever take heed, that we shut not
Christ out of our hearts, least he will hereupon shut us out of his favor.

Thirdly, He went into the Garden of Gethsemane.

First, That, as our fall was in a garden, so the work of our Redemption
should first begin in a garden.

Secondly, That his enemies might the more easily find him: for it was a place
that he had often frequented, Why Christ went into the Garden of Gethsemane.
says the Evangelist; and therefore he went not there as seeking to hide
himself, but rather to expose himself, and like a noble Champion, to appear
first in the field, and to expect his enemies: for, although they sought him
like a Partridge upon the mountains; yet, noluit dolo teneri ne derogaretur
praescientiae plenitudo; He would not be craftily taken in a net by a guile;
least that might be derogatorie to his omnisciency: and therefore knowing they
were desirous to take him, he goes to meet them into the garden of Gethsemane.

And as soon as ever he came into the Garden, What befell unto Christ in the
Garden. John 12.27. Mar. 14.35. Luke 22.42. Matthew. 26.38. Prou. 18.14.
Ecce hostem inuenit; behold his enemy was there as soon as he; for he began
presently, Cantristare, and pauere, and moestus esse; To be troubled in soul,
says Saint John; to be in anguish of mind, says Saint Mark, and to be in an
agony, says Saint Luke, and to have his soul exceeding sorrowful unto death,
says Saint Matthew.

Alas, what shall we say to this? for the spirit of man will sustain his
infirmities but a wounded spirit who can bear? yet behold his Spirit, his
Soul is sorrowful unto death: no doubt but his Apostles saw it, yet like a
barrel full, and wanting vent, he must needs burst forth, and confess it;
Spem vultu simulat, premit altum cord dolorem.
he does not here Aeneas-like, dissemble his grief with a fained countenance;
his sorrow is greater then can be contained; for it is unto death, that is, not
only extensiuely such as must continue for the space of seauenteene or
eighteen hours, even until death it self shall finish it; but also
intensiuely, such and so great as that which is used to be at the very point of
death, and such as were able to bring death unto me, were I not reserved to a
greater and a heavier punishment.

And therefore he kneeled down, and fell grouelling upon his face, and said,
Father if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; Matthew. 26.39.
and there praying, he fell into a dreadful agony, his thoughts were
troubled, his spirits affrighted, his heart trembled, his pores opened; Et
totus sudore defluit; and he sweat great drops of blood, that streamed down to
the ground: and so panting, he prayed, and sweating still he prayed, and the
more he was afflicted, the more he prayed, and fainted, as it were in the
bathe of his own blood; weeping, not only with his eyes, but even with all
his members, Bern Ser. 3.
as Saint Bernard says: And therefore the end of his Passion must needs be
mournful, when the beginning of it is so fearful; and the cause of this
agony must needs be supernatural, when it proceeds so contrary to the course
of nature: for it was in a cold season, in the open air, (and they were feign
to make a fire within doors,) without any exercise, without any man near him
to offer him violence; and therefore naturally he should be inclined to a cold
chilly operation, rather then to a bloody sweating agony; yea not only to
sweat some cold, thin, faint sweat, which is called sudor diaphoreticus, but
in such abundance of great drops (says the Evangelist) that they were able to
die his garments with crimson red; according as the Prophet Esaias says, (though
properly in another sense, yet in some respect may be applied to this)
Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, Esaias 63.2.
and thy garments like him that treads in the Wine-fat: And as the Christian
Poet Houedemius says, Sudor fluit vndique riuis, sanguineae manant tanquam de
vulnere guttae.
Cum cor sentit amoris gladium,
Cruor carnis rubricat pallium.
When through love, his hearts-vaine bled,
It dyed his garments crimson red.


And that these drops did not only distillare, drop out, but decurrere, run
and stream down so fast to the ground, from all the pores of his body, as if
they had issued out of most deadly wounds.

Wynton in Ser. sup. Thren.
It is well observed, by our learned Bishop of Winchester out of Saint Hierome,
and the Chaldee paraphrast, that the greatness of his sorrow melted him, so as
if he had stood by some burning furnace, which was able to cast him into that
sweat, and to turn that sweat into drops of blood: and it appears the rather,
because the Prophet Jeremy says in the same place, that a fire was sent into
his bones, and that might well melt all his marrow, and cause the blood to
distill from his flesh, and to trickle down to the ground: O happy garden
watered with such tears: thou must needs surpass the garden of Eden, that
was watered with four goodly rivers; for this blood of Christ, does speak
better things, Heb. 12.24.
and bring forth better fruits, then the blood of Abell: for that cried out of
the earth for vengeance, against his brother; but this cries for mercy unto
all the earth; even to his enemies; Father forgive them, Luke 23.34.
for they know not what they do: and whereas our fruitful Land, (the Land of
our hearts) was made barren, for the sin and iniquity of our fore-Father, to
bring forth thorns and thistles (sins and wickedness) yet now being watered
with these heavenly showers of his blood, he makes it very plenteous, to
abound in all grace and godliness.

But alas, strangely, to kneel so devoutly, and to pray so earnestly; that, if
it were possible, that hour might pass from him?

Thomas Aquinas answers, Resp.
that the cause of all passions is to be considered; either 1. Ex part
obiecti: In regard of the object. Or, 2. Ex part subiecti: In respect of the
subject.


That as in the conception of gold in the bowels of the earth, there is Aestus
solaris, and ignis subterranius; A concurrency of the heat of the Sun from
above, with a sulphurious fire from below; So in the Passion of our Savior
Christ, we must know, that in respect of the object, he saw the Divine wrath
from above, ready to be powered forth for the sins of men; and in respect of
the subject, he saw the Church which was his body, so justly punished by this
wrath of God; and all that punishment to alight on him which had undertaken to
satisfy Gods Justice, and to free his members from everlasting torments.

And therefore no doubt but the clear sight, The cause of Christ his agony in
the Garden.
and the deep consideration of that Cup, which he was so sheerely to drink
up, was the cause that made him both so vehemently to pray against it, and ^lso
in the vehemence of the fear of it, to be in such perplexed agony, as thereby
to sweat the drops of blood.

CHAP. II. Of that fearful Cup, what it was, which our Savior was to drink
of, and that he so much feared and prayed against it.
What was the Cup which our Savior was to drink.
But what was this Cup which he was to drink of? we cannot easily determine.
For,

Some think this prayer, this fear, this agony proceeded only from the
weakness of his humanity, that was now, though not dis-vnited, yet vnassisted
of the Deity; and that they were chiefly effected, through the fear of that
death, which so nearly approached; and therefore though they were uttered, as
proceeding from Passion, or at least humane affection, yet were they presently
seasoned, and as it were corrected, with more deliberate consideration: when he
said; Not my will, but thine be fulfilled. But,

To these men I answer; that, although Christ took our infirmities upon him,
as well the spiritual Passions of the soul, as the corporal infirmities of
the body: i. e. all such as are only miserable, but not damnable; penal, but
not culpable; or those that are painful without sin; but not those which are
sinful without pain; as both Damascen, Saint Augustine, and Aquinas, have
most excellently observed; yet we say that these affections in Christ, do much
differ from ours, in three respects.

That the Humane affections of Christ, differ from ours, in three respects.
First, In respect of the object; for we many times fear, where there is no
fear, and we do love the things which we should despise; but he only feared
the things that are to be feared, and loved the things that are to be loved
indeed.

Secondly, In respect of the manner, for will we will we, these affections
will invade us; and when they have once taken hold upon us, we do many times
fear, and love, and hate, if not against reason, yet surely beyond, and beside
all reason; and so, that as we cannot guide them; so we cannot leave them, when
we would: but CHRIST is angry, rejoices, fears, loves, when, and where, and
so much as just reason directs him: for these affections master us, but he
mastereth them: and therefore Saint Augustine says, that, Aug. in Johan.
potestate non infirmitate turbauit seipsum; These affections are rather signs
of his omnipotency then arguments of his infirmity, because he mastereth their
willingness to oppress him, when they cannot find any weakness in him to be
oppressed.

Thirdly, In respect of the effects, for our passions and affections blind us,
so that we cannot see the light of truth; in whom we love we see no sin, our
love is blind; and in whom we hate, we can see no goodness; for, malitia
little exaecauit eos: the malice of the wicked blinds them, says the wise
man; and as the Poet says of wrath, (Impedit ira animum ne possit cernere
verum.)

That it blinds our eyes, and disturbeth our senses, so as we know not what
is what; So might I say of fear, of love, and of every other vehement passion;
Non modo memoriam excutit, Plutarch. in l. de Fortuna Alexand.
sed and quoduis constitutum, and quemuis conatum impedit; It does not only
disturb our memories, but it hinders all our purposes, and endeavors; so
that in respect of these, we forget many times and are hindered oftentimes to
do those things, which our selves most of all desire to effect: Psalm. 55.5.
and therefore the Psalmist according to the vulgar Latin, says, Timor and
hebetudo mentis venerunt super me, and contexerunt me tenebrae; Fearfulness
and trembling came upon me, and then darkness has environed me, or, an
horrible dread has ouer-whelmed me; and the reason hereof is truly rendered by
the Philosopher; Auicen rer. not. lib. 6. c 5.
Quia potentiae naturales intensae, mutuo se impediunt: The natural powers
stretched to the highest strain, do mutually disturb and hinder each other,
to discharge their right functions; and therefore exceeding joy swalloweth up
grief; and so of all the rest: Arist. aethic. l. 7. c. 14.
the more intentive we are to see any thing, the less able we are to hear
any other thing; according to that vulgar saying: Pluribus intentus minor est
ad singula sensus. The sense intent to many things,
To each one truth it never brings.


But in Christ they could never divert him from his desire, they could never
darken his understanding, nor any ways hinder the execution of his Office:
Neither concourse of many, yea, of most contrary passions, and affections; as
love and hatred, joy and grief, and such like, any ways mitigate or stupifie
the sharpness, or liuely-hood each of other; but that even now when he most
fears this deadly Cup, he exceedingly rejoices at the benefits that he sees
shall accrue thereby.

And therefore though I easily grant that nature it self abhors death, the
soul and body being ever loath to part, and every thing desirous of life; yet
that death should be thus feared, thus prayed against, thus melt our Savior
Christ into such a bloody sweat; I cannot willingly yield. For,

John 8.20.
First, Desiderio desiderauit; With a longing desire did he wish this hour,
and he calls it his hour; as if in that hour he were to enjoy his longing;
and he makes no more account of his death then of his dipping in the water;
Luke 12 5.
for be calls the same a Baptism, John 2.4.
saying, I must be baptized with a baptism, and how am I troubled till that be
ended? i. e. How am I payned and grieved, John 11.
not because I must undergo it, for that is my chiefest desire, but because I
must stay yet a while; Mine hour being not yet come, before I may do it: and
therefore to this end, Quasi ambiens mortem; as one that would ever keep
himself in his enemies sight, or as one desirous to be dissolved, he goes up
unto Jerusalem, he raises Lazarus from the dead, that the wrath of the Jews,
John 13.27.
being stirred up by this present miracle, he might be the sooner condemned
unto death; he bids Judas to do quickly what he meant to do, not
commanding the Act, but as desiring the speediness of the Act, as Caietan
says, and knowing, that his hour was at hand; and his enemies near, he
says unto his Disciples, Come, let us go meet them, because they were not so
desirous to take him, Matthew. 26.46.
as he was to be taken by them: And therefore I cannot see, how so much fear
of death, as to cause such an agony, and such a greedy desire of death, can
stand together, especially in such a person, whose Passions cannot invade him
beyond the limits of his own Commission; but that we must ascribe far
greater matters to be the causes of this great and fearful agony.

Seconly, We see his Saints and servants not only willing to die, but also
running with Ignatius unto the beasts; and singing (with the Salamander) in the
midst of the fire; and therefore shall we think that this heavenly Physician,
which healed others, would not heal himself; and which strengthened others,
to call, and cry for death, would thus vehemently pray and cry only for fear
of death?

But to this it is answered, The Saints at their death were supported by God.
that the Saints were supported by the power of his grace, and they were
enabled by the help of his Spirit; and therefore no wonder though they desired
it; but Christ though he was both God and Man; yet was he now lest destitute of
the help both of God and Man; for all his friends forsak't him; and the
Godhead himself, which was himself, did now sequester and withdraw all his
help from this poor, destitute and distressed man, Jesus Christ: and
therefore no marvel that he being wholly left to himself; nay, not himself,
but the Humanity it self, should be thus moved and troubled at the sight of
death.

I confess, that although Martyrs non eripuit; God did not deliver his
Martyrs from death; yet nunquam deseruit; He did never forsake them at their
death; Whether Christ was wholly destitute of all assistance from the Godhead.
but distilled still into their hearts abundant comforts of his heavenly
Spirit; and it is most true that very much of the influence of Gods comfort,
and of the comfortable beams of the Godhead; were now restrained from the
assistance of the Manhood of Christ (as hereafter I shall more fully show unto
you) yet I say that all the Divine comforts were not detained from him; for
then the Humanity could not have endured so great an agony, had he not been
somewhat sustained by the Deity. Nay be it so, Winton. in Pass. Ser. sup.
Thren. 1 p 3.
(as some would have it) that his soul was even as scorched heath-ground:
without so much, as any drop of dew, of Divine comfort; yet I say he was not
deprived of his reasonable soul, he had all the powers and faculties of
reason, and understanding, in a far more excellent measure, then any other
man whatsoever; and these faculties were not disturbed, nor any ways darkened
with the vehemency of any Passions, as I showed unto you before; and therefore
I cannot see how the fear of a natur^ll death only, could so exceedingly
affright him, as to make him so earnestly to pray against the same: for we find
that even natural men, not knowing God, and therefore not guided by the light
of God, do, and have by the light of Humane reason, made light account of
death: and yet you see Christ, a man of perfect knowledge as man, so much as
man could have; is here grievously troubled, and vehemently affrighted at the
consideration of that Cup which he was to drink of: and therefore that Cup did
contain a great deal more then that little draught of natural death. And,

Heb. 5.7. That Christ was heard, and therefore delivered from what he feared.
Thirdly, The Apostle unto the Hebrews, says, That when Christ offered up
prayers and supplications, with strong cryings, and tears, unto him that was
able to save him from death; he was heard in that which he feared; or, for his
piety, as the original has it. Now this must be referred unto his fervent
prayer, and those bloody tears in the Garden: for we do not read, that in
any place else, he did offer the like prayers and tears unto God: and
therefore, seeing he was heard. i. e. so heard that he obtained his request;
Prae reuerentia; for his modesty, or for the respect that God had unto him,
and was delivered from that which he feared; it must needs be, that it was not
his own natural death that he so much feared, and so earnestly prayed against
it: for, from this he was not delivered, but he suffered, dyed, and was buried.

Psalm. 75.9.
And therefore, as the Prophet David says, In the hand of the Lord there is a
Cup, the wine is red, it is full mixed, as for the dregs thereof, That Christ
was to undergo the punishment of all others.
all the ungodly of the earth shall drink them and suck them out: So I say of
this Cup of Christ, it is a Cup of many ingredients; it is full red, and it
has many dregs: and although in this good servant, there was found no sin;
yet seeing he was contented to undergo the punishments of all bad servants,
and to suffer the just deserts of all the ungodly; therefore he must drink
and suck up the very dregs of this Cup: and yet, if we duly observe it, we
shall see, that he was heard in that which he feared: for though he drinks it
up sheere, yet it shall clearly pass from him: and his prayer was no more,
for he prayed not, that he might not drink of it, but that it might pass
from him; even as a man that drinks a cup of poison, and yet thereby is not
poisoned: And so it did with Christ; he drank up all; and yet it did him no
hurt at all; for though it made him sweat the drops of blood, though it grieved
him, and pained him, and made him cry out, Matthew. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? yea, though it cast him into a
sleep, and laid him dead in his grave, and there sealed him for a time; yet
presently within the space of forty hours, or thereabouts, he revived, and
awaked, as a Lion out of sleep; or, as a Giant refreshed with wine, and then
he smote all his enemies upon the che^^e-bone, Psalm. 78.66.67.
and put them to a perpetual shame; And through that short and momentary death
of his, he purchased unto his Church everlasting life.

And therefore seeing this Cup which Christ feared, was not only that little
draught of natural death; that was but the least drop thereof, but was a Cup
of many ingredients; Let us (so far as we may gather it out of the word of
God,) observe and learn, what those ingredients might be, which were contained
in that Cup; that so we may the better know what he suffered, and what he
prayed against.

CHAP. III. Of diverse particular things that were in that Cup which our Savior
drank of.
ANd if we diligently search into the particulars, we shall find, that therein
might be; The difference betwixt fear and sorrow or grief.


First, Somethings that he grieved at, which troubled him. And

Secondly, Somethings that he feared, which he prayed against.

For, there be great differences betwixt (...), grief, and (...), fear: and
betwixt the causes of sorrow and fear; for the object of sorrow and grief,
may be as well evil past, as the pain present; but the object of fear, is
only evil to come; or that which is present; but as yet not wholly passed
over; fear always going before the pain, sorrow and grief following after:
and yet I say that the same things now in Christ might, and did work, both
fear and grief; because he foresaw those things that were to come, as
present; or as already past; and therefore he feared them as things to come,
and he grieved for them, as if they had been already past.

Of the first sort there were somethings, 1. In respect of himself. 2. In
respect of others.
What Christ gri^ued at.
1. In respect of himself, he foresaw these two things. 1. The greatness of
his pain and shame. 2. The deferring of his death and punishment.
2. In respect of others, he foresaw likewise these 2. things. 1. The small
account that they would make of so great a work. 2. The greatness of that
punishment which they must suffer for this smalenesse of their account.



And would not these things grieve a man?

What Christ feared.
Of the second sort there were especially three things, 1. The weight of sin.
2. The malice of Satan. 3. The wrath of God.


And would not these enemies, so many in number, so mighty in power, and so
terrible to behold, make a man to fear, to tremble and to sweat? And yet from
all these he was delivered, and so as the Apostle says, He was heard in that
which he feared. But to speak of these a little more particularly.

What Christ foresaw in respect of himself. First, his punishment.
First, He foresaw that he should endure; Supplicium quo nullum maius, and
opprobrium quo nullum vilius; A punishment, then which there could not be
greater, and a shame, then which there could not be viler: The first (which was
but the least thing that grieved him) yet it caused a colluctation of the flesh
with pain, Aristot. 3. aethic.
with death; because the flesh naturally is desirous to escape them both: Et
omnium terribilium terribilissimum est mors: And of all terrible things, death
is the most terrible thing, says the Philosopher; and therefore the very
remembrance of the same, Secondly, His Shame. The Shameful handling of Christ
was more grievous unto him then all his corporal sufferings.
must needs bring a terror unto flesh and blood. And the second, (which was the
shameful things that were to be done unto him: to be scorned and scoffed,
accounted as wicked, taken by the wicked, and condemned with the wicked, and so
shamefully handled, shamefully deemed, shamefully dying) did a great deal more
perplexe and grieve him then the former; any man wishing rather to dye, then to
suffer shame; shame being a greater punishment, unto the mind and soul; then
any torture can be unto the flesh: Nature always releeueth the part most
distressed.
for nature (clean contrary to the course of the world, which always takes
part with the stronger-side, and lays help upon them that are mighty) uses
always to assist the weaker part; as it appears plainly in the letting of
blood in the arm, or in any other place: for then nature, as it does still
send the blood; Quasi agmine facto; as it were on heaps from all the parts of
the body thither, until the said rupture be stopped up again; and so
likewise, when the heart of man, which is the seat of fear, begins to be
troubled with any vehement or horrible fear; then will nature presently
collect the blood about the same, for to assist it, whereby the face is left
pale, and all the exterior parts, as it were void of life: and when the face
of man, which is the seat of shamefastness and honesty, is aspersed with
shame and reproach, then presently the blood relinquisheth all the interior
parts, and gathers it self unto the face, as to that part which now has most
need to be sustained, w^ereby we truly say, that Pallor timentium, rubor
erubescentium est signum: To blush is the sign of shame, and to be pale, is an
argument of fear.

And therefore, though the fear of his punishment, and of death did nearly
touch him, yet to show that the consideration of this most shameful handling
of him, did more perplexe him, his blood did not collect it self unto the
heart, (though the same was much affrighted;) but leaving the heart, as it were
destitute of all help, it flew into his face, as unto that part, which for
shame of their dispitefull usage of him, had most need to be assisted, and
from thence, as the precious ointment that was powered upon Aarons head, ran
down unto his beard, and from thence unto the skirts of his clothing; So this
precious blood of Christ, gushing out chiefly at his face, it plentifully
trickled down to the ground.

Secondly, The deferring of his suffering much grieved our Savior.
As the consideration and foresight of these things did much grieve him; so
the dilation and deferring of them, did not a little trouble him: for as the
expectation of death, is many times more grievous unto the affrighted flesh,
then death it self; so was the dilation of that good, which was to proceed
from his death, a great deal more grievous unto him, then many deaths: for he
was most greedy of our salvation; and as the Horse made ready unto the battle,
and hearing the Trumpets sounding, Virgil. l. 4. Aeneid.
(Stare loco nescit, micat auribus, and tremit artus,
-- and fraena faerox spumantia mandit:)
does fame and foam, and cannot stand, but still strives to go forward; so
Christ, having this baptism to be baptized with, he was exceedingly pained,
until that was ended: Quia spes quae differtur, affligit animam; Because (as
Solomon says) hope deferred, or expectation prolonged, languisheth the soul;
and therefore as Jonas sa^d, Irascor vsque ad mortem; I am exceedingly angry,
even unto death; that is, because death comes not to me; for I do seek for
death, and it flies from me; so Christ was grieved unto death; Ambr. 7. in Luc.
Non ex metu mortis suae, sed ex mora redemptionis nostrae; Not for any fear
of his own death, but by reason of the delaying of our deliverance, from
everlasting death, as Saint Ambrose says.

What Christ foresaw in resp^ct of us.
Secondly, As he foresaw these things, in respect of himself, so in respect of
others he foresaw.

First the neglecting of his blood.
First, The small account that many men would make of this his so great a
suffering; he saw how few would embrace it, and how many would contemn it; and
therefore when he considered with himself; Quae vtilitas in sanguine suo: What
profit might accrue from his blood, knowing that the least drop of it, was of
sufficient value to save the whole world: and yet (by reason of the iniquity
and incredulity of men) that all of it, being spilt and shed, it should
notwithstanding save but a remnant; and a small company of men; it could not
choose but grieve and vex his righteous soul to see his blood spilt in vain:
for would it not grieve any man to pay an infinite price to save a base slave
from death, and to see that villain presently cast himself to death, and with
all his strength and wit to seek the death of his Redeemer? this was the case
of Christ; for he was willing to redeem us with his own most precious blood:
and yet he saw the wicked would trample this benefit under foot, and account
the blood of the covenant as an unholy thing, Heb. 10.29.
and make none other use of it, but most fearfully to swear by it, and abuse
it; and so bringing upon themselves swift damnation: and therefore seeing every
sin grieves God, this must grieve him most of all?

O then beloved brethren, seeing, as it grieueth the Husbandman, to see his
ground well manured, still continuing barren; so it is a grief to Christ, to
see his blood grow fruitless, and that it is a joy to him, (by our conversion)
to see the fruits of his labors; O let us never cause him to say; Esaias 49.4.
In vacuum laboraui; I have labored in vain, but let us truly repent us of
our sins, and faithfully lay hold of his death, that so both the Angels and
this Lord of Angels may rejoice.

Secondly, He foresaw the great punishment and adversity, that should light
upon many men, and upon many sorts of men, for, The dispersion of the Apostles.
Zach. 13.7.
and by means of this his sufferings and his cruel death. As,

First, Upon his own Disciples and decrest Apostles; for, I will smite the
shepherd, and all the sheep shall be scattered, says the Prophet: Here
Judgment begins at the house of God: 1 Pet. 4.17.
These sheep must be scattered, and so they were; for all of them did
perfidiously forsake him, and the stoutest of them did plainly forswear him,
and yet he warned them of it, he told Peter of his infirmity, but he vanted of
his magnanimity, Matthew. 26.34.35.
he told him that he should deny him thrice, but he said he would rather die
then deny him at all: and he willed them all to watch; but they all gave
themselves to Sleep; and therefore Saint Hillary says, Hilarious l. 10. de
Trinitate.
that Christ, Non pro se tristis erat, neque sibi orat, sed pro illis quos
movet orare peruigiles; was more sorry for them then for himself; and prayed
not so much for himself, as he did for them whom he commanded to watch and
pray. And Saint Ambrose says, Ambros. l. 10. in Luc.
Quod discipuli dormiunt, and nesciunt dolere pro quibus Christus dolebat; That
his Disciples Slept, and knew not how to grieve, for whom Christ did so much
grieve, to see he did so much for them, and they so little regarded him, so
little regarded their own souls, that had he not prayed for them, that their
faith should not fail, Satan had not only sifted them all like wheat, but
he would have also blown them away like chafe from off the face of the earth.

Secondly, Upon that cursed Nation of the Jews: he foresaw how that their
glorious Temple, Psalm. 48.2.
which was the joy of the whole earth should be subverted, their houses
ruinated, themselves slaughtered, The reiection of the Jews.
and die, some with cruel famine, and some with the raging Sword, -- Ante
orapatrum
-- Solimae sub maenibus altis.
Perhaps in their mothers arms, or before their parents faces, under the very
walls, and in the spacious streets of Jerusalem, which should be made an
heap of stones: and therefore Saint Ambrose, Ambr. l 10. in Luc. Aug in Psalm.
88.
and Saint Augustine say, Quod tristis erat pro persecutoribus; That as
heretofore he wept over Jerusalem, when he considered of her subversion; so now
it grieueth him, that this wickked Nation, whom he had chosen as peculiar unto
himself, of all the Nations of the earth; should by their nesarious handling
of him, pull down such fearful punishments upon themselves: because indeed
it grieueth God, -- Quoties cogitur esse ferox; Whenever, by our sins we
do compel him to power out the Vial of his vengeance upon our selves.

The condemnation of all those that would not believe in him.
Thirdly, Upon all the rest of the generation of men, that would not lay hold
upon this his precious death: for he knew full well, that not the least drop
of his blood should fall to the ground, but it should bring forth fruit, either
to satisfy Gods Justice, and to pacify his Fathers wrath against all
believers in him; or else to kindle his indignation against all contemners of
him; for whosoever will not lay hold on the benefits of his Passion, for his
salvation, he shall be sure to be accountable unto God for all his sufferings,
to his further condemnation; because thy sins did cause them, and for thy
redemption he endured them. Heb. 6.6.
And because he saw so many millions of men, that would rather (as we do)
Crucify again this Son of God, and make a mock of him, and so tread him
under feet, rather then lay hold upon his death, by the hand of faith;
therefore it much grieved him that this great price, which he so lovingly
offered for our redemption, should through our own negligence and wickedness;
so fearfully redound to our further and greater condemnation.

And these be the things he grieved at; the greatness of which grief to see
his own miseries, so unjustly inflicted upon him, and the punishment of the
wicked so justly imposed upon them; combating with the greatness of his joy,
to see hereby the wrath of his Father appeased, The things which our Savior
feared.
and the eternal salvation of his Church purchased, might very well bring him
into his grievous, sweating, bloody agony. And yet,

Secondly, Those things which he feared, were more grievous things to behold,
and more intolerable things to endure then these. For,

First, He saw the weight of sin, or of that punishment which every sin
deserves, which he was now to undergo; and this he knew to be most
insupportable; Zach. 5.7.
for every sin is like a talent of lead that presses down the bearer, even
as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaues; the very earth it self is not
able to bear the weight of sin, Romans 8. Psalm 37.
but groaneth under the same unto this day: and therefore the Prophet David
says, that his iniquities were like a sore burden, too heavy for him to
bear: But upon Christ was laid the iniquities of us all; and he was to make a
full satisfaction for them all: and he saw that no sin could be pardoned
without great sorrow, without great pain; for as no sin is committed, but
that first it is in the mind and soul, before it proceeds out of the body,
and the rule of Justice requires: Vt per quae quis peccat, per haec and
torqueretur: Cypr. de laps.
and vt inde inciperet paena, vnde incipit crimen; That by which a man sins,
by that he should be punished, and this punishment should there begin where his
sin began: therefore seeing we our selves were neither able nor willing to
sorrow sufficiently for our sins, he began to be troubled and grieved in
mind, and to be exceedingly sorrowful for us: and so Aquinas says, Christus
non tantum doluit de amissione vitae temporalis, quantum de peccatis omnium
aliorum. Christ did not grieve so much for the loss of his own life, as he
did for our sins: and so Saint Ambrose says, Ambr. de fide l. 2. c. 3.
Mihi compatitur, mihi tristis est, mihi dolet, quia pro se nihil habuit quod
doleret: He pittieth me he is sad for me, because he had nothing, he did
nothing that he should be grieved for himself: and therefore he bewailed and
was grieved at; Non supplicia sua sed vulnera nostra, Not so much his own
death, as our sins: and because, as we not knowing the greatness of sin,
do not know the greatness of that sorrow that we owe for sin; so Christ,
knowing both, and being to undergo the sorrow of all sins, Thren. 2.13.
he did exceedingly sorrow and grieve; Magna vt mare contritia tua; and his
grief was like an Ocean Sea, bottomless and boundless. And therefore what
marvel if he did exceedingly fear, sweat, and prostrate thus himself upon
his face, to pray to be delivered from such a grief, such a burden? for as
the Poet says, -- Gemit sub pondere currus.

The strongest pillars must needs bow, if you lay more weight upon them then
they are able to bear.

Atlas en ipse laborat. Secondly, He saw the malice of Satan, and his full
leave and license, not as it was to Job, with limitation, do what thou will,
but save his life; but without restriction, the whole power of darkness was
let loose to use all his violence, and to afflict him what he could; and this
our Savior intimates, when he says, That the prince of this world comes,
John 14.33.
and calls that hour, the hour of the power of darkness: And he knew his
power to be very great, and his malice to be nothing less then his power; and
therefore he might well fear and pray against the same.

Thirdly, He saw the wrath of God so infinitely kindled against every sin of
man, and (as it is agreed upon by all Divines) he saw now God sitting in
Judgment upon the world, for so the words of our Savior shows; Now, that
is, even at hand, Is the judgment of this world, and the prince of this world
shall be cast out; John 12.31.
and himself bearing the sins of all men, standing before this Judgment
seat of God, and to undergo all the punishments due to man, that so he might
satisfy the Justice of God for us: and he knew that it was a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God; Deuteronomy. 4.24.
for the Lord our God (says Moses) is a consuming fire; and therefore, as the
Prophet says, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments; so what marvel is it, if the manhood of our Savior Christ, seeing
the Majesty of God, and the greatness of his fury against sin; and it self
now to answer for all sins, was brought into this fearful agony? and was
thereby moved, so earnestly to pray to God:

First, Against eternal malediction in the behalf of his Church.

Secondly, Against the insupportable burden of corporal castigation, in
respect of himself. For,

First, He saw that eternal damnation was due to us for our transgressions:
and he now in us and for us, stood to be arraigned, and we in him stood to be
punished; and therefore as he said to Saul; Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou
me? when his Church only, and not Himself was persecuted; so here he says;
Let this Cup pass from me: i. e. from me and mine, from me and all my Church,
which is my Body, which is my Self: for this is Vox Ecclesiae in Christo, The
voice of the Church uttered by Christ; or else Vox Christi in Ecclesia, Galat.
2.
The voice of Christ, spoken in the behalf of his Church; Romans 6. Coloss. 3.
because now the Church was comprised in his Body, in which it was crucified,
buried, and raised together with him, as the Apostle teaches.

Secondly, He saw that his Humanity, That God would lay no more punishment upon
him then his manhood should be able to support.
which was to suffer the just punishments of all sins, inflicted by the
malice of the Devil, for the satisfying of the wrath of God, was but flesh and
blood; frail, and weak: and therefore he might well fear and pray that God
would not lay heavier punishments upon him, then his patience and obedience
could endure; and so the meaning of this prayer, let this Cup pass from me;
should be this, viz. let it not oppress me, for so the words immediately
following seem to show, Not my will but thy will be fulfilled: as if he should
have said, my desire is not, that it should so pass from me, as that I do
not drink of it at all, and so not fulfill thy will, but that I drinking of
it, to fulfill thy will, may notwithstanding be not oppressed, not subverted,
not wholly swallowed by it, that it may so pass from me as a Cup of deadly
poison, that is wholly drunk up, and yet is at last quite voyded without the
final fall or death of the drinker.

And these are the things that he feared, and he was heard, (...); in that
which he feared, says the vulgar Latin; or, prae reuerentia; for the
reverence and respect had of him, as Oecumenius, and Saint Chrysostom do
interpret it: God laying on him but supportable pains, and delivering his
Church from insupportable punishments. And this was the beginning of his
sufferings, in the Garden of Gethsemane.

CHAP. IIII. Of the treason of Judas, of the flight of all his followers, and
of the taking and binding of Jesus Christ.
Three special things that happened in the Garden after his agony.
AFter that our Savior had thus prepared himself for death by Prayer; we
find three special things that befell him in that very Garden of Gethsemane.

1. The Treason of Judas. 2. The flight of his followers. 3. The taking and
binding of him.
For the first, we shall the better understand it, if we consider these three
points.

1. What Christ had done for Judas. 2. Why Judas betrayed Christ. 3. How he
betrayed him.
First the treason of Judas.
First, Saint Augustine collecteth the sum of those favors, that Christ had
conferred on Judas, as the healing of his father from his leprosy, and his
mother with whom he is said to have often committed most odious incest, A
brief catalogue of those benefits that Christ did for Judas.
from the palsy; the choosing of him to be one of his twelve Apostles, the
appointing of him to be his purse-bearer, and to keep all the wealth he had;
the preserving of his life, when he with the rest of his fellows, were
well-nigh drowned in the ship; Aug. Ser. 28. ad fratres.
the concealing of his theft and falsehood, which our Savior often knew, to
salve his credit; the giving unto him of his blessed Body and Blood; the
washing of his feet; the fore-warning of him of his fact, that he might pray
for grace; to preserve him from the Devil: and many more benefits of lesser
note, which should have eternally obliged him unto Christ.

why our Savior, knowing him to be so wicked, and that he would betray him,
would choose him to be his Apostle.

Resp.
I answer that Christ did it for diverse reasons, as specially these.

First, That it might be no prejudice, or cause of vpbraiding good men, that
wicked men should be of the same calling, Why Christ did choose Judas to be his
Apostle.
or profession: for it is usual in the world, to twitte us, with the
wickedness of our fellows; none so covetous, none so contentious, (say the
people) as you Preachers be; alas, if some be so, we cannot help it; there
was a Caine in Adams house, and a Cham in Noah's Arc, and here a Judas among
twelve Apostles; and therefore among so many of us, what marvel that there
should be many evil? but do you look, that you condemn not the righteous
with the wicked, or grieve the good, by vpbraiding them with the faults of the
bad.

Secondly, to show unto us, Nazian. orat. 4. de theol.
that men may be called to eminent and holy places, and yet be cast-awayes:
because it is not the excellency, or the Sanctity of the calling, but our holy
and upright conversation in our callings that makes us acceptable in the sight
of God.

Thirdly, To testify Christ his innocence, that had always his enemy, to
behold his conversation.

Fourthly, For our example, to be patient, Aug. li. 18. c. 49: de Ciuitat.
to suffer wicked men amongst us.

But again, it may be demanded, why he made him his Purse-bearer, knowing him
to be a thief?

To this Aquinas answers, Thom. in John 12.
that God uses to commit his spiritual graces, to his best servants, and his
temporal gifts to those that are more worldly minded, to see if by any means,
he may gain them, to serve him: Why Christ made Judas his Purse-bearer.
for the worldlings will serve God many times when God blesses them with all
manner of store; therefore Christ knowing Judas to be a covetous wretch, he
made him his steward, and committed to his hands all their wealth; to see if
this might move him to be true and faithful unto him: All this Christ did for
him; and yet as the Proverb is, Improbus a nullo flectitur obsequio, save a
thief from the Gallows, and he will be the first that will seek to hang
thee; so Judas had put all these blessings in a riuen dish, and as the Leopard
is said to be most savage unto them that do most good to him, so does Judas
here, first betray his Master, that was his best friend, and had done most good
unto him: but we must consider,

Secondly, why Judas betrayed Christ? Why Judas betrayed Christ.
The Evangelist shows briefly, that because the ointment which was poured on
Christ, was not sold for 300. pence, and put into his bag, he went unto the
high Priests, Lex talionis.
and sels Christ for 30. pence, decorum pretium, a goodly price to have for the
Lord of heaven and earth: and therefore clean contrary we read that 30.
Jews were sold for one penny; but for Judas we see how the desire of money is
the root of all mischief.

What a horrible sin is covetousness.
-- quid non mortalia pectora cogit,
auri sacra fames?
Or as Iuuenall says, Iuuen. Sat. 14.
-- quae reuerentia legum,
quis metus aut pudor est vnquam, properantis auari?


What will not covetousness cause a man to do? what fear of Law, what love
of Virtue, what shame or honesty can you find in covetous wretches? Boet. 2:
5. Nam saeuior ignibus aetnae, feruens amor ardet habendi.
For, it made Achan hide the wedge of gold, to the loss of his own life; it
made Achab a murderer of innocent Nabaoth, it made Polymnestor kill his Nephew
Polydorus; and here it makes Judas to betray his own Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, yea, and to be the foremost man of all the wicked company, to show
withal, that as the old distich says, Non audet stygius demon tentare quod
audet
Effraenus monachus, plenaque fraudis anus:


Jerem. 24.2.
None is so bad as wicked Priests: for they are like Ieremies figs; either
exceeding good, or extreme evil; either most faithful for Christ, or most
fervent for Antichrist.

Thirdly, the Evangelist tells us how he did bring to pass his wicked fact;
for he gave them a sign, that whosoever he should kiss, That there are five
kinds of kisses.
the same was he: and we find that there are five kinds of kisses; the first
a whoorish kiss; as Solomon says of the Harlot, that she caught a young man,
and kissed him: the second, a chaste kiss; Prou. 7.13. Genesis 29.11.
as Jacob kissed Rachel: the third is a kiss of courtesy, as our Savior said
unto Simon the Pharise, Thou gave me no kiss; the fourth, is a Symbolicall
kiss, for a sign of love, as the Apostle says, Luc. 7.45.
Greet one another with an holy kiss: the fifth is a treacherous kiss, 2 Cor.
13.12.
as Ioab kissed Amasa, and presently killed him whom he kissed: and thus Judas
kissed Christ, for he had said, Whomsoever I shall kiss, 2 Samuel 20.
the same is he, hold him fast: Where observe,

First, That he gave them a sign, to know him; Why Judas gave them a sign.
because it was night when they took him; and because James that was called
the brother of the Lord, and was afterward Bishop of Jerusalem, was so like
him, Ignat. in ep. ad Joh. si vera ep. Ignat.
that it was very hard to know the one from the other; and therefore, lest they
should mistake him, and take ^ames or some other for him, he gave them a sign
to know him.

Secondly, That this sign was a kiss, Why the sign that Judas gave was a
kiss.
that he might the more cunningly work his purpose; Nam doli non sunt doli,
nisi astu colas; for deceits are no deceits, unless they be cunningly carried,
and that if this way failed, he might as he thought, have still retained his
place and credit; because he had but dutifully saluted him: And therefore he
comes and kissed him; saying, Aue Rabbi, Master, God save you; but herein we
see, 1. His arrogance. 2. His iniquity.


First, His arrogance, that he would presume with those lips, under which was
the Poison of Aspes, to kiss those lips, in which was found no guile; John
Baptist thought himself unworthy to untie the la^ched of his shoes: and Judas
will presume to kiss his mouth: and so all wicked men are ever more
presumptuous then the godly; and they are bold and impudent, when the Saints
do fear and tremble.

Secondly, His iniquity is herein seen, that in two words he utters forth
two lies, for he says Aue, God save you, to him, whom he desired to perish;
and he says Rabbi, Master, to him whom he refused to follow; and so you see
sweet words, from a poisoned heart; a praying for his life, and a betraying of
him to death: Ille mihi tam exosus est, quam inferni portae,
Qui aliud animo occultat, aliud ore profert.


An Act so horribly base, that the very Heathen man could say, he hates him as
the gates of Hell, that will say one thing and do another thing.

And yet behold how our Savior deals with this wicked Traitor, he kisseth him
with the kisses of his mouth: How our Savior sought to reclaim Judas and to
bring him to repentance.
and what greater sign of love: and whereas he might have angerly and justly
reviled him for his treachery, he does mildly and kindly salute him, by the
name of friend; and what better name could he use; for Father, Wife, or
Children, are but vain names, unless they be friends.

O then, Si honoras dulcis domine,
Inimicum, amici nomine,
Quales erunt, amoris carmine
Qui te canunt, and modulamine?
sweet LORD, if thou call him friend that betrayed thee, how graciously will thou honor them, that do serve thee? but he goes on to recall him to
repentance; for in saying, Wherefore came thou, he shows his compassion
toward him; because they be, Verba miserentis, non querentis; Words of
pitying him, as if he had said, al ^s poor wretched man, what do thou mean
to do? to run from God unto the Devil? for Christ knew well enough to what
end he came: and therefore he adds, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man
with a kiss? Judas is thy name, a name Honorable and Noble among the Jews;
and will thou now so stayne it, that it shall be for ever so odious among all
Christians, that not any one of them will be called by it, but distaine it as a
most infamous appellation, even for ever: Et tradis, and will thou prove a
Traitor, to betray, yea and to betray the Son of man, and that with a kiss?
for if thou would needs betray him, why so hypocritically with a kiss? O
signum sacrilegum, Aug. Ser. 3. post. pal. fer. 2. de pass. ex Bosq.
O placitum fugiendum, vbi ab osculo incipitur bellum, and per pacis indicium
pacis rumpitur sacramentum; O most horrible, and a most hateful fact, when
War is begun with a kiss, Tuta frequensque via sub amici fallere nomen; tuta
frequensq, licet sit via, crimen habet.
and peace is broken, under the color of Peace! to prove the proverb true,
Quicquid id est, timeo Danaos and dona ferentes; Whatsoever mine enemy does,
yet still I fear him; and I will love rather the wounds of my friends, then
the kisses or gifts of my foes least they prove like the kisses of Judas, or
the mutual gifts of Hector and Ajax, to be the chief instruments of their
destruction.

Esaias 5.^.
But, quid debuit; Nay, quid potuit vltra facere, quod non fecit? What could
Christ do more to recall this Judas to repentance, then he did? O that he had
had the grace, to understand it, and to make a right use of this blessed Sermon
of our Savior Christ; Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?
for, he desired not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent,
and live.

Yet nothing could prevail to do him good; Nothing can reclaim an obstinate
sinner.
Te saeuae progeuiere ferae: He was so hardened in his wickedness, that
nothing could bring him to repentance; to show the fearful case of those men,
that notwithstanding all our preaching will still go on in their old usual
sinful courses; and never turn until with Judas they come, (as it is said of
him) into their own places i. e. the pit of destruction.

And therefore, as Caesar said, Etiam tu Brute; So our Savior seeing not a
stranger; but, Hominem pacis suae; Judas, one of the twelve Apostles, his
companion, and his own familiar friend, which did also eat at his Table, yea,
and dipped his hands in the same dish with him, Magnificare supplantationem, to
lift up his heel against his Master, his Maker, his Redeemer, Aug. Ser. 117.
Et officio sanguinem fundere, and to betray him so treacherously with a kiss;
yea, and also to contemn this his gracious Sermon, as to make no use thereof:
this must needs be a grief and a sorrow unto him, especially if we consider
how he does always grieve more at our destruction, then he does at his own
sufferings, and most grievous Passions.

Now the practice of Judas, to betray his Master with a kiss, What we should
learn from the consideration of this Treason of Judas.
should teach all Masters, not to trust every servant too far; for as all is
not honey that is sweet, nor all gold that glistereth: So is not every man a
faithful servant, that says, Hail Master, God save you: And the reward of
Judas, to hang himself, to destroy himself, to damn his soul, and with that
little gain he got, to buy a field of blood for others, and to purchase Hell
for himself, should teach all servants, to take heed that they betray not
their masters, and all men to beware of covetousness.

Secondly, Judas had no sooner betrayed him, into the hands of sinners; but all
his followers presently fled: his best beloved John was now dejected, and the
stoutest Peter did follow aloof, and all the rest did basely hide their heads,
and withdraw themselves clean away. Not long before he had fed them with his
own body, and refreshed their spirits with his most precious blood; and yet now
they all forsake him which should support him; and he was left alone in the
hands of the barbarous soldiers: well he might look (as the Prophet says)
for some to have p^tty upon him; but look while he would, there was no man to
help him, no, Zach. 13.7.
nor yet to pity him; for, I will smite the shepherd, and all the sheep
shall be scattered: And what a grief it is to a man, to see himself destitute
of all friends, and forsaken of all his familiars; as if heaven and earth had
conspired to leave him helpelesse; let any man judge.

Thirdly, Judas having given this sign, then the whole cohort, the whole
company of armed soldiers, consisting of 1000. men, as Vatablus says, or of
55. footmen, and 56. horsemen, as others think, comes in the midst of the
night, with swords and staves to take him, and to lay hold upon him; which they
might have peaceably taken in the day time, teaching in the Temple, but that as
Saint Ambrose says, Ambr. in Mat. 26.
Factum congruit tempori, and personis; The fact, and the time, and the persons
do well agree; because that a work of darkness, done by the children of
darkness, was fittest to be done in the time of the greatest darkness: and
when the soldiers had apprehended him, they presently bound his hands, and
perhaps shackled his feet with chains; Ecce trahebatur passis priameia virgo
crinibus. Virgil. Aeneid. 1.
because Judas had willed them before, to hold him fast; and because they would
hereby fore-shew, that he should die, they never using to bind any, but those
whom they undoubtedly purposed to crucify: and especially, because the Holy
Ghost would hereby signify, that as Thieves are wont to be bound, so our
Savior Christ was contented to be bound, not for his own, but for Adams
theft; he was bound for us, that we might be loosed from the bonds of sin:
And being thus bound, they drew him by the hairs of the head, as Leo seems to
affirm, when he says, Leo Ser. 7. de pass.
Trahunt volentem trahi, and sinentem sibi fieri quicquid sacerdotum instinctu,
popularis furor audebat; They drew him, that was willing to be drawn, and
contented to suffer them to do unto him whatsoever pleased their malicious
rage.

And it may be, they dragged him through the brook of Cedron, Psalm. 109.
and so made him to drink of the brook in the way, as the Psalmist says: And
thus you see how they bound him which came to loosen them; Cyril l. 11. in John
c. 37.
as Saint Cyrill says. O Lord Jesus, let this thy binding satisfy thy Fathers
wrath; that we be not bound, hand and foot, and cast into that utter
darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. And so much for the
sufferings of Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane.

CHAP. V. Of the sufferings of Christ before Annas, Caiphas, Herod, and Pilate.
SEcondly, What Christ suffered before his Judges.
Having heard some part of Christ's sufferings which he underwent in the Garden
of Gethsemane; we are now to see, what he suffered before his Judges, First,
before Annas.
and first before Annas: for when they had bound him, they brought him first
unto Annas, says the Evangelist: but what was done here, it is not fully
agreed: for Saint Augustine, and the common received opinion is, Origin. tract.
35. in John.
that he was examined here before Annas, and struck upon the cheek by the
high Priests servant, and denied the first time by Saint Peter; Tolet. annot.
8. in John.
but Origin, Tolet, Iansen* and others think that here was nothing done unto
him, but that the soldiers brought him to Annas, in ludibrium, to be mocked
and scoffed at; and that he being the chief of Sanhedrim, i. e. of the 72.
Elders of the Jews, and father-in-Law to Caiphas, and to be high the Priest
the year following, might assent unto their act; and perhaps give them some
money for their pains in taking of him, and for their observance of him, to
bring Christ unto him.

And I will not discuss which of these is truest, but receiving the last as
most probable, Secondly, what he suffered before Caiphas.
I will pass to see what was done unto him in Caiphas house: and here I find
four special parts in this Scene.

1 He is examined by the High Priest. 2. He is stricken by the base servant. 3.
He is denied by his own Apostle. 4 He is most fasly accused by many false
witnesses.
First, Annas examineth Christ of two things.
Here the Judge of all the world stands to be examined by a wicked man, and he
demands of Christ two special things.

1. Of his Disciples. 2. Of his Doctrine.
First, of his Disciples, he asked perhaps how many he had, First, of his
Disciples.
and where they were, or what was become of them; and to this our Savior
answered nothing, because he thought it enough for them to have himself,
Christ would not reueile his servants faults to shame them.
one for all: and though he might have justly said, the one has sold me, the
rest have forsaken me, and the stoutest of them will, as thou may see by and
by, forswear me, that he knew me not; yet he had rather say nothing then say
evil of them: because, it is not good to speak evil of the teachers of the
people; Theodor. li. 1. cap. 11.
and therefore Constantine was wont to say, that if he saw a Priest offend, he
would rather cover it with his Gown, then suffer the same to be revealed unto
the people; Ne inde Laicus peccare licenter aggrediatur: Lest others knowing
the same, might thereby take the more liberty of sinning.

Secondly, He is questioned about his Doctrine: and to this our Savior
answers; and, prefixing two special notes of a faithful teacher,

First, To teach publicly, for, I spoke openly in the world, and not in any
secret corners, as one that hated the light, which is a great suspicion of
evil; John 3.20.
because, every one that does evil, hates the light;

Secondly, To do it in the Church of God, for, I taught in the Temple, and in
the Synagogue, and in those places that are appointed for Gods service;

He says nothing in particular, that might commend or discommend the same; but
bids him ask those that were there, about him, what he said: for, it may be
he saw some standing there that were his hearers, and could testify unto him
what he taught; and he knew it was not the part of a wise man, either to praise
or dispraise himself.

Nec te collaudes, nec te culpaueris ipsum,
Hoc faciunt stulti, quos gloria vexat inanis.
And if he had spoken any thing to justify himself and his doctrine, he knew
that must be to small purpose; Quia illi quem pro latrone traxerunt,
detraxerunt fidem; because in bringing of him there, as a thief and a seducer
of the people, they had made him of no credit, whatsoever he had said: and
therefore he says, he were better to ask of them which were of better credit
with him then he was, what he taught; for these do know what I have said. You
see the wisdom of our Savior, and the mildness of his answer. Yet this
served not. For,

Secondly, Our Savior having thus meekely and discreetly answered unto the
demand of the High Priest; his servant struck him on the cheek; it is likely
with his fist, as hard as he could; and it is thought, this servant that smote
him, How Malabus uses our Savior Christ.
was Malchus, whose ear Christ had formerly healed; a poor beggarly slave,
which shows his great ingratitude; that like Aesopes Snake, he would render
unto Christ, evil for good, 2 Cor. 11.
and strike our Savior upon the cheek, a thing noted by the Apostle to be
most disdainefull; and therefore Saint Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. hem. 82. in
John.
Alapa nihil ignominius, nihil contumeliosius; Nothing can be more
disgraceful, then to be smitten on the cheek; Chrysostom. hom. 2. de incomprehen.
dei not.
and yet I read not of a word that the High Priest said to this wicked slave;
but suffered him to do this wrong to this innocent man: a greater fault in the
Master then in the servant; because the Master is bound to restrain the
wickedness of his servants, as much as possible lies in him: but we see the
indulgence of the Masters, does encourage and imbolden wicked and most
graceless servants, to wrong and abuse the dearest Saints of God: they are
ready to do all wickedness, swear, steal, kill, and what you will for their
Masters; and as the Poet says; Seu ver^are dolos, ceu certae occumbere morti:
and therefore their masters bear with them; and our Savior suffers at the
hands of both. Neither is this all that he suffers here. For,

Thirdly, He is denied, by his first, and chiefest, stoutest Apostle; our
Savior foretold him, Of the manifold infirmities of Saint Peter.
that he might prepare himself by prayer against this temptation, (Quia tela
praeuisa minus nocent) that he should deny him thrice, and yet for all his
boasting, that although all men should be offended, because of him, yet would
not be be offended. He does here accumulate, and heap one sin upon another;
for,

First, He fled with the rest, and left our Savior all alone. First, he fled.


Secondly, He waxes cold, Secondly, he waxes cold in love.
not only through the coldness of the night, but also through fear, which
drives away the blood, and causes the same to hide, and to congeale it self,
as it were in some secret corners, as the Poet says:

Gelidusque, per ima cucurrit ossa, tremor; Virgil. Aeneid. 2.
A trembling fear makes all the members cold, and especially through want of
love and affection unto Christ; Nam si amore in deum corda inflammare^tur,
perparum aut nihil vis frigorum corporibus esset nocitura; Frigora ne possim
gelid^ sentire profundi, Qui calet in c^pido pectore, praestat amor. Ouidius
ep. Leand. Heron.
For, as carnal love drives away all cold, as Leander says unto Hero, So
much more he that burns with the heavenly love of Christ, will scarce feel
any outward cold: and therefore Christ says unto his beloved spouse, My head
is full of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night; and yet because he
loved her, he patiently bore it all: but Peter, it may be, hearing the wicked
servants relating, how one had cast him down to the ground, another had thrown
him into the brook of Cedron, and a third had smote him upon the cheek; then
begins to wax pale, and fearful, and to forsake his first love; and
therefore he had need to warm his hands at the high Priests fire, when his
heart was cold in the love of God.

Thirdly, he denies and forsweareth his Master.
Thirdly, He denied Christ, with a lie, with an oath, with a curse and that
presently, at the voice of a Woman, a silly wench, not any of the greatest
Ladies, but a poor seruing-maide that kept the doors. O quantum mutatus ab
illo Hectore? What, do thou Peter, deny Christ? who then will confess him?
for thou said, Matthew. 16.16.
that he was the Son of the living God, and do thou now swear, thou
know not whence he is?

Why Christ suffered Saint Peter for to fall.
And yet Christ, though to humble him now that was so arrogant before, and to
teach us to be afraid to fall; for if so great a pillar fell, how much easier
may we be hurled down if we be not wary? and to erect our hope, that if with
this Apostle through infirmity, we do fall, we should not despair with Judas,
but still upon our repentance trust in God; Matthew. 14.31.
yet as formerly, when he walked upon the water, and began to sink; Christ
vpheld him, with an outstretched arm; so now, when he walked through the
paths of death, and was well-nigh swallowed in the gulf of perdition; Christ
looks upon him with the eyes of mercy; and saves his soul by his
compassionate grace: for he causes the Cock to crow, Numbers ^2.28.
the dumb beast like Balaams Ass to reprove the iniquity of the Apostle; and
as not respecting his own indignity, so much as his servants infelicity, How
mercifully Christ preserves Saint Peter.
he looks back on him that had forgot himself, and thereby reviving his
memory, to think upon his masters words, he sent him out to weep bitterly,
that so he might restore him mercifully.

Fourthly, He is falsely accused, How Christ is falsely accused of his enemies.
and charged with the things that he never knew, that he never said: for they
sought false witnesses; for true witnesses they could have none: and there came
many witnesses against him, but they could not agree, some saying one thing,
some another: yet, at last comes two sons of Belial, children of their Father
the Devil; that perverting our Saviors sense, and changing his words, said,
they heard him saying, that he could destroy that Temple made with hands, Mark
14.58.
and build another in three days; then the High Priest adjured him by God, to
tell them what he was; and when Christ did meekely and m^ldely say the truth,
he furiously rent his clothes and said, he blasphemed against God, as if God
could, or would blaspheme himself, then all the foolish Clearkes of this
wicked Priest did say, Amen.

-- Et quae sibi quisque timebat
Vnius in miseri exitium conuersa tulere.
And approving what they knew not, How all consent to crucify Christ.
as a just reward for saving many of their wretched lives, they all consent to
put him to an accursed death: and then follows their acclamation, Crucify
him, crucify him; their saying is doubled and redoubled, he must be put to
death; there is nothing else will satisfy these bloodthirsty men; and
therefore, he is now to be kept by the base Sargiants, and the most barbarous
Soldiers, as a condemned man; and to make themselves merry, as at a banquet of
Wine, or as if they had been at an interlude play, What grievous things Christ
suffered after he was condemned by Cayphas.
to pass away this tedious night, they do eterchangeably sport at him; and
first they mock him; secondly, they beat him; thirdly they spit in his
glorious face, and so make that face, which the Angels desire to behold, to
become so deformed by reason of their blows, and spitles that it seemed as in
a leprosy, Esaias 53.4.
and as having neither form nor beauty; fourthly, they hoodwinke him; fifthly,
they beat him with their hands and fists; sixthly, they scoffingly say,
prophecy unto us who has strocken thee. O sweet Jesus Christ!

Quis cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando
Explicet aut possit lachrymis aequare dolorem?
Who is able to express thy bitter sufferings, to declare thy heavy thoughts,
and to show forth all thy grief, which thou endurest throughout all that long
and tedious night? And yet, though he could have easily stayed their fury, and
have suddenly stricken them all stark dead, with the least word of his mouth,
he opened not his mouth, but he did patiently suffer whatsoever they did
violently offer unto him: and when they had done what they would, they
consulted and consented to send him unto Pilate.

How and whereof Christ was accused before Pilate.
And here before Pilate they do accuse him of two special things.

First, Of his impiety against God, because (as they said) they found him,
perverting the Nations and people of the Jews, and teaching them strange and
pernicious doctrines; breaking the Sabbath, condemning their traditions, and
no ways observing Moses his Law.

Secondly, Of iniquity against man, no less then high Treason against their
sovereign Emperor, because he denied to pay tribute unto Caesar, and said
that himself was King.

And the more to induce Pilate to believe them and to incense him against
Christ, they said that he began in Galilee; because Galilee had brought forth
many seditious and rebellious persons, Act. 5.
as Judas Galileus, Theudas, and others; and because Pilate had formerly showed
that he could not endure the Galileans, How fully they seek to incense Pilate
against Christ.
not only because they were under the jurisdiction of Herod, which till that
time was a professed enemy unto Pilate, but especially because they had so
provoked Pilate, that he caused the blood of many of them to be mingled with
their sacrifices.

And so they join subtilty and iniquity both together, for a subtiller way
they could not invent, and a greater iniquity they could not effect: How false
was their accusation of him.
for he truly explained Moses, wherein their sophistical Rabbis and
Pharisaicall Doctors had most falsely corrupted him; and he did not only bid
them give unto Caesar what belonged unto Caesar; but he paid tribute unto
Caesar, both for himself and for his servants: and therefore as they had most
maliciously accused him, so herein they have most falsely slandered him unto
Pilate.

But as the darnels may pass for wheat, until they be fifted; so falsehoods
may carry the color of truth, until they be discussed; and therefore Pilate
examineth the matter, and in the carriage of this business he does something
well, and in many things ill: as I have showed at large in my treatise of the
resolution of Pilate, Resolution of Pilate. page
where I refer my Reader, for his fuller satisfaction in this point.

Now Pilate having played his part, What was done to Christ before Herod.
and understanding (as I showed you before) that he was of Galilee, he sends
him unto Herod; and there the Evangelists say, that Herod and his men of War,
set him at naught, Vbi Jesus non respondebat, ibi vt ouis silebat, hoc est,
sicut agnus innocens non apperuit os suum; vbi vero respondebat ibi sicut
pastor docebat. Aug. in Johan.
and mocked him and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe; and Christ, though they
questioned with him in many things, yet answered nothing: and therefore they
derided his silence, and exposed him to the greater laughter: and the Soldiers
that had formerly imbrued their hands in the blood of the innocents, do now
most impiously batter and buffet the Son of God; and they disgorge their
filthiest foame upon his most glorious face: and to increase their own sport
and his grief, Induunt eum vest alba, they arrayed him with a white
glittering, and a gorgeous raiment.

And so, The mystery of clothing Christ in white, expressed.
against their wills they do herein after a mystical manner, sufficiently
test^fie, both the excellent dignity, and the most innocent probitie of the
man: for as Cicero says; Color albus praecipue decorus deo est; That the
whitest color is most agreeable to the highest God: Cicero l. 2. de legibus.
he appeared many times in white, but never in any other color; and
therefore, not only the Wise man says, Let thy garments be always white, but
also the very Saints of Heaven are said to be clothed in long white robes,
Revel. 4.
and Iuuenal says, Sufficient tunicae summis aedilibus alba; that white robes
are fittest for the greatest Peers, even for Kings and Caesar's, says
Iansenius. And the white color is the chiefest note of joy and innocence: for
the Poet wishing for joy, says, Sumatur fatis decolor alba meis. Cicero pro
milone meminit, A literae salutaris, C. autem tristis.
And as the ancients by letters did express joy or grief, life or death: as Y
to show the pattern of our humane life, the lower part signifying youth, which
is uncertain which way it will go; and the upper part on the right side, the
way of virtue, and on the left side the way of vice: and therefore Persius
says of this Letter, Et tibi quae sameos deduxit litera ramos
Surgentem dextro monstrauit limite callem.
Which one translateth thus.

The branches of the letter first in Samea found,

How the Ancients by letters and colors did use to express diverse things.
Of man's life does show the high way and ground:

And TH which has a dart in the middle, was the Character of death, and
therefore was wont to be set by the Judges, as a mark upon the heads of those
that were condemned to die, whereupon the Poet says: O multum ante alias
infaelix litera Theta: And so Tau was the letter of life, so intimated by
Ezechiel, and so expressed by the Gentiles, and used as a mark on them that
were to be preserved alive; even so they did use to express the same things by
diverse colors, as white to be the sign of innocence and absolution; and
black to be the token of guiltiness and condemnation: whereupon Ovid says:
Ovid. Met. l. 15.
Mos erat antiquis niueis atrisque lapillis,
His damnare reos, illis absoluere culpa.
The fashion was in ancient times,
By black or white to express our crimes.


And therefore certainly these things, that they should clothe him in white,
before they send him unto Pilate back again, -- Non sine numine diuum,
Eueniunt. --
do apparently show that they were directed herein by divine providence, and
declared plainly against themselves, that Christ, should rather be absolved, as
an innocent then condemned for a malefactor.

Yet all this would not serve, but as he was posted from Annas to Caiphas, from
Caiphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod; so now he must be returned to Pilate
once again. And although the former Scenes were Tragical enough; yet were they
nothing to these that follow; for now begins those doleful Acts, which prove
that saying to be most false; -- Nullum caruit exemplo nefas, No villainous deed
does want the like; How no age did ever parallel this villainy done to Christ
but presidents may be found as bad as it: for if you ask the days of old,
and search all the Stories of the whole world, since the day that it was first
created; yet shall you never be able, to show me such indignities offered to
any man, as was here done unto the Son of God; for now Pilate by the
approument of Herod, and the message of his own wife; who, as the Poet says
of Cassandra, (Tunc etiam fatis apperit Cassandra futuris
Ora dei iussu, nequicquam credita Teucris.)
did now begin to Prophecy; nay, How Pilats wife justified Christ.
to testify of the truth of Christ his innocence; and therefore presently
sent, and earnestly advised her husband, to have nothing to do with that just
man; yea and showed a very good reason for it; because she had suffered many
things that very day, because of him: I say Pilate hereby perceiving his
innocence, and fearing his Deity, and therefore seeking to loose him, deuiceth
a cruel way to satisfy the Jews, and to justify Christ, and so to let him
go: Bosq. de pass. dom. page 8^0.
for stripping him of all his clothes, he caused six hangmen, six varlets,
says Saint Hierome, to scourge him, and whip him while they could; whereof two
whipped him with rods of thorns, and when they had wearied themselves; another
two whipped him with ropes, Costerus med. 24.
or whip-cords tied and knotted like a Carters whip; and when they were tired,
the other twain scourged off his very skin with wyres, How grievously Christ
was scourged.
or little chains of iron: and the number of his stripes, (as some report it)
amount to 5400. or as others say, to 5370. or at the least according to the
number of the Band of Soldiers, to 660. a scourging able to kill any man, and
would have killed him, How he was Crowned with thorns.
but that he was preserved by the Godhead to endure, and to suffer a more
shameful death: and when he was thus scourged, the Soldiers platted a Crown
of thorns, and put it upon his head; a goodly Crown for the King of Kings:
for I read of many sorts of Crowns, as of the Triumphall, Laurall, Nauall,
Murall, and such like, but never till this, did I read of a Crown of thorns;
for this shameful and this doleful Diadem, was made like a Crown to delude
him, Osorius de Passione domini.
and it was made of thorns to torment him; for it bored his head with two and
seauenty wounds, as Osorius says: and then they put upon him a purple robe,
and scoffingly s^i^, Hail King of the Jews; Squallentem barbam, and concretos
anguine crines vuln^raque illa gerens, quae circum plurima muros accepit
patrios. Virgil. l. 2. Aeneid.
and spitefully smote him with their hands.

And after they had thus lashed him, almost unto death, and most cruelly
divided those Azure channels of his guiltless blood, they bring him out, it
may be; by the hair of the head, and expose him to the public view of the
scornful company; and Pilate says unto them, Ecce homo; Behold the man:
Behold, I say, not your King, to provoke you the more against him, nor yet the
Son of God, which you say he makes himself to be; for if he were so, he
might have easily rescued himself out of his enemies hands: But behold a
poor, silly, miserable, distressed man, and see how he lies disfigured with
wounds, weltring and panting in a crimson River of his own blood; and let this
sufficient, yea, more then sufficient punishment, suffice to satisfy your rage
against him: Quia homo qui in homine calamitoso est misericors, meminit sui;
Because a man pitying an afflicted distressed man, does thereby show he is
mindful of himself, who may fall into the same case, that another man is
fallen into.

That we should ever contemplate, how Christ stood before the people in his
Robes and Crown of thorns.
And therefore, let us behold in contemplation, the countenance of this man:
Behold, the fairest among men, being both white and ruddie, the chiefest among
ten thousand; his head being as the most fine gold; his eyes as the eyes of
Doves, by the Rivers of waters; his cheeks as a bed of spices, and his
lips like Lillies dropping sweet smelling Myrhe: And see how lavish and
prodigal are these profane and sacrilegious Cannibals of his most divine and
sacred blood, and how he stands here before these wicked Judges, to be judged
for us, wicked men; his strength fainting, his heart panting, and his hands
bound, that he could by no means wipe off those floods of tears and blood
that trickled down his cheeks, and flowed from all the pores and passages of
his precious Body: And let this consideration move us to compassionate him, to
condemn them that did it, and especially to detest that (that is our sin)
which was the only cause of all this his doleful sorrows. Parcere prostratis
scit nobilis ira leonis: at lupus and turpes instant morientibus vrsi, and
quaecunque minor nobilitate fera est. Ovid. They urge a threefold argument to
move Pilate to crucify Christ. 1. Their Law. Leuit. 24.


But to return unto the Jews, that most envious and malicious people, the
more Pilate did to appease them, the more they were enraged against him: for
seeing how Pilate sought to loose him, they had taught that unstable multitude
of ungrateful people, for all the good works that he did unto them, healing
their sick, restoring their dead, and feeding their souls with the food of
life, to cry out with one consent, Away with him, away with him; crucify him,
crucify him: And the chiefest of them do with a threefold argument urge
Pilate, to condemn our Savior Christ.

First, That they had a Law, and by their Law he must die, because he makes
himself the Son of God; so the ignorant and the arrogant Pharisees, and the
Doctors of their Law, do accuse the Author and the Publisher of the Law; not
knowing that ancient rule, Eius est absoluere, cuius est condere legem, He may
lawfully abolish, which has the power to establish any Law.

Secondly, They threaten him, that if he let him loose, 2. The friendship of
Caesar.
he is no friend to Caesar; a most forcible, though not infallible reason: for
who would not then, as the case stood, have almost condemned any man, rather
then to be accused by so many audacious impudent men, of high Treason against
Caesar?

Thirdly, They do engage themselves for him, saying, 3. Their engaging for him.
Let his blood be upon us, and upon our Children; Do thou the deed, let him
be condemned, and if thou fear any thing, we are willing to undergo the
danger; let the vengeance of his blood light on us, and on our Children for
ever.

Then Pilate having attentively heard, did most diligently consider all these
things. And

First, Musing whether he was the Son of God or not, He began to fear,
both for what he had already done, in scourging and deluding him, and what he
was presently to do, Discite iustitiam moniti, and non temnere diuos.
To pass sentence upon the Son of God; for he assured himself, the Gods
would revenge all wrongs, especially done against themselves: Mezentius felt it
for a lesser fault then this, Flectere si nequeo superos Acharonta mouebo.
for he was thrust to Hell, for saying, The damned spirits should help him, if
that the Gods would not assist him; And therefore he desires Christ to tell
him, Quo sanguine cretus, From whence he was: But to this our Savior gives him
none answer; for to what end should he answer? because he had already made
known unto them that he was the Son of God, and that his Father and he were
all one: And this was the chiefest motive, that moved them to convent him, and
persuaded them so earnestly to seek for to condemn him. Neither would he
answer, says Athanasius, Athanas. de passione and cruce.
Ne si respondisset timiditate and formidine mortis, id fecisse videretur;
Least if he had done so, he might be thought to have done it for fear of
death, and to preserve his life: Why Christ would not answer Pilate, whence he
was.
Or (as others think) he would not answer, least by his eloquence he should
have escaped death; insomuch that Pilate, who unjustly condemned him, justly
admired this, that he which was wont to open his mouth in Parables, and to
teach others the way unto eternal life, would not at this time open his mouth
to speak one word for himself to save his life.

Secondly, Pilate being much affraide to be thought an enemy unto Caesar,
Mark 15.15.
and being most willing to please the people, as the Evangelist notes, he
determined to deliver him to be crucified: And these were the motives that
caused Pilate to condemn our Savior Christ; and these cause many a man to
sin, when we fear man more then God; What moved Pilate to deliver Christ to
be crucified.
and are desirous rather to please the people, then to discharge our
consciences: from which two fearful things, good Lord deliver every faithful
soul.

Thirdly, Because Pilate knew, that for envy the Jews delivered him to be
crucified, and his own conscience by many arguments testified unto him, how
unjustly he condemned that just man; Math 27.24 The poor shift of Pilate to
excuse himself.
therefore that it might happen unto the Jews according as they had concluded
themselves, His blood be upon us, and upon our Children: He takes water, and
washes his hands, saying, I am innocent from the blood of this just person;
See ye to it: And then he gave sentence that it should be as they required,
that JESUS CHRIST should be presently CRVCIFIED. The sentence of Christ's
condemnation.
Ah senseless sinful man, a man void of wisdom, to commit such an
horrible sin against thy God, and to condemn life to death! Alas, what
avails it thee, to wash thy hands in water, and to defile thy heart with
blood? for, how shall thou answer this? not only to condemn an innocent, Sed
and ijsdem labijs illum condemnare quibus pronuntiaueras innocentem? But also
with the same lips to condemn him as guilty, which even now had pronounced
him guiltless: Surely God may say to thee, as to all those Judges that follow
thy steps, to make a long speech to justify themselves, Luke 19.22.
and in few words to condemn the innocent, Out of thine own mouth will I
condemn thee, O thou evil servant; and I will justly condemn thee to
eternal death, because thou have unjustly condemned an innocent man to death.
O consider this, ye that forget God, and ye that be called Gods on Earth;
cleanse your hearts from all evil, and let not your hands deal with
wickedness; so shall you be innocent from the great offense. And so you see
what the Judge of all the World suffered, before these petty Judges of this
World.

CHAP. VI. What Christ suffered in Golgotha, the place where he was crucified.
PIlate having passed sentence upon Christ to be crucified, the Soldiers take
him, and laying his Cross, a heavy Cross upon his shoulders, as Isaac carried
the wood wherewith himself should be sacrificed, Genesis 22.6. 2 Samuel 11.14.
or as Vrias carried the Letters of his own death, they compelled him to
carry it so long as he was able to stand under it; then meeting Simon of
Cyrene coming from his perambulation in the fields, they make him carry that
Cross of Christ unto the place of execution: and placing the same in Golgotha,
which was the place where Adam was buried, Ambros. l. 5. Ep. 1^.
(as Saint Ambrose thinks) they nailed and fastened Christ unto it, upon that
very day of the week that Adam was created; Two things considered upon the
Cross.
and (as is thought) he was hanged upon this Tree, upon the very same hour of
the day, as Adam did eat of the forbidden Tree. And here we must consider two
especial things.

1. The grievous things that he suffered. Tantum distentus sum, vt corpore nudo
in modum tympanica pellis distento, facile possint omnia ossa mea dinumerari.
Bern. de pass. c. 7.
2. The gracious words that he uttered.
For the first, they stretched his body, as Saint Bernard says, and then they
nailed him to the Cross; which was a grievous torment unto any, but especially
unto him, because his body of all other men, was the most tender; as being
only shaped of a Virgins substance, without any commixture of the male nature:
and yet the most sensible parts of this tender body, must be bored and mangled
by his cruel enemies; for his feet, that before were washed with Mary's
tears, must now be teared with iron nails; and those blessed hands, Bosquier.
de passione Domini. p. 847. in fol.
that had wrought so many wondrous works; must now be fastened Unto this
wooden Cross; and there he must hang until he die; Horrendum dictu, A most
odious and a most grievous death, and that in four respects.

First, Because it was an accursed death, so esteemed by man, 1. An accursed
death.
and so denounced by God himself; where he says; Cursed is every one that
hangs upon a Tree: Deuteronomy. 21. Gal. 3.13. Tripartit. hist. l. 1. c. 9. 2. A
shameful death.
And therefore Constantine the Great and good, made a Law, that no Christian
should be crucified upon a Cross.

Secondly, Because it was an ignominious and a shameful death, inflict^d
chiefly upon those slaves and servants, that either falsely accused, or
treacherously conspired their Masters death, and it was never imposed upon free
men, unless it were for some heinous and notorious crimes, as robbery,
murder, sedition, rebellion, or such like.

3. A painful death.
Thirdly, Because it was a most painful death, for that they were fastened to
the Cross, not with any little nails, but with big purposely made nails,
that might hold them sure and fast enough unto the Cross; so big were the
nails that pierced Christ his hands and feet, that being found, they were
found sufficient to make a bridle and a Helmet, Socrates. Hist. l. 1. c. 17.
as Socrates says; and then the whole weight of their bodies, hanging by these
parts, made their pain intolerable, and killed them at length without any
deadly wound: And therefore Cicero that most eloquent man, which wanted no
words to express any thing else, when he came to consider of this accursed
death, was brought to that pass, Cicero. Orat. 7. in ver.
to that nonplus, as to say, Quid dicam in crucem tollere? What shall I say of
that cruel and most painful shameful death of the Cross?

4. A slow and a lingering death.
Fourthly, Because it was a slow and a lingering death, for that (as the Poet
truly says) Morsque minus penae quam mora mortis habet, To be long in pain,
is worse then death; a soon dispatched riddance out of pain, being a great
favor unto a languishing life; and although in other deaths, they should be
quickly dispatched, and soon rid out of all their pain, yet here they hanged,
either till their blood distilled by little and little out of those wounds that
were made in their hands and feet, or till they died with the extremity of
hunger; unless in pity their tormentors would by violence hasten their much
desired death, by a butcherly breaking off their legs; and so dismembring of
their tortured bodies, as they did unto those two thieves, that were crucified
with our Savior: And this was the death, the accursed, base, servile,
ignominious, and most painful death, that our Savior Christ was put unto. It
is reported of Aristides, that he dying by the bite of a Weesell, said, Aelian.
de var. Hist. lib. 14. c. 4.
that his death would have been more pleasant, and more acceptable unto him, if
he had died more honorably, by the claws of a Lion, or a Libbard, and not by
the teeth of such a contemptible beast: And what a grief was it unto the Son
of God, to be put unto this, I know not whether more shameful, or more
painful death?

And besides, it is worth the observing, All circumstances do aggrauate the
grief of Christ upon the Cross.
that they crucified him then, and at that time, when he had delivered their
Fathers out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage: In commemoration
of which benefit, their Passover was to be celebrated, and a great concourse
of people was then ever present at Jerusalem. And further, they did not only
exclude him out of their City, and put him to death without their gates, as
Saint Paul notes, but they did also consort him with the wicked, and crucified
him betwixt two thieves; so cruelly they did deal, and so basely they did
esteem of him.

Secondly, After they had thus nailed him unto the Cross, in stead of the
comfort of pitying him, which we use to show unto the vilest Malefactors in
such extremities, and which is some kind of satisfaction unto the sufferer, he
finds his friends forsaking him, not daring to say, Alas for him; How they
scoffed at Christ upon the Cross.
and he sees his enemies deriding him in the midst of his sorrows, and
shaking their heads at him, and saying, O thou dissembling and disloyal
wretch, thou sauest others, but thy self thou can not save; thou can
destroy the Temple, and build it again in three days; but thou can not come
down from the Cross, to preserve thy life: for if thou be the Son of
God, come down from the Cross, Why Christ came not down from the Cross.
and we will believe in thee. But to this Saint Ambrose answers, O stulte and
caece grex sacerdotum, nunquid impossible erat ei, de paruo stipite ligni
descendere, qui descendit e caelorum altitudine? O foolish, blind, and
senseless Flock of Priests, do you think it impossible for him to come
down from a little piece of wood, which came down from the height of Heaven?
Non venit vt se liberare, qui subseru^tute non erat, sed vt nos de seruitute
redimeret. Ambros. in 27 Math.
or do you think, that your bonds, or nails, or fastening of him to the
Cross, were able to detain him there; when as the Heaven an^ all the Host of
Heaven, were not able to hold him from descending, from this ascending to the
Cross? for he came not to free himself from death, but to deliver himself
to death, that he might free us from eternal death: And therefore he
patiently suffered all, all pain, all contempts, and all disgraces; yet they
still went on, from one degree of scoffs unto another, for when he in a most
disconsolate state, cried, Eloi, Eloi, Lamasabachthani, They do in a most
barbarous scoffing manner say, Stay, and see if Elias will come to help him:
And thus was he flouted and derided by all that beheld him, by the Soldiers,
by the High Priests, by them that passed by, yea, by the very Thieves that were
hanged with him. And what is this, but to add an unspeakable sorrow unto an
insufferable pain; and so (as Solomon says) to grieve him more and more, that
was already too much afflicted at the heart?

How they gave him vinegar to drink.
Thirdly, When he most lamentably, in the midst of this hot and grievous
conflict with Satan, sin, and the wrath of God, cried, I thirst; they most
despightfully give him vinegar to drink; a sweet drink for a dying man, to
augment his grief, but not to quench his thirst.

How they divided his garments.
Fourthly, They take those blessed Garments, wherewith he had wrought many a
Heavenly miracle, and before his face they divide the same among the wicked,
and most barbarous bloody Soldiers. And

How Christ being dead, they still raged against him.
Fifthly, When he was quite dead, their malice still remained alive; so that he
might justly say, -- Nec mors mihi finiet iras,
Saeua sed in manes manibus arma dabant.


They did most furiously rage against his harmless Ghost, for though they saw
that he was already dead, yet still they persecute him; Et miles validis
ingentem viribus hastam,
In latus contorsit.


And one of those immane and bloody Soldiers, pierced his side with such a
mighty spear, that it made so deep a wound, as that Thomas might well put his
hand into the same: And thus did our Savior suffer in Golgotha, in the Fields
of Caluarie.

Diverse obseruable things to be considered.
First, Of all sorts of men, Jews, Gentiles, Princes of the people, Priests,
Soldiers, Masters, Servants, Friends, Strangers, Young, Old, Male, and Female.

Secondly, In all the things, wherein it was possible for a man to suffer, as
first in his friends, for they all forsook him, and not one of them assisted
him, when he was thus persecuted by his foes.

Secondly, In his good name, for they loaded him with lies, and accused him of
blasphemies.

Thirdly, In his outward goods, which we call goods of Fortune; for, though he
had nothing but his clothes, yet they stripped him of his garments, and left
him stark naked, but what had been abscene for themselves to see, in the
sight of all men.

Fourthly, In all his senses; for his holy ears heard nothing but shameful
reuilings, his bright eyes saw nothing but cruel enemies, his feeling could
perceive nothing, but sharpness of nails, his smelling, but their stinking
spittles, and his taste but gall and vinegar.

Fifthly, in all the members of his body, How Christ suffered in all the members
of his body.
for his head was wounded with a crown of thorns; his face was defiled with
their filthy spittings, and most shamefully buffeted with their sacrilegious
fists; his eyes dazeled with blows, and amazed to see their outrageous
cruelties; his hands and feet nailed unto the Cross, his heart pierced with a
spear; and in a word, his whole body was so pitifully rent and torn with
whippings and scourgings, that we may truly say, Totum est pro vulnere corpus;
That from the sole of his foot, unto the crown of his head, Esaias 1.6.
there was nothing whole in him, but wounds, and swellings, and soars, most
full of grievous pains. And in all this his great and grievous sufferings, we
must know them to be the sharper, in respect of the tenderness of his body,
and the senciblenesse of his spirit; because (as Aristotle says) Quo complexio
nobilior, and quo men's dexterior, Aristot. l. 2. de anima. c. 9.
co tenerior esse solet caro: The more noble our complexion, and the more
quick and nimble is our apprehension, the more sencible is our flesh of the
least pain and correction; but the flesh of Christ of all other men must
needs be the most tender, The tenderer our flesh, and the quicker our spirits,
the more sensible we are of pain.
because (as I showed you before) he was soly begotten of a pure Virgin, and
his mind must needs be most intellectiue, and most apprehensiue of all pain,
because he was of that age which is most sensitive; and therefore the
sufferings of Christ, in all respects must needs be most insufferable.

And yet all this was but the least part of his sorrows, not near the half
of his sufferings; for he was to wrestle with the wrath of God, that was due
to us for our sins; yea, he was to tread the fierceness of the wrath of
God: Revel. 15.5.
And there can be no conflict in the World so great, as to grapple with an
angry God; for the Prophet David speaking hereof, Psalm. 76.7.
says; Thou, even thou, art to be feared, and who can stand in thy sight when
thou art angry? The Earth trembled and quaked, Psalm. 18. v. 7. and 15.
the very foundations also of the hills shook, and were removed, because he
was wroth; yea, the springs of waters were seen, and the foundations of the
round World were discovered, That the sufferings of Christ were a great deal
more then are expressed by the Evangelists, or then can be conceived by any man.
at thy chiding, O Lord, at the blasting of the breath of thy displeasure: And
if his anger and displeasure be so great, O who can endure the height of his
fury? who can overcome by suffering the fierceness of his wrath? And
therefore, to show how unspeakable, and how dangerous a t^ing it is for any
man to define, what the unspeakable sufferings, and the incomprehensible
feelings of Christ were, both in the Garden of Gethsemane before his Judges,
and especially upon the Cross in Mount Caluarie; the Fathers of the Greek
Church in their Lyturgie, after they had recounted his bloody sweat, his
shameful crowning, his spiteful handling, and all the other particular
sufferings which are recorded by the Evangelists, they do most excellently
conclude, (...); By thine unknown sorrows, and by those infinite sufferings,
incomprehensible to us, though most sensibly felt by thee, Have mercy upon us,
and save us O Lord our God.

And in all this, he truly suffered, not imaginarily, as some have imagined,
Sed vere languores nostros ipse tulit; But he truly bare our infirmities, and
carried our sorrows: Not as the Priests of the Law, Leuit. 10.17.
which were likewise said to bear the sins of the people; i. e. typically in
the figure, but truly in the fact, he bare the punishment of them all; and
that, not in outward appearance, as malicious Marcion held it, Tertull. contra
Marc. l. 4. 8. Aug. de haeresibus ad Quodv. here is. 46.
and afterward the Manichees maintained it, as Saint Augustine says; but as
he was a man, (...), physically and truly, so he endured and suffered all
these sorrows Vere, and sicut verus homo, Most truly, as being a true natural
man, as Aquinas says; He did most sencibly and feelingly suffer them all: for
it was not with him, as it was with the three Children in the third of Daniel,
Dan. 3 27.
who were cast into the fiery Furnace, and yet came out, not having their
hair singed, nor their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on
them; but as Plutarch reports of Coriolanus, he can yet show his wounds that
he suffered, and make demonstratiue expressions of his sorrows, far beyond
the apprehension of any man to conceive them.

But if any man demand, how Christ being God, could suffer any pain, seeing
the Deity is subject to no passion; Heinsius. P. 81.
Heinsius answers, that Christ suffered not in respect of the divine nature,
which he had as God, but in respect of his humane nature, which he had as he
was Man; for though the Deity was in the sufferer, yet was it not in the
suffering, How the Godhead suffered not, but sustained the manhood that it
might suffer.
though it was in the Body of Christ's passion, yet was it not in the passion of
Christ's Body; but (as I showed unto you before, Page 438) the humanity only
suffered, and the Deity sustained it, that it might suffer; because the
impotency of the one, required the omnipotency of the other; Christ being a
man, that he might suffer, and being a God, that he might be able so to suffer,
such insufferable things: And therefore we say, that Christ in respect of his
Deity, remained still entire, untouched, invulnerable, impassible; and that
very then when his humanity suffered, and was dead, the Deity lived impassibly,
and rent the veil of the Temple, sealed up the Sunne-beames under a signet of
Cimmerian Clouds, caused the Earth to tremble, the Centurion to auerre that
Christ was the true and essential Son of God, and raised up the interred
Carcasses from their graves: And we say, that it was the humane nature of
Christ, that stood and suffered upon the Cross, and in the anguish of its
passion, breathed out that doleful complaint, even to the Godhead
hypostatically united unto it, as well as to the Father, and to the holy
Spirit, saying, My God, my God, Math 27.46.
why have thou forsaken me? And although the (...), the distance betwixt these
two Natures be so great, and the disparity be so evident, as that the one was
passible and mortal, the other impassible and immortal; yet are they so
combined and united in our Savior Christ, that although he is not one nature,
yet is he but one person, one Christ, one Redeemer; and when the humanity
suffered, and was buried, yet was it not, neither could it be possibly cast
off, or forsaken by the Deity, unto which the linkes and ligaments of Gods
love, had so strictly and eternally obliged it, by an hypostaticall and
indissoluble union.

Thus Christ though he was God, yet as man, Dixit multa, gessit mira, pertulit
dura, dura verba, duriora verbera, durissima supplicia; He bore and suffered an
incredible pain, and insufferable sorrows; Esaias 53.
so great and so grievous, that Esayas may well call him virum dolorum, No
sorrow like the sorrows of Christ.
a man of sorrows, and Jeremy may well demand, si fuerit dolor, if ever there
was, or if ever we heard of any sorrow like unto the sorrow of Christ: and yet
for all these pains and sorrows; these incredible sufferings both of body and
soul, he bore them patiently, he endured them quietly, and as a Father says,
Perdidit vitam ne perderet obedientiam; he would rather leese his life, then
fail in his obedience; but as the sheep before his shearer was dumb, so
opened he not his mouth; not for all the pains, that he endured, not for all
the sorrows that he sustained; so great was his Humility, according to the
greatness of his Majesty. But,

CHAP. VII. Of the gracious words that Christ uttered upon the Cross.
Of the seven gracious words that Christ uttered upon the Cross.
FOr the second, that is, the gracious words that he uttered, while he stood
crucified upon his Cross; as all the Annals and Records of time can never show
his parallel in his sufferings, never man suffered as he suffered; so in all
the books and writings of men, in all the words that were ever uttered by
voice, we shall find not one saying equalizing any one of the sayings of
Christ: Never man spoke as he spoke, John 7.45.
his own enemies confess it; and as his words were ever gracious; so never
more gracious then now upon the Cross: For,

First, In the mids of all his sufferings, the first words that he spoke, were
not against any man, but an earnest suite for his greatest persecuters; Pater
ignosce illis, i. e. illis qui dixerunt crucifige; Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do. The first words Christ spoke upon the Cross.
A lesson never to be forgotten; to teach us all to be ever ready, not only to
forgive, but also to pray for our enemies; for here we see Christ prays for
them, which mock and persecute him; and therefore we must do likewise, if we
will be Christians: And this may serve also for our exceeding comfort; Bernard
Heb. poenos. How effectual was the prayer of Christ?
for if he thus prayed for them that not only crucified him, but also cursed
themselves; saying, His blood be upon us and upon our children; Yea, if his
prayer was so effectual for his persecuters, that it brought 3000. souls of
them unto his Father at the hearing of one Sermon of Saint Peter, Act. 9.1.
and made Saul that most violently breathed out slaughters against his Church,
to serve him most faithfully while he breathed upon the earth; and caused that
very Soldier (as some do think) which pierced his heart, to be connerted by
his Spirit, and to become a Christian, Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 88. Matthew.
27.44.
a Professor, a faithful Bishop, and a constant Martyr of Christ; then what
may we think that he will do, or how powerful will be his prayers for them
that serve him, for them that love him?

Secondly, The second saying of Christ upon the Cross.
After that the thieves had most contemptuously mocked and flouted him, as
Saint Matthew testifies; one of them seeing and considering not only how
undeservedly he was condemned, but also how patiently he endured all his
pains, and how piously he prayed for his greatest enemies; Luke 22.42.
he began to relent, and to repent him of his former reuiling of him, and to
conceive some hope of some favor from him, and said; Lord remember me when
thou come into thy Kingdom; our Savior presently answered, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise; a most sweet and comfortable answer, Verse. 43.
unto a most comfortless malefactor: No sooner had he requested, but he
obtained pardon, and was acquitted from the death of his soul, though he
suffered the death of his body; yea, and when he desired but to be remembered,
he was granted presently to be admitted unto everlasting happiness; for, This
day (says Christ) shall thou be with me in Paradise; and from a malefactor on
the Cross, thou shall be translated to be a Martyr in Heaven. To teach us, To
give to them that ask, and from them that seek, never to turn away our face;
and to assure us that if we pray to God, we shall be heard, we shall be helped.

The third saying of Christ upon the Cross. John 19.26, 27.
Thirdly, After he had thus kindly dealt with his foes, he turns himself unto
his friends, and says unto his Mother, Woman behold thy Son; and to his
beloved Apostle Saint John, he says, Behold thy Mother; to show that as never
man so pittyed his foes, so never man so loved his friends as he did; and to
teach us by his example, neither in prosperity, nor in adversity, to forget
that duty which we do owe unto our Parents.

The fourth saying of Christ upon the Cross. John 4 34.
Fourthly, When he had gone over those in particular, he said, I thirst, not so
much for any drink, as for the health and salvation of us all; for this was
meat and drink unto him, to do his Fathers will, to pacify his Wrath, and
to satisfy his Justice, and so to bring many sons unto glory; to teach us
that if Christ in the mids of his sorrows did so much thirst for our health,
how much more should we hunger and thirst after righteousness, and after the
salvation of our own souls, and not (as we do) thirst and wither away for
thirst, after the pride and pomp of these worldly vanities?

The fifth saying of Christ upon the Cross.
Fifthly, Having showed his love to his foes, to his friends, to all mankind, he
returned unto himself, (for as yet he seems to have forgotten himself, and
his own pain, through the vehemence of his love which he bare unto others)
and not only perfectly seeing, but also sensibly feeling, the incomprehensible
pain and sorrow, that through the fierceness of Gods wrath, was thoroughly
inflicted upon him, and which he had already so long sustained for our sins;
he lifts up his eyes, and sends forth those words with a doleful voice, Matthew.
27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Not that he was or could be
forsaken of the Godhead, so hypostatically united unto it, but to show unto us,
what infinite sorrows he then suffered above all that we can conceive or
think; and to teach us in all distress, to have our chief recourse to God;
and in all humility, to expostulate with his Majesty, why he should create us,
to forsake us; for so with Christ, we may be sure to be heard and relieved in
what we fear, and in good time to be delivered out of our distress.

The sixth saying of Christ upon the Cross.
Sixthly, When Christ saw that the Scripture, in every particular thing that was
written of him until his death, was fulfilled, he said, Consummatum est, All
is finished; John 19.30.
not only to declare unto us that by his death, the royal Law was fulfilled,
and the redemption of all mankind was now fully effected; but also to teach
all Christians, to finish the course of their life according to the will of God.

Seauenthly, The seventh and last saying of Christ upon the Cross. Luke 23.46.
When he considered and understood all things that were to be done of him, to
be fully ended, he says; Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit; to teach
every man, especially in affliction, to cast himself in sinum diuinitatis,
even into the arms of Gods protection, and so to rely wholly upon God, as
upon a sure foundation, and as at all times else so chiefly when we see death
approaching near to us, to commend our souls into the hands of God, even as
our Savior did. Many worthy observations to be considered in the manner of
Christ his crucifying, John 19 23.


Thus Christ suffered, thus he preached, and thus he prayed upon the Cross;
and in this time of his suffering, it is observed.

First, That as he bowed the Heavens and came down to be incarnate and made
flesh; so here he boweth his head, to embrace us, and to kiss us with the
kisses of his lips

Secondly, That his arms were extended and stretched out, Psalm. 22.16.
to receive all men throughout the compass of the whole world into his grace
and favor again.

Thirdly, That the nails were fixed through his hands and feet, not only to
show that hereby thy hands are enlarged to do good works, and thy feet are
set at liberty, John 20.25.
that thou may run the way of Gods commandment; but also to teach us how
the remembrance of his Passion should be so fixed in our hearts, as that
nothing in the world should be able to root it thence.

Fourthly, That he was vnstripped of his garments, and his body extended naked
upon the tree, John 19.23.
to show that he forsook all to redeem us, that all things are patent and
open in the eyes of God, and that we poor sinful men are miserable and
naked of all goodness, until we be clothed with the righteousness of Jesus
Christ.

Fifthly, That his side was opened with a spear, to make way for the effusion
of his blood, to satisfy for our sins, John 20.34.
and to make room for us to come nearer to his heart; and to hide our selves
with Moses, Exodus 33.32.
in foramine Petrae, in this sluice of his side, in this hole of the Rock,
until the anger of God be ouer-past. And,

Many other points of great moment, I might here show unto you, as the darkning
of the Sun for shame and sorrow to see the Son of God put to such a
shameful death; the quassation and trembling of the Earth, and cleaving of the
Stones, for horour to bear her Maker dying, and to condemn the most cruel
hardness of a sinners heart, that seeing the Stones renting, will not relent
from his sins: and the cleaving of the Temple from the top to the bottom, to
show that the Leuiticall Law should be no longer a partition wall betwixt the
Jews and the Gentiles; and that the way to Heaven is now made open to all
believers, but that to speak all I might of this point, would enlarge a
Treatise into a Volume; That it is impossible for an^ one man to exp^esse all
the pa^ticula^s of Christ his Passion.
and that indeed the Wit and Learning of any one man, is no more able to
express all the mysteries and most excellent points that we might collect and
learn from the Passion of Christ; then one poor Fisherman is able to catch
all the Fishes in the Ocean Sea: And therefore commending all unto your
meditation, to muse upon the particulars of this great work, that was once
done that it might never be forgotten: I will end this point of his Passion;
and proceed unto the third part of my Text, which is the necessity of his
suffering. For thus it behooued Christ to suffer.

PART. III.
CHAP. I. Of the necessity of Christ his suffering.
THirdly, Having heard the chiefest particulars of the sufferings of Christ,
we are now to consider the necessity of his suffering, expressed here by
Christ himself, in these words, That there is a threefold necessity.
Thus it behooved Christ to suffer. Touching which we must consider that there
are three kinds of necessities.

The first is an obsolute necessity, as when a thing in regard of the nature
of it, cannot be otherwise; so the Sun moves, and the fire burns, as we
see, necessarily: because it is the property of their nature so to do, as it
is for every light thing to ascend, and for every heavy thing to descend
downwards toward the center.

The second is, a necessity of constraint, That Christ suffered, because he
willin^ly gave himself to suffer.
as when a malefactor is constrained, and must necessarily suffer, whether he
will or not; because the sentence of the Law has passed over him, and his
strength is not sufficient to save himself.

And in these two senses our Savior Christ was not of necessity for to
suffer; because God might, if he had would, have used a 1000. other ways to
have saved man, without the death of his only Son: and there was neither Law
to inioyne him, nor any force that could compel him, for to suffer; for he
says Abba Father, all things are possible unto thee; and, Mark 14.36.
he could pray to his Father, and have more then twelve legions of Angels to
have assisted him: And therefore no absolute necessity, that he should suffer,
Sed oblatus est quia voluit; But he was offered up for us, because he would; he
gave his soul an offering for sin, Esaias 53.10.
and he yielded up himself into the hands of his enemies; he could but he
would not be rescued; and he gave Pilate power against himself: for unless he
would, he needed not to have suffered; Justice could not seize upon him,
because he was a Lamb without spot; and constraint could not compel him,
because all things were possible unto him, and he had all the Angels at his
command: and therefore as the Prophet Esaias says, that he did bear the burden
imposed by his Father, Esaias 63.6.
so he did assume the same himself; and S. Paul says, Romans 8.32.
that as God gave Christ for us, Romans 8.32. So Christ gave himself for us: and
our Savior says; No man takes my life from me, Gal. 2.20.
but I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up again:
and so it was, that he himself laid down his life, John 10.
as a man lays down his garment; for it is observed by the Evangelists,
Crucem sustinuit voluntate non necessitate. S. Hieron. in Esayam. c. 53. John
19.30.
that when he would die, he seeing that impotent man could not take away his
soul, he bowed down his head, and gave up the Ghost, as calling and yielding
unto the stroke of death; which otherwise durst not for fear, to approach him:
and so Christ showed his power in weakness: for though it be a great
infirmity to die, yet so to die is an argument of infinite Majesty: Nazian.
and Bern. Ser. 4. Hebdom. paenosae.
and Saint Hierome does well observe, that the Centurion hearing his prayer
with a loud voice, to show that he was far enough, and free enough from the
touch of death; and seeing him, Statim spiritum sponte demisisse, tradidisse,
(says Saint John) emisisse (says Saint Matthew) and presently to have
yielded, Et quod emittitur voluntarium est, quod amittitur necessarium.
and most willingly to have sent forth his Spirit out of his body, as Noah sent
his Dove out of the Arc; Commotus signi magnitudine; being troubled with the
greatness of that wonder, he said forthwith, truly this man was the Son of
God: So wonderfully strange was this his yielding unto death; Hierom. q. 8. ad
Hedib. Aug tract. 119. in John.
and so Saint Augustine largely expresses the same: to show unto us that the
laying down of his life, was no imposed punishment against his will, nor any
forcible invasion of death upon him, but a voluntary sacrifycing of himself
for sin, and a tendering of his death to satisfy Gods wrath for our sake.

The third is not an absolute, not a primative, not an imposed necessity, but a
voluntarily assumed necessity, of conueniency; in respect of the end, as armor
and weapons are necessary for him that goes forth to fight: or a necessity by
consequent, presupposing the decree and ordinance of Almighty God: and thus it
was necessary that Christ should suffer, because it was the best and most
convenient way that God in his wisdom saw fittest, In what sense it was
necessary for Christ to suffer. Esaias 53.
to perform that great work of man's salvation; and because God had promised
that the Messiah should suffer, should be slain: and therefore Christ says
unto Peter, that if he were rescued out of the hands of his enemies, How then
shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, which said, that thus it must be? for God
had decreed, Dan. 9.26. Matthew. 26.54. Esaias 53.14.
ordained, and reueiled in his Scriptures, that Christ should die.

CHAP. II. The isntrumental and efficient causes of the sufferings of Christ.
But because the necessity of every thing depends upon the causes that do
necessitate the same, as every man must die, Of the causes which did
necessitate the sufferings of Christ.
because he sinned against his God, and every compound body must be corrupted,
because they are all composed of elementarie substance, and endued with
repugnant qualities, therefore we must understand the causes which did
necessitate Christ to suffer, if we would truly know how and why it behooved
Christ to suffer.

Now for the causes of Christ his suffering, I find them to be manifold, and
especially, 1. Isntrumental. 2. Efficient. 3. Final.


First, The Isntrumental causes of Christ death, I find likewise to be
fourfold.

1. The envy of Satan. 2. The malice of the Jews. 3. The covetousness of
Judas. 4. The desire of the people.
First. First, the envy of Satan.
Satan whom he had often vanquished and dispossessed of men's souls and bodies,
was most obstinate in malice against him, and thinking now to have fit
opportunity, having as it were leave to do what he would or could do unto
him, he enters into the heart of Judas (says the Evangelist) and so, John
13.27.
no doubt he did into the hearts of many of the rest, and together with them,
he complotted all this most exquisite torments of purpose to be revenged on
him, Job 1.
and to see if by this means he could bring him, as he says of Job, to
curse God and die, that so he might have him as a prey, which otherwise he
feared would destroy him: And this our Savior intimates saying, I was daily
with you in the Temple, Luke 22.53.
and ye stretched forth no hands against me, but now this is your hour and
the power of darkness; i. e. now is Satan let loose, Four special things
enraged Satan against Christ.
now he has leave to rage, and now I am set as a Butte for him to shoot all
his shafts at me. And we find four special reasons that might move Satan the
more infinitely to rage against him: As,

First, the goodness of the man.
First, the goodness of the man, for the better any man is, the more cruelly is
Satan ever bent against him: The things that he possesses are in peace; but
the more godly we be, the more we shall be persecuted of him: and therefore
Christ being without sin, he would do his best, to heap upon him all
sorrows.

Secondly, the rebukes he had received from Christ.
Secondly, The manifold checks and rebukes that he had formerly suffered at the
hands of Christ, for so the Evangelists tell us that Christ had often rebuked
the unclean spirits, and commanded them to hold their peace; and therefore he
enuyed him, and hated him, and would now be revenged on him; such is the nature
of the wicked when they are reproved.

Thirdly, the victories of Christ.
Thirdly, The many victories that Christ had formerly over Satan, as in the
Wilderness, in a single combat, and when he dispossessed him out of those
miserable creatures whom he tormented.

Fourthly, the loss of his servants.
Fourthly, The loss of those his slaves, which Christ had already freed from
his subjection, and of all those he feared Christ would free, if he should
not now subdue him. Haec secum. Nec dum causae irarum saeuique dolores
exciderant animo.
And therefore considering all these things, and knowing that sometimes; Victis
redit in praecordia virtus; The conquered have happened to become conquerors,
he resolves with himself like a desperate man, either to kill, or to be
killed: and in that resolution, Vna salus victis nullam sperare salutem.
he comes forth, having great rage against our Savior Christ; and therefore
(as the proverb is) He must needs go whom the Devil drives: So he must needs
suffer, which like Job, has Satan for his tormentor, especially being as he
was, so enraged against our Savior Christ; and having now leave to impose upon
him the most exquisite torments that he could devise.

Secondly, The Jews did malign him, 2. The malice of the Jews against Christ.
and even hated him unto the death: And as the Psalmist says, Astiterunt reges
terrae, The Kings of the Earth stood up; and the Princes took counsel
together, against the Lord, and against his Christ; Psalm. 2.
So we find that the Scribes and Pharisees, and the Herodians hunted after
him, as for a Partridge upon the Mountains; they watched all his ways, and
sought to entrap him in all his words, and to take him, that they might
condemn him.

Thirdly, Judas for very grief, 3. The covetousness of Judas. Mark 14.5.
that he had lost the price of that Ointment, wherewith the Woman anointed
Christ, and which he had valued at three hundred pence, went out as I showed
you before, and sold Christ for thirty pence, and then betrayed him into the
hands of sinners.

Fourthly, Christ being treacherously betrayed, 4. The desire of the people
violently apprehended, and most falsely accused, by the Sons of Belial; the
High Priests for very malice that they bore against Christ, and for fear that
the Romans, if they let him escape, would come and take away that rule and
authority that was left them; thought him worthy to die, and delivered him
unto Pilate, and did teach the ignorant, ungrateful, and unconstant multitude,
most earnestly to desire the death of Christ, saying, Crucify him, crucify
him; and therefore Pilate for fear of the Priests, and to please the people,
when he had scourged Christ, condemned him, and delivered him to be crucified.

And yet all these were but isntrumental causes of these manifold sufferings
of Christ, there were other more efficient, and far greater causes then all
these: For,

Secondly, The efficient cause of Christ his death, The efficient cause of
Christ his death. Esaias 53.10.
was God himself; for so the Prophet Esaias says, It pleased the Lord to bruise
him, and to put him to grief; to bruise his body with tortures, through the
malice of the Jews toward him, and to strike his soul with grief through
the mercy of God toward us. And so the Prophet Jeremy speaking of these
sufferings in the person of Christ himself, says, That they were sorrows and
sufferings; Quae fecit mihi Deus, Lament. 1.12. That God himself laid all
this punishment upon Christ.
Whereby God has afflicted me: God who is termed, A devouring fire, and an
ouer-flowing torrent of wrath, does now make our Savior Christ, as the only
Butte to shoot at him all the shafts of his fury; he opens him, and powers
into him all the vials of his indignation; and as Job complains, That the
terrors of the Lord did set themselves in array against him: So Christ when he
says; Mar. 14.34.
(...); My soul is encompassed with sorrows on every side, shows how God
had set himself against him; yea, though God afflicts sometimes in mercy,
even as a Father when he corrects his dearest Child; yet is he here said to
have done this, In the fierceness of his wrath: And therefore how could Christ
choose but suffer? for when God will smite, who is able either by strength or
wit to escape out of his hands?

Why God afflicted Christ.
But here it may be well demanded, what moved Gods wrath to be thus kindled
against Christ? for God hates nothing but sin; and in Christ there was no
sin, neither was any guile found in his mouth: And therefore seeing God never
does as Annas did, to cause Christ to be smitten, without a cause; why should
God be so much displeased, as thus grievously to punish his only Son, in
whom he was always well pleased, and with whom he was never in any ways
offended?

Dan. 9.27. God afflicted Christ for us, and not for himself.
To this we must answer, with the Prophet Daniel, that the Messiah must be
slain; but not for himself: for he took upon him the person of us all; and
if a man that owes nothing, becomes a surety for a debtor, if the principal
becomes bankerout, the surety shall be compelled to make a plenary
satisfaction, and he must pay that which he never took: And therefore Christ
undertaking the payment of our debts, and to discharge us from Gods wrath to
come, Esaias 53.4, 5, 6.
He took upon him our infirmities, he was wounded for our iniquities, and
broken for our transgressions.

Luc. 22.64.
And so if the tormentors should say, as once they did, Prophecy unto us who it
is that smote thee; We may quickly become Prophets, and most truly answer for
him, that our sins smote him, our iniquities whipped him, our pride crowned him
with a crown of thorns, our drunkenness gave him that vinegar to drink; and
in a word, our sin, our grievous sin, what sin soever it be, did thus
haynously murder Christ, and fast nailed him unto the Cross: Quia solum
peccatum homicida est, Our sins crucified Jesus Christ.
For alas it was not Pilate, nor Caiphas, nor any one of that complicie of
confederate Agents, that were the efficient cause of his death; for they were
but the instruments and executioners only of that punishment, which our
sins, the sins of each man had laid upon him; and the Executioner cannot
be said properly to be the cause of that man's death, which by the Law is
adjudged to die: but to say the truth, our sins have killed the Son of God.
And therefore as Nathan said unto David, 2 Samuel 12.7.
Thou art the man that did the deed; So I may say to every sinner, Thou art
the man, for whose sins, God in the fierceness of his wrath, did thus punish
and afflict his only Son.

O that this would make every one of us, to cry out with Jonas, Propter me
haec tempestas, I am the cause of all this troubles, Jonas 1.12.
of all this stormy winds and tempest; Take me and cast me into the Sea: And
as David, ^hen he saw the miserable death of the people for his sin, was
vexed at the heart, and cried unto the Lord, saying; Behold, I have sinned, and
I have done wickedly, 2 Samuel 24.17.
but these sheep what have they done? So I wish that every one of us would see
it, and say it; It is I Lord that have sinned, but for this innocent Lamb,
this harmless Dove, alas, what has he done? And I hope this would make us to
hate and detest our sins, when we consider that they were the only
murderers of the Son of God.

You see then, that as in the Law it was ordained that a man should bring his
Beast to the door of the Tabernacle, and should put his hand upon the head of
it, when he offered the same for a burnt offering unto God, to show unto us,
that the man himself had indeed deserved to die, Leuit. 1.4.
and that the Beast was only slain for his offenses: So here our Savior
Christ was put to death, not for any cause of his own, but as Saint Peter
says, 1 Pet. 3.18.
The just suffered for the unjust; he was wounded for our sins, and crucified
for our transgressions.

But then again it may be demanded, What moved Christ to undertake our debts.
Resp.
why should he undertake our debt, and make satisfaction for our sins, when
as we had no ways deserved any kindness at his hands, and could by no means
requite so great a benefit.

I answer, That it was requisite and necessary, that he should suffer for our
sins, to fulfill the truth of God, because he had promised that the seed of
the Woman should break the Serpents head; Genesis 3.15.
Dan. 9.26.
and that the Messiah should suffer for our sins, and be broken for our
transgressions. Esaias 53.5.
And the Father promised this for none other cause, The love of God to
mankind, moved God to do all this for us.
but this; Because he loved us: For God seeing us in such a miserable state, as
we had made our selves by sin, was moved with compassion over us, and was
contented to give his only begotten Son to be crucified for us, rather then
we should be eternally separated from him. So our Savior says, God so loved
the World; i. e. So admirably, so exceedingly, and so incomprehensibly, John
3.16.
That he gave his only begotten Son; that is, to die for us, That whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: And so Saint
Paul says, God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. And surely it was a far greater argument of his
love, to give his Son to die for us, then if he had forgiven our sins, and
acquitted us without any satisfaction at all; And therefore Saint Paul speaking
of this love of God, calls it, Too much love, as the vulgar Latin reads it:
Deus propter nimiam charitatem, God through his great, Ephesians. 2.4.
or too much love, wherewith he loved us, has quickened us with Jesus Christ.
And this great love of God will appear the greater, if we consider, that this
Son of God, which he gave to die for us, Omnis in Ascanio Charistat cura
parentis.
was not only his only begotten Son, which was very great, that having but
one only Son, he would give that one, to die for us; but was also such a
Son, in whom only God was well pleased, and with whom he was never offended,
as I showed unto you before.

And as the Father showed, Tantam charitatem, so great love, in giving his
Son to die for us; so the Son showed the like equal love, in being so
willing as he was to suffer for us: for in the beginning, or in the volume of
the Book it is written of me, (says Christ) that I should fulfill thy will O
God; Hebrews 10.7.
and I am content to do it: That is, I am as willing and as ready to fulfill
it, as thou art to conceive it; yea, I am grieved, I am pained, till I have
fulfilled it: For it is meat and drink to me (says Christ) to do my Fathers
will. And therefore once again, behold the great love wherewith Christ has
loved us: Surely (says Saint Bernard) Dilexisti me magis quam teipsum, quia
pro me mori voluisti; Thou have loved me more then thou did thy self,
because thou gave thy self to die for me: For greater love then this has no
man, John 15.13.
that a man should give his life for his friends; especially for his enemies;
Romans 5.8.
as he did for us, Cum inimici essemus, While we were yet sinners, and regarded
neither him, nor our selves: Bern. de Caena Domini Ser. 13.
And therefore Saint Bernard does most truly say, that he did this, Tanto
dignantius quanto pro minus dignis; So much the more wonderfully worthy of
love, by how much the less worthy we were of his love.

And in very deed, there is no man breathing, No Creature able to express the
great love of Christ to mankind.
that is able to express how great was the love of Christ toward mankind.
But my conscience is my witness, (O my Savior) what I have done to thee, and
thy Cross does witness what thou have done for me; for thou wast God and I a
man, and yet thou a God would be made man for me; yea, to become exiled,
poor, and base for us, that were the vilest of all Creatures, poor, and base
miserable sinners: And not only so, but also to die a most cruel, bitter, and
a shameful death, to deliver us from eternal death. O what could thou have
done more for us, that thou have not done? The like example cannot be found in
any History; Romans 5.7.
for one will scarce die for a righteous man: It may be they will ride and
run to save a good man's life; but to die for another, we shall scarce find
any that will venture it. Titus Liu. Decad. 1. l. 2. Val. Max. l. 5. c. 6.
It is true that the Curiatij and the Horatij are reported, to have adventured
their lives, for the liberty of their Country: And so Decius, Curtius, and
Codrus did freely offer themselves to death, for to preserve their peoples
life; but they did this either for ambition, to be honored for their facts,
and to be numbered among the Gods; or else in desperation of their lives, to be
rid out of their grief, when they saw none other help of their miseries;
but Christ when there was no necessity to compel him, did all this, and far
much more then I have showed, for us; And that not only, Sine nostris meritis,
sed cum nostris demeritis; When we deserved no good, Bern. Ser. 15. in Cant.
but especially when we were worthy of so much evil at his hands, as was due
to most deadly enemies; as Saint Bernard says.

CHAP. III. Of the final causes why Christ suffered, both in respect of Men,
and in respect of God himself.
AND so you have seen the isntrumental causes of Christ his death; and you
heard the efficient cause, why God punished Christ; for us, and for our sins;
and why for us; because he loved us with a great, exceeding, incomprehensible
love: And how this should teach us, that as our hearts do hate Judas and
Pilate, and all the rest of our Saviors bloody persecutors, which were but
the Instruments of his death; so much more should we loath and detest our own
sins, and wickedness, which were the maine principal cause, that moved God
thus severely to punish him. And now it rests, The final cause of Christ his
death.
that we consider the final cause thereof; and I find that to be twofold.

1. In respect of Men. 2. In regard of God.
1. In respect of Men.
First, In respect of Men, I find it likewise to be twofold.

1. The saving of all the Elect. 2. To make the reprobate without excuse.
Math. 20.28.
For the first, Our Savior faith, That he came to give his life a ransom for
many, and to save those that were lost; And so Saint Paul says, Gal 4.4.
That Christ was made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law;
and that Jesus Christ was sent into the World to save sinners. Now we must
know, that as Bellarmine notes, there are diverse kinds of redemption; as,

That there were diverse kinds of redemption.
First, By Manumission, as when the Lord did willingly of his own accord let
his slaves go free.

Secondly, By permutation, as when one prisoner was exchanged for another.

Thirdly, By force, as when by their friends they were rescued out of the hands
of their enemies.

Fourthly, By a ransom, as when a price, thought counteruaileable to the
prisoners, was paid for the deliverance of the Captives. And thus Christ
redeemed us: for we had sold our selves (or rather given away our selves;
because we do it for such trifles, for nothing, that it deserves not the name
of a sale,) under sin; and we had past away our selves unto Satan, and he
would never suffer us freely to be freed out of his hands, neither was there
any force nor friends that could any ways restore us unto our former dignity;
and therefore Christ came to repurchase us; that is, to buy us back again
unto God: And though we fell our selves for nothing, yet Satan like a cunning
Merchant, that knows well the worth of Souls, would not part with us at any
reasonable rate; and therefore Christ was feign to pay for us, not gold, or
silver, or any such like corruptible thing, 1 Pet. 1.18.
but his own dear and precious blood: So dearly was he feign to pay for us,
so dearly it cost him to redeem our souls.

And so Christ came and offered himself, How dearly it cost Christ to redeem
us.
upon the Altar of the Cross, as a sufficient sacrifice to pacify his Fathers
wrath, and to satisfy his justice to save our souls; yea, the souls of all
them that believed in him from the beginning of the World to this present day,
That the blood of Christ was the price to save all men, as well before his
coming, as now after his coming. Gal. 4.
and so forward to the final period of all flesh: For, It was not the blood of
Goats, or Calves, that was the true propitiatory Sacrifice, for the sins of
the Fathers that lived under the Law; but it was the blood of Jesus Christ,
that was only figured and signified by these Leuiticall shadows, by the
Paschall Lamb, by the Brazen Serpent, and by whatsoever else that was given
them as a Schoolmaster to bring them unto Christ, which purged their
consciences from dead works, to serve the living God: For he is said to be the
Lamb slain, that is, slain in the figure, Revel. 13.8.
slain in the purpose of God, and slain in the virtue of his passion, to
every one that believes him to be slain for him, from the beginning of the
World: And therefore, all those that went before, and all those that came
after, cried; Hosanna to the Son of David. Math. 21.9.
For as the looking to the Brazen Serpent, was the only means to save all
those people from death, which were bitten by the fiery Serpents, whether they
were before it, or behind it, Numbers 21.9.
or on either side of it, near it, or far from it; so the believing in the
death of the Son of God, was, and is the only means to preserve all men
from the sting of sin; as well those that went before him, Et vnde mundi
Philosophus erubuit ibi Apostolus thesaurum reperit, and quod illi visum est
slultitia, Apostolo factum est sapientia Quest. That the merit of Christ's
suffering, depends upon the worthiness of ^he person. Resp.
as those that do come after him: And therefore, Quod est grande ludibrium
impijs, est grande mysterium pijs; The death and passion of Jesus Christ, which
is foolishness unto the World, is the sole comfort and consolation of all
Christians, as Saint Augustine does most sweetly comment upon those words of
the Apostle, God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing save in the Cross
of Jesus Christ. Gal 6.

But here it may be demanded, how the sufferings of Christ being but of short
continuance, should be of that worth and dignity, as to be a sufficient price
for our eternal deliverance, and to make a plenary satisfaction for the sins
of the whole World.

To this I answer, that the merit of his suffering, depends not upon the
quantity of pain, or the continuance of time, but upon the worthiness of the
sufferer; and that in two respects:

Heb. 7.26. 1 Pet. 1.19.2.22.
First, Of his Innocence; for he was holy, harmless, and undefiled; a Lamb
without spot, in whose mouth was found no guile: And therefore, Iustum est,
says Saint Augustine; It is a most just and a righteous thing, Aug. l. 13. c
14. de trinitate.
that the debtors should be set free, because he which owed nothing, did pay
all our debt.

Maxim. quadragess. Ser. 1.
Secondly, Of his Excellency; for he was not only a most innocent man, Quem
nullum maculauit delictum, But he was also a most omnipotent God, as the
Apostle shows, when he bids us, Acts 20.28.
To take heed unto the Flock, which God has purchased with his own blood:
And therefore, as the Father is infinite, which was provoked, so the Son is
infinite, which made the satisfaction; that for an infinite offense, there
might be an infinite atonement; and so the person dying, being both God and
Man, his death must be of a greater value, then the deaths of all the men of
ten thousand Worlds: And therefore Saint Cyprian truly affirms, Modicam
guttam sanguinis Christi propter vnionem hypostaticam, pro redemptione totius
mundi sufficisse; That the least drop of the blood of Christ, by reason of
the union of the Deity unto the Manhood, That the sole sufferings of Christ,
is fully sufficient to satisfy for all sins.
to make but one person of Christ, is of full sufficient vain, to make
satisfaction for the sins of the whole World.

And this does sufficiently confute all those that join the afflictions of the
Saints, with the sufferings of Christ, as a part, or the accomplishment of the
price of their redemption, as if with Christ alone there were not as the
Prophet says, Psalm. 130.7.
plenteous redemption: for though the Apostle says, I rejoice in my sufferings
for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh, for his bodies sake which is the Church; Coloss. 1.24.
yet this is not to be understood of the propitiatory sacrifice for sin; for
so Christ only suffered all that was to be suffered for our sins, as both
the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 53.4.5.6. and the holy Apostles of our Savior Christ,
Saint Paul, and Saint John, Esaias 53.4.5.6. Heb. 9.26. 1 John 2.2.
do most fully and sufficiently declare; He, that is, He (...) by himself,
has purged our sins; and as David only entered the lists against Golias,
Heb. 1.3.
when all the Israelites were but mere spectators; So did Christ alone
undertake the combat against Satan, and has trodden the Wine Press alone,
Esaias 63.3.
as the Prophet speaks: and therefore Christ said, All is finished, that is,
not only all that is written of me, is now fulfilled, Ille solus sordes omnium
potest abluere. Aug. hom. 108. de tempore.
or all the ceremonies of the Law are now ended; but especially all that is to
be suffered for the sins of men, is now fully accomplished: But the
sufferings of the Saints do profit the Church, not by way of satisfaction for
their sins, but by way of example and consolation, to strengthen them in
their faith, Aquinas par. 3. sum q. 48. art. penult.
and to confirm them (says the Gloss) In gratia dei, and in doctrina
Euangelij; In the grace of God, and in the doctrine of the Gospel: and they
are called the rest of the afflictions of Christ, How the sufferings of the
Saints do profit the Church.
not because the sufferings of Christ were imperfect, or not sufficient to
satisfy for all sins, but because of that simpathy and fellow-feeling that
Christ has of all the sufferings of his Saints; in which respect he says unto
Saint Paul unconverted, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act 9.4.
because he accounts all evil or good done unto them, to be as done unto
himself; and therefore though we should rejoice in our afflictions, Romans 5.3.
because he does account us worthy to suffer for the name of Christ; yet seeing
the suffering of all the miseries that can befall a man, cannot make us worthy
of this glory of Heaven, as Origin says; Act. 5.41.
we should wholly rely upon the all-sufficient merits of Christ his
sufferings, for the salvation of our souls; because all sacrifices ended in
this selfe-sufficient sacrifice, which was not only the abolishment of all
other oblations whatsoever, but was also the most perfect and most absolute
holocaust, yea and the one only hylasticall and propitiatory sacrifice that
was to be offered for the sins of the whole world.

Suet. in vit. Aug. Caesaris.
Suetonius tells us that when Augustus Caesar either out of Humility or Policy,
desired that the Senate would adioyne two Consuls with him for the government
of the State; the Senate answered, that they held it a diminution of his
dignity, and a disparagement of their own judgment, to join any one with so
worthy a one, as Augustus was: and surely it would much more derogate from the
worth of our Saviors sufferings, and show us to be merely fools, if with
the inualuable sufferings and sacrifice of Christ, to satisfy the wrath of
God, we would join the momentaric affliction of any man.

The sufferings of Christ comfort and confi^meth all Christians.
And as this Doctrine of his suffering for the satisfaction of all sins does
confute all them, that join the afflictions of the Saints, with the sufferings
of Christ, for the making up of the price of our redemption; so it does
sufficiently confirm and comfort all those that do most faithfully put their
trust in Christ. For though our sins be very great, and though we have sat
in darkness, and in the shadow of death; yet seeing Christ has suffered for
us, both what God in Justice could require, and what our sins could justly
deserve, we should not despair, we should not fear; because the blood of
Christ, as the Apostle notes speaks better things then the blood of Abel,
Heb. 12.24.
that, crying for vengeance, this, for pardon unto his brethren.

And as it serves to confirm us against despair; so it may be applied to
assure us of whatsoever we need: Romans 8.32.
for so the Apostle reasons, he that spared not his own Son, but gave him
for us all to death; how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
he that loved us so dear, as to give us his only Son, what will he think
too dear for us? and therefore if we want any thing let us ask of God, James.
1.5.
and he gives unto all men liberally whatsoever he sees fit and convenient
for them.

How the death of Christ makes the wicked without excuse.
Secondly, As our Savior dyed thus, to satisfy the wrath of God for the sins
of all men, and to bring his Saints unto everlasting glory; so he did it to
make the wicked without excuse; because they tread under feet the Son of God,
and account the blood of the covenant, as an unholy thing, and will not lay
hold and believe in Jesus Christ.

But if any man should demand whether Christ suffered and dyed for all men
without exception, or for those elected Saints only, which he had chosen unto
salvation; or whether he dyed sufficiently for all, and effectually only for
his elect, (which in my mind is but a poor distinction; because it is most
certain, that his death and suffering, if it had pleased God to give them that
grace to apprehend it, and by a lively faith to apply it unto their souls; is
of sufficient value to ransom the sins of all men and devils) and many other
such like questions about the generality and efficacy of Christ's death, See the
Delights of the Saints* par. 1. page 30.
I refer him to my Treatise of the Delights of the Saints, where I have
handled this point more at large. And so you see why Christ suffered in respect
of men.

Secondly, He suffered all this in respect of God, for the praise and glory of
his own blessed Name; for as God has made and created all things, so he has
redeemed all men, for his own sake; that his wisdom, his power, and his
goodness might be known unto men, and so praised and magnified of men for
evermore. And therefore this should teach us to do what lies in us to
glorify the Name of God for all these great things that Christ has done, and
has suffered for us.

CHAP. IIII. Of the useful application of this Doctrine of the sufferings of
Christ: what we ought principally to learn from the consideration thereof.
ANd as generally this suffering of Christ, The consideration of Christ's
sufferings should work in us four special effects.
out of his mere love to man, should move us all to praise the Lord, and to
serve him; so more especially, it should work in us, these four special
things.

1. To move us to compassion, 2. To make us thankful. 3. To cause us to love
him. 4. To work in us a readiness to suffer any thing with him and for his
sake, that suffered all this for us.
First, to move us to compassion. Job 10.
For the first, the Prophet David musing of Gods great love toward mankind,
says, O Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him? And to this holy
Job answers; saying, Thou have made me as the Clay, verse. 11. and verse. 9.
and thou will bring me into the dust, and I shall be consumed as a rotten
thing, and as a garment that is motheaten. And yet to save this poor,
contemptible thing, Christ took upon him our nature in the womb, and
undertook our death upon the Cross; yea, and whatsoever he suffered as man,
he suffered for man; Omnis creatura compatitur Christo morienti, sol
obscuratur, etc. Solus miser homo non compatitur, pro quo solo deus patitur.
Hiron. in Mat.
and therefore, how can we behold his head resting upon a pillow of thorns,
his hands pierced with iron nails, and his heart bleeding for our sins, and
not to be moved to a godly sorrow, for those our horrible sins that caused
all his sorrows? It is reported in the Gospel, that when our Savior
suffered, the Sun withdrew his light, as being ashamed to see so woeful a
spectacle, the earth quaked and trembled, as it were for fear to see her
Creator put to death, and the stones did cleave in sunder; yea, wicked Judas
that betrayed and sold our Savior, when he saw the indignities that were
offered unto him, did repent, and grieve, that he had betrayed that innocent
blood: and therefore what strange hearts have we, worse then Judas and harder
then stones, if we can behold the torments of his Passion, and not be touched
with compassion? The naturalist tells us that the Adamant stone is of an
impenetrable hardness, Plinius l. 37. c. 4.
and yet he says, that if it be steeped in the warm blood of a Goat, it will
be mollified: and therefore if the blood of Christ, which is far more
excellent then the blood of Bulls, or of Goats, cannot intenerate our hard
hearts, we are worse then the Adamants, and no better then the Devils: That
Christ should bleed for us, and we not weep for our own sins.

Secondly, To make us thankful.
For the second, Our Savior having suffered all this for sin, to save sinful
men, and to eternize mortal men; He has broken the head of the Serpent, he
has wounded the great Leuiathan, and by the merit of his Passion he has
subdued Hell, conquered the grave, rebated the sting of death, taken away the
force and guilt of sin, and removed those Cherubims, and that flaming sword
which was placed to afright us, and to keep the way of the tree of life, Genesis
2.2.
and he has blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us,
and laid open unto us, the gates of eternal life; and therefore now we should
all say with the Psalmist, What shall we render unto the Lord for all his
benefits that he has done unto us? Psalm. 116 11.
for we must not think it enough to weep in commiseration of Christ his
pain, but we must be also thankful for Christ his suffering.

The whole world knows what great love he has showed to us, and what bitter
Passion he has suffered for us; and therefore vae tacentibus de te domine; Woe
be unto them, whose ingratitude has silenced them from praising thee; Sed
faelix lingua, quae non nouit nisi de te Sermonem texere; but most happy is
that tongue which can praise thee, O Lord, though it should be able to speak
of nothing else; because not only nothing can be carried better in our minds,
nothing can be sweeter in our mouths, nothing more melodious to our ears, as
Saint Augustine says, then deo gratias, to ascribe all praise, and to render
thanks unto the Lord our God; but especially, because (as Saint Bernard says)
no sacrifice can be more acceptable unto God, for who so offers me thanks
and praise, he honors me; and nothing can be more offensive unto Satan,
then to praise the Lord; for though thou watchest, he cares not; because
himself never sleeps; though thou fastest, he regards it not; because
himself never eats any thing; but if thou be thankful unto God for his
great love to thee, then is Satan grieved; because thou being a silly worm on
earth, do perform that here in the valley of misery, which he being a
glorious Angel in Heaven, could not perform in that seat of Majesty; and
therefore as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 107.15.
that he would rise at midnight to praise the Lord for his righteous
judgments, so with the Prophet David I wish to God, that men would praise the
Lord for his goodness, especially for this great goodness, and declare the
wonders that he has done, and especially this suffering, this great suffering,
that he underwent for the children of men; and that they would praise him from
the ground of the heart.

And because, virtus nisi cum re vilior alga; That we should show our
thankfulness to Christ by our works. Luke 2. Matthew. 2.
thankfulness consists more in works then in words, therefore let us not
only with the Angels sing, Glory be to God on high, but let us with the wise
men, present our gifts unto him, gold, to clothe the naked, and to feed the
hungry soul; Frankincense, to maintain the preaching of Gods Word; and Myrrh
to be prepared for our death, Macrob. Saturnal. l. 2. c. 4.
that we may live for ever with him. Macrobius tells us that a certain
soldier of Augustus Band, that had often adventured his life in Caesar's
cause, being to appear before those Judges whom he feared, he desired Augustus
for to assist him; and the Emperor presently wished him, to choose whom he
would, and he would appoint him for his advocate: but the Soldier replied, O
Caesar, I appointed no Deputy, when your life was in danger to be lost, but I
hazarded mine own life, and received all these scarres (which he then showed
in his body) to preserve you from all hurt; and do you now appoint another to
plead for me? what, have I done so much for you, and will you refuse to do so
small a kindness for me? even so beloved brethren, Christ did not only hazard
his life, but gave himself to death, and suffered scarres and wounds, and the
shedding of all his blood, of his dearest blood for us; and shall we do
nothing for him? Matthew. 25 40.
O yes, beloved, let us ever do what lies in us, for the poor members of
Jesus Christ; for, whatsoever you do to any one of them you do it unto me,
says our Savior.

Thirdly, to teach us how dearly and how truly we ought to love our Savior
Christ.
For the third, as Christ has so dearly loved us, as to suffer all these
things for us, so we should truly love Christ again; and we should the rather
love him, not only because he has done all these things for us, but also
because he requires nothing for all these things, but love: he exacts no
tribute, he requires no homage, he expects no requital but love; O then let
us not say with the unclean spirits in the Gospel, What have we to do with
thee, Mark 1.24.
O Jesus thou Son of God? but let us rather say with the Church, Cantic. 2.5.
in the Canticles, Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with apples, Bern. in
Ser. de pass. dom.
for I am sick of love: and as thy love to me, Erat talis and tantus vt
nesciret habere modum; was such and so great, that it could not contain it
self within the compass of any bounds, so my love to thee, is and shall be
such and so much, as I shall be possibly able to express.

Fourthly, to make us willing to suffer with Christ.
For the fourth, Saint Bernard tells us that in the Passion of Christ, there are
three things especially to be considered.

1. The Work. 2. The Manner. 3. The Cause.
And he says, that Christ showed; first, in the work, singular patience,
secondly, in the manner, admirable humility* and thirdly, in the cause,
inestimable charity; and therefore if we would truly honor God for the
giving of his Son, we must labor what we can to imitate Christ herein.

First, In patience, Quia crux non ad impotentiae documentum sed ad exemplum
patientiae suscepta est; Because (as Saint Augustine says) the Cross of
Christ is as a Schoolmaster, to teach patience unto all Christians: And so
Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 2.21.
Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steps. That the sufferings of Christ is an example to teach us how to suffer. 1
Mac. 6.34.
In the first of the Machabees, and the sixth, It is said that Antiochus being
to fight with Judas, Captain of the host of the Jews, He showed unto his
Elephants the blood of Grapes and Mulberies, to provoke them the better unto
the fight; and so the Holy Ghost has set down unto us what injuries, what
contumelies, what torments our Savior Christ did bear, and how patiently he
did bear them, to encourage us to endure whatsoever calamnities shall betide
us, during this our pilgrimage here on earth: for we see our Savior Christ;
Sine peccato venit, and tamen sine flagello non exijt; Though we do all know,
that he came into the world without sin, yet you do see, he went not out of
the world without sorrow, without suffering; and therefore, Chrysostom. in 27. Matthew.
Quae nobis erit contumelia, post quam haec Christus passus est? What if we
suffer reproaches, poverty, shame, death? what matter, what shame is that to
us, seeing Christ has suffered all those things for us? nay, what a shame is
it unto us, if we will not be ready to suffer any thing for his Names sake,
that has suffered so much for our sins?

But we must note that our suffering with Christ, We suffer with Christ two
manner of ways.
is two ways to be considered.

First, What we voluntarily assume, to be made like unto Christ.

Secondly, What is maliciously imposed, and we patiently suffer for the Name of
Christ.

In the first sense, Saint Gregory tells us, that duobus modis crux tollitur,
aut cum per abstinentiam affligitur corpus, aut cum per compassionem animi,
affligitur animus; We take up our cross two manner of ways, either when
through abstinence, fastings, 1 Cor. 9.27.
watchings, praying, we bring our bodies unto subjection, that they bring not
our souls unto destruction; That as members of the same body we should
willingly suffer when we see others suffer.
or else through a compassionate fellow-feeling of others miseries, we make our
selves copartners with them in all distresses: and therefore we should ever
crucify and mortify all the inordinate lusts of our flesh, all our wanton and
lascivious cogitations; and we should with all diligence, fight against them,
as they do fight against our souls; and as members of the same body, we
should all suffer inward grief, when we see any man endure outward pain.

In the second sense, we ought patiently to suffer, whatsoever God in his
wisdom, or men in their malice shall lay upon us; and that not only because
we cannot avoid them, but because we are contented to undergo them; for if
the mind resists when the body suffers, we rebel in what we can, and we
do only suffer what we cannot help; and God respects not so much the
sufferings of the Martyrs, though their torments were almost intolerable, as
their meek patience in suffering: and therefore it is noted in our Savior
Christ, Esaias 53 7. That God respects our patience in suffering, more then our
suffering.
that he was carried as a Sheep to the slaughter, and as a Lamb that was
dumb, and opened not his mouth; to teach us (as Saint Gregory says) that it
is not the sword, or the flame that makes a Martyr; but the patient and willing
mind of him that suffers any thing, for the name and truth of Christ: Quia
sine ferro and flamma Martyrs esse possumus, sine patientia non possumus;
Because we may be Martyrs without the pain of sword or stake, Cyprian de
duplici Martyrio.
but we cannot be Martyrs without patience, though we should suffer by the
sword, or be burned at the stake, as Saint Cyprian does most excellently
declare: And therefore seeing Christ has suffered for us, and has suffered
for our example, to teach us how we should suffer for his sake; That we should
be most ready and willing to suffer any thing for the Name of Christ.
though the world should rage and swell, and lay upon us all the weight of
miseries that it could heap upon us; poverty, reproaches, banishment,
imprisonment, death it self, or any kind of death, fire, sword, or
whatsoever, yet let us patiently suffer whatsoever shall be imposed upon us;
and let us say with holy Job, Though the Lord should kill us, Job 13.15.
yet will we trust in him: for seeing he suffered so much for us, to save our
souls from eternal death, it were a shame, if we should be unwilling to
suffer any thing for him and his truths sake, that it might be well with us,
and our children for ever, and that we might have for our selves eternal life.

Secondly, Matthew. 12.29.
As we are to imitate Christ in patient suffering unto death, so we are to
learn of him, true humility; to be meek and lowly in heart, throughout all
our life.

Thirdly, We should embrace that Queen of virtues, Divine charity, that as
Christ in love, That as Christ loved us, so we should love him, and love one
another for the love of Christ.
and for the love of man descended from Heaven, and suffered all this for us;
so we should, for the love of him, suffer any thing, rather then to swerve a
nayles-bredth from him, and do what good we can unto all our neighbors: for
if we love him, we must needs love one another; And yet it is a lamentable
thing to consider what strifes and contentions, what hatred and heart-burning
reigns, not only betwixt the children of this world, but also betwixt
Christians in the Church of God. I pray God we seek not our own, rather the
things that are Jesus Christ's, and make Religion to be a color to make way for
us to execute our own greedy minds and desires, to commit all wrong and
oppression. It was said of old, when the Pope sent his Bulls to fulfill his own
will, that in nomine dei incipit omne malum; How the want of love is the cause
of many mischiefs in the world.
I only pray it may never be so with any Christian soul, that we make not the
truth of God, (with all reverence be it spoken) as a Packe-horse to support our
vile desires. I am sure, if there were more love and charity among Christians,
less faults, less errors would appear to be in the Church of God, then now
there seems to be: 1 Cor. 13.
for charity suffers all things, believes all things, and is ever willing to
make faults and errors lesser then they be; whereas the want of love will make
the worst of every thing, every error to be an Heresy, and every infirmity to
be heinous impiety; nay, want of love will make sins where God made none, We
ought to love all men, and to hate all vices, in whomsoever they be.
and make virtues to be vices; whereas perfect charity will never hate the man,
though he be full of iniquity: and therefore my conclusion of this point is,
that as Christ has loved us, and gave himself for us so let us love Christ,
and love one another for Christ his sake; and he that does these things shall
never fall.


CHAP. Of the manner of Christ's suffering, how he suffered all that I have
showed, so as the Prophets foretold, and as the Apostles had seen the same
with their eyes.
The incomprehensible manner of Christ his sufferings.
FOurthly, Having heard of the person suffering, Christ; of the chiefest things
that he suffered, which are recorded by the Evangelists, and of the necessity
of that suffering in respect of those causes which did necessitate the same;
we are now to consider the manner how he suffered, expressed in the word (...),
so to suffer that is, so humbly, so lovingly, so meekely, so patiently, and so,
every way in respect of himself, as that neither the tongues of men nor Angels
are never able, by any like to express it, by any words to declare it, That
all predictions touching the Messiah, were all accomplished in Jesus Christ.
or by any apprehensions or thoughts of man to conceive it. And so, in regard
of men, as the Prophets had foretold, and the Apostles had already seen; for
so it pleased Almighty God before the coming of the Messiah, to foretell
almost every thing that should happen throughout all the whole life of the
Messiah, even from the first moment of his conception, unto the very last act
of his Ascension, that so all men might believe in him, in whom they saw all
those predictions fulfilled, and none other; for the Prophet Esaias had said,
that a Virgin should conceive and bear a son: Esaias 7.14. Mich. 5.2. Hos.
11.1. Esaias 9.1.
Micheas said, that he should be borne in Bethlehem-Iuda, Hoseas foretold of
his flight into Egypt; and to be brief, the place of his dwelling, in the
borders of Nepthali; the manner of his living, Healing all manner of
infirmities, Cap. 53.4.
and preaching the glad tidings of salvation, and almost every one of the least
particulars that should happen unto him at his death; Zach. 2.9.
as how he should be sold and betrayed by his own Disciple, Psalm. 41 2.
how all his followers should fly from him, how craftily and maliciously he
should be apprehended, Esaias 53.10.
how falsely he should be accused, how basely he should be handled, buffeted,
whipped, and spitted upon, how unjustly he should be condemned, and how
cruelly he should be fastened unto the Cross, to die an accursed death, and as
most accursed, betwixt the wicked, and how he should be generally mocked, his
garments taken from him, and have Gall to eat, and Vinegar to drink, and what
not? all was fore-shewed that should happen unto the Messiah: and therefore it
behooved Christ so to suffer, because it was prophesied that he should so suffer.

And as the Prophets did fore-shew how the Messiah should suffer, so the
Evangelists and Apostles testify how Christ did suffer all and every one of
those things that were written of him; for they were eyewitnesses of the same;
1 John 1.1.
and soth ey testify unto us; that which was from the beginning, which we have
heard and seen, and our hands have handled of the Word of life, that testify
we unto you; i. e. that all the things that were written of him which was
promised from the beginning, we have seen them fully accomplished and
fulfilled in him which lived and conuersed amongst us, and which we preach unto
you, Jesus Christ. S. Matthew recollects 32. several Prophesies that he saw
fulfilled in our Savior Christ; Saint John adds many other, and so do the
rest diverse more; So that whosoever would with the men of Berea, search the
Scriptures, from the first Book of Moses, unto the last Prophet Malachy, and
mark out all the things that were spoken of the Messiah, that was for to come,
we shall, if we do but look, find them all recorded in the writings of the
Apostles and Evangelists, to be most fully fulfilled in the person of Jesus
Christ.

A sufficient condemnation to all Jews, that still look for another Christ;
for why should not they believe their own Prophets? they said the Messiah
should suffer these things; Christ suffered them so, as they were prophesied;
who then can be the Messiah, but he, in whom all these prophecies were
fulfilled? but Saint Paul tells us why they will not believe in him; Why the
Jews believe not in Christ. Romans 11.
because partly blindness is come upon them, until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in: And now Lord, if it be thy will, open their eyes, that
they may see this truth, and circumcise all infidelity from their hearts, that
they may believe thy Son Jesus Christ to be the Savior of the world.

And as this condemns all unbelieving Jews, so it confirms all true
Christians in the faith of Christ: and I wish to God, that as the seeing of all
these things fulfilled in Christ, makes us all to believe in Christ; so the
suffering of all these things for us, would make us all to praise this our Lord
Jesus Christ for his goodness, to fear him in all our ways, to love him with
all our hearts, and to serve him truly and faithfully all the days of our
life; O blessed God grant this unto us, for Jesus Christ his sake, To whom with
thee, O Father, and the Holy Spirit three distinct persons of that one
indiuided essence, be ascribed all praise and glory, both now and for evermore.
Amen.

A Prayer.
O Most blessed God, that have given thy dearest, and thine only Son, not
only to be made man, subject to all infirmities, but also to suffer all
miseries, throughout his whole life, and in the end to be put unto a most
shameful, painful and accursed death, by wicked men, for sinful men, that
he suffering what we deserved, we might be delivered from thy wrath; we most
humbly beseech thee in his Name, and for his sake, to forgive us all our
sins, to accept his death as a plenary satisfaction, to acquit us from
everlasting death, and to give us thy grace, that for this, and all other thy
loving savors unto us, we may be truly thankful, and most dutifully
obedient to please thee, and to praise thy blessed Name, for ever and ever,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

IEHOVAE LIBERATORI.

FINIS.
The Fifth Golden Candlestick, HOLDING The Fifth greatest Light of Christian
RELIGION. Of the Resurrection of CHRIST.
MATH. 28.4.5.6. And for fear of him, the Keepers did shake, and became as
dead men: And the Angel answered, and said unto the Women, fear not you, for
I know that you seek Jesus, which was crucified; He is not here, for he is
risen as he said, come see the place where the Lord lay.
OUR blessed Lord God, The coherence of this Treatise with the former.
and loving Father, out of his excellent providence, and secret love to Man,
has so tempered all the accidents and whole course of man's life, with such
proportion and equal counterpoyse, that ever and anon joys and sorrows are
mixed together; as we may easily see in our blessed Savior, for upon Mount
Thabor he was transfigured in glory, Math. 17.2.
that his face did shine as the Sun; and upon Mount Caluary, he was
disfigured in sorrow, that confusion went over his face; and that in him there
was neither form nor beauty; and upon Mount Oliuet, even now, Esaias 53.2. Luke
22.43. Verse 44.
an Angel comforting him, and by and by an agony affrighting him; so upon the
Cross, even now he cries as destitute of all help, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? yet by and by after, as assured of comfort, he says; O my
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: Math. 27.46.
Even so it is with us all; Nocte pluit tota, Luke 23.46.
redeunt spectacula mane; Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in
the morning: To day we may be sick at the point to die, to morrow we may be
restored to life again; to night in prison and in distress, to morrow at
liberty and advanced to dignity: And this we see plain in my Text; for the
last day was a day of clouds and darkness, a day of grief and sorrow, for
the passion and suffering of the Son of God: But behold, this day is a day of
joy and gladness, a day of Iubile, for the most glorious resurrection of this
Omnipotent Son of God; for as it behooved him to suffer for our sins, (as you
heard) so it behooved him to rise again for our justification, says the
Apostle: And so this Angel testifies that he did; Romans 4.25.
He is not here, but is risen, as he said; Come see the place where the Lord
lay. And

In these words we may observe, The division of the Text.
1. The persons here mentioned. 2. The action of each person plainly expressed.


First, The Persons mentioned, are especially of three sorts.

1. Keepers. 2. Women. 3. Angels.
Secondly, The actions expressed, are 1. Of the Keepers watching Christ. 2. Of
the Women seeking Christ. 3. Of the Angel, 1. Terrifying the former. 2.
Comforting the latter.



And from all this, we may see these three things.

1. The malice of the Jews. 2. The devotion of the Women. 3. The Office of the
Angels.
And the maine sum of all is, The Resurrection of Christ.

PART I.
CHAP. Of the malice of the Jews against our Savior Christ.
FIRST, The malice of the Jews against our Savior Christ, is seen, in that
they did not only spitefully oppose themselves against him, throughout all his
life, and most unjustly deliver him to a most shameful death, but also
maliciously watched him in his grave, that he might not rise, (to show the
right property of the wicked, not only to throw the righteous down, but also
to keep them down, and to trample them still under feet) and to hire the
Watchmen to belie both themselves and his Disciples, that the truth of his
Resurrection might not be known and believed for our salvation.

O miseri, quae tanta insania ciues! O wretched men that you are; what, is your
rage as strong as death? nay, stronger then death? and longer then death? For
the man is dead, and he is buried; And yet, Vos excandescitis ira, Your rage is
implacable; you set armed Soldiers to watch and ward over this dead,
harmless man: And so we find what the Scripture says of the wicked, to be
true in you, Malicia eorum excaecauit eos; Wisdom 2.21.
Your malice and your wickedness have blinded your eyes. Nay, but this
deceiuer said (says some of them) That after three days I will rise again.

A deceiuer indeed; Sed pius seductor, How wicked men are deceived.
But of them only that deceive themselves, either,

First, By relying too much on his mercy, and not thinking of his justice; or,

Secondly, By fearing too much his justice, and forgetting all his mercy: or,

Thirdly, By not believing his power, either to save the penitent believers in
him, or to punish the wicked contemners of him: for of all these and the like,
the Prophet says; The Lord will deceive you, (that is, suffer you to deceive
your selves,) He will make his Arrows drunken in blood, Deuteronomy. 32.42.
and he will cause his Sword to go through your sides: But them that truly
trust in him, he will never deceive, nor suffer them to be deceived in him;
For, our Fathers hoped in him, Psalm. 22.4.
and were not confounded.

But what if you had seen him rise again? what would you have done? would you
have believed in him? no surely: for you know he rose, his Disciples testifies
it to your faces, and your own Soldiers says it; and you are feign to hyre
them to say the contrary: What then would you have done? would you have
crucified again the Lord of life? Yes, no doubt; such is the malice of the
wicked, that the death of the godly, decies repetita placebit, is never often
enough inflicted. O therefore good Lord, thou King of Heaven, Give me any head,
save the head of a Serpent; and any malice, save the malice of an enemy: For
death it self cannot hide me from these, but they will rage and rail on my
very Ghost. And so much for the malice of the Jews.


CHAP. I. Of the number, and the names, of these Women that came to seek our
Savior Christ in his Sepulcher.
SEcondly, The devotion of the Women is here commended, in that they are said
to come early, while it was yet dark, to seek Jesus, John 20.1.
for to imbalme him: And for the better understanding of this point, these
three especial things must be considered.

1. Their number. 2. Their names. 3. Their action.
First, Saint Matthew here seems to say, they were two; Why three Women went
together unto the Sepulcher.
Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary: but Saint Mark says plainly, that they
were three; and that (as we may gather) for three special reasons. First, For
decency, because it was not so fit to see a Woman gadding all alone: for it is
neither customable nor commendable for Matrones, like Dina, to walk single.

Secondly, For mutual society; Quia vae soli, For woe to him that is alone,
especially at so unwonted a season as the night, so dismal a place, as the
grave; and in so heavy a case as death.

Thirdly, For the better confirmation of the truth; for that in the mouth of
two or three witnesses, every word shall be established: And therefore there
went three of them. And,

Secondly, They were all three called by the same name, Haymo in postil in die
resur.
Mary; Et vno nomine censentur quia vna voluntas, And they had but one name;

First, Because they had but one will, they had the same desire, What it
signifies, that all the three Women were called by the same name.
they all desired, and all sought, but only Jesus Christ that was crucified*
And,

Secondly, Because they all signified the same thing, i. e. the Church of God
in general, or every Christian soul in particular.

For the first, the Scripture says; Vae duplici cord, Woe to him that goes
two manner of ways; that has two tongues, two hearts, two affections, one to
seek for God, and another to seek the World; because such, in seeking both,
do leese both: for the World they cannot keep, though they seek never so
much after it; and God, for seeking the World, they shall never find: And
therefore these three Women h^d but one heart, one will, one desire; they all
seek for Jesus that was crucified.

For the second, they all signify the same thing; for Maria in the Syriach
Tongue, signifies Dominam, a Lady or Mistress; and Mara in Hebrew, signifies
bitterness: So is the Church of Christ, and so is every Christian soul, a
Mistress for her affections, and bitter for her afflictions.

How the Church is to rule her Children.
First, The Church rules over her Children, and the Soul over her desires;
she makes all her affections yield obedience unto reason, and reason it self
to faith: for where humane reason fails, there divine faith attaineth to the
height of many mysteries.

Math. 8.24. How the Church was ever subject unto afflictions.
Secondly, The Church is like that Ship that was tossed to and fro, with the
mighty waves, and billows of the raging Seas; never at rest, until it
arriueth at the Haven of eternal happiness: The story of the Church does
make this plain.

Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine creuit,
Sanguine succreuit, sanguine finis erit.
And so is every Christian soul, full of sorrows, full of bitterness; we may
see our selves as in a glass, if we look into the state of these three silly
souls seeking Christ; for they are bereaved of him, whom their souls loved:
And therefore, as the Spouse says in the Canticles, Cant. 3.1.
In my bed I sought him, whom my soul loved, I sought him, but I found him
not; So these Women seek him, whom their souls loved, and not in their
beds, but in the Garden; for they range, and rage, and run up and down
like as it were a Lion, or a Bear robbed of her whelps, and yet they find
him not; they see the nest, but the Eagle is flowne away, and the Watchmen can
tell no tidings of him: And therefore they stand apalled, all woe-begone with
grief, their hearts are all sobby and swollen, like the lower ^allies, that
drink up the drops of Heaven, and for want of tears, to express their
griefs, (having emptied their bottles before by continual crying) each one of
them does now lamentingly say; Quis dabit capiti meo aquam? Who will power
water into the Cesterne of our heads, that we may power out our plaints like a
Nightingale robbed of her brood, and mourn like a Turtle for the lost of our
dearest Lord? For he being taken from us, our life is loathsome to us; Sit
mihi posse mori; It were well for us, if we could ^ie; Lament. 3.15.
for as our names be Marah, bitter, so he has filled us with bitterness, and
made our souls drunken with wormwood. This is the state of these Women; and
this is the state of every Christian soul, Tears must be her meat day and
night, whiles they say unto her, Psalm. 137.4.
Where is now thy God? for how shall we sing the Lords song in a strange Land,
and whiles we are as strangers from the Lord? And so you see, why all three
were called by one and the same name.

And yet we find, that they were all distinguished; for the 1. Was, Mary
Magdalen. 2. Was, Mary the Mother of James. 3. Was, Marie Salome.


And this shows either three special properties, How the three Mary's were
distinguished, and known the one from the other.
both in the Church, and in every member of the Church, or else the different
gifts and faculties which God bestows upon his servants, to every one as
pleases him. For,

First, Mary Magdalen was so called, a Castello Magdalo, from a Tower which was
lofty and strong; Marie Iacobi was the Sister of the blessed Virgin, and the
Mother of James, an Apostle and follower of Jesus Christ; and Mary Salome, was
so called, either of her Husband, or of a Village named Salome, which
signifies peaceable: And therefore by these three Women, Three special
properties signified, by the three women.
these three Mary's, are signified, three special properties.

1. Fortitude. 2. Faecundity. 3. Peace.
So is the Church, so were these Women, and so is every Christian soul. For,

First, Solomon says of the fortitude of the Church, 1. Fortitude. Cantic. 4.4.
Sicut turris David collum tuum; Thy neck is as the Tower of David, that is as
high as Heaven, and so strong, as that the gates of Hell can never prevail
against it: And in these Women here, Math. 16.18.
we find a peerless pattern of Christian fortitude; for though they were
the weaker Sex, yet I find them stronger in affection then Men; for the
Apostles ran, and out-ranne these Women, How fearelesse the Women were in
seeking Christ.
yet was their devotion sooner spent, and themselves sooner out of breath: for
they stayed not, but these Women, as they had formerly come unto the grave, so
now they stand longer at the grave; for so it is said of Mary Magdalen, Quod
stetit, That she stood still, and stood to it: And so no doubt they did all,
not like Peter, who fearfully following afar of, John 20.11.
and warming his hands in the High Priests Hall, benumbed his heart for want of
faith; Math. 26.58.
nor yet like Joseph of Aramathia, who secretly for fear of the Jews, begged
of Pilate the body of Jesus: but like the stoutest Heroickes steeled with a
manly resolution, they fear not death it self; And as the Poet says of that
valiant Scaeua, Lucan. l. 6.
Qu^m non mill modi mortis, etc.

So these fearelesse Women feared not a thousand sorts of death: So should
every Christian soul be unwearied to seek, and undaunted to profess our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; For whosoever will be ashamed of him here on Earth,
Mark 8.38.
he will be ashamed of him before his Father which is in Heaven.

2. Faecundity. How these Women labor to increase the number of true believers.
Secondly, For the faecundity of the Church, she is like Sara that brings
forth more fruit in her age, then she could do in her youth; her seed is as
the sand of the Sea, which cannot be numbered: So these Women, they run and
tell his Friends and Disciples, that Christ is risen from the dead; and so by
this means, they do what lies in them, to increase the number of Gods
Children; and so should every man do; when he is confirmed, to strengthen his
brethren: for it is our duty to incite all others to believe in Christ, and to
declare Christ unto them, That they also may have fellowship with us, 1 John
1.3.
in the fellowship which we have with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ.

3. Peace. How pe^ceably the women came to seek for Christ.
Thirdly, For the peaceablenesse of the Church, the Scripture says, that it is
a vision of peace, the Daughter of peace, and the Mother of peace: So these
Women, they came peaceably, not armed like the Soldiers, but harmelesly like
Noah's Dove, with nothing in their hands but sweet flowers, nothing in their
mouths but sweet words; John 20, 15.
good Sir, If thou have taken him away, then tell us where thou have laid him,
and as the Church says, Vbi pascit, vbi cubat in meridie; That we may know
where he is, where he lies: So should every Christian man lay aside all
bitterness, all maliciousness, and put on the garment of meekness, and
gentleness: for seeing God is a God of peace, and the Church a vision of
peace, a City at unity within it self; that man can never be the Son of
God, which is not the Child of peace. Every Son of God, must be the Child of
peace.
And so you see, that as these Women, so every man or woman that seeks
Christ, must be valiant, fruitful, and peaceable. And yet,

Secondly, As these Women, though they had each one of them all these graces in
a good measure, yet each one of them had not these, or the like graces in the
like measure; for as Mary Magdalen was less fearful, so Mary Iacobi was more
fruitful then the rest: How God bestows his gifts diversely unto men.
So God distributeth his gifts and graces even as pleases him, to one he
gives the gift of prophesying to another the gift of healing, to John the gift
to speak of his Divinity against Ebion; to Mark the gift of handling his
humanity against Marcion; to Saint Peter the gift to work mightily in the
conversion of the Jews; to Saint Paul in the conversion of the Gentiles, to
some he gives the gift to be famous Orators, excellent in persuasions, like
Apollo; to others to be judicious expositors of more positive instructi^ns, as
beneficial unto the Church, though perhaps more prejudicial unto themselves;
to some he gives the gift like Mary Iacobi, to be fruitful in number, to
preach often, and to bring forth many Sermons; to others like Mary Salome, to
be more peaceful, yet no less faithful then the rest; to do it seldom, yet
to do as well as their fellows.

And so in all the rest of Gods graces, he gives not the same gifts to all
persons; for Lactantius was good to confute the Gentiles, but he was not so
good to confirm the Christians; Origin was famous in the mystical
interpretation, but not so judicious in the literal exposition of the
Scriptures: Saint Augustine most excellent to discuss controversies, to
confound Heretics, and most judicious to interpret all positive points; but
he was not so millifluous in his exhortations; so among the practitioners of
Religion, some are faithful to suffer, some are painful to work, some
zealous to pray, some are desirous to hear, some like Mary Salome, blessed
peacemakers, others like Mary Iacobi, painful inlargers of Gods Church, and
others like Mary Magdalen, faithful sufferers for Gods truth; all good, but
not all the same gifts: for as among David's Worthies, all reached not to the
first three, so among the Worthies of Christ, all have not the same measure of
grace. That every man should be cont^nted with the gifts that God does give him.


And this should teach us, every man to be contented with those gifts, and with
that measure of grace as God has given him; and every man to labor according
to the grace he has received in his own element, whereto he is most inclined,
and not in other men's strain, whereto perhaps he is more affected: for the
fruits of affectation, can never be so sweet unto the palate of an other, as
are the fruits of our special inclination. And this should teach us all, so
to affect one grace, as not to reject the other; so to magnify one man, endued
with such gifts, as not to vilify another, enabled with some other gifts: for
this were to receive the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, James 2.1.
with respect of persons; and it is not in man to have what gift he pleases,
but it is God that distributeth and disposes of his graces, even as it
pleases him.

CHAP. II. Of the action of these Women, which was a right seeking of our
Savior Christ.
Three properties required to make every action good.
THirdly, The action of these Women is here expressed, according to those three
essential properties of every good and godly action.

1. The matter just. 2. The manner lawful. 3. The end pious.
All men are ever seeking for some thing.
First, The matter and substance of their work, is said by the Angel to be an
inquisition, a seeking; ye seek (says he) and so we do all seek: for since
Adam, like a griping Usurer, who extorting more then his due, leeseth
principal and all, desiring to be as God, lost both God and himself; the
whole World is at a quare, and in a continual seeking: but most of us do
seek amiss. For,

Some seek for wealth.
Some seek for wealth, Quaerenda pecunia primum; And they prefer that before
the health of their souls: And therefore surely they may well fear, because
they carry two heavy burdens upon their backs; the one is deliciarum
putredo, the rust of their covetous desires; and the other is Curarum
magnitudo, The greatness of worldly cares; Quorum vnumquodque ad subigendum
nauigium sufficit, Whereof each one is able to sink a Ship: the rust of our
riches to be a witness against us, and the cares of this World to choke us,
and drown us in perdition.

Some seek for vainglory, which is an intolerable drunkenness of the
mind, as Saint Chrysostom says: Some seek for vainglory.
And I fear that many of our selves in seeking Christ, do seek for this; and
we seek for it after the basest manner; for as the old Monks were proud of
humility, so many of us would be accounted most learned, by showing no learning
at all: And therefore I think, that the Prophecy of Esaias is now fulfilled,
Like people, like Priests; for in the Primitive Church, the Priests were better
then the People; and in the times of Popery, the People were better then the
Priests: Ideo non potuit dici, vti est populus ita est sacerdos, Therefore it
could not be said, As is the People, so is the Priest; because the People were
not half so bad as the Priests: but now they are all alike; the People for
fancy will hear but whom they like, and believe but what they list; and the
Priest for advantage, will speak but what may please. O Lord deliver me from
the number of these men, and into their council, let not my soul come. Genesis
49.6.


And so some seek for pleasure, where the best Ale is, where the strongest
Wine is, and where the fairest Woman dwells; some seek for honor, some for
pride, some for revenge, some for one thing, and some for another thing; Et
nemo Christum quaerit, And so seeking their own, they seek not that which is
the Lord Jesus: And therefore these seekers may all fear, least finding these
things, they leese themselves.

But these women seek for a better thing, they seek for God; The godly do
only seek for God.
and so does every man; for though we found all other things that we seek for;
yet all things cannot content us, until we find our God; for the heart of
man being as a triangle, and the whole world being round, and a round thing
cannot possibly fill a triangle; therefore it is impossible that any thing
should satisfy and content the heart of man, but only the blessed Trinity;
and therefore Saint Augustine truly says, Aug. in confess.
Irrequietum est cor nostrum, donec revertatur ad eum, That as the heart of man
proceeded from God, so it can never be quiet until it be with God: and
therefore all seek for God, but all do not seek aright: because they seek
him not in Christ, John 14.6.
for none comes unto the Father but by me: And therefore these women seek
for Jesus: and so likewise many seek for Jesus, and yet find him not; for so
the Scriptures say, they shall seek me, but they shall not find me, they
shall call upon me, but there shall be none to answer; and so the Church
says, In my bed I sought him whom my soul loves, I sought him but I found
him not; because she sought him amiss, in her bed, Many seek for God but
not aright.
at her ease, she sought him drowsily at home, and not carefully both at home
and abroad: so many shall seek Jesus, but shall not find him; because they
seek him amiss; for some feign unto themselves a false Jesus, and seek not
the true Jesus, which is able to save their souls: and therefore these women
go one step further, and seek Jesus of Nazareth (as Saint Mark says) the
true flower of Iesse; and because many seek for Jesus of Nazareth; and yet
fail of their felicity, as those that sought him for their bellies sake, to
be fed by him, Many seek Christ amiss.
but not to feed him in his members; to be cleansed by him, but not to serve
him; as those nine leapers that came with reverence to be healed, but gave him
no thanks when they were cleansed: therefore these women proceed to the
highest staff of Jacobs ladder, and seek not only Iesum Nazarenum, i. e.
Iesum floridum, Jesus in prosperity, for prosperities sake, but they seek
Jesus that was crucified; for all those that can be contented to eat the sweet
bread in the Passover, and not to taste of the sour herbs, or with Saint
Peter to build Tabernacles on Mount Thabor, and to forsake and forswear him in
Mount Caluarie, i. e. to profess his Name in the times of peace and
delectation, and to start aside like a broken bow in the days of persecution,
How we ought to seek for Jesus if we would find him.
they may well seek Christ, but they shall hardly find any benefit by Christ,
because this is to seek their own, and not to seek that which is Christ
Jesus.

And therefore as these women sought Jesus that was crucified, and the Apostle
says, God forbid that I should glory in any thing save in the cross of Jesus
Christ, i. e. in the power of his Passion, and in the benefit which I reap
from the sufferings of Christ. Quia non siluestris arbor sed virtus crucifixi
salus nostra; Because it is not the wooden Cross, but the grace and virtue of
him that suffered upon the Cross, that is the cause of our salvation; so let
every one of us, seek Jesus that was crucified, and rejoice in nothing but in
that Cross, that Passion of Jesus Christ; and though this be to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Grecians foolishness, yet to them that believe
both of the Jews and Gentiles, It is the power of God unto salvation: Romans
1.16.
So you see what they sought for Jesus of Nazareth, that was crucified.

Secondly, For the manner of their seeking of him, it is here many ways
expressed.

First, They seek him early, while it was yet dark, First, that we seek for
God betimes.
says the Evangelist, they came in that time unto the grave, when by course of
nature they should have been in their beds, and so they take away from nature
to give to grace; and perhaps all that night, they gave no sleep unto their
eyes, nor slumber unto their eyelids, for musing of him, who neither slumbreth
nor sleeps; but their eyes, like the morning watch, did continually watch for
the morning, that they might seek him early whom they loved so entirely. So
should we seek Christ betimes, Eccles. 12.1.
in the days of our youth, else if we never seek him until we have given
over seeking all things else, we may justly fear to miss him; because it is
just with God, that they which never sought him in their youth, should never
find him in their age.

Secondly, They seek him earnestly, Proverb. 2.4. Judge. 15.18. Secondly, that
we should earnestly seek for Christ.
even as Salomons Scholars sought for wisdom, or as Sampson sought for
drink; that is, with all diligence, for they came often unto the grave, they
inquired often for him; Et discipulis recedentibus, mulieres non recedebant;
And though Saint Peter the Disciple that is said to love Christ best, and Saint
John, that is said to be best beloved of Christ departed, and went their ways,
yet would not these women go, but still stayed to seek him, until they
should find him; for as Wormwood is good for ill stomachs, Marcus heremita
l. 2. de legi spirituali.
says Mark the Heremite) because it stirs up the appetite unto a desire of
meat; so the sorrow and bitterness of these women, for the less of Christ,
did the more eagerly stir and provoke them to search and seek for Christ: so
should we most earnestly seek for Christ as for hid treasure, till we find
him.

Thirdly, They seek him mournefully, with watered eyes; John 20.11. Thirdly,
That we should seek Christ sorrowing till we find him.
and with heavy hearts; for so John says, that Mary stood without at the
Sepulcher weeping; and surely not without cause do they deplore his absence,
in whose presence is the fullness of joy; for the loss of him is more then the
loss of all the world: and therefore they seek him sorrowing; so should we;
for if we put on mourning robes, and weep for our ordinary friends departed,
how should we weep and wail, Luke 2.48. Bernard. Ser. 2 de alt. and bass.
cord. Fourthly, that we should seek for nothing but for Christ.
when Christ for our sins is parted from us?

Fourthly, They seek him only; for we do not find that they inquired for
any thing, so as for him, nor any thing beside him, nor any thing after him,
says S. Bernard; so should we seek for Christ, and for Christ alone; for as
the Poets say of the Clitorian well, Clitorio quicunque sitim de font lauarit,
Vina fugit, gaudetque meris abstemius vndis.


Whosoever drinks of it, will never drink Wine after it; so the Scriptures
say of Christ, Whosoever eats his flesh, shall never hunger, John 6.
and whosoever drinks his blood, shall never thirst; therefore as Jacob said,
Genesis 45.28.
when he heard that Joseph was alive, I have enough; so will every Christian
say, I have enough, that I have Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, that we should never leave seeking Christ till we find him. Psalm. 105.
Fifthly, They seek him continually until they find him; to teach us, that we
should seek the Lord and his strength, and seek his face evermore.

Thus these women sought him, and thus we should seek him; and thus we are
taught to seek him; and I think, never people more faithfully taught then we
be: and yet alas, I fear that as Pliny says, There be certain trees, which
he calls, Indociles arbores, Plin. l. 14. in praem.
quia in alienas non comeant terras; Indocible trees, because they will grow no
where, but where they are bred; so there be too too many of us, that will not
be taught to seek after God; but as they are bred of the earth, so they will
seek for nothing but earthly things.

To what end the women sought for Christ.
Thirdly, For the end of their action, and the very depth of their intention, it
is here said to be, not as the Soldiers sought him in the Garden of
Gethsemane, to crucify him, but to imbalme him; not because they could add
any sweetness unto him, which was (...), wholly delectable, and, (...),
sweetness it self (as Nazianzen calls him;) but because they would show their
love and affection unto him: So should we seek him, to imbalme him, i. e. to
pray unto him, and to praise his Name; Quia aromata mulierum significant preces
sanctorum; Because their balmes signifies our prayers, says a Father: And
therefore we should seek for him with these women, to imbalme him with our
prayers: and finding him, we should say with King David, Let our prayers be
directed in thy sight, as the incense, and the lifting up of our hands, as the
evening sacrifice: Psalm. 142.2.
And so you see the devotion of these women, here, accompanied with every
circumstance of a most just and holy action.

But here it may be some will ask, devout, so zealous, and so religious, to
seek, Mary Magdalen was a sinful woman.
and so earnestly to seek for Jesus that was crucified? for not long before,
one of them was most sinful for life, and most hateful for her lust;
prostibula, an unchaste Lady, nay a common Curtizan, and a most public
Publican, living in all kind of lascivious luxury; how then comes she so
suddenly so devout?

Alas beloved, they run far that never turn: It is true, that she was
plunged in sin, and possessed of Devils; and all that while, she neither
sought God, nor confessed Christ; but when she was converted, and had her eyes
opened, then she hated her sins, and forsook all wantonness, and began to
seek Christ; and most earnestly to love her Savior.

I, but how came she to forsake the one, and to follow the other? or how came
she then, and not before then to do it?

I answer, that as Adam never sought God, Resp. How we can never find, nor
seek after God, until God seek after us.
until God first sought him, and cried, Adam where art thou? so this daughter
of Adam, this lost sheep had never sought for this now lost shepherd, had not
this shepherd formerly sought for this long wandering sheep; for it is most
certain, that all our power and ability to come to him* proceeds from him; his
Spirit must spirare, breathe upon us, before we can aspirare, aspire to him:
and his hand must move the golden Cymbell before we can yield any pleasant
note: And so Saint Bernard says, Bern. de delig. deo.
Nemo domine te quaerere valet nisi qui prius inuenerit: No man, O Lord, can
seek for thee, but he who has first found thee, i. e. when thou have first
found him.

And we have examples enough for the illustration, God is the first author of
our conversion.
and apparent proofs for the confirmation of this truth. For,

First, When Saint Peter denied Christ, Peter never repented, until the Cock
crowed, and Christ looked on him, i. e. looked outwardly, and moved him
inwardly to go out, and weep bitterly: and the poor blind man, that was
blind from his birth, John 9.1.
had never seen Christ, had not Christ as he passed by, seen him, and had
compassion on him; so Saint Paul had never asked the Lord, What will thou have
me to do? had not the Lord said first, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

John 6.44.
Secondly, Christ says expressly, that as No man comes unto the Father but by
him, i. e. as he is a Mediator betwixt God and man; so, no man comes unto
him, i. e. to believe in him, to be his Savior, except the Father, (...), does
draw him; and so the Church says, Cant. 1.4.
Draw me and I will run after thee: where you see, grace is promised, and
then the action is performed: So when the Spirit said unto Esayas, Esaias 4.6.
Cry, he knew not what to cry, until the Spirit had first taught him; so when
the Spirit said unto Ezekiel, Ezech. 2.1.2.
Son of man stand upon thy feet, the Spirit himself did set him upon his
feet, before he could stand; and so the Prophet Jeremy says, Lam. 5.1.
Turn us, O Lord, and we shall be turned; and so the Apostle, after he had
said, Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, lest that any man
should mistake him, and think that he has any manner of power of himself to
do the same, he shows immediately that all such power is from God; Phil.
2.13: That we can do no good but what God works in us.
because it is God that works in us both (...), to will and to effect: and so
Saint Augustine says, Da domine quod iubes, and iube quod vis: Give us, O
Lord, power to perform what thou command, and then command what thou will:
and so I might heap a cloud of witnesses, to prove, that neither this woman
could, nor any other man can turn to God, or perform the will of God, until
God himself does enlighten them, assist them, enable them, and draw them to
do it.

That God compels not his servants to do any good.
And yet we must not so understand it, as that he does it violently by way of
coaction, but sweetly and gently by way of insinuation, for he draws us, Leui
spiritu non dura manu; by an inward sweet influence, and not by any outward
extreme violence; for the will is no will if it be compelled; and therefore as
Satan cannot force us to sin, but only by way of suggestion; so God will not
compel us to grace, but only by way of inclination, and a sweet secret
operation of his Spirit upon our wills and affections, How God works our
willingness to do good.
without which notwithstanding, as I showed you before, we shall never be able
to seek for Christ to come to God; and therefore to express both the
necessity of such help, and the manner of Gods working it in us; our Church
excellently says, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts, not to
compel them, but incline them to keep this Law: Why the wicked seek not God.
And therefore hence it is apparent, that the reason why all men do not seek
for Christ, and serve their God, is, because God in Justice leaves them, and
does not thus incline their hearts to seek for him; for if he did it, how
could they withstand it? Romans 9.19.
for who has ever resisted his will?

If then you will say the fault is in God, Ob.
that all men do not seek for God; because he does not move and incline
their hearts to seek after him.

I answer, that this is a false conclusion, Sol.
laid upon no good foundation; for in the actions of the wicked he does not
drive them to sin, nor has the least finger in their iniquity; but he only
leaves them to their own inventions; and so the Prophet says, Thy
destruction is from thy self; Hosea 13.9.
and he is a debtor to no man, that he should be bound to sustain him: and
therefore, if to the one, he shows favor, and does incline his heart to
leave his sins, and to seek for Christ; Illi facit indebitam misericordiam;
He does it freely out of his mercy: if to the rest he does not this, he cannot
be reproved of any fault, Quia illis facit debitam iustitiam; because he does
but justly leave them.

And therefore I cannot sufficiently wonder at those men, eminent in place, and
excellent for words, that lessening this help and favor of God, which is the
a and o, the beginning, continuing, and finishing of all the good things that
are in the Saints of God; would, I know not for what cause, ascribe more power
and ability unto man, then is in any of themselves.

And yet, I may cease my wondering, because as the Sodomites groped for the
doors in the clear day; Genesis 19.12.
and the Jews notwithstanding all the invincible, and unanswerable apparent
arguments to prove the coming of the Messiah, would never believe it to this
very day: So that subtle Serpent, still strives to darken our eyes, many
times, that we cannot see the cleerest light; And so you see the action of
these women, and how they came to be so full of zeal and devotion. Two
special observations from the former doctrine.
Out of which we may observe these two special points for our instruction.

That many Women have been found most zealous, and religious in the service of
God: First, that many women were made Instruments of great goodness.
for though Satan has much blemished the beauty of this Sex, by making them
his often Instruments to work mischief, as Eua to seduce Adam, Dalila to
entrap Sampson, Iezabel to infatuate Achab, and many others, to further many
Heresies; so has God much honored them, in making them partakers of great
mercies, and often instruments of his glory; as Mary to conceive him, Elizabeth
to prophecy of him, Hanna to rejoice to see him, Mary Magdalen to anoint him,
Martha to entertain him, and these three gracious Women to be the first
seekers, and the first seers of him after death, and the first witnesses of his
Resurrection unto life. I might reckon many other women that trusted in God,
and were famous in their generations, and as Lamps shining in the world,
whereof some were faithful Martyrs of Jesus Christ, some bountiful
entertainers of the servants of Christ, some able to convert their unbelieving
Husbands, and some to instruct their Households in the fear of God; as that
elect Lady, unto whom Saint John writes: And I might speak of Sara, 2 Ep.
John v. 1.
Rebecca, Debora, Judith, Abigaile, Bathsheba, Hester, Dorcas, Loyse, Phaebe,
Claudia, Maxima, Monica, Pulcheria, Gorgonia, Trasilla, and many more. But
seeing, when it was granted to no man to be the father, God vouchsafed to
accept a woman to be the mother of Christ, this only thing is sufficient to
show, how abundantly he loved, and how worthily he deserves the love of women.

Wherefore elect and blessed Ladies, dear and Christian women, let us bless
that God, which has so honored and blessed you; let us remember that honor
is deceitful, and beauty is vanity, Prou. 31.30.
but the woman that fears the Lord shall be praised: and therefore imitate
not that graceless Iezabel that painted her face with diverse colors, Esaias. 3.
and defiled her mind with heinous sins, nor those daughters of Jerusalem,
which the Prophet Esaias describes, and who took such delight in their
tinckling ornaments, and trumperies of vanities, and did love to sit at ease in
Sion; but imitate that good daughter of Sion, whose beauty and glory is within,
Psalm. 45.14.
and those Elect Ladies, and blessed women, whose praise is in the Gospel.

And if at any time heretofore, you have followed Iezabell, and those dainty
Dames in transgression; do you now and ever hereafter follow Mary Magdalen in
your true conversion, for she loved much, because much was forgiven her, Luke
7.47.
and she lived most strict and religiously in her age, because she had lived
so loosly and so dissolutely in her youth: for as Dyonisius and Egesippus do
record, she betook her self to a most solitary life, sequestered from all
worldly pleasures, in the mountain Balma, full thirty years together; in all
which time she gave her self to meditation, fasting, and prayer; and as
Josephus writes, could never endure any company; for now she had given a
perfect bill of divorce unto all wantonness, and had disrobed her self of all
her sumptuous weeds and alluring paludaments, and chose rather to suffer a
short affliction, and to endure a hard penance with the Children of God, Heb.
11.25.
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

Secondly, That we should never despair of any man's conversion.
That seeing the grace of God to move and incline our hearts must be the first
agent in the conversion of our souls, and that God has his own times and
hours, and moments, to call us into his Vineyard, some at the sixth, some at
the ninth, and some at the eleventh hour, we should not despair of the
conversion of any one; for as to commit sin is the death of the soul, so to
despair, is the stepping down to the lowest Hell: Isidor. de summo bono.
and therefore seeing God is multus ad misericordiam, of much mercy, to forgive
many sins, and of great mercy, Esaias 55.
to forgive great sins, let us never despair of the eternal and omnipotent
mercy of God; for though thy sins were as heinous as Mary Magdalens, yet one
word of Christ's mouth is able to cast out all Devils; though they were as
odious as Peter's, yet one look of Christ's favor is able to work grace and
repentance in thy soul; and though they were as many as Manasses, and as red
as scarlet, yet one drop of the blood of Christ, is able to wash them all away,
and to make thy crimson soul as white as snow; and therefore return, O
Shunamite, return, and call to God for grace; say unto the Lord, that it is
time that he have mercy upon thy soul, yea, the time is come. And so much for
the devotion of the women.


CHAP. I. Of the Angels service unto Christ, and how terrible they be to the
wicked.
THirdly, The Office of the Angels is here plainly expressed; for though Saint
Mark says, he was a young man, yet Saint Matthew says, he was an Angel:
for Angels many times assumed outward forms, The Angels often appeared like
men, but were never made men.
to perform some offices, and deposed the same again, after the finishing of
their work, and so they used those forms as one uses his garments, to put it
on and off at his pleasure, and not as our Savior did: for Christ really
united himself to the form that he assumed, and assumed it, never to depose
it: and therefore they are said only to appear like men, but Christ is said
to be made many.

This Angel then being sent to comfort, and not to astonish these women, he
took upon him the form of a man, which is a form most customable, that he
might not affright them, and he took the form of a young man, which is a
form most amiable, Aug. in Psalm. 104.
that he might delight them: and he is called an Angel, Ab officio, non
natura: In respect of his office, not of his nature; Nam ex eo quod est,
spiritus est, ex eo quod agit, Angelus est; For in that which he is, he is a
Spirit, in that he is sent as a Messenger he is an Angel, says Saint
Augustine: and therefore he is a Spirit, ab essentia, in respect of his being;
he is a young man, a forma, in respect of the form wherein he appeared, and he
is an Angel, ab officio, in respect of that duty and office which he was now
to discharge: The office of the Angel here expressed is threefold.
And I find the same here to be threefold.

1. In respect of Christ. 2. In respect of the Keepers. 3. And principally in
respect of the Women.
First, The Angels are excellent in all things, but for three things most
excellent.

First, Purity of substance, Matthew. 18.10.
for they always behold the face of God, into whose presence no impure thing
can approach.

Secondly, Readiness of obedience, for the Prophet speaking of their service
says, He rode upon Cherub, and did fly, Psalm. 18.10.
he came flying upon the wings of the wind.

Thirdly, Feruentnesse of charity, for, Heb. 1.7.
he makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire; whereby they
burn in love, not only one toward another, but also toward us poor
miserable men; for they rejoice at our conversion; Luke 15.10.
and being converted, they become our Guardians in our conversation; Psalm.
91.11.
to preserve us in all our ways, that we dash not our foot against a stone.

And these three things were shadowed in those Cherubims, 1 Kings 6.23.
made by Solomon to ouer-shadow the mercy seat, for they were made of fine
gold, to note their purity, 2 Chronicles. 3.12.
with their wings spread, to note their celerity, and with their faces looking
one toward another, to note their charity.

And yet for all their excellency, when God brought his first begotten Son
into the world, he commanded them all to do him service, saying, Worship him
all ye Angels; and so they did: Heb. 1.6.
for when he was to be conceived, the Angel brought tidings unto that blessed
Virgin; when he was borne, How the Angels always did service unto our Savior
Christ.
the Angels told the same unto the shepherds; when his life was sought for by
Herod, the Angel revealed the same unto Joseph, and warned him to fly into
Egypt; when Herod was dead, the Angel bad Joseph return into the land of
Jury; when Satan had left tempting him, the Angels came and ministered unto him;
when his soul was exceeding sorrowful unto death, the Angels attended to
comfort him: and here, when his Body was to be raised from death, the Angel
descended to roll away that mighty stone which his adversaries had laid upon
his grave; Non propter impotentiam Christi, sed propter obedientiam Angeli: Not
that Christ was unable to do it himself, (for he that is able to shake the
earth, and of the stones to raise up children unto Abraham, shall we think him
unable to lift up a stone?) but to declare his sovereign authority over these
creatures of sovereign dignity; he needs but say unto his Angel, Do this and
he does it: And therefore if the Angels which never offended him, be ever so
ready to do him service, how much more willing should we be to serve him? for
to whom much is given, Luke 12.48.
of them much shall be required; and we know he gave more to us for he gave
his Son unto us; and he did more for us, for he dyed for us; and he showed
more love toward us, for he was made one with us, then ever he did unto the
Angels: and therefore I say no more, but we are obliged to the more
thankfulness.

How the Angels punish wicked men.
Secondly, The Angel here descended, to affright and terrify these wicked
Keepers; and therefore the Keepers at the sight of him, Intus timent exterius
concutiuntur, vt fere exanimes redduntur; Caietan. in Math. c. 28.
were astonished, and became as dead men: for though they have a charge to
cherish the godly, and to preserve them so, Psalm. 91 11.
in all their ways, that they dash not their foot against a stone; yet they
are likewise charged to punish the wicked, and to dash them in pieces against
every stone; and therefore they consumed Sodom, Genesis 19. Exodus 12.29. 2 Kings
19.35.
they plagued Egypt, they destroyed 100. 80. and 5000. men, in the host of
the Assirians; and here the very countenance of one Angel does so terrify
these wicked men, that they are astonished and become as dead men: and no
marvel, for his countenance is admirable, it was like lightning; and his
garment white as snow; their voice is terrible, as the voice of God; and I
heard thy voice, (says Adam unto God) and I was afraid: Genesis 3.10.
for as it is Vox suauiter dulcis and dulciter suavis; a voice like the sweet
and melodious voice of Harpers, harping with their harpes unto the godly; so it
is Vox mirabiliter terribilis, and terribiliter mirabilis; a voice like the
sound of many waters, that is, wonderfully terrible unto the wicked, it shakes
the Cedars of Libanus, Revel. 19.6.
and terrifieth the very hearts of the ungodly; and their power is incredible,
Ye Angels of his, (says David) that excel in strength. Psalm. 103.20.


O therefore senseless, godless men, will ye not fear him, that as he has
his army of little ones, that are able to destroy the greatest Potentates of
the world, as the frogs, flies, and caterpillars subdued Pharaoh and all his
kingdom; so he has his Army of great ones, Revel. 10.1.
of these mighty Angels, as the Apostle calls them, to fight against you, poor
silly worms of the earth? Alas, if their countenance be so admirable, their
voice so terrible, That it is impossible to escape the hands of any destroying
Angel.
and their power so incredible (as I showed before,) what shall you do, when
they shall have a power super added, a power given them to destroy the earth,
and a shaking blade put into their hands, not only to keep the way of the
tree of life, but also to cut down the wicked like grass, and to cast them
forth into eternal death? O consider this you that forget God, lest he tear
you in pieces while there is none to help you: for this is a doleful and a
fearful case; Psalm. 69.23.
a most grievous curse pronounced by David, To have those things which should
be for your advantage, an occasion of falling, to have those glorious Angels
which are appointed by God to save and preserve you, if you serve God, to be
transmuted by your sins to destroy and consume you: and therefore, Kiss the
son, lest he be angry, for if his wrath be kindled, yea, but a little,
blessed are all they that trust in him.

Thirdly, This Angel here descended in respect of the women, and that for two
special ends.

1. For their consolation. 2. For their instruction.
CHAP. II. How the Angel comfort these women diverse ways.
FIrst, How the Angel comfort the Women.
The Angel comfort these women many ways, but especially, 1. By the manner
of his apparition. 2. By his kind and friendly allocution.
For,

First, He appeared unto them, not in a black mournful robe, but in a garment
white as snow, which signifies purity, and is the ensign of joy and felicity;
and he assumed the shape of a young man, Mark 16.5. Haymo in postil. super
Euangel. die pasch.
whose form must needs be amiable unto all men; and he sat on the right
side, which signifies a successiue happiness unto their intentions: All good
signs, all signs of comfort. But,

Secondly, As these dumb shows, do a little consolate their afrighted
souls; so his gracious speech, does wholly expel all fear and sorrow from
their afflicted hearts: for he said unto the women, Fear you not, for I know
that you seek Jesus that was crucified, Wherein is intimated three especial
things.

1. Whom we ought to fear. 2. Who ought, and who ought not to fear. 3. How we
ought to fear.
That we need not fear men, Angels, devils.
First, We need not fear Men, Angels, Devils: for that is the meaning of the
Angels words unto the women; you need not fear the Jews, you need not fear
me, you need not fear the very Devils; Matthew. 10.28.
for they are but your fellow servants, and the greatest of all these can (and
without the leave and permission of God they cannot) but confiscate your goods,
Romans 8.
and cast your bodies into the fire; for when they have done so, they can do
no more, says Christ; but God can cast both body and soul into Hell fire: and
therefore as we should hate nothing but sin; because nothing but sin makes
us to be hated of God; so we should fear none but God; because, if God be
with us, none can hurt us, nothing can harm us.

Ob.
But against this it may be objected, that we should fear our superiors, as
Kings, Magistrates, Parents, Preachers, and such like; therefore others besides
God, are to be feared.

Sol.
I answer, that our superiors have a power and authority over us: but first it
is potestas data, non innata; a power given them from above, and not inbred in
themselves; for (as our Savior says unto Pilate) there could be no power in
man, except it were given him from God: John 19.12.
and secondly, it is potestas limitata; a power limited, so far as God
permits and no further; for God says unto them, as he does unto the sea,
Hitherto shall thou go, and no further, here shall thou stay thy proud waves:
and therefore I confess that they are to be feared, (...), in respect of that
concessed and received power which they have from God; and so indeed we fear
not them but the power and authority of God in them: but not absolutely;
because they have not absolute power; In what sense and how far parents, and
magistrates are to be feared.
but God has all and absolute power, a power both of body and soul: and
therefore God only is to be feared absolutely, in all respects. But then,

Secondly, It may be said, that obiectum timoris malum; The object of fear is
evil; for we love and desire the good, and we fear only that which is evil:
And therefore, how can it be, that we should fear him, which is the chiefest
good?

I answer, That it is true, that the object of fear is evil, and that evil
to come; for what is past, we call (...), Heaviness, which is the relic and
the effect of that evil which we have suffered: but that which is to come, we
call (...); Fear. And yet I say, that we may fear that which is good in two
respects.

First, We may fear that which is good, In what sense we may be said to fear
God, which is the chiefest good.
Ne bonum a nobis per malum auferatur, Lest that good be taken away from us, by
reason of our evil; So the body fears death, lest by that death it should be
deprived of the fruition of the soul: So we fear God, that is good, lest that
for our evil he will leave us, and deprive us of the fruition of his most
blessed Society.

Secondly, We may fear that which is good; Ne per bonum propter malum, malum
nobis inferatur, Lest that which is good, should inflict some evil upon us,
for our evil: So the Malefactor fears the Judge, lest the uprightness of
the Judge, should cause punishment to be inflicted upon him, for his evil
deeds; So we fear the good God, lest he should punish us for our evil: And
so in very deed, the thing that we fear, is not his goodness, but the just
desert of our own wickedness: For to speak properly, God, as he is (...), a
lover of man, and the chiefest good, cannot be feared; but he is only to be
feared as he is a just Judge, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
which rendereth vengeance to them that know not God. And therefore, though the
object of fear be evil, yet in t^ese respects, we ought while we live on
earth, (for in Heaven there is no fear, 1 John 4.18.
because perfect charity expels fear) to fear God the chiefest good: And
blessed is he that always fears; for he that fears the Lord, will do no
evil; But as the banks of a River do bound in the waters from ouer-flowing,
so does the fear of God hedge in our affections, that it suffers not our
souls to sin; whereas the banks being broken and trodden down, the waters
then Velut agmine facto, Will rush in heaps, and soon cover the whole face of
the plains: So the fear of God being once rejected, Blood touches blood;
Hosea 4.2.
as the Prophet says, and all sins and wickedness will be committed even
with greediness.

Secondly, The Angel does herein denotate, who ought, and who ought not to
fear; for he says unto the Women, Fear you not; because you seek Jesus of
Nazareth that was crucified; which is all one, as if he said, They that seek
Christ, or go about to do the will of Christ, to honor him, to imbalme him
with their odoriferous prayers, and the sweet swelling flowers of pious and
religious works, as you do, they need not fear; no evil can happen unto
them, because God is unto such a most loving Father, that will do them good,
and not evil all the days of their life: but they that seek to press him
down and to trample him under feet, like the Tyrants, or to suppress his
truth, like the Heretics, or seek him not crucified, but to crucify him
again, and to make a mock of him, by their wicked sins, as the Apostle
says; Heb. 6.^.
They may well, with these cursed Keepers fear, and tremble; because God will
be unto such a most just Judge, Romans 2.6.
that will render unto every one according to his deeds. And so you see, who
need not fear, those good and godly Saints that seek for Christ, that live
like Christians; for the more godly we are, the less we need to fear: If we
had no sin, we had need of no fear; for in Heaven among the Saints, there
is no fear, because there is no sin; Sin brought fear into the World.
but there is perfect love, and perfect love expels fear; because fear is
the defect of love, and the effect of sin: for if Adam had never sinned, Adam
needed never to have feared; but when he had once transgressed, then as soon as
ever he heard the voice of God, Genesis 3.10.
he feared: For so he says, I heard thy voice in the Garden, and I was afraid.

But they that go on in sin, and drink iniquity like water, they may well
fear and tremble, and the more they sin, the more they should fear; Psalm.
5.5. Heb. 10.31. The more sinful we are, the more we ought to fear.
because the Lord hates all them that work wickedness, and it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God: And therefore Saint James
says, That the Devils fear, and tremble; and no doubt but their fear is
exceeding great, because their sins are great. And therefore, Fear not, O
Jacob my servant (says the Lord) but rejoice O ye Righteous, and be glad all
ye that are true of heart: For the more you fear, the less you need to
fear; the more you fear your selves to fall to sin, the less you need to
fear my wrath to punish you for your sins; this blessed fear to sin,
expels fear of vengeance: But goe-to-now you careless wicked wretches,
weep and howl* James 5.1.
for your miseries that shall come upon you: For seeing you have no fear to
sin, you should fear and tremble at the consideration of that punishment
which you must suffer for your sins: for so our Savior says, Luke 12.5.
You should fear to have both body and soul cast into Hell fire; As if he
said, Though you fear not to sin, yet you may and should fear this
punishment for sin.

Thirdly, The Angel (perhaps) herein, How, or after what manner we ought to
fear God.
would intimate how we ought to fear; for there is too little fear, and this
proceeds, Ex carentia fidei, through want of faith; and there is too much
fear, and this springs, Ex superabundantia spei, through too much confidence
and excess of hope; and both these sorts of men Tum sperando tum desperando
misere pereunt, By hoping vainly, or fearing desperately, do miserably
perish: And therefore the Angel might well dissuade these Women from both
these kinds of fear, and say; Fear you not: Too little you do not, for I
see you affrighted; and too much, you may not, you need not, because you seek
Jesus that was crucified; but in a mean, and a middle sort, you may, and you
should fear: for, Blessed is the man that always fears; Because there be
three states of a Christian man.

1. Of grace. 2. Of laps. 3. Of recovery.
and,

Fear must be wanting in none of these. For, That God ought to be feared in
every state. 1. Of Grace. Romans 11.20. 2. Of Laps. Luke 23.40.


First, In the state of grace, we must fear to leese the goodness of God: for
so the Apostle says, Thou that stand by faith, be not high minded, but
fear.

Secondly, In the state of laps, we must fear to feel the justice of God:
for so the good thief said upon the Cross, Fear thou not, seeing thou art
in the state of condemnation?

Thirdly, In the state of recovery, God must be feared, 3. Of Recovery. Psalm.
130.4.
for his double favor; for so the Prophet says, With thee there is mercy,
that thou may be feared: That is, Mercy to forgive, that we may be afraid to
offend. And thus Saint Bernard says, In statu gratiae time, ne non digne
opereris ex ea; In the state of Gods favor fear, lest thou turn the graces
of God into wantonness; as the false Steward, that wasted his Masters goods,
and the slothful servant, that hid his Lords Talent: Luke 16.1.
In statu lapsus time, quia reliquit te custodia tua spiritus Deus, Math.
15.18. and 25.
and Angeli Dei; In the state of sin fear, because God has forsaken thee,
and the Angels of God have no charge of thee: In statu restitutionis time, quia
deterius est recidere quam incidere; In the state of restoration fear to
relapse, because recidiuation is far more dangerous then the first
transgression.

And so you see the meaning of this Angels consolatorie words unto the women,
James 2.19.
Fear you not; That is, not me, not men, not devils: for they fear
themselves, and tremble, and they cannot hurt you, because you seek Jesus that
was crucified, and you walk in the light, therefore you cannot stumble; for he
that walks in the light, John 11.9.
stumbleth not, says our Savior: but you may, and should fear God, with a
filial fear; that is, To stand in awe to offend his blessed Majesty, for
this expels all sin and wickedness from us, and continues the love and
favor of God unto us. And so much for the Angels comforting of these weak and
comfortless Women.

Every benefit requires a duty.
Secondly, This Angel does not only comfort and show benignity unto these
Women; but he does also instruct them, and require a duty from them, Quia
beneficium exigit officium. Because every favor showed, requires a
willingness to have our service performed; and as Aristotle says, (...);
Aristot. aethic. l. 5. 5.
It behooves the party gratified, to be proportionably serviceable to him that
did him kindness, so that every good turn in nature is obligatory, and
whatsoever benefiteth, ipso facto binds: And therefore this Angel sets
down unto these Women, two especial lessons.

The first of Theorie, which they must know. The second of practice, which they
must do.
CHAP. III. How the Angel informs the Women of the Resurrection of Christ
many ways, and how the vbiquity of Christ his Body is here confuted by this
Angel.
FOR the first, In the lesson of Theorie, The Angel shows the resurrection
of Christ, three manner of ways.
this Angel shows unto these Women the Resurrection of Christ, and that as
you may see three especial ways.

1. By way of Negation, He is not here. 2. By way of Confirmation, For he is
risen. 3. By way of Illustration, For he is risen, as he said, and as you may
see; Come see the place where the Lord lay.
First, The Angel says, Christ is not here; that is, That this assertion of
the Angel quite overthrows that doctrine of the vbiquity of Christ's Body.
in respect of his corporal presence: for otherwise as he is God, he was
there, and in all other places of the World; but as he is a man, consisting of
a true natural body, defined and measured with quantity, and bounded with the
limits of his trinary Dimensions, breadth, length, and thickenesse, and all
other properties of a true body, he was gone, and was not there: And therefore
this only place of Scripture, if there were none other, is sufficient to
disprove all the vbiquitaries in the World; for if his body was in every place,
how could the Angel say, that he was not in that place?

It is true, that Christ may be said to be every where, and that the Virgins
Son may be said to have created the World, Bonauent. l. 3. sent. did. 22. q.
2.
but how? Non per proprietatem naturarum, sed per communicationem proprietatum,
Not by the propriety of Natures, but by the communication of properties, and
that not as transfused, the properties of the one Nature into the other, but as
predicated of whole Christ in respect of the personal union of the one Nature
with the other: For though the Apostle says, Coloss. 2.9.
That in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily; yet we must note a
difference between Diuinitatem communicari humanitati, To communicate the
Deity, and all the divine properties unto the humanity, Bellar. de incar.
Christi. l. 3. c. 16.
Et diuinitatem inhabitare in humanitate, And to have the Divinity, and all the
divine properties to dwell in the humanity, How Christ may be truly said to be
every where.
and so to dwell, not as he does in us, by his grace, but by a personal union
unto his Nature: And therefore as a House, by reason of a man's dwelling in it,
cannot be said to go or to speak, but the man dwelling in the House may be
said to do the same; so the body of Christ, by reason of the inhabitation of
the Deity, cannot be said to know all things, or to be euerywhere; but the
Godhead that dwells in that body, may be, and is every where: for though the
humanity of Christ subsisteth in the person of the Son of God, (and in that
respect may be said to be every where, In what sense the manhood of Christ may
be said to be every where.
because that having no subsistence of it own, it subsisteth in a person that
is every where,) yet in respect of its Essence, being a finite creature, it is
no ways capable of the divine properties: And therefore though Christ
personally may be said to be in all places, or the Body of Christ vertually,
respectu virtutis seruatricis, that is, in respect of his saving virtue, as the
Sun, which is essentially in Heaven, but vertually in all inferior bodies,
may be said to be every where; yet the Body of Christ locally, or the manhood
of Christ solely considered, must needs be in one place: Otherwise how could
his manhood be contained within the straights of the Virgins womb, if his
manhood was every where? How could his body be nailed to the Cross, wrapped in
clothes, laid in the Sepulcher, if that his body was so spacious as that no
limits could contain him? Or how could the Angel say, Bellar. de incar. l. 3.
c. 12.
He is not here, if he was every where? Surely this would euert all the
Articles of our Faith, that we do profess touching the humanity of our
Savior Christ, and make Christ indeed to be no Christ at all.

Secondly, The Angel confirms his assertion of Christ's not being in his
grave, by a sufficient reason: For he is risen; for if he had said, Luc. 24.6.
But he is risen, (as Saint Luke says it) it had been a further affirmation
of his Resurrection; but saying, For he is risen, it is likewise a confirmation
of his former assertion, He is not here: And the reason is natural, and in
nature it is unanswerable. He is risen, and gone to another place, therefore
he cannot be here, in this place; he is alive on Earth, and therefore not dead
here in the grave: And therefore, Why seek ye the living among the dead? why
seek you Christ where he is not?

A doctrine surely to be well observed, Not to look for Christ where he is
not, either in respect of 1. His spiritual 2. His corporal
presence.

First, For his spiritual presence, we know where he is, Gregor. moral. l. 18.
c. 15.
In sinu matris Ecclesiae, In the bosom of our Mother the Church: For where
two or three are gathered together in my name, Matthew. 18.20.
there am I in the midst of them; And therefore, If thus we would find
Christ, Luke 2.44.
let us not with Joseph and Mary seek him among our Kinsmen, and Acquaintance,
and worldly Friends; Nam quomodo, That Christ is no where to be found but in
the Church.
O bone Jesus, inter cognatos meos te inueniam, qui inter tuos minime es
inuentus? For how is it possible, O sweet Jesus, says Saint Bernard, that I
should find thee among my Kindred, when thy Mother could not find thee among
thine own Kinsmen? (and I would to God, all the Bernards of our time would
think on this,) but let us with the Church in the Canticles, Lyra ad loc.
cant. 1.8.
follow the foote-steppes of the Flocks unto the Tents of the Shepherds; that
is, Vestigia fidelium ad seeds doctorum, The foote-steps of the faithful to
the seats of the Doctors and Teachers of Jesus Christ: There he was found by
his Mother, and there he is still to be found of his Children. And,

Secondly, For his corporal presence, we know where he is, That Christ is no
where corporally but in heaven. Act. 3.21.
sitting at the right hand of God in Heaven, not in Earth; for, the Heavens
must contain him until the restitution of all things: Indeed Mary Magdalen,
and the rest of these Women here, thought him to be in his grave; but as yet he
had not ascended into Heaven, and they knew not what was become of him: And
therefore their ignorance may be excused, for seeking Christ where he was not;
but we know where he is, and therefore our negligence and preposterousnesse
must needs be condemned, and our selves shall be found void of all excuse: Si
quaeramus in tumulo, Aug de tempore Sermon. 133.
quem adorare debemus in coelo, If we seek him not where he is, and not still
look for him where he is not.

Our Savior tells us, (and I cannot here omit it,) That there should arise
false Prophets, and they should say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or lo there
is Christ; but he advises us to believe it not: And surely we have many such
false and deceitful Prophets, even all the patrones of transubstantiation,
that teach us to seek for Christ where he is not: Look Doctor Sheldon in a
Sermon preached before the King, entitled, Christ sitting on his throne and
not in popish secrets, where this is largely handled. Aug. l. de unit. eccl.
cap. 3. Aquinas in cat. sup. Matthew c. 24.
for I do assure my self, (as Master Doctor Sheldon has most learnedly and
largely proved) that the prediction of Christ, concerning the practice of those
pseudochristians, whereof he speaks Matthew. 24.26. saying, that they should
say unto us; behold, he is in the secrets, is principally to be understood of
these men. For,

Although diverse of the ancient interpreters, as Origin, Saint Augustine,
Aquinas, and others, do expound those words of Christ mystically, of the
private conuenticles of heretics, that do challenge unto themselves only the
spiritual presence of Christ; and I confess this to be true, yet I say, that
this is not all the truth; nor yet the chiefest intention of our Savior
Christ: and it is no marvel that the Fathers attained not unto the full
meaning of our Saviors words; because, every prophecy is, as a riddle, or a
book sealed up, hard to be interpreted, as Ireneus says, contra here is. lib.
4. cap. 43. but I say, that Christ forewarneth us to take heed of such, as
would pretend to teach him, the true Christ to be personally present, in most
hidden and secret places, wherein I beseech you to observe these three
particulars.

That Christ warns us to beware of the^ that would seem to teach the true
Christ.
First, that I say, Christ forewarneth us to take heed of such as pretend to
teach the true Christ; for he says, that these false prophets shall prevail
so far in their persuasions, as that the very elect shall be in danger to be
seduced by their subtilties; and therefore this does plainly prove to me, that
they shall not deny the true Christ, nor pretend to preach any other Christ,
(for if they did so, the elect might be said to be more in danger of
persecution then seduction) but that they should with lying arguments, out of
Christ's own words, and in Christ his own name (as they will profess in the
latter day) teach and seek to prove him, the true Christ, to be in secrets;
that is, in those places, That Christ warns us to beware of the^ that teach
his bodily presence any where, but in heaven.
where he is not.

Secondly, that I say, Christ forewarneth us to beware of such as teach him,
the true Christ, to be personally and corporally present in those secret places
wherein they avouch him to be; for Christ bidding us, not to believe, that he
is in such secrets, sets down these two reasons to show why we should not
believe it.

First, That Christ uses two special reasons to prove that he will never come
bodily to any secrets, till the day of judgment.
because that as the lightening comes from the East and shines unto the
West, so shall the coming of the son of man be: which is all one as if he
had said; when they shall tell you that I am personally present in any place,
believe it not, because I shall never come personally, (spiritually I do every
day) until I come as a lightening, i. e. suddenly, gloriously, manifestly,
which shall be his coming to judgment.

Secondly, because that wheresoever the body is, thither will the Eagles be
gathered together; for though Origin senseth the body, Origin. tract. 30 in
Matthew.
to be the Church; the Eagles to be the Doctors; and their gathering together,
to be their harmonious and ioynt-consent in truth; and though Saint Jerome,
Theophylact and others, Hieron. in Matthew. 4. and Theophylact. in Matthew. 24.
do by the body conceive Christ crucified, by the Eagles all the Saints, and by
their gathering together, the applying of the merits of his passion, unto our
souls: yet Saint Chryostome, Stella, Ferus, and Maldonate, and many more, even
of our Jesuits do interpret these words, of Christ his coming to judgment;
and say that the body signifies the personal presence of Christ, the Eagles
the Saints, and their gathering together the meeting of him in judgment: and
therefore by this reason, Christ does plainly intimate, that they should not
look, nor believe any personal presence of him in any secret places; because
he is that body, or that carkeise, as both Theophilact and Beza use the word,
unto whom all the Saints shall be visibly gathered together; and he at no time
come bodily unto them, until they likewise come, and be gathered unto him.

And in both these reasons (as you see) he speaks of a personal presence of
himself, publicly showed, and in this last names his body or carkeise; and
therefore in his predictions, he forewarneth us to believe not them, which
teach any personal or bodily presence of him in any secrets; for otherwise it
had been to no purpose to bring these reasons of his not coming bodily,
until he should visibly come to judgment, to dissuade us from believing any
his spiritual coming: for his not coming personally till the day of
judgment, does no way prove, but he may as he does come spiritually every day
to be present with his Saints in many secrets; but his not coming personally
till then is a sufficient reason, to dissuade us from believing any personal
coming of him in secrets. And,

That Christ wills us to beware of them that teach him to be bodily present
in many places at once.
Thirdly, that I say, Christ forewarneth us to take heed of such as teach him,
the true Christ, to be thus personally present, in many secret, unknown
places, all at once; for the very word, which our Savior uses, to express
the subtilties of these false prophets, does prove as much: for,

First he shows us, that they shall say, he is (...): in secrets: which is a
word that signifies, a most secret, unknown place; a little cupboord where
they use to set their bread; and so the word, used to express the same in the
vulgar Latin, in penetralibus, does signify the most inward, and most hidden
place of any place.

Secondly, he shows us, that those false prophets should tell us, that the
true Christ is not only (...): in some one secret place, but in penetralibus,
in secrets, i. e. in many places, and in diverse secrets all at once.

That the defenders of Transubstantiation teach all these points which Christ
bad us herein to beware of.
And I say, that I could never see, how this prediction can be more properly
applied, to any heretics, old or new, then to the teachers and defenders of
Transubstantiation: for,

First, they persuade us to believe no other Christ, but only the true Christ
to be there, under the forms of bread and wine.

Secondly, they persuade us, that he is personally and bodily there, flesh,
blood, bones, and all:

Thirdly, they teach, that he is there in so secret, hidden, and invisible
manner, as that it can no ways, by any humane sense be conceived, but only by
a divine faith to be believed. And I am sure no false prophets in the world
could, or ever can teach a more mystical and secret presence of Christ
personally and bodily, then this manner is* and

Fourthly, they teach, that he is thus wholly and hiddenly in many thousand
places all at once, even wheresoever any bread in the Mass is consecrated,
there is Christ personally in all such secrets; according to their ancient
distich: Constat in altari, carnem de pane creari;
Hic panis Deus est, qui negat hoc, reus est:
The bread on the altar, as we say, is turned by the Priest his breath, To be
Christ's flesh; who ever says nay, is guilty of his death.

And therefore seeing the prediction of Christ concerning the practice of the
false apostles, is so plainly seen to be fully accomplished in these deceived
and deceitful teachers; I advise all men to follow our Saviors council,
believe them not, believe them not; for, though we do acknowledge, a true,
real, sacramental presence of Christ, effectually and really working, How the
body of Christ may be said to be truly and really in the Sacrament.
by a true and lively faith in all the worthy receivers of that blessed bread;
because, as the Angels are said truly and really to be, not only where they
diffinitiuely are, but also where they do effectually work; and as the Sun
is said truly and really to be, not only where he is locally fixed in heaven,
but also where it does virtually shine, and work here on earth; so the body
of Christ may be said to be truly and really, not only in the heavens, where
it is locally present, but also here in the sacred mysteries, where he
effectually works in all the worthy receivers of the same; yet for any other
real bodily presence of Christ, in the bread and wine, we utterly deny he is
not here; for the same reason that the Angel uses to prove, he was not in
his grave; because he was risen, and gone to another place; so we say, he is
not here; because we know he is in heaven, where he sits on the right hand
of God, and from thence he will not come personally into any hidden and secret
place, until he comes apparently, like the lightening that comes from the
East, and suddenly shines unto the West, as himself does testify. And so
much for the confirmation of this Angels assertion, that Christ was not there,
in the grave; because he was risen, and gone to another place; and so likewise
of my application and inference thereupon, that we are not to believe Christ to
be in the secret places of bread and wine; because he is ascended to another
place, where he sits on the right hand of God: He that has ears to hear,
let him hear; for here I do profess, What the Author thinks of
transubstantiation.
before almighty God, and before his son Jesus Christ, that in all my poor
reading (which I desired might be so much as my time and ability would give
me leave) I did never find a point, more contrary to the truth, more
derogatory to the honor of God, more destroying the nature of Christ, and more
dangerous unto men in all the writings of our adversaries then is this
incredible and impossible point of Transubstantiation: lo, I have told you
what I believe.

And here likewise we must further note, that (as I showed unto you before)
Saint Luke says, He is not here, but he is risen; to teach us* that these
words are so excellently couched by the Evangelist, as they might serve, both
for a confirmation of his former speech, he is not here; and also for an
assertion and declaration of the chiefest matter that the Angel intended to
instruct these women in: that is, the resurrection of Christ: for he is risen.

CHAP. IIII. That the Messiah was to rise again, and why: Certain objections
answered: and why he was to rise again the third day.
THirdly, the Angel does not only affirm, but he does also illustrate and
confirm this assertion of Christ his resurrection, by two infallible arguments.

First, a priori, from those typical instructions, and Prophetical
predictions, which foreshewed that the Messiah must rise again.

Secondly, a posteriori, from those clear demonstrations that do prove this
Christ to have risen again.

For the first he says; that, Christ was risen as he said i. e. formerly by
his Prophets, and lately by himself; for the resurrection of Christ was not
only prefigured by Adams sleep, by Isaacs laying upon the Altar, by Joseph's
imprisonment, by Sampsons breaking of the gates of Gaza, and such like, but in
a more plain and special manner, it was prophesied and foretold by Moses,
David and others of the Prophets, which spoke of the resurrection of Christ,
and so likewise by our Savior Christ himself. Three special reasons showing,
why Christ was to rise again. First, to manifest Satan's conquest. Secondly, to
assure us of our deliverance.


And the reason why the Messiah was to rise again is specially threefold.

First, in respect of Satan, that his subjection might be manifested, for he
had said, that the Prince of this world was to be cast forth, this Prince was
conquered at his passion, but this conquest was manifested at his resurrection.

Secondly, in respect of us men, that we might be assured of our deliverance
from sin and Satan; and of our justification before God, by the (...) virtue
and power of his passion; for if Christ be not risen from the dead, our faith
is vain, our hope is vain, our religion is vain, and we of all men most
miserable: for in this only point, consists the greatest difference, betwixt
us and the Jews, and all other unbelieving Gentiles: Nam Christum esse mortuum
ratio humana concedit, for they will yield that Christ was dead, humane reason
might prove that unto us; Ambros. l. 24. c. 26. in Joh.
sed eum esse suscitatum ex mortuis omnem fidem rationis excedit, but that he
should rise again from the dead, they cannot think, they will not believe;
because this exceeds the reach of reason: and therefore Saint Ambrose says,
that although sibi cur resurgeret rationem non haberet, he had no reason to
rise in respect of himself, yet, there was great reason that he should rise
for the confirmation of our faith: and so Saint Paul says, Romans 4.25.
that he rose again for our justification; not that any part of the price of
our redemption was unpaid at his passion, but that the evidence of our
deliverance was not manifested until his resurrection: for as he died to
deliver us, so he rose again to show that he had delivered us.

Thirdly, in respect of himself, Thirdly, to show himself a most victorious
conqueror of all his enemies.
that he might show himself a victorious conqueror of all his enemies, and a
trampler of hell, sin, and Satan under his feet; as of those that could
detain him no longer in their hands: and that he might show himself to be the
Son of God, coequall and coeternall unto his Father; for as he was to declare
himself, truly to be the son of man, by yielding unto death; so he was to
declare himself mightily to be the Son of God, by the resurrection from the
dead; Esaias 53.
and as he should be led (by Esayas prophecy) as a sheep to the slaughter,
when he was to be crucified; so he should come from the spoil, (by Jacobs
prophecy) as a Lions whelpe, Genesis 49.9.
when he was to rise from the dead: and therefore Saint Bernard says, that he,
Qui agnus extiterat in passione, factus est Leo in resurrectione, which stood
as a lamb at his passion, to take away the sin of the world, became a Lion at
his resurrection, to spoil all principalities and powers, and to make an open
show of them. Collos. 2.15.


But here it may be some will say, does resurrection from the dead declare a
man to have conquered death, hell and Satan, and prove him to be the eternal
and omnipotent Son of God? 1 King. 17.22. Mark 5.41. Luke 7.14. John 11.
why then the widows son of Sarepta, the son of the Shunamite, the
daughter of Iairus, the widows son of Naime, Lazarus, and all that did rise
with Christ, and appeared to their friends in Jerusalem, may be said to be the
conquerors of death and the eternal sons of God: but this is most absurd,
and therefore resurrection from the dead is no sufficient argument to prove the
conquest of our enemies, and the divine omnipotency of our Savior Christ.

Sol.
I answer, Quod hi resurrexerunt mortui, iterum morituri, that these men rose
when they were dead, to die again, after they were raised; but Christ being
raised from the dead, dies no more (says the Apostle) death has no more
dominion over him.

Romans 6.8.
Secondly, I say, that all those were raised virtute aliorum, by the virtue and
power of others, as the widows son of Sarepta was raised by Elias, That all
which were raised from death but Christ, were raised by others and died again.
the Shunamites son by Elizaeus, and they did it potestate precaria non
propria, by a power obtained by prayer, not proper in themselves; a power non
innata, sed data desuper, not their own naturally, but supernaturally given
them from above; and therefore though in their life time, they raised others,
yet being dead, they could not raise themselves; but our Savior Christ did not
only raise others in his life time, but also being dead, laid in his grave,
pressed with stones, sealed by the Priests, watched by the Soldiers, That
Christ raised himself from the dead
and sought to be detained by all the power of darkness; yet he, virtute
propria vt victor prodijt de sepultura, as a most invincible conqueror, by his
own proper power, raised himself to life; and by the strength of his own
arm, he caused all things, Bernard. de resur. Christ.
to make way unto himself. And this the Prophet Esaias, in the person of Christ
clearly expresses; saying, Esaias 63.3.5.
I have trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me;
and I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none
to uphold: and therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me, and my fury
it vpheld me; for as no man could take away his life from him, he laid it down
himself, as a man lays down his garments; so though there was none to help
him; yet was it impossible, that any, or all his enemies should keep away his
life from him, he had equal power to take it up, as he had to lay it down
at his pleasure: and therefore St. Peter says, Act. 2.24. Ob. Act. 5.30. Act.
2.24. cap. 4.10. Ephesians. 1.20. Romans 8.11. Sol.
that he loosed the sorrows of death, because it was impossible that he should
be holden of it.

But against this it may be objected, that the God of our fathers is said to
have raised up Jesus from the dead; and so in many places the suscitation and
resurrection of Christ is ascribed unto the Father: and therefore Christ did
not raise himself.

I answer that this does not show, he raised not himself; but it shows that
the resurrection of the manhood of Christ is the indivisible work of the
blessed Trinity essentially, common to all the three persons; for as the Father
raised him, so he raised himself, for (whatsoever the Father does, I do,
says Christ;) and so the holy Ghost raised him: and therefore this rather
confirms the truth of his resurrection, by his own power and virtue, then
any ways seem to infring^ the same. Neither was it only prophesied that he
should rise again from the dead, but it was also more particularly showed,
Hosea 6.2.
that he should rise again the third day: for the Prophet Osee speaking of our
Savior Christ, says; after two days he will revive us, and in the third day
he will raise us up, and we shall live in his presence; and Christ himself
more plainly says, Matthew. 12.40.
that as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so should
the son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.

And the reason why he was so directly to rise again the third day, may be
said to be, to fulfill all predictions, That God foreshewed Christ should rise
again the third day.
that were fore-spoken concerning him, that so the Scriptures might be
fulfilled, as our Savior himself does testify: and so the Angel said, that
he was risen, as he said: and he said that he should rise again the third day.
And this he said, 1. Formerly in the old Testament. 2. Lately in the new
Testament.


First, by his Prophet Osee he said in plain terms, that in the third day he
would raise us up, i. e. his Son united to us, or else our flesh assumed by his
Son: but because as many of us do now hear the Sermon and hate the Preacher,
praise his words, and never practice the matter, so did the Jews then, hear
the prophesies but kill the Prophets, retained the words, but never believed
the true substance of the matter: therefore God did not only by these dead
letters, but also by most lively figures, expressly show, that the Messiah,
which should be slain, should in the third day be raised up: for,

Typical testimonies showing that Christ should rise the third day. Genesis 22 4.
First, Isaac going with his Father to be sacrificed, as a true type of that
eternal Priest which was sacrificed for all men, until the third day was no
better then a dead man; but at the third day he was revived, restored, and as
it were raised again from the dead.

Secondly, Joseph being sold to Egypt, and sent by God to be a ruler next under
Pharaoh, Genesis 41.1.
(as Christ is under God his Father) that he might be a type of this eternal
King, until the third year, was no better then a dead man, but in the third
year, he was delivered and made governor over all the land of Egypt.

Jonas 2.2.10.
Thirdly, Jonas being sent into the land of Niniue, that he might be a type of
that great Prophet which the Lord our God had promised to raise unto us out of
our brethren: for three days was no better then a dead man, lying all that
while in the whales belly; but after three days he was delivered out of the
belly of Hell, and vomited out upon the dry land. All these foretold the
resurrection of Christ: and therefore Christ to fulfill all these, did rise
again the third day.

Christ himself showed, that he should rise again the third day.
Secondly, Neither did these preach louder unto the Jews, that the Messiah
which was to come, should rise again the third day, then Christ himself did
unto his Apostles that he would rise again the third day: for as soon as ever
Saint Peter, in the name of them all, had confessed that he was the Christ the
Son of the living God; he did presently profess unto him and the rest, how
he must be killed and raised again the third day: and therefore to perform
his own words, spoken by himself, as well as his Fathers words spoken by the
Prophets, he would be mindful of his promise, and rise again the third day;
and this the Angels do excellently note, when they said unto the Women, Luke
24.6.
Remember how he spoke unto you, while he was yet in Galilee, saying, The Son
of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and
the third day rise again.

An exceeding comfort unto us all, that Christ will ever perform his word,
fulfill his promise, and observe his time to a minute; for he is not as man
that he should lie: and therefore we should ever give credence unto his words,
for he will perform them all in their appointed times.

But here it may be demanded, Ob.
why God appointed and decreed this third day to be the definitive and set time
of his resurrection, rather then the second, fourth or fifth, or any other day
before or after?

To this I answer, that God is liberrimus agens, Sol. That we are not
curiously to search the reason of Gods free actions.
a free worker of his own affairs, and it is not for us to know the times and
the seasons which the Father has kept in his own power; but as he does
whatsoever pleases him, so he does them whenever it pleases him.

Secondly, I say that we find very excellent reasons (that it pleased God to
reueile unto us) why Christ raised himself the third day: that is, 1. In
respect of his enemies. Christ raised himself the third day in three respects.
2. In respect of his Disciples. 3. In respect of all believers.


First, His enemies, First, of his enemies.
both in respect of the praedictions of the Prophets, and the speeches of
Christ himself knew, that the Messiah should rise again the third day: and
therefore they hired soldiers, and appointed a guard to watch, Turtul. aduers.
Iudaeos. c. 13.
and to keep the sepulcher, that upon that day this Jesus should not rise;
lest if he did, he might be then thought to be the Messiah indeed: and
therefore upon that day he did rise, that his enemies might be convicted by the
testimony of their own watchmen, and be brought therefore, either to confess
their faults, or to remain without excuse; if they knowing the truth, would
notwithstanding seek (as they did) to conceal and suppress the truth.

Secondly, Secondly, of his disciples.
His friends and disciples upon the foresaid apprehensions, did expect his
resurrection upon this third day; for so the two disciples traveling toward
Emaus after they had said many things concerning him, Chrysostom. hom. 9. in
Matthew.
and that they trusted it had been he which should have redeemed Israel, they
add this, as a most special observation, besides all the rest, Luke 24.21.
that to day is the third day since these things were done: and therefore to
confirm their weak faith, and to comfort their disconsolate souls, he did
rise again the third day.

Thirdly, of all Christians.
Thirdly, We were all to reap and to receive the fruits and benefits of his
resurrection: and therefore chiefly (as he rose) so he rose the third day in
respect of us all, i. e. to confirm our faith, and that especially in these
four respects.

The Resurrection of Christ the third day confirms our faith in four respects
1. Touching the quality of his person. 2. Touching the certainty of his
resurrection. 3. Touching the manner of our restoration. 4. Touching the
manifestation of our state and condition.
First, Our Savior Christ consisted both of a Divine and a Humane nature:
Humane, that he might die; and Divine, that he might rise again: and to show
his death, it was requisite that he should rise no sooner then the third day;
because in less time then that, a man cannot well be said to be dead, but
may be suspected to be in a sound or in a fit of an apoplexy, How the third
day was the fittest time for Christ to rise in respect of the person of Christ.
or some other fained fit: and in respect of the Divine nature, it was
impossible that he should be held of death any longer then three days; for it
is the opinion of most, grounded upon experience, that in all dead carcasses,
and a wounded body especially, putrefaction and corruption begins the third
day; so Martha says of Lazarus, he has been dead four days, and he
stinketh: then no doubt but he began to stink the third day; but the humane
nature of our Savior Christ, in respect of its hypostaticall union with the
Deity, even then, when it lay in the grave, could not see, much less feel
corruption; Psalm. 16.11. Act. 2.24.
as the Prophet David shows: therefore it was impossible (says Saint Peter)
that he should be holden of the pains of death, i. e. be stayed so long by
death, until putrefaction or other like penalties and consequences of death
had seized upon him; and therefore as in respect of his humane nature, it was
not convenient he should rise any sooner: so in respect of his Divine nature it
was impossible he should be stayed any longer. Christ stayed while the third
day, to show the verity of his death, and no longer, to show the certainty of
his resurrection.


Secondly, Our Savior was to show both the verity of his death, and the
certainty of his resurrection: but if he had risen sooner then three days,
the verity of his death might be called into question; and if he had promised
after a long time to have raised himself again, (as Mahomet said, that after
800. years he would revive and reuisite his Sarazens again) then might the
falsehood thereof lurk in the length of time; and indeed if he had staid in his
grave any whit longer then he did, it might be easily objected and with some
probability, by his adversaries, that there was no certainty of his
resurrection, whether it was he that was crucified had raised himself, or some
other that appeared in his name; or whether he had raised the same body that
was buried, or had assumed some other body, like unto the same: because the
countenance of a dead body is soon changed, and our memory and knowledge of
such is soon stupefied, as we see these three days time, made most of them,
that they knew him not, prima facie, upon the first sight: therefore Christ to
show the verity of his death, stayed while the third day; and he would stay no
longer, to show the certainty of his resurrection.

Thirdly, Christ rose the third day might parallel our creation.
Christ in our redemption was to parallel our creation; and in many things this
second Adam was to resemble the first Adam; for Saint Paul speaking of Gods
oeconomie and dispensation of his grace unto us, shows, how Almighty God
purposing to redeem mankind, did so sweetly dispose of the manner of our
redemption, that as by man came death, so by man came the resurrection from the
dead: and so a due proportion and resemblance should be in many things betwixt
the first and second Adam.

But we find that the first Adam was formed out of the earth, as from a sole
mother without any Father, by the Word of God, and was both created and fallen
in the sixth day, the day before the Sabbath: therefore the word God, Amb. l. 5
ep. 19.
in the sixth age of the world, was made the second Adam, of a sole mother,
without a father; and in the sixth day of the week, the same day wherein Adam
was created, and transgressed, and about the same hour that the first Adam
sinned by eating the fruit of the forbidden tree, was this second Adam
crucified upon a tree, and in the same place (as some do think) wherein the
first Adam was buried: and as the Father after his creation, rested upon the
Sabbath; so Christ after our purchase and redemption, rested in his grave all
the Sabbath; and then as his Father upon the first day of the week, had
begun the world; so Christ upon the first day of the week did begin to
renew the world, and caused, as Lactantius says: Omnia cum domino dona redire
suo; All graces to be renewed, all men that believed in him to be revived, and
now to begin again to live a new life unto God with him.

And this was prefigured in the Law, where Moses shows, that the sheafe of
their first fruits was to be brought unto the Priest, Leuit. 23.11.
and the Priest was to wave the same before the Lord, on the morrow after the
Sabbath, which was the Sabbath of the Passover; Verse. 15.
to note unto us, that Christ which is the true first fruits that is offered
unto God for us all, was to be waued and raised up the immediate morrow after
the Passover; that as Adam was created the last day, and then dyed, and so
begat Ecclesiam morientium, a Congregation of sinners, all subject unto death;
so Christ the first day of the week was raised up, and lives for ever, to
beget Ecclesiam resurgentium, a Congregation of believers, that through him
might live to God and with God for ever.

Christ rose the third day to be a pattern of our condition.
Fourthly, Christ by his example, was to set down a pattern and a sampler of
our state and condition: and we are all to learn of him, and to do as he did,
if we desire to be happy where he is; but here we see Christ had his three
days and no more: and therefore we must have the same three days, and the
same like to his, if we would be Christians like to him.

Now these three days of Christ were thus distinguished: the first day was
called the day of preparation, and this was the day of his Passion: the second
day was called the Sabbath, and this was the day of his rest, and the third
day was called the first day of the week, and this was the day of his
resurrection; and so must our three days bear equipage, and prove to be like
his, if we would be his.

The first day is a day of Passion.
The first is a day of preparation, a day of Passion, a day of clouds and
darkness, wherein with strong cries, and tears, and prayers, we must commend
our selves unto the tuition and protection of God; for in this day we must
strive and struggle against sin and Satan; we must suffer all their bitter
darts against us, and we must fight till we die against them: and though this
be a day of sorrow, yet we have some comfort in this day; for as this his
first day, was the shortest of all his three days; so is our life but a day;
give us this day our daily bread, and this day is but a span long, the shortest
time that may be, like unto a dream, or a tale that is told: and therefore we
should be the more ready, and willing to bear our cross; Our suffering is but
short.
because the time of our suffering is but very short.

The second is a day of rest in our graves, The second day is a day of rest.
The third day is a day of resurrection.
where our flesh shall rest in hope, to be raised up at the last day. And,

The third is a day of resurrection unto glory, the first day of the week, and
the first beginning of a neuer-ending world.

But as Christ could not have risen in glory, had he not rested in hope,
neither could he have rested in hope, had he not suffered and dyed in faith; so
cannot we attain unto a joyful resurrection upon our third day, unless we
rest in hope in our second day; neither can we rest in hope in our graves the
second day, unless we do valiantly fight and suffer unto death on the first
day; for this is the order that Christ took, and the Disciple is not above his
Master: and therefore if any bid us come down from the Cross let us stop
our ears, like the Cockatrice, and let us bide on still with Jesus, that so we
may rest and rise with Jesus: And so you see how, and why our Savior Christ
was to rise again the third day.

But here it may be some will say (as they qui disputare mallent quam credere,
Ob.
which had rather dispute about his resurrection, then believe in his
resurrection;) that he was not only to rise the third day, but also to remain
three days, How Christ remained three days in his grave.
and three nights in the heart of the earth: and yet we find that he was
buried by Joseph and Nicodemus about three hours before Sunne-set on Good
friday; and rose again about four or five a clock on Sunday morning, which
makes not in all above thirty six, or thirty eight hours, or not above forty
hours, if we cast it to the highest account: and therefore how could he be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth?

To this Leo answers, that Christ, Sol. Leo Ser. 1. de resur.
lest his long absence should too much perplexe the afflicted minds of his
Disciples, Denuntiatam tridui moram tum mira celeritate breuiauit, etc. Did so
exceedingly shorten the fore-spoken three days space, that while the last part
of the first day, and the first part of the last day is numbered with the second
day, the time is only shortened, but the number of the days is not diminished:
and so Saint Augustine says, that the last part of the first day, is taken for
the whole day, and so likewise the first part of the last day, is taken for the
whole day.

Ob.
But then, though this taking of part for the whole might be sufficient to
prove his being three days in the earth; yet this is defic^ent, to show how he
was three nights as well as three days in his grave; Matthew. 12 40.
for our Savior says, He must be three days and three nights in the heart
of the earth: whereas by this reckoning we find but two nights in all: and
therefore to say what I think,

Sol.
I answer, that twelve hours was the Jews perfect day, according to that
saying of Christ, John 11.9. How Christ remained three days and three nights
in his grave.
Are there not twelve hours in the day? and the very same twelve hours in the
opposite Region of the Heavens, is a perfect night, and we find that Christ
remained in his grave, three whole twelve hours, cast it how you will: and
therefore thus he may be truly said to be three days and three nights in the
heart of the earth: Or else,

I say secondly, that if we measure the time according to Gods measure of a
day in the beginning, i. e. from the beginning of the Evening, until the
Evening returned again; as the Evening and the Morning was the first day, i.
e. the Evening of the night, and the Morning of the day, was the first day:
then I say, that under these parts of the first and last day, must be (as there
in Moses it is) understood the nights also: Genesis 1.5.
for as Moses reckons the Evening and the Morning of the day, for the day and
night; so must we here understand these three days, for three days and three
nights; and so Christ remained three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth. And thus we see both by types and the predictions of the Prophets, and
by the assertion of Christ himself, that the Messiah and Savior of the world
should be slain, and must rise again the third day,

CHAP. V. Of the Jews reasons why they believe not Jesus the Son of Mary to
be the Messiah, and why they think he raised not himself from the grave.
SEcondly, For the confirmation of this point, The question betwixt us and the
Jews.
a posteriori, From the apparent proof of the fulfilling of the same truth in
the person of any one that was slain, and did rise again the third day, The
question is betwixt us and the Jews; whether Jesus the Son of Mary, whom
they crucified and buried, and whom we preach and believe in, be the true
Messiah or not, and whether he raised himself from his grave, yea, or no.

To both these the Jews answer no: Not the Messiah, not raised from the dead.

First, Not the Messiah, because he came not down from the Cross, when he
was fast nailed unto the same: for, If he be the King of Israel, (said the
chief of them, their high Priests and Elders of the people,) Let him now come
down frrom the Cross, Math. 27.42.
and we will believe in him.

Ah foolish Nation, a Nation void of understanding, and Children of your
Father the Devil, Namque haud tibi vultus humanus, nec vox hominum sonat: For
here you sing the same song, Math. 4.6.
and you harp upon the same string as he did; If thou be the Son of God,
cast thy self downward, says the Devil; and if he be the King of Israel,
let him come down from the Cross, say these Children of the Devil: Chrysostom.
hom. de cruce.
So you see the one would have him to descend from the Temple, the other from
the Cross, the one from serving God, the other from suffering for man; and
both to descend, whereas God made man to ascend.

Os homini sublime dedit caelumque tueri
inssit. --
And of all his Creatures, he made him only straight, God made man to ascend.
to look up toward Heaven, and bids men always to have Sursum corda, Their
hearts like their heads, lifted up, their thoughts in Heaven, and their
conuersations in Heaven: Phil. 3.20.
And therefore whenever we are enticed to descend from the height of Gods
service, or suffering upon our Cross, and to settle our affections here upon
the base things of this World, let us know, it is the voice of Satan, not of
God.

Math. 27.42.
I, but let him come down, and we will believe in him, says this people; and
let us enjoy the pleasures and the vanities of the Earth, and we will serve
him, says the generation of this World.

Luke 16.31.
But as our Savior says unto them, in another case, If you will not believe
Moses and the Prophets, neither will you believe though one should arise from
the dead; So Saint Bernard says in this case, If now you will not believe in
him that raised himself from the grave, you would never have believed in him,
if he had then descended from the Cross. Greg. Hom. 21. in Euang.
Quia plus erat de sepulchro surgere, quam de cruce descendere, and plus mortem
resurgendo destruere, That it was a greater matter to rise from the dead, then
to come down from the Cross.
quam vitam descendendo seruare; Because it was a greater matter to raise
himself from the grave, then to descend from the Cross; and a far more
excellent argument of invincible omnipotency, being dead, to destroy death, by
rising again from the dead, then being alive, to save his life by descending
from the Cross: And so I say to the base descending worldlings, if they will
not stay upon the Cross, to suffer with Christ here, they are not worthy to be
exalted to reign with Christ hereafter; and if they will not believe in him,
and serve him for the hope of the joys of Heaven, they are not worthy to be
received into the number of his servants; because such men love the World more
then God, and will not love God but for the Worlds sake: August. de ver. Dom.
Sermon.
Like unto the Woman, Quae non maritum amat, sed aurum mariti; Which loves her
Husbands wealth more then her Husband; or not her Husband, but for his wealths
sake.

Secondly, They say he raised not himself from the grave, but his Disciples
came by night and stole him away: and if this be true, he could not be the true
Messiah.

Whether the Disciples stole away Christ from his grave or not.
But what? his Disciples that forsook him, and forsware him while he was yet
alive, and could, if he had would, have rescued himself out of the hands of
all his enemies: Alas, poor men, durst they now, silly Fishermen, thrust
themselves among the pikes of armed Soldiers, to steal away a dead carcass,
that could neither help himself, nor them? No, no, they were readier to hide
themselves in graves, then to adventure to take him out of the grave: And
therefore Mary Magdalen, that knew his Disciples did not, nor durst not take
him away, thought rather, (when she found him not in his Tomb) that they
which left him no rest in his life, did also take him and toss him now out of
his grave.

-- Sic multum terris iactatus and alto. And so left him not, neither in life
nor death: Dementia insanabilis; So implacable was their rage against him.

But though she was in the right, that his Disciples did not meddle with him,
yet herein she was deceived; Ambros. in hunc locum lucae.
Putando Christum sublatum esse de monumento, When she thought that the
Soldiers had removed him, (says Saint Ambrose;) because this victorious Lion;
did Sampson-like, carry away the gates of Gaza, Judge. 16.3.
and burst open the doors of his Sepulcher, that his glorious Body might come
forth; yet the Woman's weakness may be excused, Quia cum pietate societus est;
Because her error proceeded of ignorance, and was accompanied with an upright
conscience: but who can extenuate, or who will not aggrauate that extreme
folly, and horrible impiety of this wretched and malicious people? How the High
Priests did what possibly they could to hinder the Resurrection of Christ.
For they not only refused to receive him for their Savior, and said; Nolumus
hunc regnare super nos, We will have none of this man, we will have none other
man but Caesar to be our King: But they did also persecute him, as a seducer,
and crucified him as a false usurper, and then buried him without honor; There
were no Widows to make lamentation, nor any of his friends that durst show it,
and being buried, they locked fast his Sepulcher; Molemque and montes insuper
altos imposuere, They pressed him down with a mighty stone, and they hired a
band of armed Soldiers to watch him, that he should neither rise himself, nor
his Disciples come and take him away: And therefore his Disciples that were so
lately amazed at his passion, were now so stupefied at this obsignation, this
sealing, and watching and warding of him, that they durst not once pass out of
doors to look after his Resurrection, until these three Women, (which
esteemed themselves more free from violence, and thereupon presumed first to
see the Sepulcher) had informed them, that this one had chaste a thousand, and
had put all that band of men to flight.

Or if their hearts had served them, to adventure so great a danger, and that
they had recollected more courage now after his death, then ever Peter the
boldest of them had, during his life, (which all men will say, is most
improbable, because a living Dog is better then a dead Lion; Eccles. 9.4.
and therefore Christ being alive, might animate the vilest coward-like
Thirsites, to be more valiant and aduenturous for his defense, then now being
dead he could do to the most heroicke Achilles;) yet is it any ways likely,
or could it possibly be, that his Disciples should come thither, break up the
Monument, tumble away that great stone, take up his body, bestrip him of his
winding sheet, lay all his linen clothes, wherewith he was wrapped, so
orderly by themselves, (a sign they had leisure enough, and were in no danger
at all, or else they were very fools, that they did not suddenly snatch him
away, and take some other time and place to bestrip him,) and then carry him
away, never after to be seen or found, without the espyall of some one or
other, among so many that attended there? Ideo mentita est iniquitas sibi: But
the Jews answer, that as the foolish Virgins, (whereof our Savior speaks)
so these foolish and sottish Soldiers, they all slumbered and slept; and then
while their Argos eyes were sleeping, his Disciples came, those poor
fresh water Soldiers, and their committed charge was stolen away.

The absurdities following the High Priests saying.
But then I reply, first, with Rhemigius out of Saint Augustine, If they all
slept, Quomodo furtum viderunt? How can they tell his Disciples, and not
others, took him away? Might not God take him as he did Enoch, or the Angels
bury him and hide him, as they did the body of Moses? or how can they tell
who took him away? for they slept; and therefore surely no credit to be given
unto them: If they had said; We slept, and therefore we cannot tell what became
of him, this might have some likelihood of truth: but to say, We slept, and his
Disciples stole him away; this must needs be apparently false.

Secondly, If they slept, why did the High Priests give them money, large money
(says the Text) for their negligence, and not rather punish them for their
slothfulness? must men be so largely rewarded for evil doing? especially in
so weighty a cause, as, not the loss of a City, or a Kingdom, but the loss
of salvation to the whole race of mankind; all depended upon this one point;
for if he rose again, he was the Savior of the World; if not, he was but an
impostor: Why then would they not watch? or if not, why not severely punished?
and no punishment too great for so great a negligence?

Thirdly, If they were awake, why did they hire them to say they were asleep?
This may be answered: They knew money delivered him into their hands, and
therefore they thought that money would conceal the truth from the people; for
as the Poet says; -- Quid non mortalia pectora cogit
auri sacra fames? --


What wickedness is not done for money? How the love of money makes many men
to do any thing.
These Soldiers had been Preachers to publish this truth unto the World, had
not their mouths been stopped with silver; for as this opens the mouths of
many, to brute forth and to testify many lies; so it shuts the mouths of as
many, to conceal and keep secret many truths; and therefore the high Priests
did give large money to these Soldiers, to conceal this truth, and to belie
themselves, to say that they were asleep.

Well then, if they were asleep, how can they tell, what became of him, and
why did the chief Priests give them such large sums of moneys for their
negligence? or if they were awake, why did they hire them so dearly to say
they were asleep? To all this they must answer now to us, as they did
heretofore in another case to Christ; We cannot tell: Math. 21.27.
But then O foolish Jews, if you cannot tell, why will you not believe that
your Messiah is already come, and that God has raised him from the dead?
Saint Paul tells us why, Romans 11.25.
Because partly obstinacy is come upon them, until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in. O Lord if it be thy will, do thou open their eyes, that
they may see the truth.

CHAP. VI. Of the testimony of the Angel, and the manifold apparitions of
Christ after his Resurrection, to prove the truth and certainety of his
Resurrection.
YOU see then, how the Jews are blinded, to destroy themselves; but on the
other side, we do know, and believe, and teach this Jesus the Son of Mary,
whom the Jews have crucified, to be the true Messiah and the Savior of the
World, not only because he lived without sin, and died without cause, (on
his own behalf;) but especially because that he being dead, and laid in his
grave, did declare himself mightily to be the Son of God, Romans 1.4.
by his Resurrection from the dead: And this Resurrection of him, we do most
faithfully believe, and as constantly teach, for these three especial reasons
and respects; and a threefold cord is not easily broken.

That we believe the Resurrection of Christ, f^r three special respects.
1. In respect of this Angelical assertion. 2. In respect of his personal
apparitions. 3. In respect of many other circumstantiall demonstrations
First, the Angel said unto the women, why seek ye the living among the
dead? he is not here but he is risen, Et si non credideritis oraculo credit
oculo, and if you will not believe us, believe your own eyes, Math. 28.1. Luke
24.4.
for you may see the place where he lay. And this was spoken unto two women,
as Saint Matthew shows, and by two Angels, as Saint Luke says; and therefore
if Dives thought that the words of one man coming from the dead would be
sufficient to make all his brethren to believe the torments of hell, First, The
Angels testify the Resurrection of Christ.
why should not the words of these heavenly Angels be alonely sufficient to
make us to believe this divine truth of the resurrection of the Son of God?
for the Angels though they be mutabiles natura, mutable in respect of their
nature, yet are they now, confirmati per gratiam ne a veritate voluntatem
auerterent, so confirmed by grace, that they shall never euert themselves from
the truth, Isidorus de summo bono.
says Isidorus.

Secondly, as the Angels had testified, that he was not there in the grave
among the dead, but was risen and alive among the living: so truth it self
confirms this truth unto us, by those manifold apparitions that he made after
his resurrection, That Christ appeared twelve several times after his
resurrection.
during the space of forty days, that before he ascended into heaven, he
walked here on earth. And these (if I be not far deceived in my reckoning) were
at least twelve times, according to the number of his twelve Apostles.

First, he appeared unto Mary Magdalen apart; Mark 16.9. First, to Mary
Magdalen and why.
where we must observe, that he appeared first unto a woman, that no woman
should thenceforth be any ways reproached by any man, for their first
transgression, and seduction of man; quia vt culpam vire transfudit, transfudit
etiam and gratiam, Ambros. l. 10. in Luc. 24. Beda in cap. vlt. Luc
veterisque lapsus aerumnam resurrectionis indicio compensauit, because that as
a woman was the first instrument of death, so she was the first messenger of
life, and brought the first tidings of the resurrection of Christ, which is the
surest argument of the salvation of man.

And he appeared to this woman, first, August meditat. cap. 35.
quia Dominum prae caeteris dilexit, ideo prae caeteris videre meruit, because
she loved him above all, therefore she obtained to see him before all: She
loved much, says our Savior, and she saw him first says the Evangelist: and
therefore no doubt, but he showed himself to her first, because she loved him
most: whereby we see that with God there is no respect of persons, no
difference of sects, but whosoever loves him, man or woman, young or old, that
person shall be respected of him; for I will love them that love me, says the
Lord, and therefore whosoever fears God and works righteousness, whosoever
loves him most, and seeks him first, he may be sure he shall be first found of
him. And secondly, he appeared to this woman, first, because this woman was
most memorious and mindful of him, and of all those mercies and benefits
wherewith Christ had enriched her soul, Hieron. ep de quest. hedibiae.
and therefore he was most mindful of her.

But who this Mary Magdalen was, it is easier questioned then answered; for
Theophylact, Stapulensis, and others, Ambros. l. 10. in Luc. 24. Albertus in
Luc. 7.
do avouch that there were three Mary Magdalens; Saint Ambrose says there
were two: Albertus, Aquinas, in John 12. and Roffensis, de tribus Magdalenis,
Whether there were more Mary Magdalens then one.
do constantly affirm there was but one: and she they say, was a Noble woman,
one of the bloud-royall of the Tribe of Judah, the daughter of one Syrus and
Eucharia, a sister unto Lazarus and Martha, which divided the inheritance of
their father betwixt them three; Lazarus had all the possessions that were in
Jerusalem; Martha had Bethany; and Mary had Magdalum Castrum, the Castle of
Magdala, from whence she was called Mary Magdalen.

For my part, I confess curiosity is to be avoided; yet the truth is to be
embraced, and Mary's face is not like Moses face, so veiled with mysteries, but
that we may without danger inquire who she is; and therefore to say what I
think, I am of St. Ambrose mind, that (at least) there were two (if there
were no more) Mary Magdalens: for Saint John says, that Mary Magdalen stood at
the Sepulcher weeping, Ioh. 20.1.11.18.
and that Jesus appeared unto her, and said touch me not: here is a Mary
Magdalen all alone: and Saint Matthew says, that Mary Magdalen and the other
Mary came unto the Sepulcher, and were instructed by the Angels that Christ was
risen, and therefore they departed and went away with joy; Matthew. 28.1.9.
and it is not said that Mary Magdalen stayed behind, but that both went (for
he names but two) and as they went to tell his Disciples, Jesus met them, and
they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him: and therefore no
doubt, but there must be two distinct Mary Magdalens, for she whereof Saint
John speaks, was alone, and staide by the Sepulcher weeping, and was denied
to touch Christ, because (as Saint Ambrose says) she doubted, Why Mary
Magdalen was not suffered to touch Christ.
and did not as yet fully believe the truth of his resurrection; but she
whereof Saint Matthew speaks, was accompanied with the other Mary, and
returned with the other Mary, and met him in the way, and held him by the feet,
and worshipped him, Christ suffering her to do this, because she believed him
to be risen from the dead.

Now which of these Mary Magdalens was the woman to whom Christ first appeared,
Mark 16.9.
Saint Mark plainly shows, that it was she out of whom he had cast seven
devils: a great sinner, and a great lover of our Savior Christ, the chiefest
sinner of all these women, and the first seeker of our blessed Savior; for she
came alone, while it was yet dark, before the day light, John 20.1.
by the light of grace; but the other Mary Magdalen came with Mary the mother
of James and Salome, at the rising of the Sun, Mark 16.2.
long after her. A great comfort and a ra^e pattern for all sinners; her
sins repented of, and relinquished, were no hinderance of her to see our
Savior first: but because her sins were great, we see her repentance was
very great, The great care and diligence of this Mary Magdalen.
her care was great, her love was great; for she wept and washed our Saviors
feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, a true token
of inward sorrow; she powered a boxe-full of precious ointment upon his head as
he sat at meat, an apparent argument of her outward works; she rose early,
she sought him carefully, and she wept bitterly, not with those indiscreet
women for Thammyse which was a brazen image with leaden eyes, that being molten
with heat, did seem to weep, Ezech. 8.14.
and so caused the women to sympathize in tears, and to weep (as is thought)
for Adonis: but she weeps for Adonai, for her Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
a rare example of great piety; and therefore though she had offended much,
yet because she sorrowed much, she loved much, she had much forgiven her, and
much love showed unto her; for he which is first and last, did show himself
first unto her: O that they which walk in her sins, would tread in the same
steps of her repentance.

Secondly, he appeared to all the women together, Secondly, to the three women
returning homeward.
as they returned homewards from the Sepulcher; to teach us, that never any
truly sought for Christ, but with these women, they should be sure to find him.

Thirdly, he appeared to Simon Peter alone, Thirdly, to Simon Peter alone.
Chrysostom. 1 Cor. 15.5.
the first among the men says Chrysostom: for when the women told the
Disciples, that Jesus was risen, Peter and John ran both unto the Sepulcher,
and though John came there first, yet Peter entered first; to note unto us, not
only that mystical truth, which diverse of the Fathers have observed, viz.
that the Synagogue of the Jews, like John that came first to the monument, but
would not enter, had the first means to come to Christ, and yet refused to
come unto him; for it commanded the precepts of the Law, and it heard the
Prophecies of the Gospel concerning the incarnation and the passion of the
Messiah, and yet quem long lateque prophetauit, praesentem vidit and recipere
renuit, whom they long expected and much desired, and ran fast to see him,
when they come unto him, or rather when he came to them, they quite rejected
him, and would not believe in him; and the Church of the Gentiles, like Saint
Peter that came last, yet entered first into the Sepulcher; though they had the
last and the least means to come to Christ, yet would they first believe in
Christ crucified, according as it was prophesied of them, as soon as they
shall hear of me they shall obey me; but also that historical truth, (which
Chrysostom observes) that as Saint Peter first entered into the grave, so he
should first see him that was laid and raised out of that grave, and that for
these three especial reasons.

Why of all the Apostles he appeared first to Saint Peter.
First, lest that if he had appeared first to others, Peter should think
Christ had rejected him, as he worthily deserved, because he had so unjustly
denied Christ, Ideo Petro apparuit primum, therefore he appeared first to
Peter, lest otherwise he should give offense to Peter, and seem still to be
mindful of his offense, Idem hom 38. in 1 Cor. 15.
says Theophylact, and Saint Chrysostom.

Secondly, because Saint Peter was a most faithful, and a most worthy
witness, such a one as would so willingly and so manfully as he did in all
places testify and lay down his life for the testimony of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, because Saint Peter was the first and the chiefest Apostle whom he
called first, and who confessed him first to be the Son of God: and therefore
he does appear first unto him, and bids the women tell his Disciples and
Peter, i. e. and Peter especially, that he was risen, and went before them into
Galilee.

But when or where, or after what manner he appeared thus first unto Peter,
because the Scripture does not express it, we can no ways determine it,
Theoph. in Mar. cap. 16.
as both Theophylact and Gregory do observe: and therefore it being a
question, plus subtilitatis quam vtilitatis habens, Fourthly, to the Disciples
traveling to Emaus. Luc. 24.13. Theoph. sup. Luc.
that has more subtle scrupulositie then any comfortable vtility, I will
peaceably pass it over.

Fourthly, he appeared to the two Disciples iourneying toward Emaus; the name
of the one was Cleophas, and many think the other to be Saint Luke himself,
who out of his modesty concealeth his own name, says Theophylact: It is
certain that they were none of the Apostles but some of the seventy two
Disciples (as Nicholaus de Gorham well observes;) for they came to Jerusalem,
and found the eleven Apostles gathered together: and therefore these two could
not be any of the twelve; because they found eleven together, and Judas was
hanged, and Matthias not elected: and the manner how he appeared unto them, is
largely and plainly set down by the Evangelist, and how he was known of them
in breaking the bread: whereupon Saint Gregory has left these two excellent
moral notes and observations.

First, that these two, To fly the world is the next way to find God.
fugentes ciuitatem sanguinolentam statim inueniunt Christum, flying this
bloody city, did presently find their Savior; to show unto us, that while we
live among the wicked, we shall live separate from God; but as Elias when he
left Iesabell was presently accompanied by the Angel, so these two, and all
those that forsake the world, or shun the wicked, shall presently find their
God.

Secondly, That we shall sooner know God, by doing his will, then by the
learning of his word.
That they which knew him not by the expounding of the Scriptures, do know him
by the breaking of the bread; to teach us, that we shall be more illuminated by
him, for the doing of his will, then for the hearing of his Word: It is true,
that the hearing of his Word, did inflame their hearts within them, and moved
them, no doubt, exceedingly to love him, and to persuade him earnestly to stay
with them; but their eyes were opened, and their understanding enlightened by
the breaking of the bread: for it is most certain, that the practicke
knowledge is the surest knowledge in the World; and to practice any thing, is
the chiefest way to attain unto the knowledge of that thing: And therefore
David says, He was wiser then his Teachers, Psalm. 119.
because he kept the Commandments of God. It may be his Teachers knew them as
well, if not better then he, else how could they be his Teachers? yet herein
he was wiser then they, because they perhaps knew them, and taught them, like
the Pharisees, and did them not, but he learnt them, and kept them; The keeping
of Gods Law made David wiser then his teachers.
and therefore he was wiser then his Teachers, because he kept the
Commandments. And as it is the chiefest way for us to get the knowledge of any
thing, by the practicing of the same; so are they the only men which God
chiefly does illuminate, which do give themselves to the practicing and
performing of hi^ will: Psalm. 50.23.
For, To him that orders his conversation right, will I show the salvation of
God; says the Prophet. So here Christ, though he would not let these Disciples
know him, while they talked with him, yet Dignatus est cognosci dum pascitur;
He vouchsafed to open their eyes, and to make himself known unto them, when
they fed him. And therefore, if we would know God, and be known of God, let
us not only hear his Word, and talk of his will, but let us also perform
his will, and keep his Commandments; let us feed him in his members, and he
will feed our Souls with that food which perishes not.

Fifthly, To the eleven Apostles together.
Fifthly, He appeared unto the eleven Apostles, and all the rest of the Disciples
that were with them, when the doors were shut, and standing in the midst of
them, he said, Peace be unto you: to show, that he was The Prince of Peace,
which had now purchased their peace indeed; and he demanded, why thoughts
should arise in their hearts, to show unto us, that he was a God, because he
knew the very secrets of their hearts; and then to show that it was himself,
and none other, he shows them his hands and his feet; and he did feed with
them, and fed them also with the Word of God, opening to them the Scriptures
concerning him, and opening their understanding, that they might understand the
Scriptures.

Sixthly, To the same company, when Thomas was with them. Joh. 20.24.26.
Sixthly, Because Thomas was not with them, when he appeared unto them before,
therefore he appeared to the same company again within eight days after when
Thomas was with them, (says Saint John;) and then he suffered his body to be
handled, and he showed unto them the wounds of his body, which he kept (says
Saint Augustine) Non necessitate, sed potestate; Not for any weakness in
himself, that he could not heal them, and whole up those wounds that he
received, but through his power he reserved them.

Why Christ reserved still his wounds.
First, to show the greatness of his love, that would suffer so much of
wretched, and for wretched men.

Secondly, to show the greatness of man's malice, that would, Diomedes-like, so
cruelly deal with so merciful a God.

Thirdly, to strengthen the weak faith of his wavering servants, Vt vulneribus
corporis sanaret vulnera incredulitatis; That they seeing the wounds of his
body, might thereby have the wounds of their unbelieving souls healed.

Fourthly, to show the certainty of his Resurrection, when they saw he had the
same Body, which was crucified and pierced by his enemies.

But against this it may be objected, Ob.
that Thomas was with the rest of his Apostles the very first time that he
appeared unto them; for so S. Luke says, Whether Thomas was with the eleven,
the first time Christ appeared to them.
that the two Disciples returning to Jerusalem, found the eleven gathered
together, and as they spoke, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them:
Therefore it seems strange, that Saint John speaking of this very selfsame
apparition, which was the first immediate night after his Resurrection, (as
both Saint Luke and Saint John do accord) should notwithstanding say, that
Thomas was not with them; for Saint Luke says, eleven were there, and as yet
there were but eleven in all; because as I told you, Judas was hanged, and
Matthias was not elected.

I answer, Sol.
that Saint Luke puts down eleven in a certain number, for all of them
that were there; because there were eleven of them in all: And so he puts
all that were there, for all that were of them; As if in a Court where there be
four appointed Judges, I should say, I brought my cause before the four
Judges, though but three of them should sit when my cause was heard: Or else I
say, that Saint Luke and Saint John may very well thus be reconciled; that when
the two Disciples came, Thomas might be with them, and all the eleven might be
together, and when Jesus came, Thomas might be absent: for Saint Luke does not
say, that Jesus found the eleven together, but that the two Disciples found the
eleven together, and so they might be; and yet Saint John might say true, that
Thomas was not with them, when Jesus stood amongst them; because he might
depart after they came, before Jesus appeared unto them: for the Evangelist
does not say, how soon or how late Christ came, after the arrival of the two
Disciples, but that he came that night; Thomas was there when the two Disciples
came, but was gone before Christ came.
as they were talking of him; and it is very probable, it was a good while
after the coming of the two Disciples; for, before Jesus is said to stand
amongst them, it is said, that those two Disciples had told their fellows
what things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of
the Bread; all which declaration could not be delivered without some length of
time, in which time Thomas, and others perhaps too, might take his leave for
that night, and depart: And so I say, Thomas was there when the two Disciples
came, but was not there when our Savior came.

Seauenthly, To Men together. John 21.2.
Seauenthly, He appeared to Peter, and John and James, Nathaniel and Didymus,
and two other Disciples, when they were a fishing at the Sea of Tyberias: And
there he proved unto them the verity of his Deity by that miracle of providing
Fishes for them for to eat; and the truth of his humanity by eating meat with
them.

Ob.
But here it may be objected, that Saint John says, this was the third time
that he showed himself to his Disciples, C. 21. V. 14.
after his resurrection: Therefore how should it be the seventh time?

I answer briefly, that Saint John speaks of his public apparitions, to his
Apostles and Disciples, and not of any of his apparitions to the Women, nor of
any private apparition unto any particular persons; for so the words are, This
was the third time that he showed himself to his Disciples; i. e. Solemnly
and publicly, making himself known unto them, which he did not unto the two
Disciples going to Emaus: And so we find, that this was the third time that he
publicly appeared unto all, or the most part of his Apostles.

Eighthly, To S. James.
Eighthly, He appeared unto James, the brother of the Lord; i. e. the
Cosen-Germane of Christ, according to the Flesh; being the Son of Mary, that
was sister unto the Virgin Mary, (as Saint Hierome says, Hieron. in Catal.
) and not the Son of Joseph by another Wife, (as some would have it;) and he
was called James the just, in regard of his upright and innocent life: Saint
Paul particularizeth this apparition unto James, 1 Cor. 5.7.
as a most special appearance, saying that he was seen of James: but when
this apparition was, we find not expressed; yet Saint Hierome says, it was
within a very short time after his resurrection; because (as he says) this
James at the receiving of the Passover, vowed that he would neither eat nor
drink until he saw Christ risen from the dead: And therefore, when Christ
came unto his Disciples, Luke 24.41.
he called for meat, and did eat before them, and gave it likewise unto
James, that he might now eat, as Saint Hierome says.

Ninthly, Ninthly, to the eleven Disciples on Mount Tabor. Math. 28.10.
Tenthly, To more then 500 brethren at once. 1 Cor. 15.6. Eleuenthly, To all his
Disciples on Mount Oliuet. Math. 28.16. Twelfthly, To S. Paul going to Damascus.
He appeared to the eleven Disciples at one time upon Mount Thabor in Galilee;
and this Saint Matthew intimates, when he says, that Jesus bade the Women
tell his brethren that he was risen, and that they should go into Galilee,
and there they should see him.

Tenthly, He appeared to more then five hundred brethren at once.

Eleuenthly, He appeared to all his Apostles and Disciples upon Mount Oliuet by
Jerusalem, when in the presence of them all he ascended up into Heaven.

Twelftly, He appeared unto Saint Paul traveling to Damascus, as unto one
borne out of due time, as himself confesses.

Thus he did appear unto his Apostles and Disciples, and faithful Servants,
which were appointed before of God, to be witnesses of his resurrection; and
thus they have testified unto all men, those things which they have heard with
their ears, which they have seen with their eyes, and which their hands have
handled, of the Word of life: And if there were nothing else in the World, Two
special things should make all men believe the testimonies of the Apostles.
to move and persuade men, to give credit unto their testimony; yet me thinks
the plainness of their declaration, and the smalnesse of their expectation of
any manner of profit or reward in the World, for the testifying of these
things, should be sufficient to make all men believe them: For,

First, All the World may see, First, Their plainness.
they sought not with any tricks of wit, to set a fair die upon a bad cloth;
nor with any glozing speeches, fine sentences, subtle arguments, or any such
like sophistical ways, to procure credit unto themselves, and to draw men to
believe fabulous inventions; but their proceeding is plain, carrying nothing
with it, but a declaration of simple truth, nakedly reported, without any
manner of humane subtilty, to confirm it. And,

Secondly, All the World may see, Secondly, their desire, what they aimed at by
their testimony.
they looked for no gain in the World, but the gain of Souls, no credit by
their writing, no profit by their preaching, but only that men would believe
the truth, to save their own souls: If the man whom they had affirmed to be
dead, and to have risen again to life, had still continued with them, and had
been in expectation to be some great Monarch of the world; it might be said,
they avouched his rising from the dead, in hope to be raised by him to some
eminent place in the world; but you see they look for no such thing, neither
by their testimony to raise him to any humane honor, nor by him to be raised,
or to be any ways rewarded in this life themselves, unless it be to be
afflicted and persecuted unto death, for this testimony of Jesus Christ. This
was the best that they could expect: and therefore the testimony of these men
must needs be faithful and true, to prove more then abundantly sufficient,
that Jesus is the true Messiah, and that being dead, he raised himself to life
again the third day. And yet,

CHAP. VII. Of many other circumstances that do infallibly prove the
Resurrection of Christ, and so consequently this Jesus Christ to be the true
Messiah and Savior of the world.
The circumstantiall proofs of the Resurrection of Christ.
THirdly, Besides all this, there be many other circumstantiall proofs and
declarations of this same truth: God not desirous to make men believe so great
a matter, as is the eternal salvation of all the world, without more then
abundantly sufficient witness. And therefore,

First, the great earthquake.
First, At the very instance of his Resurrection, and descending of the Angels,
(as Caietan says) there was a very great earthquake, Caietan. in Math. 28.
the earth either dancing for joy that Christ was risen, or trembling for fear
that men would not believe this Resurrection of Christ.

Secondly, the sudden courage of the Apostles.
Secondly, The Apostles and Disciples hearts were presently changed; for whereas
a little before they durst not peep out of doors, because they did but
waueringly think that this was he, which should have redeemed Israel, they
do now courageously compass the whole world, and confidently teach and
avouch, there is no other name given under heaven, whereby men may be saved,
but the name of Jesus.

Thirdly, Many that were dead, rose from their graves, Thirdly, the apparitions
of the raised bodies.
and appeared unto many of their acquantance in Jerusalem, to testify unto
them, and to assure them of the Resurrection of Christ. Dives thought if one
was sent from the dead, his brethren would believe him; and behold here are
many sent, and yet the Jews, the brethren of Christ, will not believe them.

Fourthly, Pilate himself that condemned him to death, Fourthly, the testimony
of Pilate.
did testify of his Resurrection unto life, in a letter that he wrote unto
Tiberius Caesar: and therefore Tiberius desired the Senate, to admit Christ
into the number of their gods, for it was their custom (says Tertullian) Vt
nisi homini deus placeret, Tertull. l. cont. gentes c. 5.
deus non esset; That God should be no God, unless he were approved of men;
and because they refused to receive him, (God not suffering the Arc and Dagon
to stand together upon the same Altar, nor Christ and Beliall to be worshipped
together in the same Temple,) Tiberius was incensed against the Romans, (God
working all things together for the best for them that love him) that he gave
free leave and liberty unto all Christians, to believe and profess the Name of
Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, Josephus, the most learned among the latter Jews says, Fifthly, the
testimony of Josephus. Josephus antiq. l. 8 c. 9. Sixthly, the sufferings of the
Martyrs.
that cum Pilatus eum in crucem agendum decreuisset, etc. After Pilate had
crucified him, he appeared unto his followers the third day, according as the
Prophets had fore-shewed.

Sixthly, All Martyrs have most boldly confessed this truth, and have most
constantly suffered in defense of this truth: Tertullian does most excellently
show the difference betwixt the Martyrs and Malefactors, saying; Mali apparere
deuitant, deprehensi trepidant, accusati negant, condemnati maerent; Evil
doers are loath to be seen, being taken they tremble, being accused they deny
it, being condemned they deplore themselves: but with the Martyrs there is no
such matter; for they are neither ashamed of their profession, neither do they
grieve at their apprehension; but if they be noted for Christians, they rejoice
at it; if they be accused, they confess it, if adjudged to die, they deem it
better then life: and therefore (says he) Quid hoc mali est, cuius reus
gaudet, cuius accusatio votum est, and cuius paena felicitas? What evil is
this, when the guilty of the fact rejoices in his accusation, and is made
happy in his condemnation?

Zephan. 2.11. Seauenthly, the confession of Christ his enemies.
Seauenthly, The very enemies of Christ, yea, and his greatest adversaries did
confess and justify this truth of Christ; for as the Prophet said, that the
Messiah should famish all the gods of the earth; so Christ did spoil them all,
and stopped the mouths of all infernal spirits, that by their lying oracles,
they could speak no more, but against their wills to confess that he was the
Holy One of God, and that this Galilean had overcome them all, as Julian that
great Apostata, to his great cost at last, confessed, says Nicephorus.

Eighthly, the heavy punishments of Christ's persecutors.
Eighthly, The great plagues and punishments that were presently inflicted, and
have still to this very day continued upon all the persecuters and denyers of
Christ, do sufficiently prove the Resurrection of Christ, and that Christ to
be the true Messiah; for Pilate, being accused by the Jews, was enforced to
appeal from Vitellius the chief Governor of Syria, Joseph. antiq. l. 18. c.
11.
and to go to Rome, to defend himself before Caesar, who before Pilate came
there, was dead; and therefore he had none other remedy, but to wander as a
Pilgrim and a forlorn creature, till he ended his days in extreme
miseries: so Agrippa suffered intolerable calamities: Cap. 17.
so Herod the Tetrarch, was spoiled of his goods, deprived of his Kingdom, and
banished from his Country: So Herod that killed James, Cap. 18.
was miserably eaten up of loathsome worms, and to the Jews was measured the
same measure, as they had measured unto Christ before; for as they had sold him
for thirty pence, so thirty of them were sold for one penny; and five hundred of
them were nailed to Crosses in one day, in so much that nec locus sufficeret
crucibus, nec cruces corporibus: there was not place sufficient for the
Crosses, nor Crosses enough to nail them on: It were too too lamentable to
relate more of those doleful Tragedies, which Josephus, Eusebius, Euagrius,
and others, have written of them, and what they suffered at the final ruin
and destruction of Jerusalem, and what heavy bondage (far worse then that
Egyptian slavery) they have endured to this very day: In aureo tractatu Rabbi
Sam. de miserimo statu Iudaeorum.
Hence it is that Rabbi Samuel, about six hundred years agone, writ a
tractate in form of an Epistle, unto Rabbi Isaac, Master of the Synagogue of
the Jews, in Subiulmeta, a City of Morocco, wherein he does excellently
discuss the cause of their long captivity, their great blindness, and
extreme misery: and after that he had proved that this punishment was
inflicted upon them, for some great and grievous sin, he shows that sin
to be the same whereof the Prophet Amos speaks; For three transgressions of
Israel, and for four, Amos 2.6.
non transferam eo: I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they
sold the righteous for silver. And though he says that their Rabbis do
understand this righteous to be Joseph that was sold by his brethren unto
Egypt; What Rabbi Samuel says concerning Jesus Christ.
yet because the Prophet puts this for the fourth sin, and the greatest
sin of Israel; and because he cannot find any three sins of the sons of
Israel before the selling of Joseph: therefore he makes the selling of Joseph,
to be the first sin of Israel, the worshipping of the Calfe in Horeb to be
the second, the abusing and the killing of Gods Prophets to be the third, and
the fourth to be the selling of Jesus Christ: For the first, they served four
hundred years; for the second, they wandered forty years in the Wilderness,
until they that came out of Egypt were all consumed and brought to nothing,
excepting only Caleb and Iosuah; for the third, they were held Captives
seauenty years in Babylon; and for the fourth, the said Rabbi Samuel
confesses that they were held in most pitiful Captivity to this very day:
because he was most unjustly sold, and most shamefully delivered to death, as
he shows in the seventh Chapter of the said Tractate.

Much and many more circumstantiall proofs and demonstrations of his
Resurrection, to show him to be the true Messiah, Why the Author did so
prosecute the proofs of Christ's Resurrection.
might be produced; but I hope these will serve, I say not to make us to
believe this truth, (for to that end, I hope we need not bring any proof at
all, because we do fully and undoubtedly believe the same already) but to show
that our forefathers have not, or we do not believe these things without more
then abundant and unanswerable proofs thereof; and to convince that malicious
obstinacy and infidelity of all those, whether professed Jews, or seeming
Christians, which notwithstanding such an Army of arguments, and such a cloud
of witnesses, will still continue blinded and hardened in unbelief. It were
strange there should be any Athiests amongst us; yet I think it was not
without cause, that Dr. Fotherby writ his large and learned discourse against
Atheism; and questionless they that deny God, will never believe in Christ;
and therefore as that book shall be a witness against all Atheists in the
latter day, to condemn them; so shall this which I have written, be an accuser
of all those that will not believe in Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VIII. Of the place from whence our Savior rose, both in respect of his
body and soul.
NOw having seen that the Messiah when he should come, was to rise again the
third day, and that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is that true Messiah,
because he did rise again upon the third day, I must yet entreat you to
consider (that so you may have the full knowledge of this point) these two
especial things.

Arsatius in postilla ser. de resurrect. fol. 122.
1. The place from whence he rose. 2. The manner how he rose.
First, We must understand that as Christ in respect of his humane nature,
consisted both of body and soul; so his Resurrection must needs be considered,
both in respect of his body and soul.

First, The Resurrection of the Body, was that, whereby he raised the same
from the grave, a dead carcass, to be a living and a most glorious body, never
to die again.

The place from whence Christ raised his soul.
Secondly, The Resurrection of his Soul, must be from some infernal place, or
else it must be a descention, and not a Resurrection of his soul: and
therefore, as in our Creed we profess to believe that he descended into Hell;
so we must likewise confess that he raised himself from Hell: but here
unawares, I am fallen into an Ocean of contention. For,

First, Some say this Article of our Creed, crept in by negligence, and
therefore would have raced it out again: but, that would prove a want of Gods
providence, that would suffer his whole Church, to err so grossly in the
chief sum of her Christian faith: and if such things might creep into our
Creed, which is but the abstract of our faith, then much more might easily
creep into our Scriptures, which is so large an expresser both of faith and
manners; but the Spirit of Christ is always with his Church, to guide it into
all truth, and the Church of Christ is the Pillar of truth, and a most
faithful preserver of all truth: and therefore this opinion is most absurd.

Secondly, Others still retayning the words, Four expositions of that article
of Christ's discention into Hell.
cannot agree upon the meaning of the sentence; and of these I find four
several expositions.

The first is, that the soul of Christ suffered the pains of Hell upon the
Cross.

But this cannot stand: first, because we must bring in such a sense as will
agree with the words after his burial; for that being dead and buried, he
descended into Hell: and secondly, That Christ suffered not the torments of the
damned. John 9.
because (as that worthy Bishop of Winchester has most excellently showed)
there be eight special things in Hell pains, which the soul of Christ could
not possibly suffer. As,

First, An outward and inward darkness, for, Christ was Light, and in him was
no darkness at all: says the Evangelist.

Secondly, Destruction of body and soul.

Thirdly, The Lake burning with fire and brimstone, Matthew. 10. Apoc. 20. Aug de
ciuit. l. 13. c. 2.
which is the second death, Et qua sicut nullorum est bonorum, ita nulli bona
est; And which, as it is the place of none that is good, so it is good to none:
and therefore either Christ was not good, or he tasted not of this second
death: or if he did, then not upon the Cross; because the first death, must
precede the second.

Fourthly, The Worm of conscience, continually afflicting them for their
sins; but, in Christ there was no sin; and therefore in him, there could
not be any touch of conscience accusing him for sin.

Fifthly, Reiection from the presence of God.

Sixthly, Malediction.

Seauenthly, Vengeance of fire.

Eighthly, Continuance for ever; All set down in this one sentence, Depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire. Matthew. 25.
And neither of these can be laid upon Christ without great blasphemy; and
therefore he cannot be said to suffer the pains of Hell upon the Cross,
without great Heresy.

That Hell in this article signifies not the grave.
The second exposition is, that he descended into Hell, signifies Christ his
burial; because Sheol commonly signifies the grave: but this cannot stand;
first, because it were an absurd thing, in a brief rehersall of the sum of
faith, to have one Article twice repeated; and to have the plainest one, he
was buried, expounded by a dark and enigmaticall exposition, he descended into
Hell,: secondly, because it is not said, that he was laid in Sheol, but he
descended into Hell; which signifies a voluntary motion, and therefore cannot
signify his burial.

That this article signifies not the state of the dead.
The third exposition is, that it signifies the state of the dead: but this
likewise cannot stand; first, because this exposition cannot avoid Lymbus
Patrum: for if Hell signify the state of the dead, the place of the dead can
neither be Heaven nor Paradise: Job 11.
secondly, because wheresoever Hell is named, as an opposition to Heaven, Psalm.
139. and 8.9.
it signifies the place of the damned, even in the Old Testament, and in the
New Testament; but descending, is a plain opposition to ascending; Matthew.
11.23.
as it is said, that Lazarus was carried up to Abraham's bosom: and therefore if
Sheol should signify the state of the dead, it should have been said, that
he ascended up into Sheol, which is most ridiculous.

That the soul of Christ after the separation from the body, descended into
the place of the damned.
The fourth exposition is, that he descended into the place of the damned; for
the words of the Creed, He descended into hell, must neither be allegorized
nor confounded with the former words, but they must be understood as they are
spoken: He descended into hell: And that for three special reasons.

1. Necessity requires it, 2. The Scripture proves it. 3. All antiquity
confirms it.
First, Necessity required, that he should descend into Hell: for man being
environed with three dreadful enemies, viz.

Three dreadful enemies of man.
1. Sin during life. 2. Death shortning life. 3. Hell tormenting after death.
And the Resurrection of Christ, being the full conquest of all our enemies, he
must overthrow Sin, Death, and Hell, or else we do but vainly boast of
releasing us from sin, or despising death, if the right and power of Hell do
still remain over us: and therefore Christ must overcome Satan, and destroy
his Palace, before we can be freed from his prison. And this Christ has done
three ways; 1. By subduing Satan, Christ destroyed Hell three ways. Matthew. 12.
2. By tying Satan, 3. By spoiling Satan,


For our Savior testifies; saying, When a strong man, armed, keeps his
palace, the things that he possesses are in peace, Luc. ^2.29.
but when a stronger then he comes, he takes his armor from him, he binds
him and then he spoyleth his house: And therefore Christ entered into H^ll, the
palace of Satan, as a conqueror, he tied him as the stronger, The conquest of
Christ was not only by suffering, but also by trampling Satan under feet.
and he spoiled him as the right owner of that which he unjustly detained from
him: and this is showed by the Apostle, where he says, that Christ spoiled
powers and principallities, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over
them in his own person: for this triumphing cannot be upon the Cross (though
there it was obtained) because the conquest over Satan, was not to be by
resisting, much less by suffering the pains of Hell; but by treading his
adversaries under his feet, that so he might be truly called a conqueror: And
therefore we must not think, that all his conquest was, at length to repel
them, and with mighty fear, and strong cries to escape them; when the Apostle
says, He spoiled them and made an open show of them: but it was a binding of
them, and a trampling of them under feet; and the same was manifested to be
thus fully accomplished at his Resurrection. And this necessity, not only of
suffering upon the Cross, Irenaeus l 3. c. 20
but also of conquering Satan in his own house, Irenaeus shows, saying, Si
homo non vicisset inimicum hominis, non just victus esset inimicus; If man had
not overcome the enemy of man, That the Scripture proves the soul of Christ,
to have descended into the place of the damned.
the enemy of man had not been justly conquered.

Secondly, The Scripture proves the same thing; for the Prophet David,
speaking in the person of Christ, says, My flesh shall rest in hope, because
thou will not forsake my soul in Hell, nor suffer thine holy one to see
corruption; but here to take the soul for the body, or hell for the grave, (as
some do,) I see no reason; Quia cum Scriptura diuidit species, Tertul. de
carne Christi. c. 13.
carnem and animam, duo ostendit; For when the Scripture speaks of soul and
body it must needs signify both, says Tertullian: and therefore David in his
prediction, and S int Peter in his exposition, speaking both of the soul and
body, two names, and two natures, and naming a distinct place for either of
them, they must needs signify two distinct and diverse things, and most
clearly show unto us, that when his body was laid in his grave, his soul
descended into Hell.

That all antiquity teaches the same truth. Luc. 10. Eusebius. l. 1. c. 23.
Ignatius ad Trall.
Thirdly, The whole classie of antiquity confirms the same: for Thaddaeus, one
of the seauenty Disciples, taught the Citizens of Edessa, how Christ was
crucified, and descended down into Hell, and broke down that wall that was
never battered down before. Ignatius confessed, how he suffered (...), and
descended alone into Hell, and brake down that Rampire wall, which had stood
from the beginning of the world: Athanasius in that Creed which we do
profess, says, that Christ suffered for our salvation, descended into Hell,
and rose again the third day from the dead; this is the Catholic faith,
which except a man believe faithfully he cannot be saved. Saint Augustine
says, Aug. ep. 99.
that Christ in soul was in Hell, the Scripture does sufficiently declare; so
prophesied by the Prophet, so understood by the Apostle, and so expounded unto
us: and therefore, Quis nisi Infidelis n^gauerit fuisse apud inf^ros Christum?
Who (says he) but an Infidel will deny Christ to have been in Hell? Saint
Hillary says, Hilarious de trinit l. 2 and in Psalm. 138.
that because the Law of humane necessity was such, that when our bodies were
buried, our souls were to descend to Hell; Ideo istam descentionem dominus ad
consummationem very hominis non recusauit; Christ himself did not refuse to
descend into the same place; Pope Leo says as much; and Fulgentius is as
plain as any of them all. Fulgent. ad Tras. l. 3. ^e resurrect. dom.
I might reckon many more, but my purpose is not to say what I could in this
point: only I say that he descended into Hell, not to suffer, for that was
finished on the Cross, but for the subjection of Satan, and the deliverance of
men; not of those that were in Hell, but of us, that we should not go to Hell;
for how can we be delivered if Satan be not destroyed? how is he destroyed, if
hell be not vanquished? Zach. 9.11.
for that is the Palace of his pleasure, and the horror of our souls, the
pit wherein there is no water: but for as much as this is the condemnation of
man, and the Law of humane necessity, that the body should to the grave, and
the soul to hell for sin, it remained for the full effecting of our
Redemption, that Christ should thither descend, whither man fell by desert of
sin; that is, into Hell, where the soul of the sinner was wont to be
tormented, and to the grave where the flesh was wont to be corrupted, that by
the death of the just, temporally dying, Fulgen. quo supra. Athanas. de incar.
has the like saying.
eternal life might be given to our flesh; and by the soul of the lust
descending into Hell, the torments of Hell might be abolished, says Fulgentius.

And so I believe this for mine exceeding comfort, that now I need not fear
any enemy; because Christ suffered for my sins, destroyed all mine enemies,
descended into Hell, vanquished the Devils, and rose again the third day: to
make an open show of this his most victorious conquest, and blessed be his
name for the same.

CHAP. IX. Of the manner how Christ rose, and of the particular application
thereof unto our selves.
SEcondly, we are to consider the manner how our Savior rose, and many other
particulars concerning his resurrection, but chiefly we should observe that his
resurrection, was 1. in respect of the place: from the dead 2. in respect of
the time: early 3. in respect of his person: it was 1. true 2. perfect 3.
glorious



I will not stand upon these particulars: The application of the resurrection
unto our selves. Romans 10.9.
but to apply all unto our selves, that we may reap some fruit by all, I must
entreat you to remember what the Apostle says, If thou shall conf^sse with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God raised him
from the dead, thou shall be saved; for as I told you before, that the
resurrection of Christ is the only maine, unanswerable argument to prove Christ
to be the true Messiah, and the Savior of the world; so here you see the
Apostle puts the true belief in our Saviors resurrection, as the only
chiefest point that is necessary and sufficient for our salvation: and
therefore it is not without cause, that the doctrine of the resurrection should
be insisted upon, to be preached and manifested by us, and to be learned and
believed by you.

That it is not the Theoricke, but the applicatiue knowledge of Christ's
resurrection that will help us.
But here we must know, that it is not the bare Theoricke, and intellectual
knowledge, that Christ is raised from the dead, at that time, from that place,
and in that manner, as I have showed unto you before, is sufficient for our
salvation; for so the devils know it, and believe it too; and yet they receive
no fruit nor benefit thereby; but it is the practicke, experimental and
applicatiue knowledge and belief in the resurrection of the son of God, that
is effectual for the salvation of man. Philip. 3.10, 11
And therefore Saint Paul prays, that He may know Christ, and find in
himself the virtue and power of the resurrection of Christ; for as the rising
of the head does ever cause the rising of all the parts of the body, which is
united unto the the head; so the resurrection of Christ does ever work a
resurrection of all the members of Christ; for so the Apostle teaches us; Romans
8 11.
If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus dwell in you, he that raised up
Christ from the dead shall also quicken, and so raise up, your mortal bodies,
by that spirit which dwells in you.

That the resurrection of Christians is twofold.
And we find this resurrection of us that are his members to be two fold, 1.
from sin, and from all the vanities of this world. 2. from death, and from
the corruption of the grave.


First, if we be the members of Christ, then certainly we are risen with
Christ; risen I say, from the death of sin, unto the life of righteousness;
and if we be risen with Christ, then does our hearts wish and desire those
things that are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God, Coloss. 3.
says the Apostle; and therefore whosoever walloweth in sin, and delights
in the things of this world, it is certain that he has not as yet any part
or portion in the resurrection of Jesus Christ; for if we be the members of
Christ, we must also rise with Christ, and we must rise as Christ has risen;
for otherwise we would all rise, That the resurrection of Christ is a pattern
to teach us how we should rise from sin and from the company of sinners
and many do rise, but not as Christ rose, and therefore such risers, --
tolluntur in altum
vt lapsu grauiore ruant. --
the higher they rise the greater is their fall.

But we must rise as Christ has risen, and that is, as I told you before:

First, in respect of the place, from the dead; First, from the society of the
wicked.
so must we rise from the dead works of sin, and from all those that are
dead in sin: Christ left the dead in their graves, and walked among the
living, and I would to God we could leave the company and society of those
that do still lie wallowing and stinking in the graves of sin, and join our
selves unto those that live the life of grace: for, as he was a mad man
possessed of a devil, that had his abiding among the tombs; so are all they
no better then mad men, and possessed of devils, that have their conversation
with those that are dead in sins: and therefore I advise all that would live
with Christ, to follow the council of the Apostle, not to be companions of
them that are dead in sin, but as Christ rose and left the dead, so do you
rise and leave these dead and deadly sinners.

Secondly, in respect of the time; Secondly, to rise quickly from sin.
Eccles. 12.1.
Christ rose speedily without delay, he rose early before the morning watch;
so should we rise from sin, and as Solomon says, Remember our Creator in the
days of our youth, before the evil days come, when we shall say we have no
pleasure in them. And yet it is a fearful thing to consider how many men do
put off and delay their repentance, and amendment of life until our latest
days: for we serve the world, and follow after the lusts of our own flesh
while we are young, and we put all the burden of serving God, upon our weak
and feeble and decrepit age: we sacrifice the flowers of our years to sin
and Satan, the finest, the fairest, That God will hardly accept late services
tendered unto him.
and the fattest beasts; but to God we think it is enough to give the blind,
the halt, and the lame, the withered and wrinckled, and barrennest times of our
life: but God will have none such, for he refuses such sacrifices in his Law;
and therefore surely he will not easily receive such in the time of the
Gospel; for as there were three paiments of first fruits among the Jews; the
first was primitiae spicarum, the first fruits of their ears of corn, and
this was paid early about Easter; the second was primitiae panum, the first
fruits of their loaves, when their corn was converted into bread, and this was
somewhat early too, about Whitsuntide; and the third was primitiae frugum, the
first fruits of all their latter fruits in general, and this was very late,
about the fall of the leaf in September; and in the two first paiments, which
were offered early, God accepted a part for himself; but in the third
payment, which came late, God would have no part at all; even so, if we offer
the first fruits of our young years, early unto God, he will accept it for
himself; but if we give our best years unto Satan, and offer the last years
unto God; I say no more, but he will not easily receive them: and no marvel,
quia labor fracta instrumenta, etc. for to what end, and with what face can
any man bring those instruments to work in Gods vineyard, which are blunted
and broken in the service of the world? or with what honesty can we offer that
unto God, which we would be ashamed to offer unto a man? for who would offer a
lame horse, a disordered clock, or a torn book unto his King? and yet our
flesh is our beast, the course of our life is our clock, and the history of
our actions, is our book; and shall we offer our flesh unto God, when it is
lame and tired with excess of wantonness? shall we commend our lives unto
him, when as the whole course of the same is out of order? or shall we present
the story of our actions unto him, when as a thousand sins of our own (for
which we should be sorrowful) and a thousand blessings of God (for which we
should be thankful) are quite defaced, and torn out of our memory? or if we
should offer such unto God, why should we think it strange, that he should
reject them? Because late service is seldom true service.
quia temperantia in senectute non est temperantia, sed impotentia
intemperantiae: for continency, abstinency, temperancy, and such like in old
age, are no virtues, but a disability to be vicious; so to leave good
fellowship when thou art sick, and many other sins when thou art old, is not
a leaving and forsaking of thy sins, but thy sins have l^ft thee, like
parasites in adversity; Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes. If thou could
have cherished them any longer, longer they would have continued with thee.

And therefore, seeing it is good for a man to bear his yoke in his youth. (as
Jeremy says) because age is unfit for burdens; let us not be like the
persecuters of the Jews, which laid the heauiest yokes upon the ancientest
men; let us not reserve the weight and burden of our repentance, until our
latter age; but if we would have God not to remember the sins of our youth,
let us remember God in the days of our youth; and specially seeing we know not
whether God will hear us in our age or not, because we would not amend our
lives in our youth; and because indeed whatsoever is done then, is commonly
done amiss; let us herein imitate our Savior Christ, to rise early from the
bed of sin, and to say with that Princely Prophet, O God, thou art my God,
Psalm. 63.1.
early will I seek thee.

And there be two maine reasons, Two special reasons to move us speedily to
forsake all sin.
that should move us to rise hastily and speedily from sin; 1. The nature of
sin. For, 2. The uncertainty of our life. For,


First, Sin in the Soul, is like a stain in a garment; the longer it
remains in it, the harder it is taken out of it.

Vidi ego quod fuerat primum medicabile vulnus,
Desertum longae damna tulisse morae:
For as in the diseases of the body, the longer they be uncured, the more the
body is in dangered; or as we see in a fire, Flamma recens, parua sparsa
recedit aqua, A little water quenches a spark, but much water will hardly
quench great flames: Even so it is in the maladies of the Soul, Ecclus. 5.7.
the longer we continue in sin, the harder we can leave sin; And
therefore, let us make no tarrying to turn to the Lord our God, Math. 2.16.
but as Herod dealt with the Infants, so let us deal with sin, kill it while
it is young.

It is recorded of Roffensis, that when Henry the eight sent to him for his
consent and approbation to suppress some superfluous Abbeys, he told him, that
on a time the Axe sent unto the Trees of the Forest, only for so much wood as
would make it but a handle, and in requital, it would p^re and prune off all
rotten and fruitless branch^s that did nothing else but cumber the Trees, and
hinder the liuelier branches to bear forth better fruit; the request seeming
reasonable, was unquestionably embraced, and most willingly granted unto the
Axe: but the success answered not the expectation of the Trees; for instead of
pruining the corrupted branches, it soon wasted stock and root, until it
made way for the Plow, vncontrolably to pass through the midst of the
Forest: And so I fear (says Roffensis) your Majesty will proceed with the
possessions of the Church: So he did; and so does sin deal with every Man;
it demands but little, but it still incroacheth, until it destroys our
souls: And therefore we should withstand sin at the first, and never suffer
it so much as to enter into our souls. And we should follow the council of
the Bridegroom, Cant. 2.10.
Arise my Love, my Dove, my fair one; Make haste, as the Angel said unto Lot,
Genesis 19.22.
to save thy self, and come away. O come, come with me from Lebanon, my
Spouse, with me from Lebanon, Cant. 4.8.
look from the top of Amana, from the top of She^ir, and Hermon, from the
Lions dens, and from the Mountains of the Leopards.

Secondly, We ought to make haste to rise from sin, and to begin betimes to
serve the Lord, by reason of the shortness and uncertainty of our life; for as
Hugo Cardinalis says, The way that we are to pass, is long; the place that we
are to go unto far, and our time short; and we know not how soon God will
call for us: And therefore, we ought to work the work of God while it is day;
John 9.4.
For the night comes, when no man can work.

That we should strive to be first in Gods service.
And here we must further observe, that as he rose early, so he rose first of
all; for, He is the first fruits of them that sleep: To teach us, that we
should also strive to be the first in all goodness: but we are loath to do
this; we will do as others do, we cannot abide to be singular: such is our
Nature; we strive with the Pharisees to be first in honors, Nec quenquam iam
fere potest Caesarue priorem
Pompeius ve parem. --


We would feign be the first in reputation, but we never strive to be the first
in performing the duties of Religion: It was otherwise with Joshua, who called
all Israel together, and persuaded them all to serve their God, or if they
would not, he told them plainly, That he and his House would serve the Lord:
Joshua 24.15.
And I would it were so with us; for it is our greatest honor to be the first
in Gods service.

Thirdly, In respect of his own person, Christ rose.

First, Truly, without hypocrisy, not fainedly, but certainly: So should we;
for woe be unto you hypocrites, Matthew. 23.13.
and woe to him that goes two manner of ways; that holds up his hands, and
lifts up his eyes to Heaven, and yet has his heart full of all
unrighteousness: for though with men things are judged as they seem, yet God
sees our hearts, and we deceive our selves, if we think to deceive him. It is
observed in Nature, that the Fox nips the neck, the Mastiue the throat, the
Ferret the liver, but God cares only for the heart: for he says, Son give
me thy heart; Ecclus 2.12. That we should raise our selves truly, and not
hypocritically from sin.
and he is said to be a searcher and a tryer of the hearts: And therefore, we
must not make Saint Paul's show of godliness, to be Saint Peter's cloak of
wickedness, to rise from sin in show, and not in truth; for these rise like
Samuel, fainedly, not truly, by a Witch, not by God: It is that Witch
hypocrisy, worse then the Witches of Thessalie, that raises them up a little
to deceive the World, and to make us believe they are true Samuels, whereas
indeed they be very Devils. Our Savior bids us to beware of such, 2 Timothy 3.5.
that have Jacobs voice and Esaues hands, the words of Saints, and the works
of Jews; And I bid them beware of Satan, 1 Pet. 2.16.
for being raised up by him, and not by the power of Christ, he will at last
unmask their hypocritical faces, and then he will cast them down, and
destroy them; for though it is reported, that in a certain battle some lost
their livings for running away, which notwithstanding were bestowed upon
others, that fled ten leagues further; yet it is not so with God: for, 2 Cor.
5.10.
He will render unto every man according to his work.

Secondly, Christ rose totally without partition; That we should raise our
selves from all sins.
for he left no part behind him: So should we rise from all sins, or else all
is but in vain: for we read that Herod at the preaching of John Baptist, did
raise himself from many sins, but from his dearly beloved Herodias, he
would not rise; so many men can be persuaded by the Preachers to forsake many
sins* but from their bosom, darling, usual, customary sins, they will not
rise. And ^urely every man is naturally inclined to some sins, more then to
others; as some men to good-fellowship and drunkenness, some to wantonness,
and these could willingly be contented to refrain (as they do sometimes) from
all, or most other sins; but from these, their naturally beloved or usually
practiced sins, they cannot, they will not abstain: It is their infirmity,
and they cannot leave them: and therefore as Naaman the Syrian said unto
Elizeus, 2 Reg 5.18.
only in this thing the Lord pardon thy servant; so say these men, but in a
worse manner, only in this sin the Lord be merciful unto me, and I will
strive to raise my self from all other sins whatsoever.

Aulus Gellius. attic. noct. l. 12. c. 1.
It is reported by Gellius that Phauorinus, seeing a mother sharing her duties
betwixt her self and her nurse, said; Quodnam est hoc contra naturam
imperfectum, and dimidiatum matrum genus? What a strange halfe-kinde of mother
against nature is this, to bring forth, and presently to cast forth from her
the fruit of her own womb? such halfe-kinde of Christians have we now a
days, that will scarce perform half their duties: it were well, if they were
like Naaman, Act. 26.28.
or like Agrippa, almost Christians; if they were so, and could go in sincere
practice, as the young man in the Gospel went in proud profession, all these
things have I done from my youth up; Matthew. 19.20.
yet because with that young man they want one thing, all the other things will
avail them nothing; for to be behind in no gift, as Saint Paul speaks, is
the general description of every truly renewed Christian: and we know that as
on what part soever of a man a Lion catches hold, he will hold it fast, and
draw us by that part unto himself, or we must suffer that part to be torn
off, from our selves; and what gate soever the enemy finds open, he can
through that one gate lead in all his Army into our City: even so Satan,
cares not where he may have hold of thee, so he may have hold of thee; and he
cares not by what door he may enter into thy soul, so he may enter in by any
door; for as one leake may sink a ship, one wound may kill a man, so one
sin especially practiced may slay the soul: and what avails it whether
covetousness or prodigality, preciseness, or profaneness do reign in us?
whether on the right hand, or on the left hand, by ouer-going or vnder-going,
we be deprived of salvation? for though the by-pathes of iniquity, which do
misleade a Christian, be very many, yet they all meet in one place: for the
issues of them all, Prou. 16.25.
are the issues of death, says Saloman.

And therefore if this roaring Lion has caught hold of thine eye, that by
wanton looks, looks full of adulteries (as Saint Peter speaks) it makes
thee to offend, pull it out and cast it off, 2 Pet. 2.14.
that thou may free the rest of thy self, from eternal destruction; and so
of all other parts, do as our Savior bids thee, free thy self from Satan; Et
redime te captum quam queas minimo, and free thy self as soon as thou can,
and as well as thou can; for thou were better shake off that one sin, then
that Satan by that one sin, should take thee into Hell fire: and as they use
to do in besieged Cities, where the assault is sorest, there they place the
stoutest men; so do thou against sin and Satan, strive most to hinder him,
where he strives most to enter: for so David says, that he refrained from his
own wickedness, i. e. even from that sin, that he was most of all inclined
unto; and so let us wholly and perfectly rise from all sins.

Thirdly, Christ rose constantly without apostasy, That we should so rise from
sin, as never to fall to sin again. Revel. 1.18.
i. e. he rose gloriously, never to die again, for Christ being raised from
the dead, dies no more, death has no more power over him: and so his epethite
is, he that was dead, and is alive, and lives for evermore: So should we rise
from sin, never to sin again, not like Lazarus that rose from his grave
and dyed again, rise now from sin and immediately fall into the same or the
like sins again: but as we must obey Christ his voice, saying, Come unto me,
Matthew. 11.28.
so we must obey his voice, saying, abide in me; John. 15.4.
and as William the Conqueror is said to have sunk all his ships, when he
arrived here in England, because he would take away all hope of flying back;
so must we sink all sins, that we may never swim or ride on sin again,
drown them in the seas, dash them against the walls, and so shake hands with
all sins, that we never return to any sin again; for, Why Nouatus thought
sins of recidiuation should not be pardoned.
though it was an error in Nouatus to deny remission unto sins of
recidiuation; that is, when a man relapseth and falls again into the same
sin, because the Apostle says, It is impossible that they which were once
enlightened, (and so raised from sin) if they fall away, should be renewed by
repentance; and Saint Peter says, Heb. 6.
It had been better for them never to have known the ways of righteousness,
2. Pet. 2.21.
then after they have known it, to turn away from the holy Commandemrnts; and
because we never read that either Christ raised the same men twice, no not the
widows son, whom he pitied, nor yet Lazarus whom he loved, nor that the
Saints ever fell into the same sins again, after they had them once remitted,
as David never committed adultery again, Peter never denied his Master again,
Paul never persecuted the Church again, after they had these sins once
remitted; though I say this was an error in the Nouatians, because the Apostles
speak of falling away from Christ, by a final apostacy, and not of falling
again into sin through our carnal infirmity; and because the comparison of
Christ raising the dead, with the raising of us from sin, does not (as no other
comparison does) in all things hold aequipage; and because the other men's not
falling into the same sins again, does but show that they had a great
measure of grace to preserve them from falling, and not prove a denial of
renewing grace unto us, if we should fall again; and they are set down for our
imitation, that we should strive to stand, and never to fall, and not for our
desperation, if we do fall into the same sins again; yet I say, That
relapsing into sin is very dangerous.
that this relapsing into sin, this returning with the dog unto his vomit,
and with the swine to her wallowing in the mire, is exceeding fearful and
dangerous: for as vulnus iteratum, etc. nature is tired with the continual
assault of the same diseases, and at last is forced to yield unto them, if it
cannot by some means expel them, and as the same sore often wounded, is very
hardly cured; so the same sins still assaulting our souls, will without
doubt (if they be not extinguished by grace) make our last end, worse then our
beginning.

And therefore, it were well for us, if (when we have risen from sin) we
would ever pray to God for grace, that we might never fall into sin again:
for otherwise, as the old Proverb is, Conteritur annulus vsu.
Gutta cauat lapidem, non vi, sed sape cadendo,
Sic homo fit Demon, non vi sed saepe cadendo;
scilicet in peccatum: often sinning, makes the greatest sinners.

But if the relapsing into any particular sin be so dangerous, O then what a
fearful thing is the falling back from our most holy profession? surely, What
a fearful sin Apostacy is.
it is the most remarkable thing in the description of the sin against the
holy Ghost, and the most apparent sign, of eternal destruction: behold the
punishments of Apostates that are left for our examples: Lots wife was turned
into a pillar of salt, and the children of Israel, that in their hearts were
turned back again into Egypt, had their carcasses left in the wilderness:
and no marvel, for this is a transcendent sin; and I know no sin so great
as this; Herod's bloody murders, even of infants, and Neros savage cruelty,
even against the Saints, and the most barbarous acts of the most inhumane
heathen Tyrants, did never sound so odious in mine ears, as that horrid name
of Julian the Apostata: for that must stand as a rule infallible, 2. Pet. 2 21.
that they are far better which never knew the way of righteousness, then they
which once knew it, and then turned aside from the holy commandment.

Beloved, It has pleased God to bring us out of Egypt, and to us that walked
in darkness, and in the shadow of death, Esaias 9.2.
has the glorious light of the Gospel shined, and the truth of Christ is
amongst us; O let us not love darkness more then light, let us not return
from light to darkness.

I know there is a continual opposition, and a mighty war, betwixt truth
and falsehood, far greater then that betwixt the house of Saul and the house
of David, and each one of them seeks to prevail against the other; and I
hope I need not use any argument to prove that we are in the truth: It was the
Corinthians fault, after they were baptized, believed Christ, and professed
Christ a long while, all on a sudden (like the men that sailed into the midst
of the Ocean, and awaking out of a dream, made a great question whether they
were in any ship or no) they began to doubt whether there was any
resurrection or not: and I hope we will not be like any of these herein;
after we have it so dearly purchased with the blood of Martyrs, so truly
preached by the painful servants of Christ, and so long preserved amongst us
by the free grace of Christ, now to question, whether we be in the truth or
not; for that is beyond all question: God has brought it to us, we have
preached it to you, and you have believed it, and professed it gloriously and
christianly before the face of the whole world: and therefore I will only show
you two special points to be our help and furtherance in our warfare against
error. Two special points to be considered.


The First, shall be to preserve us in the truth.

The Second, shall be to suppress falsehood, that it prevail not against the
truth.

For the first, I desire all men to consider.

1. Who we be that teach you. 2. What they are that seek to seduce you.
First, we are plain men, that compass not sea and land to enlarge our
Monarchy: Who we are that teach the people.
we labor not so much to get your wealth, as to save your souls: for as the
Apostle says, we seek not yours, but you: and I hope most of us (if occasion
served, you should see it) would seal our words with our blood: for as there
were 7000. men in Israel, that bowed not their knees to Baal; so I assure my
self there are many thousands in England, that would lay down their necks,
and leese their lives, rather then they would depart a nails breadth from the
truth of that doctrine which we have taught: And I boldly say it, if Satan
should be let loose, to persecute the Saints of God, I do unfeignedly wish, my
dearest bones might first burn to give light, unto all them that desire to
walk in this truth.

Who they be that seek to seduce our people.
Secondly, consider what they be that seek to seduce you; and I doubt not but
you shall find most of them, to be either such as were nuzled in errors a
cunabulis, even from their cradles, by their seduced friends, popish children,
of popish parents, sent and bred in the mysteries of iniquity; and should we
look for these to be otherwise then they be? or else to be such as through
discontent to see some hoysted up unto Moses chair, which are scarce worthy to
sit at Gamaliels feet, and themselves that have good parts in them, Acts 22.3.
through want of friends, or means, to be quite neglected, have gone from us,
either because they hoped for better fortunes in other soyles, or because they
were loathe to endure their mean fortunes among their own friends; because
noble spirits had rather beg where they are not known, then any ways be
base where their worth is seen: I confess a fault in neglecting them; and it
is too common amongst us; but will you be contented to hazard your souls upon
their persuasions that hazarded their own through discontent? I hope better
things of you, and I assure my self, that as you are in the truth, so you will
continue in the truth unto your death.

For the second, how we shall suppress falsehood, Vide, The Misery of man.
page. 109.
that it prevail not against truth. I refer you to my first treatise of the
Misery of man, p. 109. where I have set down my best ad^ice in this case. But
here it may be, some will say, Quorsum haec? to what end is all this spoken,
to insinuate fear into the hearts of men, where there is no fear? I answer,
that his gracious Majesty not only by his Royal authority in maintayning true
Religion, but also by his Divine pen, by his own pains, defending the truth
of our Religion, and his wise Councellers, whose Counsels are like the great
deep, too great for me to diue into them, too high for you to attain unto
them, do not only free us from all fear of idolatry and superstition; but
do also assure us of a most happy continuance of our most true Religion, in a
far more glorious manner then our mean capacities can perceive: and yet
there is one great, powerful, and politic one, under whose wings many are
sheltered, and he intrudeth himself into all places, Country and City, Court
and Councell-chamber, and labors by all means to put out our light, and to
darken the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to bring in idolatry and superstition
into our land again; and that is the prince of darkness, the devil and
Satanas, that entered into Paradise, That Satan always laboreth to bring men
into idolatry and superstition.
to deceive our forefathers, that ventured upon the Son of God, and said,
mitte te deorsum, if thou be the Son of God, cast thy self downward, and
will suggest it into every man, if thou would be the child of God, mitte
te retrorsum; then must thou return backward, and be as thy fore-f^thers
were: There is no doubt of this; if he could send none from Rome hitherto
corrupt us; yet while he has rome for any in hell, he will never leave to
labor by his wicked suggestions, to corrupt us himself; he will enter into
our chamber, he will creep into our bosoms, and he will seek by all means
for to deceive us; we are not ignorant of his devices: And therefore I say,
let him that stands take heed lest he falls: and let us pray to God for
grace, 1. Cor. 10.12.
that as he has raised us from sin, and superstition; so he would preserve
us from relapsing or falling back into any of these sins again. And thus you
see how Christ raised himself from death, and how we should raise our selves
from sin.

And here we must further note, that as the consideration of Christ's
resurrection should make us conformable unto him, That the resurrection of
Christ is a cause of great joy unto us.
by our resurrection from all sin; so it should be most comfortable unto us,
both in respect of Christ and our selves, quia resurgens Christus tantum
attulit letitiae, quantum morions attulit doloris, because Christ at his
resurrection brought us more joy and comfort, Bernard. de passione domini c.
46. p. 1236. k.
then he did sorrow and grief at his passion, says Saint Bernard: and
therefore we should all of us, plus gaudere propter resurrectionem gloriosam,
quam dolere propter passionem ignominiosam, now say with the Psalmist, sing we
merrily unto the Lord our God, that has turned our sorrow into joy, that we
might sing one of the songs of Sion: and woe to that man that does it not,
Gregor. hom. 21. in Euangel.
quia indignum valde est si in eo die lauds debitas tacuerit lingua carnis,
quo videlicet caro resurrexit autoris, because it is a great indignity that
our tongues should be silent, from giving praise to God on that day whereon
our Savior rose from his death, says Saint Gregory. And as we should rejoice
at the consideration of the resurrection of Christ from the dead; so we should
likewise rejoice for the resurrection of our own souls from sin; for as
Tobias said, what joy can I have, so long as I sit here in darkness? so may
we say of every sinner, what comfort can he have whiles he lives in sin? or
what fruit can he have of those things, Romans 6.
whereof he must be ashamed, as the Apostle says? And so much for our
resurrection from sin.

That the resurrection of Christ is an assurance of our resurrection to
eternal life.
Secondly, if we be the members of Christ, we shall assuredly rise from our
graves, and from death, unto the resurrection of everlasting life: quia vt
Redemptor noster suscepit mortem, ne mori timeremus, ita ostendit
resurrectionem, vt nos resurgere posse confideremus; for as our redeemer died,
that we might not be afraid of death, so he rose again, that we might be
sure of our resurrection unto life; for if the head be risen, then surely the
members, in their due time, must rise, and follow after; but Christ our head is
risen from the dead (as I have abundantly showed unto you before,) and
therefore it must be that we which are his members, shall also rise and follow
after. And lest any man should say, sperare de se non debet homo, quod in carne
sua exhibuit Deus homo, that man should not hope for that to himself, which
that God and man performed in himself. S. Gregory answers, that solus in
illo tempore mortuus est, and tamen solus minime resurrexit, although he died
and was laid in his grave all alone, yet he did not rise again alone, but he
was accompanied with many others; to show unto us, that as he died not for
himself, so he rose not for himself, but for us that are his members.

And therefore, though here we suffer all the miseries of this world, though
our bodies be but semen terrae, and esca vermium, the dust of the earth, and
the food of worms, and though these bodies of ours should be cast into the
seas, and be eaten of fishes, and those fishes should be caught, and should be
eaten of men, and those men should be burnt to ashes, and those ashes cast into
the seas, yet we may assure our selves, to our continual comfort, and to our
refreshment in all miseries, that God will collect us and raise us up at the
last day, and give unto every soul his own body, and then make us like unto
the glorious body of Jesus Christ. And so much for the first lesson, 1. Cor. 15.
the lesson of Theorie, which these women, (and so likewise all men and women)
must learn, and know: That Christ is risen from the dead, and therefore that
we should rise from sin, and shall rise from our graves to eternal life.

CHAP. X. What the women are commanded to do, and why: and what special
lessons we may learn for our instruction.
FOR the second, i. e. the lesson of practice, How the Angel teaches the
women what they should do.
this Angel shows unto these women what they should do, saying, ite, go
your ways; why stand you here? and go quickly, without delay, for it is the
Lords business, Why the women were to tell the Disciples that Christ was risen.
and cursed be they that do the work of the Lord negligently; and dicite
discipulis, and tell his Disciples that Christ is risen from the dead: Tell his
Disciples, first, quia vos ad praedicandum inferior sexus, ad exigendum
infirmior; because your sex is less able to preach, Ambros. in loc.
less constant to persevere, says Saint Ambrose: secondly, because women must
not teach; for to teach, is a note of superiority, and women are bound to obey,
and to learn at home of their husbands; and therefore I permit not a woman to
teach says the Apostle; thirdly, that as man did rashly believe the woman for
his destruction, so he might now happily believe these women, for his
salvation; et ecce and behold, he goes before you into Galilee, Galilee of the
Gentiles; because now the partition wall that was betwixt the Jews and the
Gentiles is broken down; and the calling of the Gentiles approaches near:
and quia transmigrauerat a morte ad vitam, and because now he had passed from
death to life, and was to pass from this vain and momentary life unto that
joyful and eternal happiness, he says, behold he goes before you into
Galilee, because Galilee signifies transmigration, What we should learn from
the Angels instruction to the women.
or a passage over from one place unto another. And so you see the sum of the
Angels iniunction unto the women, what they must do: and from hence we may
learn these special lessons for our instruction.

First, to practice what we know.
First, that we must join practice unto our profession, if we would be happy,
for these two must never be separated: these things if you know, blessed are
you if you do them, says our Savior: And yet it has been ever the practice
of Satan, to sever those whom God has joined together: and therefore in former
times, he put out the light of the Word preached, that men might not know what
to do; and now when he sees he can hide the light no longer, he gives you
leave to know as much as you will, as much as Berengarius, who is said to know
as much as was know-able; but he labors that you shall do nothing at all,
but show your selves just like the Grecians, Plutar. in Lacoon.
which knew what was honest, but did it not; or like the Scribes and Pharisees,
which said and did not, says our Savior. But we should consider, first, that
this is one of the chiefest ends why God gave his Laws and his Commandments
unto us; that we should do them: for had he given them only to be
preserved, he might have locked them up in iron coffers; God gave his Laws not
to be talked of, but to be kept.
or had he given them to be talked of, he might have given them unto Iayes and
Parrats.

Secondly, we should know that the practice of Christianity is the only
argument to prove us true Christians: by this, Christ proved himself to be
the Messiah: Practice only proves us Christians.
for it is most true which Iouinian said of the Arrians and Orthodoxall
Bishops, I cannot judge of your knowledge and disputations, but I can easily
discern your lines and conuersations.

Thirdly, we should remember that our actions are the best arguments, Sozom.
l. 7. A good life conuerteth others. Basil. l. de 40. Mart.
and the most unanswerable Syllogismes to convert infidels: Sozomenus tells us,
that the godly life of a poor captive woman moved a King and many others to
become Christians: and Julian writing to Arsatius, says, that Christiana
religio propter Christianorum erga omnes cuiusuis religionis beneficentiam
propagata est; the piety and the charity of Christians did wonderfully cause
the Christan Religion to increase; Eusebius. l. 9. c. ^.
and Maximinus said, he could not choose but wonder to see how sedulous the
Christians were in doing good. The bitter fruits of a bad life.


Whereas on the other side, the lewd life of those that profess Christ, does
bring forth many sower and bitter fruits:

First, It dishonors God more then any other thing; First, it dishonors
God.
his name is blasphemed through them among the Gentiles, which believe not God;
and therefore God says, why take thou my Laws in thy mouth, whereas thou
hate to be reformed?

Secondly, It proves them to be no Christians, Secondly, it proves such
livers no christians.
because the profession of Christianity, is a profession of works, and not of
words.

Thirdly, It hinders the unsettled minds, to embrace Christianity: for when
they see men, like Tusser that wrote well of husbandry, but was himself the
worst husband that lived, Thirdly, It hinders others to become Christians.
or like Erasmus Ruffian, that carried by the one side a good bottle of sack,
and by the other side a fair gilded Testament; such as will hear much and
talk more of Religion, and do none of the works of God; how shall not this
diswade the unstable hearts from ever embracing of Christianity? It is
reported that Lynacrus reading the Sermon of Christ in the Mount, and
considering the conversation of men in the world, said, either this is not Gods
Gospel, or we are not Gods people; and I pray God, that the
faire-seeming-shewes of hypocritical professors, and their most vile and
abominable actions, be not the cause to kindle Gods fearful indignation
against us all.

And therefore beloved brethren; let us consider the Author of our profession,
Jesus Christ, who went about doing goood: let us consider his holy Apostles,
Act. 10.38.
and all our blessed Ancestors, how sedulous they were in the practice of
Religion, whereby they have gained a good report, and became glorious in the
sight of God and men, and let us imitate them herein, to do good as they have
done, and in all things to join practice unto our knowledge.

All men not sit for all purposes.
Secondly, We may observe from hence, that as these women were fit messengers,
to tell the Disciples that Christ was risen, but not to preach the same unto
the world; so many men are sufficient for inferior places, and to preach the
shallower points of Divinity, points of morality, and popular exhortations, but
are not fit, Ducere in altum, to lanch forth into the deep, and to treat of
the higher mystical points of Divinity; for as it is said of David's Worthies,
2 Samuel 23.19.
that they reached not unto the first three, so it may be said of us all, that
many men may receive a measure of Gods graces, and yet not attain unto the
measure of many others; God gives not the like measure of graces unto all men.
because God does not give the same measure of graces unto all; but as in
humane gifts, we find that some had their memory so good, that to their last
times they could repeat whole orations, and some that in their younger years
had their judgment so profound, that they could determine the hardest
questions; Matthew. 25.15.
so in the delivery of the Divine talents, whereby Theophilact understands
(...), spiritual graces, some have five, 2. King. 2.9.
some have two, some but one: to note unto us that God grants, not only a
superiority unto some above their brethren, in an higher kind of a different
grace, but also in a greater measure of the same grace; as the Spirit was
doubled on Elisha, if not in respect of his Master Eliah, (as some think not)
yet surely in respect of the other succeeding Prophets; Dan. 1.20.
and in the School of Nebuchadnezzars in chanters, though they were all no
doubt exceeding great Clerks, 1 Cor. 14.18.
yet Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego were found to be ten times better
then the rest; and among these, Daniel sleeping was found wiser then his
fellows waking: so in the New Testament, John Baptist was a Prophet, and more
then a Prophet, and Saint Paul spoke languages more then all the rest of the
Apostles: God expects not the like fruits from all men.
and therefore God does not require all his servants, nay he will not have them
all to adventure, or seek to bring forth the like measure of fruit: for he
was not angry with the slothful servant, because that one talent had not
gained ten talents, but because he hid his masters money, and had gained
nothing at all.

Thirdly, We may observe from hence, That we ought to follow Christ, and not to
go before him.
that as Christ went before these Women and his Disciples into Galilee, and
they all followed after him; So we should suffer Christ to go before us in all
our ways, and not to run our selves before him, where perhaps he never went,
nor will go: for it is the property of a Disciple to follow after, and not
precede or go before his master: and therefore we must not go into those
places where Christ went not; nor dispute of those points which Christ taught
not; for this is to go before him, and not to follow him.

Fourthly, We may observe from hence, That we must pass from all worldly
vanities, before we can enjoy spiritual blessings.
that as Christ passed from death to life, and from this world into Heaven; so
must we, before we come to Christ, pass from our deadness in sin, unto the
life of grace, and from the vanities of this worldly life, unto a spiritual
and a heavenly conversation; for as there was no possession of the Land of
Canaan, until there was a transmigration of the red Sea, out of the land of
Egypt; so we can have no fruition of Gods presence, until we have relinquished
and passed over all the Egyptian vanities of this life, in our desires and
affections, at the least.

And thus you have heard the office of this Angel here expressed, to serve
Christ, to affright the soldiers, and to delight these women, to teach them,
to direct them, Revel. 4.8.
and to preserve them in all their ways; for as they never cease to serve the
Lord, so they never cease to preserve the Saints, until they cease to serve
their God: and therefore to use Saints Bernards exhortation, Quantum debet hoc
verbum infer reuerentiam, afferre deuotionem, confer fiduciam? How ought
this doctrine to move us, and work in us reverence for their presence,
confidence for their custody, and obedience unto God for so great an argument
of his benevolence unto man, as to give his Angels charge over us; Et quam
caute ambulandum, and how warily ought we to walk seeing the Angels of God are
ever present with us, when all the men of the world are absent from us?

It is reported of a godly Virgin, that being often solicited by a gallant
unto unlawful lust; at last she yielded that if he met her at such a place he
should have leave to work his pleasure with her; both came to the place
appointed; and the place was full of people; then the maiden told him, that now
if he pleased he might use her as he would: he answered that now for shame he
durst not do it in the sight of so many men and women; then she replied, and
think thou that I dare do that in the presence of God, and his holy Angels,
which thou dare not do in the sight of mortal men? and I wish every one of
us did so; that is, to be ashamed to do those things in the sight of God and
his holy Angels, Psalm. 139.2. Velleius paterculus.
which we are afraid to do in the presence of men: for they always see us,
though we see not them; they are about our beds, and about our paths, and
spy out all our ways: and therefore as Marcus Drusus, when one told him he
could build him an house of such a form, as that no man might see what he did
therein, answered; that he liked better of such an Architector as could build
his house so, as that every one passing by might plainly see what was done
therein; so I wish to God that every one of us would strive and labor so to
live, as it becomes us to do in the sight of God and of his blessed Angels.

And so we see the Resurrection of Christ fully and plainly showed us, to the
eternal praise and glory of God, and to the endless joy and happiness of all
Christians, through the said Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, be ascribed, all power and dominion, both now and for ever. Amen.

A Prayer.
O Blessed God, which gave thine only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death for
our sins, to descend into Hell to destroy our enemies, and to rise again for
our justification, and so to declare himself mightily to be the Son of God,
and the true Savior of all men; We most humbly beseech thee to raise us from
the death of sin, from all our sins, and to give us grace to believe in
thee, to be thankful unto thee, and to serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life; that when we shall be laid to rest in
our graves, we may rest in assured hope to be raised up by Christ, to live with
him for evermore; through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

IEHOVAE LIBERATORI.

FINIS.
The Sixth Golden Candlestick, HOLDING The Sixth greatest Light of Christian
RELIGION. Of the Ascension of our SAVIOVR, and of the Donation of the HOLY
GHOST.
EPHESIANS. 4.8. (...).

Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, heeled captivity captive,
and gave gifts unto men.


AFter that the blessed Apostle Saint Paul had by many arguments proved unto
the Ephesians that they should earnestly study, The coherence of this verse
with what goes before.
and most carefully labor to preserve the unity of the Church of Christ, he
seems in the seventh verse to answer a certain objection that might be
made, viz. seeing the graces, the gifts, and the offices which God has
bestowed upon his Church, are so many and so manifold, so diverse and so
unequal, some having many graces, some but few, some one gift, and some
another, how can it be that this unity can be so faithfully preserved?
therefore the Apostle shows that the diversity and inequality of gifts, is
not only no hinderance, but is indeed a great furtherance to cherish and
preserve the same.

First* Because all these gifts do flow from the same fountain, Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Because they are all given and imparted for the same end and
purpose; that is, to gather together the Church of Christ into the unity of
faith.

The first reason he proves out of this Prophecy of David, who speaking of
the Messiah triumphing over his enemies, says, Thou art gone up on high, thou
have led captivity captive, and received gifts for men. And,

The second reason he confirms at large in the verses following, where he
shows, that Christ gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, and all to this end; that is, for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying
of the bo^y of Christ, till we all come into the unity of the faith, and of
the knowledge of the Son of God.

Two things contained in this verse.
And therefore we find contained in this verse, two special points.

First, A confirmation of the Apostles alleged reason: that all graces do
flow from Christ in these words, (...), Wherefore he says.

Secondly, A Prophetical prediction of the Messiah; in these words, When he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.

That the Scripture is the best warrant for all Preachers.
For the first, I mean not to stand long upon it; I will only note this one
thing; that all we the Teachers of Gods people, according to the example of
this Apostle, nay of Christ himself, and of all Christ's true Scholars, should
not teach any positive point of doctrine, unless we can either directly, or by
necessary consequence prove and confirm the same out of the Sacred Scriptures;
for whatsoever has not authority from the word of God, Eadem facilitate
refellitur qua probatur; may as well be rejected as received, Hieron. in Matthew.
c. 23.
says Saint Hierom; and whatsoever is therein contained, it requires absolute
faith without doubting, because, as Hugo Cardinalis says, Quicquid in sacris
literis docetur veritas est sine fallacia; quicquid praecipitur bonitas est
sine malicia; quicquid promittitur faelicitas est sine miseria; Whatsoever is
caught in the Scripture, it is truth it self without fallacy, whatsoever is
commanded it is purely good, without the commixtion of any evil; and
whatsoever is promised, it is perfect felicity without the least jot of
misery; and therefore Saint Augustine says very well, that, Sicut contra
rationem nemo sobrius, and contra ecclesiam nemo Catholicus, ita contra
Scripturas nemo Christianus; as no man that is sober will speak against
reason, no man that is a Catholic will kick against the Church, so no man
that is a Christian will contradict any thing that is said in Scriptures.

For the second, that is, the Prophecy of David, we may observe these three
things.

1. The Glory. 2. The Victory. 3. The Bounty.
of the Messiah, and the Savior of the world, Jesus Christ.

Or else, 1. The Ascension of Christ. 2. The Subjection of our Enemies. The
whole Treatise divided into three parts.
3. The Donation of the Holy Ghost.


First, The Glory of Christ, or his Ascension is set down in these words, When
he ascended up on high.

Secondly, The Victory of Christ, or the subduing of our enemies is set down
in these words, He led captivity captive.

Thirdly, The Bounty of Christ, or the sending down of the Holy Ghost, is set
down in these words, He gave gifts unto men.

The first part has two Branches. Branch. 1.
BRANCH. I.
CHAP. I. Of four sorts of ascenders, and how each one of them ascends.
TOuching the first, that is, the Ascension of Christ, I will by Gods help
handle it two ways:

First, by way of explication of the words;

Secondly, by way of application of the same unto our selves.

And in the first respect we must consider these three points.

Three points to be considered, touching the ascension of Christ.
1. The person Ascending, who he is. 2. The Action or Motion of the person,
going up. 3. The Place, where he is gone, on high.
Thou art gone up on high.

First, the person ascending.
First, For the person ascending, the Psalmist says in the second person,
ascendisti in altum, caepisti captiuitatem, accepisti dona Be-Adam; Thou art
gone up on high, thou have taken captivity, and thou have received gifts for
the sons of Adam; And the Apostle here in the 3. person, says, When he
ascended up on high he led captivity captive, et dedit dona, and he gave gifts
unto men.

Who is that thou, or this he? who is this King of glory, that has ascended up
on high? and what a strange thing is this, to find such difference in the
Scriptures? John 3.
he received gifts, says the Prophet; he gave gifts, says the Apostle. Haud
been conueniunt.

We may say with Nicodemus, How can these things be? for the difference betwixt
the Prophets saying, he received gifts, and the Apostles saying, he gave gifts,
I shall reconcile it hereafter, when I shall come to speak of the 3. point, i.
e. the bounty of the Messiah: and therefore it rests now that we should
discuss only of the person, who he is that is here meant to have ascended;
for Bonauenture says, that there be four sorts of ascenders.

1. Angels. That there be four sorts of ascenders.
2. Devils. 3. Men, both good and bad. 4. The God and Man Christ Jesus.
First, Genesis 28.12. To what end the good Angels do ascend.
Jacob saw the Angels ascending and descending upon a ladder, whose foot was on
earth, and the top thereof reached unto heaven, carrying up our prayers and
supplications, and presenting them unto God, as Raphael did the prayers of
Tobias, and bringing unto us the gifts and graces of God, as Gabriel did the
Message of salvation unto the blessed Virgin; not in respect of any office of
Mediatorship, that they should execute betwixt God and Man, but in respect of
that service which they are to do unto man, at the command of God; and
therefore they are said to ascend and descend along the ladder; that is,
through Jesus Christ, for he is that ladder by whom we ascend and clime up to
God, and through whom we receive all blessings from God: He is the Way, the
Truth, and the Life; John 14.6.
the two sides of this ladder are his two natures, the staves are the
proprieties of each nature, and the knitting of them together is that
indissoluble union of these two natures in the unity of his Person.

Now when Jacob saw this vision of Angels ascending and descending upon this
ladder, dormiuit supra lapidem; Who they be that shall see the Angels
descending, for their comfort.
it is not said that he laid his hard head upon a soft pillow, but that he
laid his tender head (for he was but a young man, and as yet never used to any
hardness) upon a hard stone; to signify unto us, that not those which lay
their hard hearts, and stiff necks upon beds of down, and lie wallowing in
all the pleasures of this world; but those rather which sleep in sorrow and
grief for their sins, and lie upon the hard and rough stone of true
repentance, spending their time with John Baptist in austere conversation,
shall see the Angels of God descending down to comfort them, and ascending up
to carry their souls like Lazarus into Abraham's bosom.

Secondly, Satan said in his heart, Esaias 14.13.
I will exalt my self above the skies, and I will be like unto the most
highest: and of this fastidious and proud ascender, Rupertus Tuicensis writes
excellently and largely in his books De victoria verbi Dei, Bern in Psalm. qui
habitat. Ser. 12.
and Saint Bernard says, that this wicked spirit does emulate and imitate
those heavenly Angels, but most lewdly: quia ascendit studio vanitatis, How
wickedly Satan does ascend.
descendit liuore malignitatis, because he ascends in a vain desire of
dignity to be equal with God, and he descends with an odious heart full of
wrath and malignity to destroy silly men: and sic mendax ascentio, and crudelis
descentio est, and so his ascending is but a lying vanity, and his descending a
cruel indignity: Gregor. in lib. 1. reg. c. 17. page 279. c.
or else as Saint Gregory says, they are said to ascend and descend, quia ad
expugnanda al^a, per caeleste desiderium corda subuenire, and de innocentis
vitae sublimitate nos deponere appetunt, because they seek to ouertop the
Saints of God, and to deiect their desires from the sublimity of heavenly
things, and to bring down their hearts and affections to be fixed on the
things of this base and wretched world: and therefore, pro inani suo ascensu
tam immane praecipitium sortitus est, for such vain ascending he has obtained
a most fearful tumbling of himself into the bottomless pit of hell; Such is
the reward of pride. But seeing their ascending and descending is to subvert
us, and to cast us down to hell, we ought to be very thank^full unto him (
i. e. Jesus Christ) at whose command the good Angels do ascend and descend,
and continually attend upon us, Bernar. de ascen. ser. 4. p. 199.
to defend us from them, (as Saint Bernard says,) and to preserve us in all
our ways, that we hurt not our foot against a stone.

Thirdly, men are said to ascend, and that both the good and the bad.

How wicked men do ascend.
First, ascendere malos, est de malo ad peius proficere, the wicked are said to
ascend when they grow worse and worse, and go on from one wickedness to
another, until they come to the height of all impiety: Greg in l. 1. reg. c.
15. p. 444. f. to. 1.
so the children of the first age after the flood, swelling up with pride, did
lift up their hearts on high, and would build them a tower, whose top might
reach to heaven; Genesis 11 4. Esaias 14.13. Ezech. 28.
so the King of Babell said, I will ascend into heaven, and exalt my throne
above the stars of God; so the King of Tirus said, I am a God, and sit in the
seat of God in the midst of the sea; so will that man of sin, that child of
perdition (whenever he comes) sit in the Temple of God as God, and show
himself that he is God, if not directly by verbal profession, yet apparently
by real usurpation, when he shall undertake to forgive all sins, to bind
all consciences, to dispense with all laws, to dispose of all kingdoms, to
command all Angels, and solely to open and shut heaven and hell at his
pleasure; and so do all the children of pride, ascend up on high to the very
height of all sin; and this sin makes them like unto Lucifer the King of
pride: and as the Poet says, Matrona incedit census induta nepotum. How pride
spoyleth many one.


It makes many a father and mother to wear their childrens portions upon their
backs; it makes many a woman not with Eve to hide their shame, but with
Iesabell to hide their faces, which should be their glory, under shameful
complexions of their own composure, so that God himself, if he did not know
their hearts, might hardly know those veiled faces.

Nec tamen admiror, si vobis cura placendi,
Cum videant comptos secula nostra viros;
And it makes not only women to deny themselves and their age to please men,
but it makes men also to deny their sex almost, to please women, and to spend
more time in powdering their hairs and perfuming themselves, then they do in
the service of God, or of the Commonwealth, and German-like to go in all
attires, unlike to men: yea this sin, as it made the inhabitants of heaven,
to become the citizens of hell; so it makes many a Saint to become a Devil,
and of the sons of God to become sons of Beliall: for as the Poet says of
beautiful persons, Fastus inest pulchris sequiturque superbia formam.

You shall hardly find a fair man or woman that is not proud; so I may as
truly say, Fastus inest justice sequiturque superbia sanctos.

There be not many Saints, but we may fear they are a little proud of their
sanctity; for in our best goodness, if we be not carefully watchful over our
own souls, Satan will seek to make us dote in admiration of our own worth,
and then presently he will stir us up to proceed to the extenuation of
others, and to say with the Pharisee, To be proud of goodness is the worst
pride in the world.
I thank God I am not as other men, or as this Publicane. And of all ascenders
and lifters up of themselves, there is none so bad as these; for as no devil
to the holy devil, when he transformeth himself into an Angel of light; so
no pride like this, to be proud of grace; and the devil rejoices as much to
make a Saint proud, as to make a profane man wicked.

Matthew. 24 15.
And therefore as our Savior says unto the Jews, When you see the abomination
of desolation standing in the holy place, then fly to the mountains; even so,
when you perceive in your selves the least conceit of your own worth and
goodness, then do you presently fear this lifting up, and fly to the
mountain of heaven for grace, to escape the desolation of such high conceits:
for as Orpheus had his wife Euridice granted him out of hell, upon condition
that he should not look upon her until he had passed out of the confines of
hell. But, Flexit amans oculos, and protinus illae relapsa est;

He was so far in love with her, that he could not contain from looking
back, and so she was presently taken back again: even so, if we,
Narcissus-like, stand gazing upon our own worthiness, we shall find our
best deeds but like the apples of Sodom, externally splendide and fair to the
eyes, but being handled by God, or thoroughly tried by the touchstone of Gods
Law, we should find them hollowly defective, and every way impure in his sight.

Indeed it is Satan's usual course, either to hinder us to do well, and to
cause us not to fast, not to pray, not to give alms, not to do good, or else
if we do them, to do them that we may be seen of men, and to be proud of
them; he will be sure to thrust at every side, and to thrust sore at us, that
we may fall: but we must carefully watch him in all his assayes, and especially
in this, Optatus in parab. pharis. and public.
because as Optatus says, Meliora inuenta sunt peccata cum humilitate, quam
innocentia cum superbia; it is better for a man to sin and be humbled, then
to be void of sin, i. e. of all the usual sins of the world, and to be
proud of his innocence.

And thus you see how the wicked do ascend in pride, and as Claudian says,
Satan lifts up wicked men to throw them down.
-- tolluntur in altum
vt lapsu grauiore ruant. --


They are lifted up on high, to have the greater fall: and therefore,
perniciosa haec ascentio, imo magis descentio est, a Jerusalem in Jericho, this
is a most dangerous ascension, nay rather descention from Jerusalem to Jericho,
to fall among thieves, and to be robbed and spoiled of all that we have; for
these have not the silver wings of a Dove, but the waxen wings of Icarus to
help them to ascend, and they are not exalted up by God, because they are not
humble and meek; but they are lifted up by the devil, because they grow great
without goodness; and therefore as Icarus, (Icaria^ nomine fecit aquas) fell
down and was drowned, so will the devil bring down the high looks of the
proud: for as the Iacke-daw takes up a nut in her bill, and flying on high,
lets it fall on a rock for to break it, or as the Eagle deals with the
Oister and Tortoise in like mann^r, (by which means Aescilus died, Valerius
Maximus l. 9. c. 12.
as Valerius Maximus says, because the Eagle seeing his bald head, while in an
open place he made his oration unto his auditors, thought it was a stone, and
therefore letting fall the Tortoise out of her bill, that so falling upon a
stone the shell might be broken, it fell upon his head and killed him;) so the
devil deals with these men, he lifts them up as he did Simon Magus, to make
them fly in the air and then, as he did to the said Magus, he throws them
down to break their necks; and therefore it had been good for many they had
never been thus lifted up.

It is reported of one Gaufredus Monachus Clarevallensis, Bosq^ier, de
monomachia.
that having refused a Bishopric in his life time, he appeared after his
death unto his chamber-fellow, and said that he did well in refusing that
Bishopric which his friends would have had him to accept: quia si in numero
Episcoporum fuisset, in numero damnatorum esset, because that if he had been of
the number of the Bishops, he should now have been of the number of the
damned, not that all Bishops must be damned, God forbid, there have been and
there are many of them exceeding good, learned, painful, and upright men,
(though I must unfeignedly confess, I have seen some, not as I would wish;)
but that if he had aspired to that dignity, by that unlawful means as (it is
most likely) it was offered him; for otherwise it had been most lawful for
him, both to desire it, and to accept it; for he that desires the office of a
Bishop, desires a good work, says the Apostle: or though he might lawfully
have attained unto it, yet if he finding himself, though fit enough to be a
Monk, yet unfit to be a Bishop, had accepted the same, then certainly it must
needs have followed, that if more mercy were not showed then he deserved, he
must needs be in the number of the damned: and it would be well for many, if
they did not rise to fall; for of such ascenders, Bonauen. de ascen. ser. 4. p
199.
Bonauenture says, that quantum ascenderunt per ambitionem in mundo, tantum
descendent per damnationem in inferno; by how much the higher they have
ascenbed by their ambition in the world, by so much the greater shall be their
damnation in hell: and so of these the Prophet David says, in a mystical
sense, though literally I confess it spoken of seafaring men, quod ascendunt
vsque ad Coelum, and descendunt vsque ad Abyssos; that they are lifted up to
the Heavens, and down again they fall into the bottomless pit: but they do
not descend in the same manner as they ascend, for they do ascend most
willingly, but they shall be cast down most violently into that place of
utter darkness; Luke 12.
Thou fool, this night they shall take away thy soul from thee; even as a
Sergeant does a prisoner into his goal against his will: and they do ascend
by degrees, by little and little, and by the space of forty, fifty, or sixty
years, but they shall suddenly fall away, like the lightening whereof our
Savior speaks, I saw Satan as a lightening falling down from heaven; i. e.
suddenly and fearfully they shall fall to ruin: Diabolus itaque and homo,
Bernard. in flor. p. 2090. c.
and homo, vterque ascendere voluit, sed praepostere, hic ad scientiam, ille ad
potentiam, ambo ad superbiam, and so both the Devil and wicked men would each
of them ascend, but preposterously; men to be wise, the devil to be great,
and both to be proud says Saint Bernard; for which they shall both fall down
to hell.

How the godly do ascend.
Secondly, good men do ascend as well as the evil and wicked; and though they
do not ascend after the same manner, yet they do it the same way, (says
Saint Bernard) as the wicked do; Idem de gradibus humilit. p. 972.
because as the same way leads unto the city, as goes from the city, and by
the same door we enter into the house, as we go out of the house; so if we
would return unto the truth, and ascend up into heaven, we need not seek
any other new way, but by which we have descended and fallen down from heaven,
we must ascend and climb up into heaven; and as Cacus dragged his cattle
backewards into his cave, so we, vestigia retrorsum, must retire back by the
same steps as we have proceeded forward; but you know we fell by pride, we
would be like God, Genesis 3.5.
and therefore we must ascend by humility, we must know our selves to be
nothing, and worth nothing, this is the way, and there is none other but this;
qui aliter vadit, cadit potius quam ascendit, and he that would by any other
way ascend up to heaven, he does surely fall from heaven; because it was
enacted by the eternal Law of the God of heaven, that every one which exalts
himself, shall be humbled, The way to heaven is humility.
and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted: And therefore Christ, having
not as he was God, any way whereby he might ascend, because nothing is higher
then God, and God cannot be higher then he is, by his humiliation and
descention he found how to ascend; for coming to be incarnate, and to suffer
death, that we should not suffer eternal death; therefore God exalted him, and
gave him a name above all other names; to teach us, that by humility only we
may ascend to eternal felicity: Go thou and do thou likewise, humble thy
self, if thou would be exalted into heaven, and because thine humility is
full of pride, lay hold upon the humility of Jesus Christ, for that is only
perfect; and therefore it is that only that can bring thee to perfection.

Fourthly, we read, that Christ ascended and was lifted up; Christ ascended
three special times.
and that as we find three special times: 1. upon the Cross, when the Jews
insulted over him. 2. from his Grave, when the Devils trembled at it. 3. into
Heaven, when all the host of heaven rejoiced at it,
and said; Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up ye
everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in; for this is he that
has trodden the wine-fat alone, and is worthy of all glory and honor for
evermore.

And so you see how many sorts there be of ascenders; and you see, I think,
how fearful is the ascension of Satan and of wicked men: Bernard. de ascen.
ser. 4. page 199.
and how glorious is the ascension of the Saints. And we find that as S.
Bernard says, omnes cupidi sumus ascentionis, exaltationem concupiscimus
omnes; we all desire to be exalted, we all would feign be lifted up to
heaven; but who shall teach us the way thither, lest we should be seduced by
him that fell from thence, and so seeking to ascend up into heaven, we should
fearfully fall down into hell? Who (says Saint Bernard) but he, John 3.13.
of whom it is written that he ascended up on high, that ascended up above all
heavens? we must learn the way of him if we would ascend to heaven; for he
came down from heaven, and he is gone up into heaven, and now he sits in
heaven upon the right hand of God.

CHAP. II. That Jesus Christ the Son of God, is he that is meant by the
Prophet David and Saint Paul, to have ascended upon high.
he ascended up on high? for many ascend as you hear, but which is he that is
here meant? I confess the 68. Psalm, Resp. Psalm 68.
wherein these words are first written, is literally to be understood, not of
any triumph for the slaughter of the host of Senacherib, which was done in the
time of King Hezekias (as the Jews do most fabulously dream) when the very
Title of this Psalm, that ascribes it unto David, does sufficiently confute
this vanity; nor yet for any of the victories of David, which he obtained
against his bordering enemies, the Ammonites, Literally these words were spoken
of the Arc of the Covenant.
the Moabites, the Idumeans, and the Philistines, (as some would have it;) but
of that great and glorious pomp, which was then done and showed, when King
David with great joy and triumph did bring the Arc of the Covenant into the
hill of Sion; and therefore these words, thou art gone upon high, Mollerus in
Psalm 68.
do signify that the Arc which formerly had layne in an obscure place, and
was transported from one place to another, was now ascended and seated in a
most illustrious and conspicuous place, even in the Kingly palace; and these
words, thou have led captivity captive, to signify those enemies which
formerly had spoiled and wasted diverse Countries; but now being vanquished by
King David, were led captive in this triumph, (for so it was the manner of
those times, as Plutarch does excellently declare in the life of Paulus
Aemilius;) and the other words, thou have received gifts for men, Plutarch. in
vita Pauli Aemilij.
do signify those spoils that were freely offered for conditions of peace,
and were triumphantly carried about in this pompous show, for the greater
solemnity of the same; and then, (as the manner was among the chiefftaines,
when they triumphed, Bellica laudatis dona dedisse viris, to bestow warlike
gifts upon worthy men) were bestowed on several men, in several manner, as
Sigonius shows; Sigon. l. 2. de antiquo iure pro.
Yet I say that mystically this Psalm is an (...), or a tryumphall song,
penned by King David, upon the foresight of Jesus Christ arising from the dead,
and with great joy and triumph ascending up into Heaven; Mystically these words
were first spoken of Christ ascending up into Heaven.
and thence sending his holy spirit unto his Apostles, and Disciples; and,
having overcome all his enemies, collecting by the ministry of his Preachers,
his Church and chosen servants together, and so guiding and defending them
here in this life, until he does receive them into eternal glory: for so
the authority of Saint Paul interpreting them, and all other Divines with one
consent does compel us to understand them, and to know that that pompous show
and triumph of King David, was but the praeludium and type of this triumph of
our Savior Christ, whereof the Apostle speaks in this place; and it was an
usual thing for the Prophet David, in all his chiefest and most glorious acts,
so to behold the Proto-type, that is, the Messiah, whose type he knew he was,
and so to accommodate all his actions unto what the Messiah should do, that
all men might perceive these things to be done, not through any humane
invention, All the chiefest acts of David were types of Christ.
but as he was moved and guided by the inward inspiration of Gods spirit, and
that for the instruction and edification of the whole Church, when by these
outward perspicuous acts of David, as by certain visible lectures, all men
might see, and read those things that should be done by Jesus Christ: And
therefore I say, that the person prophesied of, by King David, and here spoken
of, by Saint Paul to have ascended up on high, is our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, who having vanquished and overcome sin, death, Hell, and all our
enemies, did most gloriously ascend up to Heaven in the presence of all his
Apostles and Disciples, and thence sent the holy Ghost to replenish and fill
their hearts with all spiritual gifts and graces: and this will more fully
appear unto us out of the second point, which is the action or the motion of
this person, set down in the word ascendit, when he ascended up on high.

CHAP. II. A fuller declaration of the person ascending, and of the time,
place, and manner of his ascension.
Saint Paul collecteth two things out of the word he ascended.
YOU have heard of the person ascending, who he is, Jesus Christ: we are now to
consider of his ascension, out of this word ascendit, when he ascended up on
high: but first we must observe, that our Apostle out of this Word, he
ascended, does collect both the humiliation and the exaltation of Christ.

First, the humiliation of Christ.
First, his humiliation in the 9. v for that he says, he ascended, what is it
but that he descended first into the lower parts of the earth? wherein the
Apostle would have David, when he forespake of the glorification and the
ascension of Christ into Heaven, to have foreseen his humiliation and
descention from Heaven to be incarnate and made man.

Secondly, the exaltation of Christ.
Secondly, his exaltation in the tenth verse, he that descended is the same
also that ascended far above all heavens: for these two verses are read by a
parenthesis, and are added by the Apostle, for the fuller explication of those
hidden mysteries, that are included in the word he ascended.

First, touching the descention, the Apostle sets down two things, 1. The
descent it self, that he descended. 2. The extent of his descent, into the
lower parts of the earth.


The first shows us that he was first in Heaven, Christ first descended, i.
e. was incarnate, before he could ascend.
i. e. according to his Godhead, or else he could never have descended out of
Heaven, and that he descended to be incarnate and m^de man before the man
Christ could ascend up into Heaven; and therefore the Prophet David foreseeing
the ascension of the man Christ, must needs foresee the humiliation of the
Son of God to be made man.

The second is a point more controuerted: for first, some do expound the lower
parts of the earth, to signify his mothers womb, because the descent of the
Son of God, is nothing else but his incarnation, and that was done in his
mothers womb; and because the Prophet David uses the like saying of himself,
I was formed beneath in the earth, i. e. in my mothers womb; In inferioribus
terra.
secondly, others will have this phrase to signify his abode and conversation
here among men; thirdly, others will have it to signify the state and
condition of the dead, as if the comparison were made betwixt those parts of
the earth, wherein the living do inhabit, and that place wherein the dead are
buried; and so they do expound that place of Esayas, that he was cut off from
the land of the living, and so cast into the land of the dead, Esaias 53.8.
which they say, the Apostle understands by the lower parts of the earth:
and, fourthly, others say, that he descended into the place of the damned, not
to suffer, John 19.30.
because that was finished on the Cross, nor to fetch any Fathers out of
Lymbe, but to signify and to show, not only by words, but also by presence,
that seeing by his death and Passion, the wrath of God was appeased, Satan was
to have no more power over the Elect, which he held captive, that he was now
made Lord of all, and that all power was given unto him, and a name above all
other names; Collos. 2.15.
and not only to declare the same unto them, but also to subdue them, and to
spoil principalities and powers; and as my Text says, to lead captivity
captive: And this is the exposition of most of the ancient Fathers; for mine
own part I am of Zanchius mind, La^ch. in Ephesians. c. 4.
that in the word descendit, all these four expositions may be comprehended
because he descended, into his mothers womb, to be conversant here among men,
into his grave, and into Hell; and our very Creed expresses all these four;
he was conceived by the holy Ghost, i. e. in his mothers womb, there is the
first; he was borne of the Virgin Marie, and he suffered under Pontius
Pilate, there is the second; he was dead and buried, there is the third; and he
descended into Hell, there is the fourth; and these be the four degrees of his
humiliation: That Christ descended into Hell.
and this the Apostle seems plainly to understand by the antithesis, by the
coherence, and by the scope of the words; because he says, that he ascended
to the highest part of Heaven, and therefore this also that he descended into
the lower parts of the earth, is literally to be understood, that he descended
into Hell; because no place of the earth, is lower then Hell.

Secondly, Touching the exaltation of Christ, Saint Paul sets down two
things, 1. He describes the Person ascending, he which descended. 2. He
expresses the action, he ascended.


He which ascended is the very same person which descended.
First, he says, that it is he which descended that has ascended, i. e. he
which was made man, which suffered and was buried, he ascended; and who is he,
but God the Son, the second Person of the Trinity? for so our Savior says,
I went forth from the Father, and I came into the world, and again, I leave
the world, and I go to the Father; and therefore it is the very self same Son
of God, and none other, which both descended and ascended.

And so by these few words, we find two great heresies quite overthrown;
first, of them which say, he brought his body from Heaven, because the Apostle
does not say, he which ascended descended (though this be true, being truly
understood) for he ascended God and Man, which so, did not descend, but as God
alone; therefore he says, he which descended, he ascended; secondly, hereby is
overthrown the heresy of Nestorius, which said, our Savior consists of two
persons; for, if he which descended is the very same that ascended, then it is
apparent that by his descention, That in Christ there cannot be two persons.
i. e. by the assumption of our nature, he is no other person then he was
before; but still remains one and the self same person, and that the humane
nature does add nothing unto the Son of God, for the constituting or
perfecting of his person; for otherwise he that ascended had bin another, and
not the same which descended; for he had descended a simple person, and
ascended compounded, he had descended an imperfect person, and ascended
perfect, which is most heretical either to say or think: And this is the
cause, why we affirm that the person of Christ cannot be said to be
compounded of two natures, tanquam ex partibus, as of two parts, Christ still
remains a most simple person, i. e not compounded.
but as he was before the assuming of our nature, so also now he is still a
most simple and a most perfect person, bearing our nature, as on ^^areth on his
garment, but never to put it off again, because it is assumed into the unity
of his person: and so Saint Augustine says, that Christ descended like a naked
man, and when he ascended, he ascended the same person, but clothed with our
flesh: and therefore, as he is not another man that takes on a garment, so the
Son of God is not another person, because he took upon him the garment of
our flesh: and if the humane nature assumed, did neither change, nor perfect,
nor compound the person of the Son of God, because he which descended, is the
very same that ascended and none other, then by the same reason it cannot be
said, that Christ took man upon him, i. e. a humane person, as Nestorius
taught.

But therefore he understood not the same, How Nestorius was deceived about the
person of Christ.
because on the one side he held that true philosophical principle, that the
actions are of the persons, and not of the natures; and on the other side, he
held another principle (which is also true, if it be truly understood) that of
contrary effects there must be contrary efficient causes: and he saw that in
Christ there were diverse and contrary actions; and therefore he did thence
conclude, that in Christ there must needs be diverse persons, whereof the one
should be passible and the other impassible; and so he made that he which
descended was not the same, but another that ascended; for he considered not,
quod idem (...), potest diuersa and pugnantia op^rari secundam diuersas in eo
naturas, that the same subsistent or person may work diverse and contrary
acts, in respect of the diverse natures that are in it; as a man according to
his soul does understand, and according to his body he does not understand,
in respect of his soul he is immortal, and in respect of his body he is
mortal; and so through his ignorance he has abused these true philosophical
principles (being truly understood) to deny the truth of the Scriptures, and
to wrong the person of the Son of God; but the Fathers truly explaining the
said principles, did confute his error and confirm this truth, that he which
descended, is the very same that ascended, and none other.

But from hence it is apparent, that the word descendit, is not to be taken in
the same sense, as the word ascendit; for he descended as God, and God fills
all places; and therefore it is not phisically to be understood, of any local
descent; but for his exinination and the assumption of our flesh: but he
ascended as God and Man; and therefore must phisically be understood of a
local ascent; and whole Christ is said to ascend, by reason of the
communication of the properties and the union of both natures into one person.

Secondly, the action or ascending of Christ.
Secondly, Saint Paul having thus fully described, and showed the person
ascending, i. e. he that descended, expresses the very act or motion, in
this word ascendit, he ascended up on high: touching which, we must consider
these three especial points, 1. The time of his ascension: 2. The place of his
ascension: 3. The manner of his ascension:
All which are fully showed by Saint Luke in the first of the Acts.

Acts 1.3.
First, he says, that he showed himself alive after his Passion, by many
infallible proofs, for the space of forty days: touching which number, The
time when Christ ascended.
why he remained on earth just forty days, many men have collected many
mysteries: Moses was in the Mount with God forty days; the children of Israel
wandered in the wilderness forty years; Elias fasted forty days; Niniue had
time of repentance forty days; our Savior fasted forty days; and many other
like examples might be found of this just period of forty days: Bosquierus de
monomachia Christi.
and I will not here search into the reason of these things; he that will, let
him look into Bosquierus, but I will only note those two reasons, why he
continued so long on earth after his resurrection, which Saint Luke sets
down unto us:

First, to prove the certanity of his resurrection; therefore he says, that
he appeared unto them.

Secondly, to instruct his Apostles, in faith, hope, charity, and all other
points concerning the Kingdom of God, as Eusebius notes; and the Evangelist
plainly expresses, saying, Eusebius l. 4. de praeparat. Euang.
that he was seen of his Apostles forty days speaking of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

But here we must observe, that for this space of forty days, he was not with
his Apostles and Disciples, after the same manner as he was with them before
his Passion; for that now he was not continually conversant with them, but did
only at some times appear unto them.

If then you demand where he was for that space, while he was not with his
Disciples, whetherin the Wilderness, as some do think, or in the
terrestrial Paradise, which Bellarmine affirms to remain still though
Pererius says, it was quite abolished by the deluge, or in what place he
secluded himself, I will no ways venture to determine: for I will always hold
that excellent rule of Prosper; Quae deus occulta esse voluit, Prosper de
vocat. gentium.
non sunt scrutanda, quae autem manifesta fecit, non sunt negligenda, ne and in
illis illicite curiosi and in his damnabiliter inueniamur ingrati; What God
has concealed, they are not to be searched, and what he has declared, they
are not to be neglected; lest that in the former we shall be found to be
unlawfully curious, and in the latter most damnably careless.

Secondly, For the place from whence he ascended, it is said, The place from
whence he ascended.
that he went from Galilee to Bethanie, from Bethanie to Mount Oliuet, and from
Mount Oliuet, unto Heaven: Galilee signifies transmigration, and Bethanie is
interpreted the House of obdience, to show that as he descended by reason of
our disobedience, to suffer for our sins, and to give us an example of
obedience, thereby parare nos mansioni, to prepare us for Heaven, so by reason
of his most perfect obedience, in fulfilling all righteousness, He ascended
into Heaven; Parare mansionem nobis; Act. 14.12.
to prepare a place for us: or else Bethanie may signify the House of
affliction, to show that by many afflictions and tribulations we must enter
into the Kingdom of God. And he ascended from Mount Oliuet, because he would
use no miracle, while the strength of nature served; and whosoever does
otherwise, The manner of Christ his ascending. Luke 24.51.
tempts God, rather then trust in God.

Thirdly, For the Manner, Bonauenture observes, that he ascended.

First, Blessing his Apostles, as the Evangelist says, While he blessed them,
he was parted from them; which is an exceeding comfort unto us the poor
distressed Ministers of Jesus Christ; for though the world hate us, and curse
us, and say all manner of evil against us, yet behold Christ parting, left his
blessing with us, to defend us against all their malice: And he blessed them
with his hands lifted up; to teach us, that in our prayers we do with Moses
fight with God, we hold his hands, and suffer him not to strike us with the
sword of vengeance; and this is the Victory which ouercomes our God, even our
prayers; and to teach us that when our mouth prays to God, we should likewise
move our hands to do the works of God; and further to teach us that by this
manner of praying with our hands spread and lifted up, Prudentius hymno. 6.
we should profess Christ crucified, as Prudentius says.

Secondly, He was not suddenly snatched from them, as Elias, nor secretly taken
away, as Enoch was; Sed videntibus illis; but in the presence of them all, his
Apostles and Disciples, he ascended up to Heaven.

Act. 1.9.
Thirdly, That as he ascended, the clouds received him out of their sight: to
show that he was the Lord of al^ his creatures; he had already trampled upon
the earth, walked upon the Sea, vanquished Hell, Bern. Ser. 2. de ascent. p.
192.
and subdued all infernal things under his feet; and therefore now the clouds
received him, and the Heavens are opened to make way for this King of glory to
enter in.

Fourthly, He ascended, in voce tubae, in the sound of a Trumpet, not on earth
sounding Hosanna, but in Heaven crying Haleluiah: for God is gone up with a
merry noise, and the Lord with the sound of a trumpet, Psalm. 46.5.
says the Psalmist. So,

You have heard how he went, and you shall see him coming after the same
manner, says the Angel.

First, With the sound of a trumpet, that shall raise the dead: and this great
trumpet of God is the voice of the Angels, a voice fearfully crying, Surgite
mortui, and venite ad iudicium; Arise ye dead and come unto judgment; a voice
that always made Saint Hierome to quake and tremble, whatsoever ^ee was a
doing.

Secondly, He shall come in the clouds, and we shall be taken up into the
clouds; 1 These. 4.14.
that as we see the clouds protect us from the heat of the Sun; so we may
be ouershadowed from the heat of the wrath of God, by that true cloud Jesus
Christ.

Thirdly, He shall come, though unlooked for by the wicked, as a thief in the
night, yet so apparently, that he shall be seen of all the world, and with a
great company of Angels; 2 Pet. 3.10.
Et cum milibus sanctorum; and with thousands of his Saints, as the Apostle
says, for the chariots of God are twenty thousands, Psalm. 68.17.
even thousands of Angels, and the Lord shall be among them, as in the holy
place of Sin^y.

Fourthly, he shall come with a blessing to rejoice the hearts of his Elect,
when he shall say unto them, Matthew. 25.
Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom that was prepared for you,
before the beginning of the world. And so much for the motion, or his ascending
up.

CHAP. IIII. The place into which Christ ascended.
THirdly, We are to consider, terminus ad quem, the place whether he ascended;
Quo (inquit Augustinus) nisi quo scimus, Aug. in Psalm. 46. p. 174. b. 2.
quo eum Iudaej non sunt secut^? Where is he gone, but where we know, and
where the Jews shall not be able to follow after? Quia in cruce exaltatum
irriserunt, ideo in coelum ascendentem non viderunt; Because they mocked him
being nailed on the Cross, therefore they saw him not when he ascended up to
Heaven: and where is he gone, says the Prophet David, but on high? for, thou
art gone up on high, that is, above all Heavens, says the Apostle.

And therefore by this one little sentence, we find three damnable Heresies
brought to death.

First, Of them which said his body vanished in the air, Three heresies
confuted.
before he ascended into Heaven: for he ascended above all heavens.

Secondly, Of them that said he ascended into the Orb and Circle of the Sun,
because it is said, in solemn posuit tabernaculum suum: Psalm. 19.5.
He has set his Tabernacle in the Sun; which was the opinion of the
Hermians, and the Passionists, as both Nazianzen and Saint Augustine do
affirm; for here we see, he is gone above all Heavens: and therefore above
the Orb of the Sun, and they mistake that place of the Psalmist, which is,
in them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, and not, he has set his
Tabernacle in the Sun.

Thirdly, Of them which teach an vbiquitary Heaven, because he is ascended
above such Heavens.

Ob.
But then it may be objected, that if he be ascended above all Heavens, then is
he in no certain place, because (as Aristotle says) Beyond Heaven, Arist. l.
1. de coelo.
there is no place.

Sol.
I answer, that the Scripture makes mention of three Heavens:

That there be three Heavens.
First, Of the Air, as the Fowls of Heaven.

Secondly, Of the Celestial Orbs, as the Stars of Heaven.

Thirdly, Of the Receptacle of the blessed souls, which is called the Kingdom
of Heaven.

And this we must understand to be either 1. Material. 2. Spiritual. 3.
Supersubstantiall.


Christ ascended above the material Heavens.
First, For the Material Heaven: he is said to ascend above the same.

First, In respect of Glory; because the Body of Christ is more glorious then
any Material Heaven.

Secondly, In respect of the Continency, because in nature, it is infallible,
that contentu^ superius est continente, the thing contained must be higher then
the place containing.

Thirdly, In respect of his blessed soul; because the soul of Christ is more
blessed then all things else whatsoever.

Christ ascended above the spiritual Heavens.
Secondly, For the spiritual heavens, i. e. all Angelical or Heavenly
perfections, he is said to ascend above them all.

First, In respect of perfection; because the body of Christ is more noble, and
more excellent then any creature, not in regard of his corporal substance, but
in regard of the hypostaticall union, because it is united unto the Godhead.

Secondly, In respect of his humiliation; because he has vilified himself
below all things; therefore he is worthily exalted above all things.

Thirdly, For the supersubstantiall Heaven, i. e. God himself, and the place
of God; he is said, in respect of his person, to ascend into the same; not that
the humane nature is ascended to the equality of the Godhead; for he is still
inferior to the Father, and shall be still subject to the Father, as touching
his Manhood; but that the person of Christ, God and Man, sits on the right
hand of God; that is, does rest and reign, exalted above all things, Vsque ad
aequalitatem Maiestatis dei; To be in all things equal unto the Majesty of
God, as Saint Augustine expounds it: Descendit enim quo inferius non decuit,
ideo ascendit quo altius non potuit; For he descended so low, as it was not fit
for him to go lower; and therefore he ascended so high, as it was not possible
for him to go higher, says Saint Bernard.

And therefore Christ is ascended higher then all created things whatsoever.
Christ higher then all created things.


First, In respect of the place; because above all Heavens.

Secondly, In respect of power; Psalm. ^.6.
because God the Father has subjected all things under his feet, i. e. as
well things in Heaven, as things in Earth.

Thirdly, In respect of Dignity; Heb. 1.
because he is made more excellent then the Angels.

Fourthly, In respect of this equality, even with God himself.

And so we see how Christ in respect of his person, That Christ in respect of
his manhood, is in the highest part of the imperial heavens.
is above all Heavens; because he is an immeasurable and infinite person, which
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain: and therefore must needs be every where;
but in respect of his humane nature assumed, he is in the highest part or
place of the Imperial Heaven, which is the seat of the blessed souls; for if
he were in no place, then much less should he be in the Earth, in the Sun,
or in every place; but Saint Augustine does most excellently show, Aug. in ep.
ad Dardan.
that Vbi corpus ibi locum esse necesse est; that wheresoever a body is, there
must needs be place; because, if we take away dimensions and places from
bodies, they shall be no where; Et sinusquam erunt, non erunt; and if they be
no where, they shall not be at all: and Saint Peter does as plainly show this
truth, when he says, that the Heavens shall and must contain him, Act. 3.21.
( i. e. In respect of his Manhood, for in respect of his Godhead it cannot)
until the restitution of all things: and so we profess in our Creed, that he
sits on the right hand of God, from whence he shall come, (i. e. in respect
of his humanity; for his Deity being every where, cannot be said to go or to
come any where) to judge both the quick and the dead. And therefore it is most
certain that the Body of Christ is in a place; that is, in the highest part of
Heaven; which Oecumenius calls (...), The receptacle of him that is sent;
Aug. l de fide and symbolo. c. 6. Cyril. in Leuit. l. 9. Vigilius contra
Eutych. l. 4.
and this the Fathers, Saint Augustine, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Vigilius,
Theodoret, and others, have most fully showed and proved unto us: and that for
these three special ends.

First, That we might be assured, our Savior Christ remains still a true and
a perfect man in glory.

Secondly, That we might know where to seek, and where to find our Savior
Christ: Nam pontifex noster non vtique in terra quaerendus, Orig. in leuit.
sed in coelo: For our high Priest Jesus Christ is not to be sought for in
Earth, but in Heaven, says Origin: and therefore, as S. Augustine said of Mary
Magdalen; Aug. de tempore Ser. 133.
Quid quaeris in tumulo quem adorare debes in coelo? Why seek thou him in
the grave below, whom thou should adore in the Heavens above? so much better
might I now say unto many men; Alas, why seek you Christ here on Earth in
Bread and Wine, and I know not where; when as he is no where to be found in
respect of his Manhood, but in Heaven? there is the place where he sits on
the right hand of the Majesty of God.

Thirdly, That we might know, where we shall be; for so our Savior says, John
17.24.
Father I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am.

Ob.
But against this it may be objected, that Christ himself says, No man
ascends unto Heaven, but he that descended from Heaven, John 3.13.
the Son of man which is in Heaven: And therefore how shall we have any hope,
to ascend up unto Heaven?

Sol.
Saint Augustine answers, that we are not therefore to despair, because he
ascends alone, i. e. by his proper strength and power; for we shall be
elevated and taken up by the power of Christ, who came therefore down from
Heaven, that he might carry us up into Heaven, that were falling down into
Hell: or as the same Saint Augustine says, We ought therefore to be united
unto him, That we must be united to Christ, if we will ascend where Christ is.
that so it might be but one Christ which descended and ascended; he descended
as the head of his Church, and he ascends with his whole body, which is his
Church; he descended naked, and he ascends clothed with our flesh; and he
descended as a husband without a wife, but he ascends married unto his
Church: and so he and us is but one; one body, one flesh; Vnitas nos compaginat
vni; Aug. in Psalm. 122. p. 591.
Our unity with him makes us one with him: and therefore they only shall not
ascend, which are not, nor will not be made one with him: but our conversation
is in Heaven, and our life is hid with Christ in God: and therefore he might
well say, No man ascends, but he that descends, if you understand it of
Christ mystically; that is, of him wholly, of him and all his members, because
none but his members shall ascend into Heaven.

And so you see the place where Christ ascended, into heaven: Rupertus de
offic. divine. c. 8.
Quomodo autem sit in coelo corpus domini, curiosissimum est quaerere; But to
inquire how the body of Christ is in Heaven, whether sitting or standing,
whether naked or clothed, Aug. l. de fide and sym.
which Clemens Alexandrinus denies, because the Saints in Heaven shall have no
need of clothing; or how he ascended into Heaven, whether in a purple robe, as
Fredernus Nausea supposes out of Esaias, Esaias 63.2.
whose meaning is far otherwise then Nausea thinks; and many other curious
questions, they are far fitter to be buried in silence, then to be once
determined by any modest Christian; because as Saint Augustine says, Curious
questions ought not to be discussed.
Non est nostrae fragilitatis secreta coelorum discutere; sed est fidei nostra
de dominici corporis dignitate sublimia and honesta sapere: It is not possible
for our weakness to understand the secrets of Heaven; it is enough that by
faith we believe and conceive worthy things, Idem quo sup. de fide and symb.
and that holily and modestly concerning Christ. And so much for the
explication of the first part, which is, of the Ascension of our Savior Christ.

Branch. 2.
BRANCH. II.
CHAP. V. Of the application of this Doctrine of the Ascension of Christ unto
our selves, both in respect of consolation and imitation.
The Doctrine of Christ's Ascension may serve for a double end.
SEcondly, For the application of this Doctrine unto our selves, you must note
that it may serve for a double end.

1. Of Consolation. 2. Of Imitation.
First, Our Consolation is likewise twofold.

1. That he is gone to Heaven. For, 2. That he is not unmindful of us on
earth. For,
Aug. in Act.
First, Dum naturam humanam syderibus Christus importauit, credentibus coelum
patere posse monstrauit; Whereas Christ has carried our humane nature unto
heaven, he has thereby showed, that now Heaven is open for all believers,
says Saint Augustine; O then how much should we rejoice hereat! because now
only we see indeed, which before we only saw in hope, the Chyrography and
handwriting of our damnation blotted out, and the sentence of our corruption
quite changed: for now we see that nature, Genesis 3.19.
to whom it was said, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return; to have
gone to Heaven, and there to reign without end. Neither are we only made
possessors of Heaven, but we do receive more ample, and more excellent things,
by this most ineffable glory of Christ, then we have lost by that inueterate
envy of the Devil: Nam quos diabolus de Paradiso eiecit, Leo in Ser. de Ascent.
hos dei filius in coelo collocauit; For whom Satan has cast out of Paradise,
Christ has brought them unto everlasting happiness.

Secondly, As it is our comfort, that he has given us possession of heaven, so
it is as great a comfort unto us, That Christ in Heaven forgets not his
servants here on earth.
that he being in Heaven, is not unmindful of us, that are here on earth:
Indeed Pharaoh's butler forgot Joseph, when he ascended unto his masters
favor, and so it is an usual thing in the world, for all great men, that have
been raised up of nothing, to be most unmindful of their poor friends and
acquaintance; they hold it a point of policy to know them not, or at least to
look strangley and sternely upon them: whereupon it is most truly said,
Asperius nihil est humili, cum surgit in altum: None so disdainful, none so
proud, as they that have ascended up on high, from mean estate; but it is not
so with Christ; for though he be gone up on high from the meanest among men to
be equal with God; yet there he is not unmindful of us; but sitting on the
right hand of God, he makes continual intercession for us, and sends his
spirit to comfort us; for though corpus intulit Coelo, he has placed his body
in Heaven, yet maiestatem non abstulit mundo, he leaves his spirit, which
fills all places here on earth: Mat. 28. vlt.
for lo (says he) I am with you until the end of the world, that is, to
deliver us from all miseries, and to give us all those good things, that he
sees good for us: And therefore, though Abraham should forget us, or Israel
be ignorant of us, or as Mardoceus said unto Queen Hester, if thou altogether
hold thy peace at this time, Hester 4.14.
and do nothing in the world for us, yet shall there enlargement and
deliverance arise unto the Jews from another place: even so, though we should
fear men will forsake us and forget us, and do nothing for us, either to
deliver us from any troubles feared, or to help us unto any good desired; yet
this our good God, which neither slumbereth nor sleeps, though he be ascended
to heaven, yet he will defend us on earth, and he will lift us up out of the
mire, if we put our trust in him, he will send us comfort out of some other
place: Fear you not, but stand still, Exodus 14 13.
and see the salvation of God which he will show unto you.

Secondly, the resurrection of Christ is our hope, but his ascension is our
glorification; Si ergo recte, si fideliter, si deuote ascentionem domini
celebramus, ascendere debemus cum illo; and therefore if we do rightly, if we
do faithfully and devoutly celebrate and make a right use of the ascension of
Christ, then must w^e labor and strive to ascend with him: That in heart and
affection we should always ascend to Heaven.
and if, by reason of the infirmity of our flesh, we are so detained and kept
back, that we cannot ascend as we would to be where he is; yet let us
endeavor to follow after, passibus amoris, et affectu cordis, with the best
paces of love, and the most earnest desires of our hearts: And indeed it is
not the lifting up of our eyes, nor the holding up of our hands, that is the
right ascending into Heaven; for this may be, as it is many times mere
hypocrisy, even as the witch of Endor lifted up Samuel to deceive Saul, so
does this witch hypocrisy cause many a one, to lift up their hands and eyes to
Heaven, to deceive the world, and to make us believe they are true Saints,
whereas in deed they be very Devils; but we must have sursum corda, our
hearts lifted up; for this is that chieffest place of man, which both God and
the Devil laboreth most of all to attain; Proverb 23.26.
for God says, Son give me thy heart, and lift up the same to Heaven; and
so the Devil seeks but the heart, if riches increase, set your hearts upon
them, and therefore the heart of man is called by Macarius (...), the Throne of
God, or else (...) the Throne of Satan; for if we lift up the same to God and
set our affections on the things that are above, then is our hearts the Throne
of God; but if our love and affections be on the things of this world, then is
our hearts the seat of the scornful and the habitation of Devils. Psalm. 1.1.


And therefore, that we may the better learn how to ascend, and to lift up our
hearts to God, I will desire you to consider these three things; first,
terminum; secondly, modum, thirdly, signum.

Three things to be considered touching our spiritual ascension unto Heaven.
1. The place from whence, and unto what we must ascend. 2. By what means we
shall raise up our selves unto God. 3. The sign whereby we may know, whether
we have ascended any way toward Heaven or not.
First, the place from whence we must ascend, is this world, behold says
Christ, I leave the world, and I go to the Father; so if we would go to
Christ, we must leave the world, and never envy at the prosperity of them,
quorum tectorum gloria attenditur, labes autem animorum non attenditur, whose
outward glory we do see, but whose inward miseries we do not see. And the
place where we must ascend is, in altum, unto the Kingdom of Heaven, where the
eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
and the ear has not heard the things which God has prepared for them that
love him.

Secondly, the means how to raise our selves from this valley of miseries unto
the height of Heaven, is by casting from us, all the things that may press us
down, and assuming the things that may help us up: And you know that
whatsoever is heavy presses down, Nothing is so heavy as sin.
and we know that there is nothing so heavy upon the soul as sin, this is
like a Talent of lead: it makes the whole world to reele to and fro like a
drunken man; Atlas en ipse laborat; and it was so heavy upon Christ his
shoulders, Mat. 27.46.
that in the Garden it made him to sweat the drops of blood, and upon the
Cross it made him to cry out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and
therefore, if we would ascend to Heaven, then as Elias did throw down his
mantle, 2. Kings 2.13.
and as the blind man in the Gospel did cast offe his beggars cloak when he
would run to Christ, so must we cast offe the mantle of hypocrisy and
disrobe our selves of all the beggarly rags of sin, or else they will press
us down to Hell.

And as we know, sin is that weight which keeps us down, so we know wings
are the best means to help us up; and therefore David prays that he had
wings like a dove, Psalm. 55.6:
that he might fly away and be at rest; and Christ himself is said to have
fled, super pennas ventorum, upon the wings of the wind; so must we; we
must get us wings, if we will ascend to Heaven.

But what are those wings that will carry us thither? Bern. in Ser. de asc.
they must not be (like Icarus his waxen wings,) the wings of pride and
ambition, but as Saint Bernard says, they must be, What are the wings whereby
we ascend to Heaven.
1. Meditatio Consideration. 2. Oration Prayer.
for,

Meditatio quid desit docet, and oration ne desit obtinet; Meditation shows us
what we want, and prayer obtayneth whatsoever we want: but we never know our
estate, because we never consider in what estate we are, and we have not
grace, nor goodness, because we ask not.

Saint Augustine says, these wings must be, 1. The love of God. 2. The love of
our neighbors.


And it is not unlikely that love should carry us up unto God, because God is
love, and love brought down God unto men.

Huc me syderio descendere fecit olympo,
Hic me crudeli vulnere fixit amor.
And therefore, no marvel that love should carry us up into Heaven, Aug. in
Psalm. 83. p. 376. d. 1.
wherefore Saint Augustine says, that by love we do either ascend to Heaven,
or descend to Hell; quia amando Deum ascendis in Coelum, amando seculum
descendis vsque ad abyssum, because by loving God we ascend to Heaven, and by
loving the world we descend down to Hell.

Saint Gregory says, these wings are, 1. The contempt of worldly things. 2.
The desire of heavenly things.


And this may well stand with Saint Augustines saying, because (as the same
Saint Gregory says) tanto ab inferioribus disiungimur, quanto superioribus
delectamur, by how much the more earnestly we love heavenly things, by so much
we are ascended and sequestered from earthly things. And therefore if you would
ascend, 1. John 2.15. Colos. 3.2.
then love not the world, nor the things of this world, but set your affections
on those things that are above: and because our life is just like a clock,
that unless his weight be always wynded up will soon stand, therefore we
must be ever winding up our affections, and weaning them from these worldly
things, and with Noah's dove never suffer the soales of our feet to rest,
until our hearts and souls return to him that gave them us.

Thirdly, for the signs whereby we may know, whether we have ascended or do
ascend toward Heaven or not, I might show you many; How we may know whether
our hearts ascends to Heaven or not.
but now take this for all: if things above our heads show greater unto us then
they did before, and things beneath us lesser; that is an apparent argument,
that we ascend and grow higher and higher, for so Saint Gregory says, if a
man were aloft in the clouds, it would appear unto him, quam abiecta sunt
quae iam alta videntur, how base are the things of this earth, which to a man
on earth do seem so great; for then he should see mountains no bigger then
Mole-hills; and the Sun which before, while he was on earth, did seem but
instar pilae pedalis, like a footeball, he should now find it to be a great
and immens glorious body; all bodies above him would seem greater, and all
below him would seem lesser: even so, if our hearts and affections be ascended
up to Heaven, then surely the things of this world do seem unto us, but as
they are indeed damnum and stercora, Dung and dross, Phil. 3.8.
or as nothing, and worth nothing, as Nazianzen says; and the things of Heaven
are the only desires of our hearts, and the delights of our souls: but if
folia venti and lilia agri, the vanities and the pleasures of this world, the
Titles of Honor, and the confluence of wealth, be the desires and delights of
our hearts, then certainly we are fast bound in misery and iron, we are
fastened and fettered here on earth, and it may be with Golden chains, but
fast enough from ascending up to Heaven.

I will not judge of any: by this rule, you may all judge your selves, if you
do highly esteem of the preaching and Preachers of Gods Word; If you make
much of them that fear the Lord, and love good men, and a good conscience, and
make none account of this world, nor of the things of this world, then is your
heart ascended up to Heaven; but if not, Nudus humi iaces: Thou lie poor and
miserable, fettered here in earth, a flaue and captive of the Devil, and have
need to cry and call for Christ to lead captivity captive: which is the
second part of my Text.

And so much for the Ascension of our Savior Christ.


CHAP. Of the victory and triumph of Christ over our enemies, of our
deliverance from them, and of our restoring into the service of God again.
SEcondly, Touching the victory and triumph of Christ, set down in these
words, Thou have led captivity captive; we must understand that this is taken
two ways.

1. Passiuely. 2. Actiuely.
And I say first Passiuely, because our enemies must be vanquished before we
can be delivered: and therefore,

How Christ overcame death, Hell, sin, and Satan.
First, This phrase may be taken Passiuely, for the World, Death, and Hell, and
all other enemies of Mankind, which Christ has conquered and led captive,
that they should not reign and rule over his servants any more.

And thus Saint Augustine does expound it, saying; Quid est captiuauit
captiuitatem? vicit mortem; mortem procurauit diabolus, and ipse diabolus de
morte Christi est captiuatus; What is he led captivity captive? but he overcame
death: for the Devil had procured death for sin, and now the Devil himself
is captiuated by the death of Christ. For, as Victors were wont to do, to
lead in triumph those Tyrants that oppressed their subjects, or those enemies
that they had vanquished, being fast bound with chains, with their heads and
feet bare, for their greater shame and reproach; so the Psalmist alludeth unto
the same, when he says, Coloss. 2.15.
Thou have led captivity captive; and the Apostle does more clearly express
it, when he says, that Christ having spoiled Principalities and Powers, has
made a show of them openly, tryumphing over them in it.

captiuated, when as the Devil compasses the earth, like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour; And so does the world still oppress us; 1 Pet.
5.8.
our flesh lusts against the spirit, and Death still reigns over us all?

I answer, that Christ has destroyed their Power, Resp.
he has taken away their strength, and he has quite subverted the Kingdom
of sin and Satan, and taken away the sting of death: and yet they compass
about, not as having any power over us but as a Lion tied will tear us in
pieces, if he can catch us within his claws; so will sin and Satan, if we
yield unto them; for though Christ overcame all our enemies, yet he has not
quite taken them out of our ways, but left them as it were alive, though
bound, that we might still beware to come within their reach, if we would
escape their teeth; and therefore we say that sin is so taken away, that it
does not reign over the Saints, though perhaps through their negligence, it
does often wound them; so Satan is bound, though like a bridled horse, he often
fumes against us, and sometimes bites us too, 1 Cor. 15.54.
if we beware not of him; and so death is swallowed up into victory, and the
sting thereof is taken away, so that it can never hurt the Saints of God,
though it lays them still into a sleep; because they shall all awake at the
last day.

But if sin and Satan and the lust of the flesh have such power over us, as
that the sin is no sooner suggested, How the wicked are still in their
enemies hands.
but we are presently delighted with it, and are led by the same, as an ox
unto the slaughter, carried as it were by a silken thread, very easily to commit
the same, without resistance; then certainly our enemies are not captiuated,
but do still rule and reign over us. It is a fearful and a doleful case,
to live under the government and subjection of a Tyrant, who Dionysius-like
will give men to be meat unto his horses, That it is a most lamentable thing
to live under the tyranny of sin.
or Nero-like will cause his servants to commit immane cruelties; and yet sin
is worse then these; because it causes us to do fearful and most odious
Acts, and then it gives us as meat, like fagots to be eaten and devoured of
Hellfire: And yet behold the woeful state of a sinful man, for he is the
slave of sin, bound for Hell, and subject to the Devil; and yet for all
this, he rejoices as a fool that goes to the execution place, and he cannot
endure the man that speaks against his Master the Devil, but his desire is,
to live still in his captivity.

And this shows, that his enemies are not captiuated; for if the world were
subdued unto us, then could it not so easily command us, if sin were
captiuated, then could it not so often overcome us, and if Satan were bound,
then could he not so easily prevail against us and therefore, though these
enemies are so captiuated, that they can no ways hurt the godly; because they
have no power over them, to make them either to delight in sin, or to desire
the vanities of this world; yet they are still loose, and they do still rule
over the children of disobedience. And the beholding of the lives both of the
Saints and sinners, will sufficiently show this truth unto us; that they are
captiuated, as that they are not able to touch the one, and yet so free and so
powerful, The Saints are freed from all their enemies.
as that they do reign and rule as Tyrants over the other. Behold an Usurer
and a Drunkard, a Whoremonger, and such like, how Satan leads them as his
slaves, and transformeth them from men to be very beasts; but if you look into
the lives of the Saints; you shall see that neither the pleasures of sin, nor
the vanities of the world, nor yet all the power of darkness can once move them,
or at least remove the^ from their most holy purposes, because Christ has
overcome all their enemies, and has led captivity captive.

Secondly, This phrase may be taken actiuely for them that were held captive by
Satan, and were delivered out of his hands by Jesus Christ, and so freed from
the bondage and the slavish service of sin, and reduced into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God: Romans 8.
and thus Saint Augustine expounds it, saying: Ipsos homines qui captiui
tenebantur appellauit captiuitatem; Christ delivers us from Satan, and
places us in his own service.
That by captivity he understands those men that were Captives to the Devil;
and so their captivity is happy, because they are taken for their good, even as
Christ said unto Saint Peter, from henceforth thou shall catch men; Captiuati
ergo quia capti, they are therefore captiuated because they are catched, and
put under the sweet and easy yoke of Christ: and so they are delivered and
made free from the service of sin, whose slaves and captives they were
before, and they are made the servants of Righteousness: and therefore in this
captivity, in this service, and under this yoke; Non sunt milia plorantium, sed
milia laetantium, There is none that weepeth, there is none that mourns, but
we do all rejoice and sing the songs of Sion: Psalm. 68.17.
Because the Lord is amongst us as in the holy place of Sinai.

But they that are still so held by sin, and such slaves unto their lusts as
that they do no works of Righteousness, they are not as yet freed by Christ,
nor taken away from Satan; for they that are caught by Christ and delivered
from the bondage of the Devil, have taken upon them the yoke of Christ, and
they do find that easy and light, that as a man is able to run, which is
unloosed from his bands wherewith he was tied, and unburdened from that weight
wherewith he was pressed down, so they are able to run the way of Gods
commandments, Psalm. 119.
when God has set their hearts at liberty. And therefore they that find
themselves unwilling or unable to do the service of Christ, surely they are
not yet rescued from Satan, nor put under the yoke of Christ; We are not so
freed from Satan, that we may do what we list.
for here you must note that they are not so delivered from the captivity of
Satan, as that being freed from him, they may freely go, and do what they
list; but as the very phrase shows, Thou have led captivity captive; they are
taken away from the captivity of Satan, and from the service of sin, and put
under the yoke of Christ, to do service unto God, i. e. they are captiuated
and taken for the service of Christ: because this is the rule of war;
Preserve thou me and I will serve thee; save me from the tyrant, and I will be
thy servant. And therefore if they be not captives unto Christ, i. e. if they
do no service unto God, they are still captives unto Satan, and Christ as yet,
has not led this captivity captive.

And so all men may know hereby, whether they be captiuated unto Christ or not:
for if their understanding be captiuated to yield unto the divine truth, many
times contrary unto the rules of humane reason; He that serves not Christ, is
not freed from Satan.
and if their desires and affections be only placed on heavenly things, to
do what pleases God, and not what is pleasant unto flesh and blood, then are
they taken into the service of Christ; but as that man can be hardly said to
be taken into the service of any one, if he does no service unto his Master,
nor any thing that is pleasing or acceptable unto him; even so they cannot be
said to be taken into the service of Christ, that apply no time to do the will
of Christ.

And thus you see how Christ has vanquished and triumphed over all our
enemies: he overcame the world, he bound the Devil, he spoiled Hell, he
weakened Sin, he destroyed Death, he walked upon the Seas, he rose out of
his grave, he contemned all honors, he ascended into Paradise, he opened the
gates of Heaven, and he sits on the right hand of God, ruling and reigning
until he has put all his enemies under his feet. 1 Cor. 15.25.
And so much for the Victory or Triumph of Christ.


CHAP. I. Of the special ends why Christ ascended into heaven, and of the
gifts which he gives to edify the Church.
THirdly, touching the bounty of Christ, set down in these words, and he gave
gifts unto men, we must first reconcile the difference betwixt the Prophet and
the Apostle about the same; for David says, thou have received gifts for men,
and Saint Paul says, he gives gifts to men: and I answer that if we
understand it literally, David received gifts, which for fear of his power
were freely offered unto him: and if we understand it mystically of Christ, we
find the saying of both to be true; for the Apostle speaks of the things
which Christ does, as God, sending forth the holy Ghost, and bestowing gifts on
men; and the Psalmist speaks of him according to that which the same Christ
does in his body, August. in Psalm. 67. p. 289. a. i.
which is his Church. Thus no doubt (says Saint Augustine) but as he is
persecuted in his Church, so accepit in membris qua dona membra eius accipiunt,
he received, and receives gifts in men; for whatsoever is done to them that
believe in him, the same is done to him: or else we may say, that the Son of
God as he was man, received those gifts from his Father, which he was
afterward to distribute, and to give unto his Church: for so we read, that he
being exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the holy Ghost,
Act. 2.33.
he has shed forth this which we now see and hear; and so the original
word which the Psalmist uses, signifies to receive that which we must
presently distribute, says Mollerus: Mollerus in Psalm. 68.
and therefore the difference is soon ended, and the matter in both is true,
he received gifts, and he gave those gifts to men: for we find (as
Bonauenture tells us) that our Savior ascended for four special ends. Christ
ascended for four special ends.


First, to receive his kingdom, as himself intimates unto us in the
nineteenth of Luke and the twelfth verse.

Secondly, to make us the more earnestly to long for him; Quia abijt and
occultat se Deus, vt ardentius quaeratur a nobis, because God does therefore
hide himself from us, that he may be the more earnestly sought of us, says
Saint Bernard. Bernard. in cant.


Thirdly, to prepare a place for us; for though in respect of Gods purpose, it
was prepared for us before the beginning of the world; yet in respect of the
effecting and bringing to pass the said purpose, it was specially prepared for
us by Christ; because he removed all hindrances, and made way for us to enter
into glory, 1. by appeasing his fathers wrath; 2. by cleansing our consciences
from dead works; 3. by opening unto us the gates of heaven; and, 4. by making
continual intercession for us;
As Bonauenture speaks.

Fourthly, to send down his holy Spirit unto us; Ioh. 16.17.
for so our Savior says, It is expedient for you that I go away; Quia nisi
dederitis quod amatis, non habebitis quod desideratis; for unless I go away,
the comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto
you: Tertul. l. de carne Christi.
for now (says Tertullian) Graetum quoddam commercium inter coelum and terram
existit celebratum, a most grateful exchange, and a friendly loving bargain
was made betwixt heaven and earth, that to the inhabitants of heaven should be
given the flesh of Christ, and to us on earth should be bestowed the comforts
of Gods holy Spirit: and so the Spirit of God should remain with us on earth,
and our, flesh should dwell with them for ever in heaven; and then all things
to be common betwixt us eternally: and therefore he did not send his Spirit
unto us before he had ascended into heaven, Why Christ would not bestow his
gifts on men before his ascension.
non propter impotentiam, sed quia habuerunt corporalem prasentiam, not in
respect of any impotency that he could not do it, but because we had his
corporal presence; and because as the rain does not descend until the mist
and dew do first ascend; so the gracious rain of Gods Spirit, did not fall
upon Gods inheritance to refresh it when it was weary, until this fruit of the
womb, which was as the dew of the morning had first ascended into heaven: but
as when that little cloud like a man's hand, 1 Kings 11.
did rise out of the sea, there was a sound of much rain, so when that humble
flesh of Christ was ascended out of this world into heaven, then he gave gifts
unto men.

Aug. de verbis domini p. 63. b. 1. to. 10.
But what are these gifts which he gives, Saint Augustine says, it is his holy
Spirit: Tale donum qualis ipse est, such a gift as himself is: for he gave
himself, and he gives a gift equal to himself, because the gift of Christ is
the Spirit of Christ; but hear the Apostle says, he gave gifts, and not a
gift: and therefore though I do confess, that this holy and blessed Spirit is
the author and fountain of all gifts, by whom we have remission of sins,
subjection of our enemies, and all other gifts of grace and glory sealed unto
us; yet I say that the Apostle herein means not so much the spirit himself,
as the gifts and graces of his Spirit. And therefore that we may the better
understand the fullness of this point, of the bounty of Christ, we must
consider these four special things.

Four points to be considered.
1. What manner of gifts they are. 2. What gifts are here meant. 3. How he does
bestow them. 4. On whom he does bestow them.
First, that the gifts of God are free gifts.
For the first, we must know that they were gratuita, free gifts; so the words,
dedit, and dona, he gave them, and he gave them as gifts, do sufficiently
declare: or otherwise, si praememeruisti tum emisti, and non gratis accepisti,
if thou had done any thing to deserve these gifts, then had thou bought
them, and not freely received them; and God had sold them, and not given them:
and so they had been praemia, non dona, rewards for thy good deeds, and not
gifts of his mere grace: but this point is so clear that I need not stand on
it: Matthew. 10.8.
Freely you have received, says our Savior, freely give; for every one may
take of these waters of life freely, and may have these gifts, Esaias. 51.1.
like Esayas milk, without money or moneys worth.

For the second we must note that the gifts of God are either 1. Temporal.
Secondly, the the gifts of God are of two sorts.
2. Spiritual.


First, The temporal gifts he gave unto all sorts of men, as well before as
after his ascension; for we must note that every thing which we have is a gift
that we have received from God, All that we have is from God.
because (as Saint James says) Every good thing, and every perfect gift is
from above, and comes down from the Father of lights.

Secondly, the Spiritual gifts of God are of two sorts, 1. To edify the
Church. 2. To sanctify our souls.


First, Those gifts which he gave to edify the Church, Ephesians. 4.11.
the Apostle sets down in the eleventh verse, saying, He gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, The gifts that Christ
bestows to edify his Church.
and some Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the same, for the work
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: wherein we see that
by the gifts whereof the Apostle speaks in these words, are understood
either, 1. The Ministers of the Church: or, 2. The gifts wherewith the
Ministers are endued: or rather as I take it, 3. Ministers endued and qualified
with such gifts as are necessary for the gathering together of his Church:
which are specially,
The gifts 1. Of Tongues. Gifts requisite for Preachers.
2. Of Knowledge. 3. Of Charity. 4. Of Constancy and Perseverance. 5. Of
Contempt of all worldly vanities. 6. Of perfect power.


First, The gift of tongues, First languages and readiness of speech.
i. e. that as by the confusion of tongues the world was divided at the
building of Babell; so by the help of the Preachers tongues the world might
be reunited and made one sheepe-fold in the building of Gods Church. Secondly,
that these men might not offend in their tongues. Thirdly, that they might be
the better able to teach profound and heavenly doctrine, which they that want
the tongues or languages cannot so easily attain unto. And fourthly, that none
might be able to resist the words of their mouths, Luke 12.11.
as our Savior says, I will give unto you a mouth, or tongue, which your
adversaries shall not be able to withstand.

Secondly, Knowledge. John 16.13. Perfecta virtus non est sine cognitione
veritatis. Bernard.
Secondly, the gift of Knowledge, whereby they might know all truth, not of
politic and state matters, but of all truth necessary for this office; to
edify the Church, which is the chiefest knowledge that we should aim at: or
else all truth every way, because they should know him which is all truth, i.
e. Jesus Christ, and I desire to know nothing else: I will be contented to be
accounted a fool in all things else, so he will give me this gift only, to
know him alone.

Thirdly, Charity. 1 Cor. 8.1. Hugo de S. Vict. misc. l. 1. tit 73.
Thirdly, the gift of Charity, Quia quaerentes verum and non bonum, non
inuenient summum bonum; because knowledge without charity puffs up, and the
seeking to know the truth, and not laboring to be good, will never bring us to
the chiefest good: and because of all men we are most hated and standered, and
have all occasions offered us to make us hate all wicked men; therefore God
diffuseth this gift of love and charity into our hearts, that notwithstanding
all our indignity, we do still love them better then they do love themselves,
and do spend our whole time to do them good, and are ready to lay down our
lives for the brethren.

Fourthly, Constancy.
Fourthly, the gift of constancy and perseverance; because as knowledge and
every other gift without charity is nothing worth, so charity and all other
works without perseverance will avail us nothing; Revel. 2.10.
because we must be faithful unto death, if we would have the crown of
life: and therefore God does give us this gift of Constancy, to continue so in
our vocation that neither want, Romans 8.39.
nor contempt, nor life, nor death, nor any other thing shall separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus.

Fifthly, contempt of vanities.
Fifthly, the gift of contemning worldly vanities, for seeing it is the property
of the world to esteem of us no better then of the scumme and offscouring of
the world: every one of us (except he be great in wealth and honors) is
contemned of his own kindred, of his own people, in his own house where he
dwells, and of those very men whom he teaches, and for whom, as a burning
light, he consumes himself, that they should not be consumed with sin;
therefore the Lord gives us this gift and spirit, contemnere contemni, to
despise all contempts, and to regard none of the vain and variable things of
this wicked world.

Sixthly, the gift of perfect power, Sixthly, Perfect power.
that to the penitent and dejected, to the humble and contrite hearts, they
might open the gates of heaven, and let them in, in despite of all the devils
of hell: and that against the obstinate and rebellious sinners, Matthew. 16.19.
they might close and shut the same, that notwithstanding all their wealth and
wit, their strength and power, they may be excluded out of the joys of heaven.

And so these are the gifts, Ministers endued with these gifts which God gives
unto his Church, for the gathering together of his Saints: And indeed, What a
great gift it is to bestow able ministers upon this Church.
howsoever the world vilipendeth them and (as the Prophet says) does make but
a jesting song of them, yet if we truly observe it, we shall easily find it,
that among all the gifts of God, which he now gives unto men from heaven, the
sending of faithful and able Ministers endued with these gifts, to discharge
their duties, is the chiefest gift, and does obtain the chiefest place: for
alas, without them, what were we? unbaptized, still wallowing in our sins and
filthiness; untaught, still inuolued in ignorance; vnvnited to Christ, still
chained in the hands of Satan, without profession, without religion, without
God. And therefore it was not without cause, Matthew. 9.38.
that our Savior exhorts us to pray unto God, that he would send forth
laborers into his vineyard, for otherwise he knew that in a very short time
it would grow wild, and in stead of grapes, to bring forth wild grapes, in
stead of mercy and judgment, to bring forth cruelty and oppession, and in
stead of piety and religion, to bring forth nothing else but idolatry and
superstition.

It is reported of Phillip King of Macedon, that he sent unto the Athenians to
send him all their Orators of Athens, and he would ever live in league and
peace with them; and the wise Senators being ready to deliver those learned men
into the hands of their mortal enemy, Demosthenes said unto them, that on a
time the Wolves said unto the Sheep, that they conceived no ill thought
against them, but only for retaining those dogs which were their deadly
enemies, and oftentimes barked against themselves, which were their feeders;
and therefore if they would deliver up their dogs into their hands, they should
free themselves from their barking, and they would become their patrones and
defenders: whereupon the sheep being glad to be rid of their dogs, and
deeming themselves happy to be at peace with the wolves, they presently
delivered up all their dogs unto the mercies of their enemies, and they were
incontinently consumed; but within a very little while after, the wolves began
to pick quarrels against the silly sheep, and in a short space devoured the
whole flock: even so says Demosthenes, if you deliver up your Orators, for
the favor of King Phillip, you shall speedily find, that he will deal with
you as the wolves dealt with the simple sheep; whereupon they resolved to
keep their Orators.

Now Satan deals with our people, as King Philip did with the Athenians; The
cruelty of Satan to destroy the preachers, and his subtilty to deceive the
people.
he tells them that the Preachers be the only dogs that he hates, the only
men that bark (and often bite) against them, which by their tithes and
offerings they do maintain; and therefore he persuades them to betray their
Preachers into his hands, and to persecute them with their furies; and if they
do so, he promises all peace and content unto them; but when he has once
prevailed to destroy our bodies, he will soon destroy their souls and bring
them into hell fire: and therefore it were well for them, if with the Athenians
they would beware of their subtle and cruel enemy, and make much of them
which with the hazard of their own lives do continually watch for their
souls.

CHAP. II. Of those special gifts which God gives unto his children, for the
sanctifying of their souls, and principally of Faith, Hope, and Charity
SEcondly, those gifts which he gives to sanctify our souls are of diverse
sorts; Gregor. Hom. 8. in Ezech.
for as S. Gregory ^aith of Gods presence, gradus praesentiae diuinae
constituendi sunt, there are certain degrees of the same, quia licet omnia
tangit; non tamen aequaliter omnia tangit; so we must conceive of the giving
of Gods graces, that although he gives the same unto many men, yet he gives
them not after the same manner unto all men: and therefore, we say that Gods
gifts are either, 1. Common, The graces that Christ gives to sanctify our
souls are twofold.
2. Special,
or that God gives these gifts two manner of ways, either, 1. After a
general 2. After a special
manner.

First, the common graces and gifts of God, First common.
or those graces which he gives out of his general respect and love unto
man, are given many times as well unto the wicked as unto the godly: and
therefore in that respect, all those that profess Christ Jesus, and which have
these general gifts, are promiscuously called and taken for the Saints of God
herein this life, and cannot indeed be discerned or distinguished by any man,
from those that are the true elected Saints: for God only knows who are his,
and we may not so much as guess who they are; for we are prohibited to judge
of them, because we cannot possibly know them.

Secondly, the special graces and gifts of God, Secondly special.
or those graces which he gives out of a special respect and love to some men
more then others, (for I can find no specificall difference betwixt the gifts
that he gives unto the elect, and those graces that he gives unto many of the
reprobates, but the same graces in a more perfect, and after a more special
manner) are only given unto the elect, whereby they are preserved and kept in
the favor of God, until their last breath.

We cannot tell who are endued with the special graces of Gods spirit.
But to nominate which are those common graces and gifts which Christ after a
general manner gives unto all, or most of the professors of his name, and
which are those special gifts which out of his special love he gives only
unto his elect; or directly to set down the specificall notes and differences,
how to discern and know the one from the other, and to distinguish in whom
each of these sorts may be found (as some have venterously attempted to do)
seems unto m^^ to be none other thing then to show who are elected, and who
are not: for whosoever has but the common gifts cannot be saved, and
whosoever has the special gifts of God shall not be damned.

Yet I deny not, but by the diligent search into the nature and extent of
these graces and gifts of God, and by the fruits and effects of the same, every
particular man may know, whether he has them yet or not: for the spirit of man
(if man would search out his spirit) may know what is in man: and therefore,
not that we should judge one of another, who has these special gifts of God,
and who has them not, but that every man by searching his own heart, may know
if he has them, Every one ought diligently to examine what graces he has.
to his comfort; or, if he has them not, that he may earnestly labor, by
prayer to God, to attain them; I will a little speak of these special gifts
and graces of salvation, and show how far they do exceed those common
graces of the only outward professors.

The Schoolmen, all as it were with one consent, do distribute the gifts of
the holy Ghost into these seven special graces; viz.

1. Wisdom. 2. Understanding. 3. Council. 4. Fortitude, 5. Knowledge. 6.
Piety. 7. The fear of God.
I need not, (and my purpose is not) to stand upon each of these.

Aquinas and his followers, have excellently and largely enough handled each
one of these excellent graces; but I mean to contract all into a fewer sum,
and as Saint Paul says, to show you a more excellent way: for though it be
most true, that Saint Hierome and Saint Bernard say, Hieron. in Epist. Ber. de
pass. dom. 42. Bellarm. de great. and lib. arb. l. 5. c 3.
that as vices go by troops; so the graces of God do so assemble themselves
and cohere together, that he which has one has all, and he that wants one,
wants all, i. e. he that has one in any measure of perfection has the seeds
of all the rest, (as Bellarmine says) whereby as occasion serves, he can put
them, being but stirred up by grace, into execution. Forma est non omnibus vna,
nec diuersa tamen, qualem decet esse sororum.
They are not only like those divine sisters, like one another, but they are
also linked and chayned together like the indissoluble linkes of a golden
chain; yet I say that the chiefest graces which I find, and the surest gifts
to bring us unto life, are those three whereof the Apostle speaks, Faith,
Hope, and Charity, 1. Cor. 13. vlt.
for as the Psalmist says, he that does these things shall never fall; so I
may be bold to say, he that has these gifts shall never fail.

First, Faith is distinguished by the schools to be foure-folde, 1.
Hystoricall. 2. Of miracles. 3. Temporary. 4. Justifying.


The first is common to the devils as well as to men: for the word (...) has
diverse significations, First, of Faith.
as (...), I know to whom I have trusted. (...), rely not upon the people; but
commonly in Scriptures it signifies to assent, as, (...), with the heart we
believe unto righteousness; (...), Abraham believed God. (...), and I partly
believe it, James 2 19.
says the Apostle: and in this respect the Apostle says, the devils believe;
for we believe what we know; and daemones Deum and pagani credunt, and the
very devils do know God, says Saint Augustine, Aug. de cognit. verae vit. c.
37.
and they know Christ, Acts 19.14. Mat. 8.29. and they know the Scriptures; for
they alleged the same to Christ; and they know the Gospel, and have called
it (...), the way of salvation; and therefore they must needs believe, quia
fides est cognitio eade^que certissima, in quantu^ intellectus determinatur ad
aliquod cognoscibile, because faith is the most surest knowledge of things, and
we cannot choose but believe what we do certainly know: And Saint Augustine
comparing the confession of Saint Peter, thou art the Christ the Son of the
living God, Mat. 16 Mar. c. 1. Aug. de vnico bap. c. 10.
and the confession of the devil, I know who thou art, even that holy one of
God, says; that although Saint Peter was commended, and the devil rebuked,
Idem. tract. 10. in Ep. John.
yet in vtrisque non falsa sed vera, non detestanda sed approbanda est; the
confession was true in both; and therefore the faith of the devils in respect
of the object must needs be a right and a true faith.

A doctrine to confound wicked livers, who as Saint Augustine says, peiores et
tardiores sunt quam daemones, are far worse then the devils, for he believes
and trembles, but the wicked even as Nero when Seneca diswaded him from his
villainies, and persuaded him so to carry himself, vt facta superi semper
comprobent sua, as that the Gods might always approve his actions, answered
like a dogged Athiest, stulte verebor esse, cum faciam, deos? thou fool, do
thou think, that I fear or believe, when I do these things, that there are
any gods? so do they scarce believe there is any God; for if they did, I
wonder that with the devils they do not tremble. Mat. 7.22.


Tit. 1.1. 1. John 5.4. John 3.15.
The second and third kind of faith; that is, the faith of miracles, and the
temporary faith, which believes for a time, and then falls away, they are
likewise common unto the wicked, as well as unto the godly; for they do not
only believe the Law and the Gospel, with an hystoricall faith, but they may
also do many miracles, as our Savior testifies.

The fourth is only proper unto the true Saints of God, and it is called,
fides electorum, the faith of Gods elect: a faith that overcomes the world:
and a faith which cannot perish. If any man would know whether he has this
faith or not; he must look into these two things, 1. His works. 2.
Perseverance.


Greg. l. 2. ho. 22. in c. 40. Ezech.
For first this is called, fides operans, a faith that works, and that works
by charity; and therefore Saint Gregory says, Quantum credimus tantum amamus,
and tantum quisque operatur, quantum credit, that a true believer loves as he
believes, and works as he loves; and Saint Augustine excellently says,
that credere in deum est credendo amare, and amando in eum ire; to believe in
God is by believing to love him, and by loving him to be united and made one
with God; so that, to have this true faith in God, is to love God, and to do
the will and Commandments of God.

And secondly, this faith is a continuing and perseuering faith, such as will
continue unto the end. These are the two main properties of the true saving
faith.

Secondly, Secondly, of Hope. Luther. in gal. de ^. 5. Exodus 25.20.
Hope is a patient expectation of the thing that we believe, and it is not
only inseperably joined unto faith, each one having respect to other as the
two Cherubims looking on the Mercy Seat, but it has such great affinity with
faith, as that the one can hardly be discerned from the other.

Yet I find they differ in three respects, 1. Of order. 2. Of object. 3. Of
office.
for, How Hope differs from Faith.


First, though as the fire and the light in respect of time do appear
together, so all graces are infused together; yet as the fire is before the
light, because the light is caused by the fire, so Faith, says Alexander de
Hales, in respect of causality, Alexan. de Hal. p. L. 12. M. 3. ar. 2.
because all graces flow from it, is the mother grace, and the root of all the
rest; and therefore faith is the ground of hope, and does always precede the
same; in which respect Saint Augustine says, Sicut in radice arboris nullae
apparent pulchritudinis species, etc. As in the root of a tree there appears
no show of beauty, and yet what beauty or goodness soever is in the whole tree,
the same proceeds from the root; even so (says he) what virtue or goodness
soever shows it self in any man, it does all spring from the root of faith.

Secondly, Alsted. syst. theolog. l. 3. loc. 17.
Obiectum fidei adaequatum est omne verbum Dei in genere, the object of faith
is the word of God, the object of hope, is res verbi, the promise of God, and
the goodness of God; faith believes there is a Heaven and a Hell, hope only
looks for good things, and faith is of things past, things present, and things
to come, but hope is only of things to come.

Thirdly, the office of faith is to tell us what we must believe, but the
office of hope is to tell us how we must patiently abide, and look for what we
do believe.

And we find hope to be either 1. Humane. Hope two fold.
2. Divine.


The first is many times fallible, Plaut. rud.
Nam multa praeter spem scio multis bona euenisse, and ego etiam qui
sperauerint, First, Humane hope.
spem decipisse multos; for as many things do happen to many one beyond their
hope, so their hopes do deceive many one, and as the Poet says, Fallitur
augurio spes bona saepe suo. They do deceive themselves by their own hope:
and yet this is an exceeding great help unto men in all their actions; Spes
seruat afflictos, and this is the chiefest stay unto afflicted minds: Nam
Fortuna innocentem deserit saepe, spes nunquam: for when fortune forsakes many
times an innocent man, yet his hope will never leave him: but as the Poet
says, Iam mala finissem Letho, sed credula vitam
Spes fouet, and melius cras fore semper ait;
Hope still does promise better fortunes unto him; and therefore this is a most
excellent virtue; though like other humane virtues it is defective in many
points; as first, in respect of the things that they hope for, wealth, honors,
and such like; So Alexander having given away almost all that he had in
Greece, and being demanded what he left for himself, said hope; i. e. of more
honors and kingdoms: and secondly, in respect of the cause from whence they
do expect these things, from themselves or such like, but not from God;
whereas indeed, that man is accursed which puts his hope in man, quia de
Creatore desperare est, Ierem. 17.5.
spem in creatura ponere, because that to hope in man is to forsake our God.
But,

Secondly, divine Hope.
The second, i. e. the divine hope which is wrought in us by the Spirit of God,
is infallible: for whosoever hops in him, shall never be confounded; Psalm.
22.4, 5, 6. Prou. 14.32.
The wicked (says Solomon) shall be cast away for his malice, but the
righteous has hope in his death; and what can be more then this? for many
things do discourage us in death; for the dying man sees his body is weak,
his friends weeping, his Phisicians despayring, and his conscience showing him
the Catalogue of his sins: O wretched man that he is! who shall comfort him?
yet he whose hope is in the Lord his God, does even then see the heavens open,
and the Angels ready to receive him; and though he knows his body is to be
laid in the grave, yet does his flesh rest in hope: and therefore what can be
sweeter then hope? O dearly beloved, remember what the Psalmist says, blessed
is the man whose hope is in the Lord his God.

But here you must know, that all kinds of hope in God, Every hope makes not
happy.
makes not all men happy; for there is a bold and a presumptuous hope, a hope
of wicked hypocrites that live in sin, and yet do hope for heaven.

And therefore we must distinguish that there is a twofold hope in God, 1.
(...), an opinionatiue hope. 2. (...), a true infallible hope.


The first is the hope of wicked men, Job 8. Prou. 10. Wisd. 5.
and this shall melt away like a winter snow, for the hope of the wicked shall
perish; they may look for much, but they shall have nothing.

The second is the hope of the righteous, and this shall never perish, because
it is grounded upon a good foundation; True hope springs from the true fear
of God.
that is, the promise of God to them that fear him; for so the Psalmist says,
qui timetis Dominum sperate in illum, you that fear the Lord hope in him: And
therefore if you would be sure to have the true hope in God, then fear the
Lord; because the testimony of a good conscience must be the ground of hope;
for so Saint Paul shows, even by his own example, saying, I have fought a
good fight, and I have kept the faith, there is the ground, and therefore is
laid up for me the crown of righteousness, and there is the Anchor of his
hope cast upon that sure foundation; and he that thus hops in God is truly
happy.

Thirdly, Charity is rectissima animi affectio, Thirdly, of Charity.
the rightest affection of the mind, whereby we love God for his own sake,
and our neighbors for Gods sake; Aug. de doct. Christ.
and as Saint Augustine does observe, it is proper only unto the Saints of
God, because as Saint Chrysostom says, Chris. hom. de char.
charity is optimum amoris genus, the best kind of love; and therefore Saint
Augustine says, that habere omnia sacramenta and malus esse potest, habere
autem charitatem and malus esse non potest, a man may be partaker of all
Sacraments, and be wicked, but to have charity and to be wicked is impossible:
and Saint Paul says enough in the praise of this most excellent grace: to
write Iliads after Homer, were to commend it after him, and therefore i will say
no more but what Saint Augustine says, charitas est quae vincit omnia, and
sine qua non valent omnia, charity is that which overcomes all things, and
without which all things will avail us nothing; because as the Christian Poet
says, Christicolas veros exprimit vnus amor.

It is love and charity alone that proves us to be true Christians.

Well then, would thou know thy state? whether thou be in the state of
grace or not? thou need not to ascend to heaven and search into the secret
council of God, to see whether thy name be written in the book of life, but
descend into thine own heart, and see whether thou have perfect charity, both
toward God and man: for if thou love God with all thy heart, The surest
sign that we shall be saved.
and thy neighbor as thy self, I dare assure thee that in all the book of
God; I could never find yet a surer note, or a more infallible sign of our
eternal salvation then the same; For hereby we know (says the Apostle) that
we are passed from death to life, because we love the brethren; and, hereby
shall all men know that you are my Disciples, 1 John 3.
(says our Savior) if you love one another: but if thou love not God, or if
thou love not all men, say what thou will, do what you will, lift up thine
eyes, hold up thy hands, and pray in every corner, yet I know no sign thou
have of saving grace.

But here you must observe, that all kind of love toward God and men, will
not serve our turn; for there is a general kind of love to God, which all
wicked men in respect of their being, and that manifold good which they receive
from him, do bear toward God; and there is a special love to God, in a most
vehement, and a most excellent manner; and there is an inordinate love of men,
either too much or too little, or not after the right manner; and there is a
true, discreet, and a fruitful love to be showed toward them: and this is
properly called charity; and therefore if we would be sure of Gods favor, we
must use no mediocrity in loving God, we must use no measure; Quia modus
diligendi Deum est sine modo, because he is to be loved beyond measure, with
all our hearts, with all our souls, and with all our strength, so as if we
were ravished with the love of God; even as the Church says in the Canticles,
Stay me with flagons, Cantic. 2.5.
and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. And so much for these
three divine graces which Christ gives us to sanctify our souls.

Now after the holy Ghost bestows upon the Saints faith to believe in him,
hope to expect all happiness from him, and charity most fervently to love him,
and all men for his sake, then he works many other graces in the hearts of
his Elect, to preserve them blameless in the sight of God, and to defend them
from the malice of that roaring Lion; as, a filial fear, never to offend him,
and a special care always to please him; and beside and above all the rest he
infuseth into their souls these two excellent gifts; viz. 1. Providence to
foresee 2. Patience to endure
all things.

First, Moses in his last speech, and best song that he made unto the children
of Israel, says, O that they were wise, Deuteronomy. 31.
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end; that is,
that they would remember things past, understand things present, and consider
things to come; for this is the only difference betwixt man and beast, the one
craves for the present time, the other fore-seeth and provides for the times
to come: and the want or neglect of this consideratiue foresight is the cause
of many miseries; for as he that fore-seeth evil, either preuenteth it, or
prepares himself for it, and so it is more easily borne of him, because it
does not suddenly apprehend him; so he that never sees it till it strikes him,
is the more amazed with it, because he feels that which he never feared:
and therefore as Job says, that he was surprised with that which he feared; so
the Saints of God have this grace given them by God, to expect and fore see
miseries before they come, that they may be the more tolerable unto them if
they come.

And as they have one eye open to fear and foresee evil before it comes,
so they have the other eye open to foresee and to hope for good, that when it
comes, it may be the more welcome to them; and that using all lawful means to
compass it, they may the sooner attain unto it.

But here it may be some will object and say as it was said of old, Ob.
(...),
(...).
Scire si liceret, quae debes subire, and non subire; pulchrum sit scire:
Sed si subire oportet, quae licet scire, quorsum scire? nam debes subire:
That is, Doctor Euerard in his A^rere han p. 76.
as Doctor Euerard does as wittily translate them as they were prettily
composed.

If a man might know the ill that he must undergo,
and shun it so, then were it good to know:
But if he undergo it, though he know it,
what boots him know it? he must undergo it.
And so of good things, if he might the sooner obtain them by foreseeing
them, it were worth our pains to look after them; but seeing no care, no
providence can either help us unto the good we desire, or prevent the evil we
fear, because as one truly says, What shall be, shall be, sure there is no
chance,
For the eye eterne all things fore-sees,
And all must come to pass as he decrees:
And therefore to what end should we trouble our selves in vain, to foresee
that which we cannot forbid?

Sol.
To this I answer briefly, that although God works all things according to
his will; yet it is his will ordinarily to work by ordinary means and secondary
causes, as we may see in the second of Osee 21. Osee 2.21.
I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall
hear the Corn, and the Wine and the Oil, and they shall hear Israel: And
therefore whom God has decreed shall escape evil, or attain unto any good,
God decrees the means as well as the end of any thing.
he has also decreed that they should by their care and diligence, the one to
prevent it, and the other to use all lawful means to procure it: and they
that will not use all possible care to obtain these ends, do most apparently
show an infallible argument against themselves, they shall never attain unto
their desired end; because it is a sure rule, that whatsoever end God has
decreed, he has also decreed the means to bring to pass that end. And
therefore as he has decreed the salvation of his Saints, so he has decreed to
give them his grace to foresee all things that are necessary for them to know;
that they may the better use all diligence to eschew the evil, and to obtain
the good,

Secondly, seeing our estate in this life is a state full of miseries; and that
we are long expecting good, before we can enjoy it; therefore we have need of
patience, Heb. 10.36.
that after we have done the will of God, we might receive the promise: and
therefore God seeing how needful patience is for his servants, he gives this
gift unto us, (and it is indeed a most excellent gift, without which I know not
how the Saints could well subsist,) that we might patiently and contentedly
suffer whatsoever happens unto us, and as Job says, quietly to wait all our
days, Job.
until our change shall come.

It is recorded in the books of the Gentiles that in the Olympian combats,
that Champion wan the Garland, that bestowed most blows upon his Antagonist;
but in the wars of the Lord, where God himself is our rewarder, we find
that he bears away the Crown which bears patiently the most blows from
his adversaries, and in lieu thereof returns nothing, but good words.

But here we must understand patience is used either, Patience is taken two
ways.
1. (...), abusiuely and improperly. 2. (...), rightly and properly, and,


In the first sense, we find the word used four manner of ways.

First, for a sinful carelessness when men, per patientiam asininam, will
suffer themselves, like lazy asses, to be drawn and compelled by lewd
company, to drinking, swaggering, or any other sin whatsoever.

Secondly, for a stoicall apathie, when men will lock up all natural
passions, and strive to be insensible of any thing that shall befall them.

Thirdly, for a customarie enduring of all storms; when like children in the
School, which do so much the less care for whipping, the oftener they are
whipped, we grow insensible of all crosses, by a continual custom of bearing
crosses.

Fourthly, for a natural fortitude, when, through the strength of nature and
the courage of a heroic mind, men will undergo whatsoever adversities shall
betide them, and will seem to bear the same, as if their strength were the
strength of stones, Job. 6.12.
and their flesh of brass, as Job speaks.

In the second sense we do likewise find the word used many ways; as,

Romans 2.4.
First, for a containing of our selves from the revenging of any injuries done
unto us.

Secondly, for a contented waiting, and a most quiet expecting of what we
desire, Romans 2.7. Heb. 10.36. Psalm. 9.18.
without muttering.

Thirdly, for a sensible and a well-pleasing suffering of all afflictions,
wants, poverty, losses, persecutions, malice, contempt, contumelies, poverty,
death it self; and that not for any game of worldly good, for so worldings
suffer much, loss of sleep, labor, and toil, to get a little wealth; the
drunkard many a fall, and some hurts for the love of his pleasant wine; and the
envious man many a blow, and some wounds perhaps, to wreak his malice upon his
adversary; and yet in these men which do thus suffer much, that they may do
evil, nec miranda, nec laudanda est patientia, quae nulla est; admirand^
duritia, neganda patientia, Aug in l. de patientia* c. 5.
their patience is neither to be admired, nor to be commended; because it is a
suffering for ill ends; but our suffering must be, for to show unto the world,
that rather then we will in the least degree dishonor God, or make shipwreck of
our faith and good conscience, we are most willing to endure whatsoever shall
be imposed upon us.

All these kinds of divine patience, the holy spirit of God works in the
hearts of the godly; to make them patiently to wait for good, Job. 1.22.
and quietly to suffer all evil; and all this without grumbling, or charging
God foolishly.

CHAP. III. Of the forms wherein the holy Ghost appeared: and why; and how the
Apostles are said to be filled with the holy Ghost.
FOr the third; that is, The gifts of edifying the Church how given.
how God bestows these gifts unto men, we must understand that as his gifts
be diverse, so he does diversely bestow them: for,

First, those gifts which are given for the edifying of his Church he gave
them, after two special manner of ways, 1. Abundantly and visibly in the
infancy of his Church. 2. Sufficiently and inuisibly ever since.


First, the Scripture tells us, Acts 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
that when the day of Pentecost was come, they were with one accord in one
place, and suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a mighty rushing
wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting, and there appeared
unto them, cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them, and
they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
tongues as the spirit gave them vtteranee. Out of all which, we may chiefly
observe these three special points, 1. Who were filled. 2. With what they were
filled. 3. The effects of their filling.


First, Saint Chrysostom says, that all the company both of men and women,
were filled with these graces; Cyprian ser. de spiritu sancto.
Saint Cyprian says, the whole multitude of the believers, that were gathered
together, were replenished with this spirit; Saint Augustine, Saint Gregory,
and Lorinus says* that all the Apostles and Disciples were filled with the
holy Ghost; Hieron. in epitaph. Paulae.
but Saint Hierome and Theod. Beza, and others do affirm, that none but the
Apostles only were replenished with these gifts: howsoever, the matter is not
great, it deserves not contention, though it may afford discussion; for mine
own part, I think all that were there, Who were filled with the holy Ghost on
the day of Pentecost.
were not replenished; because it is said, many of the beholders wondered, and
others derided at this there sudden alteration; which certainly they would
never have done (because there had been none to do it) if they had bin all
filled, and I cannot easily yield that the Disciples were filled with these
gifts; because the promise of sending down the holy Ghost, was only made unto
the Apostles (as we may easily collect out of the fifth verse of the first
Chapter,) and because Saint Peter with the other Eleven, do only stand up to
answer for themselves; (as we may plainly see in the fourth verse of the
second Chapter,) and especially because some ancient copies have bin found,
which do expressly say, that all the Apostles were filled with the holy
Ghost. And,

1 Cor. 13.32. God can bless or preserve his servants in the midst of the
wicked.
This shows how the spirit of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; and
that as God can power down his plagues upon multitudes of men, and yet
preserve one free in the midst of thousands, (as the Prophet David shows) so,
he can power down his spirit upon one in the midst of millions of men, and he
can bedewe that one with his grace, like Gedeons fleece while all the rest are
dry, Judges 61.38.
and destitute of the same; which does exceedingly commend the wise
dispensation of almighty God, and afford a great comfort unto the Saints of
Christ; that although they live in the midst of a most crooked and peruers
generation; yet they may see how God can preserve them as the lilie in the
midst of the thorns, and indue them with his grace, when all the rest of the
world flows with sin.

Secondly, they are said to be filled with the holy Ghost, where we must
observe these two things, 1. The thing, wherewith they are said to be filled.
2. The filling of them with that thing.


First, they are said to be filled with the holy Ghost, and we find that the
name of the holy Ghost is taken two ways, 1. For the essence of the holy
Ghost. 2. For the effects and gifts of the holy Ghost.


First, it is taken for the essence of the holy Ghost, as, by the spirit of the
Lord were the heavens made: That the holy Ghost is a true God by nature.
and in this sense all creatures are filled with the holy Ghost; because they
live and move in him; for the spirit of the Lord fills the world, and
contains all things, says the wise man

And yet some have bin so bold, as most impiously to affirm that the holy
Ghost was but a created quality, or a godly motion in the hearts and minds of
righteous men.

But the very works of the holy Ghost, as, creating all things, as Job shows,
the spirit of the Lord has made me, Job. 33.
and the breath of the Almighty has given me life; and as the Prophet David
more expressly affirms, saying, that by the spirit of the Lord, were the
Heavens made, and all the Host thereof by the breath of his mouth; Psalm. 33.
and here, assuming on him visible forms, and sitting upon each one of the
Apostles only, and none else; (which no created quality could possibly do;)
and especially the comparing of Esayas words, with the words of Saint Paul,
will sufficiently confute this damnable error, and most manifestly show unto
us, this holy spirit to be the true and eternal God: Esaias 6.9.
for whom Esayas calls the Lord of Hosts, which said unto him, Go tell this
people; hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed but perceive
not, Saint Paul calls the holy Ghost, saying, well spoke the holy Ghost, by
Esayas the Prophet; saying, Go unto this people and say, hearing ye shall
hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive:
Acts 28.25, 26.
and therefore our Savior bids us to go, and teach all nations, baptizing
them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

But it is objected (as Nazianzen says) that he is no where called God, but
the holy Ghost, or the spirit of God; Nazian. orat. 5. de Theol.
and therefore he is not God.

I answer briefly, that this is false; for, Saint Peter said unto Ananias; why
has Satan filled thy heart, Acts 5.3.4.
to lie to the holy Ghost? thou have not lied unto men, but unto God: And
therefore, seeing the spirit of God created all things; and being created,
preserved them, as Moses shows; Genesis 1.2.
the spirit of God moved upon the waters, i. e. to cherish and to retain them
together; and now in like manner, he sanctifies and preserves us, as
Melancthon shows, in that godly wish which he makes, Spiritus vt Domini
nascentia corpora fouit,
cum manus artificis couderat ipsa Dei;
Sic foueat caetus, qui Christi oracula discunt,
accendatque igni pectora nostra suo.


And especially seeing that the holy Scripture does more plainly testify the
same almost in every place; we say that the name of the Holy Ghost is first
taken for the Essence of God.

Secondly, The name of the Holy Ghost is taken for the gifts and graces of the
Holy Ghost; as where the Prophet says, Take not thy holy spirit from me: Psalm.
51.11. 2 Cor. 13.5.
and where the Apostle says, Know you not that Jesus Christ is in you, except
you be reprobates? And again, Romans 8.9.
you are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if the spirit of God dwell in
you; and so when it is said, that they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, we
must understand it of the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost.

And these gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, are excellently deciphered and set
down unto us under the properties and conditions of those forms and figures
wherein the Holy Ghost did appear unto us, and that is (if I do rightly
collect them,) three special times;

The Spirit of God appeared in the likeness of five special things.
First, unto the Israelites, 1. In a pillar of cloud by day. 2. In a pillar of
fire by night.


Secondly, at the Baptism of Christ, he descended upon him like a Dove.

Thirdly, At the day of Pentecost, he appeared, 1. Like the rushing of a mighty
wind. 2. Like cloven tongues of fire.


First, like a cloud.
First, He appeared in a pillar of cloud, to show unto us, that as the cloud
betokens, 1. A shadowing from heat; 2. A sending down of rain;
As, 1 King. 18.45.
the Heavens were black with clouds and winds, and there was a great rain;
so the Spirit of God, does ouershadow us from the heat of the wrath of God; it
cools and refreshes our scorched souls; and as the rain makes the barren
earth fertile and fruitful; In what r^spect the holy Ghost is like unto waters.
so does the graces of Gods spirit make our barren hearts plentiful in all
good works; for the Holy Ghost in many places is compared unto water, because
that as water, 1. Mollifieth the hard earth, 2. Fructifieth the barren ground,
3. Quenches the greatest heat, 4. Cleanses the foulest things,
and so forth.

So does the Spirit of God: In what respect the Holy Ghost is like unto water.
1. Soften our hard hearts. 2. Fructify our barren souls. 3. Quench the heat
of lust. 4. Cleanse us from all our sins.
And so make us to become fit temples for himself to remain in us.

Secondly, He appeared in a pillar of fire, Secondly, like fire.
to show his consubstantiality with the Father and the Son, says Nazianzen;
because God is fire, and so appeared in the fiery bush; from whence it may be,
came that custom among the Chaldeans, which afterward spread it self among
many other Nations of the Gentiles; to worship the fire for their God; whereas
indeed they should have worshipped that God which is fire and did appear like
fire, to teach us, that as the fire has in it (says Oecumenius) 1. Calorem.
2. Splendorem. 3. Motionem.
1. Heat, to warm, mollify, and purify. In what respects the Holy Ghost is
like unto fire.
2. Splendour, to give light, and to illuminate. 3. Motion, to be always
working.


Even so the Spirit of God; First, Warmeth and heateth the hearts of the godly,
with a fervent and a fiery zeal of all godliness; he mollifieth their hard
and stony hearts, and it consumes all the drossie substance of sin, and so
purifieth their souls from all wickedness.

Secondly, John 6.13.
He illuminateth their hearts with the knowledge of God, for, he brings them
into all truth, and he makes their light to shine before men, that they seeing
their good works, Mat. 5.16.
do glorify their Father which is in Heaven.

Thirdly, He makes them always to be in action, and never idle, but as it is
said of Christ, ever going about doing good.

Thirdly, He appeared like a Dove, Thirdly, like a Dove.
when he descended upon our Savior Christ at his Baptism; first, because (as
Bonauenture says) he came not then to strike our sins, by the zeal of his
fury, but to bear them, and to take them away, through the meekness of his
Passion; but on the other side, Greg. hom. 30. in Euang.
he descended upon the Apostles like fire, because in these which were simply
men, and therefore sinners, he would kindle a spiritual feruency against
themselves, and cause them to punish those sins in themselves, by repentance,
which God had pardoned unto them, through his mercy; and secondly, he descended
on Christ, like a harmless Dove, and not like unto tongues of fire; because
Christ was not to be taught, Cyrillus hierosol. Catech. 7.
which is signified by the tongues; for his lips were full of grace; nor to
be sorrowful for his sins, which is signified by the fire; because in him
there was no sin; but his Doue-like properties were to be showed; that he
was innocent, John 1.29.
meek, and lowly in heart; for as of all the beasts of the field, the little
silly Lamb is in most respects best qualified, and therefore is Christ called
the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world; In what respect the
Holy Ghost is like a Dove.
so of all the fowls of Heaven, the Dove in most respects is most excellent:
for she is annunciator pacis, the messenger and proclaimer of peace; she
brought the Olive branch unto Noah; she wants gall; she has no bitterness
in her; she never hurts with her bill nor claws; she is full of love, and yet
she never sings any wanton tune; but woo, woo, is her matutinus and vespertinus
cantus; her mournful morning and evening song: and therefore the Holy Ghost
descended on Christ like a Dove, Matthew. 3.16.
to show these Doue-like qualities of this Lamb of God; and to teach that we
must be thus qualified like Doves, if we would have this heavenly Dove, this
Holy Spirit of God to remain within us, for on them that are otherwise, this
Dove has not yet descended.

Fourthly, like a mighty wind.
Fourthly, He appeared like the rushng of a mighty wind; for a true wind it
was not, (says Oecumenius,) but the Spirit of God; Qui a spirando and flando
dicitur; which from blowing or breathing is called spirit, is said to appear.

First, Like the wind; and that, for these five reasons.

John 9.^.
First, As the wind blows where it lists; so the graces and gifts of Gods
Spirit are given to whomsoever it pleases him; for he will have mercy on whom
he will have mercy. Exodus 33.19.


In what respect the Holy Ghost is like unto wind.
Secondly, As the wind scatters the dust, and drives away the chafe from
the corn; so the graces of Gods Spirit does winnow the consciences of the
Saints, and drive away all wicked thoughts and cogitations from their hearts.

Thirdly, As the wind carries away the ship against the maine stream; so
will the grace of Gods Spirit carry a man against the current of his natural
inclination; for if Socrates by the sole help of moral instructions was able
to bridle his loose disposition, how much more shall those men be restrained
from all lewdness, which are led by divine inspiration?

Fourthly, As the wind cools and recreateth all those that are scorched with
the heat of the Sun; so does the grace of Gods Spirit, recreate all those
distressed people that are scorched with the heat of afflictions, or burned
with the concupiscence of their sins.

Fifthly, As the wind will pass irresistably; so will the grace of Gods Spirit
work it own ^ffect; and all the power of darkness is not able to resist it:
and therefore;

Secondly, It is said, 1 Kings 10.11.
that he appeared like the rushing of a mighty wind, because, that as the
mighty wind in the first book of Kings, the 10. and the 11. did rend the
mountains, and brake the rocks before the Lord; so the grace of Gods Spirit,
and the Word of God is mighty in operation, Why the Holy Ghost is compared to a
mighty wind.
able to shake the stoutest and the proudest man, and to break in pieces the
stoniest heart: Indeed our people do esteem our words none otherwise then
wind, which makes us spend so much wind to little purpose, to weary our
selves, and scarce to waken them: but here, let them know that the Spirit of
God (like Aeolus) which shuts up the winds in his bags, can when he
pleases, let out the same in a mighty manner, to amaze the consciences of the
stoutest Peers; and either to drive away their sins, Exodus 10.19. Psalm. 1.5.
as it drove away the Grasshoppers and Locusts that ouerspread the land of
Egypt, or else to drive them away like the Chafe, from off the face of earth.

Fifthly, He appeared like cloven tongues of fire.

First, Like tongues: for though the tongue, Fifthly, like cloven tongues of
fire.
i. e. such a tongue as is set on fire from Hell, (as Saint James says) is
many times the instrument of the Devil, to do much mischief to blaspheme
God, and to abuse men; yet, Vt non debent oues odere pelles suas quia induunt
eas lupi; As the sheep should not hate their skins, because the Wolves do
many times put them on; so ought none that is wise, reject that which is good,
because it is often abused by the bad; therefore seeing (as Pittacus says) the
tongue as it is the worst member in a wicked man, so it is one of the best
members in a godly man; James 5.6. Why the Holy Ghost appeared like tongues.
the Holy Ghost did appear like tongues.

First, Because (as a Father says) Symbolum est lingua spiritus sancti, a
patris verbo procedentis; The tongue is a symbol of the Holy Ghost, proceeding
from the Word of the Father; for as the tongue has the greatest cognation, and
the nearest affinity with the Word, and is moved by the Word of the heart, to
express the same by the sound of the voice (says Saint Gregory, John 16.14.
) so the Holy Ghost has the nearest affinity that may be with the word God,
and is the expressor of his voice, and the speaker of his will, that receives
of him, and reueileth all unto us.

Secondly, Because, as the tongues are the sole instruments of knowledge, which
conuayes the same from man to man; for though the soul be the fountain from
whence all wisdom springs, yet the tongue is the channel and the conduite
pipe, whereby this wisdom, this knowledge is communicated and transferred
from man to man; so the Holy Ghost is the sole Author and Teacher of all truth;
Christ is the wisdom of God, but the Holy Ghost is the Teacher of this
wisdom unto men; 1 Cor. 1.21.
and it pleased him by this only way to convey this wisdom of God unto men;
for seeing the world by their wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it
pleased God through the foolishness of Preaching, to save those that believe.

Why he appeared like cloven tongues.
Secondly, He appeared like cloven tongues, because all tongues and all
languages are alike known and understood of God, and because this Spirit can
teach all men all languages, and the gift of tongues is a gift of God.

Why he appeared like cloven tongues.
Thirdly, He appeared like cloven tongues of fire, they were ignitae non
politae; fiery tongues, and not fine polished tongues; because the Spirit of
God, delights rather in the zealous and the fervent tongues of Saint Paul and
Apollos that warm the heart, then in those eloquent tongues of Cicero and
Demosthenes that delight the ears; for this is the desire of Gods Spirit to
kindle the hearts of men, and to set them on fire, with the love of God, and
our brethren: So when our Savior preached unto the two Disciples that
traveled toward Emaus, they said, Did not our hearts burn within us, Luke 24.
while he talked with us by the way? This is the effect of the tongue of the
Holy Ghost, to work zeal and feruency in the hearers. And so you see the
thing wherewith they were said to be filled, that is, the gifts and graces of
the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. IIII. Of the filling of the Apostles with those gifts of the Holy Ghost,
and the signs of their fullness.
SEcondly, They are said to be filled with these gifts: and Dydimus says, that
we cannot be filled with any creature; Quia deus solus implet creaturas;
Because nothing but God can replenish and satisfy his creatures, Vnus pellaeo
Iuueni non sufficit orbis; The whole world is not able to content us: so large
is the capacity of man's desire: And yet we find, that in some sense, every
man may be truly said to be full; for nature it self abhorres vacuity; Romans
1.29.
and therefore the wicked are said to be full of all unrighteousness, full of
sins, full of worldly cares: and being full of these things, they must be
void of grace, and empty of goodness; their brains empty, that they
understand nothing, their memory empty, that they remember nothing, and their
hearts empty, that they practice nothing that is good. All men are either full
of sins or of grace.


But as the vessel that is full of water must be emptyed of that water, before
it can be filled with Wine; or as thy hand full of Counters (says Saint
Chrysostom) must be emptied of the Counters before thou can fill the same
with gold; so must we empty our selves of sin before we can be filled with
grace; and we must cast away the cares of this world, before we can be
satisfied with the joys of Heaven: and therefore the Apostles did forsake the
world and left all things to follow Christ, and then having emptyed themselves
of all worldly vanities, to follow Christ; they were presently filled with
these heavenly graces of Christ, Hugo de Prato apud Discip.


Now (as Hugo de Prato says) there be four special signs of fullness.

1. Not to murmr. 2. Firmly to stand. 3. To receive no more. 4. To flow
over.
And we find this to be true in each sort of them that are full. For,

First, The wicked, which are full of all unrighteousness.

First, They are dumb, and open not their mouths to give thanks to God for
any thing; and if God knocks on these vessels with the fingers of his
blessings; yet we shall not hear the least sound of any thankfulness; they
are full of sins, and therefore they cannot speak of grace.

Secondly, They are so constant in their wickedness, (Men's immota manet) that
as a full vessel cannot easily be removed; so all the preaching in the world
cannot make them to alter their lewd and wicked courses.

Thirdly, They are so full of sins, that there is no room in them for grace,
because nothing can receive but his fullness.

Fourthly, They corrupt others, and speak of wicked blasphemy, and their
talking is against the most highest; and so their sins do flow and ouerflow
the whole Country; to show indeed that they are full and more then full of
sins.

Secondly, The Apostles and Disciples and all good Christians, being
replenished with Gods Spirit, they have the same properties, but in a far
different sense: For,

First, If God should knock on these vessels, with the fingers of afflictions,
with any plagues or troubles, yet they murmr not at any thing, they open not
their mouths whatsoever they suffer; but they rejoice in tribulation, that
they are counted worthy to suffer any thing for the Name of Christ. Act. 5.41.


Secondly, They stand constant in their profession, that neither life nor death
can remove them from their most holy Faith. Romans 8.35.


And yet here you must not think, that the constancy of standing, while a man
is full of Gods Spirit, does imply a necessity of continuing full with the said
graces; for though the Holy Ghost sat upon the Apostles, and they stood firm
while he sat on them or remained in them; yet for their sins, if they take
not heed, 1 Samuel 16.15.
this Spirit may be taken from them, (as he was from Saul) and their
Candlestickes may be removed, as they were from the seven Churches of Asia;
and he that stands, may soon fall, if he does not warily look unto his
ways; for though the gifts and graces of God be (...), without repentance; i.
e. The saving graces once given, are neither finally, nor totally taken away,
but the common graces are oftentimes taken away from the wicked, by reason of
their wickedness.
though the saving grace of God, being once received by the Elect, can never
after totally be extinguished; yet those gifts and graces which are commonly
given, (as we see) many times to the bad, as well as to the good, or else for
the edifying of the Church, may wholly cease, and be extinguished; as we read
of Nicholas the Deacon, on whom the Spirit sat, and was one of them that were
filled with the Holy Ghost, if Saint Augustine, Saint Gregory, Lorinus, and
others judgment be to be followed, and yet fell from the faith, as Bonauenture
collecteth against Saint Chrysostom. But from hence it is well concluded, that
as all or most of the Apostles and Disciples that were here filled did continue
unto the end, as our Savior requires; so it shows that we should be all,
not like the Egyptian dogs at Nilus; Qui bibunt and fugiunt; Which for fear
of Crocodiles, do take a snatch of the River, and then slinke away, but very
careful to give attendance every man in his calling, Donec venerit, until our
Master comes and never to slinke away.

Thirdly, They forsook all and followed Christ; Matthew. 19.27.
There was no room in their hearts for worldly vanities, and they deemed them
but as dung and dross, as the Apostle calls them.

Fourthly, Hest. 10.6. in Apocryph.
As the little Well in Hester grew into a great River, and flowed over with
great waters; so now the Apostles being filled with the Holy Ghost, they power
out the graces of God over all the face of the earth to renew it, as the waters
of Noah prevailed to destroy it; for now, they speak with other tongues, as
the spirit gives them utterance.

And yet here we must observe, that although they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and that from them all, the graces of Gods Spirit did flow and ouerflow
the earth; yet they had not all the same measure of grace; That the Apostles
received not all, the like measure of grace.
and therefore that grace could not flow in the same measure from them all; for
as Richardus de sancto Victore does well observe, there is infusio, defusio,
and effusio gratiae; A giving of a quantity of some grace; and there is a
filling with a fullness of grace; and there is a superabundancy of grace; or
there is a small, and a middle, and a superordinary measure of grace: and so we
find it both in the Preachings and in the Pennings of these Apostles: for
James staide only in Jerusalem, and the mayor part of the rest preached over
all the world; Jude writ but one Epistle, and that one a very short one; and
most of them writ nothing at all; but Saint John and Saint Paul writ very much:
That we must not expect the same measure of fruits from all men.
and therefore of those (as well Preachers as others) which have received
grace, not only to sanctify themselves, but also to edify the Church, we
must not expect the same measure of fruits from all: For young men, and the
meaner Scholars cannot do so profoundly as the grauer Divines can do; and
the older men cannot do it so often as the younger sort can do; and yet
neither must be contemned; for if the young men had had the time of the aged,
no doubt but they would do as well as the aged: Aristotle.
Et si senex haberet oculum inuenis, videret vt iuuenis; And if the ancient men
had the strength and bodies of young men, it is not unlikely but that they would
still take pains as young men. Neither do I say this to uphold sloth or
negligence in any Age, for to our uttermost ability (as I said before) we must
all continue constant unto death; but to reprove our partial Age that adoreth
the Sun rising in the East, and applaudeth the quick wits, and many Sermons
of youth; but make none account of aged Paul, and the best labors of declining
age, Philemon v. 9.
unless with the Israelites, they can make up the same tale of Brickes as they
did in youth, though they have neither Straw nor Stubble, neither sight of
eyes, nor strength of bodies to perform it; and to show how every man, should
do his best; Iuxta mensuram Donationis Christi; according to that measure of
grace, which he has received from Christ. And so much for the filling of the
Apostles with the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. V. Of the effects and fruits of their filling with the Holy Ghost, and
how this Spirit seals them, and shows them to be the true servants of Jesus
Chist.
THirdly, For the effects of their filling it is said, The fruits and effects
of the holy Ghost.
that they began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance.

First, They began to speak, because the Spirit of God is never idle, but,
where it sees cause, will speak, though it should cost the speakers life.

Secondly, They spoke with other tongues, i. e. not as carnal men, talking of
fleshly or worldly matters; nor as wicked profane wretches, belching forth,
Blasphemia in deum; Blasphemies against God, but as regenerate and sanctified
men, they show forth, magnalia dei; the wonderful works of God.

And hereby all men might know whether they were the servants of Christ by this
Spirit of Christ; for as our Savior says of the false Apostles, the same is
true of all Apostles, Matthew. 7.16.
by their fruits you shall know them: for as in whomsoever the spirit of Satan
is, you shall see that he will reveal them by their lewd words, and by their
wicked works, which are the works of darkness: so in whomsoever the Spirit
of God is, he will seal them, and mark them with a fourfold mark, says
Bonauenture; that is, signo, 1. Veritatis credendorum. 2. Honestatatis morum.
3. Contemptus mundanorum. 4. Charitatis Dei et proximoru^
1. With true Religion. The holy Ghost seals us with a fourfold seal.
2. With an upright conversation. 3. With contempt of vanity. 4. With perfect
charity.


First, It works Faith in their hearts, for this is the fundamental root of
all other graces: and therefore the Apostle well observes out of the Prophet,
that a man first believes, Faith is the root of all graces.
and then speaks; for we have believed (says he) and therefore have we
spoken; whereas if they had not believed, they would never have spoken of the
wonderful works of God: and therefore the holy Ghost did first work faith in
their hearts, and then it caused the same to speak and to express it self,
by this preaching of the works of God. And,

Secondly, of good works which are,
Secondly, because the verity of our faith is ever known by the sincerity of
our life, therefore these signs shall follow them that believe,

Gregor. de 7. pec. Magdal. First, to suppress sin
First, They shall cast out Devils, i. e. vitia voluptatis; they shall suppress
all sins, as Saint Gregory expounds it; because every sin is as bad as the
Devil.

Secondly, They shall speak with new tongues, i. e. utter forth verba
vtilitatis, Secondly, to praise God.
holy and heavenly words; and because our natural tongues were like the poison
of Aspes, these may well be called new tongues, when they do sing a new song.

Thirdly, to bridle their lusts.
Thirdly, They shall take up serpents, i. e. concupiscentias sensualitatis; the
biting and poisonous concupiscences of our sensual flesh shall be, though not
quite taken away from them, yet they shall be taken up in their hands, (as
Hercules is said to have held the two serpents which Juno sent to devour him,
in both his hands, while he was but a child in his cradle) and they shall be
so restrained and held fast, that they shall not be able to do them violence.

Fourthly, to bear all injuries.
Fourthly, If they drink any deadly poison it shall not hurt them, i. e.
iniurias aduersitatis; if they must swallow down lies and slanders, yet for
all the malice and the mischief of the wicked, non inflammantur per superbiam,
non suffocantur per maliciam, non disrumpuntur per inuidiam; they shall neither
swell with envy, nor burst with malice, nor any ways perish through their
indignity, Luke 21.19.
but in their patience they shall possess their souls. And,

Fifthly, to do good unto all men.
Fifthly, They shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover them, i. e.
adiutoria charitatis, and remedia iniquitatis; they shall exercise such deeds
of charity, that by their good counsels and admonitions, they shall recover
many a languishing dying soul, Thirdly, of contempt of vanities.
and bring them back again to saving health. And,

Thirdly, because these things cannot be practiced, unless the pomp and pride
of worldly vanities, be quite contemned and trodden under feet; therefore the
Spirit of God works in them a mind to forsake all worldly things. And,

Fourthly, Fourthly, of charity. Romans 5.5.
because no work is good unless it proceeds from the root of charity;
therefore the Spirit of God diffuseth this love into the hearts of his
servants, that they wish no evil to any man, but are ready to do good, even
to them that hate them.

And these four seals and signs of Gods Spirit, are expressed in the twelfth
chapter of the Revelation where Saint John saw a woman clothed with the Sun,
Apoc. 12.1.
and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve Stars,
and she being with child, cried, traveling in birth and pain, to be
delivered: For this woman signifies the Church of Christ, or every faithful
Christian soul; And first her Sun-like shining, is the brightness of her good
works and heavenly conversation, which does so shine before men, Matthew. 5.16.
that they glorify God which is in heaven. Secondly, the Moon under her feet
signifies her contemning and trampling under feet all the vain and variable
things of this sublunary world. Thirdly, her crown of twelve Stars, is the
Symbol of her faith, containing twelve articles of her belief. And fourthly,
her pain to be delivered, is that earnest desire and love which every
Christian soul has to increase and multiply the number of Gods children. And
so the holy Ghost having descended upon the Apostles, and remaining in their
hearts, it caused them first to believe, and to compose that crown of twelve
Stars, (which is the glory of every Christian soul) i. e. the twelve
Articles of our faith, as the Church receives it. Secondly, to forsake all the
world, and to follow Christ, as S. Peter shows. Thirdly, Matthew. 19.27.
to lead a most upright and a godly life, as Saint Paul avouches. Heb. 13.18.
And fourthly, to labor incessantly night and day, to send out their voices
into all lands, and their words unto the ends of the world, as now the whole
world testifies. And so you see how in the first beginning of the Church, the
gifts of the holy Ghost were visibly and abundantly given unto these servants
of Jesus Christ, according as it was prophesied long before, Joel 2.28.
that he would power out his Spirit upon all flesh, and so their sons and
their daughters should prophecy. But,

CHAP. VI. How the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit are now given unto us, and
how we may know whether we have the same or not.
SEcondly, Christ does now give his Spirit otherwise unto the Pastors of his
Church, How God bestows his graces upon us
sufficiently for the edifying of the same, but through great pains, and
diligent searching after knowledge; for now we must not look for Exthusiasmes,
nor think to attain unto learning and knowledge by revelations; but orando,
and quaerendo, and been viuendo; by earnest prayers by continual watching, and
tumbling, and tossing of many books, and by wearing and wearying out our
selves in reading, musing, and writing of many lines, we must seek to attain
to a little learning: and when we have done all we can, we can get nothing
but what this blessed Spirit please to give us; for except the Lord build the
house the builder labors but in vain; so except he does bless our studies,
Psalm. 127.1.
all our pains and industry will prove no better, then Aethiopum lauare, to
wash a black Moore; a breaking of our brains, but an attaining to no true
knowledge.

But we may be certain, that if we do our duties, in all humility to seek and
search for grace, our God will most surely give us grace, yea, and the same
graces, (though not in the same manner, or according to the same measure) which
he did give unto his Apostles. And as here it was apparently seen that these
Apostles had the gifts of this Spirit, by these signs and effects of this
Spirit; so we may most certainly know, (if we will diligently search) whether
we have these gifts and graces of Gods Spirit or not, by the works that we do,
and by the things that we find in our selves: for Si iniurias dimittimus, The
signs whereby we may know whether we have the Spirit of God or not.
quod denotat columba, si paenitentiae lachrymis irrigamur, quod nubes, si
desiderium habemus rerum aeternarum, quod ignis, si magnalia Dei annuntiamus,
quod lingua, tum habemus signum praesentiae Spiritus sancti; If we water our
couch with our tears, and be truly sorry for our sins, which is signified
by the cloud: if we be purged from all the dross of sin, and be elevated to
desire and love heavenly things, which is noted in the fire; if we be carried
against the natural stream and current of our own corruptions, which is
showed by the wind; if we remit and forgive all wrongs done unto us, and be
meek and gentle unto all men, harsh and sullen unto none, which are the
properties of the Dove; and if we zealously preach and pray, and talk of God,
and of his will, his grace and goodness toward us, and render thanks and
praise unto him for the same, which is the office of a fiery tongue; then we
do with the Apostles show the effects of Gods Spirit; and we may to our
endless comforts assure our selves that the Spirit of God is in us. 1 Cor.
3.85.
But if we find none of these things, no hatred of sin, no love of virtue,
no loathing of the vanities of this world, no lifting up of our hearts to
heaven, no meekness with men, no praising of God, but rather find our selves
clean contrary, defiled with sin, deboist in our lives, iniuring men,
offending God, blaspheming his name with wicked oaths, and breaking his
Sabboths with great contempt; then we should not only wonder to see the gifts
and graces of Gods Spirit in others, as the people did when they saw what had
happened unto the Apostles upon the day of Pentecost; but we should rather
bewail and lament the want of the same in our selves; for it is impossible
that they should have any part or portion of Gods Spirit, that do show no
sign nor fruit of Gods grace.

And therefore every man should try and examine himself, whether he find in
himself the fruits and effects of Gods Spirit or not. For,

First, the holy Ghost, being like water, if he be in you, That we should
diligently examine whether we have Gods Spirit or not. Psalm 1.3.
then you are washed and cleansed from all filthiness; and you are like the
trees that are planted by the waters side, and do bring forth their fruits in
due season: but if you be like a barren and dry ground where no water is, or
like fruitless trees that bear nothing but leaves, then certainly the Spirit
of God is not in you, and you are fit for nothing but to be hewne down, Matthew.
3.10.
and to be cast into the fire.

Secondly, the holy Ghost being like fire, if he be in us, he illuminateth the
eyes of our understanding, and he gives light to them that sit in darkness
and in the shadow of death, that they may walk without stumbling, in the way
of peace; but if our understanding be so darkened, that we neither know God
nor the will of God, then certainly the Spirit of God is not in us; 2 Cor. 4.3.
for if our Gospel be hid, (says the Apostle) it is hid to them that are
lost, that being deprived and void of Gods Spirit, are filled with the spirit
of darkness. A most fearful saying against them that understand not the
great mystery of godliness, that they have the mark of lost ones; and if he
be in us, then we must needs be fervent and zealous to do all good service
unto God, as Apollo was, who is said to be hot in spirit, or as the twelve
tribes were, who served God night and day; instantly, Act. 18.28. c. 26.7.
says the Apostle: but if we be cold and careless to serve the Lord, then
surely we are destitute of this Spirit of God; for how can a man carry fire in
his bosom, Prou. 6.27.
and not be burnt? so how can we have the fire of Gods Spirit in our hearts,
and not be fervent to all good works?

Thirdly, the holy Ghost being like a Dove, if he be in us, then we are meek
and lowly in heart; for this heavenly Dove remains in none but those that are
Doves: but if with the Ducke (that flying aloft among the wild Duckes, did
presently alight, and so brought them all with her into her owners net, whereof
Alciat says, Alciat. de Anate.
Perfida cognato se sanguine polluit ales
Officiosa alijs, exitiosa suis.
They doubting not her traiterous heart at all,
Did fly with her, and down with her did fall,)
We do deceive our friends, and wrong our neighbors; then surely this
Doue-like spirit of God is not in us; for this holy spirit of discipline flies
from deceit; Wisdom 1. Gal. 5.22.
and the fruit of this spirit is all meekness, gentleness, and goodness.

Fourthly, the holy Ghost being like wind, if he be in us, then all the dust
of vanity is scattered from our hearts; and our souls are carried against the
stream of natural desires, to wish and long for heavenly things. And,

Fifthly, the holy Ghost being like tongues; if he be in us, then our tongues
will be like the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45.2. Matthew. 12.14.
and our talking will be of the most highest; Quia ex abundantia cordis os
loquitur; and loquela tua te manifestum facit; because a religious heart will
ever express it self by a godly and a religious tongue; Romans 10.10.
for as with the heart man believes unto righteousness, so with the tongue
confession is made unto salvation; but if we talk laciuiously, and speak all
words that may do hurt; if the poison of aspes be under our lips, and the
holy name of God, or the good fame of men be evil spoken of through us, then
surely, surely, If we have not the spirit, we ought to seek him.
this holy spirit of God is not in us. And if he be not in thee, then I advise
thee to seek him while he may be found; for the time will come, when he cannot
be found, Bern. ser. 75. in cant.
i. e. cum optauerimus salutem in medio gehennae, quae facta est et praedicata
est in medio terrae; when we shall wish for salvation in the midst of Hell,
which was wrought, and is preached in the midst of the earth: and therefore now
while it is to day, we ought to seek unto him, and to pray with the Prophet
David, yea and to pray earnestly, that God would renew his spirit within us,
Psalm. 51.10.
and stablish us with his free spirit; for, whosoever has not the spirit of
Christ, Romans 8.9.
the same is none of his, the same has no comfort in the world, no assurance
of his salvation, no Faith, no Hope, no God, no good.

But if by these infallible rules thou find that thou have the spirit, If we
have the spirit of God we ought not to grieve him.
and can say with that worthy Martyr of our Church, I have it, I have it, as
he went unto the stake to be burned, then remember what the Apostle speaks,
grieve not the spirit, quench not the spirit; spill not this water, lest that
spilling this oil thy lamp goes out: and then, 1 These. 5.19.
thy last end will be far worse then thy beginning; and it had bin better for
thee, Luc. 11.26. 2 Pet. 2.21.
never to have known it, then to turn aside from the holy Commandment: for
as Sampson and Saul having the spirit of God, lived honorably and did perform
most worthy exploits; A fearful thing to be deprived of Gods spirit. Iud.
16.10. 1 Samuel
but having lost the same by their sins, they became in their lives most
miserable, and in their deaths most lamentable; even so it will happen from the
Lord, unto all backe-sliders, unto all them that quench the spirit: therefore
(I say) grieve him not, quench him not. How Preachers may know whether they
have the gifts to edify the Church.


But because the chiefest of these gifts for the collecting and the edifying of
the Church, is the gift of tongues, whereby the Ministers are enabled for the
preaching of Gods Word; therefore, we that are Preachers should here chiefly
look whether we have this gift of tongues or not; for,

Psalm. 45.2.
First, if our tongues be the pens of a ready writer, that we can readily
speak of the things that we have made unto the King, and Preach the Word of
Truth in season, and out of season;

Secondly, if these our tongues be not double tongues, but cloven tongues, i.
e. able to divide the Word of God aright, and to give unto every man his own
portion in due season; Luke 12.42.
that is, mercy and comforts unto the repentant soul, and woes and judgment
unto the obstinate transgressors, and to teach Faith and works, love to God
and man;

Thirdly, if these our cloven tongues be of fire; that is, used rather to gain
souls, then to get applause, or to gather wealth; to draw men to glorify God,
Numb. 12.21.30. 1 Samuel 25.36.
and not to magnify our selves; then we may be assured, we have received a
part and portion of these gifts and graces of Gods spirit.

But if we be like those great clarks, which they say are rare Scholars, but
never man was heard to be the better for their learning; they have it in them,
like the fire in the flint-stone, but it never comes out of them; they are
loathe to preach, they are loathe to write, for then perhaps they should not be
deemed so learned as now they are judged to be; for a fool holding his peace
may be thought to be wise: or if we be like Baalams Ass, that never spoke but
twice in all her life; or use to preach as Naball feasted, once a year, when
they receive their rents; or if we would preach, and cannot, but it were
better for us not to preach at all, then to preach so idly, and so foolishly as
we do; or if we preach more for profit, or the praise of men, then for the
glory of God; then assuredly we do proclayme unto the world, that we have not
yet received these gifts of fiery cloven tongues from God.

Usher de Christ. ecccles.
Vrbanus writes unto Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury, Monacho feruentissimo,
Abbati calido, episcopo lepido, Archi-episcopo remisso; and so it was said of
Alexander the sixth, De vitio in vitium, de flamma transit in ignem: They grew
worse and worse, as they did grow greater and greater; and I pray God it be not
true among us; that high preferment spoil not many a Preacher. I say no more:
but so you see, how the gifts which are given for the edifying of Gods Church,
were given unto the Apostles, and how ever since, they are given unto all other
Preachers.

CHAP. VII. How the gifts and graces that are given for the sanctifying of our
souls are conferred and bestowed upon men.
SEcondly, By what means we receive the grace of God.
for the other gifts and graces that are given for the sanctifying of our
souls, they were, and are given ever after the same manner, that is,

First, by those outward means which God has appointed; and,

Secondly, by the inward working of his blessed spirit; for, though I confess
with Saint Augustine and others, that God can speak by his spirit, in occulto,
and teach our spirits in silentio to cry Abba Father; All graces come by
hearing Gods Word, and by receiving of his Sacraments.
yet we find that ordinarily all the gifts and graces of God, as Faith, Hope,
Charity, Patience and all other graces whatsoever, are wrought in us by those
means which God has appointed for this purpose; and they are two, 1. The
hearing of Gods Word. 2. The receiving of the blessed Sacraments.


First we find that the best way to attain unto any gift of grace, is to
hear the Preaching of Gods Word; because prayer, by which all graces are
obtained, is the fruit of Faith, Romans 10.17.
and Faith comes by hearing, says the Apostle.

Neither is it every kind of hearing, That all kind of hearing, profits not
the hearers.
that will suffice to obtain grace; for as there be many that can receive no
grace, because like the deaffe Adders, they will not hear at all; so there be
as many that can receive but very little grace; because they hear amiss. I
have read it in Erasmus; that Demosthenes on a time, discoursing seriously of
necessary considerations of State-businesse, all his Auditors fell asleep;
the Orator to awaken them, said he had a pretty story to relate unto them,
viz. that a young man hired an Ass from Athens to Megara, and in the heat of
the day, he couched under the Ass, to take the benefit of her shadow; the
owner denied him the use of the Asses shadow, saying, he hired the Ass and not
her shadow: and therefore he should not have it, unless he would anew compound
for it; the young man said, he would have the advantage of his bargain; with
that they fell from words to blows; and so Demosthenes staid his speech;
whereupon, all his Auditors desired him to go on, that they might hear the
issue of that Tragedy: the Orator replied, I discoursed of the safety of your
Commonwealth, and you fell asleep; and now I told you a Tale of an Ass, and
see how attentive you are to it; and so he reproved the madness of his
people; Foolish hearers.
even so, we have many hearers that are more attentive unto trifling words,
and more delighted with the form and phrases, then they are with the substance
of the matter, like unto little children, that love the gilded outside of the
book, better then all the wisdom that is therein contained; or the laces of
there coat, better then the coat it self: And some we have like the
Egyptians about the fall of Nilus, that at the first, were much affrighted at
the hideous noise thereof, Acts 26.28.
but within a little while after they were accustomed with the same, they were
no ways moved thereat; so they, like Agrippa, at the first hearing of the Word
Preached, are something touched with the sense of their sins, but within a
very little while, Customarie hearers.
they grow careless of all goodness: others like the Auditors in Strabo, that
attentively heard the Philosopher, until the market-bell of their profit did
ring, and then they left him all alone; or rather like the hearers of Saint
Paul, Worldly hearers.
which gave him audience, until he touched their hearts with their unbelief;
so our men will hear us, if it be not against their worldly profit, and they
will hear placentia, such things as are pleasing for them: others hear so
much, that in very deed, Only hearers and no doers.
they do nothing else but hear; for they never practice any thing at all, but
the practice of iniquity; they will hear a Sermon every day, two for failing,
three sometimes, but they will not forsake one sin for a whole years
Sermons: they hear them to be wiser, not to be better: Ah wretched men that
you are! -- procul hinc, procul ite profani; Why will you hear Gods Laws, and
yet hate to be reformed? for this will turn to your further condemnation; not
because you do hear Gods Word, which is good; but because you do^ not do
that which you hear to be good: and so we have many other sorts of hearers,
that by their hearing do receive no grace, because they hear amiss.

And therefore not all hearers, but all those that take heed how they hear;
that do hear that they may understand, and understand that they may practice,
and practice that they may please their God; those do receive the gifts and
graces of God.

Secondly, The receiving of the Sacraments, a most excellent means to beget
all graces.
we know that the blessed Sacraments are most excellent means to beget Faith,
and Love, and all other graces in the worthy receivers of the same; for they
be verba visibilia euangelij; such things as do visibly show unto our eyes all
that the Word of God does teach and speak unto our ears; for what is the sum
of Gods Word and of all the Preaching in the world, but, that Jesus Christ
suffered, and died for our sins, that we through him might have eternal
life? and what can show this more plainly then the blessed Sacraments do? for
in Baptism we see, how the child is regenerate, and borne anew, and ingrafted
into Christ; and as the water cools all the scorching heat of the flesh, and
washes away all filthiness from our bodies, and makes every thing fruitful,
so the gifts and graces of Gods spirit does cool in us the heat of our fleshly
concupiscence, and cleanses us from all sins, How the Sacraments show us all
that the Scripture teaches.
and makes us to abound in all good works: and in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper we do most apparently see, that, as the Bread which is broken and then
given us to be eaten for to strengthen our heart, and to sustain our life; and
the Wine is powered out, and given us to drink it for to comfort our hearts; so
Christ was broken in pieces (as I showed in my Treatise of his Passion) for our
sins; and his blood was powered out to make satisfaction for our
transgressions; and so he is given unto us, as the food of our souls, and the
only joy of our heart to sustain us, to refresh us, and to be our only
comforter in all distress. And the consideration of these visible things,
should as effectually work in us, Faith to believe in him, Hope to expect all
good from him, and Charity for all received graces, most entirely to love him,
and to be truly thankful unto him for the same, and so to work in us,
patience to suffer, as he has suffered, love one toward another, as he has
loved us, and so all other graces whatsoever, as the audible declaration of
them, expressed by the Preacher, does unto our ears; for as it was the manner
in old time, not only verbally to declare, The custom of ancient time to
express their minds by visible signs. 1 Kings 22.11.
but also by certain visible signs to express memorable things; that so it
might make the more impression in their minds; as the Egyptians by their
hyeroglyphicks; and Zedechia the son of Cenaanah made him horns of iron, and
said unto Achab, thus says the Lord, with these shall thou push the Syrians,
until thou have consumed them; and Agabus took the Girdle of Saint Paul, Acts
21.11.
and bound his own hands and feet, and said, thus says the holy Ghost; So
shall the Jews at Jerusalem, bind the man that owes this Girdle, and shall
deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles; so the Lord uses all means,
Preaching unto our ears, by the best intelligible voices, and showing unto our
eyes by most plain significant signs what Christ has done for us; thereby to
make us all to understand, and to believe the same.

But as all kind of hearing, so all kind of receiving these blessed
Sacraments is not sufficient to beget faith and other graces in the receivers;
for we read that there be four kinds of receivers of the blessed Sacraments.
Four sorts of receivers of the Sacraments.


First some receive them spiritually only; that is, the matter of the
Sacraments; which are, the gifts and graces of Jesus Christ, We may receive
Christ though we want the Sacraments.
but not the Sacraments themselves; so Theodosius was baptized and ingrafted
into Christ by grace, though he wanted the outward means, as Saint Ambrose
says: and so all the elected children that die before they can be pertakers of
the Lords Supper, non manducantes manducunt; not eating the Sacramental Bread,
Aug. tract. 17. and 27. de verb. Apostoli.
do notwithstanding eat Jesus Christ: Quia manducare illam escam and illum
bibere potum, est in Christo manner, and Christum in se manentem habere;
because that to eat the flesh of Christ, and to drink his blood, is to be
ingrafted into Christ, to be united and made one with Christ; and so to have
Christ dwelling in us, and us in him; To believe in Christ is to eat and drink
Christ.
and therefore we find that Christ does not only say, he that comes to me,
i. e. to eat me, shall not hunger, and he that believes in me shall never
thirst, to show that there is no difference betwixt believing in him, and
drinking of him; but also the very same things are promised as well to the
believers in him, as to the eaters of his flesh, and the drinkers of his blood;
John 6. v. 47. v. 51.
for in the 47. v. of the 6. Chap. of John, he says, he that believes in me
has everlasting life, and in the 51. v. of the same Chapter, he says; if any
man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; and so the very same things are
threatened as well against the not believers in him, as the not eaters of his
flesh; for in the 53. v. he says, v. 53. v. 64.
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no
life in you; and in 64. v. he says, there are some of you that believe not; to
teach us, that, as Saint Augustine says, credere in Christum est manducare
panem vinum, to believe truly in Christ, is to eat the flesh of Christ.

Secondly, some do receive them Sacramentally only; To receive outward
Sacraments, and not the grace signified; will avail us nothing. 1 Cor. 10.2,
3, 4.
that is, the outward signs and elements only; but not the gifts and graces
thereby taught and signified: so the Fathers that came out of Egypt, were all
baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and did all eat of the same spiritual meat,
and did all drink of the same spiritual drink, that is, as we do, though in
other signs; for they drank of that spiritual Rock which followed them, and
that Rock was Christ, that is, signified and taught them Christ; and yet many
of them perished in the wilderness, Quia manducantes non manducabant; because
they were wicked and did only receive the outward signs, and did not receive
the inward grace that was signified and offered unto them, under those
Sacramental signs; so the Pharisees had the Sacrament of Circumcision; yet
our Savior tells them that being wicked, they were the sons of Hell, John
8.44.
and the children of their Father the Devil: and in the time of the New
Testament they had the Sacrament of Baptism, for John Baptist baptized many of
them, and Simon Magus was baptized by an Apostle, and Judas received the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and yet we see they reaped no fruit thereby,
because they received them only Sacramentally, outwardly, and did not believe;
and therefore received not those blessings and graces which these Sacraments
taught and pointed at.

Heretics do neither receive Christ nor the Sacraments of Christ.
Thirdly, some receive neither the Sacraments, nor the graces signified by the
Sacraments; so all Heretics that neither rightly believe in Christ, nor yet
truly receive the Sacraments according to the institution of Christ, do
neither receive grace, nor yet any sign of grace.

The worthy receivers of the Sacraments, do hereby receive Christ and all his
graces.
Fourthly, some receive the true Sacraments; because they receive them, as they
are delivered by Christ himself; and they receive the true graces, that is,
all the benefits of Jesus Christ, taught, manifested, and exhibited unto us by
those Sacraments; such are all the faithful and the worthy receivers of the
same; Quia manducantes manducunt; because that receiving these, they feed by
faith on Jesus Christ, and do most truly apply unto their own souls, what
grace or virtue soever is signified and showed by these outward signs and
Schoolmasters of all true Christians.

Three sorts of men excluded from the paschall Lamb.
And therefore if we would obtain the graces and blessings of God, by the
means of the blessed Sacraments, let us examine our selves, that we may be
worthy receivers of the same. We find in the Law, that three sorts of men
were excluded from the paschall Lamb, Exodus 12.43.48.
1. The uncircumcised. 2. The strangers. 3. Those that were unclean.


Indigne sumis si sumis non reuerenter, vel non catholice vel habens mortale
scienter.
To teach us, that the vnreuerent, the unbelievers, and the ungodly, great and
grievous sinners, should not presume to meddle with these blessed Sacraments:
for as the covenant of Gods grace, so these signs of the covenant belongs
not to any wicked man, so long as he remains wicked: and therefore, lest (as
the men of Bethshemesh were slain, fifty thousand and threescore and ten men
in one day, 1 Samuel 6.19.
because they looked into the arc, which belonged only unto the Priests;) we
be found guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and so pull upon our selves
swift damnation, if we snatch the childrens bread, that belongs not to us, or
receive these blessed Sacraments unworthily, let us with blind Bartimaeus,
cast off our mantles, the old rags of Adam, the lusts of the flesh, and let us
put on our wedding garment, the new man, which chiefly consists of Faith
toward God, and love toward men, if, Mark. 10.50.
when we come to receive these Sacraments, we would receive the grace of
Christ. But, Mat. 22.11.


Secondly, though such a hearing of the Word, as I have above showed, be a
special means to obtain grace; yet we must know, that this means is not
sufficient, unless, as God opened the heart of Lydia, when Saint Paul Preached
unto her ears, so he does work faith in your hearts, when we do Preach and
expound the Word unto your ears; Quia inanis est sermo docentis nisi spiritus
adsit cordi audientis; because, as the Preaching of the Word is the gift of God
in us; so the believing of the same is the operation of the same God in you;
And so likewise, though the receiving of the blessed Sacraments, be a singular
means, to work Faith and all other graces in the right receivers of the same;
yet we must understand, that it is not opus operatum; the doing of the work
that begets grace in any man, but the spirit of God only conuayeth grace,
through the conduit pipes of these outward means: and therefore we should
always pray to God, not only for the graces of attention unto our ears, and
illumination unto our eyes, but also of sanctification unto our hearts, that
what we do attentively hear with our ears, and do most perfectly see with
our eyes. We may most faithfully believe with our hearts, and so attain unto
these gifts and graces of Gods spirit.

CHAP. VIII. On whom God bestows these gifts and graces of his spirit.
FOr the third, i e, To whom God bestows these gifts; we must know that he
bestows, neither the graces of edifiying the Church, nor the other graces, to
sanctify and to save our souls, upon all men, but only upon those whom it
pleases him; for as when he was to choose his Apostles, it is said, that he
chose whom he pleased; so of the graces of preservation, sanctification, and
such like, he gives them to whom he pleases; Mar. 3.13.
and though he gives liberally unto all men, James 1.51
yet he gives not all of these, nor any of them all, inconsiderately, unto any
man, for he lets not his graces drop through his fingers (as if he cared not
what became of them) and so suffer all men to gather them, Mat. 10.29.
who will; but as a sparrow lights not upon the ground without his providence,
so not one grace falls to any man, without his special guidance and direction.
And this the Apostle shows when he says, Romans 9.16.
non est currentis neque volentis, sed miserentis Dei; it is not in him that
runs, nor in him that wills; but in God that shows mercy, and this
Christ himself declares, when he says, no man comes unto me, except the
Father draw him; John.
so no man can receive these gifts and graces, but they to whom they are given;
and as we find a gradation of the love and favor of God; As,

First, he loves all the things that he has made; and,

That there is a gradation in Gods love.
Secondly, he loves man in a more special manner, above all the things that he
made; And,

Thirdly, among men, he loves some better then others; yea,

Fourthly, among those that he loves best, he loves some better then the
rest; As, we see he loved Noah and Abraham among the Patriarks, Moses among
the Prophets, and John among the Apostles; Why God loves some men better then
others.
so he loves these best, not because these were in themselves, better then any
others; but because it pleased him to love them better then others; for, as if
he had made a toad a man, and the man a toad, the toad had bin the better of
the twain; so if he had bestowed more grace upon the wicked, and withheld
the same from the now best men in all respects, then no doubt but the wicked
had bin the best; but he loves them best, because it pleases him so to do,
and therefore, he bestows more graces and tokens of his love upon them, to
make them better then all others whatsoever; for the gifts of God make us good,
and our goodness makes not him to bestow his gifts on us.

And this I say, What this doctrine teaches us.
not to accuse God of any niggardliness or close-handednesse, because he
gives not these gifts unto all: God forbid; for he is a debtor to no man, but
may freely, without censure, do with his own what he list; But I say this,

First, to show his exceeding great bounty, and favor, First, to behold the
great goodness of God to his elect.
toward us; that deserving no more good at Gods hands then all the rest of the
race of mankind, should notwithstanding when we justly deserved so much evil
(it may be as much, or more then the rest of men) receive so many great gifts
and graces, above and before all the rest of the world.

Secondly, Secondly, to be truly thankful unto God.
and specially to move us to all thankfulness to this our good and gracious
God, that withholding his graces from many thousand others, he would
notwithstanding so graciously bestow them upon us; for had not he given us the
grace to believe in Christ, to hate our sins, and to love all righteousness;
I see not how the best of us could do any of these, no more then the wickedest
men in the world: and therefore I would to God, that we would ever praise the
Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does, as generally for
all men, so specially, for these chosen children of men.

Thirdly, and lastly, to teach us, Thirdly, to pray for what we want, and to
praise our God for evermore.
that when we feel our own wants, we should pray to him for help, to
supply our need: and when we see any of our neighbors void of grace, we should
rather piously pity them, and pray for them, then proudly to contemn them,
and to spurn against them; for as, if God would, he might have made thee a
beast, and the beast a man; so, if it had pleased him, he might have filled
them with that grace which he bestowed on thee, and he might have justly left
thee in that fulness of sin, wherein they do wallow: and therefore
beholding the goodness and severity of God, on them, to whom he gives no
grace, severity; but toward thee to whom he bestows his gifts, goodness,
if thou continue in this goodness; do thou praise thy God, and pray for them;
that for his sake that is ascended up on high, and has led captivity captive,
God would be pleased, to bestow his gifts and graces unto men; that so all men
may ascribe and give all praise and glory unto him, which was, and is, and
shall be, through him which was dead, and is alive, and lives for evermore,
Amen.

A Prayer.
O Most gracious God, which have given thine only Son Jesus Christ, to die
for our sins, to rise again from the dead, to ascend unto Heaven, to prepare
a place for us, and to send us thy holy spirit to fill our hearts with all
heavenly graces, which are necessary for the gathering of thy Church and the
sanctifying of our souls, to prepare us unto eternal life; we most humbly
beseech thee, to give us that grace to be truly thankful unto thee for all thy
graces; Increase our faith, stir up our hope, and kindle our love both
toward thee and toward all men for thy sake; and because all graces are
begotten, increased and preserved by the hearing of thy Word, and receiving of
thy blessed Sacraments, we pray thee O Lord, to give us grace to hear thy Word
attentively, to believe it faithfully and to receive thy Sacraments worthily,
that so being filled with thy spirit, we may despise all worldly vanities, and
have our conuersations in Heaven while we live on earth, and at last be
received into that Kingdom which thou have prepared for them that love thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

IEHOVAE LIBERATORI.

FINIS.
The Seventh Golden Candlestick, HOLDING The Seventh greatest Light of
Christian REIGION. Of the duty of CHRISTIANS.
1 THESSAL. 5.2^ (...).

Brethren, pray for us.


I Have showed thee, O man, The coherence of this Treatise with all the other
Treatises.
how man behaved himself toward God, offending his Majesty with heinous
sins; and I have showed thee what God has done for sinful man, how he sent
his only begotten Son, to be made man, to suffer pain and sorrow, and to
die a cursed death for man, thereby to overcome all our enemies, sin, death
and hell; to arise from the dead, to assure us of our deliverance, to ascend
into heaven, to prepare a place for us, and to send his holy and blessed Spirit
into the hearts of men to fit them with the gifts and graces of the same, to
prepare them for heaven; that the poor man might bathe himself in the poole
of Bethesda, and be made perfectly whole; that the wandering sheep might be
reduced and brought home upon this man's shoulders; and that sinful man might
be reconciled and reunited unto God again. And therefore now, Quid nisi vota
supersunt? what remains saving only prayers? to render thanks unto God for
this great kindness, and to ask those things that he requisite for us? and
to teach us how to do the same, I have chosen to treat of this short Text,
Brethren, pray for us.

It is a Text independent either of precedent or subsequent matter; and it
contains points of piety, points fit to be preached, and fitter to be
practiced, by your sacred Majesty, by the worthiest Nobles, by us Priests, by
all men: and therefore da veniam Imperat^r; I humbly crave attention but a
short time, to dilate upon this short Text, Brethren, pray for us. I may say of
it, as Saint Hierome said to Paulinus of the Catholic Epistles of Saint Peter,
Saint John, Saint James, and S. Jude, Eas breues esse pariter, and longas, that
they were short in words, but full of matter; for herein our blessed Apostle,
(as was said of that famous Hystorian) Verborum numero sententiarum numerum
comprehendit) in this paucity of words has couched plenty of matter; the parts
are two.

The division of the Text.
1. A most friendly compellation; Brethren, 2. A most Christian request or
exhortation, pray for us.
Out of the first I note two things, 1. His affection, whereby we are taught to
live in unity; 2. His discretion, whereby we may observe a Christian policy,
not such as is abusiuely, though commonly so termed in the world; but such as
is joined with true piety.
And in the second I observe likewise two things, 1. The action, pray, which is
a work of piety, 2. The extention, for us, which is an act of charity.
And so you see that from this short Text, we may learn 1. Unity. 2. Policy.
3. Piety. 4. Charity.


Brethren, pray for us.

CHAP. I. Of the diverse sorts of Brethren, and how this teaches unity.
FIrst, Brethren is verbum amoris, a word full of love, Of the unity of
brethren.
but it is diversely taken in the Scripture. For,

First, Aug. ser. 61. de tempore.
sometimes Omnem hominem per fratrem debemus accipere; says Saint Augustine;
we ought to understand every man by the name of brother; as he that hates his
brother, i. e. he that hates any man, is a manslayer.

Secondly, Sometimes it signifies those of the same nation, as Moses went out
unto his brethren, Exodus 2.11.
and saw an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren.

Thirdly, Sometimes cognatos Scriptura dicit fratres; Aug. l. 1. locut. de Genesis
Math. 12.4.7. Mar. 3.32.
the Scriptures calls our kindred by the name of brethren; as, behold thy
brethren stand without desiring to speak with thee.

Fourthly, Sometimes it is put for the sons of the same parents, as Heua bare
again his brother Abell; and Caine said, Am I my brothers keeper? Genesis
4.2.8.9. v.


Fifthly, 1 Cor. 1.26.
Sometimes we understand those of the same religion and profession, as you see
your calling brethren: Et sic fratres dicti Christiani; and so all Christians
are called brethren, says Saint Augustine; and so Saint Paul means in this
place, Brethren, pray for us; for otherwise he was an Hebrew, of the seed of
Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, 2 Pet. 1.10.
and they were Grecians of Thessalonica, the Metrapolitane City of Macedonia,
built by Philip king of Macedon, and so called (...), Aug. ser. dom. in monte,
fol. 343.
of his victories obtained in Thessaly, in which respect also he called his
own daughter Thessalonica, (as Suidas says) but they were all Christians, and
therefore brethren, and therefore the deerer one to another because Christian
brethren: Quia mayor est fraternitas spiritus quam sanguinis; because the
fraternity or brotherhood of Christians, which is in respect of the Spirit
that begets us with the same immortal seed, in the womb of the same mother,
the Church, to be brought forth and brought up as children to the same Father
which is in heaven, is a great deal more excellent, then the brotherhood of
flesh and blood: Nam haec similitudinem corporis refert, illa cordis
vnanimitatem demonstrat, Aug. in apend. de diuersis. Ser. 10. Psalm. 647. to 10.
haec interdum sibi inimica, illa sine intermissione pacifica est; for that
shows only the likeness and similitude of the body, and the sympathy of
natural dispositions; but this shows the unanimity of the heart, and a
concurrent desire in all holy affections; those are sometimes contrary unto
themselves, but these have always cor vnum, and animam vnam; one heart, and
one mind, to love the same things, and to agree in the same points: and
therefore of all brethren, the love of Christian brethren should excel and
exceed all other love of brethren; 1 John 3.16.
and these of all others should be ready to lay down their lives for the
Brethren.

How gentile brethren loved one another.
And yet in former times the love of natural brethren was such, that when a
soldier which was in the army of Pompey had unawares unto himself, slain his
brother that was in the company of Sertorius, Val. Max. l. 5. and Aug. de ciuit
l. 5. and Aug. de ciuit. Dei l. 2. c. 25. Idem de ciuit. l. 8. c 5.
and knew the same when he bestript his body, seipsum ibi perimens fraterno
corpori adiunxit, he slew himself for very grief, and left his own body upon
his brothers carkeise: and Saint Augustine reports of the sons of Tyndarus,
that when Castor was slain by Idas, Pollux besought Jupiter that he might
impart half his own life unto his brother, Sic fratrem Pollux alterna morte
redemit. And so we read of these signs Castor and Pollux, that vterque
alternis diebus lucet; each one of them appears every second day; and so the
Poet says of Pylades and Orestes, Extitit hoc vnu^ quod non conuenerat illis;
caetera par concors, and sine lite fuit.
Ire iubet Pylades charus periturus Orestem,
Hic negat, inque vicem pugnat vterque mori.
They never disagreed but only in this, which of them should first lay down
his life for the other.

And now amongst Christian brethren, we find Ouids saying to be true, --
Fratrum quoque gratia rara est -- They do show less love among themselves
then the heathen did; the love of most is waxen cold, all are become lovers of
themselves, Bern. de aduent. dominiser. 3. p. ^.
and no man remembers the afflictions of Joseph: for although (as Saint
Bernard says) Iure fraternitatis consilij sumus, and auxilij fratribus
debitores, consilij quo erudiatur ignorantia, auxilij quo iuuetur infirmitas;
in respect of our brotherhood we do owe unto our brethren both aid and advice,
aid to help his infirmity, and advice to direct his simplicity: yet al f^e, Of
the great want of unity among Christian brethren.
the whole world sees how we do insult over the weak, and lay stumbling
blocks before the blind, what wrongs and oppressions in the Commonwealth;
what more hostility then among Christian Princes? where now more bloody wars
then among the Christians, that do imbrew their swords in the blood of each
other, which should rather join their strength against the enemies of the
Lord? and what bitter contentions do we likewise see in the very Church of
Christ? Oh, how many bitter lines have ambitious spirits so contentiously
scattered in every place, to obscure the clear light of verity? Idem ser. in
ad in Pasto. Synod.
O poor Church and distressed Spouse of Christ, Pax ab extranijs, pax a
paganis, sed filij nequam filij scelerati scauiunt in eam; She has peace from
strangers, peace from pagans, peace from all but her own children; her own
wicked children do rail and rage against her, they struggle in her womb like
Rebeccaes twins, they sharpen their tongues, and blunt their pens in writing
either against the other; and so they make the Church of Christ, John 19.23. 1
Reg. 11.30. 1 Reg. 16.21.
which should be like the coat of Christ, without a seame; to be torn in
pieces, like Iereboams garment: for as in Israel one half followed Tibni, and
the other half followed Omry; or as in Rome the wiser followed Pompey, the
middle sort took part with Caesar, and the rest followed Crassus; or in Attica
the people of the mountains ran after Pysistratus, Plut. in vit. Crass.
those of the valley chose Lycurgus, and those of the Seacoast Megacles: even
so in the Church of God, one is of Paul, 1 Cor. 1.3, 4.
another is of Apollo; one is of this mind, and another is of that mind; and
as the Poet said of the vulgar sort, Scinditur incertum studia in contraria
vulgus. We may now say of the better sort, Scinditur incertus studia in
contraria clerus. They are full of all oppositions, each one inuenteth some new
points, each one dissenteth from the rest, and so by this their dissentions and
multiplicity of opinions, they make grievous contentions in every place, and
cause many men with the effusion of a little ink, have invented in their
Cells; for I do assure my self, if there were more charity and unanimity
among the Clergy, there would be less controversy, and more unity among the
Laytie.

But it was enough for Abraham to dissuade from all contention betwixt him and
Lot, to say, we be brethren; and I wish that it were enough for us, for we be
brethren; and there be enough against us, we need not be against our selves;
and therefore, Ignat. ep. 9. ad Philadel.
Fugite vt filij lucis sectionem vnitatis; we should by all means shun
dissentions, because there be many Wolves abroad in sheep clothing; but if
we keep unity and brotherly love among us, they shall never prevail against
us: but otherwise, Salust. coniurat. Catel.
vt concordia crescunt minutissima, ita discordia dilabuntur maxima; as in the
time of peace, through unity, the smallest things do grow happy, so in the
time of discord, the greatest things do come to ruin: and therefore we say,
that peace and unity are the best of all earthly blessings that God bestows
on men during their pilgrimage in the state of mortality: Pax optima rerum quas
homini nouisse datum est, pax vna triumphis innumeris potior. Sylius Ital. Aug.
in Psalm 29.
and so Brunfelsius says, that a Christians life is nothing else but mutual
charity, or a continual loving of God and of our neighbors, Quia omnis homo
est vnus homo; because all men in Christ Jesus should be as one man; like
Hypocrates twins, which willed and nilled the same things; for the whole
Church of Christ is nothing else, but Ecclesia multorum fratrum; an united
company of loving brethren: and therefore they should ever owe this duty of
love and charity one toward another; for though the Apostle bids us to owe
nothing unto any man, yet he excepteth this, to love one another, because all
Christians being brethren, they must needs owe this mutual duty of love and
charity, Idem ep. 93. ad Caelestin.
Quae sola etiam reddita semper detinet debitores; which though it be never so
much paid, yet it is ever owing unto our brethren, says Saint Augustine.

And so you see the love of the Apostle to his brethren; which should teach
these brethren to love our Apostle again, Quia amor amoris magnes, and durus
est qui amorem non rependit; because love is a loadstone to draw love again,
and he is unworthy of love that requiteth not his lover with the same measure
of love as he receives; for he should love much, to whom much is forgiven,
says our Savior; and (...); he that desires much love, says Isidor, Isidor.
Pelus. l. 2. ep. 148.
Pelus. must show much love: and therefore as the people do require love from
the ministers, so the ministers should receive love from the people, for we
give them panem sanctuarij, the spiritual bread of life: and therefore we
should have from them, panem promptuarij, bread enough to sustain our life.

But alas, such is our case, they are ready enough to demand what is due to
them, but they are backward enough to pay what they owe to us; Love is showed
four ways.
for whereas true love is showed four manner of ways.

First, In words, when we speak friendly unto our neighbors, and beseech
them to be reconciled unto God. 2 Cor. 5.20.


Secondly, In works, Quia probatio dilectionis exhibitio est operis; when by
our outward works, Gregor. hom. 30. in Euang. Mat. 20.28.
we testify our inward affection unto our brethren.

Thirdly, by our service one to another, when we desire not so much to be
ministered unto, as to minister; as our Savior says.

Fourthly, In being ready to lay down our lives for the brethren, which is the
greatest sign of love, and the highest degree of affection, for greater love
then this has no man, that a man should lay down his life for his friend:
John 15.13.
and therefore our Savior Christ took upon him, non solum formam serui vt
subesset, Bernard. ter. quart. hebd. poenos.
sed quasi mali serui vt vapularet; not only the form of a servant, that he
might minister, but also was contented to be accounted as an evil servant,
that he might suffer for us; and all this to show his love unto us every manner
of way:

Whereas I say, love is thus showed, let us say, and do, and die for our
people, as we daily do, wear and consume our selves like John Baptist, that
was a burning and a shining light; like the candle that consumes it self in
giving light to others: yet are we sure to have love little enough from them,
good words is almost all we have, and always we have not that from all; for
our souls are filled with the scornful reproof of the wealthy, and with the
despightfulnesse of the proud: but this much shall serve touching the Apostles
affection, and that unity which should be amongst us all; because we are
brethren.


CHAP. II. Of the Apostles wisdom and godly policy in seeking for to win
the Thessalonians to perform this duty: and of three sorts of Preachers,
whereof two sorts are defective in this point.
That a gentle loving entreaty, is the best way to persuade men to do any
thing.
SEcondly, Saint Paul herein shows his discretion, by this manner of speech
that he uses unto them; he tells the Corinthians, that he caught them with a
guile, not to beguile them, but to save them; and so here and in all places, he
uses all his wit, all his policy, and all the wisdom that he has to win
men unto Christ; 2 Cor. 12.16.
and being won, to make them to serve Christ; for being desirous of their
Prayers, he comes unto them, in spiritu mansuetudinis; in the spirit of
meekness, he creepes into their hearts with terms of love, and seeks to
lead them, tanquam oues, leni spiritu, non dura manu; rather as sheep by an
inward sweet influence, then as goats to be driven by an outward extreme
violence; so God himself dealt with our forefathers, and all their posterity;
he heaped upon them, beneficia nimis copiosa, multa and magna, priuata and
positiua; wondrous great benefits and blessings, to see if he could so draw
them unto himself in the chains of love, and to allure them by all fair
means, and all the allectiues under heaven, unto his blessed service; Hos.
11.4.
he spoke them fair, he used them kindly, he promised them much, he gave
them more, and all to persuade them to their own happiness: so Christ the
Son of God alleges this for a reason, why all men should be willing to
come unto him, Matthew. 11.29.
because he is meek and lowly of heart; and Moses the man of God, was
mitissimus super terram, Numb. 12.3.
the meekest and the mildest man that was upon the face of the earth, and so
the fittest man to guide the people of God: and Titus Vespasian for his
courtesy and affability was called, deliciae generis humani; the delight of
mankind; he was so courteous unto all, that he was wont to say, Non opertet
quenquam a Caesaris colloquio, tristem discedere; it was not fit for any man to
depart sad from Caesar, for he knew this was the way to win them: Mollis
responsio frangit iram, a soft answer appeaseth wrath, and a gentle entreaty
will soon persuade men: Syluestres homines sacer interpresque Deorum, Horarius
de art poetica.

Caedibus, and faedo victu deterruit Orpheus:
Dictus ab hoc, lenire Tygres rapidosque Leones.
The fair spoken Orpheus and Amphion by their sweet persuasions are said to
have mollified the most savage natures, Dictus and Amphion Thebanae conditor
vrbis, saxa mouere sono testudinis, and prece blando, ducere quo vellet.
and to have brought unto ciuility the rudest and the wildest men: and
therefore Saint Paul here does so lovingly entreat them, and so friendly
beseech them with this sweetest name of Brethren, to pray for them; Brethren,
pray for us.

To teach us, that as we be Pascendo Pastores, the Teachers of our people, so
we should be diligendo Patres, 1 Cor. 2.4.
as well fathers for affection, as teachers for instruction; and that we should
entreat and beseech our people, in the bowels of Christ Jesus, when we might
command them in the Name of the great Iehoua: for it is most certain, that
when bitter reprehensions does harden men in iniquity, a gentle entreaty will
often win them unto piety; for it was but the alluring speech of Apollo, that
made many to affect him rather then Saint Paul: and it is daily seen, that a
golden mouthed Chrysostom, with his sweet persuasions, will win more men to
Christ then any one can do with his bitter reprehensions; Seneca in Thebaid:
act. 4.
because as Seneca says in another case, qui vult amari languida regnet manu;
inuisa nunquam imperia retinuit diu; Peragit tranquilla tempestas quod violenta
nequit. Obsequium tigresque doma^ tumidosque leones.
he that would be loved in his reign, let him rule with a gentle hand; so he
that would be loved of his flock, must feed them with the words of love.

And yet for all this I deny not, but as Saint Bernard says, qui non vult
duci, debet trahi; he that will not be persuaded should be compelled; for if
men will not turn, God will whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take
hold of vengeance: and therefore we read, that in the Arc of Moses, there was
Aarons Rod for correction, The judgments of God must be threatened, when his
mercies cannot allure us to serve him. Revel. 14.
as well as Manna for refection: and in the Church of Christ, there is
discipline for the stubborn, as well as doctrine for the simple; and from the
Seat of God, there proceeded lightnings and thunders, as well as the sound of
harpers harping with their Harpes.

To teach us, that (as Saint Hierome says) debet amor laesus irasci; love too
much provoked will wax angry: and therefore; whosoever despises the riches of
Gods goodness, Romans 2.4.6.
and forbearance, and long-suffering, he treasureth up unto himself wrath
against the day of wrath; for this is just with God, (says the Apostle) to
render unto eu^ry man according to his deeds: and therefore, we must as well
thunder out Gods judgments against irrepentant sinners, as to distill Gods
mercies to the tenderhearted Christians; we must as well cry, woe to the
sinful nation, to the people laden with iniquity, Esaias 1.4.
as promise ease unto them, that are wearied under the weight of their sins.

Mat. 11.
And yet still herein, in our greatest indignation against sin, we must not
forget Saint Bernard's rule, dum das verbera ostende vbera; to do as loving
nurces, while they shake the rod, to show the dugge, or as the good Samaritan,
to power wine and oil into the wounds of the distressed traveler; Luke 10.34.
i. e. so to mix the bitter threatenings of the Law, with the sweet promises
of the Gospel, as that we neither drive them to despair by the one, nor yet
make them presumptuous by the other: and therefore herein we need discretion,
How needful a thing is, discretion for the Preachers of Gods Word. Mat. 24, 24.
which is one of the two essential parts of a true Preacher, who is that wise
and faithful steward.

First, he must be faithful to do his duty; And,

Secondly, he must be wise and discreet, to know how to do it; to give unto
every one his own portion, and that in du^ season; to preach mercy, to whom
mercy, and vengeance, to whom vengeance belongs; to know before whom we
speak, and what we speak; to do bonum been, and to weigh our words in the
balance of discretion, before we utter them unto our Auditors, and surely in
my judgment, it is a true saying, that an ounce of discretion is worth a pound
of learning; because learning puffs up, says the Apostle; and it is but as
Achilles sword in the hand of him that knows not how to use it. postulat vt
capiat, quae non intelligit arma;

But discretion is the keeper and guider of all virtues; Discretion guides,
Learning teaches, and Charity edifieth; and thus these three graces march in
order, that must lead, and these must follow; and therefore, Isidor. de summo
bone.
whatsoever is done without this, is ill done, quia virtus indiscreta pro vitio
reputatur; because zeal it self, Charity it self, and Virtue it self,
being indiscreet is no better then a discreet vice, nor yet many times so
good; for that it grows often unto many vices, and produces many
inconveniences, as most woeful experience daily shows; for, I find two sorts
of men tainted with this fault,

First, the too popular Preachers, when they come to preach before their
governors.

Secondly, the parasites of Princes, That there be three sorts of Preachers.
when they come to preach before the people, for I divide the whole classie of
Preachers into these three ranks.

The First are those that are descreet and faithful Preachers, First,
discreet and godly Preachers.
either before Prince or people, (...), such as would willingly discharge their
duties toward all men, and hold the middle way, inter adulationem et
litigium; betwixt pleasing and provoking.

The Second are those that use too much flattery before Princes, and too much
harshnesse before the people; Secondly, parasites of Princes and great men.
Aug. in Psalm. 9.
and these neither way can do good; for commonly the people will not be
compelled, and flattery not only blindes the eyes, that they cannot see, but
also persuades the doer to delight in sin: delectat enim facere, in quibus
non solum non metuitur reprehensor, sed etiam laudatur operator; for a man
delights to do those things for which he is not only free from
reprehension, but also sure of commendation; and therefore, been cum
principibus ageretur, si scirent inter adulationem and laudem distinguere; it
were well for Princes and great men, if they could tell how to distinguish and
to discern true desert from base flattery, and that blind ambition, and
desire of praise, should not make them to swallow both without distinction, and
to give credence unto others rather then unto themselves.

The Third are those that are too popular, Thirdly, the too popular Preachers.
the parasites and pleasers of the people, yet somewhat too bold to speak
against authority, and these are too blame in many things; for, as instabile
vulgus, the headless and heedlesse multitude are unable to conceive, To what
the vulgar people are naturally inclined.
and unwilling to be taught, unworthy to rule, and impatient to be ruled; so
the pleasers of these men must needs displease all wise men, (...); For, wise
men please not the people, neither can the people please wise men; for you
shall ever see the multitude, always desirous of these two things,

First, To draw their heads out of the collar of government, and to bring all
rule into their own hands, dirumpamus vincula, Let us break the bonds.
is their song; no term pleases them better then the free estate, no man to
please them, but of their own election, no longer rule, but while he please
them. O miserable state to serve such people!

Secondly, If this they cannot do, then must they have a hand in every point
of state, yea even in those of greatest weight, nothing is good, that they do
not, nothing to be done, that they allow not, they have an interest (they say)
in all, and therefore they must have a hand in all; and so in very deed those
that never learned to obey, would guide and govern their chiefest governors.

And therefore I say that those Preachers, whose rising has bin by the people,
and who give themselves to popular applause are either halting in their
honesty, or defective in their discretion; and so most unfit, either to teach
the wise, or to govern the foolish; for in the first, they teach factious and
dangerous positions; and in the second, they must either yield to popular
desires, or dissent from themselves, and so leese the applause of the people,
which is one of the mainest things they hoped for and gaped after.

And so experience daily shows us, that either want of honesty to do what
they know, or else want of wisdom and discretion to know what to do, has
moved the blind and wild zeal of many factious men, so friuolously to
intermeddle with extrauagant and needless discourses, both of State and
Commonwealth, and so furiously to precipitate themselves to most dangerous
contention in the Church of God, and many times being hoysted up to the stern
of dignity, to make way for the vulgar, to spurn against authority: And
therefore as I would wish no more wealth of God, then I had grace to use it; so
would I wish no more learning, nor any other grace, then I had discretion to
guide them; for this is that salt, whereof our Savior speaks; have salt in
your selves: and therefore all learning and all knowledge without this, will
soon putrify, and prove fit for nothing, but to be cast into the dunghill;
as our Savior says; And so much for my two observations out of the word
Brethren, now follows the request, or the exhortation, Pray for us,

PART. III.
CHAP. I. Of the diverse kinds of Prayers, both in respect of the matter and
form.
SEcondly, In the request or exhortation, I noted 2 things, 1. The action,
Pray. 2. The extention, for us.


First, for the action, i. e. Pray, lest I should wander, or ride at random in
this wide ocean of matter, I will divide all that I mean to speak of this
point, into these five heads, 1. Of the diverse kinds of Prayer. Five things
considered concerning Prayer.
2. Of the party to whom we should Pray. 3. Of the place where we are to Pray.
4. Of the time when we must Pray. 5. Of the manner how we ought to Pray.


First, for the diverse kinds of Prayer, we must know that Prayer is
distinguished in respect, 1. Of the matter. 2. Of the form.


First in respect of the matter, prayer is said to be fourfold, 1 Timothy 2.1.
1. Supplications. 2. Prayers. 3. Intercession. 4. Giving of thanks.


First, Supplications are for the remouall of evils. Secondly, Prayers for the
obtaining of good. Danaeus tract. de orat. dom. p. 47.
Thirdly, intercession in the behalf of others, And fourthly, thanksgiving
for the good received. That there are two kinds of prayer.
But we may more briefly say that prayer is either 1. (...), An invocation or
petition. 2. (...). A gratulation or thanksgiving.
First, First, Invocation.
Invocation or petition is either 1. To remove evil. 2. To obtain good.


First, evil is said to be either of sin, or of punishment; and we should
pray against both: first, Saint Paul, buffetted of the messenger of Satan,
prayed: to teach us, that when we are enticed to sin, we should pray, that
God would not lead us into temptation. Secondly, the evil of punishment, is
either temporal, spiritual, or eternal, First, all afflictions, judgments,
plagues, wars, and all other miseries whatsoever, they are punishments for
sin: and therefore we should pray that God would either take them away from
us, or sanctify them unto us; that they might work together for the best.
Secondly, spiritual punishment is when for our former sins we are delivered
up to a reprobate sense, to do those things that are not convenient: and
therefore we should most heartily pray that God would forgive us our former
sins, and not punish the same with this spiritual fearful punishment.
Thirdly, the eternal punishment is that everlasting death which is prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, from which we should continually pray to be
delivered.

All good comprehended under Grace and Peace.
Secondly, The good that we should pray for, is every where comprehended under
these two names, 1. Grace. 2. Peace.
1. Grace, whereby we may truly serve our God. 2. Peace, whereby we may quietly
live among men.
And these two Saint Paul does always join together, to show (it may be) that
he deserves no grace, which desires no peace; for howsoever disordered spirits
say, Non pacem petimus superi date gentibus iras,
Nunc vrbes excite feras, coniuret in arma mundus;
We seek not peace, we long for wars; yet all well-affected Christians that
do loathe to bathe their swords and to make them drunk with the blood of men,
will say with Drances, Nulla salus bello, pacem nos poscimus omnes. No good can
come from war, because as Lucan says, Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra
sequntur; Lucan. l. 10.
There is neither piety nor fidelity among the rabble rout of them that follow
the Camp for love of spoils, but as Saint Augustine says, Nocendi cupiditas,
vlciscendi crudelitas, Aug cont. Faust. l. 22. c. 74.
implacatus and implacabilis animus, feritas rebellandi, libido Dominandi, and
similia sunt in arma sequentibus; violence, cruelties, rapes, prophannesse and
all lewdness are commonly to be found among them: and therefore all good
Christians will pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
it: because, Omnia pace vigent, and pacis tempore florent; All things do
flourish in the time of peace, and all men may live without fear, and the more
earnestly pray for grace.

But now me thinks, I hear men crying for peace in Christ, and wars with
men; a sweet distinction, to love God and hate thy neighbor; the devil
laughes at this, to see thee such a subtle Sophister, that, when we pray give
peace in our time, O Lord, and at every meal we eat, we say, God send us
peace through Jesus Christ our Lord, thou can presently distinguish that this
is meant with God, but not with men; for thou can b^ at peace with God, when
thou make thy sword drunk with the blood of men; and thou can then praise
thy God best, when thou inrichest thy self with the spoils of the
slaughtered: for is not our life a warfare, and are we not all soldiers, Job
7.1.
to fight against the enemies of Jesus Christ? Yea, does not Christ himself
say, He came not to send peace, but the sword, 1 Timothy 1.18.
and to set the father against the son, and the daughter against the mother?
Alas beloved, it is true, that we are all soldiers, and must make continual
war with Satan, sin, and sinful men; but the weapons of our warfare are
spiritual, and not carnal, Matthew. 10.34.
says the Apostle: I will pray yet against their wickedness says the
Psalmist; and when they curse, I will bless them, as the Apostle teaches me,
Romans 12.20.
and so I shall kindle the coals of fire upon their head: and if this will not
overcome them, I will suffer unto death, and in my patience I will possess my
soul, as my Savior advises me; for I see not how faith can be wrought with
the sword, Luke 21.19.
or heresies consumed with faggots: Indeed when the Samaritanes would not
receive Christ into their village, his Disciples would feign command fire to
come down from Heaven and to consume them; but our Savior told them, They
knew not of what spirit they were of; Luke 9.55.
for they might have known, that he could suddenly turn all the world into
hell, and consume all his enemies in a moment; but he uses his patience and
long-sufferance, to lead sinners to repentance, and he suffers heresies and
wicked men to be amongst us, that they which be approved may be made manifest:
1 Cor. 11.29.
and therefore I say, that all true Christians that desire grace, will most
faithfully pray for peace; and not only with God, but also with all men;
because the only sign of loving God, is to be in love and charity with all
men.

Bonum necessarium extra terminos necessitatis non est bonum.
And yet I say not this with the Anabaptists, to condemn lawful wars: for
though health is ever to be prayed for, as in it self simply good; yet
Physic oftentimes is good and necessary to recover and to preserve our
health, and so to prevent many ill diseases that otherwise would soon invade
our bodies; and so may wars be just and lawful, yea many times most
needful, when the causes thereof do appear just and vr^ent; but I say this
to commend a blessed peace, to dissuade all men from loathing Manna, from
growing weary of their own happiness, and to show how happy are those
nations, si sua norint agricolae; which have a King of peace, Qui facit eos in
gentem vnam, which labors for peace amongst all nations.

And under these two things, grace and peace, are comprehended all kinds of
blessings, both spiritual and temporal: for, though some men do make a
question, whether we ought to pray, Caietan. in Mat. 6.33.
or seek for temporal things; because our Savior says, that if we seek for
Gods Kingdom, (...) (...): all these things shall be cast unto you; yet Saint
Augustine says, Mat. 6.33.
that, cum dicit primum, when he says, seek first the Kingdom of God, he
means that these things in the second place are to be sought and prayed for,
illud tanquam bonum nostrum, Aug. l. 2. de ser. Domini.
haec tanquam necessaria nostra; the Kingdom of God as our only good, and
these things as needful and necessary for us: and our Savior shows as
much, when he teaches us to pray, Haud vllas portabis opes Acherontis ad
vndas, nudus ad infernas stulte veheris aquas. Martial. l. 4.
give us this day our daily bread: but we must take heed, that we be not too
remiss in seeking after spiritual gits, and too eager in the pursuit after
these temporal goods; for we came naked into the world, and we shall return
naked out of the same again: and therefore, if we have food and raiment, we
should be therewith contented.

It is observed by Roffensis, Roffen. l. 1. c. 12.
that in the Manna of the Israelites there were twelve several wonders.

First, the children of Israel were fed with it forty years. Twelve several
wonders in the Manna.


Secondly, to the godly it tasted according to every man's desire.

Thirdly, to the ungodly, it was loathsome.

Fourthly, a gomer of it sufficed all stomachs.

Fifthly, whether men gathered more or less, they had full measure, i. e. a
gomer full.

Sixthly, they had two gomars full the day before the Sabbath, and on other
days they had but one gomer full.

Seventhly, It fell every day, excepting the Sabbath day.

Eighthly, It melted in the sun, and was hardened in the fire.

Ninthly, It was kept many years in the Arc vnputrified.

Tenthly, being preserved but till the morrow, it putrified, except on the
Sabbath day.

Eleuenthly, he that gathered least had his gomer full.

Twelfthly, he that gathered most, had but his gomer full.

Out of all which observations, though I might note many excellent things,
worth your meditation; yet for this purpose, I desire you to consider but these
two points.

First, he that gathered least had enough, and he that gathered most had but
enough.

Deuteronomy. 17.16.17.
Secondly, he that gathered no more then was sufficient pleased God, and he
that was covetous in gathering more then would suffice him for that day, the
Manna putrified before the next morning, and God was highly displeased with
him. To teach us,

God cares to provide sufficient for every man.
First, that God which created all men, will give unto every man, so much as he
sees sufficient for him, during his pilgrimage in the wilderness of this
world; and the greatest men, the richest men, shall have (do what they can)
but sufficient, but food and raiment, during their life; for they shall carry
nothing with them.

Secondly, that if we be contented with what he sees sufficient for us, we
shall do that which is acceptable in his sight; but if we grudge, through
discontent, and labor by unlawful means to gather any forbidden fruit, and
to enrich our selves with the treasures of this world, we shall find that our
riches will be soon cankered, James 5.1.
and our garments will be moth-eaten, and the wrath of God will be kindled
against us to consume us from off the earth.

That we should take heed of covetousness.
And therefore, though it be not only lawful, but also necessary that we
should pray for temporal things; yet let us take heed and beware of
covetousness; and desire of God, but as our Savior taught us, to give us this
day our daily bread, i. e. merely so much, as he sees convenient for us, food
and raiment, in that manner as he sees good, and not as we would desire,
during the whole term of our frail and miserable life. And in very deed,
howsoever our nature is ever ambitious of great matters; yet the mean estate
is the safest state for every man; not only because, Saepius ventis agitatur
ingens
Horat. carm: l. 2. od. 10.
Pinus, and celsae grauiore casu
Decidunt turres, feriunque summos
fulmina montes,
To stormy tempests subjects are, the Pine and Cedar tall,
The turrets high, as mountains by, are subject to a fall;


But especially because (as the Apostle says) they that will be rich, 1 Timothy
6.9.
do fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many hurtful and foolish
lusts that drown men in destruction and perdition.

Secondly, gratulation or thanksgiving is the other kind, Secondly,
Thanksgiving.
and the chiefest kind of prayer.

First, because to make request concerns our selves, and shows our love to
our selves; but to render thanks shows our love to God.

Secondly, because the other is a taking, this is a giving; and our Savior
says, Act. 29.35.
it is a more blessed thing to give then to receive.

Thirdly, because to make request shall cease, when we come to the place where
there is no want; but the Saints in heaven do ascribe glory, and wisdom, and
thanks, Revel. 7.12.
and honor, and power, and might unto our God for evermore.

Fourthly, because the Angels that feel no want do always praise the Lord;
saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, Esaias. 6.3. Luke 20.
the earth is full of thy glory; and therefore we that shall be (...), like
unto the Angels of God, should not always speak with the tongues of men, to
beg, but sometimes with the tongues of Angels, to praise the Lord for his
goodness: for this is the only thing that God requires, or that we can render
unto God for all the blessings that he has bestowed upon us.

And there be three special reasons (says Antoninus) that should move us
unto this duty of thankfulness. Antonin. p. 4. t. 5. c. 12.. 1. Three
special reasons to persuade men to be thankful.


First, the practice of all the Saints, Moses and all Israel after their
passage through the red Sea, Joshua after his victory, David after his
deliverance out of the hands of Saul, he composed songs of thankfulness unto
God; and the manifold precepts of holy Scripture that do command the same;
Psalm. 113.1.
for David bids all the servants of the Lord to praise the Name of the Lord;
and he says, that it becomes well the just to be thankful; and the Apostle
bids us, in all things to give thanks unto God. 1 Thessalonians. 5.


Secondly, the consideration of all creatures, which do all of them teach men
to be thankful; because every creature (says Saint Augustine) Est quoddam
beneficium homini collatum; A threefold voice of every creature.
is a gift bestowed on man, for which man owes thanks unto God: and therefore
Hugo de S. vict. says, that every creature speaks these three words to every
man; accipe, read, fuge: take, restore, flee: The first is vox famulantis, the
voice of a servant bidding us to receive the gifts of God; the second is vox
admonentis, Hugo de S. Vict. l. 2. c 3. de Arca.
the voice of a teacher, bidding us to render thanks unto God; the third is
comminantis, the voice of a threatner, bidding us fly the vengeance of God if
we be not thankful unto God for these blessings. And so many creatures by
their own examples do teach man to be thankful; for the very dog, says
Saint Ambrose, is so thankful for a piece of bread, vt pro Domino mori velit;
that he will die for his Master; Geminianus de exempl. l. 5. c. 56.
and Geminian tells us of a Leopard that was so thankful unto one that
delivered her whelps out of a ditch, that she accompanied him through the
forest, and delivered him from the danger of all other savage beasts: C.
Agrippa de de vanit. scient. c. 102.
and C. Agrippa says, that a Serpent called Aspis, used to eat at a man's
table, seeing a dog killing his child, did, to show her thankfulness unto
the man, kill the dog immediately after: What should I say more? but as
Solomon says, vade ad Formicam, and disce sapientiam; go to any creature, and
he will teach thee to be thankful to thy Creator.

Thirdly, the manifold gifts and graces that we have received, i. e. the grace
of God which brings salvation to all men, does teach all men, not to receive
the grace of God in vain, but to be truly thankful unto God for the same.

And as these three reasons should persuade thee to be thankful, Anton. p. 2
t. 3. c 9 1. Three things that should drive away ingratitude from us.
so there be three other reasons (says Antoninus) which should dispell from us
all ingratitude.

First, because as Saint Augustine and Saint Bernard say, Quod dederat Deus
gratis abstulit ingratis; God will in justice take away from the ungrateful,
what he has freely bestowed upon them: for so our Savior shows in the
parable of the vineyard, which he would take away from the ungrateful
husbandmen, and give it unto them that would yield him fruits in due season.

Secondly, because ingratitude does not only abstract from us that good which
we received, but does also inflict upon us the evils that we feared: Joseph.
antiq.
for Josephus says, that Hezekiah sickened unto death, because he did not show
himself sufficiently thankful for his wonderful deliverance out of the
hands of Sennacherib: and the Apostle says of the Gentiles, that because when
they knew God, Romans 1.
they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, therefore God gave
them ^uer to vile affections.

Thirdly, because ingratitude for blessings received, detaineth and keeps
from us those blessings that are promised; Nam ille non dignus est dandis, qui
ingratus est de datis; for he is unworthy of more, that gave no thanks for
what he had; whereupon Saint Bernard says, that ingratitude is a wind that
dries up the fountain of Gods grace; and Antoninus says, that by the civil
Law, the father may deprive his son of his inheritance if his son prove
unthankful unto him, which otherwise he cannot do; and so our heavenly
Father may justly deprive us of the kingdom of heaven if we be unthankful
unto him for his blessings: And therefore when we pray to God and make request
for what we need, let us not forget to be truly thankful for what we
have: but let us remember that there be three degrees of thankfulness; the
first is recognoscere, Three degrees of thankfulness.
to acknowledge his goodness with our hearts; the second is laudare, to praise
him for his goodness with our mouths; and the third is retribuere, to
express the same in our lives and conuersations; Nam si maledicitur Deus and
negatur malis factis, tum bonis benedicitur and confitetur; for if we deny God
and curse him by our evil deeds, then certainly we do praise him and
bless him by our good and godly deeds, says Saint Augustine.

Secondly, Prayer in respect of the form is manifold. First, Mental.
prayer in respect of the form is said to be fourefold. As,

First mental, so Moses Exodus 14.15. and Anna 1 Samuel 1.13. prayed unto God when
they said never a word; and thus an afflicted soul may pray to God in the
midst of company, and when no man hears him, God which knows his heart,
does hear his prayer.

Secondly, Vocal, as Solomon prayed, 1 Kings 8.23. Secondly, Vocal.
because words are to be added when we may and can use the same.

Thirdly, Suddenly, which we call eiaculations, Thirdly, sudden.
or a lifting up of our hearts and minds unto God upon any sudden occasion
that presents it self unto us.

Fourthly, Composed prayers, Fourthly, composed.
and made with our best wisdoms; so Daniel prayed, and so all men should do,
if they considered into whose presence they go to speak; for if we muse what
to say before a mighty man, why should we not premeditate what to say before
we come to God? and therefore the wise Solomon says, Eccles. 5.2.
be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be too hasty to utter any
thing before God.

Fifthly, Conceived.
Fifthly, Conceived prayers, i. e. upon all new occasions to frame new form of
words to express our minds, as the ocsion requires.

Sixthly, Prescribed.
Sixthly, Prescribed prayers* i. e. prayers made by others for to help them that
are not so well able to compose prayers themselves: thus the 136. Psalm, that
was made by David, was sung after David's time, as we may see in 2 Chronicles.
20.21.29.30.

Seventhly, Private.
Seventhly, Private prayer, when a household only prays together, and so a
Christians house is made Gods Church, and brings a blessing upon the whole
house, as the presence of God's Ark did upon the house of Obed-Edom; Romans 16.5.
Philemon 2. 2 Samuel 6.12.
or else when one man prays alone, according as our Savior bids, when
thou prayest, i. e. when thou meanest to pray privately, enter into thy closet,
and shut the door, and thy Father which sees in secret will reward thee
openly. And thus every man should often pray, because thus alone we may power
out the very secrets of our souls before God, which we are loathe to do before
the Congregation; and because this is the truest trial of a man, whether he
fears God or not; because hypocrites will do it to be seen of men, but the
true Christian does it to be heard of God alone.

Ob.
But you will say, that you can have no convenient time nor place thus privately
to pray unto God.

Sol.
I answer, that thou can never miss time and place to sin, and that privately
and secretly too; thy sins does witness this: and therefore why can thou not
as well find time and place to pray?

Eighthly, Public.
Eighthly, Public prayers, when we join our selves with the assemblies of Gods
people; thus the Corinthians had one place to worship in; and thus we ought all
of us to do; because this public prayer does more honor God, when we show
unto the world that we are not ashamed to profess his Name; and it is more
powerful to obtain for our selves, quia impossible est multorum preces non
exaudiri; 1 Cor. 11.20. Joel 2.16. Ion. 3.8.
and therefore the Prophet bids us, to gather the people together to pray to
God; and so the King of Niniue did, when Jonas threatened the destruction of
his people.

And besides, this public praying is a sign of unity, and a most effectual
means to stir up one another to serve the Lord.

Ninthly, Ordinary prayer, Ninthly, Ordinary.
when we observe our accustomed times and manner of praying; for there is no
man that has any care to serve his God, or save his own soul, but as for all
other things, so specially for this duty of prayer he has set and appointed
times, as, some morning and evening, some at noonday, and so forth, to make
his prayers and supplications unto almighty God.

Tenthly, Extraordinary prayer, Tenthly, extraordinary.
both in respect of time and manner, as when an extraordinary occasion shall
move us thereunto; as either when God bestows upon us an extraordinary
blessing, or threatens some grievous punishment, or when we would obtain some
special favor, or express some special sorrow for some special sins that
we have committed; then ought we more especially to pray or to praise the
Lord: so the King of Niniue did when he heard the preaching of Jonas; Ion. 3.8.
so David after his fall, says, Psalm. 38.8. Vide Psalm. 32.
I have roared for the very disquietnesse of my heart, and my sighing is not
hid from thee; so Peter when he denied his Master, he went out and wept
bitterly; so Christ a little before his passion did more earnestly pray then
ever he did before, with loud cries and tears, says the Apostle; and so the
Saints do often pray with sighs that cannot be expressed. Romans 8.26.
And so you see how prayer is diversely distinguished, both in respect of the
matter and form of praying.

CHAP. II. Of the party to whom we should pray, and of the place where we ought
to pray.
SEcondly, For the party to whom we should pray; To whom we ought to pray.
God himself shows unto us, when he says, Call upon me in the day of thy
trouble, and I will hear thee, Psalm. 50.15.
so shall thou praise me: And so Christ himself, when he teaches us to say,
Our Father which art in Heaven; and so does the Holy Ghost, when he moves our
hearts to cry Abba, Father.

And there be three unanswerable reasons, why we should only pray to God. As,

Ier. 17.10.
First, because he only knows the secrets of our hearts.

Ier. 23.23.
Secondly, because he only is omniscient, i. e. such a one as knows all
things.

Luk^ 1.37.
Thirdly, because he only is omnipotent, which can only help us.

That we should pray to none but God. Ecclus. 49.1:
And therefore concerning the blessed Virgin, we honor her name, we reverence
her memorial, and with all generations, we call her blessed; and of the
blessed Saints we say, that their remembrance is like the composition of the
perfume that is made by the art of the Apothecary; It is sweet as honey in all
mouths, and as Music at a banquet of wine; but to pray to any of them, we
have neither precept from God, nor practice in the ancient Church, nor promise
in Gods Word to be heard; and themselves neither do desire it, nor can deserve
it: and therefore to seek to God, by the help of them, as to the King by his
Favorites; we leave it to be used in Kings Courts, and not in Gods Church,
Ambros. in Romans c. 1. v. 22.
as Saint Ambrose speaks; and we will only pray to him, in whom we only
believe, i. e. to the only God, who does at all times hear us and can at any
time help us; and if any other dare offer prayers unto any, Origin. l. 5.
contra Celsum. Con. Laod. Can. 35.
Nisi soli domino Deo; But only to the Lord God, as Origin speaks; we do
with the Council of Laodicea anathamatize all such, for praying unto the
creatures, and relinquishing their Creator, which is blessed for evermore.

Thirdly, touching the place where we are to pray; I say, Matthew. 6. That we
should pray every where. Act. 10.30.
the precept of Christ, the practice of Christians, and our manifold
necessities teach us to pray in every place, with Moses upon the mountain,
with Elias under a Juniper tree, with Cornelius in our Chambers, with David in
our beds, with Daniel in the Lions den, and with all Christians in all
places: yet for public prayer, the chiefest service of Almighty God,

I say the Church is the fittest place, Chrysostom in act. 3. hom. 9.
and the only place appointed by GOD and MAN; for this is, doctrinae seeds,
and domus sancta, (says Saint Chrysostom) the school of Divinity, the seat
of Doctrine, an holy house, a house of God, and the gate of Heaven: it is domus
orationis; the house of prayer, The Church is the fittest place for public
prayers.
says our Savior; here were the Arc of the Covenant, the Tables of the
Testimonies, the Cherubims, the Mercy seat, and all the visible signs and
tokens of the presence of God; and therefore Christ himself frequented the
Temple; the Disciples were there daily, lauding and praising God; Luke 24.
and all the Christians of the Primitive Church did use to pray and preach in
the Church; Act. 2.46.
and this they ought to do for these special reasons:

First, Gualterus in Act.
That out of many people they might gain the more unto Christ; for as it is
good fishing in the Sea, where there are fishes innumerable, so it is good
preaching where we see a good company of people; there is hope of gayning some
where we see so many: and therefore it is good for all men to frequent the
Church.

Secondly, Lucas Lossius in Act. postill.
that they might make a public confession of their faith before the people,
to show that they were not ashamed of the Gospel and profession of Jesus
Christ; they were not like unto Nicodemus that came to Christ by night, John 3.
but durst not come by day, for fear he should be seen of the people; they
would not serve him in corners; but they would profess him openly, that he
likewise might receive them openly before his Father which is in Heaven.

Thirdly, Bulling.
that we might learn and know how unbeseeming private conuenticles be, and how
unfitting it is for Christians to have such secret meetings, (except only in
time of persecution:) and on the other side to show how commendable, yea, and
how honorable it is for us, to join our selves unto Gods public
Congregation.

Fourthly, That they may show their charity and their unity one with another,
by their meeting in the same place, with the same affection, and for the same
purpose.

Joel. 2.16.17.
Fifthly, that they might the sooner and the easier obtain their requests at the
hands of God; to have their sins forgiven, the judgments of God auerted, and
their necessities relieved; for so we find that public prayers made in the
Church of God, does best and soonest obtain these things in a double respect;
Public prayers will soonest obtain our requests in a double repect.
1. Of the place. 2. Of the Company.
For,

First, though Enter, praesenter deus est vbique potenter; God in respect of
his Essence and omnipotency is present every where; yet he is said to be more
especially present in some places rather then others, in some special
respects; as he is said to be in Heaven more properly then in any other place;
not in respect of his Essence, which the Heaven of heavens cannot contain; but
in respect of that glorious manifestation of his excellency, and that fruition
of his presence, which is there more clearly showed, then in any other place;
so he is ever ready to hear v^, and to grant our desires in the Church rather
then in any other place; not because he cannot, or will not hear us in all
other places; but because there is a blessing annexed by his promise, to the
public place of the devotion; not in regard of the dignity of the place, but
because it pleased God to promise to hear the prayers that are made in that
place, in a more special manner then he does the prayers that are made in any
other place whatsoever, as you may see most plainly in the 1 Kings 8. 1 Kings
8.


Secondly, in respect of the company which do gather themselves together, into
this place, we may more easily obtain our requests in the Church, then in any
other place; Nam si duo magna possunt, quanto magis plures? For if the prayer
of one righteous man avails much, or the prayer of two or three, when they
are gathered together in his Name, as our Savior says; then how much more
shall the prayers of a multitude of Gods servants do? And therefore we should
never excommunicate our selves upon any occasion, from this public place of
devotion; but we should ever frequent the house of God; Psalm. 122.1.
and wear out the thresholds of his doors: remember what the Prophet says, I
was glad when they said, come; let us go up into the house of the Lord: and be
ashamed of them; Chrysostom. hom. 2. in 2 Cor. 1.
Qui toto anno vix semel in Ecclesia conspiciuntur; which are scarce seen in
the Church once a year: such as are our Recusant Papists, that despise our
Church, and refuse our Congregations; and our proud Professors, that think
the Ministers more bound to come to them unto their own houses then themselves
are to come to the house of God; and so all idle and lazy Christians, that a
short little way, or a shower of rain, or some such like, the least
impediment, will easily detain them from the Church of God, and specially if
there be no Sermon, they can read, and they can pray at home. But alas, have
they such a promise to be heard at home, as in the Church? Ambros. Ser. 19. in
Psalm. 119. Esaias 29.39.
or shall they not rather be condemned for staying at home, and neglecting the
Church? for such are worse then the very Jews, because they drew near unto
GOD with their lips, and honored him with their mouths; but these give him
neither speech nor presence in his house of service; they may say, they pray
and they believe; but they give no good example unto others, neither do they
show their faith by their good works, as we are exhorted to do: and therefore
they may well fear the wrath of God to fall upon them for this contempt; for
to be out of the Church upon the appointed day and time of prayer; (without
exceeding urgent extraordinary occasion) is in my judgment, like Saint Peter's
being out of the ship; or Shemies being out of Jerusalem; the one may sink for
his rashness, the other die for his forgetfulness; and so may these perish
for their negligence, if the Son of God be not more merciful unto them,
then the son of David was to Shemei; and therefore visit not your friends in
the time of public prayer, lest God should visit you with some mortal
sickness; cast not your accounts on the Sabbath day, lest God should then
call you to give your last account in a fearful judgment; and above all,
play not then in your houses, when you should be at prayer in the house of God,
lest God should then smite you in earnest, and your play would prove to be like
the play of Abners servants, nothing else but death and destruction: 2 Samuel
2.16.
but all excuses set a part, let us all frequent the Church, and there pray to
God for grace, if we would have God to be merciful unto our souls.

CHAP. III. Of the time when we must pray, and of the manner how we ought to
pray.
FOr the time when we must pray, Saint Paul bids us to pray continually,
Colloss. 4.2.
and in the Epistle to the Collossians, and so in that to the Ephesians, we are
advised to be instant in prayer, and quidem omni tempore, Ephesians. 6.18.
and that at all times: But this is not so to be understood, as that we should
do nothing but pray (as the Heretics called Euchytae professed to do;) for
prayer is considered two manner of ways.

First, as it respects the cause, which is a certain vehement desire of
charity; and so in mind and spirit it is perpetual; Quia in fide, spe, and
charitate, continuato desiderio, semper oramus; Because in Faith, Hope, and
Charity, with a continual desire, we do always pray, says Saint Augustine;
and the spirit helps our infirmities, Romans 8.26.
and makes intercession for us with gronings that cannot be expressed: and
thus every Christian man may say with the Church in the Canticles, Though I
sleep, yet mine heart waketh; or, though I do not always pray with my
tongue; yet my desires do always speak unto God.

Secondly, as it respects its own proper reason and manner to be done, and so
it ought to endure so long, as without tediousnes or wearines, it may be
stirred up by the zeal and feruor of the inward desire of the heart: and
therefore we say that, 1. Aliud est sermo multus 2. Aliud est diuturnus
affectus.
It is one thing to speak always; and another thing to desire continually:
and that it is one thing to pray with the voice and tongue; and another thing
to pray in mind and spirit: Now you must understand that in heart and
affection we should always think of God; We should ever pray in heart and
affection.
and commend our selves by our desires unto him continually; and whether we
eat or drink, work or play, sleep or wake, or whatsoever we do else, we
should desire all to be according to his will, for the glory of his Name; that
he seeing our desires, may grant our requests, to give us grace and glory; that
so both mentalis and manualis oration (as the old Postillers term them) our
outward actions and our inward affections may be as continual prayers, crying
always in the ears of God: but in voice and tongue, we are not enjoined
always to pray, but to keep our appointed times both in our private and in
our public prayers; and as often as occasion shall be offered, either
extraordinary afflictions befall us, or some blessings bestowed on us; we
should, over and besides our usual times, betake our selves to our
extraordinary prayers, either for our deliverance from our troubles, or of
thankfulness for our blessings received.

First, for private prayers, although in respect of the efficacy, and powerful
moving of God, to obtain our requests, or the honor that we show unto God, I
cannot equalize it with public prayers; yet (as I said before) this argues
more familiarity with God, and is the truest trial of a Christian man, and in
some respects yields better fruit of honor unto God, and more profit unto
our selves, then the public prayers usually does, or conveniently can do;
because that in a private prayer, a man may both ask those things, and
confess those sins which in the face of the Church he would be loath to do;
and therefore the practice of Gods servants, the Counsel of Gods Church, and
the precept of Christ himself, should exceedingly move us to the practice of
this excellent exercise; Genesis 24.63.
for Isaac every evening would walk abroad to talk with God; Dan. 6.12.
Daniel would never miss to pray to God three times every day; and the Prophet
David says, Seven times a day will I praise thee, Psalm. 119.164.
because of thy righteous judgments; and I have read it decreed in one of the
Councels, that every Christian man should pray unto God twice at least every
day; that is, at morning when he rises, and at night when he goes to bed:
and especially before he goes to bed; for as Seneca says most truly of men
rising in the morning; Quem dies vidit veniens superbum,
Hunc dies vidit fugiens iacentem:
Many a man rose well in the morning, and has been seen dead before the
evening.

So may I say of men going into their beds, many have been seen going lively
into the same, and never seen alive come out again: and therefore every man
should so prepare himself when he goes into his bed, as if he went into his
grave; for as Menander says; (...); Sleep is nothing else but a short kind
of death, and so the Poet says, Stulte quid est somnus gelidae nisi mortis
imago? Sleep is the image of death: And so, Somnus vt est mortis, sic lectus
imago sepulchri;

As sleep is the image of death; so our beds are the very pictures of our
graves.

And our Savior Christ does most earnestly exhort every man to private prayer,
saying, When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and shut the door, and pray
unto thy Father in private, and he that sees thee in secret, will reward thee
openly; and therefore every man should appoint certain times unto himself,
for his private prayer to God.

That we should never miss the appointed time for public prayers.
Secondly, as we should not miss our appointed times of private prayers; so
much less, should we omit the enjoined times for Gods public service; for
God himself has appointed us a day in the week to serve him, and to pray
unto him: he might have enjoined six for himself, and have left but one for
thee; but he did in a manner make himself poor to enrich us; leaving six for
us to do our own affairs, and requiring but one for himself to be served by
us. And our Church has appointed an hour or two of that day, to pray and to
praise our God.

And yet we see many times on that day, yea, sometimes in that hour of
prayers, the Tauernes full, and the Churches empty; and as those men in the
Gospel had each one his several excuse, for not coming unto the supper; so
have these their exceptions for not coming unto the Sermon; some like not the
Preacher, others have not leisure; some visit their friends, which is a deed
of Charity; others cast their accounts, which is a point of Policy, to see how
the world goes with them; others wearied with cares, it may be with gaming all
night before, do rest and sleep, which is an act of necessity; others
playing at dice, or at cards, or at bowls, or some other game, and all but for
their recreation, which is a thing allowed; and they will all say, God forgive
us, and they think that is enough. What a danger it is to neglect public
prayers
But alas beloved, what if God should dislike thee, for disliking him, whom he
has appointed to teach thee, or should visit these visiters with some mortal
sickness, and send their souls presently to hell, because their bodies were
then absent from the Church? or what if he should then call the accounters of
their wealth, unto an account for their deeds, or smite in his indignation
those drousie sleepers with some deadly appoplexie, and those impious players
with some fearful vengeance? I trow they would unfeignedly wish to have bin
rather praying in the Church with the congregation, then either visiting, or
counting, or sleeping, or playing for gain or recreation.

But you will say, that you hope God is merciful, Ob.
and you trust in him, and therefore he will not be so sever against you, as we
are to preach unto you.

I answer, that you may trust in Gods mercy, Sol.
but I know no ground that you have for it; for they that call on him shall be
saved; and the righteous shall be preserved; and he will be merciful to them
that fear him; there is no question of it: To hope for Gods mercy, and to
neglect Gods service is vain presumption.
but then they which neglect Gods service, should have any part in Gods
mercies, they may think to have it, but I know no promise in the world they
have for it; and therefore if we desire God to hear us, and do look for the
blessing of salvation, let us go into his Church to hear his voice, and to
pray unto him in this appointed time of Devotion; and seeing the Lord requires
us, to watch with him but one hour, to do him service, yea for our own
happiness; let us take great heed unto our selves, that we rob him not of
that one hour, and so commit such fearful wickedness, so offensive to God,
and so dangerous to our own souls.

Fifthly, for the manner how we ought to pray, the Apostle says, we know not
how to pray as we ought; Quia nihil tam long distat a nobis, quam orare vt
decet; because nothing is harder for us to do, then to pray as we should: and
therefore our Savior was most careful to teach us how to pray, both in the
matter and in the manner of Prayer.

Christ did set us down a perfect pattern of prayer.
First, In matter; when you pray, say thus, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
to make them ashamed of their impious conceits which reject this heavenly
prayer, and affect those monstrous prayers of their own begettings, whose
birth praecedeth their conceptions; for in this Prayer, nothing is wanting that
should be desired, nothing is more then ought to be required.

I might here enlarge this Treatise into a Volume, to express the
excellencies, and to explain the mysteries, and so comment upon this Prayer,
and upon every particular petition of the same, but that I see my book
swelled already into a bigger Volume then at the first I did suppose it would,
and I know many famous and worthy men have most worthily and learnedly left
many excellent expositions upon the same, which you may find obuiously in
every place.

Secondly, In manner he left his own example when he Prayed; for in the
Garden of Gethsemane.

1. He kneeled down, in all humility. Delights of the Saints. 334.
2. He said, Father, in the assurance of Faith. 3. He said, O my Father, to show
his zeal. 4. He prayed three times to show his constancy. 5. Upon the Cross
he said Father forgive them, to show his charity; And, 6. Throughout all his
life he was a true seruer of God, and delighted only in doing the will of God,
to show his piety.
And all this he did to teach us to pray, first, in humility; secondly, in
faith; thirdly, in zeal; fourthly, in constancy; fifthly, in charity; sixthly,
in piety.

That we ought to pray in all humility.
First, In humility, because the prayer of him that humbles himself pierces
the skies, and will not depart until God hereth it, says the Son of Syrach.

Now there be 2. things that should teach us to be humbled.

First, the consideration of our own miseries, what poor and miserable
creatures we be, worms and no men, dust and ashes; and therefore why art
thou proud thou dust and ashes.

Secondly, the consideration of Gods greatness, to whom thousand thousands of
Angels do administer: Varus Germinus was wont to say to Caesar, Qui apud te,
O Caesar, audent dicere, magnitudinem tuam ignorant, qui non audent,
humanitatem tuam nesciunt; they that dare speak to thee, do not know thy
greatness, they that dare not, are ignorant of thy humanity and meekness; I
may say far better, our God is meek and lowly in heart, that we may speak
unto him, but he is so great in Majesty and Power; that one ought to speak
in all humility, and that, not with the Gentiles, whose heathenish fashion was
adorare sigillaria sua residendo, to worship their Gods as they sat, but
meekely kneeling upon our knees, That we ought to pray in faith.
that we may show both inward and outward humility; for, this was the practice
not only of great sinners, or men of mean estate in the world, but also of
the holiest Saints, Cyprian. 2. ad Don.
and of the greatest men of greatest account in the world, Kings, Princes and
Monarchs, Apostles, Prophets, and Priests, Moses, Aaron, David, Solomon,
Samuel, and Christ himself, the Son of God did often use to fall down, to
kneel and prostrate himself upon the ground when he prayed unto his Father;
and prostratus in terra orat medicus, and non inclinatur aegrotus; and shall
this heavenly Physician kneel, and we think much to stoop?

O then beloved, seeing thousand of thousands of heavenly Angels do
administer unto the Lord our God, consider with thy self says Saint Bernard,
Quanta cum humilitate debet rana paupercula odorare eum; with what great
humility ought we poor worms of the earth to adore him? And therefore, as
Eusebius reports of that most christian Constantine, that it was his usual
custom, every day to shut up himself close into some secret place of his
Palace, and there upon his bended knees and with a most submisse humble voice
to make his devout prayers and soliloquies unto Almighty God; so let us
worship God, not only in our inward minds, but also outwardly with our
bodies, and, as I said before, meekely kneeling upon our knees.

Secondly, In faith; Quia iuxta mensuram fidei erit mensura impetrandi; because
the more faith we have, the more grace we shall receive; and this is proved
unto us, out of the examples of them that came to Christ; for, the ruler of the
Synagogue believed, that if Christ came and laid his hands upon his daughter
she should be healed; the woman with the bloody flux believed that if she
might but touch the hemme of his garments she should be healed, but the
Centurion said, dic verbum, do but speak the word and my servant shall be
whole; and so we find that every one of them received according as he
believed: and therefore every man that prays to God should be like the Leper
in the 8. of Mat. who though he was weak in body, yet was he strong in Faith;
for in regard of the Law he ought not to have come, and in regard of his
sickness he was scarce able to come; and yet venit, he came unto Christ
though non tam passibus corporis quam fide cordis; not so much with the feet
of his body as by the faith of his heart; for had his heart bin no better then
his legs, Aug. hom. 23.
and his faith no better then his feet, he would never have troubled himself
to come unto Christ: so ought every man, to draw near unto God, in the
assurance of faith, quia irrisio dei est, si quid illum ores quod exoraturum te
non certe confidas; because it is a mocking of God, Pellic. in Math.
says Pelican, to pray unto him, and to doubt that we shall not have our
requests; therefore Christ teaches us, to say Our Father, to make us confident
of obtaining, and concludes with Amen, significare indubitanter a domino
conferri quod petitur; to signify that we shall undoubtedly receive what we
faithfully desire, Aug. de temp. ser. 182.
says S. Augustine: And therefore when we pray to God, let us draw near unto
him with a true heart, in assurance of Faith, that we shall be sure to have,
either what we desire of him, or what he sees good for us.

Thirdly, In zeal and affection; because the Lord respects not much babbling,
sed ad cordis potius vocem quam ad corporis, aures eius apertae sunt; because
he looks rather into the desire of the heart, then he does to the voice of the
tongue, says Saint Bernard; for he hears the desire of the poor, when he
stops his cares against the prayers of the hypocrite; and therefore we find
that the outward voice without the inward attention and devotion of the heart
will avail us nothing at all; God never regarding the voice of the tongue
talking with him, when the thoughts of the heart are wandering in the world;
where-as many times we find that an earnest seeking with the heart, That we
ought to pray in zeal.
has prevailed without any words uttered by the tongue, as Moses when he
cried to God with his heart, Exodus 14.15.
and yet opened not his mouth; for that is most true which Saint Gregory
says, tanto minus quis clamat, quanto minus desiderat, and tanto fortius
coelos penetrat quanto fortius desiderat; the more earnestly we desire any
thing the more loudly we do cry unto God, and the colder is our desire the
flower is our calling on him, and the harder to obtain it of him: and
therefore when we pray to God, O let us not be like the Jews, Esaias 29.14.
who drew near unto him with their mouths and their hearts were far from
him; but as the Apostle says, that he will pray with his mouth, 1 Cor. 14.15.
and he will pray with his understanding, so let us pray with our hearts and
affections, and not suffer our wandering thoughts to walk about worldly
vanities, when our tongues are talking about heavenly things.

Fourthly, with perseverance, because that good is done in vain, which is not
continued unto the end; Resolution of Pilate, page 145, etc.
and so I showed at large in my Treatise of the resolution of Pilate: and
therefore our zeal herein should be like the fire that the Vestall Virgins
kept in Rome, Leuit. 6.13.
or rather like the Sacrificing fire upon the Altar, that ever burnt, and never
went out.

Fifthly, In charity; because God will not forgive us, That we should pray in
charity.
nor give us any thing, except we forgive one another.

Sixthly, In piety, because God hears not sinners, but if any man be a
worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears, John 9.31.
and so Saint John says, if our hearts condemn us not, That when we pray we
should cleanse our selves from all sin. Gregor. in moral.
then have we confidence toward God, and whatsoever we ask we receive of him
because we keep his Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in
his sight: et tum cor nostrum fiduciam in oratione accepit, cum sibi vitae
prauitas nulla contradicit; and our hearts have then only confidence toward
God, when there is no prauitie of our life, nor any wickedness of our
conversation to contradict it, says Saint Gregory: and therefore Saint Basil
says; that a prayer should be filled up, non tam syllabis quam operibus; not
so much with words as with works; because it is the prayer of a righteous man,
as the Apostle says, which avails much with God, and not the prayer of
sinners, which (as the Prophet says) shall be turned into sin, Psalm. 109.6.
because he takes the name of God in vain, when he uses the same in his
mouth, and yet hates to be reformed. And therefore, seeing the Lord himself
says, Esaias. 1.15.
that although we should multiply our prayers unto him, at all times, and in
every corner, yet he will not hear us, if our hands be full of blood, or our
hearts full of malice, and envy toward our neighbors, let us pray every
where, 1 Timothy 2.8.
lifting up pure hands, as the Apostle says, and let us wash our selves from
all sins, and be ready to do all good, if we would obtain any thing at the
hands of God. And so you see to whom, when, how, and for what, we ought to
pray.

CHAP. IIII. Of the motives that should persuade and move every man to pray.
Psalm. 27.8.
NOw there be many reasons that should move us to pray continually, but
especially the charge of God, seek ye my face, and that in a double respect,
1. Of God. 2. Of our selves.


Prayer an essential part of Gods worship.
First, because it is an essential part of Gods worship, whereby we do most
chiefly honor God, by acknowledging and professing him, first, to be every
where, secondly, to be the giver of all goodness, thirdly, to be full of
pity, fourthly, to be almighty, fifthly, to be bountiful, sixthly, to be
faithful and true in all his promises, and so forth.

Secondly, In respect of our selves we ought to seek unto God by prayer,
because of the necessity and utility of prayer: for, Mat. 7.7.
this is the only way to obtain good things; ask and you shall have, seek
and you shall find, says our Savior, and you have not, because you ask not,
says the Apostle. James 4.3. Prayer how available it is for men.
And if we ask and pray, we shall find the same profitable.

First, to obtain whatsoever we ask, more then we ask, and better then we
ask; For,

First, he will give us whatsoever we ask, as our Savior shows; Hethe^to
you have asked nothing, but now, Ioh. 16.23.
Whatsoever you ask the Father in my name, he will give it you; For, though
there be many semblances betwixt us and Lazarus, he being a beggar full of
sores, and we beggars full of sins, Luke 16.21.
and he desiring to be refreshed with the crummes of bread which fell from the
rich man's board, Prayer obtains whatsoever we ask.
and we having need to be relieved with the crummes of mercy that fall from
our masters Table; yet herein we are in a far better case then Lazarus was,
it was his hard hap to knock at the door of a cruel and a miserable
Caityffe, that would at no time open unto him, nor yet give him any thing, the
least thing, the crummes of bread that he desired, to save his life; but we
knock at the door of a most kind and merciful Father; who says, Ask,
Matthew. 7.7.
and you shall have, Seek, and you shall find, Knock, and it shall be opened
unto you, that you may enter into eternal life: And so we find the Publican
did but ask for mercy, and he had it, and went home more justified then the
Pharisee, Luke 18.14.
and Stephen did but knock at the door of Heaven, and presently the heavenly
gates were opened unto him, Act. 7.56.
and he saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God: and so whosoever truly
and humbly besought Christ for any thing, we never read in all the Gospel
that he was denied it.

But it may be some will say I have often called upon God, Ob.
and he hears not; I have asked and he grants not; and therefore how does
he perform his promise to give unto us whatsoever we ask?

I answer, Sol.
that God sometimes makes as though he hears not, not because he resolves
to deny us, Why God deferreth to give us what we desire.
but he deferreth to grant our requests; either,

First, to let us further know our own wants and miseries, which if he would
help at the first, we should never perceive it to the full.

Secondly, to try our faith and patience, whether we will continue constant in
relying on him, though he kill us, as Job speaks; or, if he presently relieve
us not, whether we be ready to kill our selves, as desperate Saul has done.

Thirdly, to kindle in us the feruor of greater devotion and desire to obtain
the things that we perceive we want: Et quod a nobis auidius desideratur, eo
de nobis suauius laetatur. Greg in Moral.
Quia desideria dilatione crescunt; because delays do increase desires, Et
diu desiderata dulcius obtinentur; and the more earnestly we desire any thing,
the more joyous it is being obtained; and therefore as Laban kept Jacob a long
while from his youngest daughter, whom he loved best, that his love might be the
more increased continually toward her; so God oftentimes holds us for a time
in suspense, that so he may the more sharpen our appetite, and inflame our
desire more and more to the thing that we do desire.

And this the Prophet David knew, when he said, I cry unto thee in the day
time, and thou hear not, and in the night season; and yet this is not to be
thought folly in me, as the Septuagint reads it; For, though the world perhaps
might deem it a point of great simplicity, to call and cry to him that makes
as though he hears not, by regarding not our prayers, as it seems, by not
granting our requests; yet he knew this folly of the faithful to be far
wiser then all the wisdom of the world; because, as the same Prophet David
speaks, The Lord is a sure refuge in due time of trouble; God knows best
when to relieve us.
he is a sure refuge in trouble, but especially in due time of trouble;
because, as we know our troubles, so the Lord knows the due time to help us
out of our troubles, when we our selves do not well know the same. And
therefore if we call upon God, and God makes as though he hears not, yet let
us not say; Deus meus quare me dereliquisti? My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? but let us still call and cry to God, and say unto our souls
Quare dereliquisti deum? Why have thou forsaken God, and given over to pray
unto him, when it is an infallible rule, that nunquam deus deserit hominem,
quovsque homo deserat deum; that God never denies to hear man, until man
gives over and cease to pray to God. Or else,

I answer as Saint James says, that you ask and receive not, because you
ask amiss, Aut propter verbum, aut non propter verbum; either not for Christ
his sake, or not according to the word of Christ, not as I showed thee before,
in humility, Why God denies what we ask.
in faith, in charity, in piety; but, as the Church in the Canticles sought
him, whom her soul loved, and found him not, because she sought him in her
bed, that is carelessly and negligently; she sought him where he was not;
Christ being not so easily found, especially upon beds of Down, but rather in
the Temple where his Father found him, or upon the Cross where the thief did
find him, or in the bramble bush where Moses saw him; so many men do seek
many times and find not, because they seek amiss, it may be for worldly
things, where as they should first seek for the Kingdom of Heaven, as our
Savior teaches, and then all other things should be given unto them; and they
knock, and it is not opened unto them, because they knock amiss, it may be
too late, when the door of grace and of mercy is shut; for otherwise it is
most certain, that never man asked any thing at the hands of God, but he had
his request granted, unless he fainted and grew weary of asking, because the
words of Christ must hold infallible, Whatsoever you ask the Father in my
Name, he will give it you. Yea,

Secondly, if we pray unto him, he will give us more then we ask; for the
Centurion besought Christ only to speak a word, that his servant might be
whole; but he had not only the word whereby his servant was healed, but also
many other words to his neuer-dying-praise, for that faith wherewith he
believed, and whereby he should be saved; and the thief upon the Cross desired
only to be remembered when Christ came unto his Kingdom; That God gives more
then we pray for.
but Christ granted him that day to be with him in Paradise; and those blind
men which besought Christ only to restore their natural sight, whereby they
might see the light of the Sun, had also the spiritual eyes of their souls
opened, whereby they did believe in the Son of God; and so that man in the
Gospel, whereby we may understand every sinful man, desired but 3. loaves
only to entertain his guest, but his friend, that is, God, Luke 11.8.
did give him as many as he needed; to show unto us, that Christ is such a
bountiful Master, that if we pray unto him, he will not only give us what
mean things we ask, but also many more excellent heavenly things, which he
knows to be needful for us, Yea,

Thirdly, he does not only give us what we ask, and more then we ask, but he
gives us also far better things then we ask; Act. 3.5.
for as Saint Peter gave the lame Creeple the health of his body, when he
desired but a little alms to relieve his want; So God gives us the health of
our souls, That God gives us better things then we desire.
when we desire the wealth of the world; and he inricheth us with Heavenly
treasures, when we crave worldly vanities; because it is the property of God,
says Saint Bernard, Dare prius quod potius; to give us first, what is best for
us: And therefore whenever we pray to God for any thing, we may be sure our
prayer will never be fruitless, but will certainly bring us, either those
things that we ask, or things far better for us then the things we ask; for
God sees that we desire many times such things, as we our selves afterward
should find they had been hurtful to us, We know not what is good for our
selves.
if we had obtained them; even as many times we give great thanks unto God
that many things were denied unto us, which we desired of him: and therefore God
does well, and he does good unto us, in denying what we desire, when we desire
things hurtful for our selves.

And yet, because our prayers shall never return empty away from God, Quid
prosit vel obsit, nouit medicus non aegrotus.
Christ gives us those things that are healthful for us when we ask for
things hurtful, if we ask them as we ought to do; for a man may pray
rightly, and yet for things hurtful; because we know not what is good for our
selves: And therefore Saint Augustine says excellently well, Quod multis
propitius deus non tribuit quod volunt vt tribuat quod vtile est; that God
denies many times his Saints, with whom he is well pleased, what they would
have, that he may bestow upon them, what they should have; Aag. sermon. 54.
Quia audit deus suos ad necessitatem non ad voluntatem; Because God hears
his servants to give them what they need, and not what they crave.

God shows his love many times in denying us.
And so it is apparent, that as quaedam concedit iratus, God grants some
things unto the wicked, when he is most angry with them, as he did the Quails
unto the Israelites, of whom the Psalmist says, that while the meat was in
their mouth, the wrath of the Lord came upon them, and consumed the wealthiest
in Israel, Ita quaedam negat propitius; so he denies many things to whom he
loves, as he denied Elias when he desired to die, 1. Reg. 13.4.
and the sons of Zebedee when they desired to sit, Mark 10.35.
the one on his right hand, and the other on his left hand in his Kingdom,
that is, in a temporal Monarchy which they dreamed of: And he does this, vt
meliora tribuat, that he may bestow far better things upon them then they
desired for themselves; for so we find he denied Elias to die so meanly; that
he might carry him up in a fiery Chariot most gloriously, and so he denied
the sons of Zebedee that temporal honor which they desired, that they might
both sit on his right hand in eternal felicity.

Secondly, Many other excellent fruits of prayer.
as prayer is most profitable to obtain what is desired, so it is most
available to prevent judgments threatened against us, as we may see in the
examples of the Ninevites, and so likewise to remove judgments inflicted on
us, Ier. 26.19.
as we may see in James 5.18. and in Reg. 8.53.

Thirdly, prayer is most available to preserve and to nourish all spiritual
graces; Luke 23.32. Colloss. 1.9.
for by this Saint Peter's Faith was preserved, and the Collossians knowledge
was increased, as the Apostle shows.

Fourthly, prayer is the chiefest means to weaken sin in us, and to procure
our sins remitted unto us, as our Savior himself shows, when he teaches
us to pray unto God, to forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that
trespass against us.

Fifthly, prayer Sanctifies the creatures for our use, and makes them to
become useful and healthful, 1. Tim. 4.5.
which otherwise might prove pernicious and hurtful unto us.

Sixthly, prayer overcomes all creatures; it divided the red sea, it stopped
the heavens, it opened the same again, Prayer overcomes all things.
it brought Jonas from the Whales belly, Daniel from the Lions den, and Saint
Peter from the dungeon: it ouercomes all men, quia plus valet vnus sanctus
orando quam innumeri peccatores praeliando; one man praying will avail more
then many men fighting says the Gloss, upon the prayer of Moses, when Iosuah
fought with Amalech; and it ouercomes the very devils, which go not out, but
by prayer and fasting; for, as Christ made a scourge of small cords to drive
the buyers and sellers out of the Temple; so the prayers of a christian,
consisting of many petitions, is like that scourge of small cords, able to
drive out all devils, all sins from the soul of a christian, which is the
Temple of the holy Ghost.

Genesis 32.26. Prayer only prevails with God.
Seventhly, prayer prevails against God himself; for I pray thee let me go,
says God unto Jacob, for the day approaches; not so says Jacob, I will not
let thee go except thou bless me: O Jacob wilt not thou let God go? no says
he, except he bless me: I but will God take this well at thy hands, that thou will not let him go? O yes; for he says, my delight is to be with the sons
of men; and so Jacob prevailed with God, and his name was called Israel: And I
would to God that we would also wrestle with God by prayer, as never to let
him go until he bless us, for then we shall be sure he will not go at all;
because the blessed shall be called to him, come ye blessed, and the cursed
only shall be taken away from the presence of the Lord. But, Moses prevailed
further; for Jacob prayed for himself, Moses for others; Jacob for a friend of
God, that served him, Moses for the enemies of God, that dishonored him, by
making a Calfe in Horeb, and worshipping the molten image; and therefore Jacob
prevailed when God was well-pleased, Prayer appeaseth the wrath of God. Exodus
32.10.
but Moses prevailed when God was angry, and his wrath did burn like fire,
and he said in the fierceness of his wrath, suffer me now that I may destroy
them all at once; yet Moses would not, but he fell upon his face and prayed,
and so standing in the gappe, he prevailed with God, and turned away his
wrathful indignation from them: so prayer ouercomes him at all times, when he
is pleased, when he is angry; for our prayer is like a cord wherewith we bind
the hands of God, that when he is ready to smite us for our sins, he is
fast bound by our prayers that he cannot punish us: and therefore when the
Jews despised and neglected this duty of prayer, and the Lord powered out his
wrath upon them for their wickedness, the Prophet Esaias complains, that there
was none that called upon God, that rose up to take hold upon him, i. e. by
calling upon his name, to bind his hands with the cord of prayer.

O powerful prayer, that art able to bind, to bind the hands of God, with
bands more indissoluble then those seven green withs that bound the hands of
Sampson! Judge. 16.8, 9.
what shall I say of thee? I might say as much, as Saint Paul says of faith.
Heb. 11.
By prayer, the families of Seth did serve the Lord, for then they began to
call upon the name of the Lord, says the Text; by prayer, Abraham obtained,
Genesis 4.26.
that if ten righteous men should be found in five Cities, the wicked should
be all spared for those ten men's sake; by prayer, Moses divided the red sea;
by prayer, Joshua stayed the course of the heavenly Orbs; by prayer, Phinees
stayed the wrath of God, that it consumed not all the Israelites; for when
Phinees stood up and prayed, then the plague ceased says the Psalmist; by
prayer, Jonas overcame the great Leuiathan, and made him, which otherwise would
have bin a grievous gulf to destroy him, when he had swallowed him up quick,
to become as a ship to save him, and to bring him to the haven where he would
be; and what shall I say more? for the time would be too short for me to tell of
David, Samuel and the Prophets, of the Apostles and Martyrs, and all the
Saints of God, who through prayer subdued their enemies, wrought wonders,
obtained the promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of
fire, escaped the edge of the sword, of weak were made strong, waxed valiant
in battle, turned to flight the armies of the aliens, and in the end, all of
them whom the world was not worthy of, through prayer, obtained eternal life;
for, whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, and these all
called upon his name, and he heard them.

And besides all this, Lactant. de vero cultu. l. 6. c. 25. f. 399.
it is worth the observing that (as Lactantius does most truly say) summus
colendi dei ritus est, ex ore iusti hominis ad Deum directa laudatio; the
chiefest part of Gods worship is an humble faithful prayer, and praises out of
the mouth of a righteous man: and therefore Saint Paul setting down the whole
armor of a Christian, puts prayer as the chiefest part of all: and so
Zanchius says, that this is; Zanch. in c. 6. ep. ad Ephesians.
optimum genus, ideoque vltimo ab Apostolo, armaturae explicatum; the best part
of all our christian weapons, and therefore last expressed by the Apostle;
because that unless Gods help be craved by prayer, reliqua arma parum prosunt;
Prayer the chiefest part of Gods service.
all the other armor will avail us nothing; and therefore though we be wholly
armed with all the rest of Gods armor, yet ought we most humbly to acknowledge
our own imbecilitie, and most earnestly to sue for the help and assistance of
God by hearty prayer.

Ob.
But here perhaps some will say, it cannot be more excellent then faith, because
the Apostle says, above all, take the shield of Faith.

Sol.
I answer, that this armor of a Christian, is of two kinds; 1. Ad defendendum,
to defend our selves. The armor of a Christian of two kinds.
1. Ad feriendum, to smite our foes.


Of the first kind the Apostle names these five,

First, Truth; secondly, Righteousness; thirdly, readiness to embrace the
Gospel of Christ; fourthly, Faith; Fifthly, Hope.

And of these indeed, Faith and Hope are the chiefest; but they are not more
excellent then the other of the other kind; for then they should be more
excellent then the Word of God, which is the sword of the spirit: and therefore
I say that prayer is armatura armaturae, that armor which preserves all our
armor vnbattered and unbroken; for though Faith and Hope and the other graces
be most excellent, yea of inualuable and inconceivable worth, yet seeing there
is a difference betwixt Gods graces, and that as one Star differs from
another in glory, so one grace may differ from another in excellency, both in
regard of the quality and efficacy of the same, and so bring a greater weight
of glory to the receivers and well users of the same, That the gift of prayer
is the chiefest of all Gods graces
I say of prayer, as Solomon says of the virtuous woman, that this surmounteth
them all; for, it is a rule in logic, the end is ever better then the means
that bring us to the end, but preaching, hearing, understanding and believing
are media, the means whereby we are brought to pray; and therefore the Apostle
takes this for his Text, and makes it to be the basis and groundwork of all
his subsequent discourse, he that calls upon the name of the Lord shall be
saved; but then says he, Joel. 2.32.
how, or by what means shall this be done? How shall they call upon him in whom
they have not believed? Romans 10.14.
How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? How shall they
hear without a Preacher? and so he makes preaching, hearing, and believing,
to be the means whereby we come to call upon the name of the Lord, that we
may be saved: And it is a rule in all sciences that the practice is better then
the theorie of any thing: and therefore prayer which is the practice of all
piety, must be better then all other theoricall graces whatsoever: And it is
an axime of our Savior Christ, that beatius est dare quam accipere; it is a
more blessed thing to give then to receive, and therefore prayer, which is the
only grace whereby we render unto God that praise and glory which is due
unto his name, must needs be more excellent then all the other graces, whereby
we receive blessings from god.

And is prayer so superexcellent a grace, super alias caput extulit omnes; that
it surpasses all other graces? then surely I cannot choose but commend that
great devotion of our ancestors and forefathers, that were so zealous, so
instant, and so constant in continual praying: Indeed I bewail their
ignorance and their blindness, that knew not well for what, or to whom, or how
to pray: but I know God will not break the bruised reed, and the smoking flax
he will not quench; and therefore, How our forefathers exceeded us in devotion.
though their prayers wanted the true light of knowledge, which no doubt would
have made them more acceptable unto God and more comfortable to themselves, yet
I do assure my self God despised not the smoke of their devotion, nor
rejected the desire of their hearts; yea seeing that (as Saint Augustine
says,) melior est fidelis ignorantia quam temeraria scientia; an humble
zealous ignorance, is better then a rash proud and disdaineful knowledge, I
doubt not but they pleased God far better with their devout ignorant praying,
then many of us do with our negligent and never praying knowledge; for they
ascended to the highest step of all devotion and piety, which is prayer, and
many of us never go beyond the lowest step, which is hearing; they did what
was commanded, and knew it not, many of us know it and do it not; they spent
most of their time in praying, and most of us spend our time in hearing; and so
placing all religion, almost in hearing, we are like those foolish women,
which are ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge, nor willing to
come to the practice, of the truth.

But, though the hearing of Gods Word be the chiefest outward ordinary
means, to beget Faith and Hope and all other graces in the hearts of Gods
elect, and therefore must not by any means be neglected if we would be saved,
yet seeing that (as the Apostle says) not the hearers of the Law, but the
doers of the Law shall be justified, and that prayer is the chiefest part of
Gods service, yea, and that it is,

First, the only request that Christ made unto his Church, when he took his
last farewell of her on earth, saying, O let me hear thy voice, Cantic. vlt.
the companions hearken to thy voice, O cause me to hear it: that is, by thy
continual prayers and supplications unto me;

Secondly, the greatest comfort of a Christian man; for we are all so full of
miseries while we live in this wretched world, that there is no man living, but
if he could have known before he was borne what miseries must befall him in
this life, he would have heartily prayed that the womb of his birth might be
the tomb of his burial: and yet in all the calamities that man must undergo,
he can have no greater comfort then he has by praying to God; for by this
alone we walk with Angels, we talk with God, we relate our grief, we
bewail our sorrows, and being alone, we have the best and sweetest conference
in the world;

O then beloved brethren, as Nazianzen says of Gorgonia, that she was given
to pray, Vt genua terra contreuerint; that her knees seemed always to stoop
and grow to the ground, by reason of her continual kneeling in hearty prayers;
and as Eusebius says of James the brother of the Lord, that his knees by
reason of his continual kneeling in prayers, became as hard Camels knees, i.
e. benumbed and bereaved of all sense and feeling: so let us use continually to
pray; and if we would obtain any thing at the hands of God, or if we would
overcome the malice of men, let us pray, and pray continually says the
Apostle; or if we be so full that we want nothing, yet we have need to pray;
for Christ prayed not only in deserto, which was a place of distress, That we
have as great need to pray in prosperity as in adversity. John 18.2. John 6.
but also in horto, in the garden which was a place of pleasure, not only in
his agony, but also in his dignity, when he should be made a King; to teach us
that we have as much need to pray in prosperity, as in adversity; to pray for
help, that we enter not into temptation, and to pray for grace that we may
rightly use the grace of God: and therefore in all estates, and at all times
pray; and in your prayers, pray for us. And so I come to the last part, which
is the large extent of prayer.

PART. IIII.
CHAP. I. For whom we ought to pray, generally for all men, more especially for
the Magistrates, and most especially for the Ministers of Gods word.
SEcondly, Having heard of the first part of the Apostles request, the act that
you should do, pray; we are now to consider of the second part, which is the
extention, for whom you should pray, for us, pray for us.

You must therefore pray first for your selves; it is of necessity included,
for nulli sapit, qui sibi non sapit; it is certain, that he which seldom
prays for himself, will never pray for others: neither is it enough for us
to pray for our selves, but we must pray one for another; for though the
wicked, fibi nati, sibi vinunt, sibi damnati; are good for nothing; and
therefore will pray neither for themselves, nor others; yet the godly will pray
for themselves, and for all others.

First, Propter vniuersalem vocationem; That we ought to pray for all men.
because we outwardly call all men, and preach to all men, every one that
thirsts, come to the waters, and therefore we must pray for all men.

Secondly, Propter efficaciam gratiae, because of the unspeakable efficacy of
this grace of prayer, which is able to obtain of God, of these stones and
stony hearted sinners, to raise up children unto Abraham; for if the words of
men be so powerful to move the affection, as that the Poet says, -- quid
facundia posset,
Repatuit, fortisque viri tulit arma disertus.
then how much more powerful is the word of God, which is the power of God
unto salvation to all that believe, Christus vim verbis, vim ge^mis vim dedit
herbis, Verbis maiorem, gemmis herbisque minorem.
and is able to divide the soul and the spirit? and if the word preached be
so powerful, how much more powerful is the word of prayer? and therefore
seeing we preach to all, why should we not pray for all?

Thirdly, Propter nostram ignorantiam, because God only knows who are his,
and we are none of his privy Counselors, we know not whose names are written
in the book of life; nor when God will call any man unto his mercy; whether at
the sixth hour, or at the ninth hour, or at the last hour; for as he that
now goes on his way weeping, may return with joy, carrying his sheaues with
him, so he that now goes on in sin, may with the prodigal child, return
and find grace: and we daily see, that one man, de quo desperamus conuertitur,
and fit optimus, and alter de quo multum praesumseramus, deficit and fit
pessimus; of whom we despaired, is converted to be a good man, as Saul, to be a
Saint Paul, and another of whom we conceived great hope, has relapsed and
became most wicked, as Judas, Magus, and others, so that nec timor noster
certus est, nec amor; neither our hope nor fear is sure; and therefore seeing
we know not who are Gods people, we are to hope well of all people, and
therefore to pray for all; saying, always with our Liturgy, That it may please
thee to have mercy upon all men.

More particularly the Apostle wills us, that first of all prayers and
supplications should be made for Kings and all in authority, because that not
only man's salvation, and the knowledge of the truth, but also the quietness
of kingdoms, and whatsoever else tends to the benefit of the public weal,
comes by the power of prayer, as Saint Augustine says; their place is high,
their charge is great, and to be a King is to be a man full of cares, -- cui
mixta dolori
Gaudia nulla ferunt spes semper mixta timore.
Their sollicitous thoughts can have but little joy, and that joy is always
mixed with cares; yea, their very crowns contains nothing else but weighty
affairs, the service of God, the safety of men, and so the whole charge both
of Church and Commonwealth, -- Quantum sit onus regnare probarunt.

And this shows how hard a thing it is to govern; and therefore it is our
duties most heartily to pray for our Kings, but not peremptorily to pry into
the authorities or prerogatives of our Kings, for toll regalia, toll regem,
if you take away the royalties, you leave no King; for Christ was a King, sed
quia rex sine regno; but because he seemed without his royalties, they would
have no King but Caesar; and therefore I say, that whosoever limiteth the
prerogatives of an absolute King, he may leave him to be a man, but he scarce
leaves him to be a King; ask Abishag, and ask the kingdom says Solomon, 1
Kings 2.22.
take the one and leave no other; but as the Jesuitical Priests would have all
Kings to be ruled by their Popes, so our puritanicall, Anabaptisticall people,
would rule all Kings themselves by the rules of their clanculary Parliaments,
and Parliamentall conuenticles; and to that end they are ever limiting their
authorities, and ever nibling at the prerogatives of free Monarchs; still
affecting that government wherein themselves would have a large interest: But
the Divine verity teaches otherwise, in the 1 Samuel 8. where the extent of the
authority of free Monarchs is fully expressed, 1 Samuel 8.
as I could if I had time easily prove it; and Justinian says, Beneplacitum
regis, vigorem legis habet; the Kings good will has the vigor and strength of
a Law, i. e. where there is no law to the contrary, and Budaeus says as much
in the pandects.

But then you will say, Ob.
this is to make way for tyranny and not to maintain their true authority.

I answer, their authority or what they may do, Sol.
is one thing, and their duty or what they ought to do, is another thing; the
one they may exercise over men, and none can control them, and for the other,
if they do ill they must render an account though they be Kings, but to God
not to men; for tibi soli peccaui, against God only have they sinned, as the
Prophet David says; and therefore when we speak of the authority or
prerogatives of Kings, we do it not to make them bold to do what they list
without fear, for with God there is no respect of persons, but if Coniah
though he were as the signet on Gods right hand offend, he will cut him off;
and therefore be wise, O ye Kings, and see what you do, as well as what you may
do; but we speak this to keep the people in obedience, that are always
naturally inclined to kick against authority, that they should ever obey and
suffer, and never resist whatsoever betides them; for you must ever note a
difference betwixt those actions of Kings and Princes, which are sine offensa,
unblameable, and those which ought to be sine resistentia, irresistable; the
first are those which are according to Gods Law; the second are those which are
not only good, for which they shall be rewarded, but also those that are
evil, according to their own will, and contrary to the will of God, for which
they shall be punished; for we find by the example of David toward Saul, and
by the precept of Saint Paul unto all Christians, that whatsoever they do we
may not resist, we may not touch Gods anointed, neither with hand, word, nor
thought; and they shall find it to their cost, that for all those things they
do amiss, they shall render a strict account to God; for though I say that we
are to suffer all things, sine resistentia, without resistance; yet I say not
that we must do it, sine querela, without complaint to God, to be relieved;
and you know what he says, I will hear their cry and will help them: and I
hold this to be the rule of true Christian obedience: And therefore we should
leave to pry into those things which are forbidden, and give our selves to pray
for our Kings, which is commanded; for that is most pleasing to God, not
displeasing unto them, necessary for the good, and profitable unto us all; for
quo sublimior gloria est, eo mayor and cura est; the more eminent in place, the
more need of grace: and therefore Kings should not despise the prayers of the
poorest, nor the poorest neglect to pray for their Kings; for though this is
the best good that they can do, to pray for them, yet this good they can do
unto the best; and we find that Hezekias the great and good King of Judah, 2
Reg. 19.4.
desired the prayers of Esayas; Daniel, that beloved Prophet of God, desired
the prayers of Shadrach, Mesaach, Dan. 2.18.
and Abednego; and God commanded Jobs friends to desire the prayers of Job; Job
42.8.
and so Saint Paul the great Apostle of Jesus Christ, though he abounded in
revelations and exceeded in the graces of Gods spirit, 2 Reg. 19.4.
yet does he in many places desire the prayers of all: and therefore let us
pray for our Kings, and all such as are in authority, Dan. 2.18.
even for the good of our selves; Job 42.8.
because God many times sends evil Kings unto wicked people, and sets an
ungodly man to rule over them, as a just punishment of their iniquity; yea
sometimes he makes good Kings to become burdensome unto a land, as he did
David when he numbered Israel, for the sins and wickedness of them that
dwell therein; and on the other side, he makes evil men good Kings and
governors, for the love that he bears unto all faithful people; or, if
still they continue evil, he will soon take them off, if the people truly
and faithfully serve him, and pray unto him for their Kings continually as they
ought to do; because God has promised to hear the prayers of the faithful,
and to grant unto them their requests.

And as we are enjoined to pray for our Magistrates, so here the Apostle
shows that we ought also to pray for our Ministers; for himself and the rest
of the Apostles, and all other Preachers of Gods Word, pray for us; and this
is, praeceptum breue, leave, and vtile; a short request, but one word, pray, you
cannot forget it; and it is easy, for the poor may do it as well as the
rich; and as the distich says, Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque,
Aeque neglectum pueris, senibusque nocebit;


It is as good for you that do it, as it is for us for whom you do it; and
the neglecting of it will prejudice you, as much as us: and therefore pray for
us. Heb. 13.
And I find the Apostle requesteth this diverse times, therefore no doubt but
for diverse reasons.

First, you should pray for us, because we pray for you, yea, Three special
reasons to move us to pray for our Ministers.
oftentimes when you do not, and sometimes when you cannot pray for your
selves, as Pharaoh shows, when he sent to Moses and Aaron that they should
pray for him; and it is peccatum non orandi; a sin of not praying in us,
Exodus 9.28.
when we neglect it, as Samuel shows, God forbid that I should cease to pray
for you, and so sin against God: and therefore, lege talionis, 1 Samuel 13.23.
you are bound to pray for us.

Secondly, you should pray for us for the good of your selves; for weak
Ministers are the destruction of the people: Iereboam made all Israel to sin,
because he made Priests of the meanest of the people; for if they fall and
perish, many perish; because as Saint Peter says, 2 Pet. 2.12.
many shall follow their damnable ways. And if you look upon all sorts of
men, you shall find that they should be the most absolute of all men in all
good parts; for every eye is upon them, therefore the Law requires they should
be men without blemish, and every man is to be taught by them, and therefore
the Priests lips should preserve knowledge. Or if you consider all degrees of
men, they have all need of them, and they are necessary unto all, to correct
the bad, to confirm the good, to teach the people, and to assist the princes;
for who should speak in Sermons, Parliaments, or any other Assemblies, to
preserve piety, to increase charity, and to justify the rights of Princes,
and to vindicate the same against the gaine-saying of Corah, but we that are to
teach every soul to fear God, to love their neighbors, and to be subject
unto the higher powers? And yet we see regale Sacerdotium that royal
Priesthood, which should be vpheld by Kings to be assistants unto Kings, to
govern Gods people in all piety and honesty, to become almost vulgar
Sacerdotium, a laicke presbytery of a strange concretion, or a popular
Priesthood full of all prying curiosity and contradiction: but I hope this
will serve to show how behouefull it is, to have wise, discreet, and faithful
Ministers, even for the good of all the people; for like Priests, like people:
if we be ill, we make many ill; because, as the people of themselves have not
any grace to do good, they know not how to do it unless we teach them, so
they have not much wit (though it be always propense to evil) to do many
evils; quia non nisi ex magnis ingenijs magni errores; because strange plots
can never proceed from mean wits; but you see what cruel combustions the
bloody witty Jesuits do make in all the world, to erect their Popish
Monarchy, and what foolish factions our own giddie witty Puritan-Priests have
made amongst our selves to bring all things to an anarchie: and therefore for
your own sake, you should pray for us that are your teachers, that we may be
such as may be good for you; to teach you in all honesty and godliness.

Thirdly, you should pray for us, that by your prayers we may be helped to
discharge that great charge, which is laid upon us; for we are bound to bear
one another burden, and to help one another in all necessities;

But of all the men in the world, we are in the strangest state, and therefore
have most need of all assistance; For, 1. Our work is the greatest, which we
are to do. 2. Our danger is greatest, whatsoever we do.


First, our work is not collectio pecuniarum, The great charge of preachers.
a trading in the world to get wealth, or a hunting after our own preferment;
but it is cura animarum, a charge of souls, the greatest charge in the world:
a burden says Moses, yea such a burden, Angelicis humeris formidandum; as
would make Angels shoulders to shrink says Erasmus: and therefore Saint Paul
cries out, (...)? Who is sufficient for these things? for we are not only to
Preach in season and out of season, that is, volentibus et nolentibus; to them
that are willing, and to them that are unwilling, as Saint Augustine expounds
it; because that to the willing, it comes in season, whenever it comes; and
to the unwilling it comes out of season, come when it will; but we are also to
be an example of good life unto all others, and to live like Gregory
Nazianzen, qui fecit ea quae docuit, Ruff. in vita Nazian.
and seipsum minime condemnauit contraria agendo quam docebat; which did the
things that he taught, How uprightly we should live.
and did not condemn himself by living contrary to his teaching: The life of
Preachers should be a most upright and a sincere life, without all offense;
quia inter seculares nugae nugae, in ore sacerdotis sunt blasphemiae; Bernard.
l. 2. de considerat ad Eugen.
because those things which are but trifles or small sins among secular men,
they are great, and horrible, intolerable sins among the Preachers of Gods
Word; nam ibi criminosior culpa est, vbi honestior status; for the more
honorable is our calling, the more odious is our offending; and the Lord
says, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me: and therefore what care
and what diligence ought we to have to look to our selves, vt nihil faeditatis
in nobis appareat; Leuit. 10.
that we might abstain from all appearance of evil, and fashon not our selves
in any thing like unto the courses of this present world.

In what a dangerous state the Ministers do live.
Secondly, as our task is great which we are to do, (thus uprightly to live,
and most faithfully to preach the Word of God) so our danger is great
whatsoever we do; for we are betwixt the bark and the tree, betwixt the fire
and the water, betwixt the anger of God and the malice of the devil, and as
the Poet says, incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare charib dim, we shall fall
into one, do what we can; For,

The fearful state of those Ministers that neglect their duty.
First, If we neglect our duties, either in not preaching, or in ill-liuing, the
blood of the people, besides living in our sins, shall be required at our
hands: and therefore, woe is me if I preach not the Gospel, says the
Apostle; and vae miseris qui sunt catholici praedicando, and heretici operando,
vae qui tenent in memoria quae non agunt in vita; and woe to those miserable
men which preach well, but live ill, which have Christ in their Sermons, but
not in their actions, which know and teach others what to do, but will not do
it themselves; woe, woe, to those miserable men, says Saint Bernard; Quia
satius est sustinere paenam Caiphae, Pilati and Herodis, quam paenam sacerdotis
indigne Ministrantis; because it were better to suffer the punishment of
Caiphas, Pilate and Herod, then the punishment that is due to an unworthy
Minister.

Secondly, If we truly preach the Word of God, and live as uprightly as the
Saints of God, yet we shall be sure never to escape the censures of men, nor
the malice of the devil; for though in old time there were counted but seven
wise men (that had that name) among the Greeks, yet now there are not, (in
their own judgments) so many fools amongst us; and therefore, et garrula
anus et delirus senex, as Saint Hierome says to Paulinus; Cobblers and Tinkers
in their shoppes will judge what we shall say in our Pulpits: But if this were
all, we could well endure it, but it is not; for as we seek to destroy the
Kingdom of darkness, so does the Prince of darkness seek by all means to
destroy us; and therefore he shoots all his poisoned darts at us, he stirs
up the hearts of wicked men to trample us under feet, Tincta licambaeo
sanguine tela dabit. Ouidius in Ibin.
as the mire in the street, to do us all the mischief that lies in them,
and to deal with us as their Fathers used the Prophets, and as we read of
them in the second of Wisdom 10, etc. saying, come, Let us lie in wait for
the righteous, let us see if their words be true, let us examine them with
despitefulnesse and torture, that we may know their meekness, and prove their
patience; for they be not for our turn, Wisd. 2.10.12.
we have no benefit by them, but they vpbraid us with our offending of the Law,
and object to our infamy the transgressing of our education, yea, they reprove
our thoughts, and their life is not like other men, but their ways are of
another fashion, esteeming us as counterfeits, and abstaining from our ways as
from filthiness, and therefore, seeing they are so grievous unto us, even to
behold, let us see if their words be true, and let us join our selves against
them; as against our mortal enemies: thus do they consult, thus do they
combine themselves as against all righteous men, so specially against the
Preachers of Gods Word, and the reprouers of their faults: O then, beloved
brethren, what created power is able to undo this covenant of hell it self,
when subtilty and cruelty, the world, and the devil, like Simeon and Leui,
that were brethren in evil, have combined together to overthrow us? surely God
who is (...), Deus in oportunitatibus; a God in the needful time of trouble
(as Simplicius calls him) must be our helper and defender, or else we shall be
soon consumed and brought to nothing; for we are weak to resist, and our
enemies strong to oppress, and all our hearers, our own people, of whom we
should receive most comfort, are either mockers and scoffers of us, or at least
judges of us, who, and when we do ill and when we do well, rather then
helpers of us by their prayers, that we may do well; and therefore we see how
many of us are: one man learned without discretion; another worldly wise but
cannot preach, a third preaches well, but lives ill; and in brief, most of
us defective of what we should be: and all this turns to the hurt of all men.

And therefore that we may be as we ought to be, good for our selves, good for
you all, you see how necessary it is that you should pray for us, and
especially,

First, that evil and licentious Ministers might have grace, for their
amendment, or the censure of eiectment out of the Church, as Adam was out of
Paradise: some indeed had rather cover their faults then cure them, lest the
revealing of their vices might be a cause of reuiling their fellows; but alas
had it been more credit for the Apostles to have had Judas still retained or
excluded? I trow excluded: and therefore he lost his dignity; to teach us that
all such false stewards should hear the same sentence, Episcopatum tuum
accipiet alter; let another take this place, for a little leaven will leaven the
whole lump; and one lewd man may do much mischief; and therefore as our
Savior drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple; so should all buyers
and sellers of the Church of Christ, all factious and contentious Preachers,
and all loose and lewd livers, be delivered unto Satan, for the destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; and that
all the leaven of iniquity may be purged from the Ministry. And,

Secondly, that God would not suffer the world to condemn the righteous with
the wicked, nor to accuse all for the offense of some, but as the Poet says in
another kind, Parcite paucarum diffundere crimen in omnes
Spectetur meritis quaeque puella suis;
So in this; that they only should be blamed which are blameworthy; or if
they will still persecute us, that neither Satan with all his cruelties, nor
yet the world with all his subtilties may deiect the minds of worthy and godly
Ministers, but that in all afflictions and contempts, they may say with the
Prophet David, Why art thou so heavy, O my soul, and why art thou so
disquieted within me? yet put thy trust in the Lord, for he is thy helper and
defender; and that they may go on in the course of godliness like the two
Cowes which carried the Arc, which went on straight forward without turning to
either hand: Pyndarus.
and like King Therons Coursers, that were never weary of running; that so they
may escape all the fiery darts of Satan, and finish their course with joy, when
they shall receive that Crown of righteousness which the Lord has prepared
for them that love him.

And thus dearly beloved, you see that although man for his sin, was eiected
out of Paradise, and subjected to all miseries, yet through the mercy of God,
in sending his Son to be made man to suffer for man, to overcome the devil,
sin, and death, to raise himself from death, to ascend to Heaven, to send
his holy Spirit to fill our hearts with his heavenly graces, we shall, (if we
believe in him, and serve him, praise his Name for all his blessings, love one
another, and pray one for another,) attain unto everlasting happiness: Unto
the which happiness, the Lord of his goodness bring us all, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed, as
is most due, all Glory and Honor, and Praise, and Thanks, and Power, and
Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer.
O Eternal God, and our most gracious Father, we most humbly beseech thee for
Jesus Christ his sake, to forgive us all our sins, which we acknowledge and
confess to be more in number then the sands of the Sea, which cannot be
numbered; cleanse us O Lord with the blood of Christ, and plant in us those
heavenly gifts and graces whereby we may be enabled to serve thee as we ought
to do, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life; increase our
faith, stir up our hope, and kindle our love, and our charity both toward
thy self and all men for thy sake; give us patience to undergo, without
offending thee, whatsoever miseries this wicked world shall any ways heap
upon us: bless our gracious King, the Prince, and all the royal issue; bless
all the Ministers of thy Church, and all the Magistrates of this Commonwealth:
Grant O Lord, thy grace unto thy Ministers, that they may faithfully preach the
Word of truth, and sincerely live a most upright, and a godly life; grant to
the Magistrates thy grace O God, to defend right without remissness, and to
punish vice without maliciousness; and because we are all thy creatures, the
works of thy hands, made by thee, preserved by thee, and inioying all we have,
life and liuelihood, from thee; O Lord be merciful unto us all, and remember
that we are but dust; consider, O consider that we are but as grass, not able
to do what we would, not able to do any thing that is good, unless thou do
it in us: O then let our souls live, and we will praise thy Name, we will
magnify thee for ever and ever, for all the blessings that we have received
from thee, our Creation, Redemption, Sanctification, Preservation, and our
assured hope of Glorification, and all other graces whatsoever, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Soliloquie of the Author.
O Eternal God, thou have created me, and I have offended thee; thou have
redeemed me, and I still continued unthankful unto thee; and yet thou have
heaped many blessings upon me, and given me grace to be desirous to serve thee,
and according to my poor and weak ability, to show forth these lights unto
thy Church; I confess, O Lord, whatsoever is ill herein is only mine, and
whatsoever is good is truly thine; and therefore I desire thee to pardon mine
evil, and to make me thankful for thy good, and so to accept that work done
by thy grace, that it may be crowned with thy glory. I do not long for any
worldly thing, the whole world lies in wickedness, but I desire my soul may
be married unto thee, to live with thee for evermore: and therefore O blessed
God, seeing that as I have none in heaven, so, I have none in earth but only
thou to be my helper, I beseech thee to be my redeeming kinsman, to preserve my
wearied body from the malice of this world, and to prefer my disconsolate
soul unto everlasting joys, through Jesus Christ mine only Savior. Amen.

IEHOVAE LIBERATORI.

FINIS.
THE TABLE,
AB.
Abstain from sin is from God. 205 God never absolueth unrepentant sinners.
242
Absurdities, God shunneth in all things. 324 Absurdities of the Lutheran
doctrine, touching the communication of properties. 377. etc. Absurdities
following the High Priest, saying that the Disciples stole Christ away. 564
Nature not able to show the reason how the world should be made. 138 God able
to do what he will. 147 To hinder what he will not have done. ibid. To do
more then he did, or does, or will do. 148. 149. etc. Phrases of being able or
not able how to be understood. 158 God able to produce any thing of nothing.
163 God able to forgive all sins. 164 God not able to do contrary to what
he decreed. 165 Not able to do things contrary to his Nature. 165 Gods
ability to help us, a great comfort to the godly. 177
Absurdities of the doctrine of transubstantiation. 174 God able to save men,
without the Incarnation of his Son. 320 None able to know God as he is in
himself. 120
Abstract names of all excellencies most proper unto God, 122 Goodness of God
abused by the wicked. 225
Abuse of Christ not paralelled in any age. 474
AC.
To be an Accepter of persons, what it is. 210 We should acknowledge whence we
have all our goodness. 211 Inward actions of God, ever in doing, necessary,
incommunicable. 275 Christ how falsely accused by his enemies. 471 Whereof
accused before Pilate, and how false those accusations were. 472 Acts merely
voluntary, no sins. 15. and 32 Actual sin, what it is. 10 All actions
adjudged according to the disposition of the will. 55
Act of punishment, least agreeable to Gods nature. 195 No act can exceed the
power of the agent. 209
Actors in the Tragedy of Christ his Passion who they were. 421 Gods free
actions not curiously to be searched into. 555 Chiefest Acts of David, types of
Christ. 617

AD
Adam sinning we all sinned. 3 Adams fall brought on us a twofold evil. 3
What God commanded Adam, how small a thing it was. 98
Adamant, how mollified. 5^6 Adversity makes the Saints more resplendent then
prosperity. 207 Adversity and affliction not simply good. ibid.
AE.
Aescilus how he came by his death. 613
AF.
Affirmative precepts, how many, viz. 248. 230 Christ why afflicted by God. 496
Affections of Christ, how they differ from ours in three respects. 444
AG.
Agony of Christ what was the cause thereof. 443 The several ages of the
world. 402. 403
Agents, that there be three sorts. 162 Christ borne in the six^ age of the
world, and why. 403
Age of man divided into four parts. 68
AL.
How all we have is from God. 129 All men taste of Gods goodness. 201 How all
men may be said to hate the Preachers. 435
Alcestes how dearly she loved her Husband. 425
AN.
Anabaptists heresy, what it is. 344 Angels, for three things most excellent.
535 Angels appeared like men but were never made men. 534 Always served
Christ. 535 How they punish the wicked. 536 How they comfort the women. 537
Testify of the resurrection of Christ. 566 The birth of Christ. 411. 411
Angel, a name of office, and Christ often called an Angel. 330 Angels, how
they are said to ascend. 609 Anger, what evil it does. 229 That it is
twofold. 355
Angel cannot beget another. 4 Anselmus what he said. 66 Christ, why he would
not answer Pilate. 477

AP.
Approbation of sin, how evil it is. 15 Apuleius his Ass what she said. 92
Appearance and show of truth, how vain it is 213 Apollinaris and some Arrians
heresy. 348, and 343 Apostles words, He is the first borne of every creature,
how understood. 290 Apelles his heresy. 343 Application of Christ's
Resurrection, is that only thing which helps us. 586 Apostasy, what a
fearful sin. 595 Apostles only filled with the holy Ghost, on the day of
Pentecost. 658 To approve sin in others, what a great sin. 25
Appollodorus what he dreamed. 55 Christ appeared ofen in the shape of man,
before he was made man. 329 Christ appeared like a man, unto Adam. 329 To
Abraham. 330. to Jacob, and Joshua. 322 Christ appeared to the Patriarchs in a
true body. 345 Christ appeared like a sinful man, but without sin 346
Christ how he appeared to Saint Paul going to Damascus. 388
Apparitions of Christ after his Resurrection, twelve times at least. 505 Why
he appeared first to Mary Magdalene. 565 Why he appeared first to Saint Peter,
among the men. 570 Why he appeared to Saint James. 574

AR.
Arrius his heresy, and objections answered 248, etc. 299 Arrians, whether
they corrupted the Text of Solomon, God created, etc. 287 Armor of a Christian
of two kinds. 730 Arrogance of Judas seen. 461 To argue from Gods power
without testimony of his will, not good. 172

AS.
God made man to ascend. 561 Christ ascended three times. 615 Time, place, and
manner of Christ his ascension. 620. 621 Christ ascended above all heavens. 624
Our ascension to Heaven depends upon our union with Christ. 626 Doctrine of
Christ's Ascension to what end it serves. 618 That we should always ascend to
heaven. 630 Our wings to ascend what they be. 631 Christ ascended for four
special ends. 639 Christ before his ascension would not bestow the gifts of
the Holy Ghost, and why. 640 That there be four sorts of ascenders. 609 Angels
how said to ascend. 609 Christ whether wholly destitute of all assistance from
the Godhead. 447 That Christ assumed our flesh. 369
AT.
Athiests deny the power of God. 136
AV
First Author of our conversion to God, is God. 529 Saint Augustine reading the
death of Dido, what he said. 51 Christ borne in the reign of Augustus, and
why. 494 Desparagement to Augustus his worth to join any other with him. 504
What the Author thinks of transubstantiation. 549
BA.
BAcke-parts of God, what it signifies. 117 Balaam prophesied of Christ. 412
BE.
Being of God not safe to search too far into it. 124 God gives being to all
creatures. 125 We believe not the assertions of the Jesuits, not because we
know not how they may be done, but because we know they cannot be done. 177
Beauty of God incomprehensible. 191 We are begotten to God by the truth. 215
Saint Bernards preaching two kinds of Sermons. 266 The father always
begets the son. 275 Christ made the beginning of our ways. 288
Benefits of Christ's Incarnation. 359 Benefits of the union of the two natures
of Christ in respect of Christ. 382 In respect of us. 390 Gods benefits
recommended to our memories. 60
Benefits how many Christ bestowed on Judas. 458 Every benefit requires a
duty. 542 To believe in Christ, is to eat and drink him. 681
Best men most hated in the world. 435 Bethelem, the place where Christ was
borne. 407 etc. Christ, why betrayed by Judas. 459

BJ.
Birds flying hardly catched. 13 Birth of Christ, how mean it was, and why.
409 Why first reueiled to the Shepherds. 412

BL.
How blind sinners be. 58 Our blindness seen and confessed by the
Philosophers. 59 A fable of a blind widow. 58 Blood of Christ shed fix
special times. 164 Blood of Christ, the price that paid for all men. 501
Blasphemy against the truth, what a heavy sin, 240 Shedding of man's blood, what
a fearful sin. 240

BO.
Bodies cannot beget souls. 4 That Christ had a true body, proved. 341. 342
etc. All the objections to the contrary answered. 344. 345. etc. A natural
body must be local. 155
Body of Christ cannot be every where. 157 How it may be said to be every where
169 To be a true body, and to be every where is merely contradictory. 170
Bodies glorified have their dimensions. 170, etc. Body of Christ glorified
from the first moment of his conception. 171 Still a physical body. 172 For a
body to be in one place, and in many places at the same time is impossible. 175
We may not refer that to the body, which is truly spoken of the whole person
of Christ. 344 Christ appeared to the Patriarchs in a true body. 345
Body of Christ how said to do divine operations. 38 Body of Christ how it may
be truly said to be in the Sacraments. 549 Bodies raised at the resurrection
of Christ, testified of the resurection of Christ. 579 Bodies in heaven shall
be still quantatiue. 171 What a bondage it is to serve sin. 99 Christ why
borne in the reign of Augustus and Herod. 404 Why borne in December. 405 Why
upon the Sabbath day. ibid. And why presently after midnight. 406. Why borne of
a woman. 334 And why of a Virgin. ibid. A bountiful man is gracious. 190 God
most bountiful unto all people. 192 God not bound to give power to the wicked
to serve him. 210

BR.
Brethren, how variously taken. 689 Brotherhood in respect of the Spirit,
greater then that in respect of flesh and blood. 689 Gentile brethren how they
loved one another. 690

CA.
Giving Canaan to the Israelites, a type of giving heaven to us. 127 God
calls effectually none but the elect. 203 God not the cause why the wicked
serve not God. 210
Causes of Christ's sufferings. 493 Instrumentally manifold. 494, etc.
Efficient, God himself, and why. 496 Final. 590

CE.
Cerinthus his heresy. 374
CHAPTER
Substance changed cannot be what it was and what it is both at once. 173 God
can change any substance into another. 173
Charity most requisite for Preachers. 642 Charity, what it is. 652 The surest
sign of salvation. ibid.
Children liable to death. 9 Tainted with sin before they are borne. 9
Childhood and the miseries thereof described. 69 Our children to be married to
the godliest men. 109 The wicked shall be punished in their children. 245 How
it stands with Gods justice to punish the fathers sins upon the children. 245
Children very apt to imitate their Parents. 246 All children of the wicked not
punished for their fathers sins. 247 A child how conceived in the womb. 337
God chooses no man in respect of any thing that is in man 211
Christ the word, the sum of all things. 258 Signified by all the most
memorable things of the old Testament. 258
Christ would not reveal himself to the world all at once. ^59 To know him is
the only thing that makes us happy. ibid.
Christ despised all vanities. 260 Suffered all miseries. ibid.
Christ the most perfect pattern of all virtue. 260 Christ known suppresseth
all vices. 261 He alone is all sufficient to supply all our need. 262 Without
Christ the whole world will avail us nothing. 263
Christ only should be preached by all Preachers. 266 The Name of Christ
should be always in our mouths to be honored, not to be blasphemed. 267
Christ in the Father, not as we are in the Father. 270 Christ a true God
proved. 278. 279. etc. Christ is truly rich 281 Christ created all things, and
governs all things. 283 Christ prayed unto. 283 Christ began to be a God
existing in the manhood, when he was made flesh. 248 Christ no accidental, but
an essential word. 285 Christ how he may be said to be created and begotten.
289 Christ made the beginning of our ways. 288 Christ demands the earth as
man, and gives heaven as God. 290 Christ how the first begotten, and how the
only begotten Son of God. 291 Christ, how God of himself. 293 How said to
be with God and in God. 298
Christ equal to the Father. 299 Christ after what manner conceived. 335. Not
of the Essence, but by the virtue of the Holy Ghost. ibid. Christ conceived a
perfect man in the first moment of his conception. 337 How wonderfully he was
made man. ibid.
Christ why conceived of a Virgin. 338 How he comes from Adam. ibid.
Christ made a perfect man. 340 That he had a true body. 341, etc.
Christ made subject to all humane frailties. 351 Christ how he has performed
all things for us. 360 Christ an infallible pattern for all men to imitate.
360 Christ brought us more good then we lost in Adam. 361 Christ how made
invisible unto the Jews. 387 Christ how he came in, the doors being shut.
ibid. How he walked upon the seas. 388 How he appeared to S. Paul. 388. 389.
etc.
Christ came from Nathan, and not from Solomon, 3^8 Christ why born in the
reign of Augustus. 404 Why in the sixth age of the world. 403 Why in December.
405
Christ what manner of person he was. 429 That he was a man. ibid. A just man.
ibid. A good man. 430 A King, a Priest, a Prophet. 431 A true and eternal God.
432
Christ his sufferings expressed. 436. etc. His whole life a continual
suffering. 437
Christ's sufferings chiefly in three places, 437 Christ suffered in soul.
ibid. Christ's first degree of suffering, in being made passible. 438 Christ's
sufferings most admirable, 439 Christ why he went out to be taken. 439 Why out
of the city. 440 Why into the garden. 441
Christ whether wholly destitute of all divine assistance. 447 How lightly he
esteemed of death. 446
Christ how by his death he overcame death 84 Christ delivered from what he
feared. 448 Christ to undergo the punishment of all others. ibid. Christ how
he sought to reclaim Judas. 461. etc. Christ how handled presently after he
was taken. 464 Christ why he chose Judas to be his Apostle. 459 Christ how
crowned with thorns. 475 Christ why he came not down from the Cross 481
Christ dead, is still persecuted and raged at. 482 Christ how said to be every
where. 540 Christ no where to be found but in the Church. 545 Church, the
fittest place for public prayers 711 Church how to rule her children. 520
Church how subject to afflictions. 520
CL.
Clytoria^ Well what it effects. 528 Clothing Christ in white, what it
signified. 473
CO.
Comforts that we have from Christ his being subject to infirmities. 361. 362
Whatsoever God commands is no sin. 166 God compels not his servants to
do good 530 To compel others to sin, the practice of most wicked sinners.
25 Manner of Christ his coming to judgment. 622, 623 Gods commandments, few,
short, light, and profitable. 99 The least comfort denied in hell. 87 What
communicates most goodness unto others, is ever best. 197 That we should
confess our sins. 113
Conversion to God not to be deferred. 24 That we should confess our sins
the devil cannot abide. 28 An excellent consideration of Saint Augustine. 51
Consciences of the wicked opened before they die. 80 We can conceive but the
least part of Gods excellency. 118 What are contrari^ to the nature of God.
152 How contradictories destroy each other. 153 God cannot do contradictories,
proved. 154 That we should not contest about trifles. 265
Consultation in heaven about the restitution of man. 319 God works one
contrary out of another. 351
Contentedness requisite in any state. 410 Conception of Christ ineffable. 336
Consideration of Christ's sufferings most admirable. 439 Condemnation of all the
infidels that would not believe in Christ, grieved Christ. 454 That we should
condole the sufferings of Christ. 506
Conversion of a sinner first wrought by God. 529 Conversion of any man not to
be despaired of. 533 Contempt of vanities most requisite for Preachers. 642
Constancy most requisite for Preachers. 642, 643 Conquest of Christ over
Satan, not only by suffering, but also trampling him under feet. 583
Covetousness what a horrible sin. 460 To be avoided. 704
Covenant with hell should be broken. 26 Colors used by the ancients to
express diverse things. 474 The great courage of the Apostles presently after
the resurrection of Christ. 576
Corporal presence of Christ no where now but in heaven. 545 Christ not
corporally present in any secrets. 546, 547
Correction how burdensome to children. 69 No cost to be spared to get truth.
217

CR.
All creatures heap miseries on man. 74 All creatures have their being from
God. 125 The creatures have many impressions of Gods goodness infixed in them.
256 All creatures how enriched with good. 201 Four crying sins. 41 No
creature can be capable of infiniteness, or of infinite perfections. 156
Cruelty of Satan against the Preachers. 644
CV.
Custom of ancient times, to express our minds by visible signs. 680 Cup
that Christ was to drink of, what it was. 444 Cup which drank up, killed
Christ, but ouerceme not Christ. 449 Curiosity to be shunned in searching out
the manner of divine mysteries. 277 Curiosity to be avoided in searching what
God is. 122, 124 Custom of sinning, makes the sinner bold to sin. 20 It
makes the greatest sins seem no sins. 21 It binds us in sin. 22 It
indammageth the soul. 23 And makes the sinners almost incurable. 65

DA.
DAmage received by Adam, twofold. 3 What a danger it is to neglect public
prayers. 717
David's words, This day have I begotten thee, how to be understood. 290
Dangerous to reprove great men. 233 Who most subject to dangers. 433
Daughters of sin are two. 82 In the day of Christ's nativity, three things
obseruable. 435

DE.
Death the fruit of sin. 2 Seven deadly sins. 40 By death is contained all
that is under the curse of God. 47, 67
Death, threefold. 49 Death of the soul, threefold. 53 Death what it is. 67
How largely it extends it self. 75 How irresistable it is. ibid. How
expressed by the Egyptians. 76 How it shortens life diverse ways. 77 How it
takes men of all ages. 78 How it smites in every place. 79 How comfortable it
is to the godly. 79 How terrible to the wicked. 80 How it equalizeth the bodies
of all men 81
Death of Christ the sole cause that makes our death happy unto us. 84 Death
eternal, what it is. 86 Death of Christ a sufficient satisfaction for the
greatest sins. 164 Death how little Christ respected it. 446 Saints at their
death supported by God. 447
Death of the cross, grievous in four respects. 479 480 Death of Christ
makes the wicked without excuse. 504 Certainty of Christ's death showed in that
her rose not til the third day. 556
Deceit of sin how great. 44 Deceits, no deceits, unless cunningly carried.
461 Deformity of sin greater then we can comprehend. 107 Deferring of
Christ's suffering grieved Christ. 451 Wicked men, how they deceive themselves.
517 God a debtor to no man. 531 To defend the truth, with the hazard of all
that we have. 217 Why God deferreth to give us what we desire. 723
Delight in sin, makes us exceeding sinful. 15 Our deliverances from
punishments to be ascribed to Gods goodness. 203 God delivers not always
his dearest Saints from afflictions. 206 Christ delivered from what he feared.
448 To derogate from Gods power, how great a sin. 161 God denies his grace
unto the children for their Fathers sins. 251. Why. 252 Why God denies what
we ask. 725 To descend from the cross easier then to rise from the grave. 562
Descention of Christ into hell, handled 580. 581, etc. proved by Scripture,
and by the stimonie of antiquity. 484. 618 That Christ descended before he
could ascend. 609 Why Christ descended not from the cross. 481 We ought to
despair of no man's conversion. 533
Descending of Christ, signifies the assuming of our flesh. 301 Description of
God by way of negation, affirmation, and super eminency. 121 Desire to sin,
is an act done. 96 Desperate men think God cannot forgive them. 139 We ought
never to despair of mercy. 226 To despair, what a heinous sin. 228 Saints
desired nothihg but Christ. 264
Demosthenes his Parable unto the Athenians of the wolves request unto the
sheep. 644 Of the young man that hired an Ass to Megara. 678

DI.
Christ, whether he died for all men and how. 505 To die to sin, what it is.
50 a punishment for sin. ibid. To die in sin what it is. 51 Difference
betwixt spiritual and eternal punishment. 250 How the word God differs from
our Word. 309 A great difference betwixt appearing in the form of man, and to
be made man. 329
Difference betwixt assuming flesh, and to be made flesh. 345 Difference
betwixt the twofold generations of Christ and of the Saints. 364 Difference
betwixt Law and Gospel. 3^4 Difference betwixt the sins of the godly, and
the wicked three-folde. 35 Difference betwixt fear and sorrow. 449
Philosophers most diligent to attain to all kind of knowledge. 315 How
diligent we ought to be to know Christ. 393
Dirt nothing so foul as sin. 52 Diseases of the soul, what they be. 63
Discontent with God, what a heavy sin. 239 Disobedience to God, what a
heinous sin. 293 Disobedience to parents, what a fearful sin. 240 To
distinguish of Gods power reconcileth diverse Authors. 150
Dispertion of the Apostles grieved Christ. 453 In distress how we ought to
seek unto God. 488
Disciples whether they stole Christ from the grave or not. 562 Discretion how
needful for Preachers. 696 Devils know God, and Christ, and the mystery of
the Trinity. 314 Confessed Gods power. 162

DO.
Doctrine touching the person of Christ, how always opposed by Satan. 304
Doctrine of divinity how deep and difficult. 392 Whatsoever God does, is no
sin. 166 Doors being shut, how Christ came in. 387
Doubting of Gods goodness, what a fearful sin. 239 That we should never
doubt of Gods promises. 130

DR.
To draw near to us, how God is said. 165 M. Drusus desired all men might see
what he did. 604
EA.
EArth accursed for the sin of man. 48
OF.
The effects that Christ's sufferings should work in us. 505
EG.
Egyptians how they expressed death. 76
EL.
Electionis of some men, not of all. 203 The elect only are effectually
called. 203
Elizabeth, the wife of Zacharias, of what Tribe she was. 397
EN.
Enemies that besot the godly, 177 Envy of Satan against Christ. 493 and why
he envied him. 434 Enemies of Christ ascribe to him in mockery, what he was in
deed. 432 433 Enemies of Christ, what they testified of him. 578 Enemies of man
especially three. 582
EP.
Epicurus confessed the world had beginning and shall have ending. 137
EQ.
Equality of sins confuted. 37 Equity of eternal punishment for a
temporary sin, showed in two respects. 97 Christ equal with the Father. 299

ER.
Error of the Philosophers, touching the etertie of the world. 136 Error of the
Vbiquitaries, touching the power of God. 141 Error of the Jesuits about the
power of God. 141 Error of Pellagius about the ability of man's nature. 63* 64
Error of Nouatus, about sins after Baptism. 112 Errors of the vulgar, about
the absolute power of God. 151 Errors expelled by truth. 215 Errors boulstered
with lies. 175 Error of Saint Gregory, and Saint Bernard confuted. 94. 95
Error of Lactantius and Pellagius confuted. 63 Error of the Philosophers,
Stoics, Arist. Seleucus, Hermias and Hermog* confuted. 136, 137, etc. Error of
the Vbiquitaries showed. 141 Confuted, 155. Their Object. anws. 165
Error of Bellarmine, and the Jesuits showed. 141. Their Objections answered.
172, etc. Error of Saint Hierom. 330
ES.
Essence of God in heaven, cannot be seen but in the face of Jesus Christ.
118 Essence of God not safe to search too far into it. 124 Essence of God
distinguished into three persons. 272 The word essence derived our of
Scripture, and used in Scripture, 294 Christ of the same essence with his
Father. 292. Impossible to escape out of the hands of the Angels. 337

ET.
Eternity of Christ proved, and the objections against the same answered. 278
279, 280, etc. Eternal punishment how inflicted for a temporary sin. 94
EV.
Eua believes the Devil. 3 The evil that oppresses every sinner twofold.
321
Evangelist, why he says the Word was made flesh, rather then man. 349
Eutichian heresy, what it was. 367, etc.
EX.
Excuses of sinners to justify themselves. 24 Excuses of sinners to lessen
sin. 110 Examples of wilful and spiteful sinners. 33 Excellency of God
cannot be conceived of us. 118 All the excellencies of Christ's manhood were
created excellencies. 146 God expressed to Moses what he is, three manner of
ways. 121
Examples of Gods mercy in seeking after sinners. 181 We should carefully
examine whether we love God or not. 189
Examples of Gods slownesse to punish sin. 194 Good examples a great means to
further godliness. 360 Three sorts of men excluded from the Paschall Lamb. 682
Excellency of divine truth. 215
EK.
The word (...), whether rightly translated, created, or not. 287
FA.
THree faculties of the soul of man. 53 Every faculty of the soul defiled by
sin. ibid.
Fathers how they extol the power of God. ibid. Faith sees what reason
perceives not. 176 God called Father of mercies, never called Father of
vengeance, and why. 195
Faults of some not to be ascribed unto all. 221 God the Father always
begets the Son. 275 The name of Father taken two ways. 278 God the Father
of Christ, not as he is our Father. 291 The Father, how greater then Christ. 300
Father sent not Christ by way of command. 301 Christ the fairest among the
sons of men. 353
Family from whence Christ descended, 396, etc. Faults of the Disciples Christ
would not reveal. 466 Faith fourfold. 647 Justifying faith the properties of
it. 648

FE.
That we should fear our Lord. 131 That we should as well fear Gods justice,
as hope for his mercy. 244 Fear is twofold. 355 Fear and sorrow how they
differ. 449 What Christ feared. 450. 455, etc. Whom we need not fear. 538 God
in what sense to be feared. 539 Magistrates and parents in what sense to be
feared. 538
Fear brought into the world by sin. 540 God how he ought to be feared. 541
That we ought to fear in every state of grace, lapse, and recovery. 441

FI.
Fire and sin cannot be concealed. 20 Fire and sin not resisted will
necessarily increase. 22 Christ in what respect said to be the first begotten
Son of God. 291 That we should strive to be the first in Gods service. 590
Apostles only filled with the holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost. 658
Five kinds of kisses. 460
FL.
Flesh apt to conceive sin. 14 Flesh taken for the corrupted quality of man. 8
Flesh of Christ made by all the three persons of the Trinity. 325 Flesh diverse
kinds. 339 Our flesh assumed by Christ. 369
Flesh of Christ, how said to be Deified. 369 How said to do divine
operations. 389 Christ how flouted by all men. 481, 482
Flesh the tenderer, the more sensible of pain. 483
FO.
Forgetfulness an infernal Fiend. 60 To forbear to punish sin, increases
the number of sinners. 90
Foresight of good and evil is not the cause of punishment, or reward of
either. 95 Heathens f^lsly ascribed to Fortune, what is true of God. 139 To
forgive sin, the greatest work of Gods power. 140 God able to forgive
sins. ibid. In the forgiving of sins, many particulars to be considered.
183 God forgiu^th all sins, or no sin. 184 God cannot forget to be
merciful. ibid.
Fo^giuen^sse of sins our chiefest comfort. 224 That we ought to forgive one
another. 236 And to fo^get all injuries. ibid. Our fo^e fathers how they
exceeded us in devotion. 731 To be in the form of God, is to be very G ^. 280
To lay a good foundation, the best way to teach. 392
Fortitude of the women seeking Christ. 521 Christ in heaven forgets not his
servants on earth. 629
Four points handled touching the power of God. 13^ Four sorts of men err
about the doctrine of Gods power 135 Four special graces bestowed upon the
elect. 204 Four kinds of redemption. 500 Four sorts of ascenders. 609
Fourfold end of Christ's ascension. 639 Four points considered about the
gifts of God. 640 Four signs of fullness. 665 Fourfold feales or signs
wherewith Saints are sealed. 669 Four sorts or receivers of the Sacraments.
680
FR.
Christ assumed all our humane frailties. 351 Friends of Christ how dearly he
loved them. 488 God expects not the like fruits from all men. 602 The Saints
are freed from all their enemies. 636 Christ freeth us from Satan to place us
in his own service. ibid. We are not freed from Satan, to do what we list. 637

FV.
Fury of the wicked restrained. 178 All men are full of somethings. 665

GA.
WHy Christ went to the garden of Gethsemane to be taken, and what befell him
there. 441 Gaufredus Clareuallensis what he said. 613
GI.
Gifts of God of two sorts. 192, and 641 He gives spiritual gifts to the
godly. ibid. And temporal gifts to the wicked. ibid.
Gifts of God are free gifts. 640 Diversely bestowed. 523 Every man should be
contented with the gifts God gives him. 523 Diversity of gifts among the
Apostles and Fathers. ibid.
Gifts requisite for Preachers. 641 Gifts to edify the Church, how given. 657
Special gifts of God, whereby the elect are saved, vnpossibly to be known. 646
Gifts of prayer the chiefest of all Gods graces. 730 Gifts of the Magi, what
they showed Christ to be. 413.
GE.
Generation of Christ twofold. 288. Gentiles were not altogether ignorant of
the word (...). 311 What they writ of this name of Christ. 312, 313
Gentiles how they might come to the knowledge of this word. 313, 3^4 Gentiles
expected the coming of the Messiah. 316, 412 Generality of Christ his
suffering. 483
GO.
God how said to be the Father of Spirits. 6 Go^ly men's sinning differ in
three things from the wicked. 35, 36 Godly life makes a happy death. 82 God
loves righteousness. 90 No respect of persons. 91 Most just. ibid. Judges
every man according to his desert. 92 How great and how mighty he is. 102 How
ineffable. 125 A most faithful performer of all his promises. 127 How he
guides and governs all things. 138 Of his own nature most intelligible. 120
To us incomprehensible. 120, 121 That there is but one God, proved many ways.
269, 270
God only to be prayed unto. 710 Christ no titular, but a true God by nature
proved. 278, 279, 280, etc. To deny the Godhead of Christ what a heinous
sin. 305
Godhead of Christ suffered not, but sustained the manhood to suffer. 438,
485 The godly how they do ascend. 614 Love of goodness should make us hate
sin. 66
Goodness of God to man, how incomprehensible. 101, 103 Good and godly men
ought to be cherished and promoted. 110 Goodness what it is. 196 Goodness of
things twofold. 197 God good to all things. 197 Perfectly, absolutely, and
universally good. 198 Nothing absolutely good but God. ibid.
Goodness of God twofold. 198 General goodness of God seen in two things.
198 All things made good in their kind. 199
Good for some use, yet not universally good ibid. Goodness of God withholdeth
the wicked from many sins, suspendeth our just deserved punishments. 200 How
it extends it self to all men. 201 Yet not alike good to all men. 202 Gods
special goodness seen in two things. 203 It preserves the Saints from
sinning. 204 From punishments. 205
Goodness of God most of all seen in our afflictions. 206 All our goodness
to be ascribed to God 208 To the glory of Christ. 264 We can do no good of
ourselves. 209 The boundless goodness of Gods providence. 257 Many
impressions of Gods goodness infixed in the creatures. 2^6 Best good we can
do unto our children, is to serve God. 251 Not to do good, a sin. 230 Gods
goodness, how abused by the wicked. 225 Ill-gotten- goods never thriueth. 253
No good in the Saints but what God works in them. 2741 Why goodness is
ascribed to the holy Ghost 273
Gospel bids and forbids many things which the Law does not. 12 Gospel
in the Law, and Law in the Gospel. 224
GL.
Glorification of a body, takes not away the essential properties of a body.
170 Glory of Christ should be chiefly aimed at by all Preachers. 266
GR.
Grace not ^raduced from the best parents. 8 Word gracious, what it signifies.
190 Three special things. ibid. God is gracious in all respects. 191
Graces especially bestowed upon the elect. 2^4 Grace of justification what it
is. 208 Grace of sanctification what it is. ibid. Grace of glorification what
it is. ibid. Graces of God denied unto the children for the fathers sins,
251. and why. 252. Graces of God not given in the like measure to all men. 602
We ought to examine what graces we have. 646 Chiefest graces of God, Faith,
Hope, Charity. 647
Graces of Christ to sanctify our souls, are twofold. 645 Grace of Christ
ought in all things to be extolled, and our selves extenuated. 265 Great sins
must have great repentance 23 Great men's sins, are great sins. 37 Great men
have no excuses for their sins. 38 Great men have no privilege to sin. 39
Their state very dangerous. 39. 40 How subject to dangers. 704 Father how
greater then Christ. 300
Great sins punished with great punishments. 92 Great men how they use to
deal with the poor. 235 What Christ grieved at in the garden. 540 541. etc.
Grief of Christ on the Cross* aggrauated by all circumstances 4^1 Growth of
sin how to be hindered. 108 A gradation in the love of God. 202

HA.
Habitual sins hardly repelled. 23 Harlots how they deceive men. 45
Haynousnesse of sin seen in three respects. 97 To hazard all in defense of
truth. 217

HE.
Heart to be carefully watched. 14. Hell pains how intolerable. 86 Heathens
how they extolled the power of God. 161 Hebrews often use the present tense,
for the future tense. 288 The head always chiefly opposed. 304 Christ borne in
the reign of Herod, and why. 404
Heretics how wicked to deny the Godhead of Christ 305 Herod what he did to
Christ. 473 Hell in the Article of our Creed, signifies not the grave. 582
Hell destroyed by Christ three ways. 583 That there be three heavens. 624 The
man Christ in the highest part of heaven. 623 And why. 626 Nothing so heavy as
sin. 631.
Hearing of Gods Word a special means to get grace. 677 Diverse sorts of
hearers. 678
Heresy of Nonatus. 112, 593 Of Pellagius. ibid. Of Arrius, and his objections
answered. 284, 285. etc. 293, etc. 299. etc.
Heresy of Apelles and Apolinaris. 343 Of the Anabaptists. 344 Of Samosatenus.
363 Of Eutychos. 367, 368 Of Cerinthus, and of Nestorius, concerning the person
of Christ, and their objections answered. 374
Heresies to be showed, and why. 392
HI.
Every one labors to hide his sins, 19 None can hide his sins from God.
19
HO.
No sinner excluded from hope of pardon. 224 Honorius his childishness. 267,
268 Word Homousius not first invented by the orthodox fathers. 29^ Justified as
it is used. ibid.
Holy Ghost, whether termed the word or not. 323 Our hope supported by the
meditation of Christ his passion, 426
Holy Ghost a true God proved. 659 Holy Ghost appeared in the likeness of five
special things. 660 And why. 661, etc.
Holy Ghost, how we may know whether we have it or not. 672 Christ, why he
went out of the house to be taken. 439
Hope what it is, and how it differs from faith. 649 Hope twofold. ibid.
Humane hope what it does, and divine hope what it does. 650 Every hope in God
makes not happy. 651 To want the Holy Ghost, is mark of a lost one. 674

HV.
Humanity of Christ only suffered. 438 Humanity of Christ not capable of
infinite excellencies. 146 Humane acts how said to be done by God, 165. 166
Humility of Christ. 349 Seen in the incarnation of Christ. 358

JA.
James most like unto Christ. 461
JD.
Idleness a furtherance to sin. 13 Idolatry a great master-sinne. 41 How
horrible it is. 238

IE.
Jews, why they believe not Jesus the Son of Mary to be the true Messiah.
561 Jehovah the essential and most proper name of God. 122, 123 It signifies
an eternal being. 123 In hebrew, contains nothing but consonants, in latin
nothing but vowels, and why. 125 Known to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. 126 Why
translated Lord. 130, 131 Christ true Jehovah. 278. etc.
Jesuits what they say to prove transubstantiation. 172 Jews rightly
understood Christ teaching himself to be equal to the father. 300 Reiection
of the Jews grieved Christ. 454
Jews how cunningly they sought to incense Pilat^ against Christ. 472
IG.
Ignorance twofold. 26, 355 Simple Ignorance does extenuate a sin. 27
Affected ignorance trebleth the sin. 28 Wilful ignorance what a fearful
sin. ibid. Christ was ignorant of some things, and how he may be said to be
ignorant of any thing 356
Ignorance of Gods power the cause of many heresies. 134, 135 How ignorant many
men are of the chiefest points of christianity. 395

IM.
Immortality how to be attained. 128 Impossible things for God to do, of two
sorts. 185 Impossible for God to make the things which are, not to have been.
167 Image of God could be repaired by none but by God. 321 We are apt to
imitate our Parents. 247 252 Wherein we ought to imitate God. 228 To imitate
Christ the safest way to walk. 360

IN.
How ineffable God is 125 Sins of infirmity what they are. 30 No man free
from them. ibid. Known by four special notes, 31 Infirmities of Christ prove
the manhood of Christ. 347 Our infirmities why Christ did undertake them 352
Infirmities of how many sorts. 352 Infirmities not sinful, twofold. 353 What
infirmities Christ took on him. ibid.
Incarnation of the Word why decreed for our salvation. 318 Incarnation of
Christ what benefit it brings. 359 The greatest argument of Gods love. 257
That we are not in God, as Christ is in God 298 Christ as man, for ever
inferior to his Father. 302 Condemnation of all infidels grieved Christ 454
Infamy described, and the miseries thereof showed. 68 Three things should
expel ingratitude from us 706 God looks into the intention of the heart. 54
Invocation for two things. 700
IO.
Josephus what he writ of Christ. 577 Johannes Alexandrinus what he did. 265
IR.
Sin called irremissible three ways. 227
IV.
Judas what benefits he received from Christ 458 Why chosen to be an Apostle.
459 Why made the Purse-bearer. ibid. Why he betrayed Christ. ibid. Why he gave
them a sign. 461 How sought to be reclaymed by Christ. 461, 462 What his
treason should teach us. 461 His arrogancy and iniquity how great. 461 Why he
kissed Christ. 461 That it is a just thing to punish sin. 90
Justice is often perverted with men. 91 God judges all men according to what
they have actually done. 95 Every one according to his desert. 92 God most
just, proved 91 God in the strictnes of his justice might inflict more
punishment upon the damned 187 Whatsoever he does, is just. 237
Justice of God taken diverse ways. 237 Justice of God requires a day of
judgment. 245 How it stands with God justice to punish the fathers sins upon
the children. 245
Justice and truth how they pleaded against man. 319 That we should as well
fear Gods justice, as hope for mercy. 244
Judgments of God must be threatened, when his mercies do not allure us. 696
Justification what it is. 208 Christ Justified by his enemies. 429

KI.
Kingdom of heaven could be given by none but by God. 321 Kisses, that there
be five kinds. 460 Kings and Magistrates to be prayed for, and why. 734
KN.
God knows best when to help us. 724
Knowledge most necessary for Preachers 642 Adams desire of knowledge brought
ignorance upon us all. 58 Sins of knowledge, most fearful inexcusable
sins. 29 And yet we do what we know to be fearful sins. 29 The
excellency of our knowledge makes our sins the more horrible. 30 All
knowledge of God extinguished by sin. 64 Three ways of knowing God. 120 We are
not able to know him as he is in himself. 120
Knowledge of Gods power, the foundation of our faith. 134 We know many things
negatiuely, as, what God is not, which we know not positiuely. 176 We know what
God cannot do, though we know not what he can do. 176 To know Christ, the
only thing that makes us happy. 259 It suppresseth all vices. 261 The Gentiles
had a measure of the knowledge of God. 311 The devils know God, and the
mystery of the Trinity. 314
Knowledge of Christ, twofold. 356 Knowledge of Jesus Christ, the chiefest
knowledge in the world. 391 The devil chiefly labors to corrupt it. 391 We
know not what is good for our selves. 726

LA.
Labor undertaken upon hope of reward. 1 Labourer presently to have his p^ay.
ibid. Law of nature and of all nations teaches to punish sin. 90 Laws of
men like a spiders web. 91 Law of God like an iron net. ibid. Laws must be
made according to rules of men's ability to keep them. 210 Law in the Gospel.
224 That the law was not created. 286 To keep Gods laws made David wiser then
his teachers. 571
Law of God given to be kept, not to be talked of. 600 Languages and ready
speech requisite for preachers. 641
LE.
Letters how used by the ancient to signify diverse things. 473
LI.
God the very life of all things. 125
Life of Christ a continual suffering. 437 A good life what it effects. 601
Bad life what evil it does. 601 The wicked are lifted up to be thrown down.
612
Life of Christ a continual suffering. 437
LO.
Loaves of bread how multiplied by Christ. 174 God only absolute Lord. 131
Lord and Iehoua equivalent. ibid. Lord taken two ways. ibid. Men may be
called Lords. 131 Our Lord should be feared and served, for three special
reasons. 132 Christ most properly called Lord. 132
Logos what it signifies. 306 Why, used by the Evangelist. 310 The best known
name of Christ among the Jews. 311 God loves not the wicked. 189
Love of God, in giving Christ to be incarnate, how great it was. 303 To love
God is not to offend him. 305
Love of the Father seen in giving Christ to be incarnate. 357 Love of Christ
seen in his incarnation. 359 Our love to God increased by the meditation of
Christ his Passion. 424
Love of God to mankind moved him to give his Son to die for man. 498 How
great his love was to man. ibid.
Love of Christ to man, how unspeakable. 499 How dearly we ought to love
Christ. 508 To love one another, how we are bound unto it. 511 Want of love
the cause of all mischief in the world. 511 We ought to love all men. ibid.
Love of money what it does. 565 Love showed four ways. 693 That there is a
gradation in the love of God. 684 Man lost a twofold good. 321

LV.
Untamed lusts what an odious sin. 240 Saint Lukes words, he shall be called
the Son of God, how understood. 248
Lutherans what they teach concerning the union of the two natures of Christ.
377 Lutheran doctrine what absurdities it brings forth. 377
MA.
MAn following his vocation is the safer from Satan. 13 Man received power to
beget man like himself. 7 Manner how every sin is committed fourefold. 26
Sins of malice have two violent properties. 32
Malice of Satan restrained. 178 Man, what a poor and a miserable thing. 104
Manhood described, and the miseries thereof. 70 Manner how the Father begets
the Son, or the Holy Ghost proceeds, is ineffable. 227 Manner of divine
mysteries not curiously to be searched into. ibid No man truly rich 281
Malice of Heretics seen in denying the Godhead of Christ. 305 Not to marry
with wicked sinners. 109 Mankind produced three ways before Christ his time.
333
Manner how Christ was conceived. 335 It is ineffable. 336 Christ made a
perfect man. 340
Marcion his heresy. 343 Macedonius his heresy. ibid. Manichaeus his heresy.
ibid. Manhood of Christ seen by the sufferings of Christ. 343 Word made flesh,
why the Evangelist says. 369 How one thing may be made another thing three
ways. 37^
Manhood of Christ how adored. 383 Mary rightly called (...) the mother of God.
385 Mary of what Tribe she was. 397. 398 Matthew and Michoa, how reconciled,
touching the place of Christ his birth. 407 Magi what they believed Christ to
be. 4^3 Man, of al creatures most subject to sufferings. 434 Malice of Satan,
Christ prayed against. 456 Malchus how he used Christ. 467 Masters that are
ill, make ill servants. 467 Malice of the Jews against Christ. 495 517 Manner
of Christ's suffering incomprehensible. 5^2 Mary Magdalen a sinful woman. 529
How she lived after her conversion. 533
Mary Magdalens, how many there were. 568 Why not suffered to touch Christ. 568
Magistrates in what sense to be feared. 538 Manhood of Christ, how said to be
every where. 5^4 Martyrs how constantly they professed Christ 577 Manna had
twelve wonders in it. 703
ME.
Memory what an excellent faculty it is. 60 Wherein it excels all other
faculties. ibid. God recommendeth all his benefits unto it. ibid. How defiled
by sin. 61 How faithful to record vain and vile things. ibid. How
faithless to retain good things. 61 What we should always remember. 62
Meditation of our death what it does. 82 Mediators two sorts. 296 Mediator
betwixt God and man, to be like God and like man. 320 Christ a perfect
mediator. 341 Theesame measure of effectual grace, must work the same effect
in all men. 209 Our meaning is accepted, where means are wanting. 232
Meditation of Christ's Passion what it effects. 421. 422, etc. Most
acceptable unto Christ. 421 Expels sin. 423 Kindles our love to God. 424
Supporteth our hope. 426 The same measure of grace not given to all men. 602
Means to bring us to our end, decreed as well as our end. 654 The Apostles
received not the same measure of grace. 667 The same measure of fruits God
expects not from all men. 668
Melchisedech who he was. 330 No inhabitant of Canaan. 330. 331 That he was
Jesus Christ the Son of God, in the shape of man proved. 331, etc.
Memnons heresy. 343 Merit of Christ's suffering how to be considered. 502 All
men of note under the old Testament, types of Christ. 258 To hope for mercy
and to neglect Gods service vain presumption. 717.
Mercy and peace how they pleaded for man 319 Mercy in God what it
signifies. 180 Mercy of God how it sought Adam, and many more when they
sinned. 180, etc. Mercy of God magnified. 182 It consists chiefly in three
things. 182 It is everlasting two ways. 184 The best stay to rely upon. 185
How it qualifieth punishments. 186 Found in all places, and in all creatures 188
Mercy of God twofold. 188 How God is only merciful to them that love him.
ibid. It proceeds naturally from God. 195 How it pleads for sinners. ibid.
How largely it extends it self. 223
Mercies of God innumerable and imme^surable. 223 Lasting for ever and ever.
ibid.
Mercy of God teaches us to be affrayd to sin. 225 God more merciful then
we are sinful. 226 We ought to imitate God in the works of mercy. 228
Mercy how scarce among men. ibid. Works of mercy of two sorts. 232
Motives to persuade us to be merciful. 223 Mercy makes us like to God. ibid.
Scarce amongst us. ibid. That it is no mercy to spare wicked men. 235
Messiah expected by the Gentiles. 316
MI.
Able ministers what a great gift. 643 We ought to pray for our ministers. 737
Ministers subject to the greatest miseries. 74 The manifold miseries of all
Ages. 68 Of infancy 68. Of childhood. 68. 69. Of youth 69. Of manhood 70. Of
old age 70 71 The miseries of al estates. 71. Of the poor. 72. Of the rich 72.
Of mean men 73. Of the nobility, ibid. Of the common people, ibid. Of the
Magistrates, ibid. Of the Ministers. 74 How Christ suffered all miseries. 260

MO.
Christ how mocked upon the Cross. 481
MV.
How Christ multiplied the loaves of bread. 174 To murmr against God, what a
heinous sin. 139
MY.
Mystery of clothing Christ in white, explained. 473 Mystery of the Trinity,
why not fully revealed at first. 272 Mysteries of faith how far past the
reach of a natural man. 59
NA.
NAture is wholly defiled. 4 Nature can never procure the gifts of grace. 64
Nature teaches us to punish sin. 90 Nature notable to show the reason how
the world should be made. 138 The nature of all things good. 197
Nature relieueth the part most distressed. 451 To the nature of God what
things are repugnant. 152 Two natures in our Savior Christ. 363 Confirmed.
365. 366. By nature we are alike indifferent to all sins. 204 Abstract names
of all excellencies most proper unto God. 122. 294 Jehoua the essential name
of God. 123
Name of God taken two ways. 296 All names of dignity in the old Testament
types of Christ. 258 Christ came from Nathan, and not from Solomon. 398

NE.
Negative precepts. 365. 230 Nec^ssitie threefold. 491 How it was necessary
for Christ to suffer. 493
Nestorius his heresy. 374 Wherein he affirmed the union of the two natures of
Christ to subsist. 375 His heresy confuted. 376 How he was deceived about the
person of Christ. 619

NI.
Christ borne in the night time, and why. 406
NO.
Nominall relation of the three Persons of the Trinity makes a true
distinction of the persons. 278 Nouatus his heresy 112 Why he thought sins
of recidiuation should not be pardoned. 593

OB.
MAny observations about the manner of his crucifying. 489 Obstinate sinners
how hardly reclaimed. 463 Obedience of Christ seen in the incarnation of
Christ. 358 Objections of the Arrians against the eternal Godhead of Christ
answered. 284. etc.
OF.
We offend God for trifles. 105 Officers not to be made, but of the best and
godliest men. 109 Office of the Word to declare the mind of God. 312 What we
should offer unto Christ. 415

OL.
Old age described, and the miseries thereof. 71
ON.
One sin brings death. 3^
OM.
Omnisciencie cannot be communicated to any creature, 156
OP.
Oppressing the poor what a fearful sin. 240 To oppose the known truth what
a horrible sin. 240 The evil that oppresses man is twofold. 321

OR.
Original corruption how traduced. 4 Hard to be expressed 5
Order observed by God in all things. 324
PA.
HOw painful to walk in the ways to hell. 100 Christ made passible, the
first degree of his passion. 438
Patience and mercy of God showed by two passages of Scripture. 196 Patience
necessary to retain the truth. 218 No sinner excluded from hope of pardon. 224
Good Parents leave the best patrimony unto their children. 224 Christ the
perfect pattern of all virtue. 260 Meditation of Christ's passion what it
effects. 421, 422. etc. Cause of passions two fold. 443
Passions of man how they invade him, will he, nill he, but not Christ. 444
Passions of man how they blind and distract him, but not Christ. 445 Our
Parents never to be forgotten. 488 All the particulars of Christ his passions
impossible to be expressed.
Patience in suffering, more respected of God then our suffering. 520 Patience
what an excellent gift. 655 Patience twofold. 655 Christ set us down a
perfect pattern of prayer. 718

PE.
Chiefest perfection of man consists in the will of man. 53 Perplexities of
the wicked at their death-time. 80 A most earnest persuasion to forsake sin.
87 God a faithful performer of all his promises. 227, and 358 Each person of
the Trinity a true Iehoua. 123, 124 Three persons in the one essence of God 272
The three persons of the Trinity distinguished two ways 274
Person of Christ, how always abused by Satan and all heretics. 304 What is
true of the person of Christ, is not always true being restrained to the body
of Christ. 344 Christ conceived a perfect man in the first moment of his
conception. 337 Christ was in all respects a perfect man 340
Peter's infirmities manifold. 467 Why suffered to fall. 468 How restored by
Christ. ibid.
Persecutors of Christ how plagued. 558 Petition of the thief on the cross
how soon granted. 487 People how they desired the death of Christ. 495 Person
of Christ how excellent he was. 502 The women how peaceably they came to the
grave. 522
Peace, the badge of Gods children. ibid. Person of Christ still one, and most
simple. 618, 619 Men easier won by persuasion then by compulsion. 694
People to what naturally inclined. 698 Peace what an excellent thing it is.
701
PH.
Philosophers saw and confessed the blindness and ignorance of men. 59
Philosophers wonderful diligent to seek out all knowledge. 315 Philip King of
Macedon what he required of the Athenians. 644 Phrases of being able and not
able how understood. 158 Phrases true of us not true in the same sense of
Christ. 364
PI.
Pilates wife how she justified Christ. 475 Pilate how in censed against
Christ. 472 How cruelly he handles him. 475 How urged by a threefold argument
to crucify him. 476, 477 Why he condemned him. 478 Sinners chiefly to be
pitied. 232
Pilate what he writ to Tiberius of Christ his resurrection. 577
PL.
Place where Christ was borne, Bethelem, and why. 407 A placable man is
gracious. 190 Mercy how it pleads for sinners. 195
Plato and his followers what they thought of the word Christ. 313 Fittest
place to pray, is the Church. 711
Place whence Christ raised himself, both in respect of his body and soul.
550, etc. Place from whence and into which Christ ascended. 623, 691, etc.
Place whence and into which we must ascend. 630
PO.
Poverty an intolerable burden. 72 Knowledge of Gods power the foundation of
our faith. 134 How needful it is. 135
Power and authority not the same. 143 Power twofold. 143 Passive power what
it is. ibid. Active power of God what it is, and how manifold. ibid. Atheists
deny the power of God. 136 Denied by Philosophers. 136
Power of God proved. 137 By the creation of the world, 137 By the government
of the world. 138 By Scripture. 159 By the works of God. ibid How it appeared
at all times. 160 How extolled by the Fathers. 161 By the Heathens. 161 Confessed
by the devils. 162
Power why ascribed to the Father. 273 Power of God chiefly seen in forgiving
sins. 140 Power of every creature is a received power, and limited. 144 Power
of God considered two ways. 144 The proper power of each person. 145 The
common power of God. ibid.
Power of God so proper to God, that it cannot be communicated to any creature.
145 Power of God absolute in three respects. 147 Ordinary power of God guided
by the decree and will of God. 148 Gods absolute power proved. 149 How far it
extends. 151 Diversely answered. 152, etc.
Power of God a great comfort to the godly. 177 Preserves the Saints from
sin. 178 It should terrify the wicked. 179
Power of serving God not taken away from us by God. 210 Perfect Power most
requisite for Preachers. 643 Our posterity perpetuated by our serving of God.
399

PR.
Prayer of Christ on the Cross, how effectual. 487 What Christ prayed
against. 456, 457
Prayers made unto Christ. 283 Prayer of two kinds. 700 Prayer in respect of
the form manifold. 707 That we should pray to none but God. 707 Every where.
711
Prayer twofold. 714 We should always pray in heart. 715 How we ought to
pray, in humility, in faith, 718, etc. When we pray, we should cleanse our
selves from all sin. 721
Prayer an ess^ntiall part of Gods worship 722 The chiefest part of Gods
service. 729 How available for men. 723 To obtain whatsoever we ask, more
then we ask, better then we ask. 723, 725, etc. How powerful it is 727 This
only prevails with God, and appeaseth his wrath. 728 The chiefest of all
Gods gifts and graces. 703 We ought to pray in prosperity as well as in
adversity. 732 We ought to pray for all men. 733 That we should practice what
we know to be good. 600
Practice only proves us christians. 601 Preachers charge how great it is.
739 Their state how dangerous. 740
Preachers why hated of all men. 435 Preachers, three sorts of them. 697 How
wickedly many of them do live. 220 And how zealously many of them do live
220, 221
Predictions concerning the Messiah, all accomplished in Christ. 512 Presence
of the Angels should preserve us from sin. 603 No personal presence of
Christ to be expected before the day of judgment. 547 God can preserve his
servants in the midst of the wicked. 658
Prerogatives of the blessed Virgin, in bearing Christ. 336 Preservation from
plagues not to be ascribed to chance. 206 Preservation from sin, from God.
204 Pride how it spoileth many one. 614 How every house is full of it. 358
Priests to be made of the best men. 109 High- Priests did what they could to
hinder the resurrection of Christ. 563 Every Priest should be perfect in all
parts. 341
Priests either the best or the worst men. 460 Price of our ransom, is the
blood of Christ. 501 Providence of God how admirable. 408, 409 Providence of
God disposes all things. 138, 139 Gods promises should never be doubted. 130
Gods promise touching the incarnation of the word. 257 To be proud of
goodness, the worst pride in the world. 614
Providence to foresee things, what an excellent gift. 653 The boundless
goodness of Gods providence. 257
Providence of God, providing aforehand to preserve us from heretics. 350
Properties cannot pass their own subjects. 157 Properties of each nature of
Christ, how indifferently predicated of the whole person of Christ. 384
Properties of the manhood, how ascribed to the God head; So properties of the
Godhead, how ascribed to the manhood. 385 and 386
PV.
Public sins are doubly sins. 21 Public sinners are publicly to
testify their repentance 65 Publicly to be punished. 37
Public prayers how dangerous to neglect it. 7^7 They should never be missed.
716 To punish sin a most just thing. 89 God punishes only sins done. 97.
and no man for the sins he never did, 95
Punishment should be answerable to the offense. 107 Punishment of sin should
make us to forsake sin. 66 Christ undertook the punishment of all others.
448 Punishment, how qualified by Gods mercies. 186 Punishment of the damned
qualified by Gods mercies. 187 Once inflicted, never mitigated. ibid. How slow
God is to punish sin. 194 Act of punishment least agreeable to Gods nature.
195 God is compelled to punish. 195 Our punishment often suspended by the
goodness of God. 200 God will punish sinners. 244 Wicked men shall be punished
in their children, 245 How this punishment may stand with Gods justice. ibid.
Punishment either corporal or spiritual. 249 Godly often punished in the
corporal punishment of the wicked. 250 Humane laws do often pun sh the
children for the parents faults. 250
Punishment spiritual and eternal differ. ibid. The punishment of Christ was
imposed on him by God, and why. 496 All men not fit for all purposes. 602
Judas, why made purse-bearer. 359 Not the purity of the Virgin, but the
working of the holy Ghost caused Christ to be conceived without sin. 339

QV.
The quality of sin according to the quality of the offender. 37 Curious
questions not to be discussed. 627
RA.
RAge of the Jews against the dead corpse of Christ. 482 Christ only raised
himself from the dead 552

RE.
Regenerate men have a double being. 6 Repentance the best means to revive our
dying souls. 51, 52 Repentance kills sin. 82 God no respecter of persons.
91 God easy to be reconciled. 191 Men cannot repent when they will. 242 Christ
would not reveal himself unto the world all at once. 259 Certain
resemblances of the Trinity seen in the creatures. 273 Christ, how he
reconcileth us to himself. 297 How the word God resembles our outward and
inward word. 308 God revealed many things concerning himself to the Gentiles.
313 The Devils revealed many things concerning God to the Gentiles, and why.
313, 315 Christ would not reveal his servants shame 466
Reiection of the Jews grieved Christ. 454 Regeneration not needful unto
Christ. 364 To receive the outward Sacraments, and not the grace of the
Sacraments, is nothing worth. 681 Heretics receive neither Christ nor the
Sacraments of Christ. 682 Worthy receivers of the Sacraments receive Christ,
and all his graces. 682 We may receive Christ without the Sacraments. 680
Request of the thief, how soon granted. 487 What small things God requires
of us. 99 To rely on God in afflictions, how safe. 489
Redemption fourfold. 500 To redeem us, how dearly it cost. 50 Our
redemption paraleleth our creation. 557
Resurrection of Christ showed by the Angel 543 Resurrection of Christ
manifests the conquest of Satan, deliverance of men, and Christ to have
overcome all his enemies. 551 Resurrection of Christ the third day foreshewed.
553 How ascribed to each person of the Trinity. ibid.
Resurrection of Christ the third day, confirms our faith in four respects.
556 Certainty of Christ's Resurrection, showed in his rising the third day. 557
Resurrection of Christ the third day, is a pattern of our condition. 544
Resurrection of Christ sought to be hindered by the high Priests. 563
Resurrection of Christ believed of us for three respects 566 Proved many ways.
567, etc.
Resurrection of Christ, a pattern to teach us how to rise from sin. 587 A
cause of great joy. 598 An assurance of our resurrection to eternal life. 598
Resurrection of Christians twofold. 586 Relapsing or often falling into the
same sins, how dangerous. 549
RI.
Riches have destroyed many men, and what evil they do. 73 Riches or poverty,
whether best. ibid. No man truly Rich. ^81 Christ truly rich. ibid. God loves
righteousness. 90 The more righteous we be, the more subject to be afflicted.
434 Christ to rise again for three reasons 550 Typical Testimonies that
Christ should rise the third day. 554 Christ himself showed that he should
rise the third day. ibid. To rise from the dead, greater then to descend from
the Cross. 562 We should rise truly from sin, and from all sins. 591, 592

To.
Rossensis his parable to Henery the eight, of the axe that came to the trees
for a handle. 589
SA.
SAcraments a most excellent means to beget grace. 679 They show all that the
Scriptures teach. ibid. Every sacrifice should be perfect. 341
Sacrilege, what a fearful sin. 241 Saints preserved from sin by the
power of God. 178 More glorious in adversity then prosperity 207 They always
prayed to Christ. 283
Saints at their death supported by God. 447 Solomon speaks of a twofold
generation of Christ. 288 His words, the Lord created me, how understood. 286
Salomons posterity for his sins, were finished in Iechonias. 399 Salvation,
how we ought to thirst after it. 488 Salvation by none but by Christ. 501 Rabbi
Samuel, what he says concerning Christ. 579
Sanctification, what it is. 208 Samosatenian heresy. 363 Satan, how said to
ascend. 910 He lifts up the wicked to destroy them. 612 His subtilty to
deceive the people. 644 He ought to be spied before he comes too near us 13 He
is the Father of sin. 14 He suggesteth sin diverse ways. 12 He labors to
conceal the light either of preaching or of applying Gods word. 18 How he
handles the wicked at the time of their death. 80 He cannot do what he would.
178 How he always labors to vilify the person of Christ. 304 His insolency
against Christ. 322 His envy against Christ, and why. 493, 494 Without
satisfaction no sin can be pardoned. 163

SC.
Holy Scripture wholly true. 215. 216 The best warrant for all Preachers. 606
Scourging of Christ how grievous it was. 475 Christ how scoffed upon the
Cross. 481

SE.
To search too far into Gods essence is not safe. 124 Seed of the parents,
the substance of the whole man. 340 Seed of the man whether it falls into the
substance of the child. 340 God seeking after us should make us to seek for
him. 181 God not to seen with any material eyes 117 We shall not see Gods
essence in heaven but in the face of Jesus Christ. 118 All men are ever seeking
something. 524 Godly men seek only for God. ^25 Many seek him amiss. 526
Many seek Christ amiss. ibid. How we ought to seek for Christ. 526 521, etc.
That we cannot seek for God, until God does seek for us. 529 Why the wicked
seek not God. 531
Sensitive faculty soon defiles the reasonable soul. 17 Christ not sent by
way of command. 301
Seneca what he said. 66 Sentence of Christ his condemnation. 478 Senate of
Rome loathe to derogate from the worth of Augustus. 504 To serve sin a most
grievous slavery. 22
Seruetus his heresy. 343 To serve God, the greatest good that we can do
unto our children. 253 It procures all blessings to us. 132 Not to serve God,
heapeth all plagues upon us. 133 We were redeemed and preserved that we might
serve him. 132 It is the only way to perpetuate our posterities. 399 Late
service God will hardly accept, and why. 587. 588 The seven words of Christ
upon the Cross. 486

SH.
Shameful handling of Christ how it grieved him. 450 Shame of sin cast off,
we are almost past hope of goodness. 20 Shedding of man's blood, what a heavy
sin. 240 Shepherds why first informed of the birth of Christ. 412
SI.
Sight of sin is no sin. 15 Sickness of the soul, how worse then the
sickness of the body. 63 A sign why given by Judas. 461
Signs how we may know whether we be ascended any thing toward heaven or
not. 632 Signs of a faithful teacher. 466 Similies expressing how the word
alone assumed our flesh. 327 A simile of Damascus and Theodorus, showing how
the two natures of Christ though united, do remain inconfused. 388
Sin is so ugly that at the first the sinner himself would feign conceal
it. 18 To be resisted at the first, 23 It blinds us, that we cannot perceive
it is ugliness. 42 At last it tormenteth the consciences of all sinners. 42 How
ugly and loathsome it is. 47 Every sin pays the same wages. 46
Sins the diseases of the soul. 63 It extinguished all knowledge of God. 64
Sin of man in many things more heinous then the sin of Satan. 106 The cause
of all our miseries. 111 What it is. 166 In every sin two things to be
considered. ibid.
Sin and death indissolubly linked together. 2 Sin the root of death.
ibid. How far it spread it self. 3
Sin original or actual. 3 Sin to have any thoughts of sin. 13 Actual
sin what it is. 10 Not a mere privation. ibid. An erring from Gods will. 11.
How it creeps secretly and insensibly, like a Serpent. 12, 18. How it
increases inwardly and outwardly. 12 Not resisted, how it will necessarily
increase more and more. 22
Sin is inwardly increased three ways. 12 Sin some way voluntary, or no
sin. 15 Sin outwardly increases four ways. 17 It is compared unto a
witch. 46 It brought on man a treble death. 49
Sin against the Holy Ghost, what it is. 227 Sin irremissible three ways.
ibid. No sin so great but God can forgive it. ibid.
Sins not traduced from the parents unto the children. 246 Our sins drew
Christ to be incarnate. 318
Sin expelled by the meditation of Christ his Passion. 422 Our sins
crucified Jesus Christ. 497
Sin brought fear into the world. 540 The more sinful we are, the more we
ought to fear. ibid.
Sin ought speedily to be forsaken for two reasons. 589 Sinners how they
condemn God to justify themselves. 24 Sinners all, excepting Christ. 2 No
sinner excluded from hope of pardon. 224 Three sisters of the destiny signify
God. 312

SL.
God how slow to revenge. 193, 194
SM.
Small things suffered, do grow great and do much hurt. 42 Small sins ought
to be resisted. 43 What a small matter it was that God commanded Adam. 98 What
a small matter it is that God requires of us. 99

SO.
Christ the Son of God, not as we are the Sons of God. 291 The Son why
made flesh rather then the Father or the Holy Ghost. 322 Sorrows and
sufferings of Christ, exceeded all other sorrows. 486 Sorrow is twofold. 354
Soul whether traduced from the parents. 4 Not created from the beginning. 6
Not created as God infuseth them. 6
Soul the seat of sin. 7 Soul immortal yet has a kind of death. 51
Souls diseases what they be. 63 That Christ had a true humane reasonable
soul. 348
Soul of Christ after it parted from the body descended into the place of the
damned. 582. 619. 620
SP.
God spares none for his greatness if they offend him. 40 He spares the
wicked for good men's sake. 187 We ought to spare no cost to get the truth. 217
To spare wicked men is not good. 222 That we should speak nothing but truth.
221 Examples of spiteful sinners. 33, 34 How fearful is their state. ibid.
Spiritual and eternal punishment how they differ. 250
ST.
Our state in Christ better then that which we lost in Adam. 361
Star of Christ spoken of by the Gentiles. 412 What time it appeared. 414
What effects it wrought in the Magi. 415 Christ why he stayed so long before
he came. 401 Why he would not stay any longer. 402 Judas why made steward. 459

SV.
Christ of the same substance with his Father. 292 Made of the substance of his
mother. 342 How subtly Satan deals with men to make them bold to sin, then
to despair. 41 Christ suffered all miseries. 260 Who most subject to
sufferings. 435 Christ suffered both in soul and body. 437 His first degree of
suffering was to be made passible. 438 Consideration of Christ his sufferings
most admirable. 439 The sufferings of Christ before his Judges. 465 The
grievous sufferings after he was condemned by the high Priest. 471 Sufferings
of Christ how alone sufficient to satisfy for all sins. 502 Sufferings of
the Saints how they do profit the Church. 503 Sufferings how they do comfort
and confirm all Christians. 504
Sufferings of Christ teach us how to suffer. 509 That we ought to suffer two
ways. 509 To suffer with Christ, and for Christ, how ready and willing we
ought to be. 510
Sufferings of Christ were voluntary. 491. 492 How general they were. 483 How
unspeakable, far more then are expressed by the Evangelists. 484 Sufferings
of Christ not imaginary, but true real sufferings. 484 God provides
sufficient for every man. 704
Suggestions unto sins are sins. 12 How they are to be avoided. 13 The
surest sign of salvation. 652 Why Christ became our surety. 497

SW.
Continual swearing, what a dangerous sin. 241
SY.
That we sympathize in the sufferings of our brethren. 510
TE.
Tears are special means to prevail with God. 52 Best way to teach is to
lay a good foundation. 392 A perfideous tempting of God, what a horrible sin.
239 The temporal things of this life to be prayed for. 703 The testimonies
that prove Christ to be the true Messiah. 411, 412, etc.
Testimon^e of the Apostles to be believed for two special reasons. 572 Text
of Solomon, Pro. 8.22. whether corrupted by the Arrians. 287
TH.
That we ought to be thankful unto God for all we have. 129 How we ought to be
thankful to God for giving the Word to be incarnate. 305 For the suffer^ngs of
Christ. 506 Thankfulness to be expressed by works. 507 Theator where the
Tragedy of Christ his Passion was acted, was Jerusalem, and why. 421 Third day,
why the appointed day of Christ his Resurrection. 555 The fittest day for
Christ to rise in respect of his person. 556 Christ rising the third day did
parallel our creation, and left a pattern of our condition. 558 What we ought
to thirst after. 488
Thomas, whether he was with the Eleue^, when Christ appeared to them the first
time. 573 Thoughts that are wicked, bring forth wicked works. 14
Three persons in one essence of God. 272 Three things handled touching the
person of the son. 277 Three sisters of the destiny what they signify 312
Three wonderful things obseruable in making the Word flesh. 328 Three things
measure all durations. 400 Three things obseruable in the day of Christ his
nativity. 405 Three things that move attention. 420
Three things effected in us by the meditation of Christ his Passion. 422 Three
things move us to love any one. 425 Three things happened to Christ in
Gethsemane after his bloody swea^. 458 Threefold argument urged by the Jews to
move Pilate to crucify Christ. 476 That there is a threefold necessity. 491
The three women seeking Christ, signify three properties of the Church. 521
Three things required to make an action good. 524 Three things excellent in
the Angels. 535 Christ, how he remained three days in his grave. 559, 560
Three dreadful enemies of man. 582 Three things considered about our
spiritual ascension. 630 Three sorts of men excluded from the Paschall Lamb.
682 Three sorts of Preachers. 697 Three reasons to move us to thankfulness.
705 A threefold voice of the creature. ibid.
Three reasons to drive away ingratitude from us. 706 Three degrees of
thankfulness. 707 Three reasons to move us to pray for our Ministers. 737
TI.
No time misspent, that is spent to know the person of Christ. 305 Christ, how
made in time. 400 Of the time when Christ was borne. ibid. How time has his
fullness. 401 The particular time of the words incarnation. 402. Titillation,
and thoughts of sin, is sin. 14
TO.
Torments of Hell, how intolerable. 86 Not equal to all the damned. 93 Not
suffered by Christ. 581

TR.
That we do not traduce sins from our parents. 246 Transubstantiation has a
double contradiction 173 How full of absurdities. ibid. Defenders of
Transubstantiation how agreeable to the false prophets, whereof our Savior
bids us to beware. 548 What the Author thinks of Transubstantiation. 549
Treason of Judas, what it should teach us. 463 Mystery of the Trinity* why
not fully revealed at the first. 272 How darkly showed in the creatures. 273
Trismegistus, what he said of the word. 312 Moral truth, what it is. 312
Truth in us not as it is in God. ibid. Physical truth, what it is. ibid. God
is truth two ways. 213 All truths, how they do proceed* 213
Truth of things, of understanding of words. 213, 214 Divine truth measures
all things. 214 Expressed truth is twofold. 215
Truth, how excellent it is. ibid. How like the light. 215 How it expels
errors. ibid. Shows what every thing is. ibid. How it begets us to God. 216
God true in himself, in his works, and in his words. 216 The primarie
expressed truth, contained in the holy Scriptures. 215
Truth to be sought whatsoever it cost. 217 To be defended with the loss of
all that we have. 217 How always handled on earth. ibid. How at last it will
prevail. 218 How every truth proceeds from God. 222 How God loves it. ibid.
How it should be always spoken. 222, 231 How hardly found in these days. 222,
231
Truth makes us like to God. 231 Truth and justice, how they pleaded against
man. 319
TV.
To turn from sin, turns away all the wrath of God. 195
TW.
Twelve apparitions of Christ after his resurrection. 565 Twelve wonders in the
Manna of the Israelites 703 Two things further the sins of the parents to
continue in the children. 246 Twofold will in Christ. 296 Two sorts of
Mediators. 296 Two reasons showing why Christ was made flesh. 320 Two things to
be done for man before he could be saved. 321 Two things to be considered
touching the conception of Christ. 333 Two signs of a true Teacher. 466 Two
reasons moved Pilate to condemn Christ. 478 That there is a two fold hope. 649
Two kinds of prayer. 700
TY.
Giving of Canaan to the Israelites, a type of giving heaven to us. 127 The
three women seeking Christ, a type of the Church. 519, 520 Typical testimonies
that Christ should rise the third day. 554 To live under the tyranny of sin,
how lamentable it is. 635

VA.
VAnities of the world, how soon they pass away. 129 Christ despised all
vanities. 260
Vainglory, how it tainteth many of the Clergy. 525 Valentinus his heresy.
343
VB.
Vbiquity cannot be communicated to any creature. 156 Vbiquitie of Christ his
body, overthrown by the assertion of the Angel. 543 Objections of the
Vbiquitaries answered. 168, 388

VE.
Venial sins, or the least sins bring death. 41 Virtue is of an admirable
beauty. 47 Christ a pattern of all virtue. 260

VJ.
Victory of Christ over Hell, Death, Sin, and Satan. 634 Villainies of Satan
to be showed, and why 392 Villainies done to Christ, not paralelled since the
world began. 474 Vinegar, how given to Christ to drink. 482 Christ why borne
of a Virgin. 334 The blessed Virgin still continued a Virgin to her death. 336
Visitation of God twofold. 243 To visit, what it signifies. 243 God
visits the afflicted. ibid. God visits the wicked 244

UN.
Understanding of Adam in Paradise, how excellent. 57, 58. Our Understanding
now, how darkened through sin. 58 How quick and sharp in natural things.
59 How blockish in all Divine mysteries. ibid. Our understanding of God very
small. 121
Union of Christ his natures expressed by a simily of Justin Martyr. 371 Wherein
the Nestorian heretics avouched the same to consist. 375 Wherein the
Lutherans affirmed it to consist. 377 Wherein it does truly consist. 378
Union of the two natures, inconuertible, indivisible, etc. 379 Union of things
three ways made. 380 Union of Christ his natures substantial. 381 Ineffable.
ibid. What benefits it brings. 282, 283, etc. We must be united to Christ if
we will ascend to Heaven. 627
Unity of brethren. 689 Want of unity amongst us. 691
Unrepentant sinners shall never be absolved. 242
VO.
Voice of the creature threefold. 705
WA.
Weight of sin feared by Christ. 545 Christ how he walked upon the waters. 388
War how lawful. 702 All wants supplied by Christ. 262
Way to Heaven, how said to be hard. 98 And how easy. 99 Three ways of
knowing God. 120 Three ways of expressing what God is.
Ways of wickedness, how hard and difficult. 99 121 Best way to teach is to lay
a good foundation. 392
Way to save man could never have been found but only by the wisdom of God.
393
WE.
Wealth, what discommoditie it bringerh. 524
WH.
White clothing of Christ, what it signified. 473 White, an argument of
innocence. 478
WI.
Wicked men delight in committing sin. 36 They are greedy to do it. ibid.
And they have their full content when they have done it. ibid. How they should
be afraid to offend Gods power. 179 They have no part in the special mercy of
God. 188
Wicked men not loved of God. 189 They are with held from many sins by the
goodness of God. 200 To give unto the wicked power to serve God, God is no
ways to do it. 210 The wickedness of professors of the truth, ought no ways
to disparage the truth of God. 219, 220 The wicked how they abuse Gods
goodness. 22^ How punished in their children. 245 That they shall be punished.
244 Not every sin of the wicked is visited upon their children. 247 The
wicked how they do deceive themselves. 517 How it happens that they seek not
God. 5^1 How they are terrified and punished by the Angels. 536 How they are
said to ascend. 6^0 How still captives unto Satan. 635
Wife of Pilate, how she justified Christ. 475 Will of God revealed in our
consciences, and in the scriptures. 11 Wilful sinners. 33 How fearful is
their state? ibid. They can plead no excuse. ibid. The will commands all the
faculties of the soul. 53
Will to sin, deserves the punishment of sin. 55 Our will cannot be
compelled by Satan, nor by any other outward enemy. 55, 57 Our own will is
the cause of all our woe. 55 How our will to do good, is quite killed by
sin. 56 It is drawn to sin by our own corruption. 57 How it is guided by
the judgment. 57 How we may be said to have free will. 57 To will to sin,
ever is a temporary act. 97 God cannot will things contrary to his nature.
153 To will a thing, we may be said two ways. 167 In what sense God wills
sin. 167
Will of Christ two fold. 296, 301 To do the will of God, will sooner bring us
to know God, then to hear his word 571
Wings wherewith we fly to heaven, what they be. 631 Wine how deceitful it is
45 Why wisdom is ascribed to the Son. 273 By the wisdom whereof Solomon
speaks, Prou. 8, 22. what is meant. 285 How hard for the wisdom of God to
please foolish man. 3^0 Christ how said to be with God. 297 Not as we are said
to be with God, ibid. To be with God, and in God, how the same. 298
Witnesses of the birth of the Messiah. 411
WOE.
Woe trebled to the inhabitants of the earth. 46 Christ why borne of a Woman.
334
Women, why three went together unto the Sepulcher. 519 Why they were all three
called by the same name. ibid. They were a type of the Church, and of every
christian soul. 520 How sorrowful they were. ibid. How distinguished and
known one from the other. 521 How they signify three properties of the
Church. ^ 521 How fearelesse they were in seeking Christ. 521 How they labored
to increase the numbers of believers. 522 How peaceably they came to the grave.
522 Many women were made instruments of great goodness. 532
Word of God divided into two parts. 12 That the word was, before he was made
flesh. 278 The word GOD, no accidental, but an essential word. 285 The word,
how he may be said to be created and begotten. 289
Words of David, this day have J begotten thee, how understood. 290 Words of
the Apostle, he is the first borne of every creature, how understood. 290 Words
of Saint Luke, be shall be called the Son of God, how understood. 248 Words
of Solomon, the Lord created me, how understood. 286 Words of Christ, my Father
is greater then I, how understood. 300 Words of Christ, I came not to do mine
own will, how understood. 301 Words of Saint Paul, then the Son shall be
subject to the Father, how understood. 301 Words of Christ, I came from above,
how understood. 344, 345 Words of the Apostle, God sent his son in the
similitude of sinful flesh, how understood. 346 Words of our Creed, he
descended into hell, how understood. 580, 581, etc. The seven gracious words
that Christ spoke upon the Cross. 486 Christ called the Word, because he
declares his father unto us. 322 How God can express himself with one word.
307 Why Christ is termed the word. ibid. How the word GOD resembles our
outward word. 308 How it resembles our inward word. ibid. How it differs
from our word. 309 Whether it be a name of Christ his person or h^^ office. 310
Why Saint John uses the Word, (...), the word 310 The word why made flesh.
317, 318 Why the Word, rather then the Father, or the Holy Ghost. 322 The word
only assumed our flesh. 326 How said to be made flesh. 368, etc. All the world
without Christ, will avail us nothing. 263 Philosophers strive to prove the
world to be eternal. 136
World made by God, proved. 137 World divided into his several ages. 402 To
fly the world, the next way to find Christ. 571
Works of our vocation to be followed. 13 Outward works of God, common to
each person of the Godhead. 145, 274 They are transient and voluntary. ibid.
Inward works of God are euerin doing. 275 They are necessary and
incommunicable, i. e. proper to each person. 275
Work of the incarnation, how common to the three persons, and how proper to
Christ the Word. 326 God works one contrary out of another. 351
Works of Christ testify him to be the true Messiah. 417 Works of any man
testify what he is. ibid. Works requisite to express thankfulness. 507 God
works all the good that is in the Saints, and how God works our
willingness to do good. 530 Good works, what they be. 670 God works four
ways, with means, without means, with weak means, contrary to means. 147
Works of God prove the power of God. 159 Our best works have need of mercy.
185
Works of mercy of two sorts. 232 Outward works of mercy chiefly six 232 God
works diverse ways. 237
Wormwood, wherefore good 527 Worth of the sufferings of Christ, how to be
considered. 502 Wounds of Christ, why reserved by him. 572
WR.
Wrath of God feared by Christ. 545 Wrath of God quite turned away by our
repentance. 195
YO.
YOuth described, and the miseries thereof showed. 69
ZE.
ZEno, what he said of the Word. 312
IEHOVAE LIBERATORI.

FJNJS.

