A RETECTION, OR DISCOVERY OF A FALSE DETECTION:

Containing a true defense of two books, entitled, Synopsis Papismi, and
Tetrastylon Papisticum, together with the author of them, against diverse
pretended untruths, contradictions, falsifications of authors, corruptions of
Scripture, objected against the said books in a certain Libell lately
published.

Wherein the unjust accusations of the Libeller, his sophistical cauils, and
uncharitable slanders are displayed.

JOB. 31. 35. Though mine adversary should write a book against me, would not
I take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown unto me? Augustine cont.
Petilian. lib. 3. 2. Non ago vt efficiar homini^ conuitiando superior, sed
errorem conuincendo salubrior: I go not about to be superior unto him in
railing, but sounder in refuting his error. AT LONDON Printed by FELIX
KYNGSTON, for Thomas Man. 1603.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SAint Paul both as a Prophet foreseeing the state of Christ's Church, and as an
Apostle teaching how we should behave our selves, says, There must be
heresies, that they, which are approved among you, may be known, 1. Cor. 11.
19. For though it be possible (...).
to find a country without wild beasts, as they do write of Creete: yet a
commonwealth without enemies, a religion without gain sayers, a Church without
heresies, is not to be found: Even Creta, which was freed from wild beasts,
was pestered (...).
with brutish beastly men, liers, evil beasts, slow bellies, Tit. 1. 12. The
Church of England likewise wants not privy whisperers and carpers at
religion, maligners of the present state, and professed enemies to all that
love the truth: which as heretofore has diversely appeared to be most true; so
the flames of this fire of malice privily kindled, have of late burs^ ^^orth
in a certain slanderous Libell or inuectiue, especially directed and intended
against two particular persons, one of excellent learning and singular
industry, Master D. Sutcliffe: the other, though not worthy to be joined with
him in that quarrel, a well willer likewise of religion, and to his utmost
power a defender of the same. These two need not take it to be a disgrace, that
they are singled out, and made marks to shoot at: but rather as Eudamidas
said concerning the Thebanes, whom Alexander only excepted, proclaiming
liberty to depart to the rest of the Grecians: This decree though it seem
hard, yet is glorious to (...).
you, because Alexander only fears you: which though it cannot be said alike
of both these defenders, yet as it appears, the one is feared of them; so the
other has no cause to fear them.

The Libeller having first discharged upon that learned writer before named,
does renew his second battle against the other, laying siege to two of his
fortresses, I mean his two books, Synopsis Papismi, and Tetrastylon: in which
enterprise he promises himself a notable victory, not remembering that
saying: Let not him that girdeth his harness, boast himself, as he that
puts it off, 1. King. 20. 11. Augustine says, Facile est, vt quisque
Augustinum vincat, videris vtrum veritate, an clamore: It is an easy matter to
overcome Augustine, but see it be not rather with crying and outfacing, then in
truth, epist. 174. So may we say to this boasting and bragging Thraso: I doubt
not but his imagined victory will fall out to be such, as Pyrrhus was against
the Romans: If we overcome but (...).
once more ( says he) we are undone. It had been much better, in mine
opinion, if the Libeller had harkened to S. Paul, to have avoided oppositions
of science falsely so called, 1. Tim. 6. verse. 20. that is, not to have opposed
himself and his small skill and false knowledge against the truth. But this
their opposition redoundeth much to the benefit of the Church of Christ: first,
by this means they discover the nakedness of their cause, that cannot be
maintained but by railing, and slanders: as Hierome says: Istae machinae
haereticorum, vt conuicti de perfidia ad maledicta Apol. 3. aduers. Ruffin.
se conferant: These are the engines of heretics, that being convicted of
their faithless doctrine, turn themselves to railing. So that one (...).
reading their mad writings and furious style, may say of them as Diogenes to a
phrantike and witless young man: Thy father was drunk when he begat thee. But,
as the saying is, Like lips, (...).
like lettice, like religion, such writing, like authors, like books: Like to
Demonides slippers, which were evil favored, yet fit for his lame feet.

Secondly, by these barking fits and hollow echoes, I trust others will be
awakened from their sleep, and bend themselves to defend the truth by them
defaced, and maintain religion by them diminished, and hereby be put in
remembrance 2. Tim. 1. 6.
to stir up the gift of God, which is in them. For ( as the Apostle says)
God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power and of love, and of a
sound mind; that they may say with Hierome: Breuiter respondeo, nunquam me
Dialog. 1. aduers. Pelagian.
haereticis pepercisse, sed omni egisse studio, vt hosts ecclesiae mei quoque
hosts fierent: I answer briefly, that I never spared heretics, but did wholly
study, that the enemies of the Church should also become mine enemies.
Onomademus gave counsel, in a certain sedition and commotion in Chius, that
all the enemies (...).
should not be expelled, least we should then begin to fall out with our
friends, says he. Nasica, when Carthage was destroyed, used to say, that the
Roman state was dangerous, because now they had none left, whom they needed
to fear. And Antigonus, when he heard that Zeno the (...).
Philosopher was dead, said, That the theater of his exploits was taken away.
In like manner, if Religion had no foreign enemies, we should have cause more to
fear domestical contention: and if superstition found no patrones to favor
it, the truth would have fewer friends to uphold it: the opposition therefore
of gainsayers does make the defense of the truth more glorious: and the
diligence of the adversary to offend, should make us more ready to defend the
truth: and as the Oracle answered the Cirrheans, to fight night and (...).
day in the maintenance of the truth. Like as, when a fire is kindled in a
city, it is not fit that the standers by should look on and do nothing, but
every one in that case ought to set to his helping hand to quench the flames:
so should we seek to put out those sparks of superstition, which begin to be
blown from the coals of Popery and false religion. And in this respect, that
law of Solon is not much to be misliked: who decreed (...).
him to be infamous, that in the commotion of the city, would join to neither
part. So neither is he to be commended, that in this dissension of religion,
stands as indifferent and a Neuter.

Thirdly, a peculiar benefit may arise to the party impugned and traduced, to
profit by the admonition of his adversary: for as it were no shame for him,
wherein he has slipped, to confess an error, if he found himself guilty: as
Augustine disdained not to retract diverse things in his works: and Hierome
says, Imitati estis errantem, imitamini correctum: Ye have imitated me, while
I erred, imitate me also now being corrected, Hieron. Ocean. Hippocrates that
learned Physician did acknowledge his error about the sutures or seames of the
head, and committed the same to writing, least others might by his example be
deceived: So this further use one may Plutarch. lib. de* pr^fect. virtut. sent.
make of an enemies reprehension, thereby to become more cautelous, and to
walk more circumspectly: as the Prophet David says, I will keep my mouth
bridled, while ye wicked is in my sight, Psalm. 39. 1. Ambrose says, Laqueus
aduersarij In Psalm. 91.
sermo noster; loquimur plerumque, quod excipiat inimicus, and quasi nostro
gladio nos vulnerat: Our speech is the adversaries snare; we often utter that,
which the enemy catches at, and so wounds us with our own weapon.
Antisthenes used this saying, that he which (...).
desired to be sound, had need to have either loving friends, or angry
enemies: for the one would instruct, the other correct him. For though one be
not guilty of that, which the enemy reproves, yet he may be more wary not
to commit that, which offends. As Chrysippus answered one that told him that
he was evil spoken of by some: But I will so lead my life, that no man shall
give credite-vnto them. In like manner Philip was wont to say, that he was
beholding to his backbiters, for they made him better. And so this carping of
the adversary (...).
will minister occasion of greater circumspection.

But now to come a little nearer, to take a general view of this Libellers
proceedings: I do note four gross ouersights by him committed: I find his
affection to be malicious; his matter frivolous; his manner of handling
scandalous; his objections to himself contumelious, being guilty of the same
crimes, wherewith he vpbraideth others.

First, if he had espied any such faults in his brother, charity would that he
should have been first by private writing or conference admonished to amend
them, not at the first by public libelling to seek to defame him. This is our
Saviors rule, Matthew. 18. 15. If thy brother trespass against thee, go and
tell him his fault between him and thee alone, etc. Upon which words Origin
says: Non vult continuo te euolare in publicum, etc. He will not have thee
straight to fly out into public censure, etc. Ruffinus says well to Hierome:
Si ebrietas mihialiqua obrepens sicut patriarchae nudau^rat turpitudinem, lcui
palliolo rescripti tui co^texisses opprobrium, and velasset epistola
vigilantis, quem stilus nudauerat dormitantis: If some oversight, as of the
Patriarch, had uncovered my nakedness, you should have hidden my shame with the
cloak of your private writing, that your waking epistle might have covered
that, which the sleepic pen had unfolded. And Plato had good (...);
reason thus to say to Socrates, reproving sharply one of his friends in a
public feast: Had it not been better to have spoken these things privately?
And Socrates again to Plato: Might you not also much better have told me of
this privately?

Secondly, the whole discourse of this Libeller is superfluous and impertinent:
for what is this to the truth of religion, or what prejudice to the common
cause, if some few places should by some oversight be mistaken? For as
Augustine says: Sine his dici potest, quod volumus: Take them away, and yet we
are able to confirm, what we say, cont. Petilian. 3. 20. But it falls out
unto them, as the Apostle says: They would be Doctors of the law, not knowing
what they speak, nor whereof they affirm, 1. Timoth. 1. 7. So this challenger
takes upon him to be a great Rabbin in popish learning, and yet leaving the
discussing of matters of religion in question, brauleth about words and
syllables. Hierome says, Quis omissa causa in criminum obiectione versatus
est: Who leaving the cause would spend the time in obiecting of crimes? aut
quid refert si causa cadas, and crimine superes: Or what great matter is it, if
you fail in the cause, and prevail in crimes? Apolog. 3. aduers. Ruffin. And
what if this cauiller had his will upon the defender (which he is never like to
have) the cause of religion neither stands nor falls with him? I say unto
him, as Augustine did to his adversary: Noli attendere quomodo vincatur
Augustinus qualiscunque vnus homo, sed attend potius vtrum vinei poss^^
Homousion.
veritas: Do not mark how Augustine, howsoever but one man may be overcome,
but whether the truth may be overcome. And as Callicratides said to the
Southsayer, that foretold victory to the army, but death to the Captain:
That the Spartane affairs depended not upon (...).
one man. Neither does the defense of the truth rely upon any one man's credit.
But as Joseph said to Pharaoh, so may I in this case, Without me God shall
answer, Genesis 41. 16.

Now in the third place let us see the manner of his style: which is powdered (I
warrant you) with such saucy terms and popish Rhetorike, every page of the
Libell so garnished with railing, slaundering giving the lie, that he cannot be
deemed to have a religious heart, that so profanely and uncharitably handles
his tongue. S. Peter says, If any man speak, let him speak as the words of
God, 1. Pet. 4. 11. Now whether the Libeller do speak the words of God, it
shall even now appear in the rehearsing of some of his phrases: wherein as
Hierome complained of his adversaries: It a nomen meum frequenter assumitur,
carpitur, Ad Theoph. aduers. Joan. Hierosolym.
ac si de libro viuentium deletus essem: My poor name is so often abused and
carped at, as though I were rased out of the book of life. Phocion did compare
Leosthenes oration to the Cypres tree, that was fair and tall, but bare no
fruit: so his speech was eloquent and (...).
pleasing, yet not profitable. But this Roman Rhetor, neither brings good
speech nor good matter: yet were his sharpnes somewhat to be borne withal, if
he had any color or just cause so to do: as Hyperides the Rhetorician desired
the Athenians to consider not only if he were bitter, (...).
but if he were bitter unjustly without cause.

Now I will gather out some of his sweet flowers.
Fuller of lies then leaves. page 118. A lie also it is. page 123. He has here
belied us. page 124 Whether he be a lier or no, etc. page 126 Put in print an
abominable lie. 127 Palpable lying. 129 Shameless lie. 131 He belieth him. 148
By lying and corruption. 150 He belieth him. 153 A notable lier. 159 A lie it
is. 169 A notorious lie. 133 He maliciously belieth us. 140 Notable lies. 141
Sum up his lies. 142 A lier and a falsarie. 144 Shameless lying and
falsification. 147 Notorius lie. 155 A lie and a knocker. 156 Lies and mad
tricks. 161 Hunt all his lies. 170
As the Libell is pestered with lies, belying, lier, so has it great store of
other like stuff of bitter reuiling and railing.
Mere malice. 124 A proper tale as to set the devil to sale. 132 Filthy
Doctor, shameless mate. 133 Runnagate Roger. 138
So he blasphemeth Roger Holland Martyr.
Shameless untruth. 159 Spruse Minister. 171 A gives the same answer that
Baal did to his suppliant servants. 187 As Balaam deceived Balaak. 187
Perfidiously perverted. 213 Maliciously abused. 215 Malicious dealing. 220
Maliciously suppressed. 220 Cunningly and maliciously. 223 Maliciously abuses.
231 Unmask malicious dealing. 234 Wear Proclus heretical liuerie. 238 If he
had not cast off all care of conscience, and shaken hands with death, he would
never so maliciously have corrupted S. Augustine. 239 Maiming them most
disgraciously wickedly perverted. 240 Detest and forsake so malicious a
Minister. 245 Without al conscience by shameful shifts. 253 Malice and wilful
falsification. 258 If any should deny him the honor of a notable falsarie. 246
Shamefully corrupted S. Augustine. 247 A cunnicatching trick and in plain
English a lie. 251 Most absurdlie and maliciously corrupted, etc. 256
Maliciously added. 278
Will not any man now think, that this fellow has well profited in Zoilus
Rhetorike? but such is the manner of popish writers: railing and cursing is one
of their common weapons. They show themselves not to fight of Michaels side,
that durst not give railing sentence against the devil, Iud. 9. nor yet to be
of Paul's spirit, that when he called Ananias painted wall, excused it by his
ignorance, Act. 23. 5. But this has always been the guise of heretics and
other adversaries to the truth, with evil and slanderous words to assail
the professors thereof. Thus did the Pelagians call Augustine, Cultorem
daemonum, A worshipper of devils, cont. Julian. 3. 18* Petilian the Donatist
objected against him sin against the holy Ghost, libr. 3. cap. 62. He said
further, that he had damnabile ingenium Carneadis, the damnable wit of
Carneades, lib. 3. 20. Thus Celsus behaved himself against Origin: whose words
we may well use in this case against our adversaries: Si grauiter and modestius
haec tractaret plus forsitan suasionis sunt habitura, etc. If he handled these
things gravely and modestly, he might persuade more: but seeing now he
scoffingly and scurrilously utters many things, dicturi sumus eum elegantium
verborum inopia, vt quae nec nactus esset, nec ^^^^et in tanta^ incidisse
garrulitatem: we may say, that for want of good words, which he was unskillful
of, he has fallen into such a vain of brabling. Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 6.
It is said that the Trojans (...).
went to war with great noise and outcries, the Grecians in silence: But how
sped they? the stilnes of the Grecians prevailed against the Trojans outcries.
Neither must these bragging fellows think to carry all away with great
words. They are like to the prattling Pie, that chattereth upon every occasion:
or rather to the Vultures and Kites, that follow the smell of (...).
stinking carrions, but have no sense and delight in wholesome flesh. So is this
Libeller ready to take the least occasion to speak evil, and seems to
sport himself with great delight in filthy and unclean words: That like as
Melanthius said of Diogenes tragedy, that he could not see it, because the
strange words did hinder the sight thereof: So his uncouth terms, and
unseemly speeches, as a stinking mist and gloomie cloud do cover and hide
his slender stuff.

Augustine would not give the lie to Pascentius the Arrian, though he were
worthily detected thereof, but thus says unto him: If you say those things,
which are reported, not to be so done, either your memory fails you; Non
audeo enim dicere te mentiri; aut ^go and fallor and mentior: For I dare not
say you lie, or else I am both deceived and do lie, epist. 174. But nothing is
more common in the Libellers mouth, then you lie, you belie him, a notable
lier, a shameless lie: who herein represents unto us another Stoical
Antipater, who writing and railing against Carneades, was called (...), one
that rored or raued with his pen: or like unto Salmoneus, that counterfeited
Iuppiters thunder: as Hierome says, Tu alter nobis Salmoneus omnia per quae
incedis illustras, tu flammeus, immo fulmineus, qui in Apolog. 3. aduers.
Ruffin.
loquendo fulminas, etc. You are another Salmoneus, which fire all the way
where you go, flashing out lightning, and spitting forth fire in your speech.
But like as men use to alay the heat of wine, with cool water; and so, as
Plato says, Deum insanum alio sobrio castigare, To correct a furious spirit
with a tame and sober spirit: (...).
So I trust to qualify this railers furious heat, with a true and modest
defense: and not as Heraclitus diseased with the dropsy, desired the Physician
to turn the abundance of showers into drought; but to alay his intemperate
heat and drought with the pleasant dew of the truth.

I am not purposed to answer him in his own vain: for the Scripture teaches
us, that we should recompense no man evil for evil, Romans 12. 17. Augustine
says to Petilian the Donatist: Si ego tibi vellem maledicta pro maledictis
rependere, quid aliud, quam duo maledici essemus, vt ij, qui nos legerent, alij
detestatos abijcerent sana grauitate, alij suauiter haurirent maleuola
voluntate: If I would render euillwords for evil, what else should we be, but
two railers, that they which read us, should either of a grave judgment
reject us, or else of a corrupt fancy affect us? It is a sufficient defense
against a false accuser not to be guilty. (...).
The heathen Philosopher could say, To be without fault is not the least
comfort: Crantor. That saying also of Diogenes is much celebrated, who being
asked how he might be revenged (...).
of his enemy: If thou thy self ( says he) become a good and an honest man.

Fourthly, it remains to be showed how the Libeller justly incurreth the same
offense, which untruly he obiecteth to others: as first he is guilty of many
untruths: as that none of them read obtulit, he offered, for protulit, he
brought forth, Genes. 14. page 123. that no author can be cited, that says
the fathers of the Inquisition Diverse apparent untruths uttered by the Libeller.
cannot err, page 117. that women are allowed by the Communion book to be
ministers of the Sacrament, Libel. p. 129. which is untrue: for neither is the
baptizing by women collected out of the book, neither yet is it practiced,
that I know, in our Church: as a most reverend Prelate has avouched in these
words: For common practice I can say little, but for mine own experience this
I dare affirm, that I have not known one child so baptized in places, where
I have had to do, no not since the beginning of her Majesty's reign, etc. And
in the same place: I think if the circumstances of the book be well
considered, it will appear that the meaning is, that private baptism is
rather to be ministered by some Minister (which in time of necessity may
soonest be come by) then by any woman: Defense of the answer to the admon.
page 794. This grave testimony, omitted in the answer, I thought good here to
insert, which is sufficient to deliver us from the untruth objected, and to
rebound it upon the accusers head. See the answer more at large to the 7.
Slander.

Besides, a great untruth it is, which he utters, page 164. contradict. 5.
that Luther confesses, he was stirred up by ye devil against the Mass: for
in the places which he quoteth in the margin, libr. de Miss. angular. tom. 6.
fol. 28. tom. 7. Wittemberg. fol. 443. no such thing is to be found, in the
edition printed at Wittemberg anno 1558. neither has Luther any such title, de
Miss. angular. in the 6. tome.

The matter which the Libeller aims at, by other men's reading (as it seems)
rather then his own, is in Luthers book, de Miss. private. A slander of
Luther, that he should confess he was stirred up of the devil, to write
against the Mass.
tom. 7. where Luther indeed reports, in the beginning of that treatise, how
the devil tempted him in the night, and set before him his hypocrisy, in the
celebrating of private Masses, contrary to the institution of Christ, and that
therein he committed most gross idolatry, in worshipping bread and wine in
steed of the body and blood of Christ. And whereas it might be said unto him,
that the devil is a lier, he answers: Ipse sic adoritur: The devil so
sets upon a man, that first he apprehends some solid truth, that cannot
be denied, and so does turn and toss it, and does cast such goodly show upon
a lie, that he may deceive the most circumspect: as that thought, that stroke
Judas heart, was true, I have betrayed innocent blood: But this was a lie:
Ergo, you must despair of the mercy of God.

So Luther says, The devil lies not, when he urges a man's sin: Confessus
quidem sum, etc. I confessed being overcome by the law of God, before the
devil, that I had sinned, and was damned as Judas: sed verto me ad Christum
cum Petro: but I turn my self unto Christ with Peter.

This is the sum of the whole narration, there set down by Luther of this
temptation.

Any man may now see the cauilling spirits of Papists: Luther only reports
how Satan displayed his hypocrisy and idolatry, while he was a Mass priest,
not to stir him up against the Mass, but to bring him into despair; but
that God delivered him with Peter.

They may say as well that when Satan sifted Peter, and set before him his
sin, which drew such bitter tears from Peter, that Satan moved him to
repentance: or that when Paul felt the prick of his flesh, the messenger of
Satan sent to buffet him, whereupon he betook him to prayer, that Satan also
stirred the Apostle to prayer. So then Luthers conversion and opposition
against the Mass was a sequel, but no effect of Satan's temptation: the
devil intended his confusion, God thereby wrought his conversion.

The like cavil against Luther is uttered by Bellarmine, and vented again by
the Libeller, page 167. that Luther thinks that if the devil himself should
minister the Sacraments, that they might be fruitful and effectual: whereas
Luther says not if the devil himself, that is in his own person, as the
devil: but these are his words, ego pono, but I set down this, Demiss.
private. tom. 7. p. fol. 243 p. 2.
that if I should afterward know, the devil irrepsisse, to have crept into the
office of a pastor of the church, and in the shape of a man to be called to
preach and baptize, etc. that the Sacraments therefore are not without
efficacy. Thus they curtall and mangle his words, and alter his meaning at
their pleasure.

Untrue also it is, that the Apocalypse has no more ancient authority, then
the Council of Carthage, p. 130. That Leo confirmed not, that the blood
issuing out of a certain Crucifixe, was the blood of Christ, page 131. That
Gregory 7. was not a sorcerer and adulterer. page 159. That it is a fabulous
tale of the taking up of diverse thousands heads of children in Gregory's mote,
page 160. That father Fox is belied, whereas he is truly alleged contradict.
5. page 166. That it is a lie, that Nectarius abrogated private confession,
contradict. 6. page 169. That the ancient fathers are called heretics,
contradict. 8. p. 177. That we should hold, that adultery, murder, idolatry,
in the regenerate are no sins, contrad. 11. page 202. These apparent untruths
the Libeller utters, as more at large may be seen in the several answers:
and therefore he is worthy of Esops reward, who being asked what liers gained:
That they, when they speak the truth, (...).
(says he) be not believed.

Secondly, this Libeller is not free from contradictions: he affirms, that
Saul was elected, and yet damned, page 191. contrary to the opinion of
Contradictions.
the most learned of his side, who though they hold that a man cannot be
certain of his election, yet dare not, neither do affirm, that election
before God may be lost: nay Bellarmine writes the contrary, that the elect,
per infallibilia media, by infallible means, are directed to eternal* life:
lib. 2. de great. cap. 9.

Likewise he seems to affirm, that Martyrs are not to be inuocated in the
sacrifice of the body of Christ, falsific. 10. page 251. contrary to the
common practice of the Popish Church, which in the canon of the Mass prays
to be defended by the merits and prayers of the Saints: see the answer.

Thirdly, the Libeller himself is full of falsifications: Falsifications.
as page 209. contradict. 13. lin. 24. according to his doctrine of original
and eternal sanctification: where not the eternal sanctification, but
external rather and ecclesiastical of the faithfuls children is spoken of.
page 244. falsific. 9. he himself leaves out diverse material words in
Augustine, as is noted in the answer. He does the like, page 247. falsific.
10. as is declared also in the defense, page 226. falsific. 5. in alleging a
canon of the Council of Colen, in these words, to hear Mass, he adds
Mass, of his own. Page 268. corrup. 7. he misreporteth the words inferring
thus: He makes S. Paul to affirm absolutely that faith works by love. See
the correction of that corruption.

Fourthly, he is found to be a corrupter of scripture: as page 123. untruth 1.
the scripture says it was Samuel, whereas the scripture says only, Saul knew
it was Samuel. Page 141. untruth 11. he reads, Saul an elect and good man, 1.
Samuel 9. 2. for, Saul was a goodly young man and fair.

Thus it is evident how the Libellers eyes were blinded, and hoodwinked with
selfeloue toward himself, and hatred toward others, that while he prieth to
find faults abroad, he forgets his own at home. He should have remembered
our Saviors words to the Jews, Ioh. 8. Si quis vestrum peccatum non habet
mittat primum lapidem: He that of you is without fault, cast the first stone at
her. He should have taken the beam out of his own eye, before he had assaied
to pull a moate out of his brothers. It falls out now to him, as Ruffinus
says: Quasi siquis furti alium incusans, id ipsum vnde alium arguit in sinu
suo contegat furtum: As if a man should accuse another of theft, and hide a
stolen thing in his own bosom: Inuectiu. in Hieron. Plato, when he saw any
uncomely thing to be done by others, would thus say to himself apart, Whether
I my self were not such an (...).
one. Thus this carper of others, should first have examined himself: whereas
now the reproach, which he would fasten upon others, of untruths, contradiction,
falsification, corruption, is cast upon himself. Like as Melanthius said to
Gorgias the Orator, persuading concord to the Grecians: This man (says he)
counsels us to (...).
peace, being not able to persuade himself, his wife, and maid three private
persons to have peace at home. And so this detector of others, is detected
himself, of untruths, falsifications, corruptions, and that not once or twice,
but often: whereas in writing, as in warring, as Lamachus (...).
said to a soldier craving pardon of his offense, It is not lawful in war
to offend twice.

THE ANSWER TO THE LIBELLERS
Introduction.
ITremaineth now, that in few words an answer be made to the preamble to the
Libell, which consists of two parts: the extenuation of the defender, and the
challenge of the detector.

For the first: 1. Though the defender take not upon him to be a principal
dealer in controversies, nor to be a professed challenger, as the Libeller
boldly aduentureth: but does confess with Augustine: Absit vt mihi apud
catholicos Cont. Julian. libr. 6. c. 4.
arrogem, quod tibi (apud pontificios) arrogare non pudet: vnus sum e multis
qui profanas vestras nouitates vt possumus refutamus, etc. Far be it from me,
to arrogate that to my self among Catholics, which you are not ashamed to
challenge (among Papists) I am one amongst many that do refute, as we may,
your profane novelties, as God has given to every of us the measure of faith.

2. Yet he makes no doubt to encounter with this chalenger, and is assured he
is able to defend, whatsoever by him can be impugned: neither does he show
himself such a terrible hackster, but that a Protestant pygmie, as he
scornefully calls him, at any time dare grapple with this Popish pusio: who
every where bewrays his ignorance: being neither seen in histories; for then
he would not have denied, that Leo 3. approved the blood at Mantua to be the
blood of Christ, page 131. reported by Platina: nor yet have called that a
fable, of the childrens heads found in Gregory's mote, p. 160. which is
mentioned in the Epistle of Huldericus Bishop of Augusta to Pope Nicholas:
neither would he have made doubt of that which is alleged out of Master Fox,
concerning Luthers opinion of penance, page 166. As the Libeller is ignorant in
histories, so neither does he seem to be conversant in the Fathers: for then
he would not have doubted of Augustines opinion concerning remission of sins
had in John's baptism, p. 183. or of Origens concerning Limbus Patrum, page 185.

And as he is neither historian, nor read in the Fathers, so he seems to be
no very good Grammarian: every where writing Tetrastilon, for Tetrastylon, and
in one place Apocalipse, for Apocalypse, page 130. lin. 14. and here, where he
would seem to be most eloquent, he writes pigmie for pygmie, page 118. lin.
20. Like as another bragger one Tannerus a Jesuit in a disputation held at
Ratisbone, this year 1602. for (...), four times ignorantly cried out,
thrusting out his throat (...). The Libeller shows himself a right pygmie
indeed, and a silly champion, more worthy to be derided of Grammar boys,
for his pygmies skill, then Leo Bizantius that little Orator for his pygmies
(...).
stature. And as meet to be served, as the schoolmaster to whom Alcibiades
gave a blow upon the ear, because he said, Nihil se habere Homericum: (...).
That he had no skill in Homer: as it seems he has not in Greek.

3. As for ravening wolves in sheep clothing, and your fardle of fables:
your selves are the men, that are best known by this cognizance: such as the
Apostle describes: that make a show of godliness, and deny the power thereof,
etc. which creep into houses, and lead captive simple women laden with sin,
2. Tim. 3. 6. which follow profane and old wives fables, which the Apostle
would have Theophil. Hieronym.
cast away, 1. Timoth. 4. 7. Such as Theophilus writes of to Hierome: Vtinam
apud vos deponerent hypocrisin, qui occulte dicuntur subruere veritatem: I
would they amongst you would leave their hypocrisy, that secretly are said to
subvert the verity. And Origin speaks of such: Multi sunt, qui nomen Christi
habent, Hom. 3. in Leuitic.
sed veritatem non habent Christi: There are many which have the name of
Christ, but the truth of Christ they have not. True it is, that when you speak
of hypocrisy, and following of fables, you speak of your own: as Chrysippus
said of one that railed upon him: Thou have done well, leaving out nothing,
that is within (...).
thy self. And this which the Libeller has objected to us but in word, shall
be verified upon him in deed: As a cunning artificer said to the (...).
Athenians, when another bragging workman had promised much: That which this
man has said, I will perform.

4. Concerning your counterfeit spirit, with the white sheet, and flashing
firebox: I fear me that in you the evil spirit does more then counterfeit,
using your tongue and pen indeed, as an instrument of lying and slaundering:
For he is a lier and the father thereof, John 8. 44. Apolog. 3. aduers. Ruffin.
And as Hierome says: Peccare est hominis, insidias tendere diaboli: It is of
man to sin, but to lay wait, is of the devil. And it is your own tongue
that is the flashing firebox: as the Wiseman says, He that faineth himself
mad, casts firebrands, arrows and mortal things, Prou. 26. 18. You as
Hierome says: Flammas ore conceptas tenere non potes, vt Apolog. 3. aduers.
Ruffin.
ille Barrhacabas author seditionis Iudaicae stipulam ore accensam anhelitu
ventilabat, vt flammas euomere putaretur: You cannot keep in your fiery
flaming words: like to Barrhacabas the author of the Jewish sedition, which
kindled stubble set on fire with his mouth, that he might seem to cast out
flames. So you, as Augustine Lib. 1. cont. Julian.
says to Julian the Pelagian: Contumelias and maledica verba ardens iracundia
libris anhelasti: Burning with wrath, have breathed out contumelious and
railing words in your book. But your fire shall flash upon your own faces, as
the fiery furnace consumed those, that did heat it for the three children,
Dan. 3. 22. And like as sluggish dogs do rend the skin (...).
and bite the hair, but hurt not the beast: so though you snarle at the man
and snatch at his person, you hurt not the cause.

5. You will not examine all his cosoning tricks, etc. that were with Hercules
to cleanse Augeas stable.

It may seem strange, that you dare object cosoning* and cunnicatching
tricks, page 251. being so full of them your selves. Are you ignorant what
your Quodlibeter has discovered of the Jesuits exercise, which they use to
give to landed gentlemen, as how John Gerrard Jesuit gave the exercise to
Master Anthony Rouse, Master Thomas Euerard, Edward Walpole, 3. Quodlibet.
art. 10.
James Linacre with others, making them by force thereof to sell their lands,
and drawing from some 1000. pound, from some 1000. mark, from one 3500.
pounds, namely Henry Drurie, who became a lay brother, and was sent to Antwerp,
where he died. The like practice the said devout father used toward certain
young Gentlewomen, Elizabeth Sherley, Dorithie Rockwood with others, and the
Lady Mary Percie, whom he cosoned of their marriage portions, and made Nuns of
themselves. These are indeed co^oning and cunnicatching tricks: but that as
Hierome says: Ad caeteros talpae, ad me caprearum oculos po^^ides: You are as
blind as a mole toward others, but you cast not a sheep, but a goats eye upon
me. But as for Augeas stable, you are not Hercules to cleanse it, and if you
were, your Popes Decretals, Cleme^tines, Extrauagants, Legend of lies, and
other such dunghill and stable stuff would set you a work, you need not
seek elsewhere. In the mean time to requite your Augeas stable, I say with
Hierome against Iouinian: Lib. 1. aduers. Iouin.
De tenebrosis libris, quasi de foueis serpents protraham, neque sinam
venenosum caput, spiris maculosi corporis protegi: I will out of his books
pull out the serpents as out of their holes, nor suffer his venomous head to be
foulded within his speckled body. And as of three (...).
hundred images of Demetrius Phalereus, not one remained, but all while he
lived, were destroyed: so all these monuments of the Libellers folly, shall
quickly (I trust) in his sight be overthrown and cast down. And as
Demosthenes was wont to say of Phocion, when he began to (...).
speak: Now rises the hatchet or cutting knife of my sayings: such shall our
true defense be to his false detection.

Secondly, to answer in a word to his challenge of disputation and conference:
that the defender should hold his hands from pen and paper, and come to try
the quarrel in the presence of her Majesty's most honorable Council, with
that favor which the French Protestants obtained before the French King, etc.

1. I do not marvel, if the Libeller be loath to have his objections
examined by writing: for he fears least the light should discover his
iugling: as Demosthenes answered one suspected of theft, that found fault with
his night studies: (...).
I knew well it grieueth you, that I burn light. And as a certain unskillful
Painter having made an evil favored picture of a Cock, bid the boy drive
away the true Cocks, that (...).
his unskillfulness might not appear: So plays this bungler, he would have no
other writing set by his, that his bold ignorance be not descried.

2. As for trial of the quarrel before the honorable Lords, as I willingly
embrace the Libellers challenge, and am ready to take up his gantlet, if it
shall so seem good to their Honors: So in the mean time I send him this
Newyeeres gift: and say no more, then Archidamas to the Ele^ans: That it was
good for them to be quiet. And (...).
where he tells us, he will fall to it roundly pell mell, with push of pike,
that saying of Pau^amas will very well fit him, to a certain impotent man that
gave counsel for war: I would ye did strip your self naked, that we may see
what (...), etc.
manner of man gives this counsel to fight. So I could wish that this
champion would show himself, that we might see what a proper man he is to
maintain such a quarrel: which till it may be had I send him this posie of
Hieromes: Moueat manum, figat ^^^lum, eum ad libros prouoco, loquamur scriptis
vt de nobis tacitus lector iudicet cum ad libros venerit, and pedem pedi
co^tulerit, tune sudabit, tunc haerebit, etc. Ad Domnionem.
Let him put his hand to his pen, I provoke him to his book, let us confer
by writing, that the reader by himself may judge of us: when he comes to
write, and sets foot to foot, then he will sweat and stick fast, etc.

3. Because our adversaries do make great brags, and pretend a desire, that a
free disputation and conference may be had, I will briefly show, that they
intend nothing less, then to have the truth decided by a sober and
indifferent conference, but only to show their wrangling spirits and froward
nature, as may appear by experience already had of their attempts on that
behalf. First, in the disputation held at Westminster in the beginning of her
Majesty's reign, the popish disputers did behave themselves very frowardly: 1.
Where The perverse behavior of Popish disputers.
they were appointed to deliver their minds in writing, they contrariwise
appointed one to repeat their mind in speech. 2. When he had finished, they
were asked if they had any more to say, and they answered no: yet afterward
when the Protestants had propounded their writing, they said they had much more
to say. 3. Upon the second day, whereas they were appointed to confer of the
second question, the popish Bishops stood upon it, that they would first tender
their mind in the first question. 4. They alleged that they were commanded
to provide their writing in Latin, whereas never any other order was taken, but
that they should write in English. 5. Whereas they were appointed to begin,
they utterly refused, and so through their wilfulnes the disputation brake off.
See the report hereof penned by Master Fox. page 2119.

Of the like carriage were certain Jesuits, Hungerus, Gretserus, Tannerus,
that disputed at Ratisbone this last year 1602. with Hunnius, Helbronnerus,
with other Ministers of the Augustine confession: 1. They before they would
dispute, would have the Ministers to prove themselves to be of the Church, and
that they had the spirit of God. 2. They propounded a question impertinent
concerning Vbiquitie. 3. In their disputation Tannerus, with histrionicall
behavior, loud outcries, scurrilous scornings, and unseemely gibings, pudoris
claustra perrupit, became impudent, as the reporter writes. 4. When he could
not answer, he said nothing, but nego consequentiam, nego consequentiam, I
deny the consequence, I deny the consequence. 5. Plus centies clamatum,
respondeatur in forma: Above an hundred times they cried out, answer in form.
6. They refused to dispute in the Germane tongue. 7. When the Scriptures were
alleged, they answered nihil ad rem, nothing to the purpose: ex Egidio Hunnio.
Before this a conference was appointed at Worms, where because the Protestants
would have the Scripture to be the judge of controversies; the Colloquie was
broken off. In like manner the Colloquies at Aldenburge, Mompelgard, Baden, by
like occasions were without fruit: ibid. And here ( I think) I see the old
perverse Donatists come forth again upon the stage, who in like manner
behaved themselves in the Collatio^ with the Catholic Bishops. 1. Where it was
agreed that eighteen only of each side should come to the conference, the
Donatists would have all of their side admitted, which were all assembled to
the very aged men that could not come. 2. They allege, that the day prescribed
for the conference was past, and would have had the Catholics proceeded
against by default, where they were not faulty at all. 3. They required the
presence of Collat. 1. diei ex Augustine. breuicul. collation.
all the Catholics that had subscribed, least any might be rehearsed that were
not Bishops: whereas they had foisted in ones name, whom they (to make a
cleanly excuse) affirmed to be dead in the way. 4. Whereas the Catholics said
they had 120. Bishops more at home, the Donatists affirmed the same for
themselves, whereas they had said before, they were all come to the very aged
men. 5. They desire a respite of six days, which Collat. 2. diei.
was granted them. 6. They contend, quinam erant petitores collationis, which
of them were the first mouers and crauers of that collation. 7. The Donatists
strive for the name Catholic. 8. They object that the Catholics did defend
alienam causam, a cause not belonging to Collat. 3. diei.
them. 9. When the Catholics began to prosecute their matter, the Donatists
with noise interrupted them, and would not suffer them to proceed, and hardly
could the President of that disputation Marcellinus obtain their silence and
patience. 10. When as they were bid to sit, they wilfully refused, saying, It
is written, I will not sit in the assembly of the wicked. 11. When the
Critensian Council was alleged, they took exception against it that it had
consulem and diem, the Consul and the day, otherwise then ecclesiastical
decrees have, which was untrue, as the Catholics show both by the ancient
prophesies, that bare date of the year, and the Council of Melchiades. 12.
They take exception, that Lib. post. collation.
sentence was given against them in the night. And by these and such other
frivolous allegations, that Collation was made frustrate.

Now because he makes mention of the favor which the French Protestants
obtained with the King for a conference: I will briefly also show, what manner
of favor it was, and how indifferent the proceeding there used. First, the
Lord of Plessis desired, that whereas the Bishop of Eureux pretended diverse
authors to be corrupted in his book against the Mass, that his whole book
might be examined, which could not be granted. Secondly, whereas the Bishop had
taken exception to 500. places, Plessis required, that the rest might be held
as justifiable, which neither was yielded unto. Thirdly, that the Bishop should
propound those 500. places to the Lord Plessis, that he might make
satisfaction: but neither could this be obtained, page 8. Fourthly, the Bishop
would have Plessis proceeded against The conference between the B. of Eureux,
and the Lord of Plessis, before the French King.
for default of appearance, being uncalled and uncommanded, page 5. Fifthly, he
is denied his action of slander against the Bishop, if he could not prove the
500. places pretended to be corrupted. Sixthly, the issue is this, Plessis must
presently without further warning make satisfaction upon the opening of the
book, or else it should be examined in his absence, page 11. and so about two
of the clock in the night the Bishop sent him 60. places, to the which he
should make satisfaction the next day at eight of the clock. So these 500.
places were brought to 60. but only nine of them were discussed: in some of
them the judges suspended, in some they gave sentence with Plessis, in some
they were importuned by the Bishop to give their verdict: in the rest they
showed too much partiality in judging otherwise then there was cause. The
report of this conference is extant, translated out of French. Now all men may
see, that these popish challengers stand altogether upon advantages, and call
for a disputation, not because they are able to say more then their
forefathers, or can expect any better success, but to set a good face upon the
matter, that they should not seem to say nothing. A wrangler cannot want
words: and they care not, as Ambrose says, Vt intus in animo perdat, foris
victor abscedat: Though they lose a good conscience within, so they may get the
victory without. And such are their disputations, as Hierome says of the
Luciferians: Inconditam disputationem Aduers. Luciferian.
nox interrumpit, consputa pene inuicem facie recesserunt: The night brake off
their disordered disputation, and spitting one upon another face they
departed. Yet a sober and modest conference, without facing and brauing in
words, ^ailing speech, perverse and froward behavior we mislike not (but that
there is small hope to bring the adversary to it) such as Ambrose speaks of:
Collatio inter seruos Dei esse debet, In 2. Tim. ^. 2.
non altercatio: There should be a collation, not contention between the
servants of God.

4. It grieueth you, that I call the popish religion the owle-light of Rome,
which always has been taught (you say) in a visible Church. I think the
comparison is fit enough, seeing you refuse the light, as all evil doers hate
it, Ioh. 3. v. 20. and will not be tried by the Scriptures: as some of your
crew in a late colloquie, when it was alleged, that Scriptura est norma fidei,
The In colloquie Ratis^onae habit. anno 1602. ex Egid. Hunnio.
Scripture is the rule of faith, answered, Hoc esse fontem omnium haerese^n,
that this was the fountain of all heresy. Ambrose co^pareth heretics to the
Owl, Quae grandibus oculis tenebrarum caligines diligit, splendorem solis
horrescit: Which does with great eyes love darkness, Sermon. 43.
but abhor the Sun light. Your Church has indeed been visible, but to the
eyes of the world, as the darkness of the night is visible to Bats and Owls,
and as the Cimmerians see one another, though they have no Sun light, neither
believe that there is any. And though your number has been greater (though in
England it neither is, nor ever I trust shall be) we may say to (...).
you as Zeno of Theophrastus, that had more scholars: His queere is greater,
but mine sings sweeter.

Lastly, as for the yuie todde of his parish of Barley, take you the yuie todde
to your self, as the fittest bower for such a nightbird, that concealeth his
name and dare not show his face: and (...).
as the yuie does catch hold upon every occasion; so the least rub in your
way moves you to quarrel. But it troubles you, that pastor^ are resiant in
their parishes and charges to instruct their flocks and keep out the wolf:
which course if every Minister did take (as were much to be wished) such foxes
as you are would soon be chased out of their holes and dens, where ye
privily lurk. This is the cause why you envy parishes that benefit which
they reap by the presence of their pastors, whereby you want that
opportunity, which you desire, to seduce the people: for as Hierome says:
Statim vt oues suas recedere velle de proprio grege viderit, diabolus fremit,
irascitur, furit, perire sibi existimans, quicquid Christo seruatur: The devil
as soon as he sees, that his sheep will go from him, he fretteth, rages,
thinking it a loss to him that is gained to Christ.

I say no more at this time, but pray as the Apostle says, that God may give
you and the rest ( that are blinded) repentance, that ye may know the truth,
and come to amendment out of the snare of the devil. And I would have you
thus think, as Hierome says: Nostra Dialog. 3. aduers. Pelagian.
correptio viuificatio est, vt haeresi moriens viuas catholicae fidei: Our
correption is but a vivification or quickening, that dying unto heresy you may
live to the verity. And as Agesilaus (...).
sent this salutation to vain Menecrates: that he wished him a sound mind: the
like I wish unto you: from hence forth I would you did not put us to more
business to your own cost: least as Demades said to the Athenians, that they
(...).
never would decree or agree unto peace without black garments, when they
first had smarted for their rash adventures: so you be forced to hold your
peace with grief and shame. If reason will content you, you are answered: but
if you will brabble still, I can afford you a months work at any time, as I
have done now, though I desire to be occupied in more profitable studies: And
so I conclude with Hierome against Vigilantius: Si dormitantius in mea rursus
maledicta vigilauerit, nequaquam illi breui lucubratiuncula, sed tota nocte
vigilabo: If this drowsy writer shall watch again to rail and speak evil
of me, I will awake for him, not by short fits, but whole nights. Thus for this
time I take my leave of you (Christian and courteous reader) wishing you
heartily to farewell in the Lord.

Your hearty welwiller in the Lord, and servant to all that ser^e God, A. W.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE AND RIGHT NOBLE LORD, the Lord Dukes Grace of Lenox: A.
W. wishes increase of grace and virtue in this life, and everlasting salvation
in the next.
THe holy Evangelist S. Luke writing his Gospel to noble Theophilus, saluteth
him by the name of (...), that is, most worthy or excellent: and the same
Evangelist, doubts not to call the brethren of Beroea, (...), more noble Act.
17. 11.
and honorable, because they received the word with all cheerefulnes. Whereby
the Scripture teaches, that virtue and piety do bring forth true nobility:
divine grace being added to a noble race does make it more honorable: and true
Religion graft into a Princely generation, is more admirable. For whereas to
be highly descended of an ancient house, is but an humane privilege: as he
well says, Noble birth is excellent, but yet a gift from (...).
the parents. True piety does make us (as the Apostle says) that we be (...),
partakers of the divine nature, 2. Pet. 1. Plutar. de liber. educan.
verse. 4.

This your Grace, I know, and am well assured is not ignorant of, nor inexpert
in: and as your own nation does hold you a right Christian Peer, and both a
zealous professor, and a constant protector of the Gospel; so we trust, that
this Church and Country, to the which you are happily arrived, shall find
you. One said of Plato: Non accepit Seneca.
Platonem nobilem Philosophia, sed fecit: Philosophy received not Plato noble,
but rendered him: he was not noble when he entered, but noble after he had
profited in the study of Philosophy. But your Honor both the Church received
noble by natural propagation, at your first entrance; and by continuance shall
make you more noble by the fruits of your spiritual regeneration. Iphicrates,
when one Harmodius descended of the ancient and noble Harmodius, objected to
him the baseness of his birth, thus prudently answered: (...).
My nobility begins in me, and yours ends in you. But, your Honor (noble
Duke) as it began not with you, being derived from your honorable parents; so,
I trust it shall not die or end in you, being continued by virtue.

Now then, seeing God has exalted you to the honor of this life, advanced you
to the favor of your Prince, has given you both the privilege of nature in
your noble condition, and the praeeminence of grace in your Christian
profession; it must be your care to honor God, who has so highly honored
you: to be a faithful Steward (according to your honorable name) of your
greatness, that Religion by you may flourish and wax great, of your favor with
your Prince, to countenance the truth, and promote good causes. We heartily
pray, that you may be to his Majesty, as an Hur to hold up Moses Exodus 17.
hands, which we trust notwithstanding shall remain steadie without any prop,
and as a faithful Eliakim to be as a sure nail, upon the which we may safely
Isai. 22. 24.
hang (next under our Hezekiah) the vessels of the Church, the affairs of
Religion. God make you as a Jonathan to David, a friend to the faithful, as an
Ahikam Iere. 26. 24.
to Jeremy, a Patron of the Prophets, as a Gamaliel to the Apostles, a Act. 5.
mediator and advocate for the innocent.

Concerning my enterprise at this time: as I have already presented to his
Christian Majesty, a general treatise of all controversies of Religion
between us and the Papists, as a pledge of my service and duty, and
testimony of my joy: so unto your Grace as a principal helper under him, and
a pillar and Peer of the kingdom, I have been bold to offer this small book
(a defense of my former writings against the cauillous adversary) as a token
of my love, and signification of that hope, which we all conceive of you.

I will presume no further at this time to be troublesome: I hartelie wish unto
you the Prophets Agurs moderation, that you be neither too much lifted up Pro.
30. 8.
with prosperity, nor pressed down with adversity: like unto Phocion, that
(...).
noble Athenian, that was never seen either to laugh, or weep: not to rejoice
too much in worldly preferments, nor to grieve too much at crossing
discontentments: yea I say with S. Paul to Agrippa, God make you like that
worthy Apostle, (...), not only almost, Act. 26. 29.
but altogether, in the knowledge of Gods word, in faith and zeal: That as
Zachary prophecieth, Holiness shall Zach. 14. 20
be written upon the horse bridles: that your triumphs, your warfare, your
martial feats, may be consecrate unto God and savor of religion: that it may
be said of you as Ambrose writes of a religious Earl: Quantum imperatori
Ambros. sermon. 89.
in bello militat, tantum and in pace militat saluatori: He warreth in battle
for the Emperor, in peace for our Savior. And as he again says: Sub tectum
tuum iam sa^uator ingrediatur, etc. Let Christ now enter under your roof, into
your house, your family, your heart, that you may enter under Christ's roof
and kingdom in heaven: to whom be praise for ever.

Your Graces ready to be commanded in the Lord, ANDREW WILLET.

THE FIRST PART OF SVRMISED VNTRVTHS.
THe Libeller has thought good, to sort out his uncharitable slanders into
four ranks, of untruths, contradictions, falsifications, corruptions of
Scripture, and of every kind, he has produced thirteen places. Thus this
blind harper, or malicious carper, has set us forth an harsh song of four
parts, and every part to be played upon thirteen strings: but his false
descant shall soon appear, and his lying dittie be displayed. Emerepes one
of the Lacedemonian Ephori, of nine strings of the Musician Phrynides
instrument, did cut off two, thus saying unto him: Noli maleficium musicae
infer: That he (...).
should not corrupt or mar good music: but we will cut asunder all this
unskillful harpers strings, that he offer no longer disgrace, Non Musicae, sed
Theologiae, not to harmony, but to Theology.

This false Detector, after long study and great deliberation, has culled out
of the two books of SYNOPSIS and TETRASTYLON, thirteen places of each sort,
in all two and fifty: I marvel, that his Lynx eyes could spic out no more
faults, that in thirteen hundred pages, he has noted but thirteen supposed
contradictions, and of thirteen hundred allegations almost of Fathers, could
find but thirteen pretended falsifications, and of thirteen thousand places
of Scripture well nie, does but challenge, and that fal^ely, thirteen to be
corrupted.

This sharp Censurer, seems to have bin diverse years in hatching of this
Cockcatrice egg, that is now burst forth into a serpent: for he confesses
that he began to note his places, before he had view of the last book, p. 124.
he means the last edition of SYNOPSIS, which was Anno 1600. The other edition
which he follows, came forth Anno 1596. so that he may well be thought to
have spent four or five years in this profitable study, or so long it may be
esteemed, since first he had such purpose: it he had given his mind all this
while as carefully to have sought out the truth, as he has bent and opposed
himself against the truth, his eyes might have been open^d to see, and his
judgment reformed to confess the truth. But it falls out to him, as
Augustine says: De nature. and great. lib. 1. c. 25.
Procliuiores s^m^s quaerere potius, quid contra ea respondeamus, qua nostro
obijciuntur errori, quam intendere, quam sunt salubria, vt careamus errore: We
are more ready to seek what to answer to that which is objected against our
error, then to mark how wholesome it is, that we may be without error. But
notwithstanding his great endeavors, malicious cauils, proud bragges, the
truth will not be outfaced, nor the righteous cause suppressed: as the Psalmist
says, The Lord shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment as the Noone day, Psalm. 37. 6. Of these 52. pretended forgeries, he
shall not be able to justify one by true and sincere dealing: that it may be
said unto him, as Augustine in the like case: Ostendere hoc non potes, Cont.
Petilian. libr. 2. cap. 98.
non quia ingenium deest, sed quia bona causa: You are not able to show (that
you take in hand) not because you want wit, but a good cause. The libeller has
crafty wit enough to show malice, but he wants truth to justify his bad
cause. Now to the matter.

THE FIRST PART OF THE Libel of slanderous untruths.
The first Slander.
THe author of SYNOPSIS is challenged, for saying, that the Canonical
Scripture says not, that it was Samuel, which appeared to Saul, but that Saul
so imagined, and thought it to be Samuel: A manifest untruth (says the
Libeller.) For the Scripture says that it was Samuel, and not that Saul so
imagined. p. 123.

The Defense.
FIrst, if this be such an untruth, why does he not charge Augustine with it?
for he says it was pha^tasma, and imaginaria illusio diaboli, a fantasy, and
imaginary illusion of the devil, libr. ad Dulcit. qu. 6. and he says,
imaginem Samuelis, that the image of Samuel Samuel appeared not to Saul.
being dead, did foretell true things to Saul the King, lib. 2. de doctrine.
Christian. c. 23.

Secondly, Augustine does not only so affirm, but proves it could not be
Samuel: 1. because he was raised by witchcraft. 2. because it were contrary to
the Scripture, that says, God answered not Saul by Prophets. 3. he tells a
lie, in saying Saul should be with him: for there is great distance between
the righteous and the wicked in the next world. 4. because true Samuel would
not have suffered himself to be adored. See more of Augustines reasons,
Synops. page 353. The cauiller should have done well to have confuted
Augustines reasons.

Thirdly, their own Gratian thus alleges out of Isidore: If any man because
of the story, think that those things ought not to be pretermitted, which are
expressed in the words, he does well: Si tamen minime istud very capit
rationem, sed ad visum and intellectum Saul. Neque enim reprobus factus potuit
bonum intellectum habere, etc. So that it be not taken to be so done in deed,
but to Saul's sight and understanding: for he being become a reprobate, could
have no good understanding. He proceeds further: Historicus mentem Saulis,
and habitum Samuelis descripsit: The history writer has described the mind
of Saul and habit of Samuel, expressing those things which were done and
seen; pretermitting, whether they were true or false. Sic Gratian. can. 26.
qu. 5. cap. 14. If the defender then have uttered an untruth, Augustine,
Isidore, Gratian are culpable therein, for saying it was not Samuel in deed,
but to Saul's understanding.

The Libeller, not the Defender, has here uttered an untruth: for the
Scripture says not, it was Samuel, but only, Saul knew (or as 1. Sam. 28. 14.
the vulgar Latin reads) intellexit, understood it was Samuel: it was not
then Samuel in deed, but to Saul's understanding, as their own translation; or
to Saul's imagination, as Augustine; or sight, as Isidore says before alleged.
I say then to the Libeller, as Augustine to Petilian the Donatist: Videsne,
quemadmodum ista non sententia, sed vesica, non solum inani sono, sed in capite
vestro crepuerit: See you not how this your challenge as a bladder is broken
with a vain crack upon your own head? lib. cont. Petilian. 2. c. 101.

The second Slander.
A Manifest untruth (says the Libeller) that we read Genes. 14. verse. 18.
obtulit, he offered bread and wine: for we read not so, but protulit, he
brought forth, as our Bibles do testify. A lie also it is, that by force of
that word we would establish the sacrifice of the Mass. page 123.

The Defense.
FOr the first: 1. Andradius denies not, but that in some copies, is read,
obtulit, he offered: Andrad in 4. defension. 2. Bellarmine thus alleges out
of the canon of the Mass: Quod tibi obtulit summus tuus sacerdos Melchisedech:
Which thy high Priest Melchisedech offered unto thee, libr. 1. de Miss. cap. 6.
3. The Rhemists affirm, that Melchisedech did offer in bread and wine: Annot.
in Heb. sect. 8. It is false therefore, that none of them read obtulit, be
offered.

Secondly, Bellarmine, though he read, protulit, he brought forth; yet upon
the use of that word he groundeth the sacrifice of bread and wine: and says,
that it is idem, quod offerre, all one, as to say, offer: the word (...)
iatsah, signifies to bring forth, yet it is always (says he) in the
Scripture restrained to sacrifice: lib. 1. de Miss. c. 6. And again, wherefore
with these words (says he) brought forth bread and wine, are those joined,
and he was a Priest of the most high God, Nisi vt intelligeremus pane^ and
vinum a Melchisedecho prolatum, vt offerretur Deo: but that we should
understand, bread and wine to have been brought forth of Melchisedech, to be
offered to God? Let any indifferent man now judge, whether Bellarmine does not
by force of that word, which is the same (as he says) as to offer, and the
Rhemists which say, Melchisedech offered in bread and wine, establish the
sacrifice of the Mass.

Both these lies then and untruths, are forged out of the Detectors malicious
brain, and shaped in his uncharitable conceit: so that we may say to him in
Augustines words: Homini homo falsus docendus, fallax cauendus; prius magistrum
bonum, posterius discipulum cautum desyderat: A false man is to be instructed,
a deceitful to be avoided; the first requires a good teacher, the latter a
wary learner: Academic. 2. 5. Though I be out of hope to reform this false
slaunderer, yet I trust the reader will take heed of such a deceiuer.

The third Slander.
SYnops. p. 63. of the latter edition: because it is affirmed, that the
Communion in one kind, was forged and invented, and decreed in the Council of
Constance not above two hundred years ago: A gross untruth, says the
Detector, because both Thomas Aquinas and Alexander Hales long before allow the
Communion under one kind, and the same Council of Constance says, it was
consuetudo ab ecclesia diutissime obseruata, a custom long observed of the
Church.

The Defense.
FIrst, who sees not the cauilling spirit of this Libeller, that hunteth after
syllables, and catches after words: the defender was not ignorant, that this
superstitious use of receiving in one kind, was in hammering and devising
before the Council of Constance: but that it then only began to be enforced
and decreed as necessary to be observed of all, that no Priest under pain of
excommunication should minister under both kinds to the people: so that the
forging, inuenting, decreeing spoken of, is understood of the necessity of so
receiving (whereas it was free before) which was first invented, forged and
imposed by that Council.

Secondly, that no such thing was generally Communion in one kind not ancient.
observed before, it is evident. Council. Matisconens. 2. can. 4. celebrate
about anno 600. and Council. Vormatiens. can. 31. anno 800. and Council.
Bracarens. 3. can. 1. anno 670. or thereabout: all which Councels allow the
Communion under both kinds: as they are alleged, Synops. page 560. to the
which I refer the reader.

Thirdly, Alexander Hales cited by the Libeller, is alleged by Bellarmine to
be of a contrary judgment to the rest of the Schoolmen: whose opinion was,
that more spiritual fruit was received by communicating under both kinds then
in one: in 4. part. sum. qu. 53. memb. 1.

Fourthly, what though this superstition might begin before the Council of
Constance; yet it is clear, that it was but an humane invention, which is the
thing the Defender would show: and this may appear by the confession of the
Council it self: that non obstante, notwithstanding Christ did minister the
Sacrament under both kinds of bread and wine, etc. and similiter licet in
primitiua ecclesia, etc. and likewise though in the Primitive church, this
Sacrament were received of the faithful under both kinds: yet for all this it
was decreed, that this custom, was rationabiliter introducta, brought in upon
good reason.

I say then with Augustine to this shameless gainsayer, that labors to
conquer with lies: Non bonum est homini hominem vincere, sed bonum est homini,
vt eum veritas vincat volentem, quia malum est homini, vt eum veritas vincat
inuitum: It is not good for a man to overcome a man, but it is good for a man
willingly to give place to the truth: for it is evil for a man against his will
to be overcome of the truth, epistol. 174. So it were better for this
slaunderer to be overcome of the truth, and to confess his fault, then to
seek to overcome with li^s.

The fourth Slander.
SYnops. page 6^. the name Christian was used in the Apostles time, and by the
Apostles 1
themselves allowed: but it is not certain that the name Catholic came from
the Apostles. This the Libeller calls a certain untruth 2
and a lie: because in the Apostles Creed, we are taught to believe the holy
Catholic Church and S. James Epistle has the title of 3
Catholic Epistle.

The Defense.
FIrst, though it might be proved, that the 1
Apostles were the authors of the name Catholic, yet is it not so certain, as
that the name Christian, came from them: because this is directly expressed in
scripture, Act. 11. verse. 26. The disciples of Antioch were the first that were
called Christians: but for the name The name Christian more ancient then
Catholic.
Catholic, no such proof out of Scripture can be alleged. Wherefore in a
charitable construction, the words may be taken comparatively, that one is not
so certain as the other.

The Creed called the Apostles, is no Scripture, 2
but collected out of it, and agreeable to it: neither is it certain whether
it were made by the Apostles: as it may appear by that which Cyprian writes
of the article of the descension: Sciendum est, quod in Ecclesiae Romanae
symbolo non habetur additum, etc. It is to be known, that in the symbol of
the church of Rome it is not added, he descended into hell, nor in the Churches
of the East: Cyprian in symbol. If then the Apostles by their Apostolical
authority had set forth the Creed, it had been great presumption afterward to
have added unto it. Pacianus also Epistol. ad Symprosian. thus says: Sed sub
Apostolis, etc. But thou will say under the Apostles no man was called
Catholic: admit it was so, yet grant this, when after the Apostles there were
heresies, etc. did not the Apostolic people require their surname, whereby
they might distinguish the unity of the incorrupt people? etc. Pacianus
seems here to grant that the surname Catholic was not used in the Apostles
time: let the Libeller also give him the lie: and consequently his opinion must
be this, that the Apostles Creed was not then collected, for there the name
Catholic is found, which he admits not to have been in the Apostles time
in use.

Thirdly, is the Detector so ignorant, that 3
he knows not, the title to be no part of the Epistle, and therefore not to
be of Canonical authority, as the Epistle itself: for if it were so, the
Fathers would not have doubted, whether S. Paul were the author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, seeing it bears that title in the original: as Tertullian
does ascribe it to Bernabas, others to Luke, or Clement, as Hierome testifies,
catalog. scriptor. Oec^menius also does entitle it only the epistle to the
Hebrews, and so does Hentenius a Papist translate it. Wherefore the title of
Catholic to S. James epistle proves not that name to have bin used in the
Apostles time: for the titles of the epistles and the postscripts were added
afterward by those which copied them forth.

I marvel then that the Libeller is not ashamed to accuse the author of a lie,
for saying, it is not certain that the name Catholic came from the Apostles:
I say with Augustine: Miror si habet in corpore sanguinem qui ad haec verba non
erubescit: Imaruell if he have any blood in his body, that blusheth not to
utter such words: epistol. 164.

The fifth Slander.
SYnops. p. 115. That the Fathers of the cruel Inquisition cannot err: is
noted for an untruth and bold assertion, and an abominable lie.

The Defense.
FIrst, what will not this unshamefast Libeller dare to object, charging the
writer so untruly and unhonestly with a lie for this, as though he had devised
it of his own head: Master Fox out of a good author thus reports: The
Spaniards, and especially the great Divines there do hold, that this holy and
sacred Inquisition cannot err, and that the holy Fathers the Inquisitors
cannot be deceived. p. 930. col. 2. edition 1583.

2. This further appears, for that the Inquisitors do minister an oath to the
King and Nobles in these words: Your Majesty's shall swear, that you will
favor the holy Inquisition, and give your consent unto the same, and that you
shall not by any manner of means hinder and impeach the same, p. 931. Ex
quint. part. Martyr. Gallic. impress. page 474. Is it then like, that they
would absolutely bind Princes to maintain their proceedings, if they had not
this conceit thereof, that they could not err? for otherwise to require the
Magistrates assistance to uphold their erroneous and unjust censures (if they
took them to be such) were a presumption intolerable: yea, and the decree of
Vrbane the 4. were without all show of reason: Statutum ciuitatis, etc. That
the statute of any city is of no force, where by the business of the
Ioquisition is hindered: Sext. decretal. libr. 5. tit. 2. c. 9. if so that they
did think the Inquisitors could err: for then that exception should have been
inserted into the decree.

3. It is Bellarmines position: Concilia particularia a Pontifice approbata
errare nonposse: That particular Councels being approved of the Pope, cannot
err: libr. 2. de council. authoritat. c. 5. But the particular Councels,
assemblies, and commissions of Inquisitors, are ratified and confirmed by the
Pope: Sext. decret. libr. 5. tit. 2. c. 11. Clemens 4. Ossicium inquisitionis
contra haereticos, etc. Apostolica authoritate commissum: The office of
luquisition against heretics, committed by the Apostolic authority. This
then must be the conclusion from their own principles, that the Commissioners
of the Inquisition cannot err.

Thus are we and our brethren, the Ministers of the Gospel charged with lying,
when we truly report the opinions of our adversaries: the Libeller must not
think to carry away the victory with lies. I may say unto him, as Aristippus
to a Sophister, that went away (...).
from him criumphing, as though he had conquered him: Abeo suauius te, qui me
refelleris dormit urus, etc. I depart to sleep more sweetly, then thou which
have refelled me. So the defender, being thus most falsely traduced, shall
find more quietness of conscience then his accuser. For as Hierome says
well: Apud Christianos, non qui patitur, sed qui facit contumeliam miser est:
Among Christians, not he that suffers, but he that offers contumely, is
wretched: Hieron. Tranquil.

The sixth Slander.
SYnops. page 227. The ancient manner of election used in Rome for a thousand
years together, was* that the Bishop there should be elected by the whole
Clergy, with the consent of the people, and confirmation of the Emperor: a
notable untruth, because 23. of the Popes were martyred by the Pagan Emperors,
etc.

The Defense.
NO untruth is here uttered at all. 1. The writers meaning is plain enough,
but that the Libeller is disposed to cavil, not that continually without
interruption that form was observed of election 1000. years together, but
that it continued till 1000. years after Christ, and all that while no other
order was prescribed for the election of the Roman Bishop: and so he
expounds himself afterward, page 228. lin. 20. This was more then a thousand
years after Christ: the words then are to be understood, not inclusiue, as
though that form was perpetually and precisely kept all that time, but
exclusive, that during that time, no other order was instituted.

2. And an indifferent reader may take these words to be spoken, not
coniunctim, jointly together, as though every one of those three, the consent
of the Clergy, people, Emperor, were had in every election, but rather
diuisim, to understand them sunderly, that for 1000. years, one or more of
those orders only were used and none other. And so it is evident, that even
under those heathen Emperors, the consent of the Clergy and people was
required, as Cyprian reports of the election of Cornelius: Factus est
Episcopus de Dei and Christieius iudicio, de Clericorum pene omnium consensu,
de plebis quae tunc affuit suffragio: He was made Bishop by the judgment of
God and his Christ, by the consent almost of all the Clergy, and suffrage of
the people then present: Cyprtan. lib. 4. epist. 2.

3 And yet more fully to stop the slaunderers mouth, it were no hard matter to
prove, that those first 300. years of the Pagan Emperors excepted, the
Emperor for a thousand years did bear some stroke in the election of the
Roman Bishop, and was not utterly excluded till the time of Clement the 5.
about ann. 1300. before which time the new device of election by the Cardinals
only was not fully established: as it may appear by the constitution of
Clement. lib. 1. tit. 3. ca. 2. Ne Romani electioni pontificis indeterminata
opinionum diuer sitas, aliquod possit obstaculum afferre, etc. Least the
diversity of opinions undetermined, might bring some let to the election of
the Roman Bishop. By this Pope also it was decreed, that vacant imperio,
during the vacancie of the Empire, the Pope does, imperatori succedere,
succeed the Emperor: Clement. lib. 2. tit. 11. ca. 2. Thus the Emperor was
perfectly excluded from the Popes election, when as the Pope intruded into his
office. Bellarmine also grants, that the election by Cardinals began but ann.
1179. de Cleric. lib. 1. c. 9. So that by his reckoning, so long the Emperor
did bear sway in the Popes election.

I trust by any of these answers the defender is freed from this false charge.
The Libeller should have been better advised, then to blot so much paper with
so many lies, that may be so soon wiped away. Zeuxis the Painter being
reproved for his slow painting, answered, that he took a long time to paint,
because he would have it last long, which he painted. But the Libellers painted
lies, which he has been so long in coloring, shall in short time all I doubt
not be dashed out: he should have done well to have followed Hieromes counsel
to Ruffinus: Qui mendacij alterum criminaris, desinas ipse mentiri: You that
accuse another of lying, should forbear lying your self: Apol. 2. cont.
Ruffin.

The seventh Slander.
SYnops. page 583. Neither Lay men, nor midwines are authorized to baptize
amongst us: this is noted for an untruth, for both of them are allowed (says
the Libeller) by the Communion book to be ministers of that Sacrament.

The Defense.
FIrst, the Communion book, where it sets down the order of private
baptism, makes mention neither of lay men, nor women Lay men and women not
authorized to baptize in the Church of England
to be ministers thereof, howsoever indirectly by consequence some have so
collected: therefore there being no express mention of either lay person, or
woman, it cannot be so affirmed, that the book does allow and authorize any
such baptism.

Secondly, whereas the resolution of doubts is by the book referred to the
judgment of the Ordinary, as it may appear in the preface to the Communion
book: our Ordinaries have thus resolved this doubt, that the book has no
such meaning to approve any baptism of such.

Thirdly, the practice of our Church confirms the same. For such lay men, or
women as take upon them to baptize are to be presented, and are punishable by
the Ordinary for the same: yea they which are allowed to be public Readers,
and no more, if they take upon them to baptize, are subject to the censures of
the Church.

Wherefore if neither the letter of the book, nor the sense which is given
thereof, nor the practice of our Church (to the which chiefly the words
excepted against are referred) do allow any such to baptize, it is a great
slander of our Church, which he utters, that lay men and women are allowed
by the book for ministers of that Sacrament. Therefore this untruth may be
returned upon the deuisers head, and noted both for a rash and untrue censure.
Simonides was wont to say, that he never repented him for holding his peace,
but for speaking, often. And if this cauiller had been silent, he might have
been blameless, whereas his hasty pen will purchase him a blot, but that he
concealeth his name, and hides his face, that we cannot see him blush: I say
unto him as Ruffinus: Ad incusandum non mo^et fidei diuersitas, sed peruersitas
animi: Not the diversity of faith, but the peruersitie of his affection has
made him an accuser.

The eight Slander.
BEcause it is said, Synops. page 29. that Tobie and Judith were never taken
for Canonical, till of late it was decreed by Councels of no great antiquity:
for in the Laodicene Council, and other ancient Councels they were deemed not
to be canonical. A notable untruth, because 1
they are numbered among the Canonical books in the third Council of
Carthage, anno 47. where Augustine was present. An untruth 2
also it is that the Council of Laodicea deemed them not canonical, etc. for
the Apocalypse is omitted, as well as Tobie and Judith 3
by the Council, and has no more ancient authority then the Council of
Carthage, etc.

The Defense.
FIrst, whereas the Laodicene Council accounts 1
but 22. books of the Old Testament Canonical, and calls the rest there not
rehearsed (...), books not canonical. c. 59. and yet the Council of Carthage
coming after, decrees the same to be canonical, as namely among the rest the
books of Tobie and Judith. We cannot think that these Councels, being not
above fifty year one before the other, and so the one not likely to be
ignorant of the others proceedings, would decree contrary things: first,
because both these Councels are confirmed in the 6. general Council Trullane
can. 1. which Council was not so indiscreet as to ratify contrary decrees.

Secondly, if Augustine were present, it can not be thought that he would
subscribe contrary to his own judgment: for whereas the Canon rehearses
five books of Solomon, Augustine thinks that the book of Ecclesiasticus and
Wisdom of Solomon were only so called, propter nonnullam eloquij
similitudinem, for some similitude of the style, de ciuitat. Dei libr. 17. cap.
20. And of Ecclesiasticus he says, This book was not received into the canon
of the Scriptures: De cur. pro mortuis cap. 15. Likewise of the books of the
Macchabees he thus writes: Iudaei non habent hanc scripturam, sicut legem,
Prophetas, and Psalmos, quibus Dominus testimonium perhibet vt testibus suis:
The Jews have not this Scripture, as the law, Prophets and Psalms, to the
which the Lord gives testimony as to his witnesses: libr. 2. cont. Gauden. c.
23. How is it like the^ that Augustine would have given consent to this decree,
if their meaning had been to make these books absolutely Canonical.

Thirdly, seeing the Canon of the Scriptures was confirmed before this
Council, and acknowledged Two and twenty books of the old Testament only
canonical.
of the Fathers, who make but 22. books of the Old Testament, excluding all
those which we hold to be Apocrypha: as Origin apud Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 25.
Athanas^n synopsi. Hilarious in prolog. explanat. Psalm. Nazianzen. in carminib.
Cyrillus 4. (...). Epiphan. haeres. 8. Hieron. praefat. in libr. regum: it is
not like that the Council of Carthage would go against the consent of so many
learned Fathers.

Wherefore they must be understood to take this word Canonical in a large
sense, for all those books which were allowed to be read in the Church,
whereof there were two sorts: some were read, ad authoritatem ecclesiasticorum
dogmatu^ confirmandam, to confirm the authority of Ecclesiastical doctrine,
such were the right Canonical: some ad aedificationem plebis, for the edifying
of the people, of which sort were the books of Tobie, Judith, with the rest:
Hieron. praefat. in Prouer. And these were called Hagiographa, Hieron. praefat.
in Tobiam: or Ecclesiastici, Ecclesiastical books: the other Canonici,
Canonical: Cyprian. in symbol. This difference of the holy writings is
allowed by Sixtus Senens. lib. 1. bibliothec. Stapleton. lib. 9. c. 6.
doctrinal. that those books are called Protocanonici, Canonical of the first
sort, that are found in the Hebrew Canon: the other, Deuterocanonici,
Canonical of the second sort: and in this sense does the Council of Carthage
call the Apocryphal books Canonical.

2. Secondly, it is neither absurd, nor untrue to say that the Laodicene
Council, omitting to make mention of the Apocalypse among the Canonical
books, at that time judged it also not to be canonical, for the authority
of that book was a long time doubted of: for the Council calls all other
books beside those rehearsed, (...), books not canonical.

3. But the Libeller has uttered a great untruth, that the Apocalypse has no
more ancient authority then the Council of Carthage, which was about anno 420.
seeing that Origin long before holds it to be canonical: Homil. 7. in
Iosuam: where rehearsing the books of the New Testament, as of the four
Evangelists, the Acts of the Apostles, 14. Epistles of Paul, two Epistles of
Peter, the Epistles of James and Jude, he further says: Addit and Ioannes tuba
canere per epistolas suas and Apocalypsin: John also proceeds to sound his
trumpet by his epistles and the Apocalypse.

The Libeller then might have been otherwise occupied, then here to have noted
an untruth upon no greater ground: he might have employed his time and pen much
better: he should have remembered Platoes saying to his scholars, when they
went from school: See children that you use your otium, to (...).
some honest purpose. Or if his pen must needs run to drop lies, he should
have followed Origens advice: Homo, cui incumbit necessitas mentiendi,
diligenter attendat, vt sic vtatur me^dacio, quomodo medicamine and condimento,
vt seruet mensuram: He that has necessity to lie, must be careful to use his
lying as a sause or medicine, to keep a measure: ex apolog. Hieron. cont.
Ruffin. But this Libeller neither was forced to lie, and having begun, he can
find no measure in so doing.

The ninth Slander.
WHereas it is thus alleged, Synops. page 209. Leo the third confirmed by his
decree, that the blood, which issued out of a wooden Crucifix at Mantua, was
the very blood of Christ: anno 800. what broadface dealing is this (says the
Libeller) to vent forth such a shameless lie? etc.

The Defense.
1. THough no author in that place be alleged for the proof of this story:
if it had pleased this cauiller to have looked in the end of the book, he
might there have found these words, after the Errata: Whereas page 374. 381.
and elsewhere I allege diverse things of the acts of the Popes, forgetting to
cite the authors, I refer the reader to the collections of master Bale out of
Platina, Functius and others, in his book Deactis Romanor. pontific.

2. But because this authority will not content him, I will report the very
words of Platina in the story of Leo 3. At Leo cum seditionibus vexaretur ab
vrbe discedens Mantuam proficiscitur ad vtsendum Christi sanguinem, A manifest
story denied by the Libeller.
qui tum miraculis magno erat in pretio: is autem perbenigne susceptus
approbato Christi sanguine ob frequentia miracula, ad Carolum proficiscitur, vt
hominem cognoscendae veritatis cupidum eius rei certiorem faceret: But Leo
being troubled with sedition, departing from the city goes to Mantua to see
the blood of Christ, which then because of miracles was in great price: he
being gently received (having approved it to be the blood of Christ, because of
many miracles) goes to Charles to certify him of this matter, being a man
desirous to know the truth. How say you now (sir Detector) have you not
detected your own folly and ignorance, to deny a story written by one of
your own Chroniclers: though here no mention be made of a wooden Crucifix
(which must be supplied out of master Bale) yet the substance of the story we
have, that Leo approved it (which is all one as to say in his judgment he
decreed it, for here is no consistoriall decree spoken of) to be the blood of
Christ.

3. And if Platina be not of credit sufficient, the like story is brought in
by Ioannes A fable of a bloody Crucifix.
Monachus in the 2. Nicen Synod action 4. how a certain Jew succeeding a
Christian in his house, found there the image of Christ, which he with other
Jews running upon do wound it on the side, and thereout issued as much blood
as filled a great Hydrie, a water tankerd or bucket: by the which blood the
sick were healed, and many miracles wrought: and thereof was sent in glasses,
to all parts of Asia, Africa, Europa: and the tale ends thus, Hic est sanguis
ille Dominicus, qui apud plerosq, repertus dicitur: This is the Lords blood,
which is said to have been found with many. This Synod, with the acts thereof,
was ratified by Adrian 1. the immediate predecessor of this Leo 3. so that it
seems more likely, that he by the example of Adrian, might give credit and
approve the like fable done at Mantua.

Now let any indifferent man judge, which of the two has vented the shameless
lie: the defender in reporting as he finds, or the detector, in malicious
denying of that, which he ignorantly knows not: he must learn to be more
cunning in histories, before he take upon him to find fault with historical
reports. Sure whether he be broad or chittefaced, I know not: for he neither
tells us his name, nor dares to show his face: yet by his shameless
writings, we may as well discern him as by his bold face: to whom that
sentence of Augustine may fitly be applied, though not altogether in his
sense: Libri tui pene totum te nobis exhibent, si enim propterea te non
nouimus, quia faciem corporis tui non vidimus, hoc modo nec ipse te nosti, nam
tu quoque non vides eam: Your books do show you wholly what you are: for if
we therefore know you not, because we have not seen your face, neither do
you know your self, because you see not your face: August. epist. 9. Hieron.
We need no better glass to show the Libellers audacious face, then his
immodest and slanderous pen.

The tenth Slander.
SYnops. page 609. The Mass promises sufficient redemption to the wicked,
that have spent their life in drunkenness, adultery, etc. if they come to the
Church and hear a Mass, and take holy bread and holy water, or find a
soul Priest, or give somewhat to the Priest to do penance for them, though
they neither pray, nor repent, nor hear the word preached: For this the
Libeller cries out, a shameless mate, a notorious lie, etc. and Roger
Holland, that died for the Gospel, who thus much confesses of himself, he
calls in derision, holy Holland, one of Foxes Martyrs, runnagate Roger.

The Defense.
FIrst, as Plato bid Xenocrates a sour and (...).
austere man to sacrifice to the Graces, so it were to be wished, that this
cauiller had consecrated his pen to Gods service, that he might have written
with more grace: his bitter raylings and blasphemies toward the defender are
answered before. But as Hierome says: Iniuriam martyrum nequeo surda aure
transire: The wrong done to the Martyrs I cannot pass over with silence. The
Libeller shall one day know, if he repent not, what it is to revile Gods
Saints, when he shall see them one day enter into heaven, and himself, with
all such blasphemous mates, to be thrust out at the doors, Luke 13. 28. I do
not wonder, if his pen be whet against the living, when it spares not the
dead: I say to him with Augustine to Julian the Donatist, Cernis quam tibi
perniciosum sit, tam horribile crimen obijcere talibus, and quam mihi gloriosum
sit quodlibet crimen audire non talibus: You see how pernicious it is for you
to object so horrible a crime to such, and how glorious to me to be objected
against with such. libr. 1.

Secondly, the Libeller produces certain reasons to show that their religion
hinders not good life, but tends to virtue: 1. They teach, that a man by
grace may keep the Commandments, whereas we say it is impossible, which is a
discouragement to virtue, the other says he, is an encouragement. Contra: Nay
rather theirs is a desperate doctrine, because we see by experience, that
there is not the perfitest man, but offends against the law, as Saint James
says, In many things we sin all, Iam. 3. 2. and therefore they persuade men,
in so teaching, to build upon a false ground, and to deceive their own Popery
stirs not to godliness of life.
souls: whereas we teach them, that they must seek their righteousness, not
in the obedience of the law, but in the obedience of faith, yet do exhort
them, that they walk worthy of their calling: S. Paul thus saying: Not having
mine own righteousness, which is by the law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, Philip. 3. 9. was not therefore discouraged from virtue, but
encouraged, saying, verse. 13. I forget that which is behind, and endeavor my
self to that which is before.

2. Whereas we teach, that the motions of the flesh be sinful, though a man
consent not unto them, because the law says, Thou shall not lust, Romans 7. 7.
they say, they may be occasion of much merit. Which of these will sooner
persuade to suppress evil lusts, they that commend them, or they which
condemn them, let any reasonable man judge? I am sure the Apostle bids us
mortify, (...), the very lust, and rising motions of the heart, not to retain
them as a matter of greater merit.

3. They say their confession and satisfaction for the temporal pains of
purgatory, the shame of the one, and fear of the other, provoke to the
increase of virtue: Is not this like to be a goodly virtue, that is begotten in
fear, and for shame of men, to whom they are bound to confess? The Apostle
says, perfect love casts away fear, 1. Ioh. 4. 18. We rather exhort men to
confess unto God, that sees the heart, and from whom nothing can be hid,
rather then in the cares of the Priest. And as for your purgatory
satisfactions, which may be bought out with money, and redeemed with Masses,
they do but make men more secure.

4. They hold that no man without special revelation can know whether he be
predestinate, and that one in Gods grace may fall away. We teach men to be sure
of their Certainty of salvation nourishes virtue.
salvation: this doctrine (says he) breeds desperate security, the other
makes us with fear and trembling to work our salvation.

Contra. Nay rather he that is sure of his election by faith, thereby is the
more encouraged to good works, knowing that he shall not lose his reward: as
the Apostle exhorts 1. Cor. 15. Wherefore beloved brethren be ye steadfast,
etc. always abundant in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know, that
your work^ is not in vain in the Lord. And the Apostle says of himself, The
Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and preserve me to his heavenly
kingdom, 2. Timoth. 4. 18. They then which are sure to be preserved unto life,
God will guide them with his spirit, and deliver them from evil works; and
they also shall notwithstanding in a godly fear and careful endeavor work
their salvation: for the certainty of the end does not take away the
necessity of the means. But contrariwise as S. James says, The wavering
minded man is unstable in all his ways: So that he which is wavering in the
hope of salvation, cannot be thoroughly resolved or settled to any good work.

Thirdly, the Libeller brings in Luther and Iacobus Andrea, complaining of
greater corruptions, where the Gospel is professed, then in Papatu, in time of
Popery: whence he infers, that it is not their doctrine, but Caluins and
Luthers, that corrupts good manners. page 138.

Cont. 1. Though of some particular sins, and of particular places and persons,
even where the Gospel is professed, just complaint may be made, yet it
follows not that generally Protestants manners are worse, then Papists:
unless you will say, that because S. Paul ^aith, that there was such
fornication among the Corinthians, as was not once named among the Gentiles,
that therefore the Gentiles were to be preferred before them.

2. The cause of corruption of manners among Protestants is not the doctrine,
but their unthankful receiving of it. As where S. Paul complains thus of the
Corinthians: I fear when I come again, least my God abase me among you, and I
shall bewail many of them, which have sinned already, and have not repented
of the uncleanness, fornication, wantonness, which they have committed, 2. Cor.
12. 21. Was Saint Paul's doctrine (think you) the cause hereof?

3 Against two of our writers that thus complain of Protestants manners, I can
produce more then twenty of theirs, that cry out against popish corruptions:
and some of them even now we will hear speak in this cause: that it may be
evident to all men, that howsoever iniquity in these evil days increases
both among Protestants and Papists, yet thanks be to God, the Gospel has
brought forth more true godliness, with the comfortable fruits thereof, then
ever was to be seen in Popery.

Fourthly, this is alleged as an argument to clear their profession from
being an hindrance to godly life, because to perfect remission of sins they
require three parts of penance, contrition, confession, satisfaction. page 139.

Cont. These three we acknowledge, being Popish penance no true repen tance.
understood according to the Scriptures, are necessary in every true penitent
person: inward sorrow and contrition, with a full purpose to amend the life;
confession to God, and to the congregation publicly offended; satisfaction not
to God, but to our neighbors for injuries committed: but as these three are
taught and required in Popery, they do but make hypocrites, they work not
true conversion.

1. If contrition do proceed in part from man's free will: if it be not
necessary to have a resolute and express purpose of newnes of life: if it
must be perfect: if it bring not assurance of remission of sins: if it must
be a means to justify us: if a man must look to merit by it: if it be not
necessary for small fences as well as great: all which positions our
adversaries do hold; as may be seen at large Synops. page 633. to page 640:
how is it possible for a man by the popish doctrine to attain to true
contrition, which must take beginning in his own free will, and end to his
own praise, in seeking to merit by it?

2. So likewise, to confess upon pain of damnation all sins, never so
secret, whether they be committed in mind, heart, will, cogitation only, or
in word and work: and to none but to the Priest: to get absolution at his
hands, and to merit by it: and no oftener but once in the year, as the Papists
teach: look Synops. from page 640. to 650. who sees not how far this is
from true confession, which should be principally made to God, not yearly but
daily, and in humility, not in a selfeloue of meriting by it?

3. Concerning popish satisfaction, to teach, that God must be satisfied by our
penal works, for the punishment due to our sins: that the Priest is to that
end to inioyne penance: and that it is in the power of the pastors of the
Church to remit the temporal punishment: and to apply the merits of Saints,
and grant Indulgences: al which the popish Divines do hold and teach, Synops.
page 667. 655. What a miserable and comfortless satisfaction is this? which
must be wrought by our selves: whereas we are not able to answer one thing of
a thousand, Job. 9. 3. and wherein we must look for our release and
indulgence from men: where the Scripture says of God not of men, I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and I will remember their sins no more,
Heb. 8. 12.

I trust it does already sufficiently appear, that there is no untruth
uttered at all, in charging the popish religion to be an hinderer of good life:
but that we may be yet more fully cleared, I will further auou^h the same: 1.
by propounding some choice points of their holy doctrine. 2. by producing some
examples of their holy professors. 3. by the testimony of some of their own
writers.

1. First, your doctrine of purgatory pains, which you say may be eased and
released by the prayers of the living, and especially by the soul Priests, and
Masses of Requiem: as it is an engine to to draw advantage to your purses, so
it breeds carnal security in men's souls, especially in such as are rich,
who think to leave behind them enough, howsoever they live in the mean time,
to maintain a Priest to sing for their souls: and therefore one of your own
Doctors says: In hoc solo casu melior est conditio diuitis quam pauperis, quia
habet vnde suffragia fiant pro ipso: In this case only the estate of the rich
is better then the poor, because he Popish doctrine breeds security.
has wherewith al Suffrages should be made: Albert mag. de offic. Miss. tract.
3.

2. Your doctrine in prohibiting and restraining of marriage to your Clergy,
how it helps to holiness of life, Bernard well shows: Toll de ecclesia
honorabile coniugium, and thorum im^aculatum, ^o^ne reples ^^^^concubinarijs,
incestuosis, seminifluis, mollibus, masculorum concubitoribus: Take away from
the Church honorable marriage and the bed undefiled, shall you not fill the same
with fornicators, incestuous, unclean, effeminate persons, etc. Cantic* sermon.
66. how well these effects have followed in popish single life, they which have
written of their Votaries, have sufficiently declared.

3. The popish doctrine of Pardons and Indulgences, that it is in the power of
the pastors of the Church to release a poena and culpa, for days, months,
years, is in all men's judgments an open door to all carnal liberty: as the
Pardoners of Leo 10. did proclaim, that for ten shillings any man should
deliver a soul out of purgatory at his pleasure: ex Christian. Massaeo libr.
20. Of this abuse some while ago great complaint was made: Quaestuarij
praedicatores quaedam breuia habent, quae in singulis parochijs relinquunt, in
quibus continentur tot indulgentiae, quod mirantur viri boni si de conscientia
Papae potuerunt illae concedi: The preaching Pardoners leave briefes in every
parish, wherein are contained so many Indulgences, that good men marvel, that
ever they could be granted with the Popes knowledge: Opuscul. tripartit. libr.
3. cap. 8.

4. They hold that the Sacraments do give grace, ex opere operato, by the work
wrought, and that the faith of the receiver gives no effi^acie to the
Sacrament: Bellarm. libr. 2. de Sacram. cap. 1.

5. They also teach that the wicked do eat in the Sacrament the very body of
Christ: Rhemist. 1. Cor. 11. sect. 26. Do not these doctrines now tend to
great holiness and devotion: whereby men are made careless to examine
themselves, and to be prepared by faith to receive the Sacraments, and wicked
men are made more secure, seeing they are borne in hand, that being as they
are, they may be made partakers of Christ's body?

6. A carnal doctrine also it is, that men may do more then is prescribed,
and of their Carnal doctrine of Poperi^.
abundance may allot unto others such works of supererogation: Rhem. 1. Cor.
9. sect. 6. 2. Cor. 8. sect. 3. For by this means men are made secure to
labor for themselves, depending upon other men's superabundant works. But they
in so thinking are deceived: for every man shall answer for himself, one
cannot save another soul: Ezech. 14. 20. Though Noah, Daniel and Job were in
the midst, etc. as I live says the Lord, they shall deliver neither son
nor daughter. Upon which words Origin thus writes: Vnusquisque in proprio
peccato morietur, and in propria iustitia viuet, nihil mihi conducit martyr
pater, si male vixero: Every man shall die in his own sin, and live in his
own righteousness: my father a Martyr shall not profit me, if I live evil.

By these particular points of popish doctrine I trust it is clear, that it is
not falsely charged to be a breeder of carnal security.

Secondly, if the popish religion be such a Popes examples of loose living.
nourisher of virtue and holiness, where is it more likely to be found then in
their holy father the Pope, and in that holy chair? let us therefore take a
little view of their holy lives.

Some of them have bin Sorcerers and Necromancers: as Siluester 2. Platina.
Benedict 9. Benno.
Gregor. 7. Sleidano.
Paulus 3. with others.

Some were blasphemers, as John 12. did use to call upon the devil at dice, and
to drink to him. Julius 3. calling for his porke, which the Physicians forbad
him, give it me (says he) Ex Baleo.
all dispetto de Dio, in despite of God.

Some of them thieves and robbers: John 18. as Platina says, in pontificatu
fuit fur and latro, was in his Popedom a thief and a robber.

Some murderers: as Theodor. Niem.
Urban. 6. that put some of his Cardinals into sackes and drowned them. Conc.
Constant.
John 23. the cause of the death of Alexander 5. Raphael. Volateran.
Sixtus 4. sent to Florence to slay the Medicees. Vergerius.
Paulus 3. caused his sister and mother to be slain, that he might have the
whole inheritance. In ^nuphrius.
Alexander the 6. time, Roma carnificina facta, Rome was made a shambles.

Some of them were adulterous and incestuous Histor. Florentin. Guic^iardin.
Sleidano. Agrip. de le^ocin.
persons: as Clemens 5. John 23. Alexander 6. Julius 2. and Julius 3. Paulus 3.
Sixtus the 4. as witness they which have written of their acts and lives.

Such as these holy fathers were, such are their children. In Italy and at
Rome, the name of Christian, is used as a name of reproach, to signify a dolt
or a fool: Christian. Franch. collat. Jesuit. in fine: such holiness and
devotion is to be seen under the Popes nose. These are your filthy Doctors
(sir Detector) more filthy and unclean your self, if your life and name were
known, then he whom you do so ungodly blaspheme.

In the third place, let us hear their own writers speak. Against Iacobus
Andreae alleged by the Libeller, I will set Ioannes Andreae, one of their
Canonists: Roma fundata fuit a praedonib. and adhuc de prim^rdijs tenet, data
In sexto de elect. fundament. in gloss.
Roma quasi rodens manus, etc. Rome was founded by thieves, and yet still
sauoureth of her beginning, being called Rome, as biting one by the hands.

Budaeus: Sanctiones pontificiae non moribus regendis vsui sunt, sed propemodum
dixerim Argentariae faciendae authoritatem videntur accommodare: Popish writers
complain of their own corruptions.
The Popes Canons serve not now to guide men's lives, but they serve rather to
make a bank to get money. in Pandect.

Vrspergens. in the story of the Council of Constance: Spiritum extinguebant,
propheticas aspernabantur, Christum in membris suis persequebantur, eratque
plane persecutrix ecclesia: They did extinguish the spirit, defy the voices of
the Prophets, persecute Christ in his members, and the Church became altogether
a persecutor: Paralipomen. Vrspergens. page 396.

Aeneas Syluius: Refriguit charitas, and fides omnis interijt: Charity is
waxen cold, and all faith is dead: Epistol. ad Caspar. Schlickium.

Nicholaus Cusanus a Cardinal thus says: Si recte respicimus, omnis religio
Christiana paucis dempta, degenerauit in apparentiam: If ye mark well, all
Christian religion excepting a few, is degenerated to an outward appearance:
excitation. lib. 9.

Bishop of Bitonto: Quibus turpitudinum monstris, qua sordium colluuie, qua
peste non sunt foedati in ecclesia sancta, populus and sacerdos: With what
monsters of filthiness, with what vile uncleanness, with what pestilence be they
not corrupted in the holy Church both priest and people? in Council. Tridentin.

Another thus complains: O nos miseros, qui Christiani dicimur, gentes agimus
sub nomine Christi: Miserable are we, which are called Christians, and under
the name of Christ play the Gentiles: Francisc. Zephyrin. in Apologetic.
Tertullian.

Cheregatus the Popes Legate, thus pronounced at the assembly of Norinberge: A
sacerdotibus iniquitatem populi dimanare, multis nunc annis grauiter, multisque
modis peccatum esse Romae, and inde a pontificio culmine malum hoc atque luem,
ad inferiores omnes ecclesiarum praefectos defluxisse: That the iniquity of
the people does flow from the Priests, that these many years there have been
great and many sins committed at Rome, that this plague is descended from the
high throne of the Bishop to all inferior governors of the Church: Sleidan.
lib. 4 ann. 1523.

Many such testimonies might be brought from their own writers, who have
complained of the corrupt manners of all degrees in the Roman Church. I think
now that we have been meetly even with this Sophister, who seems to have
taken extraordinary pains, according to his simple skill, to hide the
filthiness of his mother, but all in vain.

Every man that has been at Rome, can be an eye witness of their
abominations. Franciscus Petrarch says, that Rome is the whore of Babylon, the
mother of idolatry and fornication, and says, that all shame and reverence is
quite departed thence: Cantilen. 92. Baptista Mantuanus has these verses of
Rome:

Viuere qui sancte vultis, discedite Roma,
Omnia cum liceant non licet esse bonum.
All that will live godly from Rome be packing, all things are there lawful,
only it is not lawful to be good. May we not now say of Rome as the
Lacedaemonians of Athens? one says, The Athenians know what is right, but they
do it not. Another being asked of Athens, said, Omnia ibi pulchra: All things
there were very fair and good: because nothing was counted dishonest. Or as
Eudamides said to one that commended Athens: that that city could not be well
praised, quam nemo (...).
ideo laudat, quod ibi factus sit melior, which no man therefore commends,
for that he became a better man there. Thus we may judge by the fruits what
manner of religion popery is: neither that it is any slander at al, to call
it an enemy to true virtue and godliness, and a mother of hypocrisy, as their
own writers do plentifully witness.

The eleventh Slander.
SYnops. page 908. Saul was never truly just nor righteous: and Judas when he
was in his holiest course was but a thief and an hypocrite: as the Scripture
testifies: notable lies, says the Libeller. page 141.

The Defense.
FIrst, to prove Saul to have been a good man, this text is alleged, 1. Sam.
9. 2. Saul erat electus and bonus, etc. Saul an elect and good man, and none of
the children of Israel better then he.

Answ. 1. The word translated elect in the vulgar Latin (...) bachur, Pagnine
interprets a young man, and so is the word, bechurim, youth, taken,
Ecclesiast. 12. 1. and so expounded in the vulgar Latin: the meaning then is
that Saul was an elect or choice young man: the Septuagint read (...), a goodly
great man: the other word (...) tobh, good, Arias reads, pulchrior, there was
not a fairer man: as it is taken Genes. 6. The sons of God saw that the
daughters of men were fair, the word is toboth, good: but they were not very
good in respect of true goodness: and in this place the vulgar Latin also
reads, pulchra, they were fair: it might have pleased the translator to have
retained the same word here. The text then means, that Saul was a goodly
fair man for his body and stature: as the next words do show, from the
shoulders upward he was higher then any of the people: for otherwise, if it be
understood of true goodness, he should be preferred before all the godly then
living, yea before Samuel. The Libeller was not well advised to allege this
text, whereby he does but display and lay open his ignorance in the text, and
blindness in the true sense thereof.

And further, that Saul was not truly just Saul never truly just.
before God, it appears by that Samuel says, 1. Sam. 13. 14. The Lord has
sought him a man after his own heart; that is David: Saul then was not a man
after Gods own heart.

Secondly, Hierome (says the Detector) lib. 3. aduers. Pelagian. proves that
Judas was once just by these words of our Savior, Ioh. 17. 12. Whom thou
gave me I have kept, and none of them perished but the son of perdition.

Cont. 1. He should have done well to have alleged Hieromes words, seeing that
book Judas never but an hypocrite.
is long and not distinguished into chapters: but he shows himself as well
seen here in Hierome, as before in the Scripture. The contrary elsewhere may
be gathered out of Hierome, as where he thus writes to Hedibia quaest. 10.
Deus non saluat irrationabiliter and absque iudicij veritate, sed
praecedentibus causis, quia alij non susceperunt filium Dei, alij sponte sua
susceperunt: God does not save without reason, or true judgment, but by causes
going before, because some received not the son of God, some willingly received
him. Therefore because Judas was not saved, he did not receive Christ truly, or
aright believe in him.

2. Augustine out of this Scripture concludes the contrary, that Judas was a
reprobate: Filius perditionis dictus est traditor Christi, perditioni
praedestinatus: The betrayer of Christ is called the son of perdition,
because he was predestinate to perdition: tract. ^07. in Ioann. If he were a
reprobate from the beginning, he was never a right good man in deed.

3. That Judas in his holiest course was but an hypocrite and a thief, the
Scripture testifies, Ioh. 6. 70. Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you
is a devil? This was spoken, long before Judas betrayed Christ, when he was
newly chosen, and daily conversant with Christ, and did the office of an
Apostle with the rest. When was he holier in show then while he walked with
Christ, preached with the rest, and wrought miracles? but even then he was a
devil: and when he sat with Christ at the table, and dipped his hand with him
in the platter, and as Origin thinks, was admitted ad mensam corporis
Christi, to the table of Christ's body: tract. 35. in Math. yet even then and
before he was a thief, Ioh. 12. 6.

4. I will conclude with that testimony out of their own Canon, Cause. 2.
quaest. 1. c. 6. where Christ is brought in thus speaking of Judas: Although he
be not yet excluded from you: a me tamen, qui omnia certissime noui separatus
and diuisus est: yet I that know all things have separated and divided him: et
si ego per occulti iudicij sententiam damnatum habeo, vos tamen adhuc illum per
tolerantiam sustinete: although I by the sentence of my secret judgment hold
him condemned, yet you must tolerate him a while. How then was he truly just*
before God, when he was already separated and condemned in the judgment of
Christ?

Now sir (Detector) let the Reader judge, whose mouth has now ran over: such
lips such lettice, we present you your berries as a fit dish for your tooth:
and the lies, which you have here forged, as counterfeit stuff we return to
your own shop. These are your proper colors: such slanderous spirits most
of your sect are led by. One may say of you, as Leo^^^hidas of Demaratus sons
that spoke evil of him: Non miror, been enim eorum nemo loqui potest: I
marvel not at it, for none of (...).
them can speak well. Bernards counsel had been good to such swift tongues:
Modicum membrum lingua, sed nisi caueas, magnum malum, facile volat atque* ideo
facile violat charitatem: The tongue a little member, but works great
mischief, it flies fast, but of charity soon makes waste: sermon. de
triplic. custod.

The twelfth Slander.
HEre the Libeller obiecteth four untruths together:

1. That Bellarmine is at variance with himself, in one place making the Pope
the chief judge of all controversies, in another the Pope with the Cardinals:
which both may well stand together without any variance. 2. That it is
affirmed, that Bellarmine for exposition of Scripture refers us to the
Fathers of the Church, whereof he makes no mention at all. 3. False also that
he refers us from general Councels to the Pope and Cardinals. 4. False
also, that he makes mention of Cardinals, of whom he says nothing.
The Defense.
1. WHether there be not variance and diversity in these two places of
Bellarmine, one while to make the Pope Judge, another while to join the
Cardinals with him, as though he were not sufficient without them: for why
else are they joined with him? I leave it to the Readers judgment: it is not a
matter worthy to be contended about: and I am ashamed to spend time in such
frivolous stuff, but that a brabler must be answered.

2. For the other three points, they are not first of my devising: that worthy
professor Master Whitakers, does so collect Bellarmines sense, contr. 1.
quaest. 5. cap. 3. And it seems to be Bellarmines meaning altogether (for his
words in this place are not by us alleged). First, that we should have
recourse to the Fathers for the exposition of the Scripture: for he refers
us to the Council of Trent, sess. 4. which prescribes, that sense of the
Scripture to be followed, which either the Church holds, or the joint
consent of the Fathers.

3. Bellarmine refers us to a Council confirmed by the chief pastor, or to
the chief pastor, cum concilio aliorum pastorum, with the counsel of other
pastors: these two being disioyned, with this disjunctive sieve, or, cannot be
taken in any good construction for all one: as the Libeller does insinuate p.
147. But Bellarmine must be expounded by himself, who other where would have
appeals made from general Councels to the Pope, lib. 2. de concilior.
authoritat. cap. 17. And so in this place this order is prescribed, that where
a Council cannot resolve of doubts, it should be determined by the Pope with
his assistance.

4. Though the name Cardinals, be not here expressed in Bellarmine: yet his
concilium pastorum, council of pastors, assistants to the Pope, can be no
other but the College of Cardinals: 1. For if he did mean any other Council,
it were a vain repetition of the same thing, to say, a Council confirmed by
the chief pastor, or, the chief pastor with a council. 2. It seems to be
such a council, as is always ready at hand: so is no other council but of
the Cardinals, that are always resiant in Rome. 3. Whereas the last revolution
of matters is to the Apostolic sea, distinct. 20. ^. 1. By the sea Apostolic
they understand not the Pope only, sed concilium illud, quo pontifex vtitur,
but that council also which the Pope uses in deciding of matters. Alphons.
lib. 1. cont. haeres. cap. 8.

5. Lastly, Bellarmines meaning must be such as is affirmed, to refer us for
the interpretation of Scripture first to the Fathers, then to a Council, in
the last place to the Popes Consistory, or else he differs from their own
Canons, which prescribe this course to be observed: first, whereas the solution
cannot be found, ad diuina recurre scripta Graeca, have recourse to the
Scriptures in Greek: then Canones Apostolicae sedis intuere, look into the
Canons of the Apostolic sea: then manum mitte ad historias a catholicis
doctoribus scriptas, take into your hand the histories written by Catholic
Doctors, etc. if this will not serve, Seniores prouinciae congrega, gather the
Elders of the province. This Canon sends us first to the Fathers, then to
Council: distinct. 20. cap. 3. and in the 1. canon. Last of all, ad
Apostolicam sedem referendum, it must be referred to the Apostolic sea.

Now, let the Libeller know, that here is neither shameless lying, nor
falsification committed by the defender, unless he will make Bellarmine to
speak absurdly and contrary to the Canons, or unless he will revile the
dead, that are in blessed rest: who though he can speak well of few alive, yet
I trust he will spare the dead: unless he be more impudent then that rayler, of
whom Pleistarchus thus said, when he heard he commended him: Certainly, says
he, credebat me mortuum, he (...).
thought I was dead, for he can speak well of none alive. As for your
unchristian and scornful railings, which bewray a corrupt heart and unclean
mouth, I no more regard it, then the croking of frogs: as Hierome writes of
Blesilla: Blesilla nostra ridebit, nec dignabitur loquacium ranarum audire
conuitia, cum Dominus eius dictus sit Beelzebub: our Blesilla will smile, nor
vouchsafe to regard the railings of croking frogs, seeing her Lord was called
Beelzebub: ad Marcel.

The thirteenth Slander.
TWo falsifications are here noted, that Bellarmine should say, Antichrist
shall be 1
verily of the tribe of Dan, and that, he confuteth 2
that opinion in the same place, libr. 3. de Roman. pontif. cap. 12. whereas he
would bear us in hand that Bellarmine does neither.

The Defense.
FIrst, that Bellarmine shows diverse reasons, why Antichrist is no^ like to
come of the tribe of Dan, and confuteth that opinion; it is thus showed: That
whereas that opinion is grounded upon three texts of scripture, Genes. 49. 17.
Dan shall be a Serpent by the way, biting the horse heels. Ierem. 8. 16. The
neying of horses is heard from Dan. Apocal. 7. Twelve thousand are reckoned up
of every tribe, Dan is left out, because Antichrist should come of that tribe.
Bellarmine does thus answer to all these places: in the first he understands
Sampson, in the second Nabuchadnezzar, in the third Ephraim he says is left
out as well as Dan: and so he takes away the grounds of that opinion: what is
this else but to confute it, and bring reasons against it, in answering of their
reasons, and annihilating the testimonies of Scripture, without the which that
opinion has no show of probability at all? Neither is it affirmed that he
brings reasons to show certainly he shall not be of the tribe of Dan, but that
it is not likely. And I pray you, in like sort, whereas you allege diverse
places of Scripture to prove the supremacy of Peter, and his successors, he
that should answer all those places, and show reasons, that they are otherwise
to be taken (as Bellarmine does here) would ye not say, that he confuted
that opinion, and brought reasons against it?

Secondly, where Bellarmine says, Sine dubio Antichristus licet vere sit de
tribu Dan, finget se esse de familia David: Without doubt Antichrist, although
he be verily of the tribe of Dan, shall feign himself to be of the family of
David. Does he not seem here to think that Antichrist shall be of Dan? 1. If
he speak according to the opinion of others, he should have said, licet
esset, though he should be, and needed not to have put in verily: and if he
be not of Dan, why says he, finget, he shall feign himself to be of the
family of David? for in case he be not verily of Dan, he should not need so
to feign. What then, though Bellarmines words be reported thus, Antichristus
vere erit de tribu Dan, Antichrist verily shall be of the tribe of Dan: here is
no falsification, because Bellarmines sense is kept: licet, though, was
omitted, because it would have been but a broken sentence so beginning, unless
the whole had been alleged, which had been too long and tedious, where
brevity is intended: and, where for, sit, be, erit, shall be, is read, is it
not plain that Bellarmine speaks not of the time present, but of the time to
come, when Antichrist should be revealed? for neither he nor they think, that
he is yet come. And further, if ye think that Bellarmine is not of this
opinion, that Antichrist shall come of Dan, you will set him, and your Doctors
of Rhemes together by the ears, that so affirm, 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 8. We are
not then falsifiers, but ye are cauillers, that catch at words and syllables.
I may say to this carper, as Cleomenes said to the Argiues: Miror (...).
si duarum syllabarum additio vos meliores facit: I marvel if the gaining of
two syllables (in this word licet) will make him an honester man. As for your
shameless words of lying and corruption, he belieth him, falsifieth his words:
we regard them not, your mouth is no slander: neither pass we to be judged
of such men: but this is our comfort, as Hierome says, Aliter liuor, aliter
Christus iudicat, non eadem est sententia tribunalis eius and anguli
susurronum: Malice judges one way, Christ another, there is not the same
sentence of his throne, and of backbiters in corners: ad virgin. Hermonens.

Thus has the Libeller finished the first chapter of his learned treatise: he
promises great matters in the rest of his Libell: but he will serve his
reader, as Philip did his fellow ghests, who to save his hosts credit when
provision failed, bid them reserve their stomachs for the dainties, and so
they rose an hungered: for take away the railings, sophistications, cauils,
slanders, which are the flowers of this Libell, little else will remain. As a
certain Lacedemonian said of the Nightingale, that it was nothing but a voice:
so the Libeller has nothing but scoffs, lies and bragges: And as Theodorus
was wont to (...).
say, that he did with the right hand deliver his orations, the hearers did
receive them with the left: so this cauiller with a sinister eye does examine,
what was without malice or fraud first uttered: It is an easy matter to pick
quarrels, and take exceptions against any man's works. The Libeller should
rather have showed himself, and entered into the lists, and handled some
controversy of religion, and taken upon him to confute SYNOPSIS, which he
carpeth at. But as one said to Philip when he had overcome and destroyed
Olynthus, that he could not build such a city again: so I think it would
appose this Sophister and trouble his wit, to set such another book by it, as
that which he seeks so much to disgrace. But I will proceed to examine the
rest of his accusations, not fearing any thing which he can object.

THE SECOND CHAPTER OF supposed Contradictions.
The 1. Contradiction.
HEre the Libeller obiecteth: 1. That Bellarmine is falsified to say, that the
spirit of God is witness unto us, that the Scriptures are the word of God.
page 154.

2. That the Scriptures themselves are witnesses, which words uttered by
Bellarmine, show a far different meaning, says he. p. 155.

3. Another untruth is noted, that Bellarmine should make no mention of the
Church, to be a probation unto us of the Scriptures. page 156.

4. A contradiction is noted, because it is confessed that Bellarmine should
say, that we are not bound to take the Scriptures for the word of God, without
the authority of the Church. page 148.

The Reconciliation.
1. FIrst, what difference I pray you, to say God himself is a witness to us,
and the spirit of God is a witness (for this is one exception which the
libeller takes) is not the spirit of God, God? And think you, that when
Bellarmine said, God himself is witness, he excluded the spirit? As though
the inspiration, interpretation, protection and preservation of the Scriptures
be not the work of the spirit of God? 2. Timoth. 3. 16. 2. Pet. 1. 21.

Yea but Bellarmine says in another sense, that God is a witness, not by the
inward testimony of his spirit, but by defending the scripture from humane
profanation by heavenly punishment. Libel. page 154.

Cont. 1. Is this a good consequent I pray you? God bears witness to the
Scripture sometime by taking vengeance: Ergo, not by the inward testimony of
his spirit. Sir Sophister, if your Logic had not here failed you, you would
not have made so slender a collection: for whereas Bellarmine makes the great
number of miracles the fifth witness; does not the Scripture say, Hebr. 2. 3.
God bearing witness thereto with signs and wonders and diverse miracles? God
then is not a witness only by punishments, but by signs and miracles.

2. Bellarmine himself says afterward in the same chapter: Non omnes per
internum afflatum Deus docet, etc. sed per corporales literas, quas legeremus
and cerneremus, erudire nos voluit: God teaches not all by inward inspiration,
etc. but by corporal letters, which we should read and see, he would
instruct us. We also refuse immediate revelations and inspirations: but God by
the lection and inspection of the Scriptures does instruct us. God then does
use the Scriptures themselves as means of this spiritual instruction, which is
the inward testimony of Gods spirit, by our outward reading and hearing of the
Scripture, inwardly witnessing the truth thereof unto us: how much I pray you
differ we now?

3. Whereas Bellarmine makes these the witnesses of Scripture: first, the
truth of the prophesies: secondly, the agreement of the holy writers:
thirdly, God himself: fourthly, the perpetual truth of the Scriptures: may it
not well be gathered hereupon, that Bellarmine thinks, that God inwardly
working in our hearts by the Scriptures themselves, which we find to be most
perfect, consonant, true, does teach us which is the word of God: for I pray
you, who makes us to acknowledge the Scriptures, by the truth, harmony,
constancy thereof? does not the spirit of God by these means moving and
persuading the heart? Bellarmine then is not slaundered at all, when it is
affirmed, that in this place, he holds as we do concerning the means, how
to know the Canonical Scriptures: for we also teach, that the Scriptures by no
foreign or extrinsecall means, but from themselves, the verity, harmony,
holiness thereof, (the spirit of God hereby working in our hearts) are known to
be the word of God.

2. Secondly, let it be seen whether in a different sense Bellarmine and we
in this place (for I deal no further) do make the Scriptures witnesses to
themselves. These are his words: Fourthly, the Scripture it self is witness,
whose prophesies, if they were true of things to come, why should not the
testimonies of things present be true? The Scripture then bears witness to
it self by the constant and perpetual truth thereof: what other thing do we
say, but that the Scripture from it self does prove it self, by the truth,
constancy, majesty thereof, to be the word of God.

3. Thirdly, Bellarmine makes here no mention of the Church, among these five
witnesses: 1. The truth of prophecies. 2. The consent of the holy writers. 3.
God himself, etc. 4. The Scripture it self. 5. Postremo testis est, etc.
Lastly is witness the infinite number of miracles. Now I pray you (sir
Cauiller) is here any mention made of the Church? your dealing is too childish
to send us to other places for Bellarmines judgment: I know him to be
elsewhere corrupt enough, I only urge his testimony against himself in this
place.

4. Fourthly, so is your supposed contradiction also reconciled: for to say
that Bellarmine in this place, among these five witnesses, makes no mention of
the Church, and y^ otherwhere he would have the Scriptures depend upon the
authority of the Church, is no contradiction in him that notes this
diversity, but in Bellarmine, that varieth from himself.

But now somewhat to answer to your blasphemous railings: as page 154. God may
punish him for such tricks of falsification, tending to the seducing and utter
subversion of silly souls, etc. I say rather with S. Paul, God shall smite
thee thou painted wall, Act. 23. 3. God will judge all such hypocrites in his
time, as make no conscience to slander and revile the members of Christ.

And if God do sometime give witness to the Scriptures, as most true it is,
by punishing them, that profane or blaspheme them, then how shall your popish
writers escape unpunished, that have not been ashamed, thus irreverently to
speak of the Scriptures? Hosius says it is egenum quoddam elementum, a
beggarly element: ex Nicol. Gall. Lodouicus says, Scriptura est quasi mortuum
atramentum: The Scripture is as dead ink: Illyric. in vorm. council. The Bishop
of Poicters, Scriptura estres inanimis and muta, The Scripture is a dumb and
dead thing: Sleidan. lib. 23. Eckius calls it, Euangelium nigrum, and
Theologiam atramentariam, A black Gospel, and inky Divinity: Kemnit. page 23.
Pigghius, Sunt velut nasus cereus, The Scriptures are as a nose of wax:
Hierar: libr. 3. cap. 3. And that the children may fill up the iniquity of
their fathers, of late this present year 1602. in a certain colloquie at
Ratisbone between the Divines of Witemberge, and certain Jesuits: one
Iacobus Gretserus a Jesuit uttered this horrible blasphemy of the Scriptures:
A great blasphemy against the spirit of God and the Scriptures.
Spiritum sanctum per scripturas loquentem non posse esse indicem
controuersiarum: That the spirit of God speaking by the Scripture, can not be
judge of controversies. And added further: St potest me spiritus sanctus
condemnare per hanc scripturam, age faciat, veniat, and dicat, Iacobe Gretsere
tu erras, and statim transibo ad scamnum vestrum: If the spirit of God can
condemn me by this scripture, go to, let him come, and say, thou Jacob
Gretsere art in an error, and I will straight way go unto your side: ex Egid.
Hunnio. If the Lord were not a most gracious and long suffering God, we might
wonder, how such blasphemers could go unpunished. Gods bountifulnes (as the
Apostle says, Romans 2. 4.) leads them to repentance: which God send them, if
they belong unto him, that they may repent them of their blasphemies toward
God, and their slanders against men: otherwise their judgment sleeps not,
but shall be revealed in time. For as Ambrose says: Si pro otioso verbo ratio
poscitur, quanto magis pro sermon impietatis poena exoluitur: If account shall
be rendered for an idle word, how much more for wicked speech shall punishment
be inflicted? Bias said to a certain lewd man, He feared (...).
not least he should not be punished, but least he should not see it. But we,
as we fear their punishment in the end; so we desire not to see it, but pray
for their repentance and amendment.

The 2. Contradiction.
SYnops. p. 263. it is affirmed, that marriage was lawful for all men, until
Pope Nicholas the 2. and yet in the same page it is said, that Gregory the 1.
enjoined his Clergy to live single: and page 266. the iniunction of single
life first proceeded from Siricius: which two were long before Nicholas 2.
Alexander 2. or Gregory the 7. who began by public decree to restrain
Ministers marriage.

The Reconciliation.
FIrst, here is no contradiction at all, if these words may find a favorable
interpreter: for notwithstanding that diverse decrees were made before to
restrain Ministers marriage, and some attempted to impose single life, yet till
a thousand years after Christ, there was not a general and constant restraint
of such marriage.

1. Siricius indeed began first to inhibite the marriage of Priests, about anno
428. yet after him succeeded Siluerius son of Hormisda, who was also Bishop
of Rome ann. 534 ex Caranz. Council. sum.

2. Before this in the Nicene Council they would have enjoined single life to
the Clergy, but that by the wise advice of Paphnutius the Synod altered their
minds. Sozomen. lib. 1. c. 11. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 11.

3. Gregory 1. though at the first he liked well of single life, yet seeing
the inconvenience thereof, when in his mote or pond many childrens heads were
found, he then altering his mind, confessed with S. Paul, that it was better
to marry then to burn: ex epistol. Hulderic. ad Nicolaum Papam. This Gregory
Gratian. distinct. 56. cap. 2. Caranza.
lived anno 603. yet after him anno 636. came Theodorus Bishop of Rome the
son of Theodorus a Bishop: so that we see that all this while, the restraint
of Clergiemens marriage was not received generally as a law, necessarily to
bind, till the time before expressed.

Secondly, whereas the Council of Neocesaria and second of Carthage are
objected, that forbid the marriage of Ministers: I answer, that sometime it was
decreed against, and sometime decreed with: as Council. Ancyran. can. 10.
Gangrens. c. 4. which see at large, Synops. page 265. and that all degrees of
the Clergy might take them wines, until this general restraint, it is there
further declared p. 269. to the which places I refer the Reader. Neither
need I to spend much time in ^ifting the authorities of Councels, having to
deal with a man utterly ignorant in them, which receives the^ but at the
second hand: as it may appear for that, whereas the 37. canon of the Africane
Council, is thus translated: Placuit Episcopos, etc. vxoribus abstinere: It
pleases us, that Bishops, Priests, Deacons abstain from their wives: he
charge the translator very simply and ignorantly with corruption, because he
^aith their wives: for it is evident that this Canon inioyneth abstinence from
their own wives, as it may appear by the 5. Carthage Council 3. from whence
this Canon is taken word forword, as it is alleged by Gratian. did. 85. cap.
4. Cum de quorundam Clericorum quamuis erga vxores proprias incontinentia
referatur: For as much as report is made to us of the incontinencie of Clergy
men though toward their own wives. Then follow the very same words; It
pleases us, that Bishops etc. abstain from their wives: for whose wives I
pray you does the Council mean but their own?

Thirdly, the Libeller, because Pope Gregory the 7. is said to be a notable
sorcerer and adulterer, charge him, that so writes, to be a notable lier:
and further says, that generally all the historiographers of that time, did
highly commend him: as Anselmus, Marianus Scotus, Guitmundus, etc.

Contra. What two or three which were partially affected to the Pope, might
write in Gregory the 7. no good man.
praise of him, it is not much to be weighed: for these three, that are said to
witness with him (and yet are they but dumb witnesses, speaking nothing, but
only named) we can produce thrice three, that discommend him. Sabellicus and
Blondus do describe his great in^olencie, when he suffered the Emperor in
hard frost, with bare legs to wait at his gate three days, Sab ellic.
Enead. 9. lib. 3. Blond. decad. 2. lib. 3. Benno Cardinal says, he poisoned
six Popes, that he was a Coniurer, a raiser of Devils, and in his rage cast
the Sacrament into the fire. Anselmus Rid, whom we set against your Anselme,
notes his sedition, saying, that in the time of his Popedom, both the
temporal and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction was shaken and broken, with infinite
miseries.

Sigebertus Gemblacens. says, that he troubled the states of Christendom,
discharged the subjects from their oath of fealty: Sigeber. anno 1074.

Lambertus Scaphnaburg. reports, that the Clergy held him to be an heretic,
and vesani dogmatis, and of wicked doctrine.

Nauclerus: The Clergy said, that he had defiled the Sea Apostolic with
Simonie, Heresy, Murder, Adultery, that he was an Apostata: Naucler. general.
26. The Council of Brixia called him, a disturber of the Empire, a subuerter
of the Church: Vrspergens. anno 1082. The Council of Worms, that he was
spotted with many periuries. Yea, what need we any other witness, when he
confessed to one of his Cardinals in his sickness, that he had foully abused
his pastoral office, that he had troubled mankind with malice and mischief
by the procurement and counsel of the Devil: Sigebert. anno 1085.

If then a murderer, adulterer, sorcerer, heretic, Apostata, if a seditious,
perjured person be a good man, then may you count Pope Hildebrand in the
number. Now we may see how shameless these men are, to call so evident an
history a lie: and to count a wicked man holy and blessed, not remembering how
the Prophet cries woe against those, that speak good of evil, and evil of
good. Esaias. 5. 20.


Fourthly, with the like boldness he calls that of Gregory a fabulous tale,
that 6000. childrens heads were found in his fishpond or mote, page 160. yet it
is extant in the epistle of Huldericus Bishop of Augusta, sent to Pope Nicolas
2. which epistle is alleged by Aeneas Syluius, who was afterward Bishop of
Rome: in descript. German. The same epistle written in parchment, in an old
hand, of good record, Bishop ^ewel of worthy memory testifies, that he had
seen, defens. Apolog. page 237. and Master Fox also that painful and godly
man says, he had seen an old copy of the said epistle sent by master Bale to
the Bishop of Canterbury, Fox page 1154. Of the said epistle also Illyric.
makes mention, in Catalog. and Melancthon lib. 1. de coniug. And yet for all
this the Libeller would bear us in hand, that the epistle is forged, and the
rest but a tale.

Lastly, that Hildebrand and his fellow Popes about that time did first make a
general restraint of Priests marriage, when marriage began by a public law to
be restrained, it is evident out of Auentinus: he condemned such as were
married for Nicolaitans, and directed his special letters to O. tho Bishop of
Constance to separate such as were married, and forbid the rest to marry: but
that good Bishop resisted the Popes proceedings and would not obey. And in
the Council of Brixia this is alleged as one cause why they deposed
Hildsbrand, for that he caused diuorcements and separations amongst the married:
ex Vrspergens. To say then, that marriage was first generally inhibited to the
Clergy not till a thousand years after Christ, and yet to grant that it might
be for sometime restrained before, by particular acts of some persons and
places, I hope is no contradiction: What cause then had this cauiller, to
follow with open cry, a shameless untruth, lies and mad tricks, when as more
truly these opprobries do rebound upon his own head? I may liken him to the
Lamia in Plutarch, that is fained to sit blind at home, Libr. de curiositat.
laying aside her eyes into some corner, and putting of them on again when she
goes forth: so plaieth this companion, he is sharp sighted abroad in looking
upon other, and blind in his own house, he cannot see himself. Hierome could
have told him: Non facilis est venia praua dixisse de rectis: It is not a fault
easily pardoned to speak evil of the right. Hieron. Asellae.

The 3. Contradiction.
BEcause page: 63. it is said, Telesphorus brought in the Lenten fast, Calixtus
Ember fasts, Hyginus Chrisme, that lived some 14. or 15. hundred year ago:
and yet before, these are called erroneous and heretical opinions.

The Reconciliation.
THe occasion of these words is to be considered, which was to answer
Bellarmine and the Rhemists challenge that the authors and beginners of their
religion cannot be showed, as they can produce the authors of ours: whereupon,
it is declared out of their Popes decrees, who were the authors of some of
their erroneous vsages: as Telesphorus, Calixtus, Hyginus brought in Lent,
Ember fasts, Chrisme: which is affirmed, not ex sententia scriptoris, of the
sentence of the writer, but ex confessione aduersarij, by the confession of the
adversary: for they themselves do ascribe the beginning of these vsages to
these ancient Bishops, which their confession, is a good argument against
themselves. And that this is the writers meaning, it is evident, by comparing
with this place, that which is handled of this matter in Tetrastyl. pill. 1.
part. 3. where all these decrees of Telesphorus, Hyginus, Calixtus are proved
to be forged. Telesphorus decree bears date, when Antoninus and Marcus were
Consuls, who were never together in that office. Hyginus epistles are dated,
when Camerinus and Magnus were Consuls, which was never. Calixtus 2. epistle
co^futeth the error of Nouatus, that did spring up long after. Other reasons
are there showed, why the decrees which go under their name are thought not to
be theirs: loc. 15. 16. 21.

Thus then is this contradiction healed, that notwithstanding any thing here
said: these may be erroneous vsages, for all these forged authors: whom
although you allege as patroues of great antiquity, yet we think your
superstitious observations are nothing so ancient, and confess with D.
Sutclife: We shall not find, where the Church of Christ has enjoined
Christians to fast Lent, and Ember days, and vigils of Saints: which the
Libeller notes page 24. as an apparent difference between that learned
writer, and the other whom he impugneth.

I say then to this brabler, as Eudamidas to a certain Fiddler: Magnus
delinitor in re exigua: (...).
He made a great piece of work of nothing. So has this Carper fidled unto us
with a loud sound a matter not worth the whistling: he should have done much
better to have followed Ambrose counsel; Solliciti esse debemus, ne quid
temere vel incuriose geramus, aut quicquam cuius non possimus probabilem
reddere rationem: actus enim nostri causa, etsi non omnibus redditur, ab
omnibus tamen examinatur: We must be careful, that we do nothing rashly or
carelessly, whereof we can not give a probable reason: the cause of our acts,
though it be not rendered to all, yet it is examined of all: lib. offic. 1. cap.
47.

The 4. Contradiction.
SYnops. 70. Is it not a substantial point and belonging to the faith to know
which books are Canonical, which are not, page 56. to know every particular
book of Scripture to be Canonical, is not simply necessary to salvation.
These speeches are noted to be contradictorie.

The Reconciliation.
FIrst, whereas Bellarmine says, that they dissent not among themselves in any
material points, or such things as appertain to faith, and it is answered, I
marvel he blusheth not thus to say, himself knowing the contrary: then it
follows, is it not a substantial point, etc. Who sees not that here he
appealeth to Bellarmines knowledge, who does affirm elsewhere this a thing
necessary to be known, what books of Scriptures are canonical in
particular: as libr. 4. de verbo Dei cap. 4. to prove traditions beside
Scripture to be necessary, he brings this argument in the third place:
Tertia probatur ex multis, quae ignorari non possunt, and tamen in scripturis
non continentur: Thirdly this is proved, because many things, which we cannot
be ignorant of, are not contained in the Scripture. And it follows afterward:
Non satis est scire esse scripturam sanctam, sed oportet scire, quae sit illa:
It is not enough to know that there is holy Scripture, but we must know which
it is. So How it is necessary (...) salvation to know the canonical
scriptures.
then Bellarmine does hold it a thing necessary, to know which books are
Scripture: but therein they disagree among themselves: Ergo, they dissent in
necessary points. So that in saying, is it not a substantial point, and
belonging to faith to know which books are canonical? there is relation to
Bellarmines knowledge and confession: for that which is necessary to be
known, is (I think) a material point, substantial, and belonging to faith.

Secondly: neither is there any contradiction in these words, of themselves:
for to know which are the canonical books, may be held to be a substantial
point and belonging to the faith, and yet not simply necessary to salvation:
he knows little if he cannot distinguish between a simple and absolute
necessity, and a necessity not absolute: as some things are absolutely
necessary to salvation, without the which a man cannot be saved: as Hebr. 10.
36. Patientia vobis necessaria: Patience is necessary unto you, that after ye
have done the will of God, you may receive the promise. But in another sense
the Apostles write, Act. 15. 28. It seemed good, etc. to lay no more burden
upon you, then these necessary things: yet was it not simply necessary to
abstain from blood and things strangled, but convenient, and profitable for
that time, because of offense: so to know which books are canonical, though
it be not simply necessary to salvation, if a man hold the foundation: yet is
it necessary, as a profitable mean for the increase of faith: and though it
be not so substantial as the foundation of faith, yet is it substantial, as
many necessary parts in an house are beside the foundation. I may say now to
our cauilling adversary, that triumphs in his contradictions, as Archidamus
the Lacedemonian said to his son boldly aduenturing to fight: Aut viribus add,
(...).
vel de animi elatione aliquid detrahe: Either put to more strength, or abate
of your courage: So seeing the Cauillers objections are no stronger, he should
do well not to be so confident. As for my self, I say with Hierome: Non de
aduersario victoriam, sed contra mendacem quaerimus victoriam: I seek not so
much for victory of an adversary, as for the verity against a lier: Hier.
Augustine.

The 5. Contradiction.
BEcause it is said, that Luther was an excellent instrument stirred up of God
to set forth his truth, Sy nops. page 620. and yet it is confessed, that he
erred in diverse points, as concerning penance, and the Real presence, etc.

The Reconciliation.
SIr Cauiller, your collection is very weak: May not a man be a profitable
instrument in Christ's Church, though he hold some erroneous opinions?
Tertullian favored the heresy of the Montanists in condemning of second
marriage. Cyprian and Dionysius Alexandrinus did hold, that they which were
baptized of heretics, should be baptized again: Hieron. catal. scriptor.
Papias, Irenaeus, Victorinus, Apollinarius, Lactantius, were all Chiliastes:
they did hold, that the faithful should reign with Christ upon the earth a
thousand years after the resurrection.

Many gross errors are ascribed to Origin, The Fathers profitable instruments
notwithstanding some errors
as that he should hold that in the end the devils should be saved: that men
were elected according to the merits of their souls, in a former life, before
they came into their bodies: that the torments of hell consist only in the
conscience of sin: that there was another world before this: that Christ for
the salvation of Devils should suffer in the air, etc. These and many such
gross opinions Hierome ascribes to Origin. ad Auitum, whether they be true or
false of him, it is now impertinent to dispute.

Few of the Fathers beside can be named, but they had their special errors:
will you therefore conclude (Sir Sophister) that these learned Fathers were not
excellent instruments in their times? For notwithstanding Luther might in some
things be deceived, (whose opinions I will neither now justify nor impleade,
but only touch your contradiction) yet was he a very excellent and profitable
member of Christ's Church.

But whereas you scornefully come in with your, what if, as though master Fox
were belied, or that Master Fox played some crafty trick: and you will give
more credit to Roffensis, and Bellarmine for reporting of Luthers opinion? Here
whether you show more ignorance, or malice with boldness (Sir Controller) I
cannot say: for master Fox is truly alleged, and he truly cites Luthers
opinions, as they were condemned by Pope Leo under his bull: and this to be one,
that where a Priest cannot be had, every Christian man or woman stands in as
good steed: Fox. page 1281. col. 2. artic. 13. he makes no mention of boys,
as your Bellarmine says. Now (my friend) I would think that your holy father
Pope Leo in his bull, should be of better credit with you, then Cardinal
Bellarmine in his book: you urge me to say unto you as Hierome against Ru^^in.
Quid est, quod de ore illo tuo pudentissimo non exeat, video te frontem ferream
possidere: What will not that shameless mouth of you^^ utter; I see you have a
brazen forehead? Whom I may compare to that Merchant of Ch^^s in Plutarke, de
animi tranquillit. who sold every man good wine, and kept the sower to
himself, of whom his servants said: Our master, bonis praesentibus malis
vtitur: when he may use (...).
good things, does choose the evil* So does this Carper omit the best and take
the worst, he changes good things for evil words.

The 6. Contradiction.
SYnops. page 648. it is untrue, that auricular confession has been of ancient
time used in the Church: in Chrysostomes time it was not: and page 650. it was
private confession, which was by Nectarius abrogated, to the which Chrysostom
agreed. Hence it is gathered, that auricular confession was in use in Nectarius
time, for otherwise he could not have abrogated it: how then is it not
ancient? etc.

The Reconciliation.
FIrst, it follows not, if some kind of private confession were used in the
time of Nectarius, that therefore it was the popish auricular confession, which
was brought in by Innocentius the 3: whereby every one was bound to confess to
the Priest, omnia peccata, all their sins, and that under pain of
excommunication while they lived, and to be deprived of Christian burial when
they were dead: Decret. Gregor. lib. 5. tit. 38. c. 12. Such auricular and
particular confession of all sins we deny to have been used in any ancient
time.

They confessed privately such sins as were notorious and troubled the
conscience: which kind of confession, if it be not turned to an abuse, as then
it was, we mislike not, but wish it might be practiced.

Secondly, the taking away of private confession by Nectarius, shows an old
abuse Auricular confession of no great antiquity.
of it: that when it began to degenerate and grow unto inconvenience, then was
it abrogated: what contradiction then is there to say, that auricular
confession was not used of ancient time, and that private confession was abused
in former time and so abrogated? or what do you gain by this, if ye can show
your auricular confession to have been condemned and abrogated a thousand
years and more since: it is not enough to allege antiquity, but to show the
allowance of antiquity.

Now where you say it is a lie, that Nectarius abrogated private confession, as
you enter not into that discourse, being as is most like somewhat beyond your
reach: so I do refer the Reader for our further answer, to y^ which is at
large handled hereof Synops. page 649. sure it is that private confession after
that was not used in the Greek Church, if your own decree be true: Cause. 33.
distin. 1. cap. 9. Some do say that we must confess only to God, vt Graeci,
as the Grecians. It was indeed the use of the Heathen priests to urge
confession: as the priest required of Antalcidas, what evil he had done, and
he answered: If I have done any such thing, the Gods know. As for your lies and
other railing speeches, were pass not for them, they show your weakness, they
hurt not him whom you shoot at. Alcibiades biting his hand, that he wrestled
with, and being asked if he did bite as women: no (...).
says he, but as lions: but this backbiter as a woman muttereth in corners,
not as a manly lion showing himself face to face. I wish him no more hurt,
then that he had followed Hieromes advice: Faciam ne dum volo alium notare
culpae, ipse noter calumniae: I will take heed, lest while I am a fault finder
of others, I be not found my self to be a cauiller.

The 7. Contradiction.
HEre there is both a contradiction noted, 1.
because Synops. page 715. it is affirmed, that Siluester, as Damasus
reports, was the deu^ser of Chrisme, and yet page 63. Hyginus (who lived
straight after the Apostles) is said to have brought in Chrisme.

Likewise an untruth is objected, that Siluester 2
should ordain Chrisme, because Cornelius before that makes mention of it.

The Reconciliation.
FIrst: 1. If either it be answered, that Hyginus brought in Chrisme in
Confirmation, and Siluester ordained Chrisme in Baptism: 2. or that Hyginus is
alleged as the author of Chrisme by the confession of the adversary, as is
before showed, Siluester in our opinion as more likely: 3. or that, Siluester
was the first, that made a public decree and ordinance of Chrisme, which might
be in use before, though not by like authority: Any of these answers may serve
to reconcile these two places objected, whereof we most approve the second and
the third.

Secondly: But Siluester (you say) is not reported by Damasus to have been the
deviser of Chrisme, but did ordain only, that such as were baptized, should
be anointed with Chrisme on the top of the head.

Contra. 1. Well then, ye grant us, that Siluester brought in Chrisme in
Baptism: it follows, that it is no Apostolical institution.

2. Siluester then was the first, by your confession, that made Chrisme a
member or part of the Sacrament of Baptism: others made mention of Chrisme
before, but not of the Sacrament of Chrisme: as Bellarmine himself confesses,
that those testimonies, which he boroweth from the Bishops of Rome, as from
Clemens, Cornelius, Fabianus, non disertis verbis affirmant confirmationem esse
sacramentum, do not directly affirm confirmation to be a Sacrament: de
Sacrament confirmat. lib. 2. c. 3.

3. Cornelius, as he is alleged out of Eusebius, reproved Nouatus for that
after Baptism he received not Chrisme: which was a ceremony and complement
of baptism, omitted at that time, because Nouatus was baptized in his bed
being at the point of death. If Cornelius then required Chrisme to be annexed
to Baptism, I pray you how did Siluester ordain Chrisme first to be used in
Baptism? I would have you salve up this contradiction between them, before
you pick quarrels with us.

4. You have testimonies no less ancient for the proof of Chrisme: which
because you produce not, I will help you with one out of Fabianus second
Decretal epistle. In illa die Dominus Jesus postquam coenauit cum discipulis,
sicut a sanctis Apostolis praedecessores nostri acceperunt, Chrisma conficere
docuit: In the same day, after our Lord Jesus had supped with his Disciples, as
our predecessors received of the Apostles, taught how to make Chrisme. If you
speak of lies, here is a lusty one, that our Savior Christ taught his
Apostles to make Chrisme. I marvel you did not cite this epistle of Fabians,
as you did that of Cornelius to another Fabian: but I more marvel why
Bellarmine omitteth it: you might miss it of ignorance, but I think he was
ashamed to allege so gross and counterfeited authority.

Now as for your Cuckoo song, in crying nothing but lies, lies, we rebound them
upon your own head, and cast your dirt upon your own face. I may well compare
you, as Themistocles did the Eretrians to the fish (...).
called Teuthis, that has a long bone like a sword, but no heart: so you dart
forth words like swords, but there is no heart, that is, truth or substance in
them. God forgive you, and make you an honest man. I say with Ruffinus:
Jnuectiu. Ruffin.
Demus veniam ei, qui veniam dare nescit, imitemur David qui comprehensum in
spelunca inimicum suum Saulum cum iugulare potuit noluit, etc. Let us forgive
him, that knows not how to forgive, and imitate David, who when he might
would not kill Saul taken in the cave.

The 8. Contradiction.
SYnops. Epist. Dedicat. to the fourth book: reason, scripture, antiquity,
make against them, etc. yet the Libeller will prove by our own confession,
that antiquity makes for them against us. page 173.

The Reconciliation.
FIrst, Calvin (says the Libeller) grants that antiquity in diverse
questions believed as they do: Luther refuses diverse of the Fathers, as
Basile, Hierome, and says that the Devil did grossly deceive Gregory in his
Dialogues.

Contra. 1. Is not this well reasoned of this skillful Logician? the Fathers in
some small matters held as the Church of Rome does, as in the ceremonies of
Baptism, prayer for the dead, reserving of the Sacrament: Ergo, generally, and
in the maine points of controversy, as for the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, transubstantiation, adoration of images, sacrifice of the Mass and such
like, they are all with them.

2. And is Luther such an eye sore unto you, because he sometimes refuses,
one, two or three of the Fathers? does he or we any otherwise, then the
Fathers themselves? Says not Hierome? Scio aliter me habere Apostolos, aliter
reliquos tractatores, illos semper vera dicere, istos vt homines in quibusdam
aberrare: I make not like account of the Apostles and other writers: I hold
that they always speak the truth, the other as men in some things may be
deceived: ad Theophil. aduers. Ioann. Hierosol.

Do not popish writers take unto themselves The Fathers refused of popish
writers
the like liberty? Harding refuses Tertullian and Cyprian: Turrian rejects
Chrysostom: Arthurus Hierome: Bellarmine Augustine in diverse places, and
Hilarious, Hippolytus, Apollinarius: See Tetrasty l. p. 142. 143. Bellarmine
says of Sozomene: Eum multa esse mentitum, that he lied in many things, libr.
3. de poeniten. cap. 14. Does not the libeller himself grant as much? We admit
not the authority of one, two or three ancient and holy fathers dissenting
from the rest. page 133.

3. But you think hardly, that Luther should so speak of Gregory's Dialogues:
he might well so do because it is a book full of fables and lies, whereof the
devil is the author; neither was it ever written by Gregory: for this
Dialogue makes mention of purgatory fire, lib. 4. dialog. cap. 39. whereas
Gregory holds but two places after this life, libr. 8. moral. cap. 8. in
these words: Whether a good spirit or evil do receive the soul going out of
the prison of the flesh; it shall keep it secum in aeternum, for ever with it,
without any change: from whence being exalted, it shall not be cast down to
punishment, nor being drenched in eternal punishment shall ascend, etc.

Hierome himself that learned father speaks as hardly of one, against whom
he had no greater cause: Portat nequaquam vexillum Christi, sed insigne
diaboli: He bears not the banner of Christ, but the ensign of the devil,
aduers. Vigilant. Yet I excuse not, whatsoever in the heat of affection, might
drop from Luthers pen.

4. But is not this a good argument, Calvin, Luther, sometime refuse the
Fathers: Ergo, the writer of SYNOPSIS speaks contraries?

Secondly, says the Libeller, Bellarmine in diverse controversies plentifully
cites the fathers: as in the controversies of invocation of Saints,
Pilgrimage, Purgatory, unto the which there is no answer at all but silence,
as Baal answered his suppliant servants, which bewraieth the insufficiency of
his book, and manifestly proclaims antiquity on our side. page 175. 176.

Contra. 1. The writer of SYNOPSIS intending the profit not of the learned, but
of others, thought it not so necessary to handle at large the testimonies of
the Fathers alleged by the adversary: 1. Because the book would have grown
by this means to a greater volume, then was fit for every man's leisure to
read, or their ability to reach. 2. The treatise being in English, to what
purpose should Bellarmines quotations be produced in that language, which the
adversary understood not, and so could not make answer? 3. There be others
that have happily undertaken that enterprise, as that learned man, whom the
Libeller in his first part traduceth, that Bellarmine shall not want work. 4.
As Bellarmines authorities are omitted, except in some principal controversies;
so neither on the other side are our antiquities produced, in such number, as
the writer out of his own readings could have alleged, otherwise then of
their own testimonies, out of their Canons, and writers specially urged
against themselves, and turned upon their own heads. 5. The special grounds
both to confirm the truth, and convince error in every controversy, are to
be taken from the Scriptures, which he thought most profitable for the
instruction of the Reader, and such places out of the Prophets and Apostles are
specially and principally handled: wherein he follows Hieromes advise to
Pammach. Simplices epistolae tuae olent Prophetas, Apostolos sapiunt, non
cothurnatam affectas eloquentiam, nec more puerorum argutas sententiolas in
clausulis struis: Your epistles are plain, smelling of the Prophets, sauouring
of the Apostles, you affect not curious eloquence, nor as children hunt after
sentences.

2. Bellarmine in deed makes great show of antiquity, but most of his
ancient testimonies, are either out of forged authors, or else impertinently
alleged, or by him corrupted and falsified: as, to give one instance for many,
his dealing in the controversy of purgatory evidently shows.

First, the constitutions of Clemens, Dionysius de ecclesiastic. Hierarch.
Athanasius questions ad Antiochiam, Gregory's Dialogues, the Liturgy of Basil,
Testament of Ephrem, are all bastard writings, which Bellarmine produces as
authentical witnesses for Purgatory.

Secondly, Gregory Nazianzen, Eusebius, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Theophylact, Damascene, are impertinently cited for Purgatory: who indeed make
mention of prayer for the dead, but have no one word of Purgatory, neither
does the Greek Church believe that there is any purgatory fire: prooem. ad
council. Florentin.

Tertullian likewise, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierome, are brought in to be of the
Jury for purgatory, but they do not so much as mention it: who so list to
take view of their testimonies, as they are cited by Bellarm. libr. 1. de purg.
cap. 6.

Thirdly, Bellarmine is found to be a falsifier, as Bracarens. council. 1. can.
39. these words are added of his own, vt oraretur pro defunctis, that prayer
should be made for the dead. Likewise Council. 6. sub Symmacho, these words are
foisted in by Bellarmine: Sacrilegium esse fraudare defunctorum animas
orationibus: That it is sacrilege to defraude the souls of the dead of
prayer, the Council says only, it is sacrilege, oblationes defunctoru^
ecclesiae auferre, to take away the oblations of the dead from the Church, and
convert them to other uses. Wormatiens. c. 10. is falsely alleged: Pro
suspensis in patibulo esse sacrificandum: That they must sacrifice for those
that are hanged: or else he had some new copy of his own which he followed. By
these particular instances it may appear, what fidelity Bellarmine has used
in other controversies, and how well antiquity stands of his side.

3. Whereas it is alleged that invocation of Saints is proved by Bellarmine
by the Council of Chalcedon, confirmed by act of parliament, Libel. page 175.
as though now by the laws of this land it were lawful to pray to Saints. Our
answer is, that in deed the Church of England allows the decrees of the
Chalcedon, and of the other three general Councels concerning the faith, and
their condemnation of the heresies of Arrius in the Nicen, of Macedonius in the
first Constantinop. Nestorius in the Ephesine, Eutyches in the Chalcedon: but
all the acts of this Council for other matters it receives not. 2. Neither is
there any Canon or decree in this Council extant of invocation of Saints: for
that which Bellarmine brings, is taken out of the colloquies and conferences,
and postscripts of the Council, not from the authority of any Canon, or
determination thereof. 3. That which he has of the intercession of Proterius,
and of Flauianus: Flauianus post mortem viuit, martyr pro nobis oret: Flauianus
lives after death, let the Martyr pray for us: does show the opinion which
they had that the Saints prayed for them: which is another question. Neither
does it follow, that, if it be granted, that the Saints do pray for us in
general, not knowing our particular necessities, not as mediators, but as
fellow members wishing the perfection of the rest of the body, that therefore
they should be prayed unto: neither can it be showed that those Fathers made
any supplication to those Saints, Sancte Proterie, sancte Flauiane etc. Holy*
Proterius, holy Flauiane pray for us: which form the Church of Rome now
uses. 4. Neither was this the voice of the whole Council, but Episcopi and
presbyteri Constantinopolitani clamauerunt, but the Bishops and priests of
Constantinople so cried, act. 11. 5. And yet we deny not, but that in this
time, which was almost five hundred years after Christ, superstition began to
set foot into the Church, and these opinions of intercession and invocation of
Saints to be embraced, though not in such manner as the Church of Rome now
holds. Neither do we stand so much upon this, what any Fathers of the Church
either a part, or assembled together did hold, as upon what ground of Scripture
their opinion was founded.

4. But as for Baals answer, Baals shaven priests have better experience
thereof, that worship stocks and stones, then they which detest all such
abominations. As Baal was dumb and mute, when his priests called unto him, so
are popish Images, when they are prayed unto: for they can do neither good nor
evil, as the Prophet says, Esaias. 41. 23. Xenophanes wittily derided the like
folly in the superstitious Egyptians, that in their solemn Where are* Baals
priests.
sacrifices used to howl and cry: They are either Gods, then mourn not for
them; or men, then do not sacrifice unto them. And a certain Lace demonian to
him that made collection for the Idol-temples, made this present answer: Non
curo Deos me pauperiores: I care not for such beggarly Gods, that are poorer
then I. Such are popish images, which of other men's purses are decked and
adorned with gold: Such beggarly images, in popery, use to give Baals answer
to their miserable suppliants: which is fit enough for Baals priests, that
mark and disfigure themselves with shauing and cutting, a notable badge of
their hypocrisy. As Philip said to one that (...).
misused his hair: Non posse esse fidelem in negotijs, qui mala fide tractaret
crines: That he could not be faithful in his labor, that was unfaithful to
his locks.

Thirdly, the Libeller would show us to be enemies to antiquity, because it is
called, the vain show of mothworne antiquity: and the 1
vulgar Latin translation of the Bible partly done by Hierome, partly
corrected by him, 2
partly received from another most ancient edition commended by Augustine, is
termed an old blind Latin translation: and the ancient Fathers, Irenaeus,
Hippolytus, Ambrose, 3
Augustine should be called Heretics, because they held that Antichrist
should come of the tribe of Dan. Libel. page 177.

Contra. True antiquity is not called mothworne, 1
but that show of antiquity, which Bellarmine pretends to prove the name
and office of Cardinals, is so called; because like as a garment eaten with
moths, has nothing to commend it, but the oldnes thereof: so are his
allegations borne out only with the name and show of antiquity. For that
alleged out of the Roman Council under Siluester can. 6. shows neither the
name of Cardinals appropriate to the Church of Rome, nor yet their office,
which is to elect the Pope: The Canon only says, that there should be seven
Cardinals in Rome, because the City was divided into seven regions: and every
one should be a principal ouerseer of his quarter. This proves not that
there were Cardinals only in Rome: but the principal Ministers of other
Churches were so called, as at Naples, distinct. 71. c. 5. at Syracuse,
distinct. 74. c. 6. And as for the office of Cardinals in electing the Pope,
Bellarmine confesses it is but of four hundred years continuance, lib. 1. de
Cleric. c. 9.

Neither is the vulgar Latin translation 2
of Hieromes doing, as thinks Sanctis Pagninus in praefat. ad Clem. 7. and
Driedo lib. 2. c. 1. The vulgar Latin not Hieromes translation.
de catalog. scriptur. neither is it that translation of Italy, which
Augustine commends lib. 2. de doct. Christian. c. 15. not. c. 4. as is
erroniously noted in the margin: for Augustine follows that translation which
is much differing from the vulgar Latin now used. But that it is an old blind
translation, it may evidently appear to him that will take but a little pain
to compare it with the original: as Genes. 3. 15. for ( it) shall break thine
head, the Latin has, ipsa, she, referring it to the woman. Genes. 8. 4. for
the seventeenth day of the month, they read seven and twenty. Genes. 19. 18.
for, not so I pray thee, the Latin has, so I pray thee: leaving out, not.
Genesis 24. 22. two sickles, for half a sickle. Genesis 36. 24. Aanh found out
mules: hot waters, says the Latin. Genes. 37. 2. Joseph was septendecim
annorum, seventeen year old: sedecim, 16. year old, say they. Diverse hundred
of such places might be gathered both out of the old and new Testament, to
show the corruption of the vulgar Latin translation. See more here of Synops.
page 21.

3. It is untrue, that the Fathers are called, Heretics: for none of them are
named: but these are the words: It is a very fable and cousoning device of
heretics to make men believe, that Antichrist shall come of the tribe of Dan:
where the Fathers are not noted, who held it as a probable opinion in their
time, before Antichrist was reucaled: but the Papists, the Heretics of these
days, who now in the manifestation of Antichrist, would blind peoples eyes,
that they should not see him in his colors. Neither is it here assumed, that
they are heretics for this opinion, or that it is heresy simply to think
that Antichrist shall come of Dan: but they which in other opinions maintain
open heresy, do herein also use a point of cousonage to deceive the people.
Ambrose concerning the coming of Antichrist, thus says, The Lord shall not
come before there be a defection of the Roman Empire, and appareat
Antichristus, qui interficiet sanctos, reddita Romany liberate, sub suo tamen
nomine: and Antichrist appear, which shall kill the Saints, restoring liberty
to the Romans, but under his own name: in 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2. Here he
delivers four marks of Antichrist, which all agree to the Bishop of Rome:
first, the majesty and authority of the Empire is decayed. Secondly, he has
killed and murdered the Saints. Thirdly, he goes about to maintain the
liberty and jurisdiction of Rome. Fourthly, and that under his own name, for
of the Pope they are all called Papists.

Now to make men believe, that the Pope is not Antichrist, but that there shall
come one a little before the end of the world to be borne of the Jews, that
shall conquer all the world, and work wonders; what is it else but a cunning
sleight of Satan, and a cousoning trick of his instruments to keep the people
in suspense, and make them unready for the coming of Christ? As Ruffinus thus
says, in Symbol. Scire debemus, quod salutarem Christi aduentu^, conatur
inimicus ad decipiendos fideles callida fraud simulare, and pro filio hominis
qui expectatur venturus in maiestate, filium perditionis in signis mendacibus
praeparare: We must know, that the enemy goes about craftily to dissemble and
color the coming of Christ to deceive the faithful, and in steed of the
son of man which is expected in majesty, to prepare the son of perdition
with lying signs and hypocrisy.

Fourthly, to prove the popish religion grounded upon antiquity, the Libeller
gives instance in diverse particulars. First, because Austin the Monk is
affirmed in Gregory the firsts time to be one of the Captains and ringleaders
of superstition, it is inferred that our land was first converted to the popish
religion, a thousand years ago. p. 178.

Contra. 1. Austin brought in some superstitious rites, which now the Roman
church still retains: but yet the grossest points of Popery, as of adoration
of Images, transubstantiation, justification by works, and such other, are
nothing so ancient. Neither need it seem strange, that some errors crept into
the Church a thousand year since, seeing that the mystery of iniquity began
to work in the Apostles time, 2. Thessal. 2. 7. and 6. hundred years after
Christ, the Church began much to decline and degenerate.

2. Austin the Monk was not the first conuerter of the English nation: for in
Hieromes time the Britains had received the Gospel: De Hierosolymis, and de
Britannia aequaliter patet aula calestis: Heaven is open as well in Britannie
as at Jerusalem, Hieron. ad Paulin. And Origin above an hundred year Austin
the Monk not the first conuerter of England
before Hierome confesses as much: Mortalium vniuersam naturam verbum
peruicit, etc. nec humanum genus aliquod licet spectari, quod non huius
susceperit disciplinam: The word has overcome the nature of the universal
world, neither is there any kind of men to be seen, which has not received
the discipline thereof: lib. 2. cont. Celsum. This our country was then many
hundred years converted to the faith, before Austin was sent from Rome: And as
it began in the holy Apostolic faith, so we trust it shall make an end: and
that faith which it received at Christ's going out of the world, we assuredly
hope, through Gods mercy, that it shall render unto Christ at his coming
again to judge the world.

2. Epiphanius and Augustine noted Aerius for an heretic, because he denied
prayer and oblation for the dead.

Answ. 1. Because Augustine and Epiphanius so thought, does it follow that all
antiquity is on your side, and that all the fathers All the Fathers allow not
prayer for the dead.
so thought? Cyprian says: Confiteantur singuli delictum suum, dum adhuc, qui
deliquit, in seculo est; dum admitti co^fessio eius potest; dum satisfactio and
remissio facta per sacerdotem apud Deum grata est: Confess every man his
sin, while he, that has sinned is in the world; while his confession may be
admitted, while satisfaction and remssion done by the priest is grateful unto
God, sermon. de lapsis. Ambrose says: Mors deteriorem statum non facit, sed
qualem in singulis inuenerit, talem iudicio futuro reseruat: Death makes no
man's state worse, but such as it finds every man in, it reserueth to the
judgment to come, de bon. mort. cap. c. 4. Bernard upon these words Eccles.
11. 3. If the tree does fall toward the South* or toward the North, where the
tree falls, there it shall be, thus writes: Men are as trees, the tree is
cut up in death: which way soever it falls, there it shall be: quia ibi te
iudicabit Deus, vbi inuenerit, videat, quo casura sit, antequam cadat, quia
postquam ceciderit, non adijciet vt resurgat, sed nec vt se vertat, etc. for
God shall judge thee there where he shall find thee: let the tree look which
way it shall fall, before it do fall: for after it be fallen, it shall no more
rise, nor turn it self: Sermon. paru. 49. If then the state of the dead cannot
be altered, if they shall be judged in that condition wherein they die, does it
not strongly follow, that it is in vain to pray for the dead?

But what if Augustine himself sometime Augustine against prayer for the dead.
be of another mind, what is become then of your show of antiquity? as sermon.
21. in Matthew. Qualis quisque hinc exierit suo nouissimo die, talis inuenitur in
seculi nouissimo die: nihil te adiuuabit quod hic non feceris: vnumquemque
opera sua iuuabunt, aut opera sua pressura sunt: Such as every man goes hence
in his last day, such shall he be found in the last day of the world: nothing
shall help thee which thou have not done here: every man's works shall either
help him, or cast him down. Then it follows that prayer profi^eth not y^
dead, because it is not done by themselves. And yet more evidently Sermon. ad
fratres in erem^^ 2. Si dicis, pro quo petere debeas, dico quod pro been and
male viuentibus, vt bonus perseueret, malus conuertatur, non pro sanctis, non
pro damnatis, etc. If you say, for whom must I pray, I say for good and evil
livers, that the good may persevere, the evil may be converted, not for the
Saints, not for the damned, etc. The author of these Sermons, makes but two
sorts of the dead after this life, the blessed and the damned, for both which
it is in vain to pray. It may be objected, that sermon. 44. this author
allows suffrages to be made for the dead. I answer, that that sermon is not
like to be Augustines, because it disagreeth from him in other places: as cont.
Pelag. artic. 5. Augustine makes but two places after this life, heaven and
hell: Tertium penitus ignoramus, immo nec esse in scripturis sanctis inuenimus:
The third place we are ignorant of, nay we find it not to be in the Scriptures.

Lastly, what if we should yield you Epiphanius and Augustine for this opinion
of prayer for the dead, will ye yield us them for the rest? Epiphanius directly
condemns the adoration of Images, epist. ad Ioann. Hierosoly, where seeing a
painted cloth, habens imaginem tanquam Christi, having as it were the image of
Christ, he commanded it to be taken away, because he saw the image of a man
hanging in the Church of Christ, against the authority of the Scripture.
Augustine, against the carnal presence, the adoration of Images, the doctrine
of merits, free will, and in an hundred points more, is wholly ours against the
Papists. It were too long to give a particular instance in them all in this
place, I refer the Reader to the treatise of the controversies.

3. Concerning Siricius and Gregory's authorities for the inhibiting of marriage
to the Clergy, I have answered before, contradic. 2. and what the ancient
Church did hold for the lawfulnes of the marriage of Ministers, it is showed at
large Synops. from page 262. to page 269. Cyprian. lib. 4. epist. 10. makes
mention of one Numidicus a Presbyter, Qui vxore^ Ministers married in Origin and
Cyprians time.
concrematam, etc. adhaerentem lateri laetus aspexit, which cheerfully beheld
his wife burning with him, and cleaving to his side. In Origens time Ministers
were married, and had children: Tract. 8. in Matthew. Qui a Christianis parentibus
enutriti sunt, etc. maxim si fuerint, ex patribus sacerdotali sede
dignificatis, id est, Episcopatus, presoyteratus, aut diaconatus, ne
glorientur: They which were brought up of Christian parents, especially if they
came of fathers dignified with the priestly seat, Bishops, Presbyters or
Deacons, let them not boast. Hierome, that great commender of single life,
makes mention in his Catalog of Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, who thus writes
in an epistle against Victor Bishop of Rome: Septem fuerunt propinqui mei
episcopi, and ego octauus: Seven of my kindred were Bishops before me, and I the
eight. All these were long before Siricius and Gregory. How say you now (Sir)
is all antiquity against the marriage of Ministers, or are you not proved a
vain boaster of antiquity?

4. For the reuerencing of Relics, praying to Saints, that it is not lawful
for Ecclesiastical persons to marry, that it is expedient for rich men to
give all their riches to the poor: they have Hierome altogether on their side,
who taught their faith, and wrote in defense thereof against Vigilantius.
Libel. p. 18.

Contra. 1. Whereas all these foresaid opinions are proved not to be erroneous,
both out of the Scriptures, and by the testimony of Augustine, this answer is
made, that Augustine is abused: but he shows not how, neither does he
examine the authorities alleged out of that father, Tetrastyl. page 100. page
101. whereby it may be gathered, that either those places were too evident to
be gainsaid, or without the compass of this profound Clerks reading: if he
had loosened the hold, which we have of Augustine, in those places, we would
have produced others to have strengthened them, but now it shall not need,
where the adversaries mouth is already stopped. 2. Yet he tells us, that if
we can obtain at their hands, that either Scripture or Augustine make for
them, let Hierome a Gods name be rejected.

Why (Sir) till such time as you have answered both Scripture and Augustine,
which are there urged in defense of these opinions, they do make for us. But I
think we shall hardly obtain so much at your hands: for you are a liberal
gentleman, your manner is to grant nothing, though never so evidently
convinced. Brutus was wont to say: Male is videtur florem aetatis collocasse,
qui nihil negare auderet: He seems to have bestowed his time evil, which
durst deny nothing. But I think they have bestowed it worse, that dare deny
any thing. But what if Hierome be not so much your friend in these opinions, as
you vaunt, where are you then? First, Hierome contendeth not against
Vigilantius, for the adoration of Relics, but for Hierome would have Saints
relics reverenced, not adored.
due reverence to be given them: I am se intelliget Samaritanum and Iudaeum,
qui corpora mortuorum pro immundis habet: He shall see that he is no better
then a Jew or Samaritane, which counts the bodies of the dead unclean. And
again, Nos non dico martyrum reliquias, sed ne solemn quidem aut lunam, non
angelos aut archangelos, etc. colimus and adoramus ne seruiamus creaturae
potius quam creatori, etc. honoramus reliquias martyrum, etc. We, I say not the
relics of Martyrs, but we worship not or adore the Sun or Moon, Angels or
Archangels, least we should serve the creature rather then the Creator: but we
honor the relics of Martyrs, that we may worship him, whose Martyrs they
are: ad Riparium. What makes this now for the Papists opinion, that do not
only honor and reverence, but adore the relics of Martyrs?

2. Neither is Hieromes opinion altogether current for the invocation of
Saints: Quis enim o insanum caput aliquando martyrs adorauit? quis hominem
putauit Deum? Who (O you madbraine) ever adored Martyrs? or took a man to be
God? De Petro legimus quod Cornelium se adorare cupientem manu subleuauit and
dixit, homo ego sum: We read of Peter, that he lifted up Cornelius, desirous
to adore him, with his hand, and said, I am a man. If Martyrs and Saints are
not to be adored, then not to be inuocated: for invocation is a part of divine
adoration.

3. Concerning Ministers marriage, Hierome has these words: Si Samuel nutritus
in tabernaculo duxit vxorem, quid hoc ad praeiudicium virginitatis, quasi no^
hodie quoque plurimi sacerdotes habeant matrimonia? and apostolus describat
episcopum vnius vxoris virum, habentem filios cu^ omni castitate: If Samuel
brought up in the Tabernacle married a wife, that is no prejudice to virginity,
as though many priests now a days enjoy not marriage? and the Apostle
describes a Bishop, the husband of one wife, having children with all
chastity.

4. Neither does Hierome think it convenient always for a man to give all his
riches Rich men not bound to give all away.
to the poor, but prefers it only as a more perfect thing: as he says thus
to Vigilantius: Iste quem tu laudas, secundus and tertius gradus est, quem and
nos recipimus, etc. This that you commend (that is, for a man to use his
riches) is the second and third degree, which we also receive: so that we
know, that the first is to be preferred before the second and third. For
otherwise Hierome should have spoken against himself, who did not give all
away which he had: Quo labor, quo pretio, Barrabanum nocturnum habui
praeceptorem? nostrum marsupium Alexandrinae chartae euacuarunt: With what
labor, with what price did I get Barrabanus (a certain Rabbin) to teach me in
the night? the paper of Alexandria has emptied my purse: epistol. ad Pammach.
and Ocean. Hierome then had money: for otherwise he could not have been at this
cost. You see now (master Controller) how well Hierome stands of your side:
and yet if he were yours wholly here, you must lend him to us for many other
points, as concerning the Canonical Scriptures, against free will, merits, for
justification by faith, and such other, as might abundantly be showed, if
either time or place served.

5. Fifthly: 1. In what sense Telesphorus, Calixtus, and Hyginus are said to
have been the institutors of these vsages, of Lent, Ember fasts, Chrisme, is
sufficiently showed before, in the answer to contradict. 3. 2. Though they
could allege antiquity for these toys, yet this is nothing to the substance
of Popery. 3. And if these observations have been of ancient time, yet shall
they never be able to show, that they were so superstitiously then kept, with
so many superfluous rites, with such opinion of merit, and with such
necessity enjoined, as now in Popery.

6. Sixthly, that John's Baptism was diverse John's baptism not diverse from
Christ's.
from Christ's, contrary to the opinion of the Protestants, Augustine (says
the Libeller) stands on our side.

Contra. 1. Augustine is not wholly theirs: for whereas Bellarmine denies, that
the proper end of John's baptism was for remission of sins; Augustine thus
confesses: Tamen ne quisquam contendat etiam in baptismo Ioannis dimissa esse
peccata, sed aliquam ampliorem sanctificationem etc. per baptismum Christi
collatam, non ago pugnaciter, etc. Yet least any man contend, that even in
John's baptism sins were forgiven, but that some greater sanctification was
conferred by Christ's baptism upon those that S. Paul bid to be again
baptized, I will not strive against it. Augustine here seems to grant, that
John might remit sins in baptism, so that some preeminence and greater
sanctification be yielded to Christ's. Is not the Libeller now ashamed to say,
that he abuses Saint Augustine, I make no doubt: but who so bold as blind
bayard? It is pity that he had not the Author by him to examine this
sentence: for he would then have cried out a fresh of falsification, because I
rehearsed not all the words, as they are cited now, only for brevity sake,
setting down those, which show that, for the which the place is alleged: but
now the whole sentence being expressed, there is the same sense, which before
out of part was inferred: only in the margin the place is mistaken, the 14.
chapter being noted for the tenth.

2. What if we yield you Augustine for this opinion; what have you gained, if
other of the fathers testify with us, that make John's baptism and Christ's all
one? As Ambrose confesses: Ioannes in remissionem peccatorum in aduenientis
Jesus nomine, non in suo baptizauit, etc. John baptized for remission of sins
in the name of Jesus to come, not in his own, lib. 1. de Spirit. cap. 3. Leo
says: Christus ad Ioannis baptisma accessit: Christ came unto John's baptism,
de consecr. distinct. 3. c. 14. And we are baptized with that baptism,
wherewith Christ was baptized. Ambros. sermon. 41. Ergo fratres tingi debemus
eodem font, quo Christus, vt possimus esse quod Christus: Therefore brethren
we must be dipped in the same fountain that Christ was, that we may be the
same that Christ is. And Chromatius says, Nunquam aqua baptismi purgare
peccata credentium posset, nisi tactu Dominici corporis sanctificatae essent:
The waters of baptism could never purge the sins of believers, unless they
were sanctified by the touch of the Lords body: in Matthew. cap. 6. We then are
baptized with that baptism which Christ sanctified, but that was the baptism
of John.

Your Master of Sentences confesses, that John baptized in nomine futuri, in
the name of Christ to come, libr. 4. distinct. 2. f. and that they, which did
not spem ponere, put their hope in John's baptism, were not baptized again:
ibid. and he thinks that Christ's baptism was instituted in Jordan, distinct.
3. g. but that was John's baptism, as Leo before says: Ergo, John's baptism
and Christ's were alone: And if they were not baptized again, that received
John's baptism in a right faith, then was it all one with the baptism of
Christ. I hope now it appears, that antiquity will not yield this point unto
our adversaries.

7. Concerning the profession of virginity, he says, antiquity was of our
opinion, because it is confessed, that the Manichees objected unto Augustine,
the multitude of their virgins.

Ans. 1. I marvel how the Defender here escaped the Detectors censure: for
the words alleged are somewhat mistaken: for the Manichees did not thus object
to Augustine: You labor to draw women of every hand to this profession by your
profession, that now in your Churches the number of professed virgins
exceeds the number of women: but this is Augustines objection to the
Manichees, libr. 30. cont. Faustum cap. 4. So that this testimony shows a
great affinity between the superstitious endeavor of the Manichees, and the
like practice in the popish Church, to make a multitude of virgins.

2. We grant the Fathers allowed the profession How Augustine allows
profession of virginity.
of virginity, where they had received that gift, but much unlike it was to
the popish vows of single life. Augustine in the same place thus writes: Nos
hortamur volentes, vt permaneant, non cogimus inuitas, vt accedant: We exhort
them that are willing to continue, but we compel none against their wills to
come. And again, Ipsi tam stultum iudicamus inhibere volentem, quam nefas and
impium nolentem cogere: We count it as foolish to forbid those that are
willing, as wicked to compel the unwilling, cont. faust. lib. 30. 4. They then
forced no virgins, by cunning persuasion, as the Manichees did, nor otherwise
to take upon them the profession of virginity, neither did they hold them
against their wills: But it is an usual practice in the popish Church, craftily
to entice young men and women to profess Monkerie, and after they are once
entered, they then keep them against their minds and disposition.

8. That Christ descended into that part of hell, which is called Limbus
Patrum, and delivered from thence the souls of Abraham and the Patriarchs, and
other faithful people, that were there kept expecting the redemption of
mankind, etc. the ancient Fathers give sentence for us: and it is confessed,
the most part of them to have been in this error.

Answ. 1. Whereas Origin is alleged in 1. cap. Job to prove that the
Patriarchs went to heaven, a place of life and light, to Abraham's bosom, the
queere of Angels, etc. this answer is made, that he suspecteth that Origin is
not syncerely alleged: wherein he shows his great ignorance, and slender
reading in the Fathers: the place is truly word for word copied out of Origin.

Again (says the Libeller) Origin believed herein as we believe, and to that
purpose he cites Origin, hom. 15. in Genes. thus speaking, that Christ
descended to hell to fetch Adam from thence: Quod enim dicit ad latronem, hodie
mecum eris in paradiso, non hoc illi solum dictum, sed etiam omnibus sanctis
dictum intellige, pro quibus ad inferna descendit: For what he said to the
thief, this day thou shall be with me in paradise, was not said only to him,
but understand it to be spoken to all the Saints, for whom he descended to hell.

Contra. 1. By this saying of Origin, all the Saints ascended to heaven, the
same day, and Origin against Christ's descension to hell, to deliver the
Patriarchs.
at the same time, when the soul of the converted thief went to paradise.
This is contrary to the opinion of the modern Papists, that hold, that Christ's
soul, manebat in loco animarum illo triduo, quo corpus iacebat in loco
corporum, did tarry three days in the place of souls, all which time his
body did lie in the place of the bodies, Bellarm. libr. 4. de Christ. anim.
cap. 15. And this is one of Durands arguments, to prove, that Christ's soul
went not locally into hell, but only effectually, in power and virtue, because
in the same instant of Christ's death the souls of the Saints were,
beatificatae, made blessed, in 3. distin. 22. quaest. 3. And if the same day of
Christ's death, their souls were in paradise, according to Origens opinion, I
pray you what time had Christ's soul to be in hell, but only by the virtue and
power thereof: which must be Origens meaning? Unless you will say, that
Christ's soul was in heaven and hell in two places at once: which shift
Bellarmine is driven unto, saying, It was not impossible unto God, to make
Christ's soul to be in two places at once, libr. 4. de Christ. anim. cap. 15.
All things are possible, we grant unto God: but where has he any warrant
out of Scripture of this his presumption?

2. And that Origin means not, that Christ did fetch the Saints out of any
such hell and place of darkness, as they imagine, it is evident by that which
follows within ten lines after in the same Homily: where Origin upon these
words of the Lord to Jacob, Genes. 46. 4. I will bring thee back again: Velut
si diceret, quia certamen bonum certasti, fidem seruasti, etc. reuocabo te iam
de hoc mundo ad beatitudinem futuram, ad perfectionem vitae aeternae, ad
iustitiae coronam, quam reddet Dominus in fine seculorum omnibus qui diligunt
eum: As if he should say, because thou have fought a good fight, kept the
faith, etc. I will call thee out of this world to the blessedness to come, to
the perfection of eternal life, to the crown of righteousness, which God shall
render in the end of the world to all that love him. If blessedness then,
perfection of eternal life, the crown of righteousness, be in hell; then Jacob
went to hell, otherwise not.

3. Because exception is taken against that testimony cited out of Origin upon
Job, who is thought not to have been the author of that book (for the which I
will not much contend, though it be ancient, and sufficiently show the opinion
of that time, that Limbus Patrum, was not generally held of the Fathers) I will
declare Origens judgment out of other places of his works: as Tractat. 26. in
Matthew. Prophetis recedentibus ab hac vita, corpora eorum in sepulchris erant,
animae autem and spiritus in regione viuorum: The Prophets departing out of
this life, their bodies were in the graves, but their souls and spirits in the
region of the living. Again, tract. 30. in Matthew. upon these words, they
shall gather the elect from the ends of heaven; he thus says: Electi non solum
illi qui ex aduentu Christi sunt sancti, sicut quidam magistri haerese^s
dicunt, sed omnes, qui a constitutione mundi fuerunt, qui viderunt, sicut
Abraham, Christi diem: They only are not the elect, which are the Saints since
the coming of Christ, as some masters of heresy say, but all they, which from
the beginning of the world saw the day of Christ, as Abraham did. If then the
Patriarchs were in the region of the living, and were elected, I trust you will
not say they were in hell: that is not the region of the living, nor yet a
place for the elect.

4. Neither did Origin only of the Fathers impugn your Limbus, but others also.

Cyprian sermon* de mortalitat. Ad refrigerium iusti vocantur; ad supplicium
rapiuntur iniusti: The just are called to a refreshing, the unrighteous are
haled to punishment. If hell be a place of refreshing, then the Patriarchs
went thither. Ambrose: Qui in sinu Abrahae sedet, susceptus a Christo est: He
that sits in Abraham's bosom, is received of Christ. The Patriarchs then and
Prophets were received of Christ, for they were in Abraham's bosom: he that is
received of Christ, is not I think in hell.

Augustine thus expounds these words, Genes. 49. 33. he was gathered to his
people: An forte populus non solum sanctorum est, verum and angelorum: This
people (it may be) is not only of the Saints, but of the Angels: huic populo
apponuntur, qui post hanc vitam Deo placentes fiunt, to this people they are
put, which after this life please God, quaest. 168. super Geves.

Likewise epistol. 99. Ne ipsos inferos vspiam scripturarum locis in bono
appellatos reperire potui: I could never find in Scripture, hell to be taken
in any good sense: and there he concludes, non esse membrum aut partem
inferorum tantae illius faelicitatis sinum: that that bosom of so great
felicity, was no part or member of hell. The Patriarchs then that were in
Abraham's bosom, by Augustines sentence were not in hell, but in a place of
great happiness. If they were not then in hell, Christ could not fetch them from
thence. Wherefore it is a great untruth, which the Libeller has uttered, that
all the Fathers, yea Origin believed as we do, that Christ in soul descended
into that part of hell which is called Limbus Patrum.

9. Ninthly, whereas it is affirmed, Synops. p. 523. that there was no question
about the real presence for 1000. years after Christ, till the time of
Berengarius, who was sore troubled for maintaining the truth: Hereupon it is
inferred, that the Church, till that time, generally believed the Real
presence, before Berengarius taught the contrary; otherwise how could he have
fallen into any troubles at all, if his doctrine had been consonant, to that
which was received before, etc. p. 188.

Contra. 1. That till 1000. years after Christ, no other presence was held of
Christ in the Sacrament, but spiritual to the faith of the worthy receiver:
neither that his body and blood was otherwise eaten and drunk then by faith;
and that the substances of the bread and wine, remained after consecration: it
plencifully appears by the testimonies of Tertullian, Irenaeus, Augustine,
Ambrose, Theodoret, Hesychius, Emissenus, Bid, Haymo, Bertram, Rabanus Maurus
and others, cited by M. Fox p. 1137. and 1138. it were too long to bring them
in speaking here: I desire the Reader to have concourse thither.

2 We have our adversaries confession, Transubstantiation and the Carnal
presence, but new doctrines.
for the antiquity of this opinion: Decr. p. 3. did. 2. c. 44. Non hoc
corpus, quod videtis, manducaturi estis, etc. Ye shall not eat this body,
which ye see, nor drink that blood, which they shall shed, that crucify me,
I have commended unto you a sacrament, which being spiritually understood,
shall quicken you. c. 48. Suo modo vocatur corpus Christi, cum reuera sit
sacramentum corporis Christi: It is called the body of Christ after a certain
manner being in deed a sacrament of ye body of Christ. Did. 4. c. 131. It is
not to be doubted, but every faithful man, Corporis sanguinisque dominici
participem fieri, quando in baptismate membrum Christi efficitur: To be made
partaker of the body and blood of Christ, when in Baptism he is made a member
of Christ: so that Christ is as well present in Baptism as in the Eucharist,
which is not after a carnal manner, but spirituallie. Twenty such places
might be alleged out of their own decrees. Concerning transubstantiation
also; Cuthbert Tonstal says, Liberu^ fuit ante concilium Lateranense: It was
free before the Council of Lateran, and every man was left to his own
conjecture. libr. 1. de Euchar. Cusanus says: Quidam veteres theologi
intellexisse reperiuntur, etc. Certain ancient divines are found of this
mind, that the bread in the Sacrament is not transubstantiate, but clothed with
a more noble substance: Excitat. libr. 6. How then is not the libeller ashamed
to say, that the doctrine of the Real presence was generally believed before
Berengarius taught the contrary?

3 At what time Berengarius impugned the Real presence, certain superstitious
Monks, as Lanfrancus, Guimondus, Algerius, Fulbertus, Hildebrand, held the
contrary, so that there was an opposition and parts taken: then the Pope Leo
the 6. (not Leo 9. for the figure is mistaken, and the Libellers skill did not
serve him to correct it) anno 1049. took part with the Monks and their
Monkish opinion, and condemned the opinion of Berengarius: So did Nicolaus 2.
that suceeded not long after, cause the said Berengarius to recant in a synod
at Rome: ex Wilhel. Malmesburio de gest. Anglor. libr. 3. And this was the
cause of Berengarius trouble, because he opposed himself not against the
ancient doctrine of the Church, but against the new superstitious conceit of
certain Monks, with whom these Popes took part for their advantage. And this
may appear by the recantation of Berengarius reported by Gratiane, that he did
hold the same faith, Quam Dominus and venerabilis Papa Nicolaus, and haec
sancta synodus authoritate Euangelica and Apostolica tenendam tradidit: Which
the Lord and venerable Pope Nicolas and this holy synod, by their Evangelical
and Apostolical authority, did deliver to be held. De consecrat. distin. 2.
c. 42. This synod then was the first, that decreed the carnal presence.

4 Whereas Berengarius subscribeth to the faith of Pope Nicholas: the body and
the blood of Christ Sensualiter and in veritate manibus The Papists are fled
from the Popes faith of the Carnal presence.
sacerdotum tractari, frangi and fidelium dentibus atteri: To be sensibly, and
in truth handled by the Priests, and broken and rent with the teeth of the
faithful: how comes it to pass, that the Papists are now fled from this
faith? For Bellarmine dare not say, that the body of Christ is chawne and rent
of the teeth, but the shows and accidents of the bread and wine: de Euchar.
lib. 3. c. 10. And the contrary to this faith of Nicolas is alleged by
Gratian out of Augustine did. de consecr. 2. c. 47. Quid paras dentes and
ventrem? creed and manducasti: Why do you prepare your teeth and belly?
believe and you have eaten.

Now let any man judge, whether, as this challenger makes his bragges,
antiquity stand soundly with the Papists in the doctrine of prayer for the
dead, invocation of Saints, adoration of relikes, prohibition of marriage,
Limbus patrum, the Carnal presence: it falls out unto him, as Cato was (...).
wont to say: Qui ridiculis rebus seriam impenderent operam, in serijs fore
ridiculos: They which were serious in ridiculous matters, should be ridiculous
in serious: so whereas in many frivolous objections before this Sophister was
very earnest, and laid on load, in this weighty contention about antiquity,
he has made himself ridiculous. I wish rather, that his eyes were opened,
that he might see the nakedness of their religion, and how true antiquity
favors them not. Thus by justifying their errors, he does add unto his
fault, as Augustine says: Nolens se esse reum, addit potius ad reatum, sua
excusando peccata, ignorant non se poenam remouere sed veniam: He that will not
be guilty, does add to his guiltines, and he little knows, that he does not
remove the pain, but the pardon: de continent. c. 5.

The 9. Contradiction.
SYnops. p. 924. He that is once the son of God is always to the end: this
doctrine is noted to be 1. dangerous, 2. false, 3. contradictorie to it self.

The Reconciliation.
FIrst it is dangerous (says he) that whereas it is said that the children of
the faithful are holy even before they be baptized: and so consequently can
never fall out of Gods grace, it spurreth to all desperate villainy, as to too
much experience has taught us.

Contra. 1. The Children of the faithful are said to be holy, not in respect
of their eternal election, as though all such were sure to be saved, but in
respect of the outward coueuant made to the Church: whereof they are members,
being the seed of the faithful: and therefore this is impertinently alleged;
and it is as simply inferred, that because the children of the faithful are
holy, as the Apostle says 1. Corinthians. 7. 14. Ergo, they cannot fall out of
Gods grace.

2. Not the Protestants faithful assurance of salvation, but popish religion
spurreth some to all villainy, as this land has had too woeful experience, in
their conspiraci^s, treacheries, rebellions and traitorous practices both
against their Prince and Country, though (God be thanked) they have failed of
their wicked hope. Assurance of salvation breeds not carnal security, but
godly carefulnes, that they may walk worthy of their calling: as the Apostle
says, We are chosen in him, etc. that we should be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. And if
Princes, that should give security of their goods to their subjects, were able
to guide their hearts, and keep them in obedience, as God does govern the
elect, there were no danger.

3. This disputer ignorantly confounds two questions: one of the certainty
of election before God, the other of the assurance thereof to our selves: the
first is here affirmed and grounded upon that text, Io^. 13. 1. Whom Election
certain.
God loves, he loves to the end: which text he is never able to answer: and
therefore windeth himself to another matter of assurance of salvation: but
that our election is certain in Gods eternal decree, the popish Divines
themselves do grant, as Thomas Aquinas, Peter Lombard, Gratian, Espenceus, as
they are alleged Synops. page 824. and I know none of learning amongst them,
that deny it, but this brabler, that every where proclaims his own
ignorance.

Secondly, where that text is urged, Galath. 5. 4. Ye are euacuated from
Christ, which are justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace: to prove
that election may be lost, the answer is soon made.

1. They which seek for justification by the law, are said to fall from grace,
not of election before God, but in respect of their appearance unto men, in
losing and falling away from the means, which should bring them to salvation.
As Ambrose says writing Election certain.
upon these words of the Lord to Moses, Exodus 32. 33. Him that sins, will I
blot out of the book of life: Secundum iustitiam iudicis tum deleri videntur,
cum peccant; iuxta praescientiam vero nunquam in libro vitae fuerunt: In the
justice of the Judge they then are said to be blotted out, when they sin; but
according to Gods prescience they were never in the book of life: in 9. ad
Roman.

2. Concerning Saul, I have showed before, Saul never ele^^ed before God.
that ^ee was never elected before God, or truly just: answer to the 11.
untruth: and you have brought a goodly text to prove it: Saul was a choice
young man and afaire, etc. higher by the shoulders, the^ the children of
Israel: Ergo, he was chosen before God: Ambrose says, Qui credere videntur,
and non permanent in fide, a Deo electi negantur, quia quos Deus eligit, apud
se permanent: est etiam, qui ad tempus eligitur, sicut Saul and Judas non de
praescientia, sed de praesenti iustitia: They which seem to believe, and
continue not in faith, are denied to be elected of God, for whom God electeth,
do continue with him: there is also, that is chosen for a time, as Saul and
Judas, not in Gods prescience, but in their present justice: in 8. ad Roman.

3. Thirdly, the same answer we make to the supposed contradiction, that Adam
was made subject to everlasting condemnation by his transgression, not before
God, but in How the grace of God may be lost.
respect of himself and his present state, because by his sin he had
deserved it: he was subject to damnation, ex merito suo, non ex decreto Dei, by
his desert, not by the decree of God: neither had he utterly lost the grace of
God to which he was restored, but in part only in respect of his present
feeling. As David says, Psalm. 51. 12. Restore me to the joy of salvation: he
had not lost his salvation, but the feeling, the joy and comfort of it. As
Ambrose says: In terris quateris, in caelis possides: Thou art tossed and
shaken in the earth, and yet do possess in heaven: de obit. Theodos.

The 10. Contradiction.
SYnops. page 1067. to affirm, that Henoch and Elias went up to heaven in
their bodies before the ascension of Christ out of Scripture, it cannot be
proved; it is evident that they were taken up alive into heaven, but not that
they continued alive: out of these words the Libeller, first notes a
contradiction: secondly, a notable untruth.

The Reconciliation.
1. FIrst, to remove the contradiction: in that it is said, they were taken up
alive, or in their bodies into heaven: it is not meant that they went into
heaven with their bodies, but that they were alive in their bodies, when they
were taken up from the earth: so that the words must be read with a
distinction; their being alive, or in their bodies, must be referred to the
first clause, they were taken up, not to the second, into heaven. Thus the
Sophister uses a fallacy, conioyning those things, which are to be
disioyned: As where it is said, Act. 1. 11. This Jesus, which is taken up into
heaven, shall so come, as ye have seen him go into heaven: the words must not
be taken in a joint sense, as though they did see Christ going or entering into
heaven, for a clowd took him from their sight, v. 9. neither was that heaven,
whither Christ went, ever seen with mortal eye: but the words must be
distinguished: they did only see him go, that is, taken from the earth, and
going from them: As there is no contradiction in these words, that a clowd
took him from their sight, and yet they saw him going into heaven, no more is
there in the other.

2. Secondly, whereas the Libeller affirms, that Henoch and Elias are yet
alive in their bodies, but not in heaven, belike in the terrestrial paradise,
as some have thought, Rhem. in 11. Apocal. sect. 4. And that Henoch and Elias
shall come in person in the time of Antichrist, I will briefly show how
uncertain both these opinions are.

First, that they are alive in their bodies in Henoch and Elias not alive in
their bodies.
paradise the Scripture shows not: that place Ecclesiastic. 44. 16. (which is
scripture with them) that Henoch was translated into paradise, is corruptly
translated: for the word paradise is not in the Greek, as Pererius has well
observed, lib. 3. in Genes. qu. 5. Where that place is urged, Matthew. 11. verse.
11. Elias indeed shall come, or is to come: it is rather to be read, venturus
erat, was for to come: so reads Hentenius a Papist in Euthym. so the vulgar
Latin translateth verse. 3. where John sends this message to Christ: Art thou
he, that art to come, without any sense, for Christ was come already: it
should be rather read, (...), which should come, or was to come.

2. The book of Macchabees, which is Scripture with them, says, 1. chap. 2.
58. Elias was taken up, (...): vsque, even into heaven: which word, even,
imports not his taking up only into the air, but into heaven indeed.
Hierome says that Henoch and Elias, mortis necessitate superata ita vt erant
in corporibus de terrena conuersatione ad caelestia regna translati sunt: The
necessity of death being overcome, as they were in their bodies, were
translated from their terrene conversation to the celestial kingdom. And of
this opinion he says was Theodorus Heracleotes, tom. 4. Miner. and Alexand.
that they were translated to heaven, we believe with Hierome, but not in their
very bodies: therein I prefer rather Origens opinion: Sicut ex mortuis
primogenitus Christus, ita primus carnem euexit in coelum: As Christ was the
first borne of the dead, so he first carried his flesh into heaven, ex Pamphil.

3. Whereas he urges that place Heb. 11. verse. 5. By faith was Enoch
translated, that he should not see death, to prove that he is yet alive: the
Apostle only shows, that he died not after the usual manner, and common
condition; as they which shall be alive at Christ's coming shall not die, but
they shall be changed, 1. Cor. 15. 51. which is a kind of death. For otherwise
how should that sentence of Scripture be verified, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed
unto men, that they shall once die, that is, to all men: wherefore Henoch and
Elias, though they died not a common death, yet were they changed, which was
in steed of death unto them.

4. Origin thinks, that Elias descendens Paradise is Heaven.
ad inferna, etc. did descend to hell, etc. Hom. 4. in Luc. Ambrose takes
paradise to be heaven: Tum saluus fuero in paradiso cum coepero viuere inter
electos angelos: Then I shall be safe, when I shall live in paradise among the
elect Angels, sermon. 15. in Psalm. 119. If Henoch and Elias be in paradise, they
are then in heaven.

Chrysostom Hom. 21. in Genes. If any man do curiously ask into what place
Henoch was translated, and whether he do live to this present: discat non
conuenire humanis mentibus curiosius ea, quae a Deo fiunt, explorare: let him
learn, that it is not fit for men curiously to search out those things which
God does: Hom. 21. in Genes. Augustine: Quid de Helia factum sit, nescimus, hoc
de illo tamen credimus, quod verax scriptura testatur: What is become of Elias
we know not, that we believe of him which the Scripture testifies, cont.
Faust. lib. 26. cap. 4.

Theodoret qu. 45. in Genes. dare not determine into what place Henoch was
translated.

Rupertus, that Henoch was not translated into the terrestrial paradise, lib.
3. de trinitat. cap. 33.

Thomas affirms not, that Henoch and Elias are in paradise, but with this
addition, vt dicitur, vel creditur, as it is said, or believed; 1. par. qu.
103. ar. 2.

Iansenius a popish Bishop is of opinion, Henoch, Elias, not in the terrestrial
Paradise.
that Henoch and Elias are not in the terrestrial paradise, in Comment. super
cap. 143. concord. Euangelic. Of the same judgment is Pererius a lesuite, lib.
3. in Genes. qu. 5.

Now for the second point, it is as uncertain out of the Fathers, that Henoch
and Elias shall come in person in the time of Antichrist.

1. Cyprian says: Nobis in spiritu and virtute Eliae non alium quam Ioannem
solum, etc. The Angel and our Lord Christ do insinuate none other to come in
the power and spirit of Elias, but John only, de singular. Clericor. Likewise
Origin: Vide fortassis si Ioannem baptistam possumus ponere in loco Eliae: See
if happily we may not place John Baptist in the place of Elias: in 11. ad
Roman.

2. Concerning the two Prophets mentioned Of the two Prophets. Apocal. 11.
in the Apocalypse chap. 11. Augustine understands the two Testaments, and
confuteth them, quiputant hos duos testes duos viros esse, which take these two
witnesses for two men, etc. Beda also understands the doctrine of the old and
new Testament: Ambrosius Ausbertus, the holy Church in general in her
preachers.

3. Victorinus upon that place shows, that some understand Helias and Moses,
but he would have it to be Jeremy. Hilarious contendeth they must be Moses and
Helias. Justinius thinks not only Henoch and Elias to be alive, but also
those whose bodies arose at the resurrection of Christ, qu. 85. ad Orthodox.
Hippolytus will have, not only Henoch and Elias, but John the Divine also to
come with them before the coming of Christ.

Now I refer it to the judgment of the discreet Reader, whether this
conceit of Henoch and Elias, be not more like to be a fable, then to have any
likelihood of truth, wherein there is such diversity of opinion, and
uncertainty amongst the ancient writers. The Libeller brings forth nothing
but painted papers and empty Poticaries boxes: he has painted his lines with
the names of Fathers, but produces not their testimonies: he sets forth no
new stuff, but the scrapings of other men's platters. And as Flaminius host at
Chalcis, when he wondered at the multitude of the dishes, said unto him, omnes
carnes suillas, they were all but swines flesh, (...).
diversely dressed: so this homely host entertaineth his reader but with their
wonted gross meats, though he would show in the new kind of dressing it, a
piece of slouenly cookerie of his own: I say then unto him, with Hierome: Aut
profer meliores epulas and me conuiua vtere, aut qualicunque hac caenula nostra
contentus esto: Either bring forth better meat, and let me be one of your
ghests, or else (pull down your stomach) and taste of my provision. And I
would that he, that first bid us to eat of his swines dish (too gross meat
for a sound stomach) had grace to receive the wholesome meat that is presented
to him for his health.

The 11. Contradiction.
SYnops. page 908. A true lively faith, etc. can never finally fall away, etc.
a justifying faith is always actual working by love. page 881. no love no
faith: Hereof it follows, that either David and Peter had no faith, when he
committed adultery, and the other denied his master, or else that Peter loved
his master, when he denied him, and David loved God and his neighbor, when he
committed adultery with the wife and slew the husband, etc. page 197.

The Reconciliation.
FIrst, there is a difference between a true faith and a perfect faith: a true
faith always remains in the elect, though it be not always a perfect and
glorious faith: likewise a true faith is not always a like effectual or
working, but yet always accompanied with love, though not in the same degree.

2. As then David and Peter's faith failed in these their sins, so also their
charity: but it therefore follows not, that because in one act their faith
and charity failed, and in part was empaired, therefore it was wholly
extinguished.

3. And that neither of them was given over to a reprobate sense, it may
appear, because David upon Nathans admonition repented, and Peter presently
upon his denial went forth and wept bitterly.

4. Wherefore your Logic (sir Sophister) here fails you, and you conclude
weakly, from a part to the whole, that because their love failed in part, it
was wholly lost: was there no spark of love in David neither toward David and
Peter's faith not utterly extinguished.
God nor man, nor no goodness left in Peter during their several tentations?
When the Moon is in decreasing, has she lost all her light? the seed, that
lies all the winter buried in the earth, has it no life in it? So the seed
of faith and charity always remains in the faithful, though not alike
green and flourishing. Because you (sir Cauiller) have showed your self at
this time in slaundring and railing, an dishonest man, shall I therefore
infer, that there is no goodness or honesty left in you?

4. For Solomon the same answer will serve, Salomons faith not wholly lost in his
fall.
that though in that heinous sin of Idolatry both his faith and love failed,
yet it was not generally or totally extinguished: as the Lord says, 2. Sam. 7.
15. My mercy shall not depart away from him: but where no faith nor love is,
there is no mercy. As mercy on Gods behalf therefore did not utterly depart
from him: so neither in Solomon was faith quite rooted out: the seed of faith
and love lay buried in him, in that his heavy sleep; and was afterward, by
Gods grace awaked and revived. But how is it inferred, that unless the fire of
charity were clean put out in Solomon, idolatry must be a good work and the
loving of God? for this wicked act shows a partial and temporal failing of
faith and charity, not a total or final: was there, think you, no goodness,
virtue, justice, wisdom (the fruits of faith and charity in Gods children)
remaining in Solomon in the time of his fall? The contrary is extant in
Scripture, Eccles. 2. 9. My wisdom remained with me, even in the midst of
his pleasure, the light of wisdom and knowledge was not extinguished in him.

5. Concerning Paul, we affirm, that he was always a member of the Catholic
Church (as it comprehends the number of the predestinate) not only when he
was a persecutor, but even before he was borne, in respect of the foreknowledge
and decree of God: yet was he not then an actual and present member of the
Church, to the which faith is required: wherefore to dispute that Paul had no
faith, when he was a persecutor, is a needless labor, for as yet he was not
in act a member of the Church, neither had faith, before he was called, and
therefore could not lose, that, which he had not.

6. You blaspheme the Church of Geneua, A slander.
and the Protestants, as though they should say or think, that adultery,
murder and idolatry in the children of God, be no sins, but good works,
and fruits of faith, page 202. We are further off from justifying ungodly
works, then Papists are: for they hold that some sins are venial and
pardonable in their own nature: we affirm, that all sins in themselves,
without Gods mercy, are mortal, that is, worthy of damnation: they say, that
a just man does not sin in his good works, so much as venially. Synops. page
922. we hold that even the best works of the righteous are blemished with some
infirmity: they teach, that the motions of the flesh, though never so wicked,
are not sinful, if a man give not any consent, Libel page 134. we profess,
that the very evil concupiscence, though the will concur not with it, is
sinful. Now let the world judge, which of us the Protestants, or Papists are
furthest off, from allowing, or commending wicked works.

7. But where you charge us to say, that in The virtues of the Pagans, are no
true virtues.
Infidels to honor their parents, to fight for their country, be damnable
sins, page 202. we say with the Apostle, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
Romans 14. 23. which place Augustine urged against the Pelagians, that justified
the glorious acts of the Pagans: and he further says, Non officijs, sed
finibus virtutes a vitijs discernendae sunt: That virtues are to be discerned
from vices, not by the act but the end, contr. Julian. libr. 4. cap. 3. And
again, Virtutes nisi quis ad Deum retulerit, vitia potius sunt, quam virtutes:
Virtues, if they be not referred to God, are vices rather, then virtues, de
ciuitat. Dei lib. 19. cap. 25. We condemn not then the good things, which are
in Infidels, but their evil affections, whereby they corrupt that which is
good: and so this point shall be concluded with that saying of Augustine:
Colligitur, ipsa bona opera quae faciunt insideles, non ipsorum esse, sed
illius, qui been vtitur malis, ipsorum autem esse peccata, quibus bona male
faciunt: It is gathered then, that the good works, which the Infidels do, are
not theirs, but his, that uses the evil well, but theirs are the sins,
whereby they do good things evil, con^. Julian. 4. 3.

Now having refuted this Cauillers frivolous objections, my leisure does a
little serve me to answer his injurious speeches: and as for his particular
taunts, of crows, birds, and apes, foul puppies, page 201. such scoffers we
vouchsafe not an answer: but as Magas sent to Philemon threatening war, dice
and tenice balls; so we do rebound upon this warlike challengers head, his
popish bullet shot. But seeing he goes further from men's persons to gall
religion it self with his profane jests, of Puritanical principles, and the
regenerate generation of Geneua; this injury done to the Church of Christ I
cannot pass over with silence. Wherein, as Hierome compares Heluidius, he is
like to him that set Dianaes Temple on fire, Vt qui been non poterat, male
omnibus innotesceret, That he by evil doing might be famous to al, that by well
doing could not: so he in kindling a fire against the church of Christ, nobilis
factus est in scelere, makes himself famous in his evil doing. And like as
Philoxenus and Gnato two gluttons, did use to blow their noses in the platters,
that no man should eat with them: so plaieth this trencher man in vomiting his
gall upon the table as it were of Christ's Church, that all men might loathe it.
Therefore seeing he spares not to revile the mother, the children must not
think strange to be evil spoken of: but we say with Hierome: Illud dico
maledicta tua mihi gloriae fore, cum eodem, quo Ecclesiae detraxisti, ore me
laceres, and canina facundiam and (filius) pariter experiatur and matter: This I
say, that your ray lings are a credit to me, when with the same mouth,
wherewith you derogate from the Church, you wound me, and the son and mother
together, do taste of your doggish eloquence: aduer. Heluid.

The 12. Contradiction.
TEtrastyl. p. 118. It is an absurd thing to say a man may lose the confession
of his 1
faith, and yet keep his faith sound: Synops. 2
p. 165. Peter lost the confession of his faith, he denied Christ in word:
Again, Peter lost not his justification: but it is a perfect faith which does
justify us before God: If Peter were just 3
still, then was his faith perfect, and so his faith was perfect, because it
was a justifying faith; and not perfect, because he denied Christ: to this
purpose the Libeller. p. 205.

The Reconciliation.
1. IT is true, that faith cannot be sound and whole, where a man fails in
confession: and therefore Peter, who lost his confession as Bellarmine says,
was not sound and perfect in faith.

2. Where it is said, That Peter lost the confession of his faith, he might
have considered, that those words are uttered, ex confessione aduersarij, from
the confession of the adversary, because Bellarmine says, that Peter lost the
confession of his faith, and not faith it self: but we say, though Peter
failed in confession, yet he utterly lost it not.

3. We confess, that it must be a perfect faith, that is, working by love and
effectual, that justifies us before God, Galath. 5. 6. though no faith is
simply and absolutely perfect before God, but in a certain measure: Then the
objection inferring a contradiction, if it conclude any thing, stands thus: A
perfect faith justifies before God; Peter was justified by that faith, which
he had when he denied Christ, Ergo it was a perfect faith. The second part of
this reason is untrue, for Peter was justified by his former faith working by
love, and not by this imperfect and defective faith: his justification in deed
was not lost, which he formerly had obtained by faith, but yet as his faith was
weakened, so Peter lost not his justification, though the feeling thereof was
for a time suspend^d.
his present feeling of his justification for the time was suspended. It
follows not then, Peter's justification was not lost, when his faith was
weak, Ergo, he was justified by that weak faith: like as a man's life is not
lost in his sickness, yet he cannot be said to live by his sickness. But it will
be said, that his justification begun before, was vpheld and continued still by
the same faith. I grant, that a perfect, that is, a working faith, does
perfectly justify, that is, does both justify in the sight of God, and gives
a sense and feeling to the soul of the justified: Romans 5. 1. Being justified
by faith, we are at peace with God. Now when faith is weakened, though our
justification stand firm before God, because the substance and seed of faith
remains, yet is it also weakened in our assurance and feeling, and so to our
sense for the time as imperfect. This then proves not a perfect faith, when
as our justification remaining in substance, in working and feeling is not
perfect. Your silly argument then (sir Sophister) has no good consequence. I
perceive your Logic and Divinity are both much alike: but you are not so
much to be blamed, as your master, that taught you no better: as Diogenes
seeing an vnmanner lie boy, gave his master a blow on the ear, that had
instructed him no better. And as Hierome said of Iouinians eloquence: Tam
elinguis and sermonis putidi, vt magis misericordia dignus fuerit, quam
inuidia: His style is so rude and so base, that he is to be pitied rather then
envied: Dial. 1. aduers. Pelagian. Such is this detectors kind of disputing
(to speak nothing of his style) that he has more need of pity and
compassion, then of any confutation.

4. But this contradiction in making Peter's faith perfect and imperfect, may
better be returned upon themselves: for Bellarmine says, that Peter lost not
his faith, but the confession only, lib. 4. de Roman. pontif. cap. 8. And
another says, Petrus non fidem Christi, sed Contradictions of Papists, about
Peter's faith.
Christum salua fide negauit: Peter denied not the faith of Christ, but he
denied Christ, his faith remaining sound. Alan. Cop. If Peter's faith were sound
and whole still, then was it a perfect faith: but on the other side this stout
champion affirmed, that Peter had no faith: What follows (says he) seeing
David committed adultery, and murder, and Peter denied his master, but that
they had no faith? page 197. So Peter had a sound faith and yet no faith. Thus
they agree like harp and harrow together. But we say, that neither Peter had
at this time a perfect faith, because he failed in confession, nor yet no
faith, because Christ prayed his faith should not fail, Luke 22. 32. but that,
though his faith were shaken, yet the substance and seed remained still: as
Theophilact well shows in Luc. cap. 22. Quamuis breui tempore concutiendus
sis, habes recondita fidei femina: etiamsi folia abiecerit spiritus inuadentis,
radix tamen viuet, and non defi^iet ^ides ^ua^ Although for a while thou shall
be shaken, thou have the seeds of faith laid up in store: although the spirit
of the tempter do^ cast off the leaves, yet the root shall live, and thy faith
not fail.

The 13. Contradiction.
TEtrastyl. page 97. True faith, whereby we are justified etc. cannot be lost
and utterly extinguished etc. the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance, Romans 11. 29.

1. These texts, etc prove not only, that faith cannot be lost, but also that
no other gift what soever.

2. Again, Synops. page 485. The children of the faithful are* ^olie
already, even before they are baptized, for they are within the covenant etc
of they (...) holy, being borne of the righteous ^eede, haw can they possibly
perish, although they be unbaptized? In so Howeth evidently that all children
borne of faithful parents dying without baptism, are saved, etc* hereof also
in follows* that all the Jews that came of Abraham be in^allibly saved, etc.
L^bel. page 207.

The Reconciliation.
1. FIrst the Apostle speaks not of al kind What gifts are without repetance.
of gifts, when he says, the gifts of God are without repentance but such
gifts as do follow election, and accompany special and effectual vocation
for of election the Apostle spoke before (...) 8. As ^ching election they are
beloved for the father (...) and of vocation in this verse, the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance. The Apostle* then understands not
general gifts, but the special graces of sanctification given to the elect,
whereof faith is the principal. Thus Ambrose understands the Apostle, epist.
8. Noueris Christi dona irreuocabilia, vt credas, quod semper credidisti, nec
nimio moerore tuam in dubium adduc as sententiam: Know that the gifts of Christ
are irreuocable, that thou may believe, what thou have always believed, and
not with too much heaviness make thy sentence doubtful. He infers specially
that faith is this irreuocable gift.

2. Secondly: 1. Where children are said to be holy even before baptism, it
is not understood of such holiness and sanctification as How children are said
to be holy.
follows election, but because they are within the general covenant, which
God makes to the faithful and their seed: so that holiness makes not here a
difference between the elect and not elect, but between the children of the
faithful and of Infidels: For if the one were not more holy then the other,
why should they not be indifferently admitted to baptism? which I think the
grossest Papist will non grant.

2. Neither do we say, that all the children of the faithful are saved; that
die unbaptized (though in charity we are so to think) because they are
within the covenant, and have committed nothing, whereby they have made
themselves unworthy of it) but that the want of baptism is no impediment unto
such infants, as are within Gods gracious election: as the words do expound
themselves, how can they possibly perish, though they die unbaptized? So then
infants are not by the want of baptism deprived of their election.

3. But how follows it, that all the Jews that came of Abraham be infallibly
saved? whereas the question is of those only which the unbaptized, which lived
not to the years of discretion to receive or refuse faith. But it will be
again objected: All the children of the faithful are holy, and once holy,
always holy, therefore they cannot choose but be saved.

Ans. They are holy, as I said before, being the seed of the faithful, not
by any special sanctification, but by a general vocation, being borne of
faithful parents, and so members of the visible Church, admitted to baptism
and other Sacraments of the Church. This external holiness and vocation may be
lost: for when they come to years of discretion, and then show themselves
stubborn and refuse the wholesome means of their calling, they do fall away:
and so is verified that saying of our Savior, Many are called, but few are
chosen. Some then are Loly by election, which cannot perish: others are holy
Two kind^ of holiness, general and special.
by vocation, which may be cast off. As Ambrose says: Tu quidem Domine omnes
cupis, sed non omnes curari volunt: Thou O Lord desire all (in their general
calling) but all will not be cured. And again he says: Inter generalia
promissa etc. Deus quaedam a communibus excepta causis, occultiore nouit
ordinare ratione: Among general promises God excepting some from the common
cause and condition, does deal with them after a more secret manner, lib. 2.
de vocat. Gent. cap. 1. So the general promises are made to all the seed of
the faithful, but they are specially performed only to those which believe:
Confirmauit generalem bonitatem super vniuersos, etc. God has confirmed his
general goodness to all; but part of them, merito fidei diuinitus inspiratae ad
aeternam salurem specialibus beneficijs prouehitur, by the worthiness of faith
inspired by God, by special benefits is promoted to salvation: Ambros. lib. 2.
de vocat. Gent. c. 10.

4. Thus then are the Cauillers frinolous objections answered concerning the
salvation of the Jews of Saul and Judas, the Church of Rome: all these tasted
of Gods general goodness in offering to them the external means of salvation,
but they wanted the special benefits of true sanctification, and effectual
vocation: Where the Libeller by the way is detected of falsehood, page 209.
urging eternal sanctification: which are words Falsehood.
of his own putting in: for where the children of the faithful are said to be
holy, eternal and internal holiness and sanctification, is neither mentioned,
nor yet intended, but the holiness of their general vocation.

5. Yea, says he, Turks and Jews also shall Untruths.
be saved, whose forefathers were faithful Christians: yea, and the devils
also, which sometime were in Gods grace, page 210.

Ans. 1. Are Turks and Jews, I pray you, holy seed? or does not the Apostle
speak of such children, whose immediate parents were faithful* 1. Cor. 7. 14.
Else were your children unclean but now are they holy. And are devils in your
divinity holy seed?

2. The Papists do more incline to these Papists, not Protestants favorers of
infidels.
gross opinions of the saving of Infidels and Devils then Protestants: for
concerning Infidels* they hold, that they in part may believe by their own
free will, Rhemist* Act. 13. sect. 1. and that their actions which seemed
outwardly glorious* as in honoring their parents* in fighting for their
country, and such like* were not sinful: Romans 14. sect. 4. contrary to the
Apostle, who says, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

As touching Devils: first, they do forbid Doctrines of devils.
to marry and abstain from meats, which the Apostle* calls, the doctrines
of devils, 2. Tim. 4. 3. Secondly, they hold that justifying faith is a
general, or universal believing of the articles of Christ's death and
resurrection, Rhemist. annot. Romans 4. sect. 9. which is no other faith then
such as devils may have, to believe the historical truth of the articles of
faith: for they believe and tremble, Iam. 2. 19. Now let any reasonable man
judge, whether Papists or Protestants have a better opinion of the Devils and
Infidels. The fables of the delivering of Plato and the Emperor Traian out of
hell at the prayers of Gregory, and of Falconilla at the prayers of Tecla, are
their dreams and devices, and not ours. The first reported by Nicetas to be
current in the histories of the Fathers, in commentar. ad secund. oration.
Nazianzen de pasch: the other by forged Damascene, oration de defunct.

5. Now because this ^errie companion makes himself pretty sport with Balaams
counsel to send women among the Israelites, with the virgins of the word in
Cheshire (disciples of Master Haruie) as he scornefully calls them, that
g^d* up and down the country to hear Preachers, etc. page 181. we will
continue this jest a little, and show him his own face in a (...)*

1. For ^alamites info^nieation, and Baalites Who are most like to be Balamites.
in idolatry, let popish sectaries carry the bell. Do* ye think we have
forgotten what clean birds, both cocks and hens, were found* in the Abbey
nests, in England at the suppression thereof? I say with Ambrose: Malim falsum
crimen subire, quam verum refer: I had rather bear a false crime, then
bewray a true, epistol. 44. Or think you, we know not what your own writers
testify of the chastity of your Clergy: as Constitution. Othon. in gloss.
Clerici huiusmodi concubinas tenent communiter apparatu honesto nomine
appellationis sororiae: Priests commonly keep such concubines in honest
apparel, under the name of sisters. And in the same place: Videtur, quod hoc
crimen meretricij ecclesia sub dissimulatione transire debeat: It seems good,
that the church should dissemble and to pass over the crime of whoredom.
These are more worthy the name of Balamites, then those whom you slander.

One of your late Councels thus complains: Videmus monasteria mulierum in
plerisque locis in suspectas de int^m inentia domos, ne quid grauius dieam esse
commutata: We see the monasteries of women in most places to be changed into
suspected hou^es of incontinency, to speak no worse of them: Coloniens. part.
10. cap. 9.

2. As for Master Har^ie, though I know him not, I judge him the honester man
for your unliking him. For as Diogenes said to (...).
one that railed upon him, Neither would any man believe me, if I praised you,
nor you in dispraising of me: so I think your discommending of the Ministers
of the Gospel, will be of no more credit with the wise and discreet, then if
I should commend you for an honest man, whom I know not. Your spite and envy
is most against those that labor in the Gospel, and strive against your
superstitious doctrines: but God that has hitherto strengthened us, will I
trust open our mouths yet wider, to cry out against your abominations.

3. It grieueth you, that women should be given to hear sermons, and to sing
Psalms: and I do not marvel at it, for if you might have your mind, both
men and women should be as blind as beetles. You are like those, that Hierome
speaks of: Quam viderint pallentem and tristem, miseram and Manichea^ vocant:
If they see a woman pale and sorrowful, they count her miserable and a
Manichee: ad Eustoch. So do you those women, that desire by the Gospel to be
brought to true sorrow and repentance for their sin. And do you mislike,
that devout women should be well affected to the Ministers of the Gospel, and
minister to their necessities again? I will answer you with Hierome: Mulieres
ministrant saluatori de substantia sua; ille qui de quinque panibus millia
hominum pauit, escas sanctarum mulierum non recusat accipere: The women
minister to our Savior of their substance, and he that with five loaves fed
thousands, refused not to receive the provision of women: ad Princip. It may be
thought, if this disciple of Rome had then lived, he would have carped at our
blessed Savior and his disciples, because they suffered women to resort to
their Sermons, and to minister unto them.

Thus have we taken a view of his supposed contradictions, the third chapter
follows of this goodly treatise containing pretended falsifications: I make
no doubt but to hold him here also at the staves end, that he shall not fasten
a blow: for we fear not his slanderous tongue: as Chabrias said, A weak man's
strokes, and an unwise man's (...).
threats are not to be feared. And as Hierome says: Possum omnes propositionum
riuulos vno Ecclesiae.
veritatis sole siccare: I can dry up the stream of his objections with the
sun of the truth.

THE THIRD CHAPTER OF pretended falsifications.
The 1. Falsification.
SYnops. page 219. Bernard says, The beast in the Apocalypse, to the which a
mouth was given speaking blasphemies, does sit in Peter's chair: epistol. 126.
Bernard here calls not the Pope Antichrist, which was then Innocentius, but
the usurper, that intruded himself.

The Justification.
1. WHat Bernard faith in other places* where he commends either Eugenius or
Innocentius, it is not to the purpose, neither was this place produced to prove
Innocentius or any other particular Pope to be Antichrist, but that Peter's
chair should be the seat of Antichrist: which whether these words do show,
any poor Grammarian, that can but translate a sentence of Latin, will easily
judge.

2. But to make Bernards mind more fully appear, he reports of one
Norbertus, that did hold, that Antichrist should be revealed, Antichrist began
in Bernards time.
ea, quae nunc est generatione, in that very age, and non visurum se mortem;
and that he should not see death, till he saw a general persecution in the
Church: epistol. 56. Though Bernard there says he was not bound, certo
credere, certainly to believe it to be so, yet he commends this Norbertus,
and speaks reverently of him, calling his mouth, caelestem fistulam, an
heavenly pipe. Again, Sermon. Cantic. 33. speaking of the prelates of the church,
that used gold in their bridles, saddles and spurs: Ministri sunt Christi,
and seruiunt Antichrist^: They are the ministers of Christ, and yet serve
Antichrist. But to whom ^ls I pray you were the great prelates subject (for
they were no small birds, that thus glittered in gold) but to the Pope. We have
then both the time of Antichrists coming, the persons, among the Clergy, and
the place described, ye chair of Peter: I report me now to any indifferent
Judge, whether Bernard either in word or sense be misreported. I trust, that
whosoever reads your uncharitable accusations, will do as Alexander did, who
when a complaint was made against one of his familiars, laid his hand upon one
ear, reserving it for his defense, that was absent: So I hope they will
suspend their judgment, till they hear your cauils and sophistications
answered. And I say with Ambrose: Non erit longi subsellij ista iudicatio,
facile est tibi de nostris iudicare: This matter will require no long
judgment, the discreet Reader will soon judge between us: epist. 40.

The 2. Falsification.
SYnops. page 293. Augustine is alleged to prove that the vow of obedience
promised in Baptism, is a general vow of necessity to be kept, in Psalm. 75.
the Libeller cries out, that Augustine is falsified, because the rest of the
words that follow are not alleged, wherein he makes mention of other vows, as
of virginity, of distribution of our goods to the poor. page 217. 218.

The Justification.
FIrst, whereas Bellarmine denies that our promise of obedience and of piety
in Baptism is no vow, Augustine is cited as a witness, not to prove it to be
the only vow: for in the same place it is confessed, that there is another
kind of vows that directly concerns not the worship of God, Synops. page
292. what cause was there then to allege Augustine impertinently for that
which was not in question? We do not use to paint whole pages with long
sentences for want of matter, as you do: the question then was this, whether
to vow, to believe, to hope in God to live well, be the general vow of
Christians, which Augustine there affirms, not whether there were any other
vows beside, which Augustine also in the same place shows, but it belongs
to another question.

Secondly, whereas S. Augustine, as he says, takes a vow in the largest
signification, when he calls these vows, to believe, to live well, etc. as
though they were improperlie called vows: I will show Augustines opinion
further for that in Psalm. 115. Quisquis been cogitat, quid voueat Domino,
seipsum voueat, seip-Sum reddat; hoc exigitur, hoc debetur: Whosoever thinks
well, what he should vow unto God, let him vow himself, let him render
himself; this is exacted, this we owe. Again, Which are the best vows.
de tempor. sermon. 7. One voweth a cloak, another oil, another wax for the
lights, another that he will drink no wine: Non est istud votum optimum, neque
perfectum, aliud melius volo etc. ipsum offer, hoc est, animam tuam: This is
not the best or a perfect vow, I would have a better thing, offer thy self,
that is, thy soul.

Origin also is a plentiful witness herein: Hom. 13. in Exodus Non vult Moses,
vt offeras aliquid, quod extra te est, etc. Moses will not have you offer any
thing without you: take from your selves and offer to God, as every man has
conceived in his heart: does gold grow within me or silver, etc. thou have
therefore offered gold to the tabernacle, that is the faith of thy heart.

Again, Hom. 24. Scio diuersa vota in scripturis referri, etc. I know there are
diverse vows rehearsed in the Scripture, Anna vowed to God the fruit of her
womb, Iepthe his daughter, some Calves, some Rams: but he that is called the
Nazarite, does vow himself unto God: this is the vow of the Nazarite, quod est
super omne votum, which is above all vows: he that does this, imitateth
Christ, which gave himself for us, etc.

If then for a man to vow himself, his soul, his faith to God, be the vow
which we owe, and God exacteth; if it be a perfect and the best vow, as
Augustine; if it be that which the Scripture requires; a vow above all vows,
as Origin testifies: then is it most properly and truly called a vow. And the
Libeller is found to be the falsifier, that says neither the Untruth.
Scripture nor Augustine properly do call it a vow. What cause then had this
intemperate and impatient man to cry out here against malicious dealing, page
220. whereas himself is the man, in these unfriendly words, that shows
malice? But God forgive him, I will not render evil for evil, reproach for
reproach. Demosthenes well said, I will not enter into (...).
that combat, where he that is overcome is better then he that overcomes.
And Ambrose says: Haec sunt arma iusti vt cedendo vincat, sicut fugientes
grauioribus sequentem solent vulnerare ictibus: These are the weapons of just
men, to overcome by giving place, as they that fly away use to hurt them worst
that follow them: de offic. libr. 1. cap. 5. I will therefore give way to his
reuiling speeches, that wherein he thinks to conquer, himself may be
overthrown.

The 3. Falsification.
SYnops. page 297. It was the heresy of the Pelagians and Manichees to
persuade men to cast away their riches, they were not noted of heresy, for
that they did persuade men to cast away their riches, but for that they
maintained that all rich men were bound to forsake all their goods, and that
otherwise, they could not go to heaven: Libel page 221.

The Justification.
FIrst, all that labor might have been spared, which the Libeller takes in
citing Augustine at large, epist. 106. and lib. 5. contra Faust. c. 10. to show
that to be the opinion of the Pelagians and Manichees, seeing he was not
ignorant, that Synops. page 304. (which place he himself quoteth in the
margin, page 223.) it is further said, this is the right heresy of the
Manichees and Pelagians, that promised the kingdom of God not to any, but to
those that cast away their riches. How then is this denied to be the heresy of
the Pelagians and Manichees before, being so directly affirmed here?

2. By the way this falsifier of others, has here played a trick of
falsification himself: for instead of these words, they promised the kingdom
of God not to any, he reads, not to one: which though it were a escape in the
first edition, is amended in the second. Again, he says, the Pelagians are
noted of heresy, for that Falsification.
they did persuade men to vow poverty, or as he speaks to cast away their
goods, p. 210. where these words, they did persuade men to vow poverty, are of
his own putting in.

3. Does not he I pray you, that says, none but they which cast away their
riches shall enter into heaven, consequently persuade men to cast them away? If
a man shall hear one of your Seminary priests to avouch, that none can be
saved, unless he be a member of the Roman Church, does he not in effect
persuade him to be reconciled to it? It is not said, that this is the whole
heresy of them to persuade rich men to cast away their riches: but this was
their heresy, because it was an effect and consequent of their heresy: The
other assertion that none can be saved, except they cast away their riches, is
but an inducement to this persuasion.

4. That is showed to be the heresy of the Rich men not bound to cast away
their riches.
Manichees and Pelagians, wherein they were contrary to Augustine; for he no
where persuades all rich men to cast away their riches, but to use them well:
as in that sentence of his alleged: Si diuitiae adsunt per opera bona
seruentur in coelo: If riches be present, let them by good works be stored up
in heaven. And in many other places: ^s Enarrat. in Psa. 85. Tantum meminerint
diuites, quod aijt Apostolus etc. Only let rich men remember that which the
Apostle says, Charge them that are rich, that they be not high minded.
Likewise in Psalm. 136. What is commanded rich me^, that they be not proud: Quod
faciunt diuitiae, hoc caueant in diuitijs, caueant in diuitijs superbiam: Let
them take heed of that in riches which riches make: let them take heed of
pride in riches. Seeing then Augustine persuades not rich men to cast away
their wealth: the contrary was showed to be practiced by the Pelagians and
Manichees, that persuaded al so to do: if this be not true, that these
heretics did so, or if it were affirmed, they did only so, and not further
held, that rich men unless they did so could not be saved; then he might have
had some reason to cry out of falsification: which crime he himself only in
this place has committed, as I trust does appear: his uncharitable words:
they are by him maliciously suppressed, Libel. p. 220. and page 223. cunningly
and maliciously: we regard them not: it is better to hear evil, then to (...).
speak evil, as the old saying is. And I say with Ambrose: Ne aestimet quis
plus ponderis esse in ^lieno conuitio, quam in testimonio suo: Let no man
think, that there is more weight in another man's slander, then in the
testimony of his own conscience.

The 4. Falsification.
SYnops. p. 319. the Council of Colen is alleged against the begging of idle
Monks and Friars, part. 11. c. 5. it is falsified says the Libeller, because
that Council allows the four orders of begging Friars, page 4. c. 7.

The Justification.
FIrst, in that place the Synod allows the orders of begging Friars, that
were preachers: Quo parochorum in verbi ministerio cooporarij forent, quos
absit vt repellamus: That they might be fellow helpers to the parish priests
in the ministry of the word, whom (God forbid) we should put by. But what is
this to the allowance of sturdie begging Friars, that could not preach? for of
such Monks is the question, that are fit for no other service in the Church.

Secondly, that this Synod provided not only against lusty common beggars
(as he bears us in hand) but against idle begging Friars, it is evident by
these reasons: First, the words are general: Mendicantibus validis, etc.
public and ostiatim mendicare penitus sit interdictum: To sturdie beggars let
it be wholly forbidden to beg from door to door. Secondly, they speak of
beggars subject, legalibus nostrisque constitutionibus, not only to the Civil
laws, but to the constitutions of the church: but to the Canons of the church
regular beggars were more properly subject, then lay secular. Thirdly, the
reason of the constitution is general: Vtilius esurienti panis tollitur, si de
ci^o securus, iustitiam negligat; quam eidem frangitur vt seductus iniustitiae
acquiescat: Bread is better taken from the hungry, if taking no care for his
meat he neglect justice, then is broken to him, that by this means being
seduced he should do injustice. But it is a point of injustice as well in
begging Friars, as in others, to live idly upon the sweat of other men's
brows. Fourthly, other ancient Canons have provided against wandering Monks:
as Cause. 16. qu. 1. c. 11. Monachi circumuagantes, Monks gadding about, are
called, pseudomonachi, false Monks. Cause. 18. qu. 2. c. 10. Monks wandering in
cities, speciem monachicam prae se ferentes: but bearing a show of Monks. It
is like that this provincial Synod herein agreed with former Councels.
Fifthly, but begging Friars are not received into Hospitals, if they be sick,
but into their own Couents. Ans. This is more then he knows, or more the^ is
likely: for if the begging Friars wandering somewhat far from home, did
suddenly chance to be sick, where else could they be relieved, then in such
Hospitals? Again, the Canon as well forbids them to beg, ostiatim, from
door to door, as to be received into Hospitals: then though one clause
concern them not, I am sure the other does concerning begging.

3. The Libeller makes himself some sport, because the Canons of the Council
of Colen are called ancient, etc. which was held not much above 60. years ago:
where he again plaieth the falsary: for the Council of Aquisgrane Untruth.
is first alleged, which was celebrate almost 800. years ago. There is also
cited the decree of Pelagius, cause. 16. qu. 1. cap. 18. who lived above a
thousand year since, and a Canon of the Chalcedon Council, almost a thousand
year before: and in regard of these, the Canons are called ancient: against
the antiquity whereof I hope he can take no exception.

What cause now had this Calumniator, to cry out of false dealing, and that he
does concontrarie to his conscience, if any be left: he shows what small
cause he has unjustly and untruly thus to slander his brethren. But we have
met with another Diogenes, that called himself, the trumpet of railing speech:
(...).
and I had rather he should be a Diogenes, to be loud rather in sound, then
such as Antisthenes, that compared himself to the wasps, (...).
whose wings made but a small noise, but they had a sharp sting. But this
Zoilus carries all away with a loud sound of words, he wounds neither us,
nor our cause. And as Ambrose says: Lutum cito colligit amnis exundans, de
offic. lib. 1. cap. 3. So he with a raging stream of words, does nothing but
gather filth to himself.

The 5. Falsification.
BEcause these words being cited out of the Council of Colen, part. 9. c. 9.
Ad audiendum sacrum and communicandum, are translated, to hear and receive the
sacraments, and not to hear the Mass. Libel. page 227.

The Justification.
1. HEre is no one word of the Mass, but only, Sacrum, which is in the neuter
gender, but Missa is in the Latin, and cannot be the substantive to it: Now
judge good Reader, which of us does translate more truly, he in construing,
Sacrum, Mass, or the other in Englishing of it Sacrament.

2. What this Council elsewhere determines of the Mass, it is not to the
purpose: we know it is popish enough in other points and places: the question
is, whether this place be falsified: where he has rather played the falsarie,
in thrusting in Missa, the Mass, in steed of sacrum, sacred, or holy, which
by the word following, communicandum, to communicate, does show that it may
well be referred to the Sacrament.

Wherefore the crime objected here offalsification (...).
is unjust, and as Plato says, we count his reuiling as smoke that
vanishes: he does but belch out his own shame, as Hierome says: Vt ructus e
stomacho erumpit, and vel boni, vel mali odoris flatus indicium est, ita ex
abundantia cordis os loquitur: As belching breaks from the stomach, and the
breath is a bewrayer of good or bad smell: so the mouth speaks of the
abundance of the heart. As a stinking breath bewrays a bad stomach: so foul
words show a corrupt heart.

The 6. Falsification.
SYnops. page 623. the Council of Colen is alleged to prove the name of
penance rather to betoken the change of the mind and inward contrition and
sorrow, then any outward satisfactorie work: he cries out the Council is
falsified, because it makes three parts of penance, contrition, confession,
satisfaction. page 227.

The Justification.
1. WHether this Council makes 3. parts of penance, is not the question,
neither is it denied: and therefore he might well have for borne that large
citation of the Canons of this Council, being altogether impertinent.

2. The question being then about the use and signification of this word
penance, not about the parts thereof: this Council is alleged to show that
penance signifies inward sorrow and contrition: the words are these: Penance
is then truly preached, when sins are reproved by the word of God, and
incutitur populo timor irae, etc. and there is smitten into the people a fear
of the wrath and judgment of God. And afterward, ex animo vereque contritis ac
conuersis promittatur gratia: To them being truly and in the soul contrite and
converted, let grace be promised. In this place no mention is made of
satisfaction, and yet this inward sorrow and contrition is called penance:
whether this place now do prove, without any falsification at all, such use of
this word poenitentia, repentance, or as they say, penance, a simple and mean
judgment may easily discern: and this hard Censor might have acknowledged it,
if he had not been disposed to cauil. Whom I may compare with Plutarke, to hard
hearted nurses: Dum sordes detergunt, carnes (...).
sauciant: While they take away the filth, they tear the flesh. So Chrysostom
says, that he which raises a crime against his brother, does as it were eat
his brothers flesh: No better is (...).
this slaunderer, which feeds himself by gnawing upon others good name, as
their flesh, with his biting teeth.

The 7. Falsification.
SYnops. page 957. S. Augustine is alleged, to show that there was no such
strict necessity of fasting in his time, sermon. 62. Augustine is said to be
falsified, because he thought it necessary to observe the prescript fasts of
the Church, when as he notes Aerius of heresy for denying the same, here is.
53. he also says it was a sin not to fast in Lent, in the same Sermon. 62.

The Justification.
1. IT is not true that Aerius was counted no heretic, for holding, statuta
solemniter ieiunia non esse celebranda, that fasts solemnly appointed ought
not to be kept: but Augustine says, Aerius in Arrianam haeresin lapsus,
propria dogmata addidisse nonnulla fertur; Aerius being fallen into the Arrian
heresy, did add some opinions of his own: he was an heretic, because an
Arrian, for the rest, he was held but a Schismatike and dogmatizer. And
Augustine speaks only of the set fasts and fasting days of the Church, not
insinuating any merit or religion to be therein: And such prescript fasts for
order sake and civil uses, whosoever contemns, is but a dogmatizer with
Aerius.

2. That in Augustines time there was no such strict necessity of fasting, as
in the Popish Church (for all kind of (...) is not simply denied to have been
then, but comparatively such strict and superstitious necessity Exceptis
diebus dominicis.
as they use) it may be easily showed: first, because the Lords days are
exempted from the fast; but in Popery all days are alike tied to the Lenton
fast. Secondly, they were dispensed Difference between the fast in Augustines
time and Popish fasts. Fox 1184.
withal, which by reason of their infirmity could not fast: but in Popery
there was no such liberty, as may appear by the story of Frebarnes hard
handling, for rosting a pigge in Lent for his wife, that longed for it, which
pigge was buried by the Sum^er in Finsburie field, Fox 1184. Thirdly, Augustine
says, that where a man could not fast, alms might suffice without fasting:
but in Popery they would not ^^ffer a man to be released of fasting in Lent,
for al^^es deeds. Fourthly, Augustine says, Nullus prandere praesumat: Let no
man presume to dine in Lent. Their abstinence was the whole day, to give
themselves to prayer and hearing the word, not from some kind of meats, but
wholly from all meats: but this is not observed in Popery, and therefore their
Lenton fast is not like that in Augustines time. Fifthly, then was not the fast
so strictly prescribed from cheese, butter, eggs, but only from flesh, as
Sermon. de tempor. ser. 64. Qui abstinemus a carnibus: We which abstain from
flesh, which it is lawful to use at other times, etc. Sixthly, they did not
then fast in Lent with any opinion of merit, but to humble their bodies, and
make them more fit to serve God: Tum ad Dominum etc. men's purior festinat, cum
nulla crapula crassatur; Then the mind is readier for God, when it is not
incras^ate with meat: but popish Lenton fast is held to be meritorious. I
trust by this it appears, that Augustines Lent was far differing from the
popish, neither with such strict necessity enjoined: that we may well conclude
upon Augustines sentence: What is now become of your Lent and Ember days, etc.
for the Church knew none such in Augustines time.

3. But Augustine says, it is a sin not to fast in Lent: that is, as he
expounds himself, when a man is known, non pro infirmitate non posse, sed
pro gula ieiunare non velle, not to be not able to fast for his infirmity, but
not willing for gl^ttonie. This we also grant, that he which of a greedy
appetite and gluttonous mind shall break the set fasts of the Church,
instituted for the exercise of prayer and hearing the word, does sin. Now
what small cause the Libeller had to say, he maliciously, and notably abuses
Saint Augustine, I hope it is evident, he rather abuses himself in suffering
his tongue to range so at liberty. Plutarke could have told him, that an
evil mouth is a sign of an evil mind. Origin says, (...).
They that speak the words of God, God opens their mouth: qui falsum
testimonium dicit, diabolus aperit os eorum: but they which utter slanders,
the Devil opens their mouth. Hom. 3. in Exodus

The 8. Falsification.
WHere Bellarm. does charge the Protestants with the heresy of Proclus: who
should say, peccatum in renatis semper viuere, that sin does always live in
the regenerate: because it is translated, that sin does reign etc. in the
regenerate or borne anew, he says, that this sentence is foisted in of his
own: Libel. page 236. 237.

The Justification.
HEre is neither whole sentence, nor yet a whole word foisted in, as this
foister says: but only one word translated contrary to his humor, peccatum
semper viuere, sin always to reign, for always to live: the sense being
the same. For first, I ask him what Proclus heresy was, whether that sin
did live, that is, remain in the regenerate, or did live, that is, reign in
them. To say that sin remains in the regenerate, is no heresy, but
catholic and sound doctrine agreeable to the Scripture. 1. Ioh. 1. 8. If we
say we Sin remains in the regenerate, but lives not.
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. And this was
one of the errors of the Pelagians: Posse esse hominem sine peccato: That a man
may be here without sin: which Augustine confuteth, epist. 89. quaest. 1. by
that place of John: and further he says, Omnibus est necessaria oration
Dominica: The Lords Prayer is necessary for all, where we pray, forgive us
our sins. This doctrine is confirmed by your own Decrees: Distin. 25. c. 3.
in gloss. out of Hierome: Res contra naturam pene est, vt sine peccato aliquis
sit: It is almost against nature, that a man should be without sin. Likewise,
Distin. 81. c. 1. cause. 33. distinct. 2. de poenitent. c. 40. how then could
Proclus be judged an heretic, in saying that sin remained in the regenerate,
which the Catholic Church did also hold?

Wherefore his meaning was, that sin did live, that is, reign in the
regenerate: much like to the heresy of the Eunomians, that did teach, that the
committing of never so great sins should not hurt a man, if he were of their
faith, Augustine. haeres. 54. and so they did suffer sin to reign in their
disciples.

Secondly, in Scripture for sin to reign or live in us, is taken for all
one: as Romans 7. verse. 9. Sin (says the Apostle) revived, which he expounds
verse. 14. I am carnal and sold under sin: the Apostle here speaks of
himself, when he was yet uncalled: for sin then to live or revive in us, is
to be sold unto sin. And again, Romans 6. 1. We that are dead unto sin, how
shall we live still therein? And afterward The living of sin, and reigning of
sin, all one.
he expounds what it is to live in sin: verse. 12. Let not sin reign in
your mortal bodies. So then to live in sin, or sin to live in us, is for
sin to reign in us. Thus Augustine interprets the Apostle: Qui mortui
sumus peccato, etc. eum describit, qui est sub gratia constitutus: cui autem
dominatur peccatum etc. adhuc sub lege est: We that are dead to sin, how
shall we live therein? He describes him which is under grace, but he, in whom
sin rules, etc. is under the law, not under grace, in 6. ad Roman. He then
which is under grace, or regenerate, lives not in sin, nor sin lives in
him: he that is not under grace then has sin both living and reigning in
him. The Apostle also says, Romans 12. verse. 11. Ye are dead to sin, but are
alive to God. There cannot be both a death of sin and a life of sin
together in the regenerate. It is then I trust sufficiently cleared, that the
living of sin and reigning of sin is all one.

Now (thou accuser of the brethren, whosoever thou art) take your choice, if
Proclus by the living of the sin in the regenerate, means reigning, then
are we no heretics, for so we hold not: if by living, he understands the
being of sin: then are you heretics, if you deny it. Your heretical
liuerie then take to your self, it is fittest for your shoulders, that first
shaped it and cut out the cloth: your liuerie may well be heresy, and your
cognizance, hypocrisy: be not offended, if you carry away that you bring: Si
dixeris (...).
quod vis, audies quod non vis: If you speak what you will, you shall hear
what you would not: as Homer says, What you speak, the same shall you hear
again. The Pelagians objected against Hierome, that he was an heretic: I
answer you, as he answered them: Egone haereticus, quare ergo me haeretici non
amant? Am I an heretic, wherefore then do not heretics (such as you are)
love me? lib. 3. aduers. Pelagian.

The 9. Falsification.
WHereas Augustine is alleged, Tetrastyl. page 97. in these words: The pomp
of funerals, the rites and solemnities of burial, are comforts of the living,
no help to the dead: let men therefore perform this last duty to their
friends. Sermon. de verb. Apostol. 34. to show, that though Augustine seems
somewhat to be infected with the error of prayer for the dead, yet sometime his
speech sounds to the contrary: hereupon these outcries and exclamations are
made:

1. That prayer for the dead is Catholic doctrine, seeing it was believed in
the pure time of the Primitive Church, and the contrary opinion by Epiphanius
and Augustine sentenced for heresy in Aerius, Libel. p. 239. 2. That Augustine
is pitifully mangled and maimed, many of his sentences being left out. page
240. 3. That the words are wickedly perverted by false translation. 4. It is a
most plain place against the Protestants, to prove prayer for the souls
departed. page 242.
The Justification.
FIrst, neither was Aerius held an heretic by Augustine, for denying prayer
for the dead: but thus he said of him, as I have showed before, that, in
Arrianorum haeresim lapsus propria quoque dogmata addidisse nonnulla fertur:
That he is reported to have fallen into the heresy of the Arrians, and to
have added certain opinions of his own, Haeres. 53. He calls it not
heresy, but dogma, an opinion or sentence: he was counted an heretic because
h^ was an Arrian.

Neither yet in the pure time of the Primitive Church was prayer for the dead
generally believed, as I have proved before in the answer to contradict. 8. 4.
p. art. 2. And this may further appear, because Bellarmine cites no Canon
more ancient for this matter, then from the third Carthaginian Council, Can.
29. which was above 420. years after Christ: but so long we hold not the pure
time of the Primitive Church to have continued, which extended not much beyond
the age of the Apostles, if you speak of the purest times thereof. And that
Canon makes no mention of prayer for the dead, but only of the commendation
or commemoration of the dead: Si defunctorum commendatio facienda est, etc.

Secondly, it is confessed, yt many sentences of Augustine are left out, that
seem to make for prayer for the dead. But what then? first, whereas it is
granted that Augustine held that error, to what purpose should his words be
alleged to prove that which was not denied. Secondly, whereas it was affirmed,
that sometime his speech sounds to the contrary, was he bound to allege any
but these words, which seemed so to sound? Thirdly, and further whereas the
reporter of Augustine, breaks off the sentence at these words, they are the
comforts of the living, no help to the dead, and leaves the rest that
follows: has he not herein Augustines own example, who repeating the same
words and sentence himself, with very little alteration, libr. de cur. pro
mortuis cap. 2. proceeds no further, but then adds other words: for there
he says thus: Curatio funeris, conditio sepulturae, pompa exequiarum magis
viuorum solatia sunt, quam subsidia mortuorum: The manner of sepulture, pomp
of exequies are rather comforts of the living, then helps of the dead. And
there he breaks off, no further following the course of his speech in the
34. Sermon. Fourthly, but what if the Libeller himself has mangled Augustines
sentence, clipping off that which makes against him: as these words that
follow: Non ergo mortuis noua merita Falsification.
comparantur, cum pro eis boni aliquid impendunt sui, sed eorum praecedentibus
consequentia ista redduntur: Therefore new merits are not obtained for the
dead, when their friends bestow some good upon them, but these merits following
are rendered for the other going before. And again, Et ideo istam finiens
quisque vitam, nisi quod meruit in ipsa, non poterit habere post ipsam: And
therefore every man ending this life, cannot have after it, but that he
wrought or merited in it. What reason had this (Carper) now to leave out all
these words, which show that nothing is added unto the state of the dead, but
what they procured while they lived: which shows that prayer for the dead is
vain and superfluous, if nothing thereby be obtained for the dead, which they
had not before. Is not now he himself become a clipper of Augustines coin,
and a falsifier of him, and so is truly guilty of that crime, wherewith
untruly he charge another?

Thirdly, he cries out of false dealing, because agmina exequiarum, is
translated, the rites and solemnities of burial, whereas he thinks he plaieth
the better translator to say, the multitude of people attending upon the
funerals. Now sir, let us see who has translated best. Again, you interpret,
companies or multitudes: but the other rather reads solemnities, as Augustine
elsewhere interprets himself, saying, pompa exequiarum, the pom^^ or
solemnity of the exequies, de cura pro mortuis cap. 2. and yet the word
solemnities implies also companies or multitudes, without whom there can be no
solemnity.

All the difference then is about this word exequiarum, you English it,
attending upon funerals: the other, the rites of burial. Now sir, is there
any, not word, but syllable here that signifies attending? Then attend what I
say, your self, and no body else (sir Corrector) have falsely translated. But
let us now briefly see, whether this word exequiae, do signify the rites of
burial, and prayer among the rest. Council. Toletan. 3. c. 22. Cum Psalmis
tantummodo and psallentium vocibus debere ad sepulchra deferri, etc. They that
are departed must be brought to the grave with Psalms and voices of singers.
Arelatens. 3. in fine: Si quis cantare desideret Kyrieleson, cantet: If any man
desire to sing Kyrieleson, Lord have mercy on us, let him sing. This was one
rite of the solemnity th^re prescribed for the funerals of the dead. Sext.
decret. lib. 1. tit. 6. c. 3. Gregor. 10. Vt solemnibus pro eo celebratis
exequijs etc. humiles preces fundantur ad Dominum: That ^olemne exequies being
celebrate (for the Pope deceased) humble prayers should be powered out. I hope
these places do clear this point, that exequies are the rites of burial, and
that prayer and thanksgiving be^^ng to those rites.

Fourthly, this place he says, makes not for the Protestants, but against
them.

First, he has not answered those arguments from hence enforced: the rites
and solemnities of the burial are comforts of the living, they help not the
dead, prayer is of the rites of burial: Ergo, it helps not the dead. To this
he answers nothing: but see good Reader, page 244. where our intent is not to
deny the scope of Augustines discourse, but only to show, that some of his
speeches sound otherwise. By the same collection, officia postremi muneris, the
offices of the last duty, erga suos, toward theirs, not suorum corpora, the
bodies of theirs, may carry a sound contrary to the discourse, that prayer
being one of the rites of burial, is one of the last duties to be performed.

Secondly, neither is this so pregnant a place as he thinks, for popish
prayer for the dead: for it shall appear that there is great difference
between this kind of commemoration for the dead, which Augustine here
speaks of, and that which they use.

1. He says, Fideles quando moriuntur paululum No Purgatory believed in
Augustines time.
a nobis abire, and transire ad meliora: That the faithful that die, go away
for a while, and pass to a better place: Ergo, not to purgatory: for that is
no better place: neither is it, fidei gaudium, a reioy cing or joy of faith, as
Augustine also says, that our friends go to be tormented in purgatory: they
the^ prayed not for the souls of the dead as broyling in purgatory, as the
Church of Rome does.

2. Whereas Augustine says, This received from our fathers the whole Church
observes, that for those which die in the communion of the body and blood of
Christ, when as they are rehearsed, commemorantur, in their place, ad
sacrificium ipsum, at the sacrifice, it should be prayed for. He gathers from
hence, that this was the general practice of the Church to Difference between
commemoration, and commendation of the dead, and prayer for the dead.
pray for the dead: whereas this only is showed, that their names that were
departed, were commemorated in the sacrifice, or Sacrament so called (because
then they offered up the spiritual sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving,
whereof it is called the Eucharist) and this commemoration, and commendation of
the dead (both which words Augustine uses here) was as the common prayers,
requests and desires of the Church for them.

3. He says here, that mortuis noua merita No new merits obtained for the
dead, by the prayers of the living.
non acquiruntur, that new merits are not by these prayers obtained for the
dead. If the simple people were so taught in the popish church, they would not
greatly care for their Masses and Dirges, when they are gone: but Augustine for
that, thus answers, that while they lived they obtained, vt possint eis haec
vtilia esse post mortem, that these things may profit them, when they are dead.
But I pray you, if the worthiness of the dead, while they lived, do make the
prayers of the living available; was it not much more effectual to make their
own prayers available for themselves, while they lived, that they should not
need any prayers, when they are dead? This device will slake the prayers of
the living one for another for if it be so that my acceptance with God makes
another man's prayers acceptable for me, and he rather does not make me better
accepted with God, what need should I have of his prayers, seeing my
acceptance with God will as soon make mine own prayers acceptable as the
prayers of another? Yea further let this be marked, that their Masses are not
available for the dead absolutely, but with a condition, if they were worthy
while they lived, to have Masses said for them when they are dead: then the
virtue and worthiness of your Masses must depend upon the virtue and worthiness
of those for whom they are said or sung. If you would open this secret to your
blind ignorant people, they would little regard your Trentals, Obites, Masses
of Requiem, when they are gone.

4. It then appears, that if the Church used to pray for the faithful gone
to heaven, if they made commemoration and rehearsal of them, yet thinking that
they procured no new merit or favor for them: then it follows, that those
prayers were not made upon any necessity, but rather of a tender compassion,
piety and pity toward the dead: as Augustine here calls them, piae chordae
Prayer for the dead of pity, rather the^ necessity in Augustines time.
charorum: the tender and devout hearts of their dear friends. Thus much
Augustine shows, Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13. that his mother dying, Tantummodo
memoriam sui ad altar tuum fieri desyderauit: Only desired that remembrance
of her might be made at thine altar, and no otherwise. And though Augustine
prayed for her: he says, Credo, quod iam feceris, quod rogo, sed voluntaria
oris mei approba Domine: I believe, that thou have already done, that which I
pray for, but approve the voluntaries of my mouth. He therefore prays for his
mother rather to show his piety and duty toward her, then of any necessity.

Thirdly, now because, this (uncharitable Censor) vaunteth of Augustine, as
being wholly theirs for prayer for the dead, I will therefore at large show what
may be gathered out of that learned Fathers works concerning this matter, and
draw from thence most strong and invincible reasons against this superstitious
use.

First, it is superfluous to pray either for the Reasons out of Augustine,
against prayer for the dead.
blessed in heaven or damned in hell: as Augustine says, Qui orat pro martyr
iniuriam facit martyri; qui orat pro damnatis, nequaquam impetrabit: He that
prays for a martyr, does wrong to the martyr; he that prays for the damned,
shall not obtain: ad fratres in erem. sermon. 42. But after this life all are
either in heaven or hell, blessed or damned, because there are but two places
after this life: Augustine knows no third place beside heaven and hell.
Duae habitationes, vna in igne aeterno, altera in regno aeterno: There are but
two habitations, one in everlasting fire, another in the everlasting kingdom,
de verb. Apost. ser. 18. Beside these two places: Tertium penitus ignoramus,
imo nec esse in scripturis sanctis reperimus: The third place we are utterly
ignorant of, nay we find it not in the holy Scriptures. But it will be
objected that Augustines meaning is, that there shall be but two places at the
day of judgment, not presently after this life. Ans. Augustine says: Sub
omnipotentis manu tria sunt facta habitacula, primum regnum coelorum, imum
infernus, medium mundus praesens: There are three tabernacles made by the hand
of the omnipotent: the first, the kingdom of heaven; the lowest, hell; the
midst, this present world, cap. 1. de triplie. habitac. He speaks of the
places, that are now present: but if this book shall be doubted of, he says in
another place, in Psalm. 57. Est quaedam poena futura ignis gehennae, ignis
aeternus: futura enim poena duas habet species, aut inferorum est vbi ardebat
dives ille, etc. and altera est in fine, de qua audituri sunt, etc. There is a
certain punishment to come, the fire of hell, fire everlasting: this punishment
to come has two kinds, either it is hell, where the rich man burned, etc.
another shall be in the end, whereof they shall hear which shall be placed at
the left hand, go into everlasting fire. What now is become of your third kind
of fire and punishment in purgatory?

The conclusion follows, that it is in vain and superfluous to pray for the
dead, seeing they are either in heaven or in hell.

Argum. 2. If nothing profit the dead, but what they did themselves, when they
were alive, then the prayers of the living cannot profit them now they are
dead, for it is none of their acts, neither are they now alive.

But the first is true by the testimony of No man profited being dead, but by
that which he did in his life.
Augustine: Ad spiritus mortuorum non peruenit, nisi quod viui secum fecerunt,
etc. Nothing comes to the spirits of the dead, but what they did with
themselves being alive: if then they did it not when they were alive, nothing
comes to the dead: in Psalm. 48. con. 1. Ergo, the prayers of the living do
not profit the dead.

Argum. 3. If the state of the dead cannot be altered, but in what condition
soever they die, in the same they rise to judgment: then it follows, that
prayer is in vain for the dead.

But the first is affirmed by Augustine: Vnusquisque cum causa sua dormit, cum
causa sua surgit: Every man sleeps with his cause, and rises with his cause.
Tract. in Ioann. 49, Redimite vos ipsi dum viuitis, quia post mortem nemo vos
redimere potest: Redeem your selves while you live, for after death no man can
redeem you. De rectitud. Catholic. conuersat. tom. 9. Quales in die isto
quisque moritur, talis in die illo iudicabitur: As a man dies in this day, so
shall he be judged in that day, epist. 80. ad Hesych.

Ergo, prayers are not available for the dead.

Argum. 4. That which a man has obtained The soul at rest presently after
death if ever.
already, if ever he shall obtain it, is in vain prayed for. The souls of
the departed are presently at rest, if they be counted worthy. August.
Requiem, quae continuo post mortem datur, si ea dignus est, tum accipit quisque
cum moritur: Rest, which is presently given after death, every one even then
receives, if he be worthy, when he dies, tract. in Ioann. 49. Ergo, it is
in vain to pray for the rest of their souls.

Argum. 5. He that departs this life without sin, needs not afterward to be
prayed Sin is only forgiven in this life.
for, to be forgiven his sin: but every one that shall be saved, goes forth
of this life without sin. Augustine. epist. 89. ad Hilar. qu. 1. He that
assisted by the grace of God, does abstain from those sins which are called
crimes, and those sins without the which a man lives not here, does not
neglect to cleanse by the works of mercy, and godly prayers, merebitur hinc
exire sine peccato, quamuis cum hic viueret habuerit nonnulla peccata: quia
sicut ista non defuerunt, ita remedia quibus purgarentur, adfuerunt: shall
procure to go out hence without sin, although while he lived here he had some
sins: for as these things were not wanting, so the remedies, whereby they are
purged, were present. But what if a man neglect to use these remedies while he
lives? certainly he is deprived of them for ever, he cannot have them
afterward. Augustine says, Noli differ o homo remedia salutis tuae, quia
nescis, quando anima a te repetatur: Defer not O man, the remedies of thy
salvation, for thou know not when thy soul shall be taken from thee.

Ergo, if he that is saved has his sins forgiven him before he go hence,
prayer for pardon afterward is superfluous.

Argum. 6. Where there is no remission of sins, nor effectual repentance,
there prayer for remission is in vain.

But after death, there is neither remission, No repentance unto remission of
sins after death.
nor yet true repentance. Aug. de temp. sermon. 66. Tempus est nunc remissionis
poenitentibus, sed tempus erit post mortem vindicationis, negligentibus
confiteri peccata: Now is the accept^ble time, the time of salvation, now is
the time for remission to the penitent, but after death shall be the time of
revenge to all those that neglected to confess their sins. Sermon. 181. cap.
16. Cum abducti fuerimus ab hoc seculo, ibi poenitebit nos, sed nulla est
vtilitas poenitentiae: When we are carried out of this world, there it shall
repent us, but there shall be no utility or profit of our repentance.

Ergo, prayer for remission of sins is in vain, when it cannot be had.

Argum. 7. Every man dies either penitently No hope for the impenitent after
death.
or impenitently: if he die penitently, all his sins are forgiven him.
August. sermon. 181. cap. 16. Donec sumus in hac vita, quantacunque nobis
acciderint peccata possibile est omnia ablui per poenitentiam: As long as we
live in this life, it is possible for all our sins how great soever to be
washed away by repentance. For such therefore prayer is superfluous: if a man
die without repentance, prayer can not help them, because they enter into
damnation. Si sine poenitentia mortui fuerint; non veniunt ad vitam, sed
praecipitantur ad mortem: If they die without repentance, they come not to
life, but are cast headlong to death, sermon. 217.

Ergo, prayer is profitable to none that are departed.

Argum. 8. After judgment prayers help not. August. Non post iudicium patet
precum, aut meritorum locus: There is no place for prayer or merit after
judgment, sermon. 22. in Matthew. But in death every man receives his judgment.
Aug. in Psa. 32. Misericordiae tempus modo est, iudicij post erit: Now is the
time of mercy, the time of judgment shall be afterward: Qualis exieris ex hac
vita, redderis illi: As you go out of this world, so shall you be presented
unto God, in Psalm. 36. 1.

Ergo, after death there is no place for prayers.

I could produce no less, then an hundred of such places out of Augustine, to
show, that there is no utility or profit coming to the dead by the prayers of
the living: but these may suffice. Wherefore then (will it be said) does
Augustine allow prayer for the dead? I answer, that they did it in some
commiseration and tender affection, not of any necessity, as I showed before:
and then prayer for the dead was far differing from popish Dirges, and Masses
of Requiem, as is before declared.

And what if Augustine, or any other Father of the Church, does seem to like
and approve prayer for the dead? that is no sufficient warrant, unless they
can show their ground out of Scripture. And this judgment Augustine himself
would have used toward his writings: Auferantur de medio chartae nostrae,
procedat in medium codex Dei: audi Christum dicentem, audi veritatem loquentem:
Let our writings be taken out of the way, let the book of God be brought
forth: hear Christ saying, hear the truth speaking, in Psalm. 57. Wherefore
neither the opinion of Augustine, nor of any other Doctor ought to bind us
without authority of scripture, which in this point of prayer for the dead,
fails.

Whereas then the Libeller thinks, that these words, which were sorted out of
Augustine, do little make against prayer for the dead; indeed it may well be,
that more pregnant places might have been produced out of Augustine, to that
end, as any of these before alleged: yet howsoever, for any thing he has said
for himself, there remains some life in those objections still, and the
party traduced is cleared of the crime of falsification, which cleaves fast
as pitch to the traducers face. As for his ungodly blasphemies of malicious and
wilful corruptions, shaking hand with death, detest such a malicious Minister,
they do as a filthy some bewray his cankred and corrupt heart, with whom he
seems to have shaken both hand and heart, that is, the father of lies, and
accuser of the brethren. And thus we see how this, (...), sophister of many
heads, as Plato says, turns himself from lying to railing, from railing to
falsifying, from that to bragging, and so becomes at the last audacious and
past shame. But as Lysias said: They that often offend are most ready to lie.
So it is no marvel that he (...).
spares not to utter so many untruths, that makes no conscience of offending
other ways: his book every where breathing out nothing else, but unjust
accusations, uncharitable surmises, sophistical cauils, intolerable railings.
I would he had considered well, when his pen was going, that saying of
Hierome: Peccare est hominis, insidias tendere diaboli: To sin of frailty, is
of man; but maliciously to lie in wait, is of the devil.

The 10. Falsification.
WHereas Augustine is cited, Tetrastyl. p. 100. out of libr. 22. de ciuitat.
Dei cap. 10. against the invocation of Saints, these exceptions are taken.

1. That diverse of Augustines words, that set forth the sacrifice of the
Altar, are left out, lib. page 249. 2. Augustine speaks of that invocation,
which is due only to God: so that his meaning is, that the Martyrs are not
inuocated as God. Libel. page 252. 3. Augustine speaks not of the spiritual
sacrifice of prayer, but of the external sacrifice of the Altar. 4. Augustine
is declared to allow invocation to Saints: lib. 6. de Baptis. cont. Donatist.
cap. 1. de cura pro mortuis. cap. 4. lib. 22. de ciuit. Dei cap. 8.
The Justification.
1. FIrst, if that the rest of the words following in Augustine had plainly set
forth your imagined sacrifice of the Altar, was there any cause to allege
them, seeing the question was only of the invocation of Saints? you show your
self a fit man to write of controversies, that would bring in by head and
shoulders, whatsoever you find in your way, though never so impertinent to the
cause.

2. But what if he himself is the falsifier, leaving out the most material
words, that take away his hold for the sacrifice of the Altar, may not he be
counted a shameless man, that in the same place, where he obiecteth a fault to
another, commits the same himself? But this he does: for whereas Augustine
ends thus: Ipsum vero sacrificium corpus est A Falsifier.
Christi, quod no^ offertur ipsis, quia hoc sunt and ipsi: But the sacrifice it
self is the body of Christ, which is not offered to them (the Martyrs) because
they themselves are the same (body:) he has clean pared away, these last
words, because they themselves are the same, and supplieth them with an etc.
this he does p. 248. and blusheth not a whit at it.

Now in these words lies hidden the whole sense: the Martyrs are the same
body (or as learned Viues expounds) ex Christi corpore, of Christ's body,
which is the sacrifice. And that this is Augustines meaning, it does elsewhere
appear: as libr. 10. de ciuit. Dei cap. 6. Hoc est sacrificium Christianorum,
multi vnum corpus sumus in Christo: quod etiam sacramento The Martyrs are
Christ's body.
altaris fidelibus noto frequentat ecclesia, vbi ei demonstratur, quod in ea
oblatione, quam offert, ipsa offeratur: This is the sacrifice of Christians,
we are many one body in Christ: which in the sacrament of the Altar known to
the faithful the Church frequenteth, that in the oblation, which she offers,
she her self is offered. So then that body of Christ is the sacrifice, whereof
the Martyrs are members. Is this any other then the mystical body of Christ's
Church? But how is the church otherwise offered up in sacrifice, then by their
spiritual sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving? Thus then stands Augustines
reason: The Martyrs cannot be both the sacrifice, and the party to whom the
sacrifice is offered; but they are the sacrifice, that is, part of the
mystical body of Christ, which is commended unto God by their spiritual
sacrifice of prayer. If he can show us how the Martyrs are a piece of Christ's
natural body, then will we believe him, that this makes for the sacrifice
which he urges of Christ's natural body.

2. Secondly, his evasion is, that they are not inuocated in the sacrifice of
Christ's body, which hinders not, but in other public prayers they may: and
he insinuates, that they may be inuocated, with an inferior kind of
invocation, beside that which is proper to God, as we pray men in earth to be
int^r cessors for us.

Contra. 1. S. Augustine says, at which sacrifice, as the men of God, that by
their confession have overcome the world, in their place and order are named,
but not of the Priest, which sacrifices inuocated. When is it most like they
should be inuocated, but when they are named? if not, when they are named, then
sure not at all. 2. And though the very act of the sacrifice be not offered
unto them, yet in the public prayers then used beside, they might be
in^ocated, but now they are not: wherefore there is no place for this invocation
in public prayers. 3. And why do ye popish priests now invoke Saints and
Martyrs in the Canon Contradiction.
of your Mass, if they are not to be prayed unto in the sacrifice of the
Altar? See how well your sayings and doings, your prating and practice hangs
together: for does not the priest thus say in the Mass: Worshipping the
memorial of the Virgin, by whose merits and prayers grant we may be
defended? And say they not likewise in the Mass of Leo: We pray thee Lord, vt
intercessione beati Leonis haec nobis prosit oblatio, that by the intercession
of blessed Leo this oblation may profit us? Decret. Greg. lib. 3. tit. 41. c. 6.

2. Where learn you in the Scripture to But one kind of religious invocation.
make diverse kinds of religious invocation? I am sure the Apostle says, How
can they call upon him, on whom they have not believed? Roman. 10. 14. There is
no invocation without belief, but we must only believe in God. Ioh. 14. 1.
You believe in God, believe also in me. As for the request which we make to our
brethren to pray for us in earth, it is but a civil observation: if ye demand
no more to be yielded to the Saints, we shall be soon agreed.

3. Thirdly, here is no mention made at al* of the sacrifice of the Altar, or
of any external sacrifice offered to God. He says, Sacrificium-immolamus, we
do offer up sacrifice: which phrase Augustine elsewhere applies Augustine
speaks of spiritual sacrifice.
to spiritual sacrifice: as lib. 5. cap. 24. de ciuitat Dei: Si pro suis
peccatis humilitatis, miserationis, and orationis sacrificium deo suo immolar^
non negligunt, etc. If they neglect not to immolate or offer the sacrifice of
humility, sorrow, mercy or pity (we will not strive about words) (it
signifies pity proceeding of sorrow and grief) and of prayer, etc. all which
are spiritual sacrifices. Yea if you be remembered, or have sung your first
Mass, your own mouth then said in the Canon, Offerimus tibi hoc sacrificium
laudis: We offer unto thee this sacrifice of praise. Your own Mass book will
tell you why the Eucharist is called a sacrifice, because therein praise and
thanksgiving is offered unto God.

4. Fourthly, whereas he would feign win Augustines favor to be of his side, I
will first show how much without cause they presume of Augustines kindness, and
then answer to the allegations by him produced.

1. Nu^quid aliquis apostolorum dicere auderet, qui credit in me, non credit in
me, sed in illum qui misit me? credimus enim apostolo, non We must not believe
in the Apostles.
credimus in apostolum: non enim apostolus iustificat impium, etc. Did any of
the Apostles dare to say, he that believes in me, does not believe in me, but
in him that sent me? we believe the Apostle, not in the Apostle: for the
Apostle does not justify the wicked, but to him that believes in him that
justifies the wicked, faith is imputed for righteousness: in Ioann. 54. If
then it be not lawful to believe in the Apostles, then not to pray to them.
Romans 10. 14. How shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed?

2. De ciuitat. Dei libr. 8. cap. 27. Nec tamen Augustine against Prayer to
Saints.
no^ ijsdem martyribus templa, sacerdotia, sacra and sacrificia constituimus
etc. honoramus eoru^ memorias tanquam sanctorum hominum dei etc. quis autem
audiuit aliquando fidelium stantem sacerdotem ad altar, etc. dicere in
precibus, offero tibi sacrificium Petre, vel Paul, vel Cypriane, cum apud
eoru^ memorias offeratur Deo, etc. quaecunque igitur adhibentur religiosorum
obsequia in martyrum locis ornamenta sunt memoriarum, non sacra vel sacrificia
mortuorum tanquam deorum: Neither do we appoint Churches, Priests, holy things
and sacrifices to Martyrs, etc. we honor their memory as of holy men, etc.
who of the faithful ever heard the priest standing at the Altar built upon the
body of a Martyr to the honor of God, say in his prayers, I offer to thee
Peter, Paul, or Cyprian a sacrifice, when at their memories they offer to God:
what service soever then is done of the devout, in the places of Martyrs, are
ornaments of their memories, not sacrifices of the dead as of Gods.

3. Sermon. 14. de natali Domini. Inuoca Virgo sancta Deum tuum, David patrem
tuum, non illum David adulterio fuscatum, etc. Holy virgin call upon thy God,
David thy father, not that David polluted with adultery, but that David which
strove with the devil. If David be not to be prayed unto, what privilege have
the Saints of the new Testament more then they of the old?

4. Ser. 6. de Steph. Exaudi me sancte meus, virginis filius, ad me exaudiendum
vnus: Hear me my holy Lord son of the virgin, one or alone sufficient, to
hear me. If Christ alone hear us, Saints are not appointed to hear us, nor
we to pray to them.

5. Cont. Faustum lib. 20. cap. 21. Quis antistitum in locis sanctorum corporum
assistens altari aliquando dixit, offerimus tibi Petre, Paul, vel Cypriane,
sed quod offertur offertur Deo, etc. Which of the Ministers standing by the
Altar in the places of the Saints ever said, we offer unto thee Peter, Paul, or
Cypriane, but that which is offered is offered to God, etc. And again, Colimus
martyrs eo cultu dilectionis and societatis, quo in hac vita coluntur homines
Dei, etc. We worship Martyrs with the same worship of dilection and fellowship,
wherewith holy men are worshipped in this life. A civil adoration then, such
as is due unto men, is to How Saints are to be honored.
be yielded to the Saints departed, and no other:

6. De vera religion. cap. 55. Non nobis sit religio cultus hominum mortuorum,
etc. honorandi sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem, etc.
quare honoramus eos charitate non seruitute, etc. The worship of the dead is no
religion unto us, etc. they are to be honored for imitation, not to be adored
for religion, etc. wherefore we honor them with love, not with service. Here
all religious service is denied to Saints, and consequently prayer, which is a
part of religious worship. By these testimonies then alleged it appears,
what Augustines mind was of the invocation of Saints.

Secondly, to answer to the places objected.

First, where Augustine says: Adiuuet nos orationibus suis, etc. Let him help
us with his prayers, speaking of Cyprian, lib. 7. de Baptis. cont. Donatist.
cap. 1. (not lib. 6. as he has erroniously noted in the margin) this shows
not that Augustine did invoke Cyprian: he does not say, Sancte Cypriane,
Holy Cypriane pray for me: for he, as is before alleged, testifies, that no
priest thus says in his prayers. But hereby Augustine declares the communion
between the Church triumphant and militant, that they wish well unto us, and
do long to see us in their state. And thus Augustine expounds himself lib.
5. de Baptis. c. 17. speaking of Cyprian: Praesens est non solum per literas,
sed per ipsam, quae in illo maxim viguit, An intercourse of love between the
members of the triumphant and militant Church.
charitatem, etc. cui ego inhaerere and conglutinari desyderans, orationibus
eius adiutus: He is present not only by his letters, but by that charity
which did most flourish in him: which charity I desire to be joined unto,
helped with his prayers. This then shows nothing else, but a charitable
intercourse between the members of the triumphant and militant Church, that as
we give thanks for their deliverance, so they do long for ours, and wish the
same. So Augustine in another place: Ergo sancti non petunt pro nobis, etc. Do
not then the Saints pray for us? do not the Bishops and ministers pray for the
people? yea mark y^ Scriptures, the Apostles pray for the people, the people
for the Apostles. Inuicem pro se omnia membra orent, caput pro omnibus
interpellet: Let all the members pray one for another, and the head make
intercession for all, in epist. Ioann. tract. 1. It is not then all one to say
the Saints pray for us in their desires unto God, and we must pray to them.

Secondly, where Augustine is alleged, de cur. pro mortuis cap. 4. The
affection of him that prays and remembers, does commend his beloved soul to
the Martyr: This shows not, that humble supplication was then made to
Martyrs, but that in their affection and desire, they wished to have the
assistance of Martyrs: as Augustine elsewhere in Psalm. 69. Audiamus Martyrs
and loquamur cum eis ex affectu cordis: Let us hear the Martyrs and speak
with them out of the affection of the heart. We then no otherwise speak to
the Martyrs, then they speak to us and we hear them, that is in our
affection, denotion and desire.

Thirdly, concerning that place cited out of lib. 22. de ciuitat Dei cap. 8. I
answer, that many fabulous reports are foisted into that chapter, and so
thinks Lodouicus Viues in his annotations there: In hoc capite non dubium
(says he) quin multa addita ab ijs, qui omnia magnorum authoru^ scripta
spurcis suis manibus contaminabant: No doubt but in this chapter many things
are added by way of declaration by those, which with their unclean hands
defiled all the writings of great authors. This may serve as answer to your
counterfiet Augustine: other reasons I could show, to prove these stories
counterfeit, but neither time now, nor place here serves.

And what if Augustine notwithstanding or any other Father might be produced
directly to speak for the invocation of Saints, if they have not Scripture on
their side, as we are sure in this matter they have not, we are not to hear
them. Augustine himself says, speaking of humane writings: Hoc genus
literarum non cum credendi necessitate, sed cum iudicandi liberate legendum
est: This kind of writing is to be read not with necessity of believing, but
with liberty of judging, cont. Faust. lib. 11. cap. 5.

Now, as for cunnicatching tricks, monstrous falsification, and your plain
English lie: I say no more but with Hierome: Haec sunt sibila serpentis
antiqui: These are the hissings of the old serpent, lib. 1. cont. Iouinian. I
hope it now appears, which of the two has best deserved the name of a
falsarie: at the length your false packing is discovered, as Men^^der (...).
says: That no lier can long time be hid.

The 11. Falsification.
TEtrastyl. page 112. because the Pelagians opinion is reported to be this,
that a man may be perfect in this life, and keep all the commandments: he
takes a double exception.

1. That Augustine is corrupted: because he condemns not the Pelagians for
Heretics, because they taught that men may be perfect in this life, etc. but
because they said, that just men in this life were void of all sin, and that
the commandments might be kept without grace. 2. The Rhemists nor any other
Catholic do hold, that a man may be so perfect in this life, as to have no
sin at all, and keep all the commandments without help of Gods grace.
Libel. page 255.
The Justification.
1. FIrst, the Pelagians did hold these two opinions: first, that a man may be
perfect without sin, and keep all the commandments of God in this life.
Secondly, that a man is able to do all this without grace by his own free
will. These two heretical opinions Augustine in the place alleged h^res. 88.
touches jointly together: but elsewhere he distinguishes them sunderly: as
libr. de perfect. iustit. cont. Celest. ratiocinat. 16. whereas the Pelagian
had asked this question, whether a man might be without sin: Augustine
answers: Posse esse hominem sine peccato, neque nos negamus; quando autem
possit, and per quem possit, hoc quaeritur: si enim modo est, non omni animae
fideli positae in corpore mortali orandum est, etc. That a man may be without
sin, we deny not, but when, and by whom, that is the question: for if now,
then it were not needful for every faithful soul placed in this mortal
body to pray, forgive us our trespasses, etc. And again, epistol. 89.
Augustine handles these two questions severally: first, whether a man may
attain to that perfection in this life to be without all sin. Secondly,
whether man's free will do suffice to keep all the commandments, quaest. 2.
Now then seeing the Pelagians held both these erroneous assertions, it was
impertinent to produce that opinion, which to the adversary was not objected.
These being then two errors of the Pelagians, that all the commandments may
be kept in this life, and that by free will without grace: the first only is
objected, and the other as impertinent omitted.

2. But it will be objected, that the Pelagians error herein was not, whether
it is possible to keep the commandments, but whether one may be perfect in
this life without sin?

Ans. All these do depend one upon another: for he that can keep all the
commandments is perfect, and consequently without sin. This first is proved
by the Scriptures: Iam. 3. 2. If any man sin not in word, he is a perfect
man: much more is he perfect that sins neither in word nor deed. Again, 1.
Ioh. 3. 4. Sin is the transgression of the law: he then that transgresses
not the law, sins not: and he that transgresses it, sins. If a man then
keep all the commandments, he also sins not. Augustine says: Cur non De
perfect. iusticiae cont. Celestin. ratio^in. 16.
praeciperetur homini ista perfectio quamuis eam in hac vita nemo habeat? Why
should not this perfection be commanded, though in this life no man can have
it? The perfection commanded, is to keep Gods commandments: as a little
before he said; Non omni modo ex tota anima diligitur Deus: God is not here
loved altogether with the whole heart. And again, Tunc homo iustus erit: Then
a man shall be just without sin (that is in the next life) when he shall with
his whole soul love God. Thus Augustine confuteth Celestius the Pelagian, that
affirmed it was commanded, that man should be without sin: showing, that man
can neither be perfect in this life, with that perfection which is commanded,
nor yet perfectly keep the commandments. Hierome likewise disputing against
the Pelagians that held, facilia esse Dei praecepta, that the precepts of God
might be done, thus reasons: first, Cur ausus es dicere facilia esse, quae
nullus impleuit? How dare you say they are easy to be done, seeing no man
ever kept them? Secondly, whereas they demanded, The Law no man can keep,
though assisted with grace.
whether the commandments were possible or impossible: he answers: Si hoc
mihi cum Christo commune, etc. If this be common to me with Christ, that is,
to have no sin, quid ille proprium habuit, what was then proper to him?
Thirdly, Asseris homine^ esse sine peccato si velit, etc. You say a man may be
without sin if he will, frustra conaris adiungere, non sine Dei gratia: and
after an heavy sleep to deceive simple souls, you go about in vain to say,
not without Gods grace: sic Hieron* ad Ctesiphont. Thus Hierome proves
against the Pelagians that the commandments cannot be kept, because Christ
only was without sin: Whereupon it must be inferred, that they which keep
the commandments sin not: yea he seems to mislike the Pelagians assertion,
that a man may be without sin, being not without the grace of God.

To be then without sin in this life, and to keep the commandments, is all
one question both with Augustine and Hierome: and this differing from the
other, whether free will be sufficient thereto without grace. Augustine then is
neither mangled nor corrupted, when one opinion is singled from the other, and
that only produced which is objected.

3. It is one question, whether it be possible by the grace of God to be
without sin and to keep all the commandments: another, whether any man, de
facto, has in act lived without sin and kept the commandments. The first
Augustine seems to grant in these words: Et si non inuenitur homo in ista
vita sine peccato, id tamen dicitur posse fieri, etc. Although no man is found
in this life to be without sin, yet it may be said to be done by the help of
Gods grace: which that it may (...), we must endeavor, we must desire:
Tolerabilius in id quisque fallitur, etc. Every man herein is tolerably
decciued: for it is not diabolical impiety, but humane error, optanda
affirmare, licet, quod affirmat; non possit ostendere, to affirm things to be
wished, though he cannot show that which is affirmed: epistol. ad Innocent.
Augustine seems to grant that it is possible by Gods grace to be without
sin in this life: for what is impossible to the grace and power of God? yet
he calls it a tolerable error, so to affirm: epistol. ad Innocent.

But concerning the other point, that the law is impossible to be kept in fact,
and that no man ever fulfilled it, Bernard does evidently witness: Ergo
mandando impossibilia non praeuaric^tores homines fecit, sed humiles, vt omne
os obstruatur, etc. Therefore by commanding things impossible, he made not men
transgressors, but humble, that every mouth should be stopped, and all the
world made subject to God, because by the works of the law no flesh shall be
justified before him. And again: D^ mihi hominem, qui ante omnia ex toto se
diligat deum: Give me a man that with his whole self loves God, and his
neighbor as himself: sed vbi ille, quando ista? but where is he, and when
shall this be? Sermon. 50. in Cantic. This was then the Catholic opinion of the
Church, that no man ever in this world kept the law of God: The Pelagians held
the contrary, and so do the Rhemists, as even now shall be showed.

2. Secondly, the Rhemists then are not wronged, for these are their own
words: It is possible to love God and keep his commandments, Ioh. 14. sect.
1. they make no mention here of Gods grace, though out of other places, that
may be gathered to be their meaning, we will not take them short, as this
unequal and unfriendly Censurer uses to do, for the omission of a word.
Again, they say, that good men do keep all Gods commandments, Luke 1.
sect. 7. because the Scripture says of Zachary and Elizabeth, they walked in
all the commandments of God without blame: what else in effect do the
Pelagians say, when they affirm, Vitam iust^ru^ in hoc seculo nullum habere
peccatum, that the life of the just has no sin at all in this life, August.
h^res. 88. For as I showed before, to keep all the commandments of God, and
to be without sin, do necessarily the one follow the other. The Pelagians
also held, that a The agreement of the Pelagians and Papists.
man might be perfect in this life: alleging that text, Matthew. 5. Be perfect
as your heavenly father is perfect, and such other. The Rhemists also say, that
a man may be perfect in this life, Though not in respect of the absolute
perfectnes in heaven: in Philip. 3. sect. 4. Neither did the Pelagians so
think, that a man could be as perfect here as in heaven: for they speak of
that perfection, which is commanded in Scriptures: which do not bid us to be
so perfect: And Augustine confesses, that such perfection, as in commanded in
Scripture, cannot be had in this life, as I showed De perfection. iustit. cont.
Celestium ratiocinat. 16.
before: but yet it is prescribed; because as he says, Non recte curritur, si
quo currendum est nesciatur: A man cannot run well, unless he know whither to
run, Quomodo autem sciretur, si nullis praeceptis ostenderetur: And how
should it be known, if by no precepts it were shown.

3. Thirdly, it will be objected, that the Pelagians excluded the grace of God,
so do not the Papists.

Ans. First, though therein they join not with the Pelagians, yet in the other
point they do, that the commandments of God may be kept in this life.
Secondly, neither did the Pelagians utterly exclude Gods grace: for Pelagius,
as Augustine shows, being reproved for ascribing so little to the help of
Gods grace, afterward qualified his opinion thus, saying, Homines facilius
implere posse per gratiam: That men may more easily fulfill by grace what they
are bid to do by their free will, Haere. 88. And some of ye Pelagians allowed
that saying: Potest homo esse sine peccato pergratiam: a man may be without sin
by grace. Whereupon Augustine says: Laetitia repent perfusus sum, quod Dei
gratiam non negaret: I suddenly rejoiced, because he denied not the grace of
God: de nature. and great. cap. 11. And before Hierome shows, that they added
this to their sentence, non sine gratia Dei, not without the grace of God. And
though the Church of Rome in show seem to ascribe more to Gods grace then the
old Pelagians, yet they make grace but a cooperator and fellow worker with man's
free will, as Bellarmine distinguishes grace into gratiam operantem and
cooperantem, working grace, and felloworking grace: lib. 2. de great. c. 2. the
Rhemists call Gods special motion and grace assistance, Romans 9. sect. 4.

Now then by this that has been said, it may appear, that Augustine is
neither corrupted in this place, nor the Rhemists falsely charged.

Therefore is the Libeller found here to be a false witness: For as it is said
in the Proverbs 14. 5. A faithful witness will not lie. Theophrastus (...).
was wont to say, that we should ^lie such more then Vipers: and we may say
unto him with Hierome: Ibiprodidit vera non esse iudicia, vbi sunt mentita
negotia, seque in rebus carentibus veritate, carere iudicio vero iudicat: There
he has bewrayed there can be no true judgment, where the business is forged,
and himself to want judgment, where the matter wants truth: ad Geruntij
filias.

The 12. Falsification.
TEtrasty l. p. 142. because Bellarmine thus saying, Augustinus absurdissimum
censuit, etc. is translated, Augustine thought most absurdly that the heresy
of the Donatists three hundred years after Christ should out of Carthage be
propagated into all the earth: whereas Bellarmines words truly turned into
English be these: Augustine thought it a most absurd thing, etc. and so
Bellarmine is cleared from fathering a lie upon Augustine.

The Justification.
1. HE that noted this out of Bellarmine, might be induced to think, that he
made bold with Augustine here, because elsewhere he does the like, in charging
Augustine with that which he writes not: as libr. 1. de verb. Dei cap. 5. he
says: Augustinus in Psalm. 126. and alibi saepe Salomonem a Deo reprobatum
fuisse scribit: Augustine upon the 126. Psalm and otherwhere often times does
write, that Solomon was reprobate of God. But in that place cited by Bellarm.
there is no such thing affirmed by Augustine: for in the exposition of the
Psalm I find not so much as Salomons name, and in the enarration, he only
says: Quid mirum si in populo Dei cecidit Solomon, in paradiso non cecidit
Adam? etc. What marvel if Solomon fell among the people of God, did not Adam
fall in paradise? and did not the Angel fall from heaven and became a devil?
He speaks of the fall of Solomon, not of his reprobation: for if Solomon fell
no otherwise then Adam, he was not a reprobate.

2. The Grammatical construction of this sentence of Bellarmine, Augustinus
absurdissimum censuit, quod haeresis Donatistarum, etc. May seem rather to
yield this sense, that Augustine thought most absurdly, or a most absurd thing,
then that he thought it an absurd thing: for in this translation two things
must be understood, both the verb, esse, to be, and hoc, or id, this: so that
to make a full sense, the words must be supplied thus: Augustinus hoc
absurdissimum esse censuit: Augustine thought this to be an absurd thing,
that, etc. But in the other construction there is a full sense in the words
expressed, without any supply. Now any simple Grammarian knows this, that
the words expressed do rather make the sense, if they be perfect, then words
supplied or understood. If ever the Libeller taught Grammar boys, he might
have remembered, that they are not in construction, to say, supple, or subaudi,
to supply such or such a word, where the sentence of it self makes a full
sense.

3. But this is no malicious dealing (Sir Grammarian) if Bellarmines sense be
as you say, to mistake his meaning, especially y^ right construction of the
words bearing the same. A small oversight is neither malicious nor shameful.
Bernard says: Non tam simplex sum, vt simplicem oris prolationem sine cordis
duplicitate mendaciu^ putem: I am not so simple to think the simple pronouncing
of the mouth without a double heart to be a lie, epistol. 89. Bellarmine is
rather to be blamed, that in such ambiguous terms sends his oracles from
Rome, as Apollo in time past did propound his Oracles at Delphos so doubtfully,
that they might have a diverse meaning.

4. But what have you gained, if it be yielded to you, that Bellarmine means,
not that August. thought an absurd thing, but that it was an absurd thing that
the heresy of the Donatists after three hundred years should be propagated
into all the world? For in steed of one lie, which Bellarmine is said to father
upon Augustine, now is he chargeable with three: for in that cap. 15. de
vnitat. Eccles. neither the word absurdissimum, most absurd, can be found,
neither is there any mention of three hundred years, nor yet is the heresy of
the Donatists named: nay Augustine of purpose refraineth to call the Donatists
heretics, and their schism heresy: Si mihi per alios vestros concederetur,
schismaticos vos libentius, quam baereticos dicerem: If your fellows would
give me leave, I would more willingly call you schismatikes, then heretics:
cont. Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 7. Yea Augustine says to him ( frater Cresconi)
brother Cresconius, lib. 3. cap. 63. so far is he from calling him heretic.

And as these words are not found in Augustine, so neither is the sense: for he
speaks not of the propagation of the Donatists errors into all the world, but
counts it a ridiculous and mad part to think, that all the Churches in the
world should fail, Et earum reparationem ex Africa per partem Donati, etc. And
the same to be repaired out of Africa by the sect of Donatus.

I say then as Augustine to the Grammarian Cresconius, who contended about a
Grammar point with Augustine: In quibus quatuor verbis sieve nominibus, quia hoc
vel tibi, vel arti Grammaticae placet, etc. primum corrigo and muto: caetera
vero tria, quia verissima dicta esse iam, vt puto, sentis, vos corrigite, vos
mutate: In these four words or names, because it so likes you and your
Grammar, I will correct and change the first: but the other three, which (as I
think) your self see to be truly objected, do you change and correct.
Bellarmine is now much beholding unto you, that for one fault before noted, you
have caused three or four more to be descried.

5. Lastly, I marvel at one thing, that he which plaieth here the cunning
Grammarian in construing of words, s^ileth every where so grossly in letters
and syllables: for in steed of (Tetrastylon) he every where writes
(Tetrastilon) there being no such word, at the least, not in that sense. So
likewise in another place this skillful Grammarian reads the (Apocalipse) of
S. John, for (Apocalypse) page 130. lin. 14. But as for this point of Grammar
construction, which he obiecteth, though it be as he says, I stand not much
upon it: but as Demosthenes answered Aeschines that found fault with him, for
certain insolent speeches: Non in eo positas esse fortunas Graeciae: That the
state of Greece consisted not therein, whether he used this word or that. So
neither does the cause of religion depend upon these points. And I say again
as Augustine iested with the Donatists: Nuncia vestris securitatem, ne iam
timeant tanquam dialecticum, cui vides adhuc necessariam esse Grammaticam: Bid
your fellows be secure, that they fear not him as a disputer, whom they see
to fail in his Grammar. And so I end this point with the same Fathers words,
In ea re, in qua nihil causae nostrae minuitur, facillimum me praebeo: Wherein
nothing of our cause is diminished, I pass not to yield my self.

The 13. Falsification.
TEtrastyl. p. 113. Because where the Rhemists say, Though the Gentiles
believed specially by Gods grace and preordination, yet they believe also by
their own free will. The first clause is omitted, and the last only
rehearsed, to fasten upon them the heresy of the Beguardines, that say, the
soul needed not the light of grace to lift it up unto God: he cries out of
malice and wilful falsification. p. 238.

The Justification.
1. IF all these words be put together, the meaning can be no other then this,
but that though Gods grace do more specially make men believe, yet they also
may believe of their own free will, though not so specially. Such a like saying
the Pelagians had: Facilius posse implere per gratiam, etc. That they may more
easily fulfill by grace, what they do by free will. Whereupon Augustine
infers, that their opinion was, a man might work by his free will alone,
though not so easily, Haeres. 88. And this may be gathered to be their
meaning by the words: though they believed specially by grace, yet they believe
also by their free will: they speak not of the same action of believing, but
of diverse, they believed by grace, and believe also: the one of the time past,
the other of the time present.

2. What their opinion is of the ability of free will, it may appear in other
places. Matthew. 12. sect. 1. It is man's free will and election The Papists
opinion of free will.
to be a good tree or evil tree. Matthew. 20. sect. 1. Men believe not, but of
their own free will. Matthew. 25. sect. 5. Men by their free will have received
faith. Act. 27. sect. 3. God executes not ordinarily his designements toward
men, otherwise then by their free will and actions. 2. Peter 1. sect. 1. The
certainty (of Gods election) and effect thereof is procured by man's free will.
If it be in man's free will, procured by man's free will, not but of man's free
will, not otherwise then by man's free will; what follows, but that man's free
will can do it alone, though not so well alone (perhaps they will say) as by
grace.

3. That free will is not elevated, lifted up by grace, but of it own free
consent, let us see their judgment further. Luke 2. sect. 2. God works not
our good against our wills, but our wills concurring. Ioh. 1. sect. 5. Free
will to receive or acknowledge Christ, and power given to men if they will to
be made by Christ the sons of God, but not forced or drawn thereunto by any
necessity. John. 6. sect. 3. God by the sweet internal motions and
persuasions of his grace makes us of our own will and liking to consent to
the same. All this while grace draws not the will, nor yet works the will,
but only offers motions and persuasions, and the will of it self consorteth
to them, and concurreth with grace. Then it follows, that grace does not
eleuate the will, which is to draw and work the will, but only gives the hint
and occasion: for if grace did eleuate the will, then it must draw and work
the will, which they deny: so that in their doctrine the will does eleuate it
self of it self, to meet grace and to consent to grace of it own power, and
so consequently without grace: which their opinion is cousin german to that of
the Beguardines. Therefore neither are the Rhemists words misreported, nor
their sense mistaken, nor yet they wrongfully here charged.

Thus also have we heard the third part of this song played, we want but the
fourth to make up the melody: but we must look for no other stuff, then he
has hitherto uttered. The Ephori among the Lacedaemonians punished Terpander
the Musition, because he (...).
stretched out but one cord higher of his harp to vary his voice: but what is
this bold harper worthy of, that has stretched out so many lying cords to
show his variety of slanders? But the further he proceeds in this kind,
the more he shows his folly. These lines and leaves are but a monument of
his intemperate affection: as Crates said of the golden (...).
image of the harlo^ Phrynes at Delphos* that it was a monument of the
intemperancie of the Greeks. But let him go on in his kind, and let us hear
what he can object: ^ay with Hierome: Etiam tibi furenti satisfaciam: I will
shape you an answer, though you be in a mad mood.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER, containing thirteen corruptions of Scripture.
FIrst, he takes exception against the allegation of that place Luke 17. 4. If
thy brother sin against thee seven times a day, and seven times a day turn
again, etc. thou shall forgive him: which place is urged against the cruel
practice of the Church of Rome, in punishing relapsed heretics with death.
This it pleases him to call a mad exposition: allow this, and when says he,
shall felons and traitors be executed?

Ans. 1. He misreporteth the words: for that text is not applied against their
law in punishing relapsed and abiured persons with death: but against their
cruel proceedings against simple men and women, that yielded themselves to be
conformable: which practice is there showed to be both against their own law,
which suffers a man once to abjure his heresy, and against this rule of the
Gospel. See the place, Synops. p. 336.

2. Yet is this their law also unjust, to suffer A hard law against persons
once abiured.
an heretic to abjure but once, being contrary to the saying of our Savior
here, and of S. Paul Tit. 3. 10. An heretic after once or twice admonition
reject.

3. They proceeded against such which were no heretics, but held sound and
catholic opinions, which they falsely called heresy.

4. Neither is there the like case of Ecclesiastical and Civil judgment:
neither is the same course to be held in punishing of Civil and temporal, and
spiritual offenses: for the one tends to the dissolution of the politic
body, as the outrages of traitors and felons, and therefore must speedily be
prevented: the other though they do spiritually Difference in Civil and
Ecclesiastical proceeding.
infect, yet are not so dangerous to the outward state, but may more safely be
forborne. Our Savior Christ therefore gives a rule to his Disciples here, and
namely to S. Peter Matthew. 18. 21. both how they should carry themselves toward
their offending brethren in their private disposition, and in the external
dispensation of discipline. So S. Paul shows to Titus before cited. And Leo
epist. 13. Sedis apostolicae moderatio hanc temperantiam obseruat, vt seuerius
agat cum obduratis, and veniam cupiat praestare correctis: The moderation of
the sea Apostolic does observe this temper, to deal severely with the
obdurate, and to show mercy to the corrigible.

5. But because he speaks of an excellent talent of interpreting, I will give
you a taste of his: to prove Saul to be a just and good man, he alleges this
text, 1. Sam. 1. 9. Saul was elect and good, that is, a choice young man and a
fair, as it is in the original: Ergo, he was a just man. Christ said, Ioh.
17. verse. 12. Whom thou gave me I have kept, and none of them perished, but
the son of perdition: Ergo, Judas was once just. This collection he fathereth
upon Hierome, and allows himself, Libel. page 142. The like gift of
interpreting Scripture is elsewhere discovered in Bellarmine and the Rhemists,
Tetrastyl. page 128. 129. whither the Reader must be desired to have recourse.
And we need not marvel, that they have such a dexterity in applying and
expounding Scripture: for they must be all led with the spirit of their head
the Bishop of Rome, who sometime applied these words of the Apostle: They that
are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8. 8. very profoundly and clerklike
against the marriage of Ministers. Innocent. distinct. 82. c. 2.

As his faculty is in the interpreting of Scripture, so is it in writing: more
scoffs, taunts and reuiling terms cannot lightly fall out of any man's pen.
But I force not: if I should make my choice I had rather be dispraised, then
praised of such: As Antisthenes (...).
said, when he was commended of certain lewd persons: I fear me (says he) I
have done some evil, because these commend me. And Ambrose might have told
him: Non credibile est been posse eum viuere, qui male loquitur: It is not
credible, that he can live well, that speaks evil: in 4. ad Ephesians.

The 1. Corruption.
GReat exception is taken, because we read, Act. 3. 23. Whom the heavens must
contain, etc. whereas it should be translated, according to the Greek and
Latin, receive, etc.

The Correction.
1. THis is no particular quarrel against the party challenged, but general
against the translation received.

2. We read indifferently in one translation, receive, in another contain:
being both in sense all one.

3. Gregory Nazianzene so cites this text, as that it must be understood,
that Christ is contained in heaven: orat. (...).

4. Beza translateth the word better, (...), capere, to contain or hold, then
the Latin, recipere, to receive: for this word in the English tongue is a
compound, but in the original it is a simple.

5. Whether we read contain with Gregory Nazianzene, or hold with Beza: or
recipere to receive with the Latin, or excipere to receive in, as the Siriake
translator, or suscipere, as Arias Montanus: we will not greatly contend. For
howsoever it be translated, the words following: until the time that all
things be restored: do make it an invincible place against Christ's corporal
presence in the Sacrament: for if the heavens, contain, hold, or receive his
body till his second coming, till all things be restored; then his body
before that time is not to be expected on the earth.

The 2. Corruption.
SYnops. p. 165. He that puts away a good conscience, makes shipwreck of
faith: A wilful falsification, for the Apostle speaks not generally, but
that certain repelling a good conscience, made shipwreck about the faith. 1.
Tim. 1. 19.

The Correction.
1. But that this (spider catcher) is disposed to cauil, he might well have
peceiued, that the text of S. Paul is not here alleged, but a proposition from
thence collected: that whosoever does put away a good conscience, does also
make shipwreck of faith.

2. And where the Apostle says, certain: this word makes a distinction
between those that have faith and a good conscience, whereof the Apostle
speaks in the beginning of the verse, and them that make shipwreck of both:
not between some that make shipwreck of a good conscience and keep faith,
and them which put away both: but the Apostle speaks in general of all such,
that if they put away a good conscience, consequently they also wrack their
faith. As the Apostle elsewhere shows, 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. That they which
depart from the faith, have True faith and a good conscience suffer wrack
together.
their consciences burned with a hot iron. And Tit. 1. 15. Unto the
unbelieving, their minds and consciences are defiled. These two therefore do
always go together, the wrack of faith and a good conscience. And so Ambrose
says: Dignus erat perdere inutilem fidem qui non exercuerat charitatem: He is
worthy to lose an unprofitable faith, that did not exercise charity, libr. 2.
de vocat. Gent. cap. 2. he sets it down as a general axiom. Likewise
Chrysostom upon these words: Vbi vita reprehensibilis sit, dogma item
huiusmodi sit necessarium est: Where the life is reprehensible (a good
conscience being put away) there the doctrine must needs be such. From the
Apostles words he concludes generally: that wheresoever a conscience of a good
life is cast off, the doctrine of faith cannot be sound: and therefore it is an
evident sign, that the Libeller making no conscience of lying and slaundering,
can be of no good faith and religion. As for his loud crying: he has put away
a good conscience, we regard it not: as Demosthenes said to one that had a
great voice, but no great wit: Not that which is (...).
great is well, but that which is well (done or said) is great. Augustine
says: Nec malam conscientiam sanat praeconium laudantis, nec bonam vulnerat
conuiciantis opprobrium: Neither does praise heal a bad conscience, nor
dispraise hurt a good.

The 3. Corruption.
IN that text Ierem. 17. 7. alleged to prove that we must trust only in God,
and not in man: these words are foisted in says he, only, and not in man: and
so likewise Psalm. 50. 15. only is added of his own.

The Correction.
BEcause this trifler picketh quarrels at every thing, and takes exception
against the allegation of these and other texts: I will make him one answer for
all, and show in what manner the Scriptures may be cited and alleged, without
any corruption or falsification, though the same words be not always
precisely kept. And this may be best learned from the example of our Savior
Christ and the Apostles in the new Testiment: where in the citing of the old
Scriptures sometime they follow the words with some alteration, sometime the
sense and not the words; the words are altered diverse ways.

1. When as out of other places of Scripture other words are annexed: as that
testimony Matthew. 21. 13. is taken out of two other places of the Prophets,
Esaias, 57. 7. Ierem. 7. 11.

2. Sometime a word is added, which is not found in the text, exegetic^s, by
way of exposition: Matthew. 4. 10. Him only shall thou serve: whereas, this word
only is supplied to Scripture alleged in sense, not in words.
show the sense, being not in the original. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. So Matthew. 2. 6. art
not the least, where this word not is added to show the sense in the
accomplishment of that prophecy.

3. Sometime the manner of speech is altered: Matthew. 13. 15. The Prophet
speaks in the imparatiue, make the heart of this people fat. Esaias. 6. 9. the
Evangelist: this peoples heart is waxed fat: Matthew. 1. 13. the person is
changed: they shall call his name: Esaias. 7. 14. she shall call.

4. Sometime another word is used, but in the same sense: Matthew. 4. 14. sat in
darkness. Esaias. 9. 2. walk in darkness.

5. The sense is gathered, not the words rehearsed: Matthew. 22. 24. out of
Deuteronom. 25. 5.

6. Sometime an argument is framed out of the scripture, not there expressed,
but from thence collected: as Matthew. 22. 32. Christ concludes the resurrection
out of these words: I am the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

Thus as Hierome says: Apostolis curae fuit non verba and syllabas aucupari,
sed sententias dogmatum ponere: The Apostles care was not to hunt after words
and syllables, but to set down the sentence.

And as the Scriptures are not corrupted, when the sense, though not the words,
is retained: So may the Scriptures be abused, when the same words are kept,
but the sense altered: as Matthew. 5. 38. an eye for an eye, etc. the Pharisees
did use the words, but wrested the sense, when they applied that to private
men's revenge, which was lawful only for the Magistrate.

Now then to apply these rules: in the places objected there is no corruption:
for Ierem. 17. 5. it is forbidden to trust in man: then consequently ver. 7.
where the Prophet says, Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, the
sense must be, that God only is to be trusted in: therefore, not in man, is
added out of the 5. verse: not foisted in, as he ignorantly and maliciously
says. In the other place, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble,
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me: an argument is from thence
gathered, that we must only call upon God: for who else but God does deliver
us? who else but God is to be glorified for our deliverance? So that this is the
order, as Augustine well shows: Cum tribularis inuocas me; cum inuocas me,
eximam te; cum eximam te iam glorificabis me, vt iam non discedas a me: When
thou art in trouble thou do call upon me; when thou do call upon me, I
will deliver thee; when I deliver thee, thou shall glorify me, that now thou
do not depart from me: in Psalm. 49.

Therefore to these places to add only, to show the sense of the place, that
God only is to be trusted in, only called upon, is no more corruption, then
where Moses is alleged to say: him only shall thou serve, Matthew. 4. 10.
whereas Moses only says, him shall thou serve.

The 4. Corruption.
BEcause 1. Corinthians. 9. 5. we read, a sister a wife, not a sister a woman: he
cries out, manifest corruption, a false translation.

The Correction.
1. TO translate (...), a sister a wife is more proper, then to say, a sister a
woman: for that were superfluous: the word sister implies a woman: and
therefore the Latin interpreter seeing the inconvenience, does inuert the
order, and puts woman in the first place, saying, a woman a sister,
contrary to the original.

2. Though some of the Fathers translate a sister a woman, all do not so.
Clemens Alexandrin. strom. lib. 3. by this place proves that the Apostles had
wives.

3. Who were fitter to minister to the Apostles, then their own wives, which
might be done with less offense? and it is absurd to think, that whereas some
of them had wives, as Peter, they would sequester themselves from them, and
take other women into their company. And where the Apostle says, have we not
power, (...), to lead a sister a wife: over what women were the Apostles more
likely to have power, then as husbands over their wives?

The 5. Corruption.
WHereas reference is made to that place, Hebr. 13. 15. and thereupon it is
inferred, that there is no sacrifice left, but spiritual, of praise and
thanksgiving: these words, but spiritual, is a dram of his own addition.
Libel. 266.

The Correction.
1. THe Apostles words are not here alleged: which are these: Let us by him
offer the sacrifice of praise always to God: whereof but two words only are
rehearsed, sacrifice and praise: therefore this cauiller might have seen, but
that he is wilfully blind, that the words of the text are not cited, but the
sense of the place given.

2. Whereas the Apostle bids us always offer up such sacrifice, and that
God is pleased with such sacrifice, does it not follow that the Apostle
speaks of spiritual? for such he speaks of: and if God be with them
pleased, they alone are sufficient, other sacrifice beside are superfluous: for
if God be pleased with such, what need we seek for any other?

3. Where he obiecteth, that there is beside, the spiritual sacrifice of
prayer and contrition: he shows himself herein very childish: as though al
these tend not to the praise of God, and the Apostle under the sacrifice of
praise comprehends the fruits of the lips, where prayer also must be
understood, which is called the calves of our lips. Hosh. 14. 3.

4. And if this be a wrong collection from the Apostle, blame also Augustine,
who upon these words of the Psalm: I have offered in thy tabernacle the host
of praise or iubilation, thus after many other words infers: In creatore
quid agit? nisi solarestat sermon deficiente oration: What shall he do to the
Creator? where speech fails, nothing remains but only iubilation. He out
of these words brings in a conclusion of only praise.

The 6. Corruption.
BEcause it is f gathered out of S. Paul, that a justifying aith is always
actual working by love: these w^rds, is always actual are foisted in. page
267.

The Correction.
1. BEside our general answer, that the Apostles sense is here followed, not
his words precisely numbered: the Apostles meaning is cuident, where he says,
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith working
by love; that no faith is auailable before God, but a working faith: then if it
cease to work, it is no longer auailable; if it be not available, it
justifies not: therefore a faith that justifies, must be always working,
which is all one as to say, lively, actual: but that this cauiller is disposed
to trifle.

2. Neither is S. Paul alleged to prove every faith to be working: for who
knows not, but that there is a dead faith, which works not: but mention is
made directly of justifying faith, which is always working: A Falsifier.
therefore he shows himself a notable falsifier so to misreport the words.

3. Augustine out of this place concludes that it is faith working by love,
which justifies: Fides, quae operatur per dilectionem si in vobis est, iam
pertinetis ad praedestinatos, ad iustificatos, etc. Faith working by love, if
it be in you, you do belong to the predestinate, to those which are
justified, sermon. 16. de verb. Apostol. From hence then it is forcibly inferred,
faith only justifies, which is actual working by love: the faith, which they
imagine to be in infants does not work by love: ergo, it is not an available
and justifying faith, and so consequently a vain faith, or no faith. To this
argument, this doubtie Confuter answers nothing, but certain it is, that
children are justified by an habitual faith: and so like a skillful Logician
denies the conclusion.

Thus I trust, it sufficiently appears, how frivolous and childish his
objections are: as for his scoffs and ridiculous terms; of being familiar
with scripture, such luck, such gamesters, we pass them over as the words of
children not to be regarded, or as of a phrantike person to be pitied: we are
taught not to give taunt for taunt, nor to recompense evil for evil Romans 12.
17. And as Chrysostom says, No man heals evil with evil, but evil with
good. And I say to this Cauiller, as Augustine (...).
to Petilian the Donatist: Te arbitrari possunt homines, nihil inuenisse quod
diceres, nisi tibi proponeres, cui malediceres: Men may well think, that you
could not have found out what to say, if you had not propounded one unto your
self, to gainsay.

The 7. Corruption.
BEcause Synops. page 730. of the first edition: this sentence is alleged,
When we have done all, we are unprofitable servants, and we did no more then
was our duty: he cries out, that the words of Christ are corrupted: because
these words, all that are commanded 1
you, and say ye, are left out. Then he takes upon him to expound this text:
that we are 2
unprofitable servants: first, in respect of God: secondly, in respect of our
nature: thirdly, we must so acknowledge for humility, etc. page 270. 271.

The Correction.
1. FIrst: He might easily have seen that the text is not alleged in the same
form of words: for Christ speaks in the second person, when you have done,
etc. the sentence is pronounced in the first, when we have done: therefore the
sense was more aimed at then the words.

2. So much of the sentence is alleged, as was pertinent to show that no
works are meritorious, because when we have done all, we are unprofitable,
in which word lies the force of this testimony in this place: Yet otherwhere
the whole sentence is produced, where the occasion so requires: as Synops.
page 288. argum. 3. and page 662. arg. 2. therefore he had no just cause to
complain of corruption.

3. The Evangelists in citing the old scriptures, repeat so much of the
sentence, as is to the purpose, and leave the rest: as Mat. 4. 13. out of Esaias
9. 1. a great part of the verse is omitted.

4. And if this be a point of corruption, Hierome also is a corrupter of
Scripture, who thus alleges this text: Cum omnia feceritis, dicite, serui
inutiles sumus: when you have done all, say ye are unprofitable servants. He
leaves out: all things that are commanded you, etc. ad Ctesiphont.

2. Secondly: 1. Our Savior speaks of that profit which redoundeth to our
selves: as may appear by the parable, Does he thank that servant, etc. So
likewise, where no thanks is received, what profit to a man is gained or
deserved? And if it be taken, as he says, that we are unprofitable servants
to God, this place still remains strong against merits: for if God receive
nothing from us, then can we not merit or deserve from him.

2. Our Savior speaks not of men in the corruption of nature, for they are
not Gods servants being not yet called, but of such as are under grace, and do
walk in obedience of Gods commandments: and so does Ambrose expound it: Quis
tanta salutis beneficia digno possit aequare seruitio: Who can counteruaile so
great benefits of salvation with worthy service? sermon. 16. in Psalm. 119.

3. And of all other it is most absurd, that Christ bids us so to say for
humility: as Augustine says: Quomodo est humilitas vbi We are all
unprofitable servants in verity, not only in humility.
regnat falsitas: There is no humility, where there is falsitie: Non ita
caueatur arrogantia, vt veritas relinquatur: Do not so take heed of
arrogancy, that you leave the verity: Cause. 22. qis. 2. c. 9. 11. It is not
to be thought that Christ the verity, would have his Apostles lie for
humility: to confess themselves to be unprofitable servants, if they were not
so indeed. For a more full answer concerning the true meaning of this
Scripture, I refer the Reader to another treatise, Synops. page 933.

The 8. Corruption.
SYnops. p. 668. The Scripture says, God only forgiueth sins, Mark. 2. 7. it
is no scripture, but the wicked Scribes and Pharisees so thought, whom our
Savior reprehendeth. Lib. page 273.

The Correction.
1. Our blessed Savior does not reprehend the Scribes for so saying: who can
forgive sins but God only, but because they charged him with blasphemy for
taking upon him to forgive sins, not acknowledging the divine power in him:
our Savior rather by his silence approves that sentence of theirs, as
agreeable to Scripture.

2. This saying is called scripture, not because it was uttered by the Scribes
and Pharisees, but because it is a principle taken out of the Scripture. Esaias.
43. 25. I am he that puts away thine iniquity for mine own sake, etc. And
Job says, Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness, there is not one?
Job. 14. 4. If no man can make one clean, then it is God only that can do it.

3. Ambrose cites this text as scripture: Quis potest dimittere peccata, nisi
solus Deus, qui per eos quoque dimittit, quibus dimittendi tribuit potestatem:
Who can forgive sins, but God only; who also forgiueth by them, to whom he
gives that power? etc. lib. 5. in Luc. Go now and charge Ambrose likewise to
be an abuser of scripture. But in truth you your self are the man, that
abuse your self and others with these childish and sottish cauils, that do
every where proclaim your ignorance, and bewray your evil heart: For as Basil
says, Lying is the very scope and end of impiety. (...).
But passing over his vnchristia^ terms, and unseemly scoffs, as not worthy
the answer, I say with Augustine: In bona conscientia teneo, quisquis volens
detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi meae: In a good conscience I speak
it, he that willingly does detract from my good name, unwillingly does add to
my reward.

The 9. Corruption.
SYnops. page 749. To speak simply, death is the wages of all sin, Romans 6.
23. he has falsified S. Paul by foisting in the word all.

The Correction.
1. THe Apostles sense, not his sentence is there repeated: for in other
places, where the text is cited, the words as they stand are repeated: as
Synops. p. 747. lin. 17. page 656. lin. 31. page 775. lin. 50.

2. This word all, is added exegetic^s by way of exposition: for indefinit
propositions in Scripture, though they want the note of universality, yet are
aequiualent unto them: as Ioh. 1. 29. Behold the lamb of God that takes away
the sin of the world. Ye may as well say that Christ takes not away all the
sins of the world, because all is not expressed, as that all sin deserves
not death: because the Apostle only says, the wages of sin is death.

3. S. Paul, Romans 10. verse. 11. alleging the Prophet Esaias 28. 16. says,
Whosoever believes in him, shall not be ashamed: where the Apostle puts to
these words, (...), all, or whosoever, and (...), in him, which words the
Prophet has not; will you say that the Apostle falsified the Prophet? Which is
not alleged, as though any man had now the like gift of interpreting Scripture
as Paul had, but to show that it is lawful, in more words to express the
sense and meaning of Scripture.

4. Neither was he the first (whom you challenge specially for this) that thus
collected upon this text: but a reverend writer of our Church before him, thus
infers upon this text, The wages and worthily deserved reward of all sin
in general is death, Romans 6. 23. Fulk Romans 1. 1. sect. 11. whom I name not
here, as though the adversary honored the memory of that excellent man, but
to show, that he neither is one alone or the first, that has thus cited this
Scripture.

5. This Scripture is not falsified at all, because it is the Apostles meaning,
that al sin of it self deserves death: Galat. 3. 10. Cursed Death the wages
of all sin.
is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in the book
of the law to do them: every transgression then of the law is under the curse,
and so subject to death: then consequently every sin: for sin is the
transgression of the law, 1. Ioh. 1. 3. 4. Hierome to this purpose says:
Contemptus cuiuscunque praecepti, praecipientis iniuria est: The contempt of
every commandment, is an injury to the commander. And what is he worthy
of, that does wrong to the everlasting Creator and lawgiuer, but of death,
without Gods mercy?

7. In this sense do the Fathers understand S. Paul to have spoken generally of
all sin: as Origin. hom. 5. in Leuitic. Inuenimus de peccato, quod sit ad
mortem: We find concerning sin, that it is unto death, de delicto non
legimus, of offenses we do not read, etc. though he make a difference
between, peccatum and delictum, sin and offense: the first in committing,
the second in omission, which distinction he says is not always found in
Scripture: yet it appears by this comparison, that he takes the Apostle to
speak of all sin.

Augustine also says: A Deo est quicquid pertinet ad naturam, ab illo non est;
quicquid sit contra naturam: peccatum autem contra naturam est, de quo mors,
etc. Whatsoever belongs to nature is of God; whatsoever is against nature is
not of God: but sin is against nature, whereof death, and all things which
are of death do spring: ad articul. falls. imposit. art. 5. Here his meaning
must be, that from all sin death springs, because all sin is against
nature, because no sin is of God, etc.

7. That place Matthew. 5. 22. 23. shows, that there are diverse degrees of
everlasting punishment, not that any of those sins there named are exempted
from thence, but more or less punished there: as Origin does gather upon the
like place Matthew. 23. 15. You make him twofold more the child of hell. We
learn by this, that there is eorum qui in gehenna futuri sunt differentia
tormentorum, a difference of torment of those, which shall be in hell, because
one is simply, another twofold the child of hell.

The 10. Corruption.
SYnops. p. 907. Judas when he was in his holiest course, was but a thief and
an hypocrite, as the Scripture testifies of him. S. Peter says of Simon
Magus, that his heart was not right in the sight of God: there is no Scripture
for the first, and in the second place, was is thrust in, for is, Libel. 175.

The Correction.
FIrst, how Judas is proved by the Scripture and exposition of some of the
Fathers in his holiest course to have been but an hypocrite, I have showed
before, in the defense against Slander 11. whither I desire the reader
courteously to look back. I will not use needless repetitions of the same
things to avoid prolixitie, as the Libeller does often, as it should seem,
for lack of matter: showing his simplicity.

2. The Cauiller does here egregiously show his folly: for the words of Peter
are reported in the third person, what he said of Simon Magus, and therefore
could not be rehearsed otherwise, then by a verb of the third person, that
his heart was not right, etc. Neither is this unusual in the new Testament in
the alleging of Scripture, to change the person, and the tence or time; as
Matthew. 13. 15. that I might heal them, says the Evangelist: and he heal
them, says the Prophet, Esaias 6. 10. And again, Saint Peter says out of the
16. Psalm, Thou have showed me the ways of life, Act. 2. 28. having relation
to the accomplishment of the prophecy. But the Psalmist says, Thou will show
me the ways of life, Psalm. 16. 9.

3. We ground not an argument upon the change of the tence, but upon the true
meaning of S. Peter's words: whether, we say his heart was not, or is not right,
it shows he was but an hypocrite: for he says, thou art in the bond, (...),
of iniquity: which words show, that he was knotted and rooted in his
hypocrisy, not then begun, but then showed. Ambrose says: Petrus Simoni, qui
magicae artis Simon Magus never but an Hypocrite.
consuetudine deprauatus putasset: Peter to Simon, that being corrupted with
the custom of Magical art thought, that he might get the grace of the spirit
with money, said, non est tibi pars neque pars in hac fide, thou have no part
nor fellowship in this faith, lib. 2. de poeniten. cap. 4. From hence I note
two things, that Simon did not leave his witchcraft, though baptized, and
therefore was not an hypocrite now only, but before: and that seeing he had no
part in the faith (as Ambrose reads, and Gratiane reports his words Cause.
1. quaest. 1. c. 19.) he was never in heart baptized, for then he must have
had part in the fellowship of the faith, whereof he had received the sign.
Wherefore by this that has been said, I trust it appears, that he had little
cause to say, Does not silence in this case cry corruption? I may say of him,
as Hippomachus of one, that had long arms being commended for a good wrestler:
Yea (says he) if the crown were (...).
hanged aloft, and to be gotten by reaching and catching: so if the masterie
were to be had by lying and ouerreaching, and catching at words and syllables,
not by sound wrestling and grapling, this adversary would soon go away with
it. But his silence would have showed his wisdom, whereas his brabling
utters his folly: and he shall do well to make amends afterward by holding
his peace: as Gennadius reports of one Seuerus seduced to be a Pelagian:
Agnoscens loquacitatis culpam vsque ad mortem silentium tenuit, vt quod
loquendo contraxerat tacendo emendaret: Acknowledging his loquacitie, he kept
silence unto his death, that he might recompense by his silence, what he had
offended in speaking. Gennad. catalog.

The 11. Corruption.
SYnops. page 473. S. Paul concludes that a man is justified by faith only,
without the works of the law. Manifest corruption, says he, by thrusting the
word only into the text. Libel. page 277.

The Correction.
1. SAint Paul's words are not here repeated: first, for then the sentence
should have been uttered in the first person, we conclude, as it is in the
text, not S. Paul concludes. Secondly, elsewhere, when the text is alleged,
the words as they stand, are rehearsed, as Synops. page 598. lin. 43. p. 885.
lin. 13. p. 887. lin. 9. Thirdly, neither should the sentence alleged have
been expressed in other letters, but in the common character, as it stands in
the first edition. page 566. lin. 2.

2. The text only then is not here urged, but an argument therefrom concluded,
and therein included: that because a man is justified without the works of the
law, it follows, that he is justified by faith alone. So Origin infers
upon this place: Dicit sufficere solius fidei iustificationem, ita vt credens
quis tantummodo iustificetur, etiamsi nihil ab eo operis fuerit expletum: He
says that the justification of faith only suffices, that one believing only
may be justified, though he have fulfilled no work: lib. 3. ad Roman. Say
now that Origin also corrupts S. Paul. So likewise Ambrose in 3. ad Romans
Iustificati sunt gratis, quia nihil operantes, neque fidem reddentes, sola fide
iustificati sunt dono Dei: They are justified freely, because working nothing,
Justification only by faith.
nor rendering nothing, they are justified by faith only by the gift of God.
Again, in 4. ad Roman. Cum videant Abramum, non ex operibus legis, sed sola
fide iustificatum: When they see Abraham justified not of the works of the
law, but by faith only. Ambrose thus concludes only faith out of S. Paul,
without any corruption at all: out of which Father I have twenty like pregnant
testimonies at the lest at hand for justification, sola fide, by faith only.

3. Where you say there is no Scripture for only faith, though this place of
the Apostle be equivalent to that speech: yet somewhat to satisfy your
contentious spirit, I will name you such a Scripture: as Luke 8. 50. (...),
believe only, etc. and she shall be saved.

4. Your evasion of works that go before grace, that the Apostle only
speaks of such, will not serve your turn: for even such works are excluded,
which God has prepared for us to walk in, Ephesians. 2. 8. 10. This was the old
shift of the Pelagians, as it should seem, which Hierome remoueth thus writing
upon these words, By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified: Quod ne
de lege Mosi tantum dictum putes; and non de omnibus mandatis, quae vno legis
nomine continentur, idem Apostolus scribit dicens, consentio legi Dei secundum
interiorem hominem: Which least you should think spoken only of the law of
Moses, and not of all the commandments, which are contained under this one
name of the law, the same Apostle writes, saying, I consent to the law of God
in the inward man, etc. ad Ctesiphont.

5. Whereas S. James says, that a man is justified of works, and not of faith
only, 2. 24. he speaks not of that justification, whereby we are made just
before God, but of the outward probation and testification thereof, as it may
appear out of the 22. verse, Was not Abraham our father justified through
works, when he offered Isaac his son upon the altar? But Abraham was
justified before God by faith at the least thirty years before. Genes. 15. 6.
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness: therefore by
this work his faith was proved and made known: as the Angel says, Now I
know that thou fear God, Genesis 22. 12. he was not thereby justified before
God. This distinction of justification Thomas Aquinas allows: Iacobus hic
loquitur de operibus sequentibus fidem, quae dicuntur iustificare non secundum
quod iustificare dicitur iustitiae infusio, sed secundum quod dicitur iustitiae
exercitatio vel ostensio, vel consummatio: res enim fieri dicitur, quando
perficitur, vel innotescit: James speaks here of works following faith,
which are said to justify, not as the infusion of justice is said to justify,
but as it is said to be the exercise, showing or perfecting of righteousness:
for a thing is said to be done, when it is perfected and made known: in epist.
Jacob. 5. 5. And no otherwise Origin says, that Abraham was justified by
works: Quia certum est eum, qui vere credit opus fide^ and iustitiae operari:
Because it is certain, that he which truly believes does work the work of
faith and righteousness, lib. 4. ad Romans Thus S. Paul and S. James are
reconciled: the one speaks of our justification, that is the infusion of
justice before God, which is by faith; the other of the testification thereof
by works.

The 12. Corruption.
SYnops. page 532. I am the bread, Ioh. 6. 35. the text is corrupted by leaving
out two words, of life, which if he had put to, his argument against
transubstantiation had bin destitute of all force.

The Correction.
1. IF it be corruption of Scripture, sometime for brevity sake to leave out
a word: you had best charge our Savior with that corruption: who says out of
Esaias, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, Luke 4. 18. whereas the Prophet says
of the Lord Jehovah.

2. He might have considered, that the argument taken out of this scripture, is
set down from Bellarmines report together with his answer, lib. 3. de Euchar.
cap. 24. argum. 1. So that herein is no deceit nor corruption in rehearsing
that, which is by others propounded: although it were granted, that some
oversight might pass in the first propounders, which is not yet proved:
otherwise, when this text is alleged by himself, all the words are expressed:
I am the bread of life. page 509. lin. 1.

3. It was not necessary nor pertinent to add the rest of the words: neither
have they any advantage in putting of them to: for where Christ says, I am
the living bread, or bread of life; so he likewise says, this is my body
(pointing to the bread) which is given for you: but he gave his living, not his
dead body for them: As then Christ is not changed into bread, when he says,
I am the bread of life, but it is a figurative speech: so the bread is not
changed into his living body, where he says, this is my body given for you.
But here of necessity also a figure must be admitted; as Augustine says:
Corporis and sanguinis sui figuram discipulis commendauit and tradidit: He
gave and commended a figure of his body and blood to his Disciples, Enarrat.
in Psalm. 3. So Tertullian before interpreted, this is my body, that is, a
figure of my body, lib. 4. cont. Marcion. So then, as Christ is not material
bread, but spiritually: so the bread is not his material body, but likewise
spiritually. This comparison then stands still, between these two speeches,
though the word ( of life) be supplied, that in both a figurative kind of
locution must be admitted.

The 13. Corruption.
THe Scripture says, that Christ was given only for those that are given to
him, to whom he gives eternal life, John 17. 2. the word only is maliciously
added Libell p. 278.

The Correction.
1. HEre not so much the sentence, as the sense of the Scripture is applied:
does the Scripture say nothing, but that which in so many words is expressed in
Scripture? then should we want Scripture for the probation of many substantial
points of our faith. That then is not only Scripture, which in so many words is
there found, but that also which may be from thence necessarily collected: As
our Savior makes that Scripture, which is inferred out of Scripture: as
Matthew. 22. 31. Concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not heard what
is spoken to you of God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the
God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: In these words
our Savior says, that God speaks of the resurrection: whereof there is no
express mention, but only a natural and proper collection. That then is not
only Scripture, which the words only betoken, but which the sense also truly
collected, yields, as Hierome says: Nec putemus Euangeliu^ in verbis esse,
sed in sensu; no^ in superficie, sed in medulla; non in sermonum folijs, sed in
radice rationis: Let us not think the Gospel to be in the words, but in the
sense; not in the outward show, but the marrowe; not in the leaves, but in the
root, in epist. ad Galat. c. 1.

2. The Scripture here alleged, Ioh. 17. 2* is only produced to prove that the
elect only are given unto Christ: the words stand thus, Who are not contented
to say, as the Scripture says, that Christ was given only for those which are
given him, to whom he gives eternal life, John 17. 2. That is, the elect, for
to them only is life everlasting given: by the collection out of this text, it
does appear wherefore it is quoted: that the elect only are given to Christ,
because they only have eternal life. The argument may be framed thus:
Eternal life is given to all those that are given to Christ: none but the
elect have eternal life: Ergo, none but they are given to Christ. The
proposition of this argument is grounded upon the very words of the text, John
17. 2. But that Christ was given only for those, which are given him, is taken
as granted, for none that stand for universal grace, that I know deny this
assertion, but the question is, who are given unto Christ. Snecanus a patron of
universal grace, affirms that Judas was given unto Christ, p. 724. we
affirm that the elect only are given. Therefore seeing this Scripture was not
brought forth to fortify this assertion out of these words, Christ was giuenly
only for those, etc. he cannot prove any addition.

And yet further, this assertion, that Christ died only for the elect given
unto him, is evident also out of this chapter, Ioh. 17. verse. 9. I pray for
them, I pray not for the world; but for those which thou have given me. From
whence, this reason may be enforced: Christ prayed only for those which are
given unto him; he gave himself to death only for those whom he prayed for:
verse. 19. for their sakes do I sanctify my self, which was by sacrificing
himself, Rhem. Ioh. 17. 19. Ergo, he gave himself to death only for those,
which are given unto him, that is, the elect. Wherefore both these assertions,
that the elect are only given to Christ, and that Christ was given only for
the elect, being so evidently deduced out of scripture, it is no corruption to
affirm, that the Scripture says, that Christ was only given for those, that
are given him, that is, the elect.

3. Ambrose proves out of the Scripture, Christ died only for the Elect.
that Christ was not given, but only to those which believe: as upon these
words of Esaias 9. ver. 6. Unto us a child is borne, a son is given: Puer natus
est nobis, non Iudaeis; nobis, non Manichaeis; nobis, id est credentibus, non
incredulis, etc. A child is borne to us, not to the Jews; to us, not to the
Manichees; to us, that is believers, not unbelievers: Sic puer non omnibus
natus est, sed fidelibus: So the child was not borne for all, but for the
faithful, lib. 3. de fid. cap. 4. Augustine also out of the Scripture proves
the same: Christ died for the children of God, which he shows by this
scripture, Ioh. 11. 52. Jesus was to die for that nation, and not for that
nation only, but that he should gather together in one, the children of God,
which were scattered. But the elect are these children, and none else: Tales
filij filio Christo dati sunt, quemadmodum ad patrem dicit ipse (vt omne, quod
dedisti mihi, non pereat, sed habeat vitam aeternam) hi ergo Christo
intelliguntur dati, qui ordinati sunt ad vitam aeternam, ipsi sunt illi
praedestinati: Such sons are given to the son Christ, as he says to his
father (that all that thou have given me should not perish, but have eternal
life) these are understood to be given to Christ, which are ordained to eternal
life, they are y^ predestinate, lib. de corrept. and great. c. 8. 9. Then this
must be the conclusion, that Christ died for the elect and predestinate, and
none else. And here by the way let it be noted, that where Augustine says,
Christ says to his father (that all that thou have given me should not perish,
but have eternal life) this sentence is neither found in these very words in
the 17. of John, where Christ prays to his father, nor in the 6. of John, as
the gloss notes, did. 4. de poenit. cap. 8. but is rather inferred upon
Christ's words uttered in diverse places. Let him now cry out also against
Augustine, that he is a corrupter and falsifier of the words of Christ.

4. Christ's death we grant was sufficient to all, but effectual only to the
elect: and herein we refuse not Peter Lombards distinction: that Christ
offered the price of redemption, pro omnibus quantu^ ad sufficientia^, sed pro
electis tantum quantum ad efficaciam, quia praedestinatis tantum salutem
effecit: For all in respect of sufficiency, but for the elect only in regard
of efficacy, because he wrought salvation only to the predestinate, lib. 3.
distinct. 20. C. Again, he says in another place: Christus electos tantum
sicut se dilexit, eorumque salutem optauit: Christ only loved the elect as
himself, and wished their salvation, libr. 3. distinct. 31. D. If Christ only
wished the salvation of the elect, then he only to their benefit intended his
death. Now ask your Master from whence he has this tantum, only: if he add
it of his own, why do you not refuse him? if he has his warrant from the
Scripture, then is it no corruption to affirm, the Scripture says, Christ
gave himself to death only for the elect, that were given him.

5. Concerning the addition, which Sixtus the 4. made unto the Aue Marie: and,
blessed be Anna thy mother, of whom thy virgins flesh has proceeded without
blot of original sin: he would excuse it thus, that these words are not
added to the text, neither do they prove out of them that our Lady was
conceived without sin.

Contra. 1. Why (Sir) as though any of these pretended corruptions of Scripture
did add to, or make any innovation in the standing text? your answer here if
it were sufficient, may serve very well for all your own objections.

2. It shall be showed even now, if you will have a little patience, that you
make bold with the original text, by adding to, and taking from it, by
chopping and changing of it.

3. What though this addition of Pope Sixtus be not in the text of your Bibles,
yet is it in the text alleged in your service for the Conception of the Virgin
Marie: and the Pope granted great indulgence to those which should say the (
Aue Maria) with that clause: And seeing this annexed piece makes but one
sentence with the ( Aue Maria) being distinguished by an imperfect point; and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus Christ, and blessed is Anna thy mother,
etc. it cannot be but an addition to Scripture?

4. You say the conception of the Virgin Marie without sin is not grounded
upon this addition, or that we may pray to our Lady: yet this new scripture,
together with your new found feast of the Conception, is warranted by the
authority of the Papal sea, which has power to allow Scripture: As it
stands in the decree of Sixtus 4. De ipsius immaculata virginis mira
conceptione gratias referant, etc. That they should give thanks for the
miraculous conception of the immaculate Virgin, and say Masses, etc. that they
may thereby by the merits of the Virgin be made more fit, etc. You imagine
then, that her merits are greater because of her sinlesse conception, and so
are ye more imboldened to pray to her: and therefore your invocation upon the
Virgin Marie is in part grounded upon her miraculous conception. And all this
the Pope ordains, by the authority of almighty God, and of his blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul: Extrau. co^mun. lib. 3. t. 12. c. 1. Wherefore seeing
the Pope promises great indulgence to all those which shall celebrate this
festival, and sing Masses in the honor of this miraculous conception, you must
either say, that the Pope brings in a new service without warrant of
Scripture, or that he makes Scripture of his own: now choose which you will.

Now to keep promise with you: it is an usual thing in your Church, both to
add to and take from Scripture, as may be seen every where in your vulgar
Latin translation: It would fill a large volume to note all the places
corrupted, but for a taste I will produce some.

Genes. 21. 9. playing with Isaac, says the Latin, where Isaac is added: 28.
5. Rebeckah, the mother of Esau and Jacob, left out in the Latin: 31. 47. both
according to the propriety of his language: this clause added. Genes. 34. 1.
which she bare unto Jacob, left out: 38. 12. the daughter of Suah Iudahs wife:
daughter wanting in the Latin: 41. 22. awaking, and again overcome of sleep,
etc. added: 47. 22. they had their ordinary of Pharaoh: out of the common
barnes, says the Latin. Exodus 2. 23. And she brought forth another son, and
called his name Eleazar, saying, the God of my father is my helper, and has
delivered me out of the hand of Pharaoh: all this is added in the Latin, being
not extant in the original. A thousand such places might be remembered, wherein
their Latin translation, which they have decreed to be authentical,
corrupts the Hebrew text. But we need not give an instance of lines, seeing
they have added whole leaves and books to the Canonical Scripture, as the
Apocryphal stories of Judith, Tobie, Macchabees, with the rest.

Now to return unto my kind friend, that has spied so many faults: what has
he gained, but the name of a false accuser? for there is not one of these
devised corruptions, which either by example of Scripture, or like deduction of
the Fathers, or by conference with other places is not rectified and ratified.

It were an easy matter to requite him with the like, and to pay him home with
his fellows faults: as how Bellarmine, Dan. 11. 37. for, he shall not regard
the desires of women, reads, he shall. Tit. 3. 10. after once or twice
admonition: once, says he. Judith 5. 18. these words: the temple of the Jews
had been cast down to the grouud: he says, are supposititia foisted in.
Hosius, Romans 6. 19. for sanctification, reads satisfaction. Stapleton,
Galath. 1. 8, 9. reads, if an Angel should preach otherwise, then we have
received of the Church, etc. These and other such bold adventures upon the
Scripture are more at large set down, Tetrastyl. page 59. 60. where the Reader
shall be more fully satisfied for this matter.

Thus has this unfriendly neighbor taken upon him to discover the ouersights
and scapes of these two books, which he has sought by his wrestings, cauils
and deprauations to mangle and deface: I hope I shall not need to say as
Iphicrates of Aristophon with whom he contended: That his adversary (...).
was strong, but his cause the better: for I fear not, but that the goodness of
the cause has had in this conflict the best success. And as he has pried and
searched into some corners of another man's house, I could wish with Drusus, who
when a workman offered for five talents to make his house so close, that none
should see into it, said, I will give thee ten, to make it so open that every
part may (...).
be seen, that all men may see how I live: that he also had taken a perfect
view of the whole building: for by his contradictions the truth is more
fortified: his dark eye only aimed at the blemishes, the light of the truth
dazeled his eyes, that he could not endure to behold it and acknowledge it. I
may therefore say unto him, as Augustine to Faustus: Vestrum oculum maleuolus
error in solam pal^am nostrae segetis ducit: nam and triticum cit^
ibivideretis, si and esse velletis: Malicious error leads your eye only to
the chafe of our corn: for you might epsy good wheat there also, if ye were
wheat your selves: cont. Faust. lib. 5. cap. 11.

Now concerning the adversaries charge, who heapeth up so many malicious and
wilful falsifications of authors, corruptions of Scripture, etc. I speak this
in the fear of God and in the testimony of a good conscience, that though in
so large a volume, and long a piece of work, some faults by oursight might
escape and be passed over (for from errors of negligence, and inuoluntarie
slippes, what humane writer can challenge to be free?) and I say with
Augustine: Scripta mea, sicut Dei data, sic etiam errata mea agnosco: My
writings as I confess they are Gods giuings, so mine own errings: ad
Simplician. lib. 2. q. 5. Yet I do clear my self (and I trust by this true
defense have sufficiently declared the same) from all malicious corruptions,
such or so many as are suggested: so that I nothing doubt in this case to say
with S. Paul, As for ^e, I pass very little to be judged of you: I judge ^ot
mine own self, for I know nothing by my self, 1. Cor. 4. 4. And as Augustine
^aith of the false accusations of Petilian: Nihil eorum quibus me criminatus
est mihi conscius sum: I am not guilty of any thing wherewith he accuses me.
And so I conclude with the same Fathers sentence: Etiam me in mea causa, sicut
inimicus existimari cupit, deficiente and oppresso, victrix erit causa cui
seruio: Though I should faint and fail in mine own cause, as the adversary
would have it imagined, yet the cause (of truth) which I serve, shall never be
conquered: libr. 3. cont. Petilian. cap. 2.

Laus Deo: Vincat veritas.
Errata.
Page 3. line 19. Pref. for (...), read (...). p. 5. l. 1. for cationem, r.
rationem. p. 20. l. 15. anno 47. r. canon. 47. p. 28. l. 27. non talib. r. cum
talib. p. 33. l. 23. fences, r. offenses. p. 64. l. 19. general. 26. r.
generat. 26. p. 97. l. 12. p. 18. r. p. 180. p. 137. l. 23. Caullers, r.
Cauillers. p. 113. l. 23. (...), r. (...) in the marg. p. 157. l. 13. no
heretic, r. an heretic. p. 163. l. 9. (...), r. (...), in the marg. p. 167.
l. 10. again, r. agmina. p. 271. l. 17. piae chordae, r. pia corda. p. 183. l.
28. observation, r. obsecration. p. 202. l. 20. verissima, r. verissime. p.
205. l. 30. consorteth, r. consents. p. 209. l. 10. aith, r. faith. Pref. p.
21. l. 6. in the marg. (...), r. (...).

Places omitted, are thus to be supplied.
Page 99. l. 19. lib. 1. cont. Iouinian. p. 202. l. 20. lib. 2. cont. Crescon.
c. 7. p. 203. l. 17. lib. 2. cont. Crescon. c. 2. p. 209. l. 10. ena^rat. in
Psalm. 26. p. 221. l. 10. lib. cont. Petilian. 3. 2. p. 228. l. 16. tract. 25.
in Matthew.


