The Art of Love. OR, Love discovered in an hundred several kinds.

ET VSQVEAD NVBES VERITAS TVA



Printed at London by P.S. for William Leake: and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Greyhound. 1598.

To the Right Worshipful Ma: Henry Prannell Esquire, the true Friend and
Favorer of all laudable Professions.
SIR, the stranger may these my salutations seem unto ye, in that I being a
Stranger and never treading on English ground till this instant, make choice of
you for my first Entertainer, intruding my self as a guest, whereas yet I have
no acquaintance at all. But if you shall deem me blameworthy herein, (as I
will not greatly stand in maintaining any presumption) the fault indeed is a
kind Countrimans of yours, who would needs have me leave my honorable
Friends in Italy, and those great preferments allotted me in France, to try the
air and climate of fair Englands Maiden Kingdom. And whereas diverse others
entreated me to honorable habitations, yea, as great places of reckoning as
any mine own native Soil affoorded me: yet the persuasions of this your
wel-wishing Friend has ouerruled me, to lay all my fortunes at your feet, and
either by your favor to live here for ever, or by your discountenance to
return back disgraced. The rude English I speak, I learnd it of him: the
danger I may incur, I impose upon him: only (for his friendly association in
my travel) if you allow me any grace, bestow it on him. For, as his affection
to you exceeds that of many: so, (in mine opinion) if you try him, you
shall find him as forward to your welfare as any.

Your Worships to be commanded: Hecatonphila.

Jn Artem amandi Decastichon.
EXimie scripsit Cicero, been pinxit Apelles,
Inuidiae morsum sensit vterque tamen.
Conscia men's recti cum te comitetur euntem,
Sperne venenato quicquid ab ore fluit.
Quod liber est nitidus, miscetur and vtile dulci,
Dexter Apollo tibi; Fama perennis erit.
Ergo macte animo, nec publica co^moda tardes,
Ingenij viuent sic monumenta tui.
Candidus Interpres laudetur, and optimus Author,
Viuat vterque diu, cedat vtrique decus.
FRANCISCVS MERES.

The Argument.
VIncentio Bentiuoli being Duke of Ferrara, a solemn contract of marriage was
concluded, between Ludouico his Son, and fair Annabella, Daughter to the
Marquess of Mont-Ferrat. And when the time of the Nuptials came to be
performed, there wanted no resort of honorable Personages, nor any
magnificent cost and royal pomp, as might well be seem a matter of such
importance, as also the time so necessarily urging it. Triumphs, Tiltes,
Maskes, Barriers, were one while Companions with this gracious Assembly, then
another while stately Tragedies, and queint conceited Comedies help to beguile
the idle hours: and when neither of these were thought expedient, then civil
discourse and familiar conference liberally passed between the Lords and Ladies.

Jnto several Companies were these Discoursers divided, some entreating on
martial affairs, others of civil and domestical occasions. But they who are
the Argument of our present Treatise, their talk consisted only of Love,
laying down Rules, grounds, and principles, whereby (at full) to instruct the
true Art of Love.

One Lady (among the rest, tearming her self Hecatonphila) was allowed to be
chief Speaker in this discoursing of Love: and though at diverse times before
she had indifferently instructed all (or at least the most part) of them,
concerning the proceeding in so weighty a matter, yet now at this instant they
request a further satisfaction.

She, loath to deny any thing remaining in her power, and seeing the pastime
which was prepared for that night to be a pleasant Comedy, even almost at the
point of presentment, while the Actors were attiring and furnishing themselves
to their intended merriment, she delivered this her short Instruction to the
Art of Love, fitting it with the brevity of the time, and the earnest desire
of them that so much importunde her theretoo, beginning her Discourse as
hereafter follows.

HECATONPHILA The Art of Love. Written by Master Leon Baptista Alberto,
Florentine: wherein is taught an hundred kinds of Love.
I Take it to be a part of humanity, as also an action of pity and
compassion, seeing for the most part amongst you (fair Ladies) so many signs
of an afflicted spirit, only through the weighty oppressions of love, that
by all the wit and cunning remains in me, I should instruct how this burden
might be more easy, and less troublesome unto you.

For beholding at this instant (most sweet Sisters) many of ye leaning your
heads on your hands, others cross armd ore the breast, some (bitterly sighing)
hiding their eyes with their fingers, other some lending their looks to all
parts of this Theater, as it were to epsy among the multitude, the man who^
they most of all expect, and with greatest longing desire to see.

Whereby I cannot choose but take pity on them, whom I know to be in the same
agony, which I my self have heertofore felt, being then less seen and skild
in loves affairs, than now I am at this instant.

Now albeit you are furnished of good judgment and singular wisdom, whereby
to direct and govern ye in the case of Love; yet make no doubt at all (fair
Patrones of beauty) but being less experienced therein than I, that you shall
hear some thing delivered from me, as pleasing to hear, as profitable to
practice.

At no time can be found a better Physician, than he, who having first tasted
an infirmity himself, learnes thereby the skill of helping others infected
with the same disease. As for my self, concerning mine own love, and others
made known to me; I find, that without any repenting, I have satisfied my
desires (for one woman) more than an hundred other Lovers could do: so that at
every Fall of the leaf, and likewise for every Summer season, I might justly
make account of a whole years experience in love.

Upon this occasion, learned men (who above al other most please and content
me) in their private amorous Discourses call me Hecatonphila, which is as much
to say, as An hundred Loves; wherefore from me, beyond all other, they would
seek to gather the fruits of the second Triumph, concerning the sweetes and
pleasures of Love.

Therefore (fair Friends, and my dearest Delights) while the Comoedians delay
their time of appearing on the Stage, listen to me as diligently and
attentively as ye can: yea, to me I say, who am a perfect Mistress in this
Art, and desirous withal to make you deeply learned therein; that you may
learn how to end your Loves with marvelous pleasure and contentment, without
dread of any sinister accident, that may befall in the progress of your love.

CAP. 2.
AS concerning mine own Loves, (which till this instant were never more than
two) with those of others, wherein I have employed my labor and industry: but
only of the first, thorough my want of providence, I have no great occasion to
complain: And that was in my young years, when I set a high rate on mine own
beauty, esteeming more a bare victory of opinion, than the endowment of such
an especial occasion, whereby I might soly study and endeavor, to make my self
fair and beautiful indeed.

But for this ever afterward I gave thanks to Venus and Cupid, who in my first
affections and younger errors, gave me a Love discreet, wise, modest, virtuous,
pitiful, patient, and worthy of all commendation: of whom I learned (that
which is only sufficient) to love secretly, and without pride, controuling
daily mine own imperfections, and practicing the knowledge of many things
necessary to true and perfect loving: as for example, to rehearse large
Histories by looks only, and other especial matters by least suspected
behavior.

But most happy is the Lover whatsoever, whose fortune is so good as to light
on so true and faithful a Friend: sweet love, sweet pastime, but sweetest of
all is the first kindled heat, which brings the lover both pleasure and profit
together, whereby he may the better attain his own contentation.

The first love, being not counterfeit but surely grounded, can never be
removed from the remembrance: but truly the sweetness of those ioies were rare
and numberless, were they not often troubled by crooked and finister means,
as oftentimes happens to us women, such as I was in my young and vainer days,
as showing our selves too disdainful, and reckoning the meanest of our own
private opinions, to be far beyond all others.

Fools that we be, how many wonderful pleasures lose we, in nice shunning
them? Afterward, both alone and public, how much do we bemone our own
stearne rudeness? Thus first (through our own fault) we find the cause of
our annoiance, til with floods of tears we wear out the flint of our stony
stubbornness, learning thereby to become more mild and tractable.

It is best then to learn, how to love without fierceness or disdain, but it
falls out very sildome, that without some bitterness one can endure the
sweet which grows by Loves beginning, except we first make choice of such an
one, as shall appear most meet and worthy to be beloved.

Listen then (fair Virgins) and learn of me to pass pleasantly the course of
your life, as also to bring such quiet to your Love, as the issue thereof
shall be most peaceable and glorious.

CAP. 3.
Here then will I first instruct ye, how to make choice of a right good Lover:
and afterward teach, in what manner and by what art you may take and entertain
him, with all the grace and good will in such cases requisite. Lastly, ye shall
understand from me, with what ease and security ye may long time triumph in
your amorous enterprises. For which good Lessons, I would next of all know, what
thanks or kindness (on your behalf) I shall be requited withal?

But out alas, what recompense shall I expect from ye (fair lovely Creatures)
when ye have proou'd, what pleasure, profit and contentment these my
instructions shall enrich ye withal? Well, come what may, I will wait for
nothing else from ye, or make any other demand, but when ye have
attentively heard my speeches and admonitions, that ye would bestow your love
effectually on the party, by whom ye find your selves to be loyally beloved.

For this I dare certainly assure ye, that whatsoever she be among ye, that
in her course of love will not observe my Aduertisements, let her never look
for any amorous content, without very great crosses and perturbations,
neither shall she live without the charge and oppression of infinite cares,
greefes and heart-killing passions. Listen then advisedly, how much it shall
avail ye to love discreetly, and how prejudicial beside, the want of this
knowledge in love will be unto ye.

CAP. 4.
FIrst then must we show ye, what kind of Lovers they ought to be, of whom
you should make choice: and therefore (sweet Sisters) be careful of this
first precept, that ye choose not a man either too young, or ouer-wearied with
years: for no age can be more successful in loving, than when a man is in
the state of firm strength and ability: which being already spent and gone
in old men, makes them unapt or incapable of those sweet pastimes the case of
Love requires.

Think with your selves what a hell it is, to love where the like cannot be
returned again. Whereas the able gallant Youth, being in the first flower of
his manly age, has a most delicate aspect or countenance, declares a more
firm and potent constitution, and is able to endure watchings or other
weighty burdens, in better sort than those of weaker disposition can.

But learn with me (I beseech ye) to know, how many discommodities attend upon
such men, as being over young, are likewise unapt for love.

They are not expert, and every small occasion seems in their minds to make a
very great shadow, being always hasty, and subject to no patience.

They are sudden, rash and indiscreet, knowing little, and therefore
improuident, suspicious in all things, and easily carried away with any
disdainful conceit. Sildome shall ye see the^ without some following friend, to
whom they will discourse a whole history of their amorous passions, taking
delight in counterfeiting and defending apparances of truth, and making open
vaunts of approved falsehoods.

Here hence insues it, that these reports passing from one to another,
whatsoever is spoken of us women, be it never so false, as quickly will some
be found to believe it.

Thus by the means of these indiscreet young heads, before we can scant know
the name of him we purpose to love, we are made common reports and pratlings
of the people.

And sometimes it happens, that when all sinister language is silent of us,
then our own fortune resembles the young Liones following the Heart, who iested
and dallied very long with her yet in the end cast her off: rather than which
inconvenience should happen to me, I would make election of an elder Lover,
than one so over young and void of reason.

The Lover more seen in years, will be wise, discreet, ready to know and
accomplish whatsoever, according to time, place, and all offered occasions:
whereas the young gadding head, not observing those necessary rules, can never
know how to fit him self with these needful furnitures.

Note well the discreet Lover, and ye shall see him silent, secret, patient,
modest and advised: but the young Fantastic will go up and down all day
before your door; where, though he be alone, yet every passenger shall be a
witness of his inward affection.

The elder Favor it, except theretoo induced by some mighty occasion, will
never give over his enterprise, his Love is his hearts Heaven: but if he cease
to love, yet never will he become an enemy, hate, or seem molestuous unto ye,
either by word or deed.

The young wanderer, like one that newly comes into a public market place,
walks along every side, and admireth all things, desiring to enjoy each thing
he beholds: but with the least look he is presently changed: and no
greater misery can happen to her that truly loves, than to affect the man,
whose heart and soul are not solemnly dedicated and linkt together, to desire
or covet more than one only Love.

But that which is worst of all, these young amorous Gallants, for every small
occasion give over their affection, converting their behavior and all else
toward us, as if we were their very greatest enemies.

Unhappy then are we, that by loving such young straglers, proud minded, and
void of counsel, must live continually in fears, compassed in with worlds of
endless molestations.

In a soft and gentle molde, any print or form we like, may easily be
effected: even so in this first estate of green and delicate youth, sooner
(believe me) may love be extinguished, than rightly enkindled.

This makes every one timorous to deal with so sweet a solace: remembering
the beautiful Rose, that it both springs and dies in one Summer; and hail
stones fallen in the morning are no where to be found the same day at night.

Hereby ye may perceive, fair virgins, that men over aged, are not the aptest
for love: likewise these younger sort to be very dangerous, and therefore not
to be dealt withal; but such as flourish in a mature and settled middle age, may
perform, what the too old are unable for, and know that, which those young
and green wits are utterly inexpert and ignorant in.

An apple being well knit together and mellowed, is more sweet and pleasing
than when it is green; yet that apple being ouer-ripe and too much mellowed,
becomes wrinckled, saplesse, and well near sauourlesse: even such is the love
of men over young and over old; the one sour and sharp, the other dry and
senseless.

Here too I must now add, that in love are infinite pleasures, no less
delightsome, than to be admired; as in the marriage bed, where is all kind
conference, discovering of greefes, recounting afflictions passed, clearing all
suspicions, correcting with sweet accusations one another: thus out-wearing the
slow-paced hours, one while with true-loues tears, another while with intyre
rejoicing.

To the faithful Lover, nothing is more pleasing, than to feel on her
cheeks, or in her bosom, the tears of him she loves, sweetly trickling
down: what honnie of Hybla, what cinnamon of Arabia, or what Nectar prepared
for the gods themselves to drink, can be imagined so sweet, (fair Glories of
Virtue) as one little tear of him whom you entirely love? A thing inestimable,
a delight admirable, nothing so precious, wherewith may not be valued all the
pearls of India, the gold of the Persians, or Emperie of the Latins; no, not
with the very least tear (sweet Sister) of thy affected Lover.

Oh happy Maiden, oh fortunate Lover, that see shining in thy souls eyes,
love, faith, pity, and all other sweetness, religiously combyned fast
together. So that by these, and infinite other heavenly pleasures, which though
available* yet here I let pass for breuities sake, and some other serious
respects: affirming this, Green Youth is not for ye, old Age is as
unnecessary, only the mean between both, the sound settled spirit, is above
all other to be preferred.

CAP. 5.
HEthertoo ye have heard, of what Age your Lovers ought to be: there are now
other things most profitable, concerning their election, which I will rehearse
to ye as breefely as I can.

Never could I find my self inclinable to love a man ouer-rich, because these
money-mongers will buy love without exchange of good will, and seeking to serve
their turn with many, never keep faith with any.

As hard a matter do I account it, to love a man ouer-beautiful, because he
being desired of diverse, though I love him never so earnestly, yet shall I be
in continual fear to loose him.

As dangerous I take it, to love a man lifted by Fortune to any great
dignity, because he can never intend to love without many witnesses, both
strangers and domestical, abroad and at home.

He can never go abroad, but with a mighty throng of Servants and Friends,
which makes him ordinarily more noted of the world, than others are.

Such men are commonly of proud spirit and puffed up courage, compassing many
things rather by violence, than any favor, love, or friendship.

As little wisdom is it, to love such as are slothful, dull spirited and
couragelesse, who through want of better wit or exercise, make an art or
occupation of their love, gadding abroad with frizled locks, embroidered
garments, and other open marks of their lightness, only but to procure their
own scorn and derifion.

Fly from such (fair Sisters) and take heed of them, for they love not a
jot, but spend the day in these odd courses, not as requiring your kindness,
but for lack of other labor: and look what they say to you, the same will
they to whomsoever they meet withal; and doubt not, but what they speak of
others, the same will they of you, be it true or false.

I hold it in like manner as blame-worthie, to fore-stall good fortune in
better place, and stoop to the affection of a Boore, Peazant, Carterly clown,
or such like, because it is a submission to men of the very vylest and basest
condition: for mark what inconvenience follows thereupon. These abject
hirelings and mercenarie grooms; think to attain some title of honor, by
giving it forth in public to be known, that they are favored by such a
Gentlewoman, or beloved by a Lady of so great height and calling.

Moreover, under color of religion, to love him, who pretending zeal in his
speeches, shall discover and reprove that publicly, which himself seeks
for in secret, and gladly would attain unto; I condemn as much as any of
the rest, and hold it for a misfortune hardly to be repaired.

Then all these rehearsed, vz. The too rich, too beautiful, too fortunate, too
negligent, too base, and too holy, are men not to be regarded, neither
contained within my lessons, any way to be beloved; let us learn to know them
then, that are to be termed worthy of affection.

CAP. 6.
MAke no doubt (dear Sisters) in fixing your fancies on such a lover, as is not
poor, misshapen, defamed, or a villain: ye shall easily perceive when he is
endued with wisdom, modesty, patience and virtue.

It has evermore been my natural inclination, to love such an one, (as I have
said before) that was addicted to good letters, learned, and adorned with many
virtues, even such an one as my first husband was; whom (indeed) I loved more
dearly, than I did mine own self: for he was of goodly personage, of
exceeding qualified conditions, accompanied with a maiesticall countenance,
gentle and affable, complete in all parts of humanity, and of a mind (divine
as it were) far beyond all other men.

He abounded in all virtues, especially those that best beseemed the greatest
Princes, being of comely and strong personage, courageous, hardy, affable,
grave, secret, modest, merry, pleasant, where he deemed it best became him;
eloquent, learned, amiable, pitiful, wary, expert, quick witted, and (above
all) most loyal, and exceeding in all the parts of gentleness.

Very skilful was he in the exercise of Arms, managing great horses, and
either at his lance, bow, or such commendable qualities, right ready: well
seen in sciences, music, painting, engrauing, yea all other Arts
whatsoever; and ye can name no laudable action fit for a man, but I imagine he
could therein very hardly be seconded.

Impossible it is for me to recount the moitie of his admirable virtues, which
worthily made him famous, affected, and every where regarded.

Think then (fair Ladies) I need not be ashamed, both to esteem and term
him my Lord, being such an only most sweet and loyal Lover, neither a matter
hard or laborious to me, readily and at all times to please and obey him; nay,
I thought my self most happy and fortunate, if I might express my uttermost
diligence, in doing whatsoever he pleased to command me.

Who better could deserve such duty and reverence at my hand, than such a
worthy husband? Oh my Lord, most blessed have I ever reputed my self, seeing
Fortune bestowed such a Love on me, as had not his like. But alas, my mishap
chanced afterward, cutting off the felicity of such a heavenly kind of life,
by taking him from me into a far distant Country, and death could be no
worse to me, than this sour separation: yet this is some consolation to my
soul, that the remembrance of thy faith and love continues alive in me,
which I keep and will do with all religious duty I can, as a most memorable
testimony of our never sundred affection.

Such a Love as this (fair Ladies) yea, such a Love, if such a one may be met
withal, do I council ye to make choice off, and intyrely to love him, never
preferring any to the souereigntie of your affections, but such as are wise,
virtuous, and modest.

These are they that will requite your faith and kindness with endless
recompenses, and by whom ye shall never need to doubt any sinister accident.

These (like Poets, Times glories) will make your names immortal, giving true
fame and eternity to your beauty and virtues: Lesbia, Corinna, Cynthia, and
many more deceased a thousand years since, yet live, by being beloved of
virtuous and learned men.

Love then (sweet Sisters) those that are learned, wise, modest and virtuous:
so shall your lives be here as none the like, and your loves remembered, as
none comparable.

CAP. 7.
THus having declared, how ye should elect men worthy of your love, now will I
show the means to entertain and preserve them still in loving.

And first of all let me tell ye (fair Creatures) that nothing better
becomes your excellent perfections, and sooner prevails in conquering his
heart you aim at, than a sweet carriage of countenance, as also a comely,
discreet, and modest presence: one piercing look heates and enkindles the
dullest desire, one modest amorous glaunce awakens sleepie thoughts, fetches
fire from the flint, and makes the heart as yielding, as your own can crave
enjoying.

Herein I have discerned many young Damsels, (through want of better wit)
very much to deceive themselves, imagining, that a man no sooner looks on
them, but presently he is in love with them: which makes them very liberal in
eying every one, and take pleasure in gazing on each goer by, still thinking
their beauty increased by their often beholding, whereas men are rather wearied
with noting their vanity.

But believe me (dear Friends) it is no part of beauties glory, to attract a
troop of eyes, or be beleagerd with an host of idle regarders: covet rather
privately to be seen, as one adorned with virtue, courtesy and humanity,
than gold, purple, silk or silver, for that shall make thee truly honored,
when the other will leave thee foolishly despised.

One only light makes an entyre and perfect shadow, whereas many lights being
together, confounds and defaceth it: even so from one only Friend and loyal
Lover, true and perfect love is to be expected; for well may she be compared
to the Broodhen, that all the day long bestows her pains in all the dust
she meets withal, and yet sleeps at night hungry and unsatisfied.

It is good then for her that loves, to employ all her endeavor, to find the
means for preserving one entire Love only: for how unwise is she that
considers not, how many casualties and dangers happen in love, especially when
affection is rouing at more than one mark only?

Understand (fair Sisters true love is a matter immortal, not to be divided
or severed: for when it is truly bestowed where your soul solemnly affects,
what beside it is bragd or boasted on to any other, is words without worth,
and golden shows with glassie substance.

She that can divide her liking into diverse parts and proportions, knows not
how to love indeed, but prophanes so sacred a profession, and she that labors
not to maintain love in his true and only glory, deserves not to have the
benefits of love, but rather to be generaly hated and contemned.

And though all other reasons auailed as nothing in this behalf, yet think
with your selves, that being pursued with a multitude of riualls, what
expectation is to be had thereof? I will not stand to rehearse all the
inconveniences, but let this one suffice for the residue.

If ye lend good looks to every one, ye bring your self into a hell and
intolerable servitude: for then, if ye grace one more than another, presently
arises hatred and contentions between them. What daily is then to be looked
for about your doors, but brawles, quarrels, frayes and murders, made only
about you? The people lay the blame hereof upon you, worthily despising ye
for these rude inciuilities.

Some one of them, either to despite his enemy the more, or because he will be
singular in his own conceit, bears down the rest with terms and
brauadoes, he becomes the kill-cow, he will have more than any, though he
merit less than any: where ere he comes, he brags of your favors, presents,
letters, and tokens, yea, sometime of kindness that might be kept closer. And
hearing the like delivered from another, with oaths and protestations, how
true I know not, (fury being enkindled) nothing but blood can allay this hot
tempest; and you being the cause thereof, are publicly condemned, that never
can your credit be afterward repaired.

But admit that all your Lovers were civil and modest, no way iniuring your
fame and reputation, yet shall ye find great defect in this multitude of
followers, and that the prosecuting of their love will prove very perillons.

Continuallye will they be to one another as spies, murmurers, and secret
enemies, so that no place or time can yield ye any safe assurance or
privilege, but by one or other ye shall be continually siedged, and never
enjoy one minutes rest, from their ceaselesse perturbations.

Therefore would I advise ye, not to be so general in your affection, but to
elect one Lover only, such a one as before I have deciphered unto ye, to whom
ye may safely disclose your hearts secrets, and find your love every way
effectually requited.

To all other beside, ye must be very scarce and sparing of your behauior: for
they perceiving themselves not to be regarded, will suffer ye to enjoy your
own choice the more quietly, because no man will love longer, than he has
hope to be esteemed.

If they discern in your looks no apparent signs of love, they will cease al
pursuit, and for bear further molestation: abuse not then your selves with the
opinion of some vain headed wantons, who are persuaded that the only means to
make them affected, consists in bravery of attire, and gay decking of the body
to be gazde on.

But I assure ye (dear Sisters) that neither gold, pearls, periwigs nor
painting, but fair and comely demeanor, humanity, gentleness and modesty,
are the true weapons to win Love withal, and the only fair Trophies that
beautifies his Triumph.

I have seen more homely in aides beloved for their civil demeanor and
modesty, than fair faces for their pride and boldness and reason gives us
knowledge by most apparaunt proofs, that a proud mind can never love as it
should do.

What think ye (sweet Sisters) did first of all incite and provoke ye to
love? Questionless neither gold, purple, precious stones, or any other of
Fortunes ornaments: but rather discreet behavior, virtue, modesty, gentleness
and civility, discerned in your amorous Servants: then look what first
procured you to affect, the self same in others makes you to be favored.

Give then your selves to one modest Lover only, not audaciously, as diverse
ouer-bold and impudent use to do, but with a womanly carriage, an affable
demeanous, true signs of humanity, simple facility, and a pleasing
disposition, whereby you shall gain as much grace, good will and equal
affection, as you can wish or desire from your chosen Favorite.

CAP. 8.
THus ye see how ye should make your election of one only Lover, of mature
age, virtuous, modest and civil behavior, as I have already described unto
ye: him and no other would I wish ye to affect, even as ye seek to be
required with the like again in him.

Not much differing from this present purpose, I begin now to remember mine
own former loves, when sitting weeping by my dear beloved mother, I would
make complaint unto her, that my Husband (the only moitie of my soul, to whom
I frankly gave my self, despising the thought of any other) seemed unkind to
me, and in outward appearaunce did not manifest such affection toward me, as
my simple wisdom craved and expected.

Continuing in the heat of these amorous oppressions, I found but one comfort
only in this my martyrdom; which was, to weep my fill daily, and declare my
greefes to my pitying Mother, still accusing (to my uttermost) my Husband with
great cruelty.

When such large expense of tears and heart-renting sighs auailed not, I
would often entreat and desire him, that he should not forsake my company,
and seem so disdainful to her, that intyrely loved him: but his discreet
aunsweres (as now I can confess they were, though then my folly would not
suffer me to discern so much) declared him to be a wiser Husband than I was
a Wife, and his council was more auailable, than I had wit to conceive.

But I being then young, and in the extremity of Loves flames, as many other in
the like case do, took all in the worst sense, fretted, grieved, and wept
alone by my self, imagining still, that I loved but in vain, and fancied
where I was not affected.

These troubles and molestations made me so forget my self, that I used the
advice of forcerers and charmers, herbs, vearses, ointments, or any thing
thought likely to induce and procure love: them I made proof of, as deeming I
had him not sure enough, who loved me better than I did my self.

In tears at length I told all to my Mother, and she being well acquainted
with youths peevish follies, worthily controlling my deep indiscretion, used
these or the very like speeches unto me.

Daughter, the eye only is Loves directer, no herb, no potion, no
enchauntment, neither Circes nor Moeris, that could change themselves, and
other humane shapes, into beasts and monsters of strangest qualities, have any
power at all by their spells or exorcismes to procure love, or prevail against
a mind not determined to love.

Let her then that will declare her self a Lover, affect truly him whom she
deemes to be the like.

One knows not a Musician, but either by his voice or touching his instrument:
even so ye cannot be reputed a perfect Lover, but by the testimony of the true
signs belonging to Love.

Figures are fallacies, and shows no substances; love more privately, than may
be noted apparently, so shall ye express your loves value, and your wits
virtue: for by following this course, ye shall have this assurance, to be as
intyrely affected, as your self can fancy, and the least friendly look shall
find as favorable liking.

Heertoo she added diverse other reasons, but none so pleasing (me thought) as
this.

Beware Daughter (quoth she) that when reports come of others despising thee,
thou be not as ready to believe, as the other to belie, and so prove as
sudden in hatred, as they were swift to incense thee.

We should be naturally inclined rather to love tha^ hate, because love is
full of sweetness, and hatred has no felicity but in bitterness and
sowrenesse. Therefore thus resolve with thy self, that whosoever shall
perceive thy hearts firm affection, will hold it as religion to return thee
the like: leave then these had courses, to base abusers of their time, for they
that so live, shall worthily be loathed, and run into more contempt, than thou
have reason to consider.

Love, and thou shall be belou'de; be kind, courteous, gentle, and debonaire,
that thy outward demeanor may (...) hearts feruor: for thus shall the fire that
warmes thee, heat him, and make him as tractable, as thy self can be affable.
What though he be somewhat slow in discovering his affection? thou ought not
to misdeeme thereof, but conceive the best in such a case, governing thy self
by this rule; That he who is long ere he loves, is much longer ere he mislikes,
for hasty fancy has as hasty flight: whereas love growing by leisure, has
advise for his guide, comfort by his continuance, and true fame after death to
make him eternal.

He never slips or falls, that runs with discretion; and the tree which is
slack in sprouting, is as slow in perishing.

Well worthy regarding were these good admonitions, for (to my cost) since
then, I have found them most certain.

How many disdaines, how many molestations, more hurtful to my self, than
offensive to him: yea, how many wrongs bare my Husband at my hand, only
through no other occasion, but because indeed I knew not rightly how to love?

All which notwithstanding, his affection to me never failed, and scantly would
he seem to show himself any way offended: he saw it was but my want of
better judgment, and, being borne weak by nature, I must needs declare the
same in nurture; which though he had admirable patience to endure, yet had I no
reason at all to discern.

My Grandame being a Woman experienst in many things, but especially in the
Art instructing to love, told me that long since, which I found most true in
my Husband. A patient man (quoth she) is the true honor of manhood; for being
evermore wise and secret to himself, be his wrongs few or many, his bosom
is their burial, and tungs abroad shall not tattle of his troubles at home.
Even so did I find it in my Husband: for though I daily gave him cause to be
displeased, and (indeed) presumed a little too much on his patience, yet (God
knows) much grief would he smoother with a smile, pitying to to have my
errors showen, or his disquiet revealed to any.

Consider then (fair Ladies) on the good precepts rehearsed, be constant in
love, and doubt not of the like: the next way to purchase contempt, is by
showing your selves unkind, and the surest way to win love, is by expressing
true love; hate then the one, and be sure to enjoy the honor of the other.

CAP. 9.
YE have hithertoo heard, sweet Sisters, what election ye should make of
modest and virtuous Lovers; likewise, that civil conversation and fair
demeanor, both preuailes and purchases such meet men for ye. It remains now
to know the latter part, how this love may be kept in perfect continuance, that
the pleasure thereof may for ever be preserved.

Which I hope ye will account as a most necessary consequent, and that no less
skill is to be used in keeping, than was in obtaining: for in compassing of a
thing, we are oftentimes assisted by fortune and good hap, but to keep the
same in such estate as it should be, requires industry, wisdom, and
careful diligence: for the felicities of Love are subject to many
infirmities, one while, by time and course of occasions, another, by the
iniquity and malice of envious persons, sometime thorough lets and
hinderaunces ensuing by fortune, then again by want of knowledge, how to guide
and govern our selves in loving.

To Time and Fortune (fair Ladies) we must needs be obedient. And as he
that intends to pass a River, stays on the bank till the rough storms be
ouer-blowen: so in the stearne tempests of time, we should awaite and not
wilfully cast our selves into danger, considering that what may not be done
to day, happily to morrow in better sort will be compassed.

Let the way be never so long, hold on, and at length thou shall attain the
end. Think then no travail tedious in Love: if thou meet any cross
encounters, proceed on cheerfully, and at last thou shall land in the wished
haven.

As for the slander and detraction which oftentimes attends on secret love,
it may easily be escaped, because hidden Love is fortefied on all sides with
infinite good excuses, which serves as a rampart against all bad reports.

But among all the adverse chances incident to us Lovers, (as I have tried by
mine own proof, and noted the like in others) there can no mishap whatsoever
betide us, but it receives from our selves the ground and original; as by our
overmuch inconstancy, pride, wilfulnes, disdain, and such like, which
proones more to our own harm, than theirs we seek to hurt.

And let me assure ye, that there is nothing more prejudicial to the sweet
proceeding of love, than our own peevish humors, which being carried away
with mere shadows in many things, continually deludes us with vain and
idle fantasies in all things.

Only our own folly and obstinate opinions, makes us afterward sit alone, and
sigh out our repentance, nor ensues this fault so much by improuidence, as
through pride and vain conceit at the first in our selves: therefore he spoke
both well and truly, that affirmed: A proud Woman could not love effectually,
because suspicion continually attends her.

Suspicion ensues through lack of knowledge, and distrust, waited on by
disdain; which makes us to shun, iniure and torment them, that too dearly love
us: thus our crooked behauiors serve as instructers to them, and look what
coin they received of us, they pay us back with the like.

There are some of us women, who deem themselves never satisfied with pride,
fury, and scornfulnesse, which makes but a bad agreement among us: for where
disdain is entertained, contempt of all kindness is the more increased, and it
is pity a true Lover should have such a reward for his labor.

But she that is of a noble inclination, gracious, benign, modest, kind and
gentle, will listen to just excuses, and let reason be her ruler. If anger
would presume, she will quickly suppress it; if disdain would attempt her,
she can forthwith turn it off: remembering, that love must be embraced with
love, and where the enemy is repulsed, the solace is with greater sweetness
received. Be not then coy, proud or scornful in affection, but (like your fair
semblances) full of all affability.

Which of ye would deny him whom ye dearly love, whatsoever he demands?
Little can ye do then, if (at his request) ye will not forsake a fond and
frivolous opinion: learn, as my Lord taught me in my first affections, to
reject and despise all such hurtful follies.

I took extreme delight, sweet Sisters, in commending him whom I knew to be
complete in all arts and virtues, especially this whereof we now confer: yet
let it not seem offensive to ye, that among my praises of him whom I loved,
and ever shall, I mingle some of mine own infirmities, wherein, either you
have likewise fallen through lack of providence, or may hereafter by
overmuch peevishness.

Being a young Damsel, rash and unexperienced, I began to love, falling
afterward to a little pride in my self, which drew me to disdain, and such
fantastic humors, as falling from one perverse opinion to another, I grew
afterward suspicious of any occasion whatsoever.

My Husband was a goodly personage, of exceeding pleasing speech and virtuous
qualities, which made him called to many companies, loved and esteemed of
every one generally, and herehence began in me a world of afflictions.

Whatsoever woman looked on him, I iudgd her immediately a rival in my love, my
thoughts were never free from jealous suspicion: if he were in my sight, yet I
deemed him not sure enough, and what woman looked upon him but once, I wished
she might be blind for ever afterward.

I could never glut mine own eyes with sufficient gazing on him, but desired
that perpetually they might be fixed on him, when he came toward me, no woman
in the world could be more contented; and let him but go back again, I
imagined no torment might be so grievous.

My too much reposing trust in him, began to make me distrustful of my self:
and, though needless suspicion had got some hold of me, as yet it robbed me not
of my loves felicity, nor any way impaired the height of my pleasures.

So long these golden hours, days, months and years endured, till fortune
(envying my further happiness) suffered me to see a certain Gentlewoman, who
albeit her deserts else where were worthy liking, yet me thought her
familiaritye fitted not with my Husband.

Hereupon, as if I had been wounded with a deadly stroke, my face became pale
and wan, deep conceived displeasure sat upon my brow, and my former pleasing
disposition converted into such melancholy, as my Husband (being present) and
conquered with compassion, gathering by his discretion, what danger hereby
might redound to our love, both in tears, and other apparent testimonies of
sorrow, he declared how greatly this mishap did discontent him.

All which was no appeasing of my furious oppression, but I must needs go
complain my self to my Mother: who, to witness her own experience, as also to
withdraw me from so vain a persuasion, affirmed; That she had both noted and
heard their discoursing, meruailing I would show my self so immodest, as to
judge of honest demeanor so absurdly and rashly, and the Gentlewoman, coming
but in kindness to see me, my Husband (for my sake) gave her such
entertainment, as well knowing what became him, far better than I did.

Her words wanted strength to remove mine opinion, I reputed it an injury,
and therefore I would not be otherwise persuaded, but gave this frantic
spleen such souereigntie over me, that I grew into a wonderful hatred against
him, concluding, never after to love him again, but rather greeuing for the
affection I had bestowed on him already. And in this heat, I shut up my self
to solitude, purposing while I lived to loath men's company: love now was changd
to hate, fair looks to bitter frowns, and all else were my utter foes, but
such whose fortunes did equal mine afflictions.

Alas, what fools are we women, transported up and down with these amorous
passions? When I perceived my former determination of solitariness, to have no
likelihood of continuance, then became I devout and religious, none but
Church-goers might now be my companions, with them (sister-like) I went from
Church to Church, using all the means I could devise, to forget the love of
him whom I thought my greatest enemy.

And, least conference with ouer-manie, might alter mine intent, I would
prattle with dumb pictures, vowing this day and that day to enter religion,
because I would become a sworn adversary to love. See here my silly wisdom,
as if I could thus have left my Husband, at mine own proper pleasure, being
bound to him in the bond of all humility and duty.

The very thought of Love, I found would not agree with the austeritie of
Religion; the one, in bitterness, I deemed sweet, and the other, in the very
best estate, somewhat too sour.

Thus, while with one nail I thought to expel another, in seeking to quench
Love, I kindled it more violent, and where I was but sindgd before by the
flame, now, in every part of me, I felt the fire hotly burning.

Thus one while, I would feign be free from Loves mighty thraldom, yet loathe
at another, to loose his continual amorous service, whose very looks were my
life, and whose absence was more bitter than a thousand deaths.

But I was cunning enough to keep all this close, and seemed outwardly to feel
no grief at all, when (God knows) how extremely my poor heart was tormented.

Sullen will made me to delight in solitude, dark rooms and obscure vaults
would I daily walk in, where, like a witless fool, I did nothing else but
plague my self, and please others, who in secret smiled at my peevish
disposition.

In the end, being well disciplinde with mine own disease, and more weary of
this oppression, than I would the world should have known, I became a little
more friendly to my Husband, desiring that still he would keep me company,
and I might be his glass continually to gaze on.

To ease himself of my daily molestations, and somewhat to sooth me in this
frivolous humor, he yielded to let his own affairs run lauishly at random,
and suggest my sottishnes with all possible conversation and observance.

When I had gotten this vain victory, it were wonderful to tell you, how
proud I became thereof, for then I began to determine a sovereignty in my
self, to make my will a law, and his submission the only pillar to maintain
and underprop it. I grew then into such extremity of bold and indecent
presumption, that I would esteem of him as I list, offend him when I pleased,
having no other reason, but only his patient sufferance: if he laughed, I
would lowre; if he spoke fair, I would be froward; if he desired to walk, I
would tarry at home; if he invited friends to be merry, I would devise all the
means I could to make them malcontent: thus home was a hell to him, abroad,
little or nothing better, and I (like a very devil) continually tormenting
him.

But who sustained the worst all this while? His patience did privilege him for
inward vexation, so that my self bare the burden of this disquiet, and I did
my self more harm, than I could do him: for my blood began to dry up, my
mind afflicted with insupportable sorrows, all my veins seemed as shrunk and
wythered, and daily was I subject to (welneere) howerly swounings. Which my
pitiful Husband with great grief beholding, my former fair shape to be so
strangely altered, and without any just cause of offense proceeding from
himself, he still desired to know the reason of this malady, and whether it
lay in him by any means to help it, or if at him I was thus offended. If not
(quoth he) but that your displeasure is kindled against some other, wrong not
your self with these sharp tormentings, but let me revenge it on whom so ere
it be: for it is a debt due to Love, and a right which he does by great reason
challenge, that between two united souls, nothing should be kept in secret,
but the one be always privy to the others oppressions; because a Lover (in
such a case) is to be commanded, and eithers counsel is not to be scorned, but
obeyed as the only salve to cure any amorous sickness.

But I (even as it is the nature of many other women, never to be suffised
with injury, much less with revenge) one while took pride to see him humbled,
another while practiced how to prevail more and more against him, smiling to
see him so obsequious, and I sit (as it were) controlling over him.

I wished that he might know the ground of my grief; yet, if by my speeches
he any way perceived it, with stout courage and solemn oaths I would flatly
deny it: affirming that he had no way offended me, but the cause of my
distemper grew by others. Then would I show disdainful looks, scorn to keep
him company, and express manifest hatred against him: and so long I continued
in these pestilent humors, only to make him weary with the weight of this
martyrdom, that I could sing when he sighed, smile when he wept: and (though
indeed I loved him) yet I took a great pride in these commanding behauiours.

Thus, though outwardly I appeared to be high minded and imperious, yet
iealozie within kept me hot and fiery, loading me with more mighty
molestations, than those foolish conceits of mine could burden him withal: yet
still his patience exceeded my presumptions, and the more I grew stubborn, the
less he cared for it. How sorry have I been (many times) within my self,
that I could not by my disdaines and outrages, provoke him to anger? I could
have wished my self in hell, to have gotten him but half way thither. See
(poor souls) the folly of our self wills.

When all the rest prevailed not* to plague him as I would, I fell to this
wicked purpose, to seem in outward show quite weaned from his Love, and that
my affection was inclined to some other; which to make him the more soundly
believe, in his sight I would talk idly and fondly with young Gallants, to
kindle the same fire in him, that flamed so extremely in me.

Thus after long seeking mine own misery, at length I found it; and I was not
so greedy of compassing it before, but then I would as gladly have been rid of
it again.

Much rain wears out the roughest marble, and with continuance of strokes the
hardest steel is pierced: even so, the greatest patience (by extremities) may
be perverted, and the kindest heart made cruel by intolerable torturing.

His love, which before flamed toward me like Aetna, became now more cold than
frostie Caucasus; his kind looks, fair presence, and admirable sufferance,
were now sour frowns, moodie gestures, and stearne impatience: which (finding
to my cost, and feeling to be so cruel) then, each word I had spoken, each
deed I had done, and every private thought which had displeased him, with true
tears I bewailed, and with sighs from my soul entirely repented.

But what a hell is it, when repentance auailes not? Let me complain, it was to
no purpose, though I sighed and sorrowed, it had no success: his wrongs had
been so mighty, and my wilful transgressions so many, as I could not but
expect a just deserved punishment, having thus (through mine own folly)
procured both his hurt and mine own.

Unfortunate wretch, my tears and torments I cannot express unto ye: the
nights seemed too long, wearying me with a thousand reuoluings and repentances,
the days likewise appeared gloomie and dark, because I had no succor but
solitude only.

My breast was nothing else but a storehouse of cares, griefs and vexations;
my thoughts, like distempered seas, diversely transported, one while with anger,
then with repentance, now with disdain, then again with love; now with
pitying my self, then him whom I had displeased: I would, and I would not, I
wept, pleaded excuses, told my self the whole story of my silly behavior,
wishing I could again have recovered so much time spent in vain.

At length it was my good fortune, (though all this while I had been so
unhappy) to know for certainty, that my former suspicion concerning the
Gentlewoman, which had been the cause of my so long coffeehouse, was nothing
else but the folly of mine own peevish fancy, and no offense at all committed
by my Husband.

Had I not then great reason to be ashamed of my self, as one almost unmeet
for any virtuous company? Judge you (fair Ladies) that are careful of your
honors, and would not have your good names to be any way scandalized: was it
time to submit my self speedily or no? and to beg favor of him, to whom I had
been so far unfriendly?

But to see how different the nature of men is from us women, and where true
wisdom is embraced, how no malice can have long predominance: he, who never
was acquainted with uncivil disdain, but evermore despised all frantic
follies, upon my submission was immediately satisfied; all offenses past
before, were presently forgiven, and as effectually forgotten, as if never at
all committed.

Then could I not choose but confess my infirmities, finding that most true
which himself had alvvaies taught me, that in love the least suspicion is
foorthvvith to be disclosed, and a conceit no sooner taken, but presently to be
told.

For, a Lovers best strength is subject to much weakness, and suspicion once
entered the mind, will hardly with reason or persuasions be mastred. It may
be compared to an Egg, the more it is heated, it wexeth the harder: so
jealous suspect, the more it is credited, the worse it is for us; and the less
we regard it, the greater is our quiet.

They that pay for experience, as I did, will rue it as I do; and they that
prevent the sweetes of Love by their own wilfulnes, may wish for them
afterward, and yet walk without them. My luck was little better, which I sigh
to remember, because when our felicity began again to be firm, and that now I
would not loose the least portion of pleasure, our Countries affairs robbed me
of my Husbands company; where, with the loss of him, I would my life had
perished.

CAP. 10.
THus falls it out with us (fair Sisters) alas too often, we care not for
delight when we have it in possession, but would give our lives for it when it
is too far from us.

See then how many inconveniences attend on false suspicion: suspicion breeds
disdain, disdain couets revenge, revenge prosecutes injuries, which injuries
do bring the wrack and ruin of all love delights: this makes our souls
oppressed with infinite molestations, being a more plague to our own selves,
than them we would offend. Thus in stead of smiling, we sluice forth whole
rivers of tears; for friendly conference, we use bitter taunts and terms:
and love being created a heaven, we make it worse than hell; then shun
suspicion as a deadly poison, for that is the only enemy to true loves
felicity.

Seek not for that which ye will be sorry for afterward and enquire not too
curiously after your Lovers lives: for believe me (fair Ladies) if you be
wronged in love, and know it not, the blame is theirs, not yours; and an
injury endured, is better than one offered.

Covet not then to know, what ye cannot wisely govern: if he be kind to you,
it is sufficient; if he err without cause, your glory is the greater. But
never will he stray abroad, that finds all well at home; and never will he
care for another, that may have his own in quiet.

Without thread, a needle serves to no use, nor the plesures of love, without
due prosecution: and though a needle have two, three eyes or more, by reason
whereof it carries as many threads with it, yet it makes but one entrance,
marry it makes the work the faster: even so, he that delights to dally with
many, binds himself thereby the more strictly to her he loves indeed.

But happy is she that knows how to joy with him whom many covet to enjoy,
and she that can skill of making her self the cheifest, shall be sure to find no
equal in her loves good fortune.

CAP. 11.
Love then (sweet Souls) the men that love you, be contented with your
liking, and seek not to know that which will hurt ye: fly suspicion,
disdain, and all other proud humors; believe none but him love, if ye wish
well to your own selves: for look what love ye extend, the like shall ye find
again, and the firmer ye keep your faith, the faster shall ye find his, whom
ye have chosen to affect.

Think not but men's constancy in love must needs go beyond ours, for men be
less suspicious than we are; therefore they have the greater wisdom and
government.

They persevere more than we can, because they are less obstinate.

They are not so sudden in ill conceit as we be, because they have better
courage and lofty disposition.

They cannot bear hatred so long as we use to do, by reason they are of a more
magnifique mind, and affable nature.

No hindrance whatsoever can stay them in their amorous deseigns, because their
permanencie exceedes ours, and their qualities are not so apish as ours.

Some of us women are timorous, and the least occasion offered, is our guide to
suspicion: which frivolous humor makes us scorn others, albeit our own
errors go far beyond theirs.

Each small offense we seek revenge for, having no moderation in malice and
misliking, but live as capital enemies to them that love us most.

We know how to offend, but not to suffer: we are quickly led into error, but
never firm in belief, for look how our opinions are, such be our
behauiours, and an imagination once settled, is not in haste removed.

CAP. 12.
THis opinion has always been the destruction of kindness. For (as my Husband
once told me) it resembles the Mole, that being in the deep earths
obscurity, straies about every way, passing through the hardest molde she
meets withal; now, so soon as she comes but to the daylight, all her force
and strength immediately fails her: even such in this jealous opinion hid
within the dark cloud of an afflicted mind, it never cease to remove fresh
thoghts with infinite perturbations: but when truth does discover it, it is
presently nothing.

When ye manifest your conceit to him ye love, using withal some reasonable
excuse, ye clear both his doubts and your own dread: increasing (withal) his
affection the more toward ye: for then ye declare, all trust is not removed,
and show a desire of love to be continued. Which in like occurrences happening
afterward, makes him the more careful of offensive behavior; and when occasion
is hindered, the less wrong can be offered.

Whereas on the contrary, suspect kept within the heart and not revealed,
caries ye headlong from one bad conceit to another; and then ye see what
mischief immediately follows. For a man tossed in the tempest of continual
molestations, if he find that reason be utterly abandoned, though he give
ye leave to pursue your headstrong opinions, yet he will bestow his love,
where he may find it in better sort requited. Is not this a fair harvest of
such foolish humors? and a very meet recompense for such vain and rude
demeanor? Ye may then sit and sigh, but who will bemone ye? You may cry for
comfort, and it flies the faster from ye.

And when this shall come to the cares of others, what censure will they
presently pass upon ye? That ye were rash, indiscreete, unthankful and
unkind: ye were beloved, and despised it; had a true Love, and knew not how
to use him; therefore worthily do ye bear the burden of your own abuses.

Others, less acquainted with these mighty disgraces, seeing ye not walk as
ye were wont, not your Love keeping ye familiar company, they judge as their
opinions please them; That; either greater faults are committed, than may well
be endured, or such imperfections cross your course, which rather deserve
burying in silence, than publicly to be spoke of, for scandal of the Sex.

CAP. 13.
IT may so come to pass, that your Lover being over passionate by reason of
your offenses, and touched too near with the piercing point of your continual
injuries, will revenge himself with your shame, and ease his own oppression
by your public defamation. For ye must thus be persuaded, that he whom your
rigours have brought to an extreme estate, as it were next neighbor even to
deaths door; will regard your disgrace no more, than you did his disease; and
take as little compassion on your honor, as you did on his life.

Remember then (dear Sisters) that by being so unjust, proud, unkind and
disdainful, the lamp of fair renown is quite extinguished: and in stead of
true love with the pleasures thertoo pertaining, ye shall receive but
counterbuffes of your own cruelties, and a just measure of revenge, for being
so desirous to seek it.

Alone shall ye be left without Lover or Servant, accompanied only but with
tears and sighs: and where before you suspected a rival in your love, you
shall then find your self not to be loved at all: but, like one cast off and
despised, fearing (withal) to be further afflicted.

Consider (fair Ladies) the most constant patience (being too far provoked)
conuerteth into fury; and a wrathful Lover is more to be feared, than a
savage monster that has no reason.

CAP. 14.
HEertoo could I add diverse other such discommodities, no less to be
respected, your selves being the original. Ye shall find that those pleasant
places, where before ye were wont to pass the time in sport and delights,
through want of his company that then graced the Assembly, they are become
like solitary deserts, and unhaunted walks, not so pleasing before, but now
as uncouth. Alas poor souls, what a torment will it be unto ye, to see the
years fair seasons so often wheel about, when ye were wont to be at amorous
sports, sweet conference, and other delicate recreations: now to find no
more, but that there were such times, and once ye had a Love, who made all
those delights in their very chiefest luster? For now the times are miserably
changed; ye are left companionlesse, ioylesse, neighboured on every side with
grief and calamity: sighs and tears abound, but return no benefit; many
eyes look on, but none lending pity; and that which indeed is the very
worst of all, abandoned by him, who was your lives solace, and bayted at by
every one for a course so careless.

Then be no more (sweet Sisters) like to blown bladders, puffed up with proud
opinion and needless suspicion, seeking thereby to make conquest of your
Lovers. What victory call ye that, which hurts your own selves, and
brings (beside) the loss of your Love? Strive to vanquish and surmount him
in loyalty and kindness, and then the victory will be to eithers profit.

It is a far greater emperie, to make your selves beloved by loving, than
reaching thereat by sinister ways, to procure your Lovers damage, and your
own downfall: for in nothing is a gentle and brave mind more to be discerned,
than in lenity, humanity, pity, and affability; where contrariwise,
loathsome disdain breeds all inciuilitie, and none but a wicked mind does
nourish such thoughts, as knowing neither how to revenge, nor how to pardon.

Then least ye should fall into such misfortune, and have your fair names
blemished by so foul a blot, follow the courses I have already declared, give
your selves to love truly, and ye shall find love again as truly.

Choose a Lover as I have advised ye, neither young nor old, modest and virtuous:
win his love by gentleness and all fair behavior; so shall ye still preserve
Love in his cheifest sovereignty, and make the issue thereof peaceful and
glorious.

CAP. 15.
REmember here withal, that your quiet will be the more effectual, if so
soon as a fond suspicion is conceived, ye seek for immediate resolution
therein, remaining firm and immouable in your selves, as also toward him whom
your heart has elected, as knowing the benefit that ensues by the one, and the
unrecoverable loss happening by the other.

And, affecting thus with intyrest faith, diligent obseruaunce, and all kinds
of gracious usage: the miseries and mishaps attending on proud opinion, which
is the utter shipwreck and perishing of love, can never prevail against ye,
but howrely joy and felicity evermore await on ye.

CAP. 16.
HAd I more leisure, I would teach ye many other rules to be observed in
love: but I see the Comedy is in some forwardnes, and the Personages ready
attyred that are to present it: then till some other time and place convenient
will I refer what remains as yet undiscovered, as having not gone through a
quarter of the hundred kinds of love. In mean while, sweet Sisters, show your
selves pleasing and tractable to your Lovers, be not offensive to them, and
thereby hurtful to your selves. Be warned by the multitude of so many
examples, change not pleasure for pain, solace for sighing, and all loves
heaven, for foul hates hell.

As ye desire to be beloved, so show you the like: no enchauntment, no herb,
no charm preuailes so much in love, as the very power of an immoouable
affection.

Love then, and shun all misbeliefe of your Lover, then will he embrace ye with
all due correspondence: disrobe your selves of jealous doubts, disdaines and
opinions; so shall your lives be matchless, and your Loves immortal.

Tutto vince Amare.
FINIS.

