THE ANCHOR of FAITH.

Upon which, A Christian may Repose in all manner of Temptations. Especially in
that Great and Dangerous Gulf of DESPERATION.

Wherein so many ouer-whelmed with the weight and Burden of their Sin, and
not resting themselves by the Hand of Faith, upon the Promises and Inuitations
of CHRIST, have with Caine and Judas most fearfully fallen and shipwrackt
themselves, to the utter Confusion both of Body and Soul for ever.

PROVE. 18.14. The Body will bear his infirmity; but a Broken and wounded
Spirit who can bear.

St. August. in lib. de Vtilitate poenitentiae agendae. Least we should
increase our sins by despayring, the gate of Repentance is set open unto us.

Least by presuming, the day of our Death is concealed from us.

LONDON. Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop at
Grayes-Inne new Gate in Holborne. 1628.

A PREFACE TO THE Christian Reader.
IT is a Wonder of the World, a wonder to be seriously marked, and diligently
considered of; and a wonder being seriously marked, and diligently considered
of, worthy to be deeply wayed, and inwardly to be laid up in m^n^ hearts as
a thing most necessary, profitable, and available to Christian piety, and
everlasting felicity both of soul and body, The thing (...) be ^dred (...)
seriou^ to be ^sidere^
to see and to think of it, how careful, watchful, diligent, earnest, and
painful, almost all the world every where is to avoid, to prevent, to cure,
and to remedy, all such troubles, crosses, griefs, maladies, infirmities, and
sicknesses as do or may befall the body: And on the other side to see, or find
so few watchful, careful, and painful to avoid, prevent, cure or expel the
most dangerous wounds of the Spirit, the troubles of the conscience, or
desperation, a mischief, of all other mischiefs, most needful to be looked
into.

(...) se^ thing (...) be ^dred and se^sly to (...) ^d of.
It is a wonder to see, and consider how many there are in the World, which
either loath and are aff^aide of bodily sickness, or love and like health, will
send for and seek, run and ride after bodily Physicians, and enquire after the
best, the most expert and most skillful of them, to learn by their direction,
and to be advised by their counsel (though it cost their purse full dear)
how to purge and avoid such corrupt humors as may breed (though not
presently bring forth) noisome diseases, and sicknesses: how careful and how
scrupulous they are to keep a temperate order and a diet in eating and
drinking: and how moderate they will be in sleep, and all other bodily
exercises: And on the other side, how few there be in the World that will
either abate their sleep, forgo their pleasures, abridge their dyets, or
seek after the spiritual Physician, or prepare Physic to purge and expel
those dangerous and peccant humors, of notorious and heinous sins which in
time will both breed and bring forth the most deadly disease of Desperation,
the very Peste of soul and body for ever.

It is a wonder to see, The (...) thing be ^dred.
how many abhor, and are afraid of worldly poverty, and for the avoiding
thereof, and for the love and liking of transitory riches, will with great
carke and care rise up early, and late take their rest: they will fare hardly,
and go clad full barely: they will hazard both bodies and souls; they will
toil and tear their flesh in unmeasurable labors by land and sea, be the
weather fair, be it foul, per mare pauperiem fugientes, per saxa, per ignes:
And yet on the other side, how few can abide any costs charges or pains, to
escape and remedy spiritual decays, to avoid poverty of conscience, or in
time before it be too late, to beware that they be not plunged ere they be
aware into the most deadly and devilish gulf of Desperation; as though
salvation, and peace of a godly conscience, were a matter not worthy the
talking of, or laboring for.

It is a lamentable thing to behold, how many in the world will undertake and
attempt any thing, ^ing to ^men^
be it never so chargeable and troublesome, not sluggish nor sleepie, not
careless and slothful, but most earnest and watchful most careful and
painful, at every assay, by Prudence and prowess, by wit and by wariness,
by counsel and by cunning, by learning and by laboring, ambitiously to hunt
gain, and gape after honor, and vnfatigably seek to attain fame, and highly
account of it to be gazed on, and talked of, with the eyes and tongues of all
men. And again, how few take any care at all, or once endeavor themselves to
avoid shame and confusion in the presence of the Almighty, to become glorious
in the sight of GOD and his Angels, and to use and exercise any of those good
means and instruments ordained and appointed of God for the increase of Faith,
Hope, and Charity: and for the weakening and abandoning of all desperation and
diffidence in Gods infinite mercies, and infallible promises.

It is a lamentable thing to mark and consider how vigilant careful, The
second the to be ^mented
and heedfull many of the wiser, and circumspecter sort of men of this world
will be to escape, and avoid all the penalties, pains and punishments
provided and set down, for offenders of mortal men's laws; how painful they
will be in Penal Statutes, and how skillful in every branch of the Civil
Laws, least they should ignorantly incur the dangers of imprisonment, of
loss of lands, forfeytures of their goods or death it self.

Many have greater care of mortal men's laws then of Gods laws.
But the mighty God, the only highest Lawgiver, that Lord of Lords, and King
of all Kings, Let him ordeyne, publish, and proclaim his Laws, Statutes, and
Ordinances, to be hearkened unto, observed, and kept, and that under never so
rigorous and Severe conditions, punishments, and penalties: How few men will
search his Book of Statutes and Laws? How few are afraid of his, not
temporary, but everlasting threatninges and punishments, contained in his
Laws? and how few men regard, esteem, and thankfully embrace his covenant of
reconciliation, set forth in his most joyful, and comfortable Gospel?

And yet most certain it is, that all these aforesaid things so much to be
wondered at, and so greatly to be lamented for: so lightly looked on, so smally
regarded, and so little thought on, and many such other of the like fraternity
and order of disorders, and sins being delighted in, and securely continued in,
without all care or endeavor to forsake them in time, by repentance, and true
returning to the Lord, do first breed or in gender, and afterward bring forth
Desperation; then the which, all the Furies, and Devils in hell, cannot
lightly excogitate nor find out a greater torment or a more intolerable pain,
and that because that all other torments, penalties, and pains are but
temporal, and pursue men no further then bodily death; but this ends not
with bodily death, but becomes eternal. Whosoever then he be, that is once
surely caught in this net of desperation, he needs no mo accusers to come
against him, then his former unrepented sins, which lie at the door to
arrest him; his own heart will give evidence against him, and his own
iniquity will plead him to be guilty, and that to his own face.

Upon consideration of these things I have now in this treatise following,
(good Christian Reader) endeavored my self to set down, First, a definition
of Desperation; then the grieuousnesse thereof: after this, certain principal
causes thereof: together with remedies for the same: and lastly a general
preservative against Desperation, arising of what cause soever: To the intent,
that the Children of GOD, falling by some occasions into some degrees of it,
(for if it rage in extremities, in the opinion of some learned Writers, it is
an evil incurable, and unrecoverable) may with the more case and quietness
be recovered, and saved as it were out of the Devils claws; even out of as
great danger as ever were the poor Sheep that David took out of the Bears
or Lions mouth. 1 Sa, 17.


Accept hereof (gentle Reader) ^^h no worse a mind, then I have at^mpted to
be the Writer; and then ^oubt not, but it shall either mini^r unto thine heart
some comfortable Physic, or else give thee occasion to seek, read, or
collect a better.

Thine in all Christian affection. W. W.

The Contents of this Book entreated of in every several Page as follows.
A Definition of every thing which is to be ^puted or reasoned of, is
necessary, (...) wherefore. The Definition of Desperation of two sorts. Page 1
Two kinds of Desperation: the one wicked, (...) other good and holy. page ^
Three things especially to be noted in the Treat^ of Desperation. Page ^ GOD
is constant and faithful: and how, a^ wherein. Page ^ The duty of the
faithful toward God, in rega^^ of Gods faithfulness toward him. Page ^ The
horriblenes of the sin of Diffidence, Mistru^^ or Desperation. Page ^ When
especially the Devil begins to tempt (...) Desperation. Page ^ What kind
of Physic and Surgery the Diue^ practices. Page ^ The absurd dealing of such
as yield to Desperation Page ^ What great inconveniences they fall into, that
yee^ to Desperation. Page ^ Saint Bernard his opinion concerning the haynousnes
of the sin of Desperation. Page ^ Scilla and Charibdis is not so dangerous as
Desperation. Page ^ The dangers of Desperation. Page 10 and 11 Of the degrees
by which the Devil draws me^ into Desperation. Page 13 The Devil the chief
cause of Desperation. Page 13 The forerunners of Desperation. Page 14 that the
Devil will object to bring us to desperation. Page 15 ^norance the second
cause of desperation. Page 16 ^norance the mother of Desperation. Page 17
^eruitude or bondage of sin the third cause of ^esperation. Page 17 ^he
woeful effects of sins. Page 18 ^he fourth cause of Desperation. Page 18 ^he
manifold adversaries of man's salvation, all which the Devil uses as means to
Desperation Page 19. ^he fifth cause of Desperation. Page 20, and 21 ^he sixth
cause of Desperation. Page 22 ^ong custom grows into a second nature. Page
22 ^he first preservative against Desperation. Page 88 ^n example showing that
many men put more trust ^n mortal man then in God. Page 89 another proof that
many put more trust in mortal (...) man then in God. Page 90 ^he second
general help against Desperation. Page 91 ^he third general help against
Desperation. Page 92 ^hatsoeuer could be looked for at Gods hands or whatsoever
man could be charged with, that has Christ performed. Page 93 ^he fourth
general help for the avoiding of Despe^tion. Page 94 The fifth general help
against Desperation. Page 95 ^aint Paul and Saint James their counsel against
the temptations and assaults of Satan. Page 24 (...) description of the Armor
with which Saint Paul would have Christians to resist the Devil. Page 25 The
first kind of Armor to resist the Devil with. Page 25 The second kind of
armor werewith the Devil is (...) to be resisted. Page 25 Whereby the Devil
is emboldened to tempt, and whereby on the other side he is discouraged. Page ^
The third kind of armor against Satan. Page ^ The fourth kind of Armor
against Satan. Page ^ What ^aith is. Page ^ The st^t k^nd of armor to resist
the Devil. Page ^ The Scriptures do minister store of Armor again every kind
of temptation. Page ^ The sixth kind of Christian Armor. Page ^ Remedies
against igno ance. Page ^ The danger of wilful Ignorance. Page ^ What the
Ignorant must do. Page ^ Counsel very necessary for the ignorant. Page ^ What
the ministers of Gods word are. Page ^ How the Ministers of Gods word are to
be acco^ted of. Page ^ Of the great servitude and bondage of sins, and the
remedies thereof. Page ^ Examples tending to the strengthening of our Fa^ Page
^ Hope, and Patience against Desperation. Page 39. and 4^ Wherefore Christ came
into this world. Page 41. 42. and 4^ What manner of righteousness God requires
at o^ hands. Page ^ Sin dwells even in the believers, and in the m^
righteous in the world: but yet reigns not neyth^ can it condemn them, and
why, Page 46 and 4^ Places of Scripture letting forth Gods great mer^ Page 4^ A
Catalogue or rehearsal of many things, where^ the Devil craftily tempts
many men to sin a^ Desperation. Page ^ How the Devil tempts by riches. Page
^ How the Devil tempts by poverty. Page ^ How the Devil tempts by
friends. Page ^ ^ow the Devil tempts by enemies. Page 52 ^ow the Devil
tempts by carefulnes. Page 52 ^ow the Devil tempts by security and
careles^es. Page 52 How the Devil tempts by strength, by health. ableness
of body, beauty, by honor and dignity, by quicknes of spirit and sharpnes of
wit. Page 52. and 53. How the Devil tempts by Gods word, and how he will
abuse wrest and misapply Gods word. Page 53. and 54. The true use of those
Scriptures which the Devil seeks to abuse, to bring men to Desperation
thereby. Page 55 The comforts and commodities of the crosses and aflictions of
Gods children. Page 57, and 58. Why God send^th evils to his children, and how
he sends comforts in the midst of evils. Page 59. How God loue^h and deals
with his children. Page 60 Gods ^od^ of what sort they are. Page 61 What God
seeks to work by dealing hardly with his children. Page 62 Go^s affection to
his children like unto a kind loving mothers affection. Page 63, and 64. God
deals with his children as Physicians and Surge^ns do with their Patients.
Page 65 God uses sometimes the service and ministry of Devils and of wicked
men. Page 67 The wicked are not be^tered by their troubles and aflict ons. Page
67 Whence it comes that afflictions and crosses profit Gods children. Page 67
The conceits and opinions of the wicked in their adversities and troubles. Page
68, and 69 The ends that the Devil brings the wicked unto by their aflictions
troubles and crosses: Page 70 Two commodities to be reaped by the lives, and
manner of the deaths of the wicked. Page 71 The great danger of custom^ in
sin, and of delaying of amendment of life. Page 71, and 72 A comparison
showing the danger of long custom and w^ltring in sin. Page 72 and 73 Whence
repentance and amendment of life are to be had, and how they are to be come by.
Page 74 Many are and may be deceived in the manner and time o^ their
repentance. Page 75 A note for such as defer repentance unto their last day.
Page 75 Examples showing that it is dangerous trusting unto the last hour.
Page 76 Notable examples of sudden and unprovided death out off holy
Scriptures, and other writers Page 76, 77, 78. A catalogue or rehearsal of
sundry lets and impediments which oftentimes fall out when we come to our last
hour, to hinder and pur by that late repentance which so many trust to at the
end of their lives. Page 81 and 82 The effects of choler in time of extreme
sickness Page 82 The manner how the Devil will busy himself to hinder
repentance, at our last pant. Page 38 The example of Joseph of Arimathia most
worthy to be imicated. Page 85 The use and custom of the Egiptians to bridle
evil actions. Page 86 The notable and imitable example of King Ezechias. Page
86
Finis.
Of Desperation.
CHAPTER. 1
The first Chapter containing the Definition, and Division of Desperation.

M. T. Cicero, that most worthy Father of the Roman eloquence was of that mind,
A definition of every thing which is to be disputed or reasoned of, is
necessary and wherefore.
that every thing which was to be reasoned and disputed of, should first begin
at the definition thereof, that ^o it might briefly be understood what the
substance of the matter was where^f reasoning or disputation was to be ^olden:
Of the like opinion and mind ^m I at this present, concerning the ^angerous
peste of most wicked and ^amnable Desperation; being the mat^er which now I
have in hand (through Gods assistance) to write of.

Definition of Desperation is of two sorts.
The Definition then of Desperation I find and read to be of two sorts as
concerning the words, and yet in sense and substance of matter little differing
one from the other: Whereof the one is, Desperatio est horribilis mentis and
cordis seu co^scientiae ^repidatio ex sensu irae diuinae propter peccatum
concepta cum metu aeternae damnationis, The first Definition of Desperation.
sine vlla expectatione veniae. Desperation is an horrible fear, or trembling
of the mind and heart or conscience, conceived through a sense and feeling of
Gods wrath for sin; with a fear of eternal damnation, without all expectation
or hope of pardon or forgiveness thereof.

The other (which is a far more ancient Definition) is this Desperatio est
malum quo quis diffidit de volu^tate dei, The second Definition of desperation.
aestima^s malitiam sua^ magnitudine^ diuinae misericordiae and bonitatis
excedere. Desperation is an evil through which a man mistrusting despaireth
utterly, and is past all hope of the good will of God, verily thinking that
his naughtines, or sins, excel the mercies and goodness of God, according to
that saying of the first desperate man Cain: Mine iniquity is greater then can
be pardoned. Genesis 4.13
Genesis 4.13

Thus it being made plain and easy what desperation is by these aforesaid
Definitions, it follows in the next place, (to proceed after the same order
that the said Cicero used) that I speak of division of Desperation; Two kinds
of Desperation the one wicked the other holy.
which I likewise find and read to be of two kinds: the one a wicked kind of
Desperation of Gods promises, power, goodness and mercy toward sinners, the
matter which here I am to entreat of: The other an holy Desperation of a man's
own power, in the obtaining of eternal life, conceived and wrought by a sense
or feeling of a man's own defects, infirmity, and corruptions. Concerning this
former kind of Desperation, being especially the mark which I would have
poor silly distressed souls to have a diligent and a watchful eye unto, to
the intent that both my self, and my poor brethren, living and warring yet
with me in the militant Church of Christ here on earth, may be the better
forewarned (for that as they say Tela raeuisa minus nocent) of this most
subtle and deadly stratageme, concerning this most dangerous and fatal
assaulting engine, of the Arch-enemy of our souls, this deep despair and
devilish soule-poyson, I have thought good by the penning of this short
Treatise, to put my self and others in remembrance of these three points;
Three things especially to be noted in this Tr atise of Desperation.
to wit, first of the haynousnesse, grieuousnesse, and pernitiousnes of
Desperation. Secondly, of the causes thereof: and thirdly of the remedies.

CHAP. 2.
The second Chapter, wherein is described how heinous, grievous, hurtful, and
pernicious, the sin of Desperation is.

IN sundry and manifold places of holy Scriptures are we taught, that Go^ is
faithful, 1 Cor. 1.9 2. These. 3 3 1 Ioh. 1.9 2 Co. 1.20
faithful in his words, an^ true in all his promises: All the promises of God
are Yea and amen: Faithful^ in his mercies, for they never fail (...)
Faithful, Just, and True are his ways (...) according to the song of the holy
Angels. GOD is constant and faithful: and how, and wherein.
Reu. 15.3. Yea moreover, God is careful for the Faithful, and hat^ promised
to be their God, Reu 15.3 2 Cor. 6.18
and they shall be his people. It is thy duty therefore, O Man! to do GOD this
honor, to believe without all wavering, doubting, or despairing; The duty of
the faith full toward god in regard of Gods faithfulness toward him.
that GOD has both Power and Will to do all things that he promises, and
not to permit any such cogitations, thought, or conceit, once to enter into
thine heart, as that God should prove himself a liar; or that it should not
come to pass, which he has promised. But if thou once suffer the distrust and
diffidence in Gods promised mercies (through the multitude of thy sins, and
the grieuousnesse of thine offenses, through the nature of ^inne it self and
the crafty ingestion and ^uggestion of Satan) to take hold of, The horriblenes
of the sin of Diffidence, Mistrust, or Desperation,
and possess thine heart: O horrible and ^rieuous is this last sin of
Despayring which thou addest to thy former sins. ^o heinous, so hurtful and
pernicious, ^s this thy sin of Diffidence and distrust ^n Gods mercies to be
obtained, accor^ing to his promised word, that I may ^y of thee, Aug in lib de
vtilitate paenitentiae agendae.
as S. Augustine said of Judas ^e traitor, Non tam scelus quod eom^isisti quam
indulgentiae desperatio facit te penitus interire: Not so much the si^^ which
thou have done, as thy despayr^^ of forgiveness, has utterly cast the^ away.
Surely Judas his despair and distrust (according to S. Augustine his opinion)
was a more grievous sin, them his treason in the betraying of his Master. Ier.
super Psa. 108.
Wher-vnto agrees S. Iero. Magis inquit offendit deum Judas, in ho^ quod
desperando scipsu^ suspendit, quam in hoc quod d^u^ tradidit. Desperatio enim
reddit hominem maledictum, et protectione derindignum. Judas (says S. Jerome)
more offended God herein, that in despair he hanged himself, then in tha^ he
betrayed his Lord and Master: For Desperation makes a man accursed, (...)
unworthy Gods protection. And thu^ likewise Cain his dispayring in God mercy
after his murder committed was a more grievous sin, then the shedding of his
brother Abell hi^ blood: For to add Despair to fo^mer sins, is to draw
sin afte^ sin as it were with Cart-ropes, t^ heap sin upon sin, to
fulfill the measure of iniquity, and so to pu^chase swift and most certain
damnat^on. It is indeed the fashion and old wont of Satan, When especially
the Devil begins to tempt to despair.
to persuade man (when he has once committed many heinous sins) after his
own sins, to despair, and so to commit the greater sin after the lesser:
which is as if an unlearned ignorant and a murdering Physician should cause
his Patient for the remedring of a little cold taken to drink the juice of
Hemlocke which by adding cold to cold, is most sure to bring present death; Or
as if a man, having an Ache in one of his fingers, should cut off the whole
hand to take away the Ache of a finger. Note what kind of physic and surgery
the Devil practices.
Even such like Physic and Surgery does the Devil practice to minister unto
lewd and wilful sinnors, when he inticeth and draws them after many
precedent heinous sins, through despair of finding mercy and forgiveness
to shorten their lives, by killing and murdering themselves, by poisoning, by
stabbing, by throat-cutting, by drowning, by Iudas-like hanging of themselves;
and finally by casting off all use of faith, all use of hope, and so quite to
despair of Gods mercy: then the which, what can be a more dangerous course for
any man to yield unto? What can be more foolish or contrary to all reason, if a
man's reason were not blinded and bewitched that he could not see, nor
perceive, nor consider well of it, then whiles a man is afraid of water,
presently to cast her self headlong into it, The absurd de^lings of such as
easily yield to desperation.
and so seeingly and wittingly to drown himself? or then whiles a man is
afraid of fire, presently to run into it and to dispatch himself therein? Or
whiles a man is afraid of hell fire, out of hand most desperately to plunge
himself into the dangers thereof?

And yet such as these are the persuasions, and temptations of the Devil, to a
man whose barking conscience continually pangeth and plagueth him for his
sins.

Such as these are the fruits of the most monstrous sin of dispayring of
Gods mercy and grace.

May not he be accounted worse then madd, Mark this O man, least thou yield to
Desperation before thou be awa^e what great inco^^ niences thou yeeldest unto.
that is so foreward and ready to yield unto, and to follow after the Devils
whistle, alluring and entising unto desperation, seeing it is no means to
diminish, but to increase sin, and the rewards of sin, seeing that it is no
relief, but an everlasting burden and grief of the soul: seeing that it is
not a delivery of the soul, but a certain destruction of the soul: seeing it
is not a redemption, but an undoubted condemnation of soul and body for ever.

And finally, seeing that it changes temporal grief into eternal grief,
and the panges of conscience, into the pains of hell for ever. And thus is
verified that saying of S. Bernard, Desperatio auget peccatum, Saint Bernard
his opinion concerning the (...) ^nes of desperation.
Desperatio mayor est omnibus peccatis, Desparatio peior est omni peccato,
Desperation increases sin: Desperation is greater then al other sins,
Desperation is worse then all other sins.

This is a thousand times worse then the dangerous rock Scilla, against which
so many poor Mariners have dashed their ships, Scilla and Charybdis not so
dangerous as desperation.
to the great loss both of Ships, goods and lives: or then that no less
dangerous gulf Charybdis, which have devoured up so many passengers: For at
this unfortunate and deadly rock of Desperation, many thousan^s of poor
souls ouercharged with the burden of their iniquities, and turmoyled in their
consciences with the waves of fearful thoughts, and troublesome conceits by
the blustering blastes and surgie storms of Gods vengeance threatened against
sinners, both have and daily do make dangerous and fearful ship-wracke. This
is a worse dungeon for both souls and bodies of poor desperate sinners: then
was the Den of Lions, into the which the Rulers, Officers, Dan. 6.17
and Governors of King Darius caused Daniell to be cast, and closed up: Dan
3.19
Yea, and this is seven times worse then the seven times heated burning Oven
or Furnace, into the which that proud Idolatrous King Nabuchadnezzer commanded
Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago, the true servants and worshippers of the only
true and everliving God, to be cast in. This is that incurable, remediless,
and desperate sore, wound and malady, which the Prophets of God Jeremy and
Micheas, Ier. 3. Mic. 1.
in their days complained of among their people. This is that great stop and
let, that hinders and resists Gods holy grace from flowing and entering into
the souls of sinful men. This is the Axe that heweth and choppeth a sunder
the chains wherewith God in his great mercy, and merciful kindness, would
draw the hearts of sinners unto himself by Repentance; whereof speaks the
Prophet Ozeas. Oze. 11.
Trust in the Lord, and do good, says the holy Ghost by the Prophet David:
Psalm. 37.3
where he places and sets Trust in GOD in the first place, and doing good
in the second: trusting in GOD, goes before as the Mistress, and doing good
follows and attends on as the Hand-maide: For as it is said Spes alit
agricolas, were it not for Hope the Husbandmans heart would burst; Hope
nourishes his heart: Even so Despair and diffidence, or distrust in GOD, is a
Stepmother to well doing, and draws back from doing good; according to the
saying of a learned Writer upon the said 37. Psalm. Desperatio and diffidentia
abstrahit ab omni studio honi nam cogitat omnia fieri frustra: Musculus in Ps.
37.3
ita namque ex spe et fiducia promanant mortaliu^ conatus, vt ex ipsis
conatibus satis liqucat quid quisque sperat. Desperation and Mistrust draws
back from all desire of well doing, Desparation draws men back from all well
doing and why.
for it thinks all to be but lost labor: for so do all men's labors and
endeauours flow and spring from Hope and trust, that every man's doings do
plainly testify what he hops or trusts for.

And now let this suffice briefly to give a taste how great and grievous,
hurtful and pernicious this sin of Desperation is.

CHAP. 3.
The third Chapter containing the chiefest and most principal causes of
Desperation.

THat memorable and notable saying of S. Gregory in one of his Homilies, moves
me to think, and here to commit it to writing, that one cause of Desperation,
and not the least, but rather the primary and principal cause of all other
arises from the subtle, cunning and cosoning counsel, inducement,
persuasion, and allurement of the Devil: for says S. Gregory, Greg. in quadam
Hom.
Quum in graui peccato miser homo labitur: suadet ei diabolus ne peniteat, ne
co^fiteatur peccatum leave et modicum in cord affirmat, misericordiam
praedicat, longum spaciu^ vitae promittit, permanere in peccato suggerit, vt
sic in contemptum dei, and d^sperationem sui inducat and pereat: When wretched
man slippeth into some grievous sin, the Devils council is, that he repent
not at al for it, that he confess it not: he tells him in his heart, The
degrees by which the Devil draws men on into desperation.
that it is but a light and small offense: he says God is full of mercy, he
promises him long life, he suggesteth unto him to lie still in sin, that by
these means he may bring him at last into contempt of God, and into utter
Desperation, and so he may become a castaway for ever. Here does S. Gregory
in most manifest and plain words describe and decipher the Devil himself to
be the author and so consequently the cheifest causer, and cause, of this
horrible soul murdering Desperation; and here also does he set down by what
steps and degrees he brings and leads a poor careless wretched man into
despair.

Now consider this moreover, that if Satan that arch-enemy of man's welfare,
Job. 1.
durst very boldly and sawcely without any bidding, presume to thrust himself
into Gods presence amongst his holy Angels; if he durst so subtelly and
cunningly, dissemblingly and lyinglie, assail and assault our first Parents
Adam and Eve, Genesis 3.
being yet innocents, unstained, and pure from all sin: Nay more then all this,
if he durst approach and with diverse temptations assault and allure Christ
Jesus himself, Man. 4.3.
both God and Man; and yet Man free from any spot or blemish of sin
endeavoring himself to the uttermost of his skill and power if it had been
possible, to have brought him, and wrought him to his own wicked will: Alas,
is it any maruele then if he do as diligently and busily bestirre himself
with his manifould wiles, and guiles, to assail us weak, poor, and miserable
sinners? Who (without the daily and howerly strengthening of Gods holy spirit)
are of our selves prompt, apt and ready, The forerunners of desperatio^ except
we look to our selves in time.
every hour to decline and fall away from God, and to fall unto Idolatry,
Blasphemy, Perjury, Murder, Whoredom, Theft, Pride, Disobedience, and what
not; wherein, after we be once plunged over head and ears, and over run with
thee guilt of many sins, then will Satan lay about him, and apply his
business like a most valiant Champion, to catch us in the most dangerous snare
of all other, even deep Despair: He will challenge our souls by the severe
justice of GOD, let us say against him whatsoever we can, and argue against him
as long as we will, yet will he insult, rejoice, and reply saying: Neither
Gods mercies nor Christ's merits, can any thing help, but thou must needs be
damned, What the Devil will object against us to bring us to despair
so lightly heretofore have thou esteemed God, and his precepts; so smally have
thou regarded Christ Jesus and his merits, or rather so willingly, wittingly,
and seeingly have thou vilipended, and contemned them; and so obstinately,
carelessly, and desperately, trodden them underfoot, that even as thou hitherto
have made noe reckoning of God, and have not opened the door of thy heart to
receive him, and give him entertainment when heestood without and knocked to
be letten in there; so now God will requite thee, with Legetalionis, with like
for like: he will make no reckoning of thee, he will not open his ears unto
thee when thou cryest unto him, he will not let thee have though thou ask,
he will not let thee find though thou seek, he will not open unto thee
though thou knock. Behold now art thou tossed like waves of the Sea, thy Faith
wauereth between Hope and Dread, and therefore can thou receive nothing at
the Lords hands: with these and infinite such like disputations, will Satan
set upon, and vex the very elect of God, to bring them (if it were possible)
to desperation. And if the elect shall be thus fifted, (as Peter was) in what
case then shall the wicked and reprobate be?

CHAP. 4.
The second cause of desperation.
THe second cause of Desperation, is ignorance of God, and want of knowledge of
the will of God, unto mankind revealed by his holy word: Mat. 22.
for as ignorance of the scriptures, as it was pronounced by the mouth of
Christ Jesus himself speaking against the Saduces, 2 Kin. 17.26. Ps. 23.10.11.
Pr. 28.29 30.31. Esa. 1.34. Hos. 4.7. Ephesians. 4.18
concerning the resurrection of the dead, was the cause of that their so great
error; Even likewise the ignorance of God, is oftentimes the occasion and cause
of Gods heavy displeasure; and so of diverse and sundry inconveniences and
mischiefs: Ber super Cant.
and amonst the rest, it is also a cause of this cursed Desperation, as writes
S. Bernard: Vtraque cognitio, dei scilicet and tui tibi necessaria est ad
salute^, quia de ignora^tia tui venit superbia, ac de dei ignora^tia venit
desperatio. The knowledge both of God, and of thy self are necessary unto
salvation, because out of the ignorance of thy self, arises pride; Ignorance
the mother of desperation.
and likewise out of the ignorance of God, comes Desperation. Out of this
ignorance of God, must Desperation needs arise: for how can it otherwise be,
but that he that is altogether without any knowledge of God, must despair to
receive any good thing of him? for as no man can take pleasure nor any profit
by hid and unknown Treasure: so no man can look for grace, mercy, and
forgiveness of sins, or any other benefit or good gift at his hands, of whom
he is utterly ignorant, and of whom he has no knowledge.

CHAP. 5.
The third cause of desperation.
THe third cause of Desperation is the great servitude or bondage or sin: with
which whosoever is clogged, he becomes thereby the servant of sin: John
8.34. And the woeful and hurtful effects of sins, are the procurements of
Gods curses and plagues upon bodies, The woeful and ^urtfull effects of sin.
souls, lands, children, stock, croppe, and every thing else that a man has,
or goes about at home or abroad, in town or in field, in City or in Contry,
by land or by water. Deu. 28. Leu. 26. Sin hardens the heart. Heb. 3.13. It
fights against ye soul. 1. Pet. 2.11. It gnaweth and tormenteth the
conscience. 1. Sa. 25.31. And brings men into the most damnable gulf of
Desperation, wherein multitudes of Worldlinges, Matcheuillians, Epicures, and
impious Atheists are daily implunged, and irreuocably drowned for ever.

CHAP. 6
THe Fourth cause of Desperation do many gather to themselves upon the words
of Christ in Mat. 7.13. The fourth cause of Desperation.
Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few
there be that find it. And again out of Mat. 20.16. Many are called, but few
are chosen. And again out of Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait
gate, for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in and shall not be able:
All which places do plainly teach; that few shall be saved; for in bidding to
strive to enter in, Christ gives us to understand yt it is no easy matter,
but a matter that requires great strife, pains, and earnest diligence against
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

Upon these considerations, The fear and doubt of many.
many begin to fear and to tremble, to stagger, and no doubt, whether they may
think themselves to be in the number of those few that shall be saved yea or
no; and so are drawn into despair, whiles that they find this present evil
world against them with all the baytes, snares, nets, and lets, pleasures,
and profits thereof to catch them, The great and manifold aduersa^es of man's
salvation: all which the devil uses as means to Desperation.
fetter them, and entangle them, whiles they find their own flesh, their own
corrupted nature against them; their reason poisoned, their wills and affections
blinded, their natural wisdom, concupiscences, and lusts, ministering strength
to Satan's temptations, taking part against them daily and howerly ready to
betray them into his hands, whiles that they see and perceive even legions of
Devils, even all the Devils in hell against them, with all their crafty
heads, maruailous strength, infinite wiles, cunning devises, deep slights, and
tried temptations, lying in ambush against their poor souls; and who sees
not ye thousands are carried headlong to destuction through the temptations of
either the world, the flesh, or ye devil? And thus are we poor wretches in a
most pitiful case assaulted and betrayed on every side.

CHAP. 7
THe fifth cause of Desperation arises from the manifold crosses and
afflictions of this present life,: The fifth cause of desperation.
for from hence it is that some men being daily feretted, followed on, and even
almost pressed down with temporal afflictions and troubles, Sundry kinds of
crosses and afflictions.
as penury, poverty, hunger, nakedness, sickness of body, troubles of mind,
unquiet suggestions of the flesh, temptations of the Devil persecutions,
imprisonments, loss of friends, loss of goods, loss of good name and fame, a
wicked, crooked, and froward mate in matrimony, disobedient and untoward
children, unkind and unthankful friends, vnderserued malice, envy, and hatred
of froward neighbors, and many other such like crosses, as daily in one sort
or other befall men: When they once feel themselves touched and tried herewith,
Ier. 20.
anon they take occasion hereby to cry out, and lementably to houle, and curse
the day wherein they were borne, Ier. 15.
to call that an unhappy hour wherein their mothers brought them forth, Job. 3.
to wish they had dyed in their birth, and that they had perished so soon as
they came out of their mothers womb; that some hill might fall upon them and
ouerwhelme them that so they might shortly be rid out of their pains: Yea
they will not be persuaded that these things are sent of God (for the most
part) to such as he loves, but rather to such as he hates; and that never a
loving father will handle his children so as they are handled. Now the Devil
most subtly lying in wait for his aduantoge, takes hold on this their
weakness, and strives by little and little by such occasions as these to
work utter desperation in them; and by these means oftentimes forces some to
sudden, wretched, and desperate ends.

CHAP. 8
THe sixth cause of Desperation is long custom of sin, The sixth cause of
Desperation.
whereby a man yields and submits himself as an obedient and ready
bon^-slaue to the Devil, little respecting if not utterly contemning both God
and his word, whose dull conscience through giving himself over to impurity
and filthiness of life, is waxed hard in iniquity, and corrupt ways, and as it
were burned with a hot iron, so that he is now past all sense and feeling of
sin, Long custom grows into a second nature.
and this long costome grows as it were into a second nature (in process of
time) which to expel is a matter of great difficulty. This is it which the
Prophet Ierim. meant, where he affirmed that it is as hard a thing for such to
do any good that have bin continually inured with doing of evil, as it is to
wash a Blackamoore or Ethiopian skin white: or to chang the spots of a
Leopard: And therefore according to our English adage, as that which is bred in
the bone, will never lightly out of the flesh: so an old wont or custom of any
vice, be it of lying, swearing, gaming, drinking, whooring, or any other such
like, will seldom or never be remedied; whereby it oftentimes comes to
pass, that in the end ye Devil by this means having laid a foundation, so
fitting his purpose to work on, brings his old customers to despair.

CHAP. 1.
The first Chapter concerning the Remedies against the temptations and assaults
of Satan, being the first special cause of Desperation, before entreated of in
Chapter 3

TO meet with the dangerous and manifould temptations of Satan, that great
enemy of mankind, wherewith he continually after other sins first committed,
labors to bring us into the deep gulf of desperation; It shall not be
amiss, nay rather it shall be our best course and remedy, to learn and
practice that most sure, safe, and excellent counsel, which the holy ghost
gives by those two worthy Apostles of our Savior Christ, Ephesians: 6. Iam. 4.
Saint Paul and S. Iam s their counsel against the temptat^^ns and ass^ults of
Sath n.
S. Paul and S. James; whereof S. Paul says, Put on the whole armor of God,
that ye may be able to stand against ye assaults of the Devil and S. Iam.
says, Resist the Devil and he will fly from you: that is to say, we must
st^iue against all unlawful and forbidden lusts by which he eggeth, draws,
and haleth men from sin to sin, from bad to worse, and finally to
desperation, the worst of all sins.

Had Cain thus resisted the Devil, he had never been so far drawn (as he was)
from faithless hypocrisy, to envy; from envy to murder. and from murder to
Desperation. Had Judas the traitor thus resisted the Devil when he by his
intisement first yielded to covetousness, and so for a little filthy lucre to
betray his most loving, gentle, and kind Lord and Master, he had not from
those sins one in the neck of another finally fallen into despair, wherein he
became his own hang man to the everlasting testimony of his own damnation.

Full worthy therefore, and very needful in this case is S. James his
counsel, Resist the Devil etc. yea and that in the beginning. A description
of the manner of armor with which Saint Paul would have Christians to resist
the Devil.


And S. Paul goes further on with the like good counsel, and sets down
very plainly with what manner of Armor he would have Christians to buckle and
furnish themselves with, that so they may be found the more ready and able to
encounter their general enemies temptations: As first with Verity, or Truth,
which is the arming of themselves with true and sincere knowledge of God Tit.
1.1. The first kind of Armor to resist the Devil with.
In the true service of God with out hypocrisy, in Spirit and truth. Joshua
24.14. John 4.24. 3. Kin. 2.4 And likewise with vprighr true speaking and
dealing with our neighbors in word and deed Ephesians. 4.25. Ex. 23.1.

The second kind of Armor wherewith the Devil is to be resisted.
Secondly with the Breast Plate of righteousness: that is, with the earnest
appliyng and endeavoring of our selves to all virtue and godliness in our lives
and conuersations: Where note, that the Apostle having placed Verity, Truth, or
true knowledge of God, in the first place: in very fit and good rank and order
he placed this Righteousness; ye is to say practice of true knowledge in holiness
of life in the second place; as a godly father hereupon has very well observed
in these words: Vera dei cognitio^e and animi sinceritate, and puritate pr mu^
deinde pia et sancta vita ornari debe^t Christiani milites: Christian Souldiars
ought first to have their hearts and minds decked and furnished with true
knowledge of God, with true sincerity and purity of mind; and secondly, with
Godly and holy life answerable to their true knowledge. Hereby all slighty,
cunning, and forcible entries unto Satan's engines and subtle snares shall be
debarred and shut up: hereby all the passages of our thoughts and imaginations
shall be prevented and taken up, Whereby the Devil is emboldened to tempt: and
Whereby on the other side he is discouraged, and resisted
that he shall not so easily find any breach or weak place to invade. For as
on the one side, by looseness and licentiousness of the flesh, by lewdness
of our lives, by our iniquity and ungodliness, the Devil is animated, fleshed,
and emboldened, daily to tempt and assault us: for he seeing in the corruption
of our nature a forwardness to wickedness, he blows the bellows and kindles
the flame of our bad inclination; he stirs us up, and pricketh us forward,
till after the heaping up of one sin after another, at the length he casts
us down headlong into ye bottomless pit of Desperation: So on the other side
by this Armor of righteousness, sincerity and integrity to an holy life is
the Devil withstood and resisted, and we become the more able to stand fast in
the day of our temptation: So that it is not without just cause, that ye
Apostle compares this Righteousness the second kind of spiritual Armor, unto a
corporal Braest-plate; for that like as a Breast Plate saves and fenceth the
vital parts of man, The good fruits of vprighteousnes, and holiness of life.
as his heart, liver, and entrails; which once being stricken and pierced man's
life is lost: so does uprightness and holiness of life, preserve the heart and
conscience of man free and safe from the invasion and confusion wrought by
Satan from the fiery darts of infidelity, hardness of conscience, coldness in
religion, wickedness of life, corruption in conversation, and finally from
Desperatio^, the very vp-shot of al mischiefs.

The third kind of Armor for a Christian against Satan.
Thirdly, must we arm and furnish our selves to resist Satan the Devil, with
ye Gospel of peace, ye is, our hearts must be thoroughly acquainted, and fully
fraughted with the knowledge of that glad tidings of great joy, which the
Angels of the Lord brought at the birth of Christ; L. 2.10.
that tydinges of great joy, which must be unto all nations, with that most
comfortable and joyful embassage of the Reconciliation of man with God, which
may full w^l be called ye Gospel of peace for that it only makes the
Conscience of man quiet, and at peace with God and it self: then the which,
what one thing in all the world, can set a man more free from all Desperation?
The fourth Armor. 1. Cor. 16 13.


Fourthly, with Faith in Jesus Christ; wherewith the same S. Paul arming men
against spiritual assaults by Satan and his ministers, and preparing them to
the spiritual battle agaiast the Devil and his members, encourages them
not to shrink, but to cleave fast to this Faith, whereby we may resist and
beat back our spiritual enemy.

And likewise S. Peter instructing us to prepare and make our selves strong,
to encounter with the common enemy the Devil, teaches us to resist him by
faith especially: Be sober (says he) and watch, 1. Pet. 5.8
for your adversary the Devil, goes about seeking whom he may devour, whom
resist steadfast in faith.

For this cause Saint Basil upon the 32. Psalm says, Basilius in Psalm. 32.
What man is able to make war with the Devil, unless he flee for help to the
Captain of the Host through faith in him, to wound and thrust through his
enemy?

And likewise S. Augustine accounted this faith to be so powerful, Aug. lib. 3
Cap 20. de lib. arbitrio.
that it resists, vanquisheth and ouer-commeth the Devil.

What faith is
And this true Christian Faith which is of such power as aforesaid, is a sure
trust in the mercy of God ye Father through ye merits of Christ Jesus, when we
do persuade our selves most certainly of the pardon of our sins through Christ's
righteousness; and of eternal salvation by his passion, hereby obtaining peace
in our consciences with God, and rest, and walk in obedience to his will and
commandments by his word unto us revealed. Of this kind of faith is entreated
in Abac. 2.4. Romans 3.38 Romans 51. Ephe. 2.8.

The fifth kind of Armor
The fifth kind of Armor to resist the Devil with whereof S. Paul in the
catalogue of a Christian Souldiars armor makes rehearsal, is ye word of God:
this is the Sword of the spirit, whereby the suggestions and wicked temptations
of Satan, are beaten back, propelled, and kept off, even as a man keeps
back his enemy at the point of his Sword.

With this kind of Armor did our chief captain Christ Jesus in his manhood
here on earth, resist and put back all the Devil his subtle and faulse
temptations, answering every one of them with Scriptu^ est, It is written:
whence we may learn by the like means, Christ him self an example how to
resist the Devils temptations.
after his most excellent example to combat with the Devil, and to give him
the foil, whenever by him, or any his wicked instruments, we shall be
tempted to this Desperation, or any other sins whatsoever.

If we be tempted to swear and blaspheme the holy name of God, it is to be
resisted with Sciptum est, It is written, Thou shall not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain. If to pollute and break ye Lords Sabbath day through
either laboring about our pleasures or profits, answer, It is written,
Remember that thou keep holy etc. If to murder, and shedding of blood, by any
forbidden way or means, or upon any unlawful occasion whatsoever; answer, It
is written, Thou shall do no murder. If to steal and purloyne by any
unlawful means, directly or indirectly; answer, it is written, Thou shall not
steal If we be tempted to usury, Exo. 22.25. Deu 23.19. Le. 25.39 Psalm. 15.5.
let us draw out ye Sword of the Spirit, Thou shall not give to Usury unto thy
brother, Usury of money, Usury of meat or of any other thing. If he move us to
deceit and fraudulent dealing, 1 These. 4.5. Leu 25.14
let us resist him with, It is written, Let no man oppress or deceive his brother
in bargaining, for the Lord is a Judge in such things. If we be solicited to
disloyalty, and disobedience to Princes, let us strive against that, with, It
is written, Romans 13.1 2, 3,
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers etc. Finally to be short to
what kind of sin, mischief, or inconvenience so ever any of us shall happen to
be drawn, The Scriptures do minister store of swords against every kind of
temptation
enticed, or inueigled, let us search the Scriptures, and we shall soon find
store of swords, of one kind or other to answer, foil, and recoyle,
whatsoever this mortal enemy of ours can use or object against us, here is
armor enough to find him occupied with.

The sixth kind of spiritual Armor, and heavenly furniture, wherewith S.
Paul, or rather the holy Ghost by Saint Paul, The sixth kind of Christian
Armor.
would have us complet and furnished against all the dangerous combats,
conflicts, and wicked suggestions of this wicked and damned spirit, thereby to
avoid, repel, and vanquish him utterly is devout, hearty, zealous and Godly
prayer. Over and besides S. Paul his instruction, and most needful
exhortation, in this case his and our Lord, Master, and Savior Christ Jesus,
has commended unto us this kind of weapon, when he taught to pray with this
petition. And lead us not into temptation but deliver us from evil. Let us
then apply this Armor, this kind of propulsatiue weapon, and fervently, and
heartily use it: And firmly believe that which David the Prophet for our good
encouragement has written in Ps. 145.19. God is nere to those which call upon
him, and will fulfill the desire of them that fear him. and deliver the^
Whenever therefore we are tempted, allured, and drawn on by Satan through
covetousness to riches, through ambition to honor, through envy to murder,
through co^cupisence to adultery, through intemperance to gluttony; or to be
short through any other sin to iniquity. Let us straight ways by prayer
crave for power and strength from above, to overcome these temptations, and
especially the most dangerous suggestion of Despair.

This kind of Armor is always ready at hand, so that Satan can no sooner
attempt any thing against us, but this weapon is as soon ready (if we heartily
and zealously lay hold thereon) to repel and vanquish al his practices against
us: And therefore, Pray, pray, pray.

CHAP. 2.
The second Chapter concerning remedies and helps against ignorance, the second
cause of Desperation, entreated of before in Chap. 4.

COncerning the second cause of Desperation, to wit, ignorance; Our Lord Jesus
Christ who was nothing ignorant of the manifold mischiefs, and of the manifest
dangers that the Devil leads silly men into, as it were blindfolded through
blind ignorance: and he knowing that Ignorance is rather the mother of
desperation (as heretofore in the 4. Chap. of the causes of Desperation has
been sufficiently proved) then of Devotion, as the Papists have in this point
ignorantly taught and maintaind: has in his own person, and with his own
mouth exhorted and admonished all men, Io. 5.29
to Search the Scriptures, which is a lesson in this case most necessary for
all men, to learn thereby to deliver themselves out of the dangerous gulf of
Ignorance, and so consequently out of many other sins, and finally out of
desperation; where-into thousands through Ignorance have been implunged and
drowned for ever.

Let us therefore for the remedy and avoiding of final Desperation, Remedies
against Ignorance.
whereunto so many run headlong through Ignorance, little knowing, and less
regarding what they do, until it be too late; receive the word of God, which
(as S. James says) is able to save our souls: with all readiness like unto the
Nobleme^ of Berea, and search the Scriptures daily. Act. 17.11
Let us seek after the knowledge of God in time. And as the Prophet Esaias said,
Esa. 55 6.
Seek the Lord whiles he may be found and call upon him whils he is near. The
danger of wilful Ignonorance.
And let us be assured of this yt al manner of Ignorance is perilous; but
wilful Ignorance of all other is most perilous (For it is (as a learned Writer
has affirmed) a plain Prognostication, A. D. in the plain man's path to heaven.
and a demonstratiue argument of eternal death. It is a most horrible and
fearful thing for a man to refuse instructions, despise counsel, harden
their Hearts, stop their ears, and close up their eyes against God this is
the very up shot of everlasting ruin.

What the Ignorant must do
Let the ignorant therefore that stand in this dangerous estate repair with all
diligence and attentiveness unto the learned Ministers and dispencers of Gods
most sacred word, and at their mouths enquire the knowledge of Gods laws. This
does God himself command us by the Prophet Malachie, Malac 4.
And when we feel our consciences wounded, let us after the example of the
Godly, faithful, and devout people, who after the hearing of Gods word
preached, came unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles, saying, Men and
brethren, Act. 2.
what shall we do? Even thus I say, let us come unto Gods Ministers, Counsel
f^r the ignorant very necessary.
and confess and acknowledge our great blindness and ignorance, and say unto
them. Help us, instruct us, teach us set us in the way, and guide us in the
paths of the knowledge of God and of our salvation: What the true Ministers of
gods word are.
for surely they are the Physicians and Surgions of our souls, so that if w^
repair unto them, they shall give us t^ drink of the wholesome waters of
knowledge, to quench our thirst of Ignorance: they are the dispencers of the
manifold graces of God, and the Lords Stewards to give each one of us our
portions in due time.

We have not Christ always amongst us (as appertayning to his bodily presence)
but as himself says, we have the Poor always amongst us: even so also we
have not Christ himself (that body I mean which sits at the right hand of
God the father) always with us: but yet our Lord Christ, ascending up on high,
gave unto men among other gifts, this gift also (if we could rightly consider
of it) of no small value, eue^ Pastors and Doctors that is, the Ministers of the
Gospel of Christ, that might instruct, inform, and teach us in the way of
life, that might declare unto us the secret counsels and hiden mysteries of
God, How the true ministers of Gods word are to be accounted of
thet might arm us with the Sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, to
encounter and resist our deadly enemy the Devil therewith. Let us joyfully
receive them; for who so receives them as they ought to be. receives also
with the^, him that sent them, whose Messengers they are, Let us hear them,
for they bring unto us the word of life: Let us give credit unto the Lords
Ministers, and Glory unto the Lord himself, that has given in his great love
this blessing unto us, to have his messengers and Ambassadors abiding among
us, to declare and make known unto us by them, what his own good will and
pleasure is in all things, to the avoiding of this blind ignorance, the very
mother of Desperation, and so consequently of eternal Damnation with the
Author thereof, and his cursed Angels for ever.

CHAP. 3
Of the great servitude and bondage of sins and of the remedies thereof.

COncerning the great servitude and bondage of sin being the third (before
noted) cause of Desperation, for the helps and remedies thereof this have I
briefly to say, that what though we have bin servants unto sin, and have been
pressed, and surpressed with the bondage thereof, so that we must needs
confess, (unless we should prove our selves liars, and thrt there were no
truth in us) that we through our often doing of those things which we should
not have done; and on the other side, through our leaving off those things
undone which we should have done, have most justly deserved Gods threatened
curses and plagues to light on our bodies, our souls, our children, our
stocks, our croppes, and every thing else we go about, and put our hands
unto. What though our sins fight against our souls, and gnaw our
consciences, and be ready even out of hand to lead us into the most dangerous
state of Desperation? Examples tending to the strengthening of our faith hope
and patience against desperation-
What though we have contended and fallen out with our brethra^? as did Paul
and Barnabas, who were so hot in contententio^ one against another, that they
forsook one an others company in high displeasure and heat of their stomachs,
the one taking with him Luke the other John? What though we have yielded unto,
practiced!, and followed Oppression, Extortion, polling, pilling and wresting
that we can by hook or crook from our brethren? Luke 19 2
So did Zaoheus, yet notwithstanding after his repentance, his forsaking and
ceasing from bad getting, his restitution, and alms giving, received that most
cheerful and comfortable saying of Chiist, This day is salvation entered into
thine house, Luke 19 9
What though we have bin thieves, robbers and stealers of our neighbors goods?
so was the thief that was crucified with Christ; and yet upon eis humble,
contrite, and sorrowful confession of his sins, he heard this most sweet
word from Christ, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. What though we
have murdered and sh^d the blood, or caused the blood to be shed of some of
our brethren? so did David to Vrias, and yet upon his zealous, inward and true
unfeigned sorrowfulnes and repentance, he was not taken away in his sin, but
found pardon. And so did the Jews which put to death the Lord of life.

(...) Manasses was an Idolater, he def^^^ the Temple of God, he with stood
(...) beat down the truth, 2 K^^^
he set up Ido^^^ry, he was a coniurer and a Southsa^^^, (...) shed abundance
of Innocent (...), so that the streets flowed therewith, he committed more
abominations the^ the Cananites or Amorites who^ for their filthiness the Lord
cut off out of the land of the living, he sacrificed his sons and daughters
to Devils: and yet upon his true returning to the Lord from the bottom of his
heart, he found favor and mercy.

If our sins then, 2. Chr. 33.
or the sins of any one of us, were as grievous as ever were the sins of
Manasses, yet upon our true and unfeigned return to the Lord shall we despair
of his mercy? shall we or may we, or day we think that the mercy and power of
the Lord is shortened? or that God is not the s^^^e God he was? Is he not as
ready to pardon and forgive sins, the sins of a m^^ repenting, returning,
and faithfully c^^ling upon him, as ever he was the sins of Manasses?

All these examples, and many more, are written for our learning, comfort and
strengthening of our faith, hope, and patience, that we should in no wise
despair upon our true repentance, neither for the multitude nor grieuousnesse
of our sins.

And likewise also it is written for the brusing, and as it were even for the
breaking of the back of all damnable Desperation, and to hold the hearts, and
to restore the fainting and dull spirits of all such as the servitude and
bondage of sin (this our third cause of Desperation) does vex and press
down: It is (I say) written, that the Son of man is come to save men's lives.
Luke 9.56
And he himself has said, I am come to call not the just but sinners, Math.
10. Math. 20 Ioh. 3. Wherefore Christ came into this world
And again, Jesus Christ is come to give his life a redemption for many. Also
God the father has not sent his Son to judge the World, but to the end the
world may be saved by him.

Now what is it to save and not to judge? but to deliver from death and
damnation; wherein we lay in the midst of the bondage of sin; for sin is
the death and damnation of the ^oule: Now he cannot save us except sin be
first taken from us; And therefore, and for this cause came Jesus Christ the
Son of God, Ioh. 8.
and he has declared himself to the world to the end that he should take
away sins, and should destroy the works of the Devil. If it be so that
Jesus Christ be come into the world to take away sins; and if the same were his
intent and his message, ye purpose of Jesus Christ shall not fail at all and
his message remains steadfast and true; he then without all doubt, has taken
away this which ye Devil would persuade us to be a cause of Desperation, this
great servitude and bondage of sin, from all those that trust in him, and do
verily believe, and persuade themselves in the bottom of their consciences
that it is most true: but yet how comes this to pass? to wit by Jesus Christ
only by his own free grace and mercy; by the benefitts and merits of
himself, who is our only Savior, without any other mean or merit; Ioh. 1.29
for he is the only Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. As
also S. Peter said to ye Jews, Act. 4 12.
There is none other salvation, but only in Jesus Christ; for among men there
is given none other name under heaven whereby we must be saved. And so Christ
himself said after he was risen from ye dead. It must needs have bin, Luke
24.44.
that Christ must have suffered death and that he must have risen the third day
from the dead, and that ame^dme^t of life, and forgiveness of sins must be
preached in his name to all people and to all nations, O ho^ swe^te and
comfortable are these wor^s and sayings of God which is the only eternal
truth indeed? O how worthy are they to be laid v^ in the depth of our hearts,
and to have our whole confidence reposed freely vp^n them! And to the
Collossians it is sai^, Collos. 2
God has quickened us which were dead in sins with Jesus Christ, forgiving us
all our trespasses, and has put out the handwriting that was against us, he
even took it out of the way, and fastened it on the Cross. What means he by
this, but only that Jesus Christ has taken away the obligation of our debt?
to wit, that we did owe for our sins, and has taken it and tied it wi h
himself upon the Cross^; and ^ath indeed paid it full bitterly: w^o also is
for us, and will surely take away this grea servitude and bondage of sin (which
the Devil would use as an instrument of Desperation against us) in case we will
believe his word, and that we can setle our minds and quiet our hearts, to
account and esteem his bitter passion and merits to be so great and of such
value, that they are able, effectual, and of sufficient strength, to obtain
these oforesaid things for us. And Christ's prayer to his heavenly Father is
heard, and remains heard continually when he prayed, saying, Ioh. 17 20
I pray not for these alo^e (meaning his three present Disciples) but for them
also which shall believe in me through their word: Wherefore the same prayer
includes every one of us, so far forth as we believe, and place the same in
our hearts, and wholly repose our selves thereon.

And S. Peter says, Jesus Christ has commanded us to preach unto the people,
Act. 10.42 43.
and to testify that it is he that is ordained of God a Judge of the quick and
the dead, and that to him all the Prophets give witness, that through his name
all that believe, should receive remission of sins.

Moreover, S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 5.21.
God has made him which knew no sin, sin for us to the end that we should
be made the righteousness of God in him.

And here is to be noted, What manner of righteousness God^ ^quireth at our hands
what righteousness, or Justice and goodness that is, which God requires and
esteems; which is no other, but that only which dwelleath and holds upon
the Justice Goodness, and merit of Jesus Christ, being utterly ignorant of the
Justice or Righteousness and goodness which many do seek in their own good
works.

But yet when I stand so much upon this point, to prove that our sins should
be no cause of Desperation, (a thing which the devil greatly urges and
obiecteth against the conscience of an ignorant man) for that our sins are
taken away by the innocent Lamb Christ Jesus, that he has sufficiently paid
the ransom thereof, and that we are become righteous, by ye righteousness of
Jesus Christ: it is not here my meaning, neither would I have any man so to
mistake me, and mis understand me, that I think, or would have any other men
to think hereby, that there is no more sin in us or that sin dwells not
in these our mortal bodies: Sin dwelle^h even in the believers, and in the
most righteous men in the world: but yet reigns not in the (...)
for I confess it plainly, and it is too true, that sin indeed dwells in
us; but yet to the great comfort of an afflicted conscience against desperation
I affirm it (having the holy scriptures for my teachers herein) that although
the root of sin, the naughty disposition, and inclination to sin remains
always strong in a Christian, and never can be wholly vanquished before we put
off by death, this sinful flesh of ours; although (I say) it do dwell in us,
yet it does not reign in any Christian believer; yet it is not able to damn a
true faithful believer: it cannot (I say) damn us for as much as we are in
Jesus Christ, and that we do fight and strive against the remanent of sin,
albeit we stagger and waver sometimes, and do feel and perceive our selves to
be assailed sometimes by the strong temptations of the devil, and the flesh.
This is it that S. Paul writes of when he says, Romans 8.1
There is now no damnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit.

The remanent and root of sin dwells always in us, but we like unto
licentious worldlings, give it not the bridle, and suffer it not to range too
far, and to take too deep a root, but we break it, tame it, and make it
subject unto us by walking after the spirit. etc. and then nothing more sure
then that there shall be no condemnation at al unto us thereby, neither any
cause of desperation thereby, for that we are justified by our faith and
delivered from sin; to wit, these sins which might condemn us, the root,
original, and mother of sin yet notwithstanding still abiding, remaining and
dwelling in us; against which we war and strive, as long as we continue in
this life; but the victory remains to our Chieftaine and head-Captaine Jesus
Christ, by the law of his spirit which makes us to live in him, and has set
us free from the right of sin and death (in such sort that we may no more
fear sin, nor death) by Jesus Christ, who has overcome all for our wealth,
and has reconciled us eternally to his Father; who as our dear Father, from
henceforth will show favor unto us, for the love of Jesus Christ his dear
Son, and so will take from us all our sins as though we had never committed
them. Even so does he promise, saying, Mich. 7.18 19.
God is one God willing to show us grace and mercy, he will turn to us and will
be favorable, and he will take away our iniquities, and cast our sins into the
depth of the sea. And again it is said of Gods wonderful mercies, The Lord is
full of compassion and mercy, Psalm. 103.8.9.10. etc
long suffering and of great goodness. He will not always be chiding, neither
keeps he his anger for ever He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor
rewarded us according to our iniquities. For look how high the heaven is in
comparison of the earth so great is his mercy also toward them that fear him:
Look how wide also the east is from the west, so far has he set our sins from
us. Yea, like as a father pittieth his own children; even so is the Lord
merciful unto them that fear him: for he knows whereof we be made; he
remembers that we are but dust etc.

Of the great mercies of God toward sinners, read more in Psalm. 145.8.9.
Places of holy Scriptures, setting forth Gods great mercies.
and 147.8.10. and in Joel. 2.13. Math. 18.11. 2. Cor. 1.3. Ephesians. 2.4. 1. Tim.
1.13. unto the 18. verse.

Surely these places are words of most rare and singular comfort, and they be
certain, firm, sure, and unchangeable spoken and pronounced by the eternal
verity it self, and therefore not to be mistrusted or dispaired of. But yet
let us take heed, least that verse be verified in us, Stulti cum vitant vitia
in contraria currunt.

Let us not abuse Gods mercies, making a cloak thereof to cover our sins:
Let us not presume too far, and say as in Ecclesiastic. 5.6. The mercy of God
is great, he will forgive my manifold sins: for mercy and wrath comes from him
etc.

CHAP. 4
The fourth Chapter concerning the Remedies to be used against the fourth cause
of Desperatio^, arising of the doubts suggested by the Devil unto many men to
bring them into despair of their salvation, by means of the small number of
those that shall be saved, in comparison of the great number of the reprobate.

A catalogue or rehearsal of many things whereby the Devil craftily tempts
men to sin and desperation.
GReat indeed is the power, and manifold and marvelous are the polices,
devices, wiles, subtilties, assaults, and suggestions, wherewith and whereby
that wily Fox, that old bitten Dog, that subtle Satan the Devil, daily
and hourly practices to entice, allure, and even as it were to force
multitudes of men hear on earth, into one sin or other, whereunto he finds
and proves them to be naturally inclined; and last of all upon one occasion or
other, into Desperation.

If he espieth a man to be rich, How the devil tempts by riches.
and to have worldly blessings through the gift of God, then will he apply him
earnestly by his prosperity to lull him asleep in the forgetfulness of God,
in worldly Pleasures, pleasant Vanities, and transitory delights, comforts, and
solaces; and by trusting in his riches to lift up himself arrogantly above
others; to swell in pride, and to contemn his brethren, committing (and that
with great sauciness and boldness) many fond, palpable, and gross errors
and follies, against Gods word, even as if he should say, Who is the Lord?

On the other side if a man be poor, he labors thereby to make him
contemptible before the world, How the devil tempts by poverty.
to pinch and nip him with the want of many things necessary both for back
and belly, that he sees before his face many others have in great and in
abundant measure; he soliciteth him to steal, Pro. 30.9
to take the name of God in vain, to seek after gain by dishonest, unlawful,
and ungodly means; to murmr, distrust, blaspheme, and despair.

How the Devil tempts by friends Genesis 3.6. Job. 2.9 Ester 5.14
If a man have friends he will use them as his instruments, to tempt unto some
evil by their lewd and wicked counsel, as he did procure Euah to do unto
Adam, Job his wife to Job. Haman his Wife unto Haman.

How the Devil tempts by enemies.
If thou have enemies then will he prick thee foreward by their procedings and
dealings against thee, unto unjust choler, wicked anger, and devilish revenge.

If thou be careful for thy family, wife and children, he will take hold upon
that occasion to stuff thy heart with too much desire of having, How the
Devil tempts by carefulnes.
and getting by right or by wrong, and thereby through extreme covetousness,
make thee to forgo all godliness and piety.

How the Devil tempts by security and carelesnes.
On the other side if thou be careless, that is it that he can make use of also;
for as S. Bernard says, Infert diabolus securitate^, vt inferat etiam
perditionem. etc. In heaven Angels became devils. In Paradise Adam and Euah fell
into disobedience. In the school of Christ, Judas became a traitor to his Lord
and Master: and all this (says S. Bern.) through security and retchlesnes, to
keep themselves in that good state wherein they were once set.

Have thou strength? thereby will he take occasion to embolden and harden thee
to do injury and wrong, and to set upon thy weaker.

Have thou health and a strong able body? How the Devil tempts by strength
by health ableness of body and beauty.
by those will he induce and entice thee to one kind or other of lewdnes and
dissolutnes.

Have thou beauty? that will he make an instrument for bawdry; an inticeme^t
and an allurement to voluptuousnes and wanton delights.

Have thou honor and dignity in the world? How the devil tempts by honor
and dignity.
thereby will he blow the bellows of pride, audacity, and boldness, to
oppress, to crush, and tread under foot thine inferiors.

Have thou viuacity, How the Devil tempts by quicknes of spirit and sharpnes
of wit.
and quicknes of spirit, and sharpenes of wit and learning? these also will he
strive to abuse and wrest to serve his turn to excogitate, invent, and devise
a thousand vanities; yea, and all the rare and excellent guiftes of God, which
God does bestow on any man: this Devil, this arch-enemy of mankind will leave
no ways, nor means unattempted, to procure man to abuse the same to a clean
contrary end (if it were possible) to that for which they were bestowed.

How the devil tempts by gods word
And finally the very Word of God, given through Gods great and infinite
goodness, to be our spiritual Sword, to resist and encounter the Devil with;
which as S. James says, is able to save the souls of men: which as S. Paul
says, is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes: which as
holy Dau. says; was a lantern unto his feet and a light unto his paths. This,
even this, will the Diuil so far forth as ever he may, with all ye cunning
fetches, crafts, and policies that ever he can devise, How the Devil will
abuse, wrest, and misapl^ gods word
seek to abuse, wrest, and misapply, from the true meaning sense and
signification thereof, to confirm lies, untruths and heresies, thereby: he will
draw some texts and sentences, thereof to bring men into presumption of their
own Virtues, Worthiness and merits to their utter overthrow. And likewise with
some other places and sentences thereof, he will bestir himself to bring men
to waver in faith, to doubt of Gods graces and mercies through Christ, and so
finally to fall into utter desperation. And thus does he daily abuse and wrest
all those places of holy Scriptures before noted and alleged in the fourth
cause of Desperation, tending to prove the small number of those that shall be
saved, in comparison of the huge and great number of the reprobate.

Those places I say, does he urge upon the consciences of many in the world,
and by his misapplying of them, and by his misconstruing of Christ's purpose,
drift, and meaning therein, draws and drives them to fear and to tremble to
doubt and despair, that they are none of that small number, seeing so few
shall be saved.

But O thou man that art thus tried, The true use of those Scriptures which the
Devil seeks to abuse, to bring men to desperation thereby.
tempted, and drawn toward temptation! for thy remedy and help herein Search
the Scriptures, and consider upon those places, to what end and purpose Christ
delivered this doctrine, and thou shall anon prove and find, that his meaning
was nothing less then to drive men into despair, but rather hereby to exhort,
persuade, and to give caueats, and warning pieces unto all men that run at
random after the world, to remember them selus, and their dangers, and tickle
states; to awake and rouse them up that are so fast lulled a sleep in the
dangerous cradle of security, and retchlesnesse, that so they might be touched,
moved and stirred up to embrace in time when time serves, a far more
diligent and watchful care of their salvation, that by such means they may
be found in the number of Christ's little flock and of those few that shall be
saved; who^ the Apostle Paul exhorts to make an end of their salvation with
fear and trembling: Phi. 2.1.
by which they might be made more careful and more diligent in that their so
weighty a business.

CHAP. 5
The fifth Chapter wherein are contained the comforts, helps and remedies
against the fifth cause of desperatio^, which is the heavy and great weight of
crosses, afflictions, troubles and necessities, that God suffers to fall upon
many in this life.

MOst true, most notable, and most comfortable for the distressed and afflicted
children of God, To. 8.22.
is that golden sentence of the holy Ghost, penned by his chosen vessel S
Paul, Romans 8.28. All things work together for the best, to the^ that love God.
For even the afflictions and troubles of Gods children are so sanctified unto
them by the spirit, He. 12.10
that by the same they are made pertakers of Gods holiness. Heb. 12.14 1 The. 1.6
By the same they enjoy the quiet frut of Righteousness. By the same they
attain unto a greater measure of Joy in the holy Ghost. Gal. 6, 14 1, Cor, 11
32,
By the same the world is crusified to them, and they to the world. By the same
they are made, conformable to Christ's death, By the same they are kept from the
condemnation of the wourld. Rom, 5, 5,
By the same they learn experience, patience, hope etc. The comforts and
commodities of the crosses and afflictions to Gods children.


So that these things rightly pondred weighed, and considered, their Crosses
are mercies, their losses gains, there afflictions are their schoolings, and
their adversity their learned University. Avoid thou Satan, thou can not
make these afflicto^s, crosses and trubles neither good nor likely causes of
Desperation, so they be taken, borne and used as they ought to be, for it is
written for the learning, comfort, help, and remedy of all Gods afflicted
children, whom thou would full gladly persuade, that their afflictions are
signs and prognosticating tokens of Gods wrath; and so consequently if thou
could, thou would draw them thereby to despair of Gods love and mercy. Pro.
2.12.
It is written I say; That the Lord corrects him whom he loves, eue^ as the
father does the child in whom he delights. And again, My son, He. 12.5 6
7.8.9. etc.
despise not the chastning of the Lord neither faint when thou art rebuked of
him, for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth; and he scourges every son that he
receives. If ye endure chastning, God offers himself unto you, as unto
sons; for what son is it who^ the father chasteneth not? If therefore ye be
without correction, whereof al are pertakers, the^ are ye bastards and not
sons, and so forth unto the 12.v. These and many other such like sayings and
sentences of the holy scriptures, are most evident testimonies, that
afflictions, troubles, crosses, and vexations, are sure tokens of Gods grace,
mercy, and favor, whereby God assures us of his merciful will and fatherly
good heart toward us and not signs of his wrath and heavy displeasure, as the
devil would persuade us, thereby to cause us to despair.

God indeed oftentimes sends euilles even upon his own beloved children; Why
God sends evils to his children and how he sends comforts in the midst of
evils.
but yet to the intent to do them good thereby: and withal in the midst of
those evils which he touches them with he sendeh them some comforts to hold
their hearts with. Examples hereof you may see in Adam and Euah, for when for
their disobedience God would banish them out of that most pleasant place in all
the world, wherein at the first he had placed them, yet in the midst of that
punishment which he had laid upon them, his fatherly kindness showed it
self; for before he drove them out, he made them coats to arm them against
all weather, and he comforted them with a promise of ye blessed seed (Jesus
Christ) which should restore that salvation to mankind which they had lost by
yielding to the Serpents entisings. Genesis 3.12


This was, and this is, the most kind and loving dealing of God with man, he
will make us to smart a little for our sins: here is his justice; but yet so
that he will not utterly forsake us, nor give us over for ever: here is his
mercy. Avoid therefore Satan, once I say again avoid; cease to suggest or to
ingest into any man's heart that he should think because that God does cross
and afflict him, that therefore he does hate, forsake, and utterly casts of
those with whom he so deals: for this is most true, that as Christ Jesus has
taught us to call upon him by the name of a Father, saying, Our father which
art in heaven and. so he loves us as a Father, for his sake: and again he
will be more mindful of us, then our own Mothers; for why? himself has so
taught us, and so promised, as appears in Esa. 49.

How God loves and deals with his children.
Examine and consider but a little the proceedings and dealings of Mothers and
Fathers with their children, and thereby shall you see and perceive more
clearly, how God handles his children under their afflictions, troubles, and
crosses.

It is the fashion and manner of a good kind and natural Father, that feign
would see good proof of his child, first to instruct and teach him in the
virtuous course and ways of well-doing: Secondly to give him oftentimes warning
and monition, to keep him in that good way which he has taught him: Thirdly
if words will not serve, then to ierke him now and then with the rod:
Fourthly, in case his child being now grown up, wax stubborn, malapart, and
disobedient, if he will needs spend his thrift wantonly, prodigally and
ryotously in ill company, then comes his Father and draws him out by the ears
and with a whip or cudgel, beats him till his bones crack.

All this he does, and yet with a fatherly love, and a natural kind affection,
to fear him, and to tame him; and as it were with violence, to bring him to
amendment not minding to forsake him, nor utterly to cast him off for ever.

Even such as this is the dealing of our heavenly Father, with his untowardly,
stubborn, and disobedient children: For, first he teaches and instructs
them by the Ministers, Teachers, and Preachers of his holy word and will: he
gives them often monitions and warning to walk in his ways, Gods rods of
what sort they are.
and to live in his obedience; which if they despise and will not follow, then
he uses his rods, as poverty, sickness, diseases, crosses in their children, in
their stock, in their crop, and such like: and when this will not serve, nor
do any good, but still on they wax obstinate and stubborn, and care not
neither for words nor warning, for stripes nor gentle correction; then God
sends upon them more heavy and grievous punishments, as plagues, pestile^ces,
dearth, casualties of fire, wars loss of victory, fire and sword, captivity,
and other such like great and almost intolerable mischiefs: and all these to
work in them acknowledging of God, hu^bling themselves under the mighty hand
of God sorrowfulnes of heart for their negligence in serving of God, What God
seeks to work by dealing hardly with his children.
and true unfeigned repentance, and turning again unto God, who then is as
ready to receive them as ever he was before, and with mercy and loving kind
benefits to bless them: Examples hereof holy scriptures afforde us not a few,
but especially in ye government of Gods chosen people the Isralites, wherein it
does plainly appear, that although God did oftentimes punish the disobedience
and falling away of those his people; yet it ever proved nothing else, but the
displeasure of a kind and loving father, which sought not their utter
overthrow, but rather their reformation and amendment. Let us therefore in the
like cases, not despair of Gods mercy, but amend our former wicked course of
life and yield our selves patiently unto our heavenly father, and rejoice in
him, in the midst of our troubles and afflictions, for as much as there is
nothing more sure the^ that if we return to him, but he will likewise turn
again unto us with a gracious and fatherly mind, heart, and good will.

In this behalf also is God compared and likened unto a kind loving mother;
Gods affection to his Children like unto a kind loving mothers affection.
for like as a natural mother is very careful, watchful and diligent about
her child, she trimmeth it, she dresseth it, feeds it, nourishes it, prays
to God heartily for it and does all the good she can for it with a most loving,
tender, and motherly affection; and yet now and then she is so disquieted in
her mind, so moved and provoked by her child's peltishnes, frowardnes and
unruliness, that she is even against her own nature, forced to be angrye with
it to chide it, and sometimes to beat it: Even so like unto this motherly
dealing, is the properly and natural affection of God toward Mankind, who as
he would not the death of a sinner, so neither delights he in any manner of
grief, sorrow trouble or misfortune of man, were he not sometimes stirred up,
moved, and provoked, through our frowardnes, unthankfulness and unkindness, to
chasten and correct us, and like as a mother though she be angry and offended
with her c^ild for a time, yet her displeasure soon passes away she gives it
not over, she forsakes it not, she forgets it not for ever. Even after the
like fashion does God our heavenly father deal with man: nay more mindful,
more kind and more pitiful is God toward us* This is most true, the mouth of
God himself has spoken it; for those are hi^ words. Can a woman forget her
own^ child and not have compassion on the son o^ her womb? Esa. 49.15
though she should forget, yet will not I forget thee. And finally (to draw to
an end of this comparison) eue^ as a Mother when her child is impish, peevish,
and wayward, menaceth and threateneth it to throw it away to a Beggar, and
s^arreth it with some bugs, throsts Hobgoblins, or such like, and all to make
it quiet, and to cling the more unto her: so likewise our good Father, when he
sees that we forget him make smaller rekoning of him then becomes us, and wax
unthankful and untowardly to al goodness declining and hasting on apace to
follow all sin and iniquity; then he sometimes shows us the terrible faces of
fearful troubles and dangers, and he will bring us into great perrils: yea,
and for our unthankfulness, and other such like offenses, he will now and then
take away by one means or ^ther, our health, our wealth, our peace, our
liberty, our safety, etc.

And all this does he to cause us to turn back again unto him, to cleave
and cling the faster unto him, to pray and call upon him the more faithfully,
heartely and zealously for his help and deliverance, to esteem better of his
gifts, when we enjoy them, and to be more thankful for them when we have them.

So that the very causes of all troubles, crosses, and calamities are not to
work in us murmuring and grudging, and despair, but if we will weigh them and
consider them thoroughly, to make good use of them, they may turn to our great
profit and benefit, and not to our hurt: For like as a natural Father and
mother do, so does God love us when he smites us; he favors us, when he
seems to be most against us; when he seems to be most angry, he aims
most at our good, for as S. August. says, Melius nouit medicus quid expediat
quam aegrotus, The sick man the patient, never knows so well what is good
for him as does ye Physician. God deals with his ch^ldren as Physicians and
Surgions do with their Patients.
And therefore the Physicians and Surgions when they see no other remedy for ye
recovery, curing, and amending of their sick, corrupted, and infected patients,
use to minister unto them tart, bitter, harsh, and unpleasant things, and to
fear, burn, and cut away corrupted, rotten, and dead flesh with sawes, iron,
and other such like instruments, and all to save and cherish the sound and
whole parts, Ne part sincera trahatur, least that which is whole, should by the
other be corrupted, infected and poisoned; even so does God sometimes (when he
sees it is best for us) plague our bodies sharply and grievously, that our soul
may be preferued and saved. The Physician in compounding of his best Triacle,
uses Serpents, Adders and other poisoned things, that with the same he may
drive out one poison with an other: How God uses sometimes the service of Devils
and wicked men.
Even so God (as by Histories plentifully in Gods Book it appears) uses the
ministry help, and service of Devils, and of most devilish and wicked men, by
them to afflict and chastise us, and yet to do us good withal; and afterward
burns the rods when he has corrected and beaten his children with them a
while. It is not given to every man (I must needs confess) to understand
this, and to make this good use of afflictions, crosses, and troubles laid upon
them for their sins sake; for then should Pharaoh and many of his wicked
courtiers like himself; then should Cain, The wicked are not bettered by their
troubles and afflictions.
Saul Judas Iscariot, and many other vile, leaud, and desperate persons beside,
in their manifold crosses, troubles, and adversities, have turned unto the Lord
and been saved.

But we must learn and know, that adversities, Whence it comes that
afflictions and crosses profit Gods children.
troubles, and afflictions, of themselves and of their own proper nature,
cannot work and bring such profits, and so much good unto men: But it is the
spirit of God, which resting in Gods faithful children, purges, reformeth,
comfort, and strengthens them, and by these outward means works all
these good things in us: And so whatsoever goodness has been spoken of
heretofore to befall men by means of adversities, crosses, and troubles, is to
be understood only of the faithful and godly, which are taught and led by the
spirit of God, to consider rightly of them, and to make such use of them, that
according as in the beginning of this Chapter it is truly said, to the^ that
love God all things work together for the best. Romans 8.28


Whereas on the other side, in the unfaithful, The conceits and opinions of
the wicked in thie^ adversities and toubles.
unrepentant, and wicked ones, they work after another fashion, and are of
clean contrary operation, whiles that they ascribe their adversities and
troubles, either to blind Fortune and Chance; as though Fortune had a certain
power to work, without the working and providence of God; or else, unto them
that are not of their own sect, faith, and religion, as did wicked Ahab to
godly Elias, or to ye Magistrates, 4. Kin. 18
or to the Ministers of Gods word, or to Faith and religion it self, or to the
Planets, Stars, and influences of the Elements; yea, and some will I blame God
himself, as though they themselves were so innocent and blameless, that God
deals not well with them to lay upon them such crosses and punishments: and so
very busy they make themselves, to shift off all blame ever to others faults.

And although their sins be multiplied to exceeding multitudes of offenses,
yet they will not see nor confess any such things in themselves, nor any
thing consider, nor regard the punishments of God laid upon them, and cleaving
unto them for the same. But through their hardness of heart, and want of faith
(which is the mother of all blasphemy, and abomination) they can not spy whose
hand it is that is against them, nor wherefore; or else being even as it were
violently forced to know it, that it is, the working of ye Lord against them,
and his vengeance in heavy displeasure upon them; yet they will not be moved
thereby, nor any thing at all stirred up to amend their lives, but like unto
King Pharaoh the more God corrects them, the more obstinate they swerve,
decline, and fly away, from him being like unto graceless children, with whom
neither words, threatninges, nor beating, can prevail. Like unto them yt will
neither dance with the piper, nor lament with the mourner: Mat. 11.17 Luke
7.31.32.
and so far off are they from being recovered, won, and reformed by means of
any crosses, afflictions, and troubles lighting on the^; an^ following them
ever as the shadow does the body; that they will sooner burst out into al manner
of impatientnes bitterness, and spightfull poysonful railing and blaspheming
words against the righteousness of God, saying, That their punishment is greater
then their sins, and heavier then they can brook or bear: and that they are
wronged, and are not indifferently dealt with, and so at the length after
heaping one sin in the neck of an other, the Devil brings them on, The ends
that the devil brings the wicked unto by their afflictions, troubles, and
crossss.
and by little and little winds them into that he gapes for, namely into a
reprobate mind, and deadly Desperation, in so much that at the last they fall
too, and yield to murdering, hanging, drowning, o by other such means most
miserably, to dispatch themselves with their own hands, like unto Saul,
Achitophel and Judas, so giving the^mselues over to the Devil; and as they
lived for a while most wretchedly, so they depart out of the world as
diuelishly, forgeting utterly, and al-together inconsiderate, retchlesse, and
carlesse what shall become of them afterward for ever. By whose lives, Two
commodities to be reaped by the lives and manner of the deaths of the wicked.
and manner of deaths the children of God may yet reap two commodities: first,
they shall be eased of the great troubles, disturbance, and discommodities, and
of the leaud and evil examples which they gave to others whiles they lived.
And secondly, they which remain a live after them, may learn and take warning
by their shamfull falls, and by their terrible examples, and desperate deaths,
lay hold on repentance and amendment of their lives before it be too late.

CHAP. 6.
The Sixth Chapter concerning the remedies against Desperation, arising and
growing by long custom of sin, and by delaying and putting off the forsaking
of sin from day to day.

The great danger of custom of sinn^, and of delaying of amendment of life.
IT is written, that the continual and long cu to^e of sin, and the delaying
and putting off from time to time of the amendment of life, is one of the
greatest and most dangerous deceites and cunning stratagems and policies which
the enemy of mankind does use toward the children of Adam: for he is not
ignorant how that like as links in a chain one catches hold and hangs by
another, and one draws another: Even so by continuance, long custom, and
secure sleeping in sin, one sin draws on another, and so every day sin
is added to sin, so that by toleration and procrastination, sin so mightily
increases, and by this means waxes so headstrong, that in the end, the
saying of the Poet proves very true; to wit,

Qui non est hod^e, A comparison showing the d^nger f ^ong ^ustome and w^ltring
in ^inns.
cras minus aptus erit He that is not ready to day (to forgo and forsake
sin) to morrow-day shall he be more unfit. The Devil knows well enough, how
that like as old festred and long grown sores and diseases of the body are
far more dangerous, more troublesome, and harder to be healed, and require a
longer time by much to be cured, then if they had been looked to at the first:
Even so the diseases of the soul as swearing, theeuing, whoring, drunkenness,
and such like, being once long accustomed, settled, and having gotten an habit,
are either never, or seldom, and that with greater difficulty afterward
rooted out, then at the first beginning they might have been.

And so by these diseases of the soul, the habit thereof having once taken
root in man, and the Devil by them having gotten the surer hold and
possession, he endeavors and most diligently by all w^ies and means
applies to keep men still on in ure, and practice with old and long accustomed
sins, until at the length in extremity of sickness toward the hour of
death (if not before) he may by such causes and occasions plant and work in
the heart of man deep despair to his utter confusion for ever.

To resist therefore, to remedy and help this canker-like creeping and
infectious evil, let us to day while it is yet to day, study to turn again
unto God, cast out the Devil, and with him this great cause and occasion of
desperation, even long custom of sin, and delay of amendment of our lives,
the thing that so hangs on, and presses us down, and let us in time while
we have time take a better course, looking up unto Jesus Christ, and set him
before the eyes of our faith, as ye only mark to shoot at. And for as much
as we can not turn again to the Lord, and forsake our former wallowing in our
former long accustomed sins, except the Lord our God reach us his helping hand
to turn us unto him; and that repentance is not in our own power to take it up
and lay it down at our own pleasure, Whence repentance and amendment of life
are to be had, and how they are to be come by (...)
and that of our selves we can not put it into our hearts when we list,
exceept it first come from above; for that it is an excellent and a rare gift
of God: Let us earnestly and heartily with our humble and fervent prayers beg
the same at Gods hands: Let us practice much and often hearing, reading, and
meditating the word of God and with care use all ordinary means for the
better, and speedy attaining of it, for it is not so easy a matter to come by,
as the world thinks it: It is not an hours work when we lie on our
deathbeds that will serve the turn: It is not, Many are and may be deceived
in the manner and time of their repentance.
Cry God mercy a little for fashion sake, that will do it: It is not a
coursing or mumbling up of a few prayers at a man's last farewell, ye will avail:
And yet if we were sure that that would serve, yet we are very vn-sure, whether
we shall have time, leisure, and remembrance at our last gasp, to do that yea
or no: to trust to do it at our last hour, is but a broken staff to be
trusted unto, And yet it is not so uncertain, but on the other side it is as
certain, that then we shall have many byasses, Note this you that defer
repentance until your last end.
many rubs and stoppes, many impediments to lie in our ways, and to hinder our
course in going foreward at that time with last gasping repentance, which many
fond and foolish men rely so much upon, (...) ^^st so much unto, passing away
their days, and carelessly neglecting good opportunity when time serves, like
unto those five foolish Virgins that made no preparation aforehand to be in a
readiness to enter in with the Bridegroom, till it was too late: this is I say,
a very broken staff to trust unto, and a thing very doubtful, and uncertain
to depend upon, or to make any reconing of, for a man to repent and cry God
mercy, and make himself fit and ready for God at his last hour, because that
very many in all ages and in all places have been and are taken away oftentimes
with a sudden death, and have neither that hours nor half hours leisure
that they before spoke of, and trusted so much unto.

Lu. 17.27. examples showing that it is dangerous trusting to the last hour.
Genesis 19.23-
When the World was eating and drinking, planting and building: when they were
most secure and careless, then suddenly came the flood, and overwhelmed them
al. Though it were a fair morning at Lo^s going out of Sodom, yet by and by
when they least thought of any such matter, they were all suddenly destroyed.
When Nabuchadnezzar was most brag and thought himself most safe and sure, Dan.
4.12.
suddenly (never dreaming nor once suspecting any such things) was he pulled on
his knees. The Rich man thought himself never more like to have lived, Luke
12.20 Acts 5 are two notable examples of sudden and unprovided death in
Anania^ and his wife.
then when he so busily made such great provision, and laid up store for many
years: yet was his soul suddenly taken from him the very same night. And what
know thou O man! that trustest so much, and put off till the last day
and hour, whether that day and hour may not come as suddenly on thee, and
as unlooked for, as it did on any of these?

Augustine and Ambrose did write one of them to the other, what his opinion
was, concerning the state of an old Adulterer which in their time, as he was
going in the night time to his Whore, passing over a Bridge in his way, fell
into the River; and so being drowned, was taken away suddenly in the very
purpose of his wickedness, having neitheir hour, half hour, nor minute, to
cry God mercy, to repent, and to pray in.

Ioannes Riuius, a learned writer, Lib. 1. de stultitia mortas^um in
procrastinanda.
and of good credit, affirmed that in his time, and in a village of his
country, two old men lying with their Whores whom they had aforetime haunted,
Correctione vitae.
in one and the self same night dyed, suddenly taken as it were with the
manner: having likewise neither hour nor half hour to prepare themselves in:
for the one was suddenly stabbed to death, the other was taken with a sudden
Apoplexy, whereof he presently gave up the Ghost.

And what knows any of us all, or what greater privilege has any of us all
but that we may be suddenly yreuented and carried away in the midst of our
sins as these were? And whether we have not the like examples of such hastye
deaths here in England, whereby many of us have bin disappointed of these two
or three hours at their last end, to make us ready in, I report me to the
deaths of Earl Godwin, and Grimwood of Hitcham? Earl Godwin his sudden and
fearful death.
whereof the Earl after he had traitorously slain the brother of King Ed. the
third, being charged afterward by the King therewith at Windsor (where he
happened to sit at table with the King) he falsely denied the fact, and for his
better excuse, he falsely forswore it; and besides all this, he moreover took
a piece of bread and put it into his mouth, wished that he might be choked
thereof, if he were guilty of his blood, and it followed indeed according to
his desire: for he being choked therewith, yielded up his Ghost, and fell
down dead in the presence and sight of all at the Table, and from thence was
had to Winchester to be buried. Grimwood, his sudden and fearful death.
And likewise the said Grimwood of Hitcham in the County of Suffolk, known to
be a wilful fursworne man, in the harvest time next after his perjury, feeling
of no pain, complaining of no disease, being strong and able to labor, as he
was stacking up corn, suddenly his bowels fell out of his body, whereof
immediately he died most miserably.

But what need I to stand bestowing time, paper, and ink, troubling both my
self and future Readers, in setting down the manner of the sudden deaths of
many men, seeing that both holy and profane writers, and daily experience it
self, may fully fraught, store, and furnish us with infinite examples of this
sort? And what charter, privilege, or certain hold of life has any of us all,
more then these here before recited, or thousands of others in the like case
have had?

O let us not presume therefore to run on headlong in the long and hardened
custom of our sins! not to delay and put off the reforming of our wicked
lives until the last hour: And although we be not stricken with sudden death,
but have both certain days and hours before our death, yet (as I before
said) full many are the stops, lets, and impediments which both may, and also
daily do fall out to hinder and put by this late repentance; A catalogue of
lets and imp^diments which oftentimes fall out when we come to the last hour,
that hinder and put by ^h^t l te rep^ntance, wh ch so ma^y trust unto.
that so many will needs trust unto, and make all their reckoning of, putting
of from day to day, and from year to year, till this last time approach and
fall on them indeed: For so long as the extreamities of sickness do nip and
pinch our mortal bodies, the dolours, pangs, and pains racking and tormenting
our flesh, will keep our minds so occupied, sometime calling on the Physician
for help, sometime turning, tossing, and seeking for ease in every corner of
the bed; yea, and from bed to bed, while strength does serve sometimes taking
this receipt, and sometimes that, as the Physicians shall minister: somet^mes
turmoyled and occupied both in mind and body by the working and purging of the
Apothecaries drugs received, sometimes disquiet and brawling with those that
are attending about us, crying out on them, as though their using and handling
of us wear the occasion of our greater pangs and pains: with these and such
like cercumstances, are both bodies and minds exercised and vexed, so long as
the vigor and strength of flesh and blood are able to endure and hold out, and
so busied here-with continually, that we seldom have any rest or leisure to
frame our selves to any quiet calling on God; to any repentance, or unfeigned
and zealous, crying for mercy: for if we sometimes endeavor our selves to begin
to go about it, yet behold one thing or other soon strikes all out of mind,
and disturbs us so, that never a whit the better: but if after the powers and
senses of our bodies be once worn and weakened, and the feeling of the extreme
dolours and panges of the sickness be mittigated, whereby the body after a time
of wrestling and wearying of it self, is now somewhat quieted, and so the
mind more settled, w^ then begin again to take better hold, yet still on either
the care of children and wife for want of sufficient provision for them, or
grief to depart from them, or the remembrance of lands, goods, houses and
possessions, and other worldly treasures: the love, liking and delights whereof
have possessed our hearts all our life time before, will now so afresh enter
and trouble our heads and minds, that yet time serves not for to continue any
such godly and christian exercises as we in health-time when we should have
done it, made no account of, and deferred until the last hour. The effect of
choler in time of extreme sickness.
Sometimes are we troubled and diseased with melancholy and frenzies, choler
shooting up into our brains, and with such crampes and convulsions caused by
much euacuation, and such abundance of choler in our veins, that hereof,
follows the natural effects, rauings, blasphemings, insensible talking,
wrything of the lips, strange and vn-accustomed wresting and turning of the
neck, buckling of the joints and whole body; yea and oftentimes such
extraordinary strength that three or four men cannot hold us nor rule us
without bonds. With these and such like strange effects, are many men deprived
not only of the right use of the parts of their bodies, but also of their
reason and right wits, and last of all of life it self. Are not here then
lets enough from the performance of that amendment of life, and crying God mercy,
which we put off in our life time?

Put case that we be neither cut off with sudden death, nor annoyed at our
last end with any of these aforesaid lets and impediments of strange diseases
and extraordinary effects thereof, nor with any other such like noisome and
troublesome circumstances or sicknesses, but that we have time, leisure, and
quietness to do all such things as any of us all trusted unto at our last
farewell with the world? The devil will be most busy to hinder repentance at
our last hour.
yet will that deadly enemy, that mortal adversary of ours Satan the Devil,
at ye time above all other, apply himself; and let us look for no other, but
what vile sin we have committed and delighted ^n all our life time, that will
he lay to our ^harge, and clogge our consciences with, and to bring us into
desperation with and ^y them, he will put us in mind, and ter^ifie us with
Gods severe threatenings against sin. He will object against us that saying of
our Lord Christ, Math. 19.
that if we would have entered into life, we should have kept his Commandments.
Math. 7.
He will tell us that not he yt says Lord Lord, but he that does the will of the
father of heaven, shall enter into the Kingdom of God. He will put us in mind
that, Not the hearers of the Law, but the doers shall be justified. Romans 2. Romans
8.
He will threaten us that because we have lived according to the flesh, we shall
die. He will crack us that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of
God: and that neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers nor Wa^tons,
1. Cor. 6.9.10.
nor Buggerers nor thieves, nor the Covetous nor Dru^kards not Railers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.

And that such as have lived according to the works of the flesh, which are
repeated up Gal. 5. shall not attain to the kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 5. Ier. 2.
And that we must be presented before the judgment seat of Christ and every
man receive particularly according as he has done in this life good or evil:
Apoca. 20
2. Pet. 2.
every man shall receive according to his works: and that God spared not the
Angels when they sinned: 1 P^^. 4.
and if the just shall scarce be saved, where shall the wicked man and sinner
appear.

When all these, and a great deal more, describing and setting forth unto us
the rigor of Gods severe justice, and the reckoning whereunto we shall be
called, shall be put into our minds on our deathbeds; and that damned Satan
which all the days of our lives before labored to make us careless and
negligent of the knowledge, or consideration of any of these things, that so he
might make us the more boldly and blindly to run headlong into sin, shall
charge us with this, and much more like stuff, appealing to our own
consciences for witness hereof, and so heervppon plant in our hearts deep
Desperation: Alas in what case shall our poor souls then stand? Would a man
then for a thousand worlds, and all the profits and pleasures thereof be
brought to such a quandary?

O thou therefore that read or hear this damnable and miserable state
that silly souls may be implunged into, for the better avoiding of these
perils, read and read again, meditate, ponder, and put in practice the
direction, advice, and counsel in the beginning of this present sixth Chapter.

And take this lesson of Joseph of Arimathia, The example of Joseph of
Arimathia most worthy to be imitated.
that like as he in his life time had made a ready Sepulcre in the midst of
his Garden, which was the place of his pleasure (as all Gardens of great men
most commonly are) even so thou in the midst of these things wherein thou
take thy greatest felicity and delight, remember yet thy grave, and what one
day (thou know not how soon) shall become of thy poor soul, and afterward
of thy soul and body for ever.

The use and custom of he Egyptians.
Remember and learn likewise at the Egiptians, who perceiving the mindfulnes of
death to be a good help to bridle their evil actions, used to bring a Picture
or Image resembling death, into their great and sollemne Feasts; which
fearful and ugly sight, trembling and shaking, they took to be a special
occasion to keep the beholders in sobriety, by the remembrance of their end,
The notable and imm^^a^^e example of ^ing Ezechi^s.
which they must all come unto sooner or later.

And finally, learn at the good king Ezechias, when thou shall be by any
occasion put in remembrance of death, be afraid of Gods threatening, and sorrow
a little before hand, least thou be constrained to sorrow, howl, and cry
remediless always afterward; for according to the old saying, Ecclesiast.
7.40.
Qui ante non cauebit post dolebit, he that will not beware before shall
afterward be sorrye, and he that in all his doings remembers the end, shall
never lightly do amiss. The which wise remembrance of our ends, he vouchsafe
to plant in our hearts, who has full dearly bought us, Jesus Christ the
righteous, to whom with his, and our heavenly father, and the holy spirit three
persons; and one eternal majesty of Godhead, all worthy glory, honor, and
praise, be worthily attributed, for ever and ever Amen.

CHAP. 7
The seventh Chapter containing the General Preservative against the despair
or doubting of Gods mercy arising upon any cause whatsoever.

FOr as much as it is a thing manifestly to be proved by holy Scriptures, that
a man endued with true faith it self may not withstanding now and then be
troubled and assaulted with motions of doubtings wavering; yea and of
despairing: therefore for the bridling, suppressing and ouercomming of these
assaults, it shall be good to put in practice these five things especially.

First, we are to think and consider thus much, The first preservative against
Despair.
that as not to murder, not to steal, not to commit adultery, and all the
rest of the Decalogue or ten Commandments, are the Commandments of God, and
we are careful, and strive with our selves that we should not break any of
the^; least that in breaking any of them, we should so highly offend God, that
he would therefore power down upon us his heavy wrath and in his indignation
severely punish us as by many examples we see he has done to others in the
like offenses: So also it is Gods commandment as well as any of the others
are, 1 John 3.23.
That we believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ: and therefore we must
think we offend against God as grievously, or rather far more grievously in
violating and breaking this Commandment by incredulity, doubting, wavering and
despairing as if we should shed man's blood, commit whordome, theft, perjury, or
any other such like notorious sin.

O what a heinous sin must it needs be to cast no doubts, nor despair in
the help of a mortal man in the time of need: and yet to mistrust and
despair of the like in God? As for example, we can settle our hearts to
believe in our mortal fathers if we stand in need of meat, drink or
clothes, An example that many men put more trust in mortal man then in God.
we then call on them, and if they promise us any such things, we can set our
hearts at ease, and count it as a thing done; we doubt no thing of their good
will toward us nor of the performance, of their word unto us, we depend upon
them, we rely only on them and none other, and what they give their word to do
for us, we make as sure reckoning of it, as if it were already in our hands.

Another example showing that many men put more trust in mortal man then in
God.
Again, if we stand in need of a piece of money as of x. l xx. l. xxx. l. or
be it more or less, to discharge some dangerous bond, or for any such like use
by a set day, or to save our bodies out of prison; and in the mean time,
before the day appointed come, some one of our honest rich neighbors, that is
counted an honest substantial man, and of good credit, promise us certainly
so much money as we want, and stand in need of to serve our turn with, and bids
us trust unto it that before that day he will be sure to help; we heerevpon
trust his honest promise, we believe his word, and make as sure account of it
as if we had it already in our purses, and take no more thought nor care for
it. O how much more should we trust Gods most faithful, just, and true word
and promise; believe him without all distrust, doubting, or despair, and
depend upon him who is a thousand times more able and more willing to do us
good, and to keep touch with us, then ever was, to ever shall be any mortal
earthly father or friendly neighbor?

The second thing in this case to be considered of, is that every one of us,
The second general help against desperation.
is particularly to believe that he is in the number of the^ that shall be
saved, by the merits of Christ's death and passion: for the promises of
salvation in Christ are indefinite, excluding no particular man, as for
example, God so loved the world, Ioh. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten son, to the end that all that believe in him
should not perish but have life everlasting. In with general words is included
every particular believing person, although he have not his name severally and
particularly set down: and here God excludes none from his promise unless
through their unbelief and despair they exclude their own selves. If the
King of Great Britain of his own mere mercy and motion of compassion, or at
the suit and mediation of some Nobleman or other that is dear unto him,
should freely pardon and forgive all the malefactors and prisoners of any
Gaile, within his kingdoms, may we not account them very fond and foolish men,
and not worthy the benifit of the Kings gracious Pardon, if some two or three
should doubt and despair that this general Pardon appertains not unto them,
because their own particular and several names were not therein specified and
expressed? Even thus is our case.

Let not therefore any illusion of Satan nor fear of our own unworthiness, nor
want of our particular names, nor any other argument or reason whatsoever,
withdraw us from challe^ging our own portions and parts of Gods most merciful
promises, of his free pardon, and remission of our sins: Let us not doubt nor
distrust the performance and truth of Gods promises.

Thirdly, to comfort our selves, and to suppress Satan's temptations to
despairing, The third general help against desperation.
we may further meditate and ponder with our selves these two points
especially: First that seeing the Lord has promised to forgive us our sins;
and to put all our wickedness out of his remembrance (as by plain and most
manifest evidence of holy scriptures it may easily be proved) then it stands
with his justice and truth, to perform the same, and that upon such a
necessity, that he must either forgive us our offenses according to his own
word, or else we must count him unfaithful for the breach of his promises; or
else, (which were horrible to think) judge him an hippocrite or a dissembler,
if he should pretend one thing, and intend another; or at the leastwise
unconstant in altering and changing that which he has spoken with his own
mouth, and so to be thought (which is monstrous) to be unjust: for the second
point we may consider likewise to our comfort and to the weakening and overthrow
of all desperate conceits that God has already punished Jesus Christ for our
offenses, Esa. 75. Whatsoever could be looked for at man's hands, or whatsoever
man could be charged with, that Christ performed and discharged
and therefore cannot in justice punish them again in us. We offended and
Christ was punished for the same: Whatsoever in justice God could either demand
or man owed, that paid our Lord Christ. Man ought to die, Christ satisfied for
the same: man ought to have born the heavy wrath and displeasure of ye father;
Christ did bear ye same: man ought to have bin cast down into hell, Christ
satisfied for that also: yea, he so fully contented paid and pleased God the
Father, for all whatsoever the Lord could look for at man's hands that the
father himself acknowledged, and in thunder from heaven confessed the same, in
the hearing of many witnesses present; and hearing the same at the baptizing of
our Lord Christ by John Baptist in the flood Jorden: and so all faithful
believers hereof, are heere-by fu^ly and freely acquitte and discharged from
all debt of sin they owed unto God for ever.

Why should thou then, O Satan; so busily charge us with any such matter to
drive us into desperation, seeing that Sublata causa, tollitur etiam et
effectus? The cause whereby thou so vrgest desperation by Jesus Christ being
taken away the effects also must needs then cease.

The 4. general help for the avoiding of despairing.
The fourth thing to be used and practiced for the better avoiding of despair
is that at what time soever we feel our hearts through Satan's crafty
suggestion assaulted and molested with this venomous sting of desperation, we
should then straight convey our selves into some quiet and secret place, and
there in some humble manner power out our hearts before God with inward hearty
and zealous prayer desiring him of his infinite mercies, to work in our hearts
increase of faith, and to suppress and vanquish all our unbelief, and utterly
to expel from thence all despair.

The fifth and last remedy that now I purpose to handle here against
Desperation, The fifth general help against desperation.
is that we frame our selves carefully, dilligently, and with godly zeal to
use, and oftentimes to frequent such godly means as God has appointed and
set forth unto us, for the obtaining and increasing of faith, as (over and
besides earnest prayer last before spoken of) the use of reverent reading,
hearing, and meditating of Gods word, and the receiving of the Sacraments,
being holy Signs, and as it were Seals seen with our outward or bodily eyes,
which inwardly do signify, and set forth to our hearts the secret and inward
graces of GOD.

FINIS.

