A Brief discourse of War.

Written by Sir Roger Williams Knight; With his opinion concerning some parts
of the Martial Discipline.

Newly perused.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas Orwin, dwelling in Paternoster Row, over
against the Sign of the Checker. 1590.

TO THE MOST HOnorable, my singular and best Lord, Robert Earl of Essex and
Ewe, Vicount Hereford and Bourghchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourghchier
and Louayne, Master of the Queens Majesty's horse, and Knight of the most
noble Order of the Garter:
Roger Williams wishes increase of all Honor and Virtue.
MOst honorable Lord, having busied my self more than two years in writing
sundry actions that passed in our days, especially the great actions of the
Netherlanders since the first arrival of Duke D' alua, until the late sieges
of Sluice and Bergis, having resolved to print and dedicate them unto your
Lordship: diverse occasions persuades me to crave pardon for a time; assuring
your Lordship, if health and liberty permits leave, to present them unto your
self in the French tongue: hoping by those means to be rightlier judged,
than I have been hethervnto. In troth, but for the negligence of a servant that
lost part of my discourses, I would not have printed any thing without the
whole; wherefore I have taken boldness to present your Lordship with some of my
lost papers, humbly desiring you to accept them, as from a Soldier that has
but small skill in writing or inditing; but could I do better, assuredly it
should be unto your self, and shall be in any thing I can perform. Bear
with my faults, be assured of my love, and command my life, next unto my sacred
Sovereign and dear Country.

Your Lordships most bounden to serve: Roger Williams.

To all men of War in general.
NOble Soldiers of what quality soever, where I discourse of the virtues and
vices that aduanceth and overthrows all actions, all that has their honor to
lose may claim part of the virtues, neither needs any to be grieved at the
vices unless they condemn themselves guilty; the greatest Captains of
Europe, can witness, that I robbed neither superior nor companion of his
right, much less has been ever my thoughts to wrong any general action: the
which all or the most of you that know me will bear witness, when my
Netherlanders discourses with others, comes out. I think Gonsalua was called
the last graund Captain, but I persuade my self neither he nor any other
before him had ever carried that name, without the seconding of a number of
brave companions. The most worthiest Caesar although he was highly ambitious,
notwithstanding in his Commentaries written by himself, he imputed part of
his honor unto his Lieftenants and Officers. Wherefore should not others do
at the least the like, being not worthy to be compared unto the basest sort of
his followers: no honorable minds can be free from honorable ambition, but the
ambition may be such (let the mind be never so great) if he robbs the honor
of his companions, he wrongs himself and imbates his action. Few men of
judgment but knows it impossible for one man to conduct an Army without
Officers, and impossible for any state to know the worth of their Captains
without being in action with great enemies: but for that trial the Parisians,
Gauntois, Antwerpians and such, would only place squadrons in battles,
choose grounds, march in what order you would, arm men in good order, fortify
and discourse, with other matters, to the show, as though they had been great
masters of Camps: but when they were tried with the fury of expert
executioners, their wars proved but May-games. Although I persuade myself
my Discourse be Unpleasant, with small judgment: notwithstanding, being
persuaded by honorable good friends, I took courage to print it: true it is,
no action ought to be printed without the consent of sundry Actors, or at the
least by one Principal, which ought to sign his works with his name,
otherwise we find the most Actors wronged and robbed of the most of their
reputation: some with envy or malice, others with glorious ambition: sometimes
you have most honorable quiet Estates wronged with ambitious follies libells,
the which are hardly known and found out: but being signed by the author,
deserves he well, the honor is his; if ill, the shame shall be his. Men of
War ought to be more open hearted, more liberal, and more affable, than any
other profession, although their secrets ought to be but unto few, their
hearts must be open unto the multitude, and liberal to confess good deserts
as well as with their purses: although their resolutions be agreed on by two or
three, notwithstanding the more affable they show themselves unto the
multitude, the greater will be their voges and loves. Some term men wise for
not speaking many words: true it is, idle speeches are winds, and a disgrace
unto the speaker; but be they to good purpose, the more he speaks, the
greater is his praise. You must think to repeat great actions, it requires
many words, to persuade the few expert companions to offend or defend, a few
words will serve: but to animate or dissuade the rude multitude, the more words
and the oftener the better. We do find the most Conquerours were greatly
advanced with the orations of their Orators, as well amongst the seruilest sort
as the rude multitude: without speeches, the wise can not be discerned from the
foolish, nor without trial of government against equal enemies, the perfects
Captain cannot be known from the most ignorant. Otherwise ignorance will
condemn Generals, their followers and actions let them be ever so great,
although themselves never carried places of reputation either in field or
town, nor commanded more than over their own servants, saying we have known
great Potentates Camps, and Courts. Let no man be so simple to judge them
worthy to condemn great actions or their actors, without being employed in
their great affairs, it is hard for men to govern themselves well, harder to
govern a few, more harder to govern many, much more a great multitude; some
can govern a household, and cannot govern a town; some can govern a town,
and not a whole country. A man may be sufficient to conduct a private
company, and not sufficient to command a Regiment; likewise sufficient for a
Coronell, and not for a General. But whether it be for policy or Arms, it is
an error to think men without trial worthy to be compared unto the others
tried, in what place soever great or small. Diverse play Alexander on the
stages, but few or none in the field. Our pleasant Tarleton would counterfeite
many arts, but he was no body out of his mirths. Many have a virtue, few
has many, none have all: the most men looks into their fellows faults, but
few looks into their own; bear with mine, I will bear with thine; love
me, I will love thee; let us love each other, and God will love us all: on
that condition noble superiors, Roger Williams wishes to you all honor and
happiness, and to you companions, no worse than to himself* Farewell.

FINIS.
EXperience and Learning must confess, all VVarres are maintained with these
three Principalls. A good Chief; A good Purse; And good Justice.

ALl consists in the Chief: where there is a good Chief, there is good
Justice; and a brave Chief cannot want a good Purse, if he be second with his
Prince or Estate: if their purse fail, a brave Chief will force his Enemies
Countries to maintain his action, having a good quarrel: with the sufferance
of the great God.

Is he resolute and valiant? All the rest of his Officers and Soldiers will
resolve themselves, no coward shall be advanced; taking always care unto their
words and deeds: assuring themselves, this resolute valiant Man will advance
us, do we deserve it; do we ill, his Honor is such, he will not abide us.

Is he liberal and constant? Then are all that serve under him sure to receive
their due, rather more than less, that come into his hands, and assured to be
recompensed for their vigilant pains and travel, and to be partakers as well
with his honorable acts, as with his liberal Purse: neither backbiter nor
flarterer dares call in question the name of a brave man, much less none of
his familiar acquaintance. If they should, then is the other sure to come to
his answer, and not be condemned without great faults, as noble Sir Philip
Sidney was wont to say, Let us love him for his small virtues, for a number
have none at all.

Is he covetous and miserable? He cares not what wrong he does to recover
wealth, cause men to end their days in every light skirmish, weary others
with wants and discurtesies, keep the Officers of his Army in pickes and
quarrels, cause them to disgrace one another, lay all the fault on his fellows,
spare neither friend nor foe to recover wealth; it is impossible for such a
Chief to end any action honorably: for he respects the least of his bags,
more than his best Captain; and valures his crowns too good for his brauest
soldiers. A multitude are not to be contented, without consuming great
treasure; the sight of his gold, and departing with his treasure will cause him
to wish all his troops dead to recover their dues. In short time he will
discredit his Estate and action.

Is he ambitious, in such sort that he thinks none to be valued unto himself,
and that all services are done by himself, resolving none shall be advanced,
but such as flatter his humors, envying all other men's fortune, and virtues?
That man cares not what becomes of his State and Action, longer than they
maintain his ambition, against all others, be it right or wrong.

Is he proud and vain glorious? All those that serve under him, must flatter
his favorites to come unto his speech; when they come, there must be nothing
contraried; if they do, he will term them fools, and his favorites devise
faults to condemn them, to please his humors, and to maintain his Gloria
Patri.

It is almost impossible for any one to have all these virtues; or for any to
be free from al these vices. To say troth, Ambition is given to men of war,
more than to any other profession: but let him be assured, whosoever has it as
I speak off, overthrows any action, unless the great God will have the
contrary.

Some think it hard to know these men, because every man thinks himself
valiant and virtuous, or at the least say honest and just. Their valor must be
judged by their deeds, not by their words; the rest of their virtues are easier
known, than thieves in a civil government. Thieves are tried by God and their
country, so ought these great Captains to be tried by the multitude that
serves under them; especially by their officers in general. Their fear cannot
stop the rumor of the multitude, nor their bribes content few or none of the
Officers, but such as respect neither honor nor virtue, and care not how they
come by their favor and wealth, so they have it.

Duty, honor and wealth makes men follow the wars: when Generals rob their
inferiors of all three, often it makes honest minds quit their service, and the
dishonest to serve their Enemies. None knows the worth of honest Soldiers,
but such as have bin in action with equal Enemies. Those that are most
furnished with experime^ted captains, shall find it a loss to lose few; but
those that have but few, shall find it a greater loss to lose any at all:

How that all Conquests and Overthrows consists in expert soldiers, and ever
did since the world began unto this hour.
SOme thinks Commissions and authority is sufficient to conduct an Army, and
that Conquests and Overthrows consist in multitude: let the Commission be ever
so large, the authority ever so great, the multitude ever so many; the Wars
consists altogether in good Chiefes, and experimented Soldiers, and ever did
since the world began to this hour. What caused Alexander to overthrow Darius
with few men, considering his number? but his valorous person, with the
experience of his Captains and Soldiers. What caused Caesar to overthrow
Pompey, Roman to Roman, with far lesser number? because he had old trained
Legions, against more than half new levied raw men.

Our famous Kings Henry the fifth and Edward the third, gave their overthrows
with few in respect of their Enemies.

Also Charles the fifth with a few experimented Soldiers, considering the
number of the Germans.

How often few or one is the occasion of the winning or loosing of a Battle.
IN our time did not the Prince of Conde give battle to the French King at the
gates of Paris, to the Kings loss, to the honor of the small Troop, being not
half a quarter so many; where Stewart a Scottish Gentleman with a dozen
Horsemen was one of the principallest occasions, by killing the Constable being
their General.

At the Battle of Mocberhay, where the worthy Count Lodowick of Nassau was
overthrown and killed; the Troops of Spaniards being fearful to fight,
seeing the number of Lodowickes Horsemen, were only encouraged to charge
resolutelie, by the oration of Sentia de vela.

The shameful Overthrow at Iubeleo, where less than 600. Horsemen of Don John
de Austria, overthrew 15000. against reason, only for want of Chiefes to keep
order. The occasion of this charge came through a Captain of Horsemen, which
discovered their disorder of March, and procured the rest to follow, desiring
leave of Octauia Gonzaga his General, to charge.

At Northorne in Freezeland, two or three cowardly captains were the cause of
the overthrow of our Battle with discouraging words, the Enemies Horsemen and
vangard being broken.

The mutenous Gauntoys and Iper, did they not give battle in our fathers
days unto a French King, and their Earl of Flanders: and did not this Prince
of Parma with less than 8000. men conquer them like slaves? only because
they were void of Chiefes, inexpert for wars, their brave warlike minds
changed unto mechanickes.

Also the proud Town of Antwerpe, which was left in good guard and Discipline
by the late famous Prince of Orange having in it better than 16000. as well
armed and in as good order as any Garrison in Europe, furnished plentifully
with artillery, munition, and all necessaries for wars; for want of Chiefes
to direct the^, this prince of Parma made them slaves, with less than 8000.
men.

The difference betwixt raw men, and expert Soldiers.
WHat is a multitude without Chiefes, but bodies without heads. Nations must
not flatter themselves what they have bin, but what they are. The Grecians, and
the Macedonians had the Monarchy, so had the Romans, with others; what are
they now? The people wanting their Chiefes, and their accustomed brave minds.
All these actions with the rest that have been aforetime or in our days, were
executed by the lesser numbers, and the praise of every several action,
belonging unto less than a dozen Chiefes. It is an error to think that
experimented Soldiers are sodeinlie made like glasses, in blowing them with a
puff out of an iron instrument. There can be no Leaders of good conduct, unless
they have been in foughten Battles, asseiged and defended Towns of war;
the longer experted, the more perfected. The Duke of Alua was wont to say; In
leesing of 100000. in 10. years action, their proves not 20. famous Leaders.
To conclude; a multitude without experimented Leaders, that have to war with
expert Captains, are to be compared unto a Navy in a Tempest, without Masters
or Pilots.

One noble opinion of Mounsieur de La Now.
THE famous Mounsieur de La Now was wont to say, It was necessary for the
greatest commanders, to give ear often unto all their under Officers, I mean
their simplest Captains, to hear their opinions, concerning their Discipline
in open audience. His meaning was noble without ambition: for in all Armies,
there are a number of Captains better Soldiers, than many higher Officers;
which can never be known without place to execute their art: which must be
in action and audience before famous Superiors. These liberties and courtesies
make a number employ their wits and valors daily to advance their credites. It
hinders no great Officers, unless they mean the wars should end with
themselves; it aduaunceth the Wars, and Actions: when they are gone, other
experted known men are placed in their rooms. This order must maintain good
Discipline, otherwise ignorance happens often into the high places, unknown,
until actions be overthrown. Those will say, we are expert and as valiant
as the others; let them say and be what they list, unless they be known to be
expert of action, it is not necessary for a State to hazard their action in
trying their experience, and unknown fortunes. What corrupted the discipline
of the Netherlanders? chiefly placing their ignorant cousins and favorites to
command. Who could have won Gaunt, Antwerp, Bridges, Iper, with an 100 other
towns, that wanted no necessaries for wars if there had been expert
Commanders in them. These strong places were lost shamefullie without blows,
with twenty overthrows in the field, with the like disorders. Therefore this
noble La Now would say always, Checune a son mety; as much to say, Every man
ought to have place according to his art. The martial Byron would say also,
These Coronells of three days, marres all the Armies of the world.
Notwithstanding, it must be confessed, that some quick spirits prove to be
expert with small actions: but so rarely found, that it is dangerous to give
them charge before they be well known.

What makes the Spaniards discipline to be so famous as it is? Their good
order: otherwise it is well known, the Nation is the basest and cowardly sort
of people of most others; so base, that I persuade my self, ten thousand of
our Nation, would beat thirty of theirs out of the field, let them be chosen
where they list; saving some 3. thousand which is in the Low countries. And
those, for all they be conducted by ancient expert Captains accompanied with
other Nations, nothing inferior to those Spaniards, both for valor and
conduct; notwithstanding, the trained Troops of our Nation did beat them
always number to number, both in General Norris his time, and sithence. In
their Countries the world does know five thousand of our Nation made guardes
at the gates of Lisborne four days, although there were in the Town five
thousand Spaniards, 4000. Portugeses carrying arms; besides they were assured
of all the Burgesses, for they had sent into Spain, and kept in the Cytadell,
their wives, children, and chiefest goods. Also by reason of our Army staying
in Galitia, where 6000. of ours ouerthrewe 16000. of theirs. Before we arrived
at Lisborne, they had 20. days respit to arm and put themselves in order; but
had our Army not touched at the Groine, and sailed strait to Lisborne, as the
Earl of Essex did, neither Soldier nor Captain can deny, but the town had
been ours; for it was vnmanned, without any good order: and when we arrived,
had our Navy entered, we would have entered the Town, or the world should have
witnessed, so many Englishmen had bin buried in that place. But let all the
Captains of Europe judge rightly of our proceedings from the first to the
last, considering our small means and great crosses, they cannot deny, but
both our valor and government, deserved 100. times more praise, than the
attempt of Duke Medina and his, on England: notwithstanding they wanted neither
men, victuals, munition, nor money. Also the world knows, we were not set
out with our Sovereigns royal Forces; notwithstanding we gave them the law 30
days in their Countries. When sickness with other wants forced us to imbarke,
being followed with their Army, we returned toward them with less than 4000.
Where the Earl of Essex sent his Trumpet, to dare their General the County
of Fuentes, to find himself in the head of his troops, to change the blows
of the pikes, giving him signal of his attire and feathers: so did General
Norris command the Trumpet to tell them our small number, and to dare their
whole Forces to battle: but the cowardly besonions perceiving our
resolution, before we could arrive within 3. miles of the^, al their footmen
ran away to Lisborne, being 3. for one. Fuentes with Don Gabriel de Ninis
knowing we had under fifty horsemen, staid where they were encamped, having
with the^ at the least 600. horsemen: notwithstanding, the alrrme being given
us, the Earl, and General Norris with the most of the Chiefes, giving order to
our Squadrons to keep in that order we marched, and to march with all speed to
recover the top of a hill, a fine place to give battle, assigned unto them by
the trumpet, within half a league of their quarter. The Earl, General, and
Chiefs with the horsemen, advanced with speed to the top of the hill, both to
discover the Enemies order, and to choose a commodious place to fight. At their
sight, we persuaded our selves by their fashion to receive battle, our
ensigns being displayed on the top of the hill, and our squadrons possessing
the ground that we thought most fit: after resting a while, and perceiving
their cowardly resolution, adua^ced our battle toward their quarter,
unknown to us but that all their forces had bin in that village. At our
approach, they ran away in such sort, that our horsemen (being but 50. in all,
amongst whom were diverse of our Chiefs, besides the Earl and his brother) made
200. of them run away that they kept in the Reregard. This proof with diverse
others, had we on them in our Portingall voyage.

But to speak troth, no Army that ever I saw, passes that of Duke de Parma
for discipline and good order: the which and it pleased others to follow, it
were not amiss. And to that end I thought good to show some part of the
discipline and orders amongst them. None comes to be high Officers, unless they
be known to be expert and tried Soldiers of action, of long continuance; or
for courtesy to grace their Armies with young Princes, or Nobility, or at the
least Gentlemen of good quality; neither must these contemn the basest Master
of their Camp. For all their birth, they must be known valiant, and of good
discretion. These Noble men are placed Generals of horsemen, or command a
Cornet; but they will be sure to look, that their under Officers shall be
expert and known men; they shall not choose their own favorites and
followers: which makes them to maintain the like discipline, when they come
to be expert themselves: for without doubt, none can command so well, as those
which have been commanded.

Their State is governed with two sorts of people, Captain and Clergy. As the
Captains ambition persuades the king to increase his Wars, to maintain
their estate in wealth and greatness, so does the Clergy persuade him also to
wars, to maintain their State, against the^ of Religion. By this means the
State of Spain during this government can never be without wars, and
continual wars must make expert Soldiers.

The long continuance of their Army.
THis Army of the Prince of Parma has been in action unbroken, since Charles
the fifth his troubles against the Germans. They have continued in the Low
Countries three and twenty years. When the Duke D' alua, brought them
thither, he found them ready disciplined in Regiments, under Ensigns and
Cornets, although the Governors, Captains and Soldiers, were changed with
casualties of Wars: notwithstanding the Army was continually maintained
with one purse and discipline from the first hour unto this, which must be
about 50. years. For that time, we must confess, none had the school of
wars continually, but themselves. Their actions shows their discipline,
which were not amiss for others to follow. Their order is, where the wars
are present, to supply their Regiments being in Action, with the Garrisons out
of all his Dominions and Provinces: before they dislodge, besonios supply their
places, raw men, as we term them. By these means he trains his besonios,
and furnishes his Army with trained soldiers: yet though these Garrison men
be well trained Soldiers, God knows they are but raw men for a long time, in
respect of the men of Action: then judge you, what difference there is betwixt
expert Soldiers and raw. In my poor judgment, (as I showed before) all their
discipline consists in the Spanish. They maintain also certain companies of
ordinances, chiefly to content the Nobility, as I will show hereafter; they
keep in good order their Caualeri, Italians, Burgonians and Albanetes, for
their great numbers I mean, to supply their Armies, as occasion presents.
They make most account of the Wallons, Burgonians and Italians: for the
Almaines they care not, but will hire them only to serve their turn, when
their Enemies leauie Germans against them. They have great reason; for as
long as any Prince or Estate keeps continually 7000. expert footmen, and
3000. horsemen, though his levied Army be 50000. the ten thousand will both
discipline them, and keep the^ in order: for out of the 10000. he may draw
co^tinualy 100 or two experimented Soldiers to make officers, to train the
others. Besides he places diverse great Officers out of his assured 10000.
amongst his mercenaries; in the which he shows great discipline; for there can
be no dangerous muteny in any Army, unless some of the Chiefes be privy unto
it; and easily prevented if it be discovered; and can not be but discovered by
reason of this good order.

How they divide their Armies.
THey divide their Armies into Regiments. All the Spanish Colonells are
termed, Masters of the Camp. Although al their Army be divided into
Regiments, be they never so many Colonels, there are none termed M. del Campo,
but the Spanish. Although there are but four Tertias Spanish, which are called
de la Lyge, de Lombardy, de Naples, and de Flandrie; to grace the Spanish, they
give often the name of M. del Campo unto others, but never above six at a
time, the which must be famous. Mondragon being Colonel of the Wallons before
Serexe, for his famous service was called M. del Campo, so was Jonas Oria,
having no Regiment, for his famous service at Malta and in other places.

These four Tertias, when they are most, are scarce 6000. strong, they make up
their 10000. I named before with Burgonians, Italians and Wallons. One of these
Tertias when the Duke of Alua came down, was called Tertia de Sardinia. For
their disorder, the Duke executed their Captains in Amsterdam, in Holland,
cassid the Tertia, entertaining the Soldiers a new. To keep the honor of the
brave Soldiers, they termed this Tertia, Tertia Veche, to give example unto
others. It is necessary to remember this Discipline, with other, executed by
the Duke of Alua. This Tertia of Sardinia had to their Colonel a valiant
Captain, named Don Gonsalo de Drakemont, being commanded to Frizeland, against
Lodowicke the worthy Count of Nassaw, brother to the famous Prince of Orange:
to stop his course, Duke d' Alua sent Sir John de Lamy Count de Aranberge
Chief, with other troops of horse and foot. Besides this Tertia being
approached Count Lodowicke understanding his strength, Aranberge would have
stayed where he was, until the arrival of the Count de Megem, the which would
have joined with him that night with more forces. The ambition of this Colonel
and Captains was such, they forced Count Aranberge with urging words touching
his reputation and credit, both to approach and charge some of Lodowicks troops,
the which brought them into an ambush where Lodowicke was: who defeated them in
route, leaving Count de Aranberge dead in the place, with diverse other Chiefes.
At their return, Duke d' Alua rewarded them, as I showed you before.

Another time a great Regiment of Almaine mutined for want of pay: in their
outrage they spoiled Count Laderne, their own Colonel. Duke d' Alua called
them into a field, both to be mustred and to receive their pays, Into this
place he commanded also al his Caualery with other footmen to come. The
mutinous Regiment being viewed with commissaries, he placed the horsemen in
Squadrons round about them, commanding them to charge them like enemies, unless
they would deliver the mutiners into his hands. The poor Almains seeing
themselves deceived, fearing the fury of the horsemen, delivered unto him all
that he demanded. To revenge their mutiny, and to maintain Discipline, he
executed of them 200. Since that time we cannot learn that the Almaines
mutined in the Spanish Army.

Their great Officers in order as they command.
IN the absence of the Captain General, the hie Marshall or master of the
Camp general commands al. After him, the General of the horsemen: after
him, the General of the Artillery: after him, the eldest master of the Camp:
next unto the Masters del Campo, the Lieftenant general of the horsemen: after
him, the Lieftenant of the Artillery. These Officers direct the field: for the
rest of the Colonells and Officers, none meddle further than his own
particular charge, unless they be authorized. Although the Threasurer at wars be
an honorable place commanded by no body, but by the Captain general, he nor
none of the others meddle with the Martial Discipline; I mean the Auditores,
Commissaries, Muster masters, and such. Touching the charge and duties of the
Captain General, and the other great Captains, I refer it unto the famous
warriors which wrote it often before.

What other Officers ought to second their great Officers.
THe office of the Marshal, is painful and great, for he medleth with the whole
affairs of the wars; he has to serve and to help him, the Serieant mayor,
Quarter masters, Prouosts, and Captain of the Spions.

The General of the horsemen has to serve him, his Lieftenants, Colonells,
Captains, and Scoutmasters.

The General of the Artillery, his Lieftenant, Commissaries of munitions,
Gentlemen of the Artillery, Colonel of Pioners, Trench-masters, and
Carriage-masters.

The Treasurer is chief of all the others: he, the Auditor, Muster-masters,
Commissaries as well for musters, as for victuals, deliver their accounts only
unto the captain general, or to his deputy authorized by him for the use of the
King. There is also one Secretary authorized by the King, who looks into all
their dealings, and knows all the secret only that passes betwixt the King
and the Captain general.

This Secretary has always diverse blanks signed by the King. With those
bla^ks they have redressed suddenly many disorders which could not have bin
done, if they had bin forced to stay to know the Kings pleasure.

The greatness of their General, and Obeisance unto his King.
ALthough the General has his commission absolute from the King, to alter, to
redress, place, and to displace whom he lists, as occasion presents:
Notwithstanding he does nothing, without the advice and consent of his
counsel of war, if he should he is sure to be despised and contemned, not
only by his counsel of war, but by his whole Army in general; who will not
fail to appeal unto the King, and Estate of Spain, which redresseth
presently any disorders. For sudden dispatches, the King has his counsel of
war severally for every of his kingdoms and provinces, where he has occasion
to use Viceroyes or Captain Generals. All these Counsels of wars both in
Spain and abroad, are expert and principal Captains, saving a few Divines
and Ciuililians joined with them, to advise and redress their high minds and
ambition; the which is done easier and better by wise persuasions, than by
extreme justice: for if justice were executed to the uttermost, few great
Captains should live. The most great captains cannot deny, but their
profession ouer-reacheth themselves, more than any other; because all their
speeches, deeds, and minds consists in ambition for honor, seeking to
overthrow all estates, to advance their own, weighing no peril in respect of
fame.

I speak this for Captains in general: but there are honest, virtuous, and
just, yet so few that the number must be embraced, else the multitude of the
enemies would be too to many for the few friends. If a Captain be a good
counselor in War, a good executioner, or a good engioner, he ought to be
embraced, and as noble Sir Philip Sidney said, borne withal, unless his
faults are too intolerable.

How they divide their Horsemen.
THey divide their Caualerie into an 100. under a Cornet. Unless it be their two
Generals, the most of the aduantagers and adventurers march under the high
General, so do all his domestiques. When he is in person in the field, his
Cornet is always four or five hundred; they give several commissions unto
Launtiers, and to the Hergulutiers, to five hundred Launtiers they join a
hundred Hergulutiers, they keep that rate from the lesser number unto the
greatest. These Launtiers are called light Horsemen, notwithstanding they are
as well mounted as the men at arms, for one horse a piece, and as well armed,
saving the barbd for their greeues and maces: the most carry one Pistol, but
all carry a curtilace, I mean a good broad sword. Their Hergulutiers are
also well mounted for 1. horse a piece, more than half curaces of the proof,
with an open burgonet, or Millaine murrions; many have pistolls besides their
pieces, but all have good curtilaces. Both Launtiers and Hargulatiers have al
cassocks, every company several colors to be known.

The divisions of their foot bands.
THeir Commissions for foot Bands are like unto ours, some Ensigns 300. some
200. the most of an 150. Every hundred has forty armed men, of which there
must be 30. pikes, the ten others, are halberds and targets of the proof; al
their Gentlemen and vantagers are armed men, the most carry the pike, having
plasterons of the proof, I mean the fore part of the armor, the 60. others
are shot. In the later days of Duke D'alua 25. of every 100. were commanded
to be Musketters. With their armed pikes and musketters, they execute most of
their services. They found such service in the musket, that this Prince of
Parma has the most of his shot musketters.

The order of their marching.
When the Army marches, one commaundes the vangard, another the battle, the
third the rereward. None of these, nor of the Officers appointed with them,
whatsoever occasion presents, although their fellows were in fight, dares
break out of his place to offer to fight, without commandment from the
Principal. If the General be in person, he is known by a signal, like unto
a Cornet, which is carried hard by him. As he sends often to know the State of
his Army in all the quarters, so do they send others unto him, as occasion
presents, both to acquaint him of their Estate, and to know his direction. To
give equal honor unto al their troops, they alter their marches every several
march. He that had the vangard to day, to morrow is to have the rereward, the
third the battle. When occasion presents to divide their Army into several
parts to do some exploits in surprising some town, Castle, Fortress, or other
to give camisadoes, or reincounter troops, either at their lodgings, or in
their march, they send two of quality, according to the number of the troops
that go, the one commands the horsemen, the other the footmen; but one is
obeyed chief, in as ample authority, as the Captain General himself, until
they return into their Army. They have great reason; for it is impossible for
two Chiefs to agree, having equal authority.

The order of their Sieges.
When they assiege any place, they incampe at the first out of the danger of
the enemies artillery: before they make any approches, they do what they can
to make sure either with Fortes or Trenches all the passages, I mean the
coming in as well to their Camp, as to the Town or place assieged. If there
be any river or passage by water, they will be sure to stop it with Forts,
Artillery, Stockathos, Pallisathos. If they can make a bridge to pass over
horse and foot, with all necessaries from one side unto the other: if they can
they will not fail to make ways round about the place assieged to march with
horse and foot. If there be any passages strong by nature, straits through
woods, hills, or with waters, although it be a dozen miles from their Camp,
they will build strong Forts, sufficient with a small guard to abide the fury
of an army without battery. At one of these places will they give battle,
rather than leave their siege, if the party be to their advantage: by this
means they will be sure to have forty hours liberty to resolve, whether they
will fight or retire; as they did at Muncier, at Cambria, and at other places.
Count Lodowicke being in Mounce, well accompanied, especially with good
Chiefes; for he had with him the famous Captains Monsieur de la Now, Monsieur
de Poiet, Monsieur de Roueres: Notwithstanding, Duke d' Alua entrenched his
Army before it so strongly, that he was able to send out half his men to do
exploits where it pleased him. When the Prince of Orange encamped hard by him
with equal forces, he never stirred his Army, by reason of his trained
Soldiers, undid him with a Camisado, forced him to retire. So did he also
send Chappine Vitelly out of his Army, with sufficient forces into the strait
toward Valentia, who defeated Monsieur John de Lise, which marched to the
succors of Mounce with seven thousand Frenchmen. Also at Cambria this Prince
of Parma abode the Army of Monsieur d' Alanson to come in sight, although he
resolved to retire, sending his Artillery, munition and baggage out of
danger: he stayed to see the order of his march, seeing the party unequal
who marched in good order, he retired orderly without ingageing any fight. If
they think the place assieged too well manned, or the seat such by nature,
that battery can do no good, they will block it up with Fortes in such sort,
that half their Army will be sufficient to assiege it, they will be sure to
place the rest in the best quarters for victuals and forage, although it be
three days journey from the place assieged: as they did at Antwerpe, Gaunt,
Iper, Berke, and other places. By these means they relieve their wearied
troops with fresh at their pleasures. If there be troops making head to leauie
their siege, they will join closer together, as occasions present: if they
batter, they approach carefully with trenches a far off, spare neither Pioners
nor cost to save their Soldiers. Before they place their Battery, they mount
Culuerings, and other pieces to beat the flanks and defenses: if there be not
high grounds aduantagious to do it, they will be sure whatsoever it cost, to
raise mounts for the purpose. If the Bulwarks be such that the flanks cannot
be taken away with their pieces, they will lay battery at once both to
Bulwark and Curten; for the Soldiers may lawfully refuse to assault, until
the flanks be taken away; neither will the Chiefes offer it; for some of them
must lead them.

The order of their assaults.
BEing ready to assault, to give equal honor unto all the troops, the
Regiments hurl the Dice, who shall have the point, the first charge we call it:
lightly the Chief that commanded that quarter will ask it as his right,
because his troops are most spoiled by reason of their near guardes and
approches. Most often he has it: being given him, he diuides his troops to
second one the other, according to the wideness of the breach, they respect
the honor of the point, that the Captains will not give place one unto the
other more than their Colonells, but by fortune of the Dice. They need not be
so earnest for the matter, because the greatest warriors account the first
troop that enters a breach in more danger, than the first troop that must
charge in their several battles. They have reason; for I know it by good
experience, whether they enter or retire the most of them are killed, if the
defenders be honest men, I mean any thing valiant. They may have two or three
breaches, but at every one they keep one order. Before the armed men advance
to the assault, they place their Musketeers as nere to the breach as they can,
lightly they make mounts higher than the defendants: in those and in trenches
before the Artillery they place all their small shot. Before they give an
assault, they send sundry Officers and Soldiers armed of Musket proof and
good judgment to discover the breaches: when they give the assaults, if they
be not pell mell with the defendants, their Canoniers, flanks the breach over
their heads, both from the battery, and with their flanking pieces: they line
their armed men that have the first point with Musketeers armed of the proof.
At these assaults both sides lightly shoot all the vilest shot they can
invent, both to pierce Arms and to cut off Pikes, chained bullets, Dice of
steel covered withlead: lightly they give their assaults general at once, I
mean at all their breaches and mines, if the ground serve to mine. To
discourage the defendants, they have messengers of credit one horseback, if
they can pass, which run from breach to breach crying, courage the Tertia de
la Liege is entered: So at the other breaches the like, that Tertias of
Lumbardy or Naples, or others are entered, when there is no such matter. When
those that give the first charge begin to retire or wax cold, the great
Officers command their seconds to the assaults; finding fault with the rest,
telling them, it is you fellows must do it: with these stratagems and words,
they make the poor soldiers break their necks at their pleasure. But to
speak troth, the Spanish discipline is very grateful unto the men of war;
for want of present places to advance their valiant men of virtue according
unto their deserts, they give them advantages of pays, with encouraging words
and assured promises of the first places that fall void. If a Colonel,
Captain, or any other officer under them, leeseth his whole Regiment or
Company in Battle, Assault, Skirmish, or in any other service commanded unto
by their superiors; although the troop be defeated, those that return, are
sure to remain in pay, and the Colonel or Captain have present Crowns to
recomfort his troop. If the Regiment or Company be cashed, all the Officers
are surely enrouled in their own pays they had before. A cashed Colonel,
Captain, or Officer, will never take baser charge than they had before, but
will serve privately, until occasion presents to advance them unto the places
they had before. As they are bound to follow the wars, where they receive
their reliefes; so have they liberty to follow whom they list, unless they be
commanded to the contrary: the greatest part will follow the Cornet royal,
some the General of Horsemen, others the high Marshall, others the Master of
the Camp, as they be affected and minded. Likewise the cashed Soldiers are
placed in their former pays, under other Colonells None of these cashed
Officers are bound unto any duty, saving fighting; I mean to guard or
watch* but the most part will do it orderly, better than the bound men, to
show example unto others: persuading themselves he that excels his fellows,
is soonest advanced. Their usage has been such, that I marvel all
professions in Spain desires not to be Soldiers. Charles the fifth being
before Metz in Loraine, his Army being in misery and extreme sickness, his
Soldiers would openly rail on him, especially his Spanish would call him
the son of the mad woman, with all the vile words they could devise, yet he
would not hear them, but threw Crowns amongst them, saying to his nobility;
hearken these knaves, yet let me call the worst by his name, he will not
refuse to do any thing for me, though it cost him his life. Also the Duke of
Alua, when the Burghmasters of Holland presented a petition unto him of the
disorder of the Spaniards; amongst other foolish articles, they showed him how
they would have their napkins changed twice at a meal. He answered, you must
think, all those which came with me were not brought up amongst Burghers. To
say troth, God help that man of war, that has al his deeds and words
construed to the worst, considering what casualties there are in wars above
all other places. Often choler altreth honest minds, to day rich, to morrow
poor; now happy anon unhappy. Although their discipline in martial actions
be most famous, and worthy to be followed of al others; notwithstanding their
government is so vile and tyrannous, that no people is able to abide it, unless
they be too base minded. For example, the Castilian of Gaunt, having occasion
to execute 3. or 4. offenders: to terrify the multitude, he did it openly in
the market place; by chance a scaffold fell down, at the which there grew a
great noise and rumor: suddenly without more adoo, the Castilian drew his
sword, crying Alerto to his soldiers; The soldiers most sauagely discharged
a salve of hargubusaides on the poor people; with shot and sword they killed
and hurt above an 100. Complaint being made unto the Duke D' alua their
Governor; his answer was, he was sorry the fault was done without desert,
notwistanding he punished no body: thinking it a good means to terrify a
mutinous popular (as he termed the^). Another time, the Master of the camps
company, Julian Romero, being in garrison in the town of Macklen, his Alfere
being in love with a gentlewoman, could not obtain her love; on a May day, he
and his company armed, came unto her fathers house under the color of
Maying, took her away by force: her friends and kinsmen making what stir
they could to save her, with the disorder of the Alfere and Soldiers, diverse
were killed and hurt. Complaint being made, no man was executed, but
persuasions unto the parties to take patience, showing them what an offense it
was, to stir against a flying Ensign of the King their Lord. The Alfere was
banished for a few days; notwithstanding he inioyed his love, and his favor
with his Governor in a short time. Another time, a Serieant of Sentia Dauilla
Castilian of Antwerp, rode up and down Antwerp on a footecloth of velvet,
mandilion and hose imbrodered with gold letters, the contents of the words in
Spanish, Gasador de los Flaminges; as much as to say in English, A Scourge for
the Flemings: a number complained, but none had redres. Such is their
government in all places where they command with citadels, garrisons, fortresses
or forces; the least Serieant of a Band, being a natural Spaniard, will seem
to command the greatest man of quality of any other Nation, unless he command
forces himself. Let the forces be ever so great, although it be 40. or
50000. and of them, but two. or 1000. Spaniards, it must be called the Spanish
army. When they come first out of Spain, either to Italy, Flanders, or any
other places, they be the simplest besonios (as they term them) that can be
found of any other Nation; the most are apparelled by the Governors, before
they enter the Countries, to save the honor of the Nation. Let them continue
any time in pay, the simplest will compare in pride with any captain of other
Nations, and diverse rascals must be called, Signor of such a place, meaning
the next Town or Village that he was borne unto, having neither land nor
house of his own. Besides the tyrannous Inquisition is maintained by that
Nation, principally in Spain to bridle Princes and Nobility; which otherwise
have so great liberty by their ancient customs, that diverse of them owe but
small subjection unto their King: for abroad as well as in Spain, they make
whom they list slaves and prisoners at their pleasures, without trial of
Justice: neither shall the parties know, who accused them, nor what is laid to
their charge, more than it is the will of the holy Inquisition. With their
devilish Inquisition, they take men's goods at their pleasure. With their Bulls
and other paltrie devises, poisoning, murder, breaking oaths and promises, may
be pardoned by the Pope. Their religion is such, where they subdue kingdoms or
countries, either by right, policy, or arms, if they find any of great
quality that carries a voge, to command popular or men of war; let their
service and deserts be never so great, unless they be sure of them, in such sort
to obey al those, that carry their commissions and directions, be they never so
basely or vilely directed, they will be sure to make them away with poison or
murder, for Justice can take no place, I mean touching all strangers, saving
their own Nation.

For example, the Marquis of Marin^an, after they gave him advancement, Charles
the 5. wrote letters to execute him, which were discovered by the Marquis.
Likewise the Duke of Bourbon having won the battle of (...) fearing his
greatness, Charles caused his Army to mutine against him, with other disgraces
underhand to undo him; if the Duke had not taken resolution to sack Rome, to
content the men of war. Also the brave Count Egmont with others of his
Nation, for all their service were executed most cruelly by Duke D'alua, and the
Marquis of Berges with Mountenie poisoned in Spain, only to bring to pass
their determination against the Netherlanders. Also Mark Anthony Colono,
whose house and himself, followed always the house of Austria, being Viceroy
of Naples, reputed and feared for the greatest Captain in Italy, was sent for
into Spain; and before he could speak with the king, he was poisoned in his
way to the Court. The last day, two or three noble men Porteguises, taking
arms, made to the Sea coast, having discovered sir Francis Drakes fleet; the
Spanish perceiving their greatness, executed one Count, and poisoned the other;
although some of them were the men that sought to bring them into the country,
and most assured them. Look also to their proceedings with Naples and Millain,
the wrongs to Francis Fortza, Ferdinando of Aragon, with diverse other the like
actions. To His discipline and government do I know by good experience, for I
served under the Ensigns of the M. del Campo, Julian Remero 22 months, and
Mondragon 18 months, with the domestiques of the brave Don John de Austria
eight months, always in action. As I said before their discipline must be
good, for good Chiefes makes good Soldiers.

The least of thirty commanders they had always amongst them, were sufficient
to command 10000. Soldiers. A camp continually maintained in action, is like
an University continually in exercises, when famous Scholars die, as good or
better step in their places: Especially in armies, where there be every day new
inventions, stratagems of wars, change of weapons, munition, and all sort of
engines newly invented, and corrected daily.

Some may ask me as I did Philip de Comines in reading his book, where he
speaks much to the praise of Lewis the xj. but nothing how he quited his Duke
of Bourgondie: true it is, at the defeat of Harlam; Colonel Morgan and his
Regiment were discharged from the Prince of Oranges service, my self being one
arriving in England, the said Colonel with a number of others, were employed
into Ireland. At that instant the Prince of Condie was newly escaped out of
France into Germany. I having nothing to do, hearing the said Prince meant
to return into France with an army, my self and 4. other companions, resolved
to employ our service with that Prince: being in Germany with small purses,
finding the Prince not able to martch in six months, having no means to live,
we returned for England; passing through Lier in Brabant, we were brought before
the Master of the camp Julian Romero, who entertained me with such courtesy,
that I remained with him. Thus did I enter into the Spaniards wars, and do
think it no disgrace for a poor Gentleman that lives by wars, to serve any
Estate that is in league with his own.

To prove Lantiers more serviceable than men at arms, considering the numbers
that do duties.
THe difference betwixt the men at Arms, companies of Ordinances, as they
term them, and the Launtiers, called by the strangers Light Horsemen, by us
Demilances. I must confess a company of men at Arms, to be the most
honorablest private charge that a man may have in the wars, principally
because these charges are given unto Princes, Nobility, or men of great
qualities in the wars. To every several company belongs one Ensign, one
Guydon, and one Cornet; the Ensign over the men at Arms, the Guydon over the
Archers, the Cornet over the light horsemen: Considering the number of hands to
come to fight, and to do duty, I persuade my self the greatest warriors think
the Lantiers more profitable and more serviceable: my reasons are these; a man
at Arms ought to have 5. horses, for every horse he receives as much pay as a
Launtier: commonly the men of Arms makes no conuoyes that belongs unto an
Army, the most of them are men of quality (as we term men of war) either
gentle or cashed Officers, wherefore they are favored for their skouts, guards
and watches. If they be commanded to any of these duties, out of their five
horses, it is much if they send three, commonly one and two: half of them
keeps but four horses, the most three, the rest is laden with baggage,
perhaps lame iades, sufficient with courtesy to pass the Musters, being
trimmed up with help of their witnesses, how they were hurt in service, and
devises. Lightly they are not commanded to march, unless the Army dislodges: if
they do, Cornets of Launtiers and Hargulatiers are commanded with them. The men
of Arms never break their soft paces, unless they charge or retire, the
others often are commanded to great marches, to do exploits, Caualgade, (as
the strangers term it) beside they must skout, discover, with all duties that
belongs unto an Army, either in lodging or march, and fights often, when the
men of Arms see no enemy* when they do fight, lightly, it is a battle, then
the Launtiers receive and give the first blows. The first charge being well
conducted, and directed, tryes the most of the fortune of a days service, 100.
men at Arms are as chargeable as 500. Launtiers, and do not the duty,
neither in fights nor guards as half so many. Touching the barbd, (I mean
the arming of the horses) I think it to little purpose, seeing all squadrons
of pikes be lined with Musketeers or Caliuers; the lesser of both pearceth any
arming that horses use to carry. In stead of Maces, the Launtiers may carry
one Pistol, the which is lighter and far more terrible, than thrice the
force we have in these days. True it is, it is necessary, for the shocke of a
horse to wear a little Cuisset to cover the knee, so ought all the Launtiers to
be. We know it by experience; let a horseman be armed, the forepart of his
curaces of a light pistol proof, his head piece the like, two lames of his
pouldrons the like, two or three lames of his tasses of the like proof, the
rest I mean his tasses, cuisses, pouldrons, vambraces, and gauntlets, be also
so light as you can devise. With one pistol these kind of arming shall be
found heavy for the most men, to carry all day long, and too heavy for the
most horses to carry ten hours together, and to do any service: As I said
before, the Launtiers are as well mounted for one horse a piece, if he have
not two, unless he be too base minded, and the wars very bare. Besides, all
Launtiers receive every man his own pay, and have nothing to do with Master,
nor any body, saving his Officers, that commands him to do his duty in
the war. Wherefore I persuade my self, they maintain these Ordinances, as
they term them, chiefly (as I said before) to keep the ancient customs,
fearing in breaking that order, diverse of their great men would grudge: by
reason, all or the most part of these companies belong unto them. For example
our Band of horsemen Pentioners did account them the fairest Band of ordinance
in Europe for the number, because all the men at arms are Gentlemen of
quality: wherefore I do value this Band better, than twice as many of any
other, let them be of what Nation soever. I may speak it by good experience,
out of this Band there may be picked 15. or 20. sufficient to answer so many at
all deeds of arms, let it be chosen out of any Army, be it never so great:
considering their charges in pays, expenses in victuals munition, and their
liberties for duties; I mean to conuoy, guard, and to watch, so many private
Launtiers, as this fair Band musters in all of horses, under their Ensign, or
Guydon, would excel them; my reason is, as I said before, because every
Launtier is a master, and receives his own pay.

To prove Hargulatiers more serviceable than Spear men, termed by us, light
Horsemen.
THE difference betwixt our Northern Spears, Light Horsemen we term them;
and the Light Horsemen termed by the strangers Hargulatiers, as much to say
Hargabushes or Petronels on horseback. Touching the mounting and arming of
these hargulatiers, I showed you before, the service of all Light horsemen,
consists chiefly in marching of great marches, (Caualgades the strangers term
it) I mean, to surprise Companies a far off in their lodgings, or marches;
likewise to defeat conuoyes, and to conduct conuoyes, as much to say, direct it
to spoil necessaries that come to furnish their enemies, and to conduct
necessaries to furnish their own camp or service. Also to scout and discover,
to spare the armed men, I mean the Launtiers, and the other horsemen; likewise
both to conduct and spoil forragers, with the like services. They be never
commanded to do any exploits on men of War, without being accompanied with
Launtiers, or armed Pistolers, I mean Curaces on horseback. Diverse march with
swords without Pistol or Lance, especially the Frenchmen. For these services
it is necessary to have in armies or troops, for every 500. Launtiers or
armed Curaces, 100. of these kind of light horse: from that rate to the
greatest numbers. If horsemen be directed to assail troops at their
lodgings, either in villages, streights, or fields, where it requires too great
a march for footmen to keep company with the horsemen, without doubt these
hargulatiers are far better then the spearemen; my reasons are these; when
the horsemen approach the enemy, if it be in a village, lightly they must
pass through barriers and narow streights, bard with wagons, both of
victuals, and of their men of war, where commonly the Enemy keeps guardes
and watch. If the passage be such, either in entering a village or straight,
that horsemen cannot find place to enter and to charge, these hargulatiers
light on foot, and do no less duty than foot hargabushiers. If the enemy be
lodged either too strongly or to many, for the assailants to do any good on
their quarter, as ye must think, a 1000 strongly lodged in a village or
straight, with good guard and order, are worth 2000. without, let them be of
one valor and conduct) then the assailant will address an ambush perhaps, in
a passage or narrow straight short of the Enemies quarter, where he will also
cause all or the most of those Hargulatiers to light, then place and hide them
in such sort, that 100. shot will spoil and defend ten times more than
themselves, unless the enemies bring shot to displace them; if they do, the
Ambush may dislodge, if he thinks the party unequal; the which he could not,
were his Hargulatiers Hargabushers without horses, being engaged to fight. I
confess also the Hargulatiers far better than the spearemen for this
service; if troops of armed curaces, launtiers, or others, chance to meet by
fortune with the like enemies in a champion, the Hargulatiers unarmed march on
both sides of their squadron, like wings of shot about a squadron of pikes;
until the launtiers or curaces charge, diverse of their Hargulatiers march
skirmishing before the squadrons, like forelorne men after the Almaine phrase;
when the squadrons charge, they fly on both sides to their fellows They place
their armed Hargulatiers behind the squadrons, they execute more than the
Launtiers, after the Launtiers, break into the enemies squadrons: for the armed
hargulatiers ought to be as well mounted, and armed for curace and caske,
saving their beauers, as the launtiers; the most of them, as I showed you
before carries a pistol, besides his caliuer or petronell. Let it be for
what service Captains can devise, these hargulatiers are better than our sort
of spear men that we term Light Horsemen. I persuade my self, that all the
warriers in Europe, saving our selves and the Scots will be found to be of my
mind. I am sure the Earl of Essex, General Norris, the Lord Willoughbie, Sir
William Russell, Sir Richard Bingham, with the most of all that served against
the great Captains, I mean the Prince of Parma and his followers, will say
and confess as I do. For example, the famous Mounsier de la Now, commanding
chief of the wars under the Prince of Orange and the States in Flaunders,
had 5. Cornets of these spearemen, all Scotts: he finding little service with
these kind of arming and mounting, changed them unto Launtiers and
Hargulatiers; the which afterward proved to be serviceable, and as brave
ba^ds as any other under his charge: especially the company of Seaton. True it
is, brave men will show themselves valiant with any kind of weapons, al manner of
ways: but the best sort of arming and mounting is the more profitable, and the
more serviceable. Although our two nations (I mean English and Scottish) may
compare, and in my opinion do excel all the rest of the world in value and
strength: notwithstanding, neither of both our Nations can compare with the
Strangers for the mounting and arming, unless we resolve to be Launtiers,
Pistolers and Hargulatiers, as I showed before.

Our discipline is to have 1000. Spearmen, and some 200. Launtiers, from that
rate to the greatest numbers, which ought to be 1000. Lantiers and 200.
Spearemen. Likewise, from that rate to the greatest, and those 200. ought to be
Hargulatiers. I know no reason but 2000. Lantiers, 2000. Pistolers, 1000.
Hargulatiers, should not Master 20000. Spearemen on horseback. Likewise from
that rate to the lesser numbers; you must think the reason was that our kings
of England and Scotland fought always or the most part on foot, because their
whole trust was on the footmen, and that all strangers mastred them with
horsemen: Assure our selves let us keep their discipline with horsemen, none
shall master us number to number, although they were more.

Let us not err in our ancient customs, although our famous Kings Hen. 5.
Edw. 3. and Hen. 8. were the most worthiest warriers that our nation ever had:
notwithstanding you may be assured, had they known the terror of Muskets,
Caliuers and Pistolls, they would have used the less Bows, Spears and Bills;
as the actions of these famous kings shows their Captains to be the most
expert. Likewise, we must confess Alexander, Caesar, Scipio and Hanniball, to
be the worthiest and famoust warriers that ever were; notwithstanding, assure
your self, had they known Artillery, they would never have battered Towns
with Rams, nor have conquered countries so easily, had they bin fortified as
Germany, France and the Low countries, with others, have bin since their days.
Although the ground of ancient Discipline is the most worthiest and the most
famous; notwithstanding, by reason of fortifications, stratagems, ingins,
arming, with Munition, the discipline is greatly altered; the which we must
follow and be directed as it is now: otherwise we shall repent it too late.

The difference betwixt Launtiers and Pistolers,
TRue it is, as Monsieur de la Now says, a squadron of Rutters (meaning
Pistolers) ought to beat a squadron of Launtiers. It were a great folly of
me, either to deny his reasons or deeds; the little experience I got was from
him, and from such others as himself. Touching Monsieur de la Now, he is
known to be one of the worthiest and famous warriers, that Europe bred in his
days. I do persuade my self, a squadron of Pistolers ought to encounter so
many Launtiers; if they should enter into the squadrons of Lantiers, as
Monsieur de la Now says. Without doubt the Pistol discharged hard by, well
charged with judgment, murders more than the Lance: out of a hundred
Pistolers, 20. nor scarce 10. at the most do neither charge pistol, nor enter
a squadron as they should, but commonly and lightly always they discharge
their Pistols eight and five score off, and so wheel about; at which turns
the Launtiers charge them in the sides, be they well conducted, if they should
enter as Monsieur de la Now speaks, the Launtiers have or ought to have one
Pistol at the least: touching their arming and mounting, they ought to be
rather better than worse. The captains or captain that charges either with
troops or troop, cares not much whether the companies break their lances or
not, but desires the^ to enter resolutely, and to keep close together. If they
be well conducted, their leaders command more than half of the^ to carry their
swords or pistols in the bridle hand, rather than fail to use the sword and
pistol, and quit their Lances; but they will be sure to place the best of the
Lantiers in the forefront. Lightly of every hundred, 15. or 20. know how to
break: being well broken, with care of the goodness of the staff and head,
the blow of the Lance is little less in valor unto the pistol: the charge
of the Lantiers is terrible and resolute, being in carier to break, the
enemies perceiues their resolution is to enter, and not to wheel about like
unto the pistolers; seldom or never at al shall you find pistolers charge or
enter a squadron, either horse or foot on the spurs like unto the Launtiers;
but softly on a trot or soft pace, persuading themselves, as it is true, their
Pistolls give as great blows, without the force of the horses. Considering the
resolute charge done with the might of their horses, the Launtiers are more
terrible and make a far fairer show, either in Muster of Battle: for
example, the Almaines, during the time they carried Lances, carried a far
greater reputation than they do now being pistolers named Rutters. The most
Chiefes or Soldiers of account are armed at the proof of the Pistol. If the
Leaders command their troops to spoil horses, the Lances are more sure, for
diverse Pistolls fail to go off, if they do, they must be charged with
discretion; being ouercharged, it shakes in a man's hand, so, that often it
touches neither man nor horse. If the charge be too little, it pierces
nothing to speak of. True it is, being picked and chosen, the Pistolers murder
more, would they do as Monsieur de la Now directes them? But it has been
seldom or never heard that Launtiers gave place unto Rutters; but I was often
in their company when they ran away, three from one Launtier both in great
troops and small. True it is, the great Captain the Admiral Chatillion,
chose often to fight, and would have diverse or the most of his horsemen to be
armed, with one Pistol and a good Curtilace: he had great reason, for the
most of his followers on horseback were Gentlemen of quality, or resolute
Soldiers that fought for the Religion. Diverse of the Gentlemen were in
quarrels for their houses, or for their particular reputation, but all in
general, were resolute valiant faithful men of war, that fought either for
religion or reputation, to maintain their words after the old Roman
fashion. Being such men, no weapons comes amiss: for constancy and true
valor, ouerthrows al policy, being in Arms, ready to fight without delays.
Besides, the nature of the Frenchmen is such, that they will grudge to carry
any Arms, but such as please themselves: unto the which their Leaders were
feign to agree, partly against their wills, fearing otherwise to offend their
humors, knowing it lay in them to follow whom they lifted, especially their
Realm being divided into factions; being al united, their kings were feign to
hire Switzers and Almaines for their battles on foot, I mean armed Pikes,
which is the body of all battles.

To prove Musketeers the best small shot that ever were invented.
THe difference betwixt the Muskets and any other pieces that are used. If it
be in a battle, howsoever the ground or place falls out in Trenches, either
assailing or defending Towns, Forts, or Fortresses, or in defending or
assailing streights, or passages, whether it be by night or day, in my
judgment five hundred Muskets are better than 1000. Caliuers, or any other
such shot, and are to be valued from that rate unto the greatest numbers. My
reasons are thus, the Musket spoils horse or man thirty score off, if the
powder be any thing good, and the bearer of any judgment. If armed men give
the charge, few or any carry Arms of the proof of the Musket, being
delivered within ten or twelve score. If any great troops of horse or foot,
offers to force them with multitude of smaller shot, they may discharge four,
five or six small bullets being delivered in volley, the which pearceth al
they strike, unless the enemy be heauely armed, the which are not unless it
be some 100. of a 1000. at the most of either horse or foot. By that reckoning
100. Muskets are to be valued unto 200. Caliuers or more: the Caliuers may say
they will discharge two shot for one, but cannot deny; but one Musket shot
does more hurt than two Caliuers shot, far or nere and better cheap:
although the Musket spend a pound of powder in 8. or 12. shot, and the other
smaller shootes twenty and thirty of a pound. Considering the wages and
expense of two to one, the Musket is better cheap and far more serviceable.
Some think the Musket cannot march far in a day, or night, or continue long
without rest, by reason of their weight nor skirmish so nimbly nor so often,
by reason of their length, weight, and sore recoyling. Armed men are heavier
laden than the Musketeers, and more combersome in carriage: lightly no great
troop matches ten miles without resting, although it be but a little at every
stand and nere the enemy: the Musketeers are suffered to quit their weight,
leaving their Muskets in their rests: the armed men will not be suffered to
disarme themselves in their march, let the^ stand never so often, if they be
within five hours march of an Enemy any thing equal of either horse or
foot: by that reason they have a little advantage. Few Captains will force
any great troop of footmen to march above 15. miles, without resting: if the
Enemy be equal and in hazard to fight, although it be 20. miles, both armed
men and Musketeers will not stick to march, if their Leaders have any credit
with them, and discretion to furnish their troops with victuals and
necessaries that belongs unto such a march.

Touching their often discharging, nimblenes and profit, I answered before. For
recoyling there is no hurt, if they be straight stocked after the Spanish
manner. For their weight and sure shooting, the Muskets have advantage on all
the other small shot, by reason they shoot in their rests: true it is, were
they stocked crooked after the French manner to be discharged on the breast,
few or none could abide their recoyling, by reason of their great charges of
powder: but being discharged from the shoulder after the Spanish manner, with
the thumb betwixt the stock and the face, there is neither danger nor hurt,
if the shooter have any discretion; especially not to ouerload their pecces,
and take heed that the bullets join close to the powder. Few services of
importance are executed in the field without armed men; and where armed men will
march, the Musketeers are il conducted, unless they do the like, let it be
never so far. The overthrows of all Battles and great fights are given
within two miles, the most in half a mile: for that space, were it further,
the Musketeers march as their leaders needs to wish them.

Touching light skirmishes, unless it be to some purpose, none uses them,
unless it be raw men or light headed, that delights to hear the pieces crack:
as I said before, the most service consists either to defend or assail
passages by water, or by straits, or to assail towns, forts, fortresses, or
whatsoever service you can invent if it be done on great troops, the
musketeers are the terriblest shot and most profitable that ever was devised.
The Spaniards do use them most, and finds their seruie and terror such, that
I persuade my self shortly, al or the most of their small shot will be
Musketeers. True it is, I do think it necessary to have of 1000. shot, 200.
Caliuers from that rate to the greater number, and such shot for this purpose,
when occasion presents to make great marches (Caualgades the strangers calls
it) to give Camisadoes on troops that are lodged a far off, to surprise
Towns, Fortresses or passages that are simply mand, and negligentlie guarded,
or to lie in Ambush a far off, to cut off conuoyes, passengers, and such
services. These lighter shot are necessary to march great marches with
horsemen for these purposes, the which are often taken behind the horsemen for
expedition of great marches, to do executions unlooked for.

To prove the Pike the most honorable weapon carried by Footmen.
THe Pike is the most honorable weapon that is carried by footmen; the Pike is
the strength of al battles. I know no reason but two thousand Pikes, 1000.
Musketeers, should not retire ten miles, although it were all champion grounds,
from 3000. horsemen mounted and armed, as Captains can devise. The Pike is the
chiefest weapon to defend, and to enter a breach, although diverse guards nere a
place assieged are furnished only with shot and short weapons, as armed
Holberts, Targets, and such weapons, by reason their Trenches are narrow and
deep to cover them from the defendants shot, in which trenches the Pikes have
no convenient place to fight: notwithstanding, about their batteries, and in
diverse places nere unto these guards, they make large Cordigards, where they
place their Ensigns in some and in all strong guards of Pikes; meaning thereby
to put their strength and rest chiefly on that weapon: wherefore the
experimented Spaniards commands all their chief men on foot to carry the
Pike.

What number of short weapons there ought to be amongst one thousand armed
men, from that rate to the greater number.
I Persuade my self there ought to be amongst one 1000. Pikes, 200. short
weapons, as Holberts or Bills; but the Bills must be of good stuff, not like
our common brown Bills, which are lightly for the most part all iron, with a
little steel or none at all; but they ought to be made of good iron and
steel, with long strong pikes at the least of 12. inches long, armed with iron
to the midds of the staff, like the Holberts: for example. like unto those
which the Earl of Leicester, and Sir William Pelham had in the Low Countries
for their guards: being made thus, no doubt but it is a necessary weapon to
guard Ensigns in the field, trenches or towns, and a good weapon to execute,
but no better tha^ the halberd. Because the Frenchmen make their halberds with
long neckt pikes, and of naughty stuff like our common brown bills, diverse
of our Nation condemns the Halberdes: but let the Halberds be of good stuff
and strongly made after the Millaine fashion, with large heads to cut, and
broad strong pikes both to cut and to thrust, then no doubt the Halberd is
nothing behind the bill for all manner of service, and arms a soldier fairer
than the bill. Both Bills and Halberds ought to have corslets, with light
Millain murrians; the foreparts ought to be of reasonable proof, I mean of
the proof of the Caliuer, discharged ten or twelve score off: so ought the
pikes also to have the foreparts of the corslets of the like proof, fifteen
or twenty of every hundred, from that rate unto the greatest numbers. I know
no reason, that a thousand armed men ought to ask above two hundred targetters
of the proof: those weapons are very combersome, they are best to arm men to
discover breaches; or for the defendants to discover trenches, or the enemies
works; and for to cover shot that skirmishes in streights; their weights are
such, that few men will endure to carry the^ (if they be of good proof) one
hour, I persuade my self, the best arming of targetters, is to have the
corslets of reasonable proof, and the targets light; so the bearers may the
better and nimbler assail, and fight the longer in defending.

To prove Bow men the worst shot used in these days.
TOuching Bow men, I persuade my self five hundred musketers are more
serviceable than fifteen hundred bow-men; from that rate to the greater
numbers in all manner of services: my reasons are thus, among 5000. Bowmen, you
shall not find 1000 good Archers, I mean to shoot strong shoots; let them be
in the field 3. or 4. months, hardly find of 5000. scarce 500. able to make any
strong shootes. In defending or assayling any trenches, lightly they must
discover themselves to make fair shoots; where the others shot spoil them, by
reason they discover nothing of themselves unless it be a little through small
holes. Few or none do any great hurt 12. or 14. score off; they are not to be
compared unto the other shoots to line battles, or to march, either in the
wings of any battles, or before, as we term them from the Almaine phrase
forlorn hope. Diverse will say, they are good to spoil the horsemen; I do
confess it, if the horsemen come within their shootes, and can not charge them
by reason of their trenches or guards of pikes. Lightly when the horsemen
approach within twelve score, the trumpets sound the charge; if it be on shot,
that lies where they cannot charge, they are ill conducted that lead any great
troup of horsemen to charge trenches. Commonly the Cornets or Guydons charge one
an other if there be any of both sides: if not, few horsemen well conducted,
will charge either trenches, or battles of footmen, unless they see a fair
entry, or the footmen begin to shake, as good Captains will soon perceive. If
they do charge, they will be sure to be well accompanied with small shot, which
soon terrifieth bowmen, especially the musketters: besides the horsemen are
all well armed, in such sort that Bowmen cannot hurt the men; let them say what
they list, when the men are sure the arrows will not pierce them, they will be
the valianter: although the horses be killed, and the Masters service lost for
that day, notwithstanding they think it better to be taken prisoner six
times, than killed once, beside the munition that belongs unto Bowmen, are not
so commonly found in all places, especially arrows: as powder is unto the other
shot. Also time and ill weather weakneth the bows as well as the men. In our
ancient wars, our enemies used Crossebows, and such shoots; few, or any at all
had the use of long bows as we had; wherefore none could compare with us for
shot: but GOD forbid we should try our bows with their Muskets and Caliuers,
without the like shot to answer them. I do not doubt but al, honorable and
others, which have served in the Low Countries will say as I do:
notwithstanding some will contrary it, although they never saw the true
trial of any of those weapons belonging either to horse or foot, alleging
antiquity without other reasons, saying, we carried arms before they were
borne. Little do they think how Caesar ended all his great actions in less
than twelve years, by their reckoning none could prove great Captains that
followed him, which began and ended in that time, as Duke D'alua said, the
longer experted, the more perfect. T'rue it is, long experience requires age,
age without experience requires small Discipline. Therefore we are deceived, to
judge men expert because they carried arms forty years, and never in action
three years, during their lives counting all together.

Some will say, what discipline could there be seen in the actions of the
Netherlanders and France, counting them civil wars: touching the Netherlanders,
the world does know their wars dured 23. years, without any peace, putting
all together not 15. months. The wars of France dured 30. years: true it is
they had often peace, and a long time together: wherefore it cannot be compared
unto the other; notwithstanding, in these actions were employed all the brauest
Nations of Europe, their greatest Captains, enginers, and counselors for
war.

What Fortifications are best to withstand a royal battery and to prove a
wet ditch better than a dry.
SOme will condemn me for my strange names of Fortifications, they ought to
pardon me: for my part, I know no other names than are given by the strangers,
because there are few or none at all in our language. If a man should call a
Casamate a slaughter house, the multitude would think I speak of a place to
kill biefes, and such matters; if I should call a Cauilere a mount, diverse
would ask, what to do? to place windmills or artillery; if I should call a
rampire a wall, they would think I lied, unless it were made of lime and
stone: therefore as the most languages calls London and Bristow as we do, so is
it best for us to call their inventions as they do: touching Muskets, Caliuers
and Hargubuziers, with other things, we agree with their names. The best dry
ditch, is to have the ditch 100. paces broad, and 50. foot deep, 4. Casamats
on every side of the Bulwarks, the lowest to flank the bottom of the ditch
from the one side unto the other; the second like wise within ten foot, with
broad Casamats, that the Artillery may be raised hie behind, to beat a long the
ditches, as nigh to the botome as can be devised; the third and fourth Casamats
likewise within ten foot one of another, to flank the ditch in every part as
low as may be devised; also the fourth Casamate must flank the Counterskarfe:
in every part the Counterskarfe ought to be three score broad, rising from the
foot to the head; the head ought to cover the ditch and rampire as high as the
fourth Casamate: you can not bestow too much cost on the Counterskarfe,
Counterskarffe, for before the enemy possess the Counterskarffe, he cannot
batter to take away any of the flanks: wherefore it ought to be made with all
the art that can be devised with lime and stone, from the foot to the head,
especially for forty paces nere unto the head. It were not amiss, although it
has been never seen before to have mines like vautes, overthwart to the midds
of the Counterskarsse; which mines ought to be flanked with two low Casamats
out of the head of the Bulwarks, likewise from Bulwark to Bulwark in that
sort: my reason is, when the assailant lodges in the Counterskarffe, they must
be covered with Trenches, the which will be hardly done by reason of these
mines. The mines cannot be hurtful; let the Enemy find them, they cannot
lodge in them, we know it by good experience: he that possesses a mine, first
having an entry that cannot be cut off, has treble advantage, though the
mine were suddenly made, much more being made artificially with time and care,
having a Casamat to flank it. The Counterskarffe ought to have parapets cut in
them four foot deep, every trench to flank one another, from the head to
the foot of the Counterskarffe, I mean place to lodge what troops pleases
the defendants to guard it, with diverse places to sallie both horse and foot
at their pleasures. Every Bulwark ought to have two sallies, one for Horse
and foot, the other a little secret sallie: the Bulwarks ought to flank one
another within ten score; every Curten ought to have two Caualeres to
command the field within their shootes, as well as the Counterscarffes: let all
this be finished as Captains and Inginers can devise. Notwithstanding, no
dry ditch can be compared for strength unto a wet ditch: my reason is thus,
where water may be drawn unto the ditch of the Rampire, likely it may be
drawn unto the Counterskarffe ditch: half or the best part of the
Fortifications is lost, when the Counterscarffe is possessed, being possessed, the
assailants with their Trenches on wheels, pusht on with strong poales with the
force of men, the which may be made of the proof of a field piece; with those
and with wool sacks, gabions, sand bags, faggots, and such devises, as they
had before Sluice, they will soon place their battery: after dismounting the
Caualeres and highest Casamates. Also they will deface the Counterscarfe, enter
the ditch with mines in diverse places, in time make all the Counterscaffe an
easy entry in the ditch, and keep their guards in the sides where the
flanks can not annoy them: that being done, they will soon lay battery to
the other Casamates before they batter: having an easy entry into the ditch,
the defendants dare not sally, by reason the Assailaunts Artillery beats all
their high flanks and parpets; in such sort, that none dares show themselves.
Let the defendants enter the ditch, the Assailants will enter also; being pell
mell, the Casamates kills their own as well as their enemies. Being thus, no
doubt in short time the assaila^ts will lodge in the rampire let it be never so
thick, what tre^ches with in the Captains and Engioners can devise, unless
they have new fortifications, like unto those I named before: in time the
Assailant will lodge his battery on the rampires, as they did at Mastricht,
and in short time fight with equal hands with the defendants to their undoing.
Therefore a dry ditch cannot be compared unto a wet. If there can be made a
wet deep broad ditch at the foot of the counterscarfe, where the water may not
be taken away, I know no reason why the defendants should loose their
Counterscarfe, being well manned. If the water may be drawn out of both the
ditches of Rampire and counterscarfe, yet is the wet ditches better than the
dry. Few good Enginers gives counsel to make a wet ditch artificially,
without Casamates under water, as low as reason persuades them the water may
be taken from them: being let out, there remains in some trenches, water that
cannot be voided, being clean taken away, the Casamates flanks all one.

As I said before, flanks cannot be taken away, without possessing the
Counterscarfe, neither can a broad ditch be filled, without great murders
against reason, with out dismounting the flanks. Some will say, the dry ditch is
better, alleging that any army may the better succor the place asseiged, and
that the defendants may the better sally out. Touching the succouring of the
Asseiged, it is well known al Armies are victualled from hand to mouth; he
that leads an Army to leauie a siege, and cannot find a place to lodge his
army within three hours march of the others, where he shall be assured to
force his enemies to fight within ten days, leauie his siege, or famish,
conducts his troops very ill. None besieges any place, but intrencheth
himself and troops in such sort, that 5000. will defend trenches, against
thrice their number: wherefore the succors are ill conducted to force
trenches, and may fight better cheap. Touching the sallies of the besieged, if
the fortification be such, as I named before, it ought to have in it for every
bulwark a ponton, I mean a bridge joined close together with iron engines, like
unto those of the citadell of Antwerpe. Those pontons are just the breadth of
the ditch, hatched fast with iron hooks unto the Counterscafe, made so broad
and so strong, that Artillery may pass beside horse and foot. These pontons
serve a wet ditch for salying, as well as any salies that belongs unto a dry
ditch: both wet and dry, when the Counterscarffe is possessed, leeseth their
salying, if the Seigers be good Captains. All Batteries ought to be guarded
with strong trenches, and all quarters ought to be strongly entrenched, as I
said before; especially, the assailants having intelligence of succors, that
being furnished, the salying of the assieged is their own confusion. It is
dangerous to have Bastiles from the rampire like unto Mastricht, Vtricht, and
other places. Some counts these bastiles bulwarks, I think al Bulwarks ought
to be gardall round about: others counts them spurs or rauelins; whether
they be spurs, bastiles, rauelins or bulwarks, they be dangerous unless they
join unto the rampire, or to be furnished during a siedge with strong guards.
Commonly they are not guarded, unless the Enemy lodges against them,
because the defendants persuade themselves, the Enemy dares not lodge in them,
by reason they be open unto the curteine and cauileres like the
Counterscarfes. These Bastiles have much earth. Let the Enemy enter one of
them, within two hours, he couers himself in the earth; nothing made with hands
that can be battered, but will be made assaultable. Is there a breadth in one
of them, and the enemy can beat the entry, I mean the bridge, betwixt the
curten and it, their succors is cut off. Besides the defendants shall not
find much ground within the^, to retrench themselves against the cannon; and
where the cannon plays no defendant dare show himself: some will say, these
bastiles may have counterscarfes as I named before; I do confess it, but they
are so far from the rampire, that neither the rampire, his counterscarfe, nor
scarce caualere can flank; wherefore without doubt these bastiles that are not
joined unto the rampire, are very dangerous, and not to be compared unto the
others joining. True it is, men, victuals and munition ought to defend Trenches
against an Army, I do confess it, a little Army against a great, I mean
half so many. But no Fortifications made with men's hands, can be kept
continually against a royal Army, without succors, if it can be battered;
nor against a small Army, without men, victuals and munition: wanting one of
the three, the best Fortress is lost, you must think the assailants having
the field, and means to reenforce their troops as they list, the loss of one
hundred unto the defendants is more, than two thousand unto the assailants. But
let the defendants or assailants do their duties to the uttermost in any kind
of services, unless it pleases their masters or superiors to grace their
deeds, their well doing will be turned to naught; and their virtues, vices.
Wherefore all men of war ought to pray to hazard their lives in the sight of
their Princes or Estates, then likely they will confess no traffic so dear
as lives, especially being in action with equal enemies. It is hard to please
the most masters, and impossible to content the rude multitude: the least worm
will move, having any life being trodden upon: for my own part I do confess
to be one of the least in respect of thousands, not so base but ever I carried
a mind rather to be buried dead, than alive.

I speak this for the wrongs done unto my self and companions for the defense
of the town of Sluice: true it is, those that serves many, serves no body; I
mean, they shall find none that will confess to be their masters, especially
when they should be rewarded for their service, but the multitude will be
ready to disgrace their servants, thinking by such means to pay them their
debts, or at the least sufficient rewards to be reconciled unto them and
pardoned for their misconstred thoughts. Wherefore I would wish all men of
war, and they can, to be in all strange Princes or estates debts, rather
than they in yours: if your masters be given to any machiuell humors, the
debts that should pay you, will hire them diverse others: are you in their
debts, you are sure not to be wronged, thinking your service to come paid
for. Although our masters the States be for the most part honest and virtuous
personages, notwithstanding look into their actions, you shall find a number
of Captains wronged besides our selves: they are partly to be borne withal.
Sometimes great Captains are so ambitions, that they will deface their
inferiors deeds: therefore there can been no great fault in the States, nor
any such, when we wrong one another: otherwise time and fortune might make
inferiors Competitors with the great ones. Sometimes fortune frowns on the
greatest Captains, in such sort, that they can not or will not perform that
the world looks they should do, then likely had they rather bury their
instruments and inferiors, rather than be touched themselves with the least
disgrace. Therefore you cannot blame the poor Soldier to desire the eye of
his master, when he hazardeth his life. Subjects are vassalls unto Princes and
States, and not unto the most Generals: although I never knew any,
notwithstanding, it is well known ambitious Generals wronged often their
masters: being in those humors, they will be sure to wrong their inferiors,
unless they serve their turns. Touching our wrongs, I impute it to no body
but unto our own fortunes, as the Spaniards said unto Charles the 5. Adeunda
salta la diecha, non apreuiecha la diligencia. Touching Sluice, I do protest by
the faith of a Soldier, what I write is troth. As nigh as I can remember, we
kept the Town about 60. days: diverse thinks it no time, because Harlam,
Mastricht, and others, were kept longer: little do they think how those
places were furnished with all necessaries, especially, the lesser of both had
in them at the least 6000. hands to fight and to work. Let us be rightly
judged, I will prove that Bouennene was the furioust siege that was in the
Low Countries, since Duke D'aluas arrival until this hour; the which began
and ended in less than twenty days: notwithstanding, there was more
Captains and Soldiers spoiled by sword and bullet at that siege, than at
Harlam, which dured ten months. Experimented Captains will confess, the
fury of all breaches are tried in few hours, and the fury of artillery
prevented without sudden attempts. We were not in S^uce 1600. fighting,
workmen, and all: we had to keep (counting the two Forts) above two miles and
a half. It is well known, before we entered, the Town lost one Fort. If we
showed any valor in our entry, let Sir Henry Palmer, and his Seamen, with
them of Zealand judge; the danger was not so little, but of the vessels that
carried us in, five were taken the next tide in coming out. The third tide,
Sir Charles Blunt offered fifty pounds (besides the commandment his Masters
and Mariners received at his imbarking) to carry us our necessaries from Sir
William Russell, then Lord Governor of Vlishing, who indeed was the occasion
of our entry, resolution, and quick dispatch; who sent with us a good
quantity of victuals and munition: and to say troth, without his earnest
dispatches we had not entered: then the world knows the Town had been lost
without blows, as a number of others were in those Countries far better than
Sluice: The best sort does know, had I and my companions marchanted our lives,
as traffickers does their ware, we had no need to have entered Sluice, for our
direction was but to Ostend: we were battered with thirty Cannons and eight
Culuerings on S. Jacobs eeue: from three of the clock in the morning until
five in the afternoon, they shot above four thousand Cannon shot. By the
Dukes own confession he never saw so furious a battery in one day: we were
made saultable above 200. and 50. paces, betwixt five of the clock and seven:
we were above five times at the push of the pike for our breach, where we
spoiled the enemies in great numbers; who perceiving our Trenches within
Overthwart the breach, quieted their furies: afterward we kept the Town
eighteen days, the enemy being lodged in our port, rampire, and breach,
above three hundred paces, in the which time the Enemy passed through the port
six paces to beat our Trenches within: we kept our Fort until we were made
saultable more than our Troops could guard, unless we would quite the Town:
being mined, we countermined them, in the which we fought hourelie for the
space of nine days with Sword, Target and Pistols: at our breach, port, and
rampiet of the Town we fought daily with pikes, short weapons and stones,
besides our shot for the said space of eighteen days. Touching our sallies,
let the Enemy testify. The Duke of Parma being entered, asked me which was
Buskeruilde, standing before him; I showed him: who embraced him, turning
toward his Nobility, he said: there serves no Prince in Europe a brauer man.
Most true it is, at one sallie he had the point with an hundred corslets of the
best sort, who charged and made to run, eight Spanish Ensigns of the Tertia
Vecho, and hurt their master del Campo. True it is, he was seconded with a
number of others; but himself principally known by prisoners, and his great
plume of feathers. Also Sir Francis Vere marked for his red Mandilion, who
stood always in the head of the armed men at the assaults of the Fort and
Town, being twice hurt, I and other his friends requested him to retire: he
answered, he had rather be killed ten times at a breach, than once in a house.

Captain Heart most valiantly swamme in and out to show our General and
States our wants and dangers: the world does know what picks there was betwixt
them at that instant, such that none can deny but a full resolution was taken
not to enter in by water. The world does know our Army by land retired at
midnight from Blanckenborough to Ostend: let envy and malice speak what they
list, troath may be blamed but never shamed: we were lost men but for our own
wits and resolution: our powder was all spent so far, that we had not to
maintain half a days fight: the Enemies had gotten into our rampire so
far, that their shot flanked us into our trenches, for eighteen nights we
lay always Officers and all at our breach, where we eat our meat
continually: we had not left unbroken of twenty field pieces with their
Artillery, four: we endured in Town and Fort, seventeen thousand four
hundred and above of Cannon shot. Where malicious tongues speak of our
assaults, I protest we endured one assault in the Fort at breaches and mine,
from nine of the clock in the morning, until two in the afternoon, where the
brave Marquis of Renti was hurt, the great Captain Mounsieur de la Mote lost
his right arm, Mounsieur de Strippeny, Colonel of the Burgonians slain, with
diverse Captains and Officers: besides, by their own report at that assault
they had slain, above seven hundred and as many hurt: we had hurt and slain
at that assault above one hundred and fifty; where Colonel Huntley, Sir
Edmond Vdall, Sir John Scot, Captain Ferdinando Gorge, Master Selinger,
Captain Nicholas Baskeruilde, with diverse other Gentlemen and Officers showed
themselves most valiantly, both at that assault and at all other services,
during the said Siedge. Captain Francis Alene swam in with Captain Heart after
the breach was made; during his time, none showed greater valor. Truly, all
the Wallons with their soldiers showed themselves constant, resolute and
valiant, especially the brave Captains, Messures de Medkerke and Erogier. We
were but four English bands near two hundred strong a piece, by reason we
divided amongst them some two hundred and fifty Musketeers, who through the
means of the Governor of Vlishing, came with us from his Garrison, from
Berghen, and Ostend. There were many Lieftenants, Ensigns and Sergeants,
adventurers, beside those soldiers, the better half of our men were slain*
for of 1600. English, Wallons, and Flemings, we carried not out 700.

In respect of our losses, our Captains asked pay for the whole numbers;
wherefore our masters the States and others, would not confess our losses to
be so great, from the first hour of our entry, until our coming out, none
came to us but those which swamme. The Duke of Parma himself asked me before a
great number, what were our losses? I answered him with the troth as near as I
could: himself, and diverse other assured us, that he lost before Sluice five
and forty Captains besides other Chiefes, and more Soldiers than he lost at
Nuse, Berke, Grave, and Vendello. What words I spoke unto the Englishmen that
followed him, my companions can witness. Some others (besides the Duke and my
self) knows, if I listed, and promise kept, I might have had a far greater
number of Pistolls, than ever I had of Angels. True it is, some Princes love
treason, but never like the traitors: did they love them, they should never
love me, for the least thought of such matters. Where it pleased some to speak
of two Irish Greyhounds, which the Duke requested me to send unto him;
returning to Middleborow, where I found the Earl our General, he gave me two
fair Greihounds, commanding me not to fail to send them unto the Duke: and
finding Master Steeuens, sometime servant unto the most noble Sir Philip
Sidney, returning unto the Duke, on my request he presented the dogs; for the
which it pleased the Duke to send me a fair Spanish horse with a rich saddle.
The saying is true: It is better for some to steal a horse than others to
look on: notwithstanding, that I gave nothing nor received nothing without the
consent of my General, it was envied without more occasion. A fair horse with
rich furniture is easily discovered by day light, where bags or rich bribes
can hardly be seen, if the parties has wit to cover it, the which the
Spaniard presents often to many, unknown to their masters or estates, else their
credites had not troubled Europe as it does, nor the proceedings against them
so slowly as it is in some places.

Some said also; if they had bin in such dangers in Sluice, wherefore gave the
Duke of Parma such large composition unto them? I know no reason but this, six
days before we gave over the Town, all the Captains and Officers met in
counsel: Having seen our dangers, and some perceiving the heat of our
succors, we assigned our Articles of composition, swore all to have them
granted unto us or to dye, and to burn the Town and Castle, so escape that
could through the drowned land: The copy of those Articles with other letters
we sent unto the Earl our General and Estates, the which came into the
Enemies hands, by reason the messenger was slain in swimming by their boats
and pallisade on the river. This is well known unto all our companions, for
the Marquis of Renti out of his Trench told it me openly before all our
guards at the breach, and that Owen a Welsh Gentleman had much adoo to put my
foul hand in Italian to the Duke. Also we made a sallie, where we lost two
Officers, who showed them our resolution, the which we maintained being face to
face with the Duke in our parlie, and returned once from him into the Town,
thinking he would not agree unto some of the articles: but his prudence or his
counsel persuaded him to send for us again, and to sign them all. But I
protest on the faith of a Christian, I think so will the rest of my companions
protest the like, for my part I know not how we might have kept the Town
twelve hours with the loss of our lives, had we been al desperate, if it had
pleased the Enemies to attempt us: but most true it is, rather than take any
base conditions, some and many would have ended our lives in that place. I
protest to all manner of qualities, I write not this with a meaning to condemn
any particular nor general that should have succored us, nor to rob the
least defendant of his right; for I confess my self the simplest Captain of
half a dozen that was within the Town, three or four of them, were they
known and rightly judged, are sufficient to conduct double that Garrison in
any Army in the world, and to conduct a greater troop, having authority.

Some may blame me because I took no care in writing this action of Sluice more
larger, and in better order; I will do it at large in my discourse of the
Netherlanders actions, perhaps both that and a number of other matters, in
better order, than some persuaded great Personages, I could do.

True it is, some are to write, some to speak, others to execute. What I want
in any of those virtues, my blood shall witness in others, the zeal of (...)
toward my sacred Sovereign and dear Count^^^, if occasion presents it. In
the mean time, and always, I pray most heartily to the Almighty to preserve
her sacred health and royal estate to the honor of God, and confusion of her
Enemies.

FINIS.

