Mount Tabor. OR PRIVATE EXERCISES OF A PENITENT SINNER.

Serving for a daily Practice of the life of Faith, Reduced to special heads
comprehending the chief comforts and refreshings of true Christians: Also
Certain occasional Observations and Meditations profitably applied.

Written in the time of a voluntary retrait from secular affairs.

By R. W. Esquire. Published in the year of his age 75. Anno Dom. 1639.

The Contents of the book are prefixed.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for P. Stephens and C. Meredith, at the gilded Lion
in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

TO MY DEAR WIFE AND CHILDREN.
THese private notes and thoughts of min^,
Not worthy, nor so fit for public view;
I (For last pledges of my love) consign,
(My nearest, dearest, private ones) to you.
Three sons, two sons and two daughters-in-Law, G^and-children eleven;
Beside^ those six and five, Non amissos; sed praemisso^.
already gone to Heaven:
Beseeching God, by grace so to prepare us yet surviving here,
We all may meet together, and live for ev^^ there.
The Table of this private Book.
THe Dedication of it to my wife and children. The occasion and motive of these
exercises, called Meditations of Mount Tabor. 1 The introduction to those
meditations. 7. 1. How excellent a thing it is to have all our debts cancelled.
8. 2. How sweet a thing to have God appeased toward thee. 20. 3. How glorious
a thing to be the child of God. 36. 4. How happy and safe a condition for thee
to be sure of perseverance in grace and salvation. 49. 5. How pleasant a state
of life to be void of the fear of death and hell. 56. 6. How rich and stately
a^^ng to be heir of glory. 63. Two meditations formerly composed, applied for
a seventh step or meditation of Mount Tabor. 79, A Meditation on the
Incarnation and Passion of our most glorious Savior the Lord Jesus, and our
blessed union with him; alluding to the song of Simeon (called Nunc Dimittis.)
79. A contemplation of the new Jerusalem and the triumphant Church, celebrating
an everlasting Sabbath in the Kingdom of Heaven. 84. A Meditation of man's
mortality. 86. Four short meditations of the vanity of man's life. 87, 88.
Occasional Meditations.
1. Upon a sad and unseasonable shower of rain. 88. 2. Upon a Looking-glass.
89. 3. Concerning an extraordinary veil which covered my body at my com^^^
into the world. ibid. 4. Of an extraordinary accident when J was first in my
swaddling clothes. 92. 5. Upon my breeding up at School. 97. 6. Upon an
accident when I was a Schoolboy. 101. 7. Upon six verses of the 12. Chapter of
S. Luke. 105. 8. Upon a Stage Play which I saw when I was a child. 110. 9. Upon
the Dial of Gloucester College Clock. 115. 10. Upon good counsel given by a
Country Painter in homely verse. 117. 11. Upon a Pedigree found in a private
man's house. 120. 12. Upon a pedigree found in a noblemans house. 124. 13. Of a
felon making a comfortable end at his death. 129. 14. Upon the words used in
the emblem of our mortality, body mihi, cras tibi. 135. ^5. Upon observing of
a gravestone, in Paul's Church, London. 138. 16. Of a short inscription upon a
gre^^ man's tomb. 14^ 17. Upon three words written with cole, in a great Judges
house. 14^ 18. Upon consideration of the fif^^ muscle of a man's eye. 14^ 19.
Upon the name of God (blessed for ever) proclaimed. 15^ 20 Upon the Greek words
((...)) si^nifying to breath. 15^ 21. Upon the words of S. Paul, So r^^ that ye
may obtain. 15^ 22. Upon a worthy Divines Letter a case of conscience. 16^ 23.
Upon the words revealed to Saint Augustine, In te stas, and non st^^ 17^ 24.
Upon the building of S. Pa^^ Church in London. 17^ 25. Upon the reading of a
paper ^sually taken out of an old bundle my first going to Stanwick. 17^ 26.
Upon the Turkies coming a^^ to their roost before Sunset. 19^ 27. Upon the
remove of household fr^^ one dwelling to another. 19^ 28. Upon the casual
hearing of verse in the new Testament read by a child. 199. 29. Upon the words
of a child, intimating the necessity of my timely preparation for death and
heaven. 202 30. Upon a fight between two Cocks. 206. 31. Upon a child's asking
of blessing in the morning 211. 32. Upon one word attributed to God thrice in
three verses together, in one Chapter of the Prophet Jonas. 214. 33 Upon the
great Clock in Westminster Palace. 218. 34. Upon our last and best home. 219.
35. A Dialogue between an old sickman and his neighbor visiting him 220. 36.
A hymn for Christmas day upon the Angels song, Gloria in excelsis Deo. 222. 37.
A prayer or meditation for my wife and my self to join together, in our daily
preparation for our dissolution. 225.
Imprimatur.

Thomas Wykes.
October 31. 1639.
The occasion and motive of these weak exercises of mine following which I
call my Meditations of Mount Tabor.
UPon my reading over of one of the Sermons of a worthy messenger of God and
Batchelour of Divinity, enti^eled (the Life of Faith) reprinted in Anno 1627.
wherein I found the duty of daily renewing our faith (the Life of our Souls)
by Prayer and Meditation, by many arguments of necessity, profit and comfort,
powerfully and graciously pressed, I observed a passage in these very words.

Hearken unto me (O thou of little faith and less use of it) do thou desire
to have a continual feast, to rejoice always with the Lord? I know that thou
desire it with all thy soul. Let me prescribe a diet, a daily diet without
omission, strictly to be kept: the Lord give thee and me grace to observe it.
Look how duly thou refreshest thy body, by use of repast or recreation; so
often at the least be sure to cheer up thy soul by the use of thy faith. Let
thy soul have two or three walks a day up to Mount Tabor, that is, into some
retired place of Meditation and Prayer; such as Isaac's Field, Cornelius his
Leads, David's Closet, etc. But what is there to be done? I answer, still make
use of thy faith. But what is that you call using of faith? I now come to the
point, to the chief mystery of spiritual life. Stir up thy soul in this
Mount to converse with CHRIST. Look what promises and privileges thou do
habitually believe, now actually think of them, roll them under thy tongue,
chew on them till thou find some sweetness in the palate of thy soul, view
them jointly, severally, sometimes muse of one, sometimes of another more
deeply, and lest thou should still think me obscure; think with thy self,

1 How excellent a thing it is to have all thy debts cancelled.

2 How sweet a thing to have GOD appeased.

3 How glorious a thing to be the son of GOD.

4 How happy a condition for thee, upon thy perseverance, to be assured of thy
salvation.

5 How pleasant a state of life, to be void of the fear of Death and Hell.

6 How rich and stately a thing to be heir of glory.

Say to thy self, as Paul to the Corinths, 1 Cor. 5.8. Let us feast and be
merry CHRIST has made us holy days, our Paschall Lamb is slain: have any
more cause to be merry? With these Soliloquies mingle some Ejaculations to
Heaven for ^r^ce and aid, and descend not this (...) till thou find and
feel thy soul in some cheerly plight, revived and warmed with these
spiritual Flaggons of Wine; in the strength whereof thou may walk all the
day following.

And this in plain terms, I call, using of faith, and living by faith; which
if thou will duly inure thy self unto, thou will not marvel why I call it,
ascending Mount Tabor, thou will stay thy self upon good proof: It is good to
be here, daily to be here, often to come hither, oh that this did as clearly
appear to the world in this matter of faith, as it does in all other habits,
graces, gifts, virtues, and good things whatsoever; that the principal beauty
and benefit of them consists in use, fruition and action; (not the bare
profession) yea, the very increase and perfection of them. Use limbs, and have
limbs. The more thou do, the more thou may: Use will bring perfectness,
and thorough disuse things perish, and come to nothing. As the Plough-share
laid up rusts and consumes; employed glisters, does good, and lasts the longer.
Let any man diligently and thoroughly improve, the greater will be his faith,
and great comfort it will bring in.

And again, after the end of the Sermon in his Epistle to the Reader, (which
he purposely then enters and not before it) to leave the better impression, he
has a farther passage to this effect. Let me minister unto thee an
Interrogatory or two; and answer me in good serious sooth between God and thy
soul, Have thou and do thou thy self (letting others alone) live by faith?
Prove and examine thyselfe, and take for instance this present week or day
past wherein thou read this little Manual, How have thou or usually do thou
spend the day? What thought did thou awake withal? what was the morning
draught for thy foul next thy heart? What has cheered and made thee merry in
private and in company, whether thy sports or thy meals more then the heavenly
ejaculations? Deal plainly (not with me and this Book, which yet shall
witness against thee, if thou refuse to practice it, when thou have read it)
but with thy self. Have not thou challenged some time (more or less) half a
quarter of an hour at the least in the day, for this exercise of thy faith? if
not (as it is neglected by most men, not for days, or weeks, but for months
and years) let thy heart smite thee for thy folly and say, have I lived, or
rather not lived, by consuming precious time in vanities? How comes it about,
that the greatest part of my life, is the least part wherein I have lived? Oh
then recover and recollect thy self before thou go hence; will thou die before
thou have lived? as boys slabber their books, before they have learned their
lessons: Oh learn to live this life; it is never too late, it is never (I am
sure) too soon. It is no shame for thee to learn it, of what age or condition
soever thou be.

The Introduction to my MEDITATIONS OF MOUNT TABOR.
My work is done, I can no longer toil,
under the restles cares of worldly things,
Come then (my soul) let us prove another while,
what sounder comfort thought of heaven brings.
For here we see by selfe-experience,
the fruits of this world, wheresoever they grow,
In City, Court, high place of eminence,
in Cottages, or Country shades below,
Yield but the spirits vexation -- If not confusion;
Or vanity at best, -- The spirits illusion
Then leaving all below: let us ascend
the sacred Mount of Tabor; where we may
With humble quiet thoughts attend,
our Saviors call from day to day;
For we should now make every day our last,
not needing or desiring any more;
If God another to our life shall cast
spend it likewise, with thanks to him therefore.
And so being freed from earthly perturbation,
Make heavens care our daily meditations,
Waiting the period of our frail life's story;
Until his calling of us to himself in glory.
The first Meditation How excellent a thing it is to have all our debts
cancelled. Places of Scripture, showing how this benefit belongs to us.
Daniel 9.24
SEaventie weeks are determined upon thy people, to finish transgression, to
make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness,
and to anoint the most holy; (verse. 25.) Messiah the Prince (26.) who after
sixty two weeks shall be cut off, but not for himself.

^say^ 3.5
He was wound^d for our transgressions; he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed.

Matthew ^.2.
JESUS seeing their faith, said to the sick of the Palsy, son, be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. And undoubtedly (says Bishop Cowper) this
is a standing sentence, spoken not only to this Paralytick, but as a general
proclamation to every believer.

This is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many, Mat. 26.^^
for the remission of sins.

I came not to call the righteous, Mark ^.17.
but sinners to repentance.

To give knowledge of salvation unto his people for the remission of their
sins. Luke ^.^7.


Through the tender mercy of our GOD, ^er^e ^8.
whereby (CHRIST) the day spring from an high, has visited us.

To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, Ver^e
^^.
to guide our feet in the way of peace.

That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all
nations. Luke ^4.47


Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. John ^.2^


And he is the propitiation for our sins. John 13.^.


To him give all the Prophets witness that through his name whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins. Acts 10.43


Acts 13.32.
We declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the
Fathers.

Verse 33.
God has fulfilled the same to us their children, in that he has raised up
JESUS again.

Verse 38.
Be it known unto you therefore, that through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins.

Verse 39.
And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could
not be justified by the Law of Moses.

Romans 3.24.
Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in JESUS
CHIRST.

Verse 25.
Whom God has set forth, to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins.

Heb. 9.26.
But now has he appeared to put away sin, by the Sacrifice of himself.

Verse 27.
And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the Judgment.

Verse 28.
So CHRIST was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look
for him, shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation.

Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, 1 Peter 2.24
by whose stripes ye were healed.

He is the propitiation for our sins. 1 John 1^.^.


The Son of man came to give his life a Ransom for many. Mat. 20.28 Mark.
^^.^3


There is one God, 1 ^^m. ^.^
and one Mediator between God and man, the man CHRIST JESUS.

Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. Verse ^


My first MEDITATION of Mount TABOR.
NOw (my soul) that by Gods mercy and goodness we are withdrawn from the
world, into this solitary Mountain; where our blessed Savior the Lord JESUS
was transfigured in divine glory, before his suffering in his humanity; that
his Disciples thereby discerning both his natures in one person, might be
assured that he was that true promised Messiah, God manifested in the flesh,
for the redemption of mankind: Let our meditations be employed in the
consideration of those glorious benefits, which the faithful soul receives
from this blessed Savior of the world: wherein our first remembrance
propounded unto us, is; How excellent a thing it is, to have all our debts
cancelled: that is to say; to have all our sins discharged: and so the
Gospel (comparing Matthew 6.12.14. with Luke 11.4.) expounds the same: for
every sin is a grievous debt indeed, and a debt upon record, in Gods own
debt-booke; which he has committed to the keeping of our own consciences; as a
trusty register between him and us: as well that we should not be able to deny
o^ wage our law for the least parcel there entered, as that our selves may see,
h w we grow every day more and more into debt, and being thereby privy to our
own miserable and wret^hed esta^e, o not being able to make satisfacti^, may
seriously and seasonably l^^o^^ to g^t our debts cancelled, befo e we be called
to reckoning ^n the XVIII. Chapter of S. Matthew, we read of a King that would
take account of his servants, Verse. XXIV. and when he had begun to reckon, one
was brought unto him, that owed him a thousand Talents, and having not to pay,
his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children and all that he
had, and payment to be made. Such a miserable debtor (O Lord my God and
Savior) am I: my debts being not of pence, but of talents, and that not
single, but thousand-fold: and all of them of such nature, as the world (if I
had it in my power to dispose of) cannot satisfy divine justice for the least
of them; and yet there can be no discharg of the debt, no remission of my
sins without satisfaction. For mercy and justice are in our God both
essential, neither can the one exceed the other, where they are both infinite.
Oh then, where shall I wretched creature find in heaven or earth a payment of
infinite value, to answer and satisfy this infinite justice, for my manifold
and grievous offenses? What surety will come in to be my bail, in this
desperate and forlorn condition? this satisfaction can no way be made but by
thine own blessed self (O most gracious Lord JESUS, one only Savior) who
being God and Man in one person, have vouchsafed out of thine infinite mercy
and goodness, together with our frail nature, to take also our debts, all our
sins upon thy self; and so (as my most glorious surety and Redeemer) to free
me from that insupportable burden, which otherwise had pressed me down to the
nethermost hell. It being not possible that the black lines of my debts of
sin could be crossed or blotted out of Gods debt-booke by any other means,
then by the red lines of thy most precious blood. For thou only (O Lord) art
the alsufficient and propitiatory sacrifice, whereby divine justice is fully
satisfied for all the sins of every true penitent that believes in thee.

Therefore in all true humiliation of soul, hungring and thirsting after thy
salvation (O blessed JESUS, my Lord and my God, thus crucified for me) do I
prostrate my self at thy glorious footstool; beseeching thee by thy grace to
strike my heard and stony heart, that in all contrition of soul I may spend
my self into the tears of unfeigned repentance for the manifold sins and
wickedness, ignorance, prophannesse, unthankfulnes, and unfruitfulnes of my life
past, and then withal by the same thy gracious spirit, to lift up my penitent
and afflicted soul, by the hands of an humble and lively faith, to lay fast
hold upon thee (my blessed Savior and most glorious Redeemer) that so this
alsufficient satisfaction of thine applied to my soul and conscience, and by
faith become mine, may make me assured, that all my huge and burdensome debts
are cancelled, and my sins remitted, that they may never affright my conscience
any more. For I know O Lord and assuredly believe, that how great or grievous
soever my sins have been, yet there can be no sins unpardonable to an
infinite mercy, nor any sins so heinous or multiplied, but the infinite merit
of thy precious death and passion can and does fully expiate and discharge the
same for ever, to every true penitent and believing soul. Oh then (most
blessed Savior) quicken I beseech thee, and strengthen my weak and feeble
faith by thy gracious spirit; to make such a powerful and effectual
application of this thy most gracious satisfaction for me, to my wounded and
fearful conscience, as may quiet the same for ever: In assurance that all my
debts are paid, and crossed out of GODS Debt-booke by thee my most blessed
surety, never to be demanded of me again.

Give me grace (O Lord JESUS) not to stand only poring and gazing upon my
sins the objects of confusion, but to lift up the the eyes of my soul unto
thee (my gracious Savior) the proper object of consolation, and to be so
wholly and truly enflamed with thy love, as that I may for ever with all awful
reverence and devout adoration, bless, praise, and magnify thy most holy
name, for this eternal love and incomprehensible mercy of thine toward me, in
freeing and acquitting me from all my sins.

And now (O my soul) let us rouse up our dull and heavy spirits, and rejoice
together with joy unspeakable and glorious; let us sing and be merry in the
Lord: for he is the Lord our God, even the God of our salvation: And we shall
ten times more honor him, in obeying his commandment, by believing in him
whom he has sent into the world for our redemption, and shall much better
please him in trusting to his mercy, and sealing to his truth in the blessed
performance of his covenant of grace, in the promised Messiah, then in doubting
of his mercy by reason of our sins, or fearing his justice against us, which
our Savior the Lord JESUS has already satisfied for us, to our final peace
and salvation. Let us then cheer up our selves in this blessed comfort of all
comforts, our debts are all paid and cancelled, our Paschall Lamb is slain:
CHRIST JESUS has made all our days holy days; have any more cause to be
merry then we? Away then with droopings and mistrustfulnesse: for the Lord
has turned our sorrow into joy, and such joy as shall never be taken from us:
Blessed be the name of the Lord our God for ever.

And now (O most glorious and gracious Redeemer) who art the author and
finisher of my faith, perfect the good work of thy grace begun in me, that by
daily renewing of my humble faith and repentance, by these weak and unworthy
meditations of mine, I may with joy and gladness, comfort and cheerfulness,
walk before thee this day, and all the remaining days of my earthly
pilgrimage; waiting for thy blessed calling of me to thy self in glory, when
my faith shall be turned into fruition, and I shall leave imperfection and
mortality behind me for ever.

The Second MEDITATION of Mount TABOR. How sweet a thing it is, to have God
appeased toward thee. Places of Scripture showing how this benefit belongs to
us.
THus says the high and mighty one that inhabiteth eternity; Isa. 57.15.
whose name is holy: I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is
of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
revive the heart of the contrite ones. Ver. 16 For I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and the
souls which I have made. Verse. 17 For the iniquity of his covetousness was I
wroth and smote him: J hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly, in the
way of his heart. Verse. 18. I have seen his ways and will heal him; I will
lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and unto his mourners. Verse. 19.
I create the fruit of the lips; peace, peace to him that is afar off, and to
him that is near, says the Lord, and I will heal him.

Who is a God like unto thee, Micah ^.18
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of
his heritage: he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy Verse. 19. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will
subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depth of
the sea.

For when we were yet without strength, Romans 5.^.
in due time CHRIST died for the ungodly. Verse 8. But God commends his love
toward us, in that whiles we were yet sinners, CHRIST died for us. Ver. 9.
Much more then being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him. Verse. 10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God
by the death of his son, much more being reconciled, shall we be saved by his
life. Verse. 11. And not only so, but we also rejoice in God through our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, by whom we have now received the atonement.

Ioh. 16.33.
These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace.

1 Cor. 5.18.
All things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ and
has given unto us the ministry of reconciliation (19) To wit, that God was in
CHRIST reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them, and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Verse. 20. Now then
we are Ambassadors for CHRIST, as though God did besee^h you by us, we pray you
in CHRIST his stead, be ye reconciled unto God. 21. For he has made him to be
sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

For now in CHRIST JESUS, Ephesians. 2.1.
ye that sometime were far off, are made nigh by the blood of CHRIST. Verse. 14.
For he is our peace. Ver. 16 And that he might reconcile both unto God, in one
body by the Cross.

For it pleased the Father, Colos. 1 ^^
that in him should all fullness dwell. Verse. 20 And having made peace through
the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself, by him,
I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. Verse. 21. And you
who were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now
has he reconciled. Verse. 22. In the body of his flesh, through death; to
present you holy and unblamable and unreproovable in his sight.

And to wait for his son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, 1 These. ^
^.
even JESUS, which has delivered us from the wrath to come.

1 These. 3 ^.
For God has not appointed us to wrath but to attain salvation, by our Lord
Jesus Christ. Verse. 10. Who died for us.

The second Meditation.
NOw (my soul) having formerly considered the great benefit of having all our
bebts cancelled; our second remembrance points us to a blessed consequence
thereof; how sweet a thing it is to have our God appeased toward us: which
will the better appear for our instruction and comfort, if we seriously take
into our humble considera^ion, these three points. 1. The infinite power and
greatness of the Almighty, whom our sins have provoked to wrath against us.
2. His graciousnesse and goodness toward our selves in particular. 3. The
heinousness of our offenses, by which we have justly incurred his displeasure.
For the first, The Lord our God is the great and the terrible God, Nah. 1.5 The
great and dreadful God, Daniel 9.4. The Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth,
and all things therein contained, and disposer of all things by his eternal
and al-governing providence; who has ever at his commandment innumerable
hosts of Angels, one of which (2 King. 19.35.) killed 1850000. of his Churches
enemies in one night. ( Nah. 9.3.) who has his way us the whirlwind, and in
the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet, ( Nahum. 14.) He rebukes
the sea and makes it dry, the mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and
the earth is burnt up at his presence, yea, the world and all that dwell
therein, ( v. 5.) Who can stand before his indignation? who can abide in the
fierceness of his anger? ( Verse 6.) The King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords,
(1 Timothy 6.15.

A great God and a great King above all gods, ( Psalm. 9.13.) The great and
mighty God, the Lord of Hosts is his name, ( Jeremy 32.18.) Great in counsel,
and mighty in works, for his eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of
men, ( Verse. 19.) to give to every one according to his ways, and according to
the fruit of his doings, who shall judge the quick and the dead, (2 Timothy 4.1.)
For he is the judge of the whole world, and will hold his grand Sessions of
life and death, of salvation and damnation, at that ( Acts 2.20.) great and
terrible day of the Lord, wherein (2 Pet. 3.10.) the heavens shall pass away
with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth
also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, the dead raised, the
living changed, and all mankind brought together, to give a most strict
account, not for their ill works alone, but for their neglect of good duties;
not for actions alone, but for their words, and that not for filthy and
mischievous words only, but for every idle word, and the thoughts of the heart.
And this (my soul) is that infinite, almighty, and most glorious and dreadful
Majesty, against whom we have rebelled in the highest treasons; his wisdom,
power, justice, being incomprehensible, and his wrath insupportable. O come,
let us worship and fall down prostrate, with all aweful reverence, trembling
and fear, and then in the second place consider, how infinitely gracious and
good this our most blessed God, the King of eternal glory, has been to such
a worm and vile wretch as my unworthy self. For besides those most blessed
and extraordinary privileges which I have with my contrymen in being borne
an Englishman, in the time of the most glorious Sunshine of the Gospel of
grace, seconded with such Halcyon days of blessed peace, the public miracles
of mercy which God has wrought (even in my life time,) in the preservation of
this Church and Kingdom, our gracious Princes, our selves, and our
posterities; specially in these two famous deliverances, never to be forgotten
by any true English heart, from the Spanish invincible Armado, and the Popish
hellish Powder plot: (O blessed Lord God*) how infinitely good and gracious
have thou been unto me most unworthy in all the particular passages of my
earthly pilgrimage? First in spiritual blessings, by thy preventing mercy
keeping me from some grievous sins, into which my own wicked corruptions, by
Satan's damnable enticements had else drawn me: In thy sparing mercies in my
acting of other sins, wherinto I was fallen: In thy pardoning mercies, that
miracle of miracles, in translating me out of that damnable estate of mine
unregenerate time, into the glorious liberty of thine own children of grace
and adoption in JESUS CHRIST: and for thy renewing mercies by the work of thy
holy spirit, making me to loath all sin, and to apply my self to all duties
of holiness and righteousness in universal new obedience to thy most holy
will, and a constant will and resolution to serve and please thee, love, fear,
adore, and obey thee in all true repentance and sanctification all the
remaining hours of my life: and lastly, for the assurance thou have given me
of the upshot of all thy final and crowning mercies, in the life to come.

Then again, in temporal blessings, by preserving me from harm in most
desperate dangers, giving me the help of good education, blessing me with a
most gracious and comfortable fellowship in marriage, and us both with hopeful
children and grandchildren, especially for our eldest son, the true staff of
our age, and for thy bountiful providing for us and them in outward
necessaries, and showing us mercy in all our occasions, yea, (good Lord) for
thy fatherly chastisements sent amongst us, and therein for that gentle
paralyticall infirmity of mine own aged body, whereby I have been graciously
taken off, from worldly cares and employments; and have held and still by thy
goodness have this blessed time and opportunity for heavenly meditations, and
Christ in preparation of my self for my change and dissolution, and my final
translation into those glorious mansions, which our most blessed Savior has
provided for us in his heavenly kingdom.

O most blessed Lord God, how shall I poor weakling do, to admire thy
providence, adore thy Majesty, love, fear, serve and obey thee, and glorify
thy most holy name, as I am most bounden, and heartily desire to do? in all
sincerity duty and thankfulness; for all thy numberles and incomprehensible
mercies, blessings, comforts and deliverances, vouchsafed unto me, even in this
frail life, and valley of tears, and for the glorious upshot of all thy
crowning mercies reserved for me in the life to come. Oh fill my heart with thy
gracious spirit for enabling me to pay my humble vows unto thy Majesty, in
all true sanctified obedience, and faithful and serious endeavors of soul
and body to walk acceptably before thee, from henceforth and for ever, Amen.

And now (my soul) should we in the third place consider, how wickedly and
ungraciously I have misbehaved my self all the days of my flesh toward this
most high, glorious, almighty, and most dreadful Majesty, and toward this
most gracious and merciful God and Savior of ours. But (here alas) I am
confounded w^h shame, astonishment of heart, and horror of conscience, but to
think of the manifold frailties, prophannes, and pollutions of my youth, and
the sinful negligencies, rashnesses, improvidence, unfruitfulnes, and
unthankfulnes, and other sins and transgressions of thought, word or deed of my
whole misspent life by past. Yea, (O Lord my God) in my ungrateful and froward
neglect of thy gracious time of visitation granted me of thine unspeakable
mercy these four last years, as well for my sound humiliation, and serious
daily repentance for my manifold sins and corruptions, as for improving that
precious time in those gracious duties and spiritual exercises, public and
private, which my conscience tells me I should have performed with more fervor
of spirit, fear and trembling, and syncerity and intention of heart then I
have done. But (O Lord) I find, that were mine eyes fountains of tears,
powered out every moment of my life, should my heart fall asunder, into drops of
blood in my breast, for anger and indignation against my self, for my grievous
sins and transgressions, yet should I come infinitely short of that sorrow and
hearts grief, which mine offenses would justly require and exact at my hands.
And therefore, O Lord my God, though it be my most earnest suit, and the
earnest desire and constant prayer of my humble soul, that my hard and dull
heart may by thy grace be so softened and quickened, as to be truly broken and
dissolved into sighs of true contrition, and that I may weep day and night for
my sins and offenses all my life long, unto my dying hour: yet all could not
serve to draw thy mercy upon me, for the least of my transgressions, for in the
point of redemption of mankind, and purgation of sin, nothing could serve the
turn, but the precious blood of JESUS CHRIST, God and Man in one person,
blessed for ever. Either the son of God must die, or else all mankind be
eternally damned and their sins only are properly said to have pierced him,
who at length are saved by his blood. Come then (my soul) let us set our
humble faith on work, to lay fast hold upon this blessed Savior of ours, who
only is become our reconciliation and peacemaker for us, to God our heavenly
father, and alone c^n help us in all our distresses. This being a true
principle in the heavenly art of comforting of afflicted consciences; that so
soon as a man is heartily humbled for all his sins, and weary of their
weight; though his sorrow be not answerable to his own desire, yet he shall
most certainly be welcome to JESUS CHRIST, for it is not so much the
muchnesse and measure of our sorrow, as the truth and heartinesse of it, that
fits us for the promise and comfort of mercy: though withal it is true, that
he that thinks he has sorrowed enough for his sins never sorrowed
savingly.

O most blessed and most gracious Lord God, I beseech thee sanctify my heart
by thy holy spirit, unto sound and sincere humiliation of soul, that in the
sight of my sins I may still grow viler in my own eyes, and be more and
more humbled in true repentance for them; but yet withal by the hand of lively
and saving faith upon the Lord Jesus, dying and bleeding upon the cross for my
sake and for mine assured reconciliation with thy Majesty, by whom alone thou
art appeased toward me, and made my most gracious and merciful father for
ever: that so (by thy grace) I may ever keep in my bosom, an humble, soft, and
lowly spirit, which may ever enable me to live by faith more cheerfully, to
enjoy thee (my most glorious Lord God) more nearly, to apply my Jesus to my
souls comfort more feelingly; and to wait for and long for his blessed coming
more earnestly: that so being graciously prepared and sanctified by thy holy
spirit (the soul of my soul, governing, comforting, and supporting me,) I may
with all alacrity and thankfulness, faith, repentance and obedience to thy most
holy will; walk before thee in all holy fear, all the days of mine appointed
time till my change shall come. In full assurance that no sooner shall this
dark world and the shadow of it be out of my bodily sight, but the glorious
light of the heavenly mansions of my Saviors Palace provided for me and all
the rest of his, shall shine upon my soul, in full brightness, to mine
everlasting joy, comfort, and final peace, through JESUS CHRIST my blessed
Savior and only peacemaker, Amen.

The Third MEDITATION OF MOUNT TABOR. How glorious a thing to be the child of
God. Places of Scripture showing how this benefit belongs to us,
Ioh. 1.11.
HE came unto his own, and his own received him not. Verse. 12 but as many as
received him, to them gave he power (or the right, or privilege) to become the
sons of God, even to them that believe in his name.

Ioh. 12.3^.
While you have light believe in the light, that ye may be the children of the
light.

For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. R^m.
8.^^
(15) For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye
have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. Verse. 16. The
spirit it self bears witnesses with our spirits, that we are the children of
God.

For ye are all the children of God by faith in CHRIST JESUS. Ga^. ^.^


When the fullness of time was come, Ga^. ^.^.
God sent forth his son made of woman, made under the Law, (5.) to redeem
them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.
(6.) And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son into
your hearts. (7) therefore thou art no more a servant but a son.

Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, John 3.^.
that we should be called the sons of God. (2) Beloved, now are we the sons
of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be.

The third Meditation
Now (my soul) are we by Gods mercy come to the third step of these our
Meditations; which offers to our consideration, how glorious a thing it is to
be the child of God. In our first step, when we lay first bound in the chains
of our sins, under the insupportable weight of numberless talents of debts,
oppressing us, our most gracious Savior the Lord Jesus blessed for ever,
became our surety, took our nature upon him, God manifested in the flesh, paid
all our debts, satisfied divine justice for all our sins, and so set us at
liberty, and made us freemen In our second step, he brought us into a further
degree of favor, to make our God whom we had so grievously offended and
provoked to become friends with us, and appeased toward us. And now in the
third place we are brought to be more than friends, children of the almighty
and most glorious God himself* whereby we are entitled to demand and challenge
at his fatherly hands, not only safe protection from al dangers and evils, and
careful provision both for soul and body in this life, but also an eternal
inheritance of heavenly glory in the life to come. And how comes it to pass (o
my soul) that so wretched and worthies a creature as my unworthy self should be
advanced to those glorious privileges, and high dignity of being made and
accepted a child of the most high? our God has but one only son by nature even
G d the son, very God of very God, the second person of the most holy, glorious
and ever blessed Trinity, in and by whom alone, as (in our former meditations)
I was redeemed from my sins, and reconciled unto God: so it is in and by him
only that I and all the rest of his redeemed ones do receive the adoption of
sons: even so (O most blessed Lord God and heavenly father) because it so
pleases thee, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord* whom our humble and true faith
apprehending, we receive from him into our hearts the blessed spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father; the same spirit bearing witness with our
spirits, that we are the children of God, by faith in CHRIST JESUS, as in the
several places of holy Scripture before named, appears.

O then (my soul) let us now also by this third step and meditation, take this
just and fit opportunity for renewing of our daily repentance, and of our
humble faith in this most gracious Savior of ours, for our laying fast hold
upon him, who by these blessed degrees has brought us to this high privilege
of being the children of God.

And true faith I find to be thus defined. Faith is a filial confidence in
God, conceived of the knowledge of CHRIST, and the love of the father in him;
whereby man runs unto God, and cries unto him, Abba Father.

In which lively faith there is a twofold operation.

First, an apprehending virtue by which the believer receives and applies to
himself JESUS CHRIST, as he is offered in the word and sacraments.

Secondly, a rendering virtue, (so to call it) whereby the believer goes out of
himself into the Lord. Qui credit in Christum transit in Christum. By the
first CHRIST becomes ours, by the second we resign our selves unto CHRIST,
and become his. And these are the two hands of faith. By the one we receive
mercy from God, by the other, we render son-like obedience unto him: and if we
believe (as we ought to do) that God is become our Father, and do so apprehend
him in Christ; then ought we again to show by our chang of life and new
obedience, that we have rendered our selves to be his. For of all those that
came to CHRIST in the Gospel, none went away as they came; and they that are
truly in him, get virtue from him, which works in them the similitude of his
own life, so as this meditation (O my soul) does properly spread it self
into two branches. First the glorious privileges and comforts, we receive by
our adoption, and then our most bounden duties to our most gracious God for the
same.

There is a natural adoption, which is defined to be, a lawful act imitating
nature, found out for the comfort of them, who have no children of their own,
but this spiritual adoption of us differs far from it: For it is, a lawful
act transcending nature, found out by the Lord our God, for the comfort of
children that want a father. We being by nature miserable Orphans, having no
father to provide for us; It pleased the Lord our God to become our father in
Christ, and to make us his sons and daughters by adoption, not for any
benefit he receives of us, for nothing can arise by the means of any creature,
to that most high and alsufficient Majesty) but that he might have some upon
whom to bestow his benefits, for the declaration of the glory of his rich mercy
Yet both adoptions agree in this, that they flow from the pleasure and
goodness of the adoptant, and that there are given to him that is adopted, the
privileges of a son which by nature he has not but where the natural
adoptant cannot change the nature of the party adopted. It is otherwise with
us: For if God by the grace of adoption make us his sons, he will also by the
grace of regeneration make us new creatures, and therefore whosoever continues
in sin, cannot challeng, any interest in this divine privilege, only the
sanctified are entitled to it.

Here also let us to our unspeakable comfort observe, that the sons of God
know most certainly that God is become their heavenly Father. For in this that
they are taught of God by his own spirit to acknowledge him and call upon him
with boldness, as upon their father, they cannot be deceived of their
generation: but with more freedom of spirit, yea, and surer knowledge they
call God their Father, then any son of the world is able to call upon his
earthly Father.

Here also we are taught, that we cannot pray unto God but by the spirit of
adoption, who is the parent that begets prayer, as the mother who conceives it,
is the humble and contrite heart: For no proud, unclean, or hard heart can
pray unto God. And certainly unless the holy spirit testify unto us that God
is our father, and has made us his children, we dare not go near him, to
crave good things from him, and therefore herein appears the Fatherly
indulgence of our God toward us.

We are here in the valley of death, in heavines through continual afflictions
and temptations. The time is not yet come, wherein the Lord will communicate
unto us his glorious presence, to fill us with that fulness of joy which is in
that blessed vision; The time is not yet come, wherein we must ascend to our
father: yet to keep us in the mean time that we faint not, the Lord has sent
down his holy spirit into our hearts, to comfort us. O fatherly care! O
wonderful love! That spirit the comforter descended once according to CHRIST'S
promise upon the Apostles in a visible manner, and does daily descend in a
secret and invisible manner into the hearts of the godly, lest the children of
the marriage chamber should be swallowed up with heavines, through the want of
their Bridegroom. And this glorious Ambassador teaches us to cry unto God, as
upon our Father: which if we do with this spirit of adoption, it is effectual
enough to draw down upon us all those bless^ngs which the Lord communicates to
his children: His name shall be sanctified in us; his kingdom shall be
advanced in us; we shall not want our daily bread; he will forgive us all our
sins; and preserve us that we fall not into temptation, and deliver us from
evil For all comforts rest under this name of father: if we can so call him in
faith, the riches of his mercies are ours.

O (blessed Lord God,) what manner of man should I be in holiness,
righteousness, and heavenly-mindednesse, answerable to this high and holy
calling? and how unworthy a wretch have I showed my self of so great mercy:
when instead of worshipping, fearing, loving, and obeying this most gracious
Lord and heavenly father, in all things I have yielded to the fil^hy
allurements of his and mine own most malicious and accursed enemy, in many
vile pollutions of my profane youth, and the many rash indiscretions, sinful
neglect of good duties, unfruitfulnesse, and unthankfulness of my after time?
Here, here, (my soul) is a fit opportunity for me to break out into holy
mourning and lamenting, for the manifold sins and offenses of my misspent life
past; which now appear the more abominable and heinous in mine eyes, when I
look back and consider, in what strict and precise humiliation, with what
universal holy obedience, dutifulnes and careful watching over my thoughts,
words, and actions, I should have walked before this blessed God almighty mine
heavenly father whom I have so ungraciously offended.

O most blessed spirit of adoption, God the Holy Ghost, most glorious sealer up
of my precious salvation; look down in thine infinite mercies upon my poor,
humbled, and afflicted soul, and have compassion upon me. Descend (o Lord my
God) by thy heavenly grace into my heart and purify and sanctify it into a
holy Temple for thine own blessed residence for ever: to mollify and melt it
into the sighs and tears of true contrition and repentance for the sins and
iniquities of my life past; and then withal to raise it up by faith, to see my
self fully acquitted and discharged from them all, in the precious
bloodshedding of my dear Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST the promised Messiah,
God in the flesh manifested: and so to enable me with the hands of humble and
true faith to lay fast hold upon him and his merits for me, and upon this
blessed privilege of being in and by him the adopted son of my heavenly
father, unto the assurance of my final and everlasting comfort and peace:
Quickening and strengthening me unto all holy duties all the remaining days of
my earthly pilgrimage; whereby to glorify my heavenly father as I am most
bounden and to assure mine own conscience of the truth of mine adoption by the
syncerity of my heart and thorough sanctification: that so by the sweet beams
of thy grace shining into my dull and feeble soul, I may with cheerfulness
and comfort wait the good hour, when my blessed Savior JESUS shall call me
from hence, home to himself peace, in and I shall leave mortality and
imperfection behind me for ever, Amen.

The Fourth MEDITATION of Mount TABOR. How happy a condition it is for thee,
upon thy perseverance in grace to be assured of thy salvation. Places of
Scripture showing how this benefit and privilege belongs to us.
Exodus 15.2. The Lord is my strength and song, he is become my salvation.

Esaias 45.17) Jsrael shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation;
ye shall not be confounded nor ashamed world without end.

Jeremy 31.3. The Lord has appeared unto me, saying, yea, J have loved thee
with an everlasting love: therefore have I extended loving kindness unto thee.

Ioh. 4.42. And know that this is indeed the CHRIST, the Savior of the world.

Ioh. 14.1. JESUS having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them
unto the end.

Ioh 15.16. You have not chosen me, but J have chosen you; and ordained you,
that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain;
that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you.
(9) As my Father has loved me, so have I loved you; continue ye in my love.
(11) These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and
that your joy might be full.

Romans 1.16. J am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believes.

Romans 11.29. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

1 Corinthians. 1.9. God is faithful by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of
his son Jesus Christ our Lord (8.) Who will also confirm you unto the end,
that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Galatians 2.20. Christ lives (...) me, and the life which I now live i^ the
flesh, J live by the faith of the son of God.

Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he who has begun a good
work in you; will perform (or finish it) until the day of Jesus Christ.

Acts 4.10. Be it known unto you all, that by the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, does this man stand
before you whole.

(11) This is the stone which was set at naught by you builders, which is
become the head of the corner. (12) Neither is there salvation in any other,
for there in no other name given under heaven, amongst men, whereby we must be
saved.

Acts 13.26. Whosoever among you fears God, to you is the word of this
salvation sent.

1 Timothy 1.5. Christ came into the world to save sinners.

Heb. 7, 22. By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better testament. (25)
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him.

The fourth MEDITATION of Mount TABOR.
NOw (my soul) has the Lord in mercy brought us to a fourth step of these our
meditations, which is a blessed consequent of the three former. For being
redeemed from our sins, which was our first step, and in the second, received
to our heavenly Father; and in the third, made his children by grace and
adoption; we are thereby become sure upon our perseverance in grace, of final
salvation: which brings us to this fourth step, making our condition (even in
this earthly pilgrimage) most happy and safe; notwithstanding any inward or
outward afflictions, temptations, terrors, torments, we shall or may be
exercised withal in our way to heaven. For he that is sure of grace here, and
glory hereafter, what can possibly trouble him? seeing ( Romans 8.18.) the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us, and (2 Cor. 4.17.) our light afflictions which
is but for a moment, works for us, a far more exceeding weight of glory.
And how is it (O my soul) that we are brought to this blessed condition of
safety and happiness? even by the same our most blessed Savior only, with
whom we began in the first step of these meditations. For he is Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last, ( Heb. 12.2.) the author and finisher of our
faith; neither is there salvation in any other, as is before quoted and
recited. Oh then (my soul) here are we to renew our daily repentance for our
offenses past, and our humble faith in our almighty Savior, who has acquitted
us from them all, and is thus graciously pleased to go along with us, and will
confirm us unto the end, that we may be blameless in the day of the Lord
JESUS.

O most gracious Lord and Savior, who have begun thine own good work in me,
thy poor, weak, and unworthy servant, finish the same for thine own glorious
names sake, and by thy holy spirit dwell in my heart for ever: that for being
both in soul and body thoroughly purified and sanctified unto all holy duties
of true humiliation and godly sorrow for my sins and corruptions, and of new
universal obedience, in the remaining hours of this transitory life, J may
with cheerfulness and comfort pass over the same; and not with patience only,
but with joy and thankfulness wait for the time of my change and
dissolution, when thou shall be pleased to call me home, to thy blessed self
in glory, Amen, Amen.

The Fifth MEDITATION OF MOUNT TABOR. How pleasant a state it is, to live
without fear of death and hell. Places of Scripture showing this comfort to
belong to the fa thfull.
HOsca 13.14. I will ransom them from the power of the grave, J will redeem
them from death. O death J will be thy plagues; O grave J will be thy
destruction.

Esaias 25.8. He will swallow up death in victory: and the Lord God will wipe
away tears from all faces.

Mat. 16.18. Upon this rock (viz. the faith of Christ) will I build my Church:
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death. (25.) I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, for the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free
from the law of sin and death.

1 Cor. 15.54. Death is swallowed up in victory. (55.) O death, where is thy
sting? O grave (or o hell) where is thy victory? (56.) The sting of death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the law. (37.) But thanks be to God who gives
us the victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

2 Timoth. 1.10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Lo^^ JESUS
CHRIST, who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to
light through the Gospel.

Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch th^^ as t^^ children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself ^ook par^^y the same: that through death ^e^ might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is the devil (1^) and deliver them, who
through (...) were all their lifetime subject to bondage.

Revel. 1.18. I am he that lives and was dead; and behold I am alive for ever
more, Amen; and have the keys of hell and death.

Revel. 2.11. He that overcommeth shall not be hurt of the second death.

Ioh. 5.24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my words and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death to life.

Ioh. 8.51. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man keep my sayings, he shall
never see death.

Revel. 20.6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection;
on such the second death has no power.

The Fifth MEDITATION.
NOw (my soul) are we by Gods goodness come to the fifth step of these our
meditations, to consider how full of sweet comfort and contentment the life of
him is, or ought to be, that lives without fear of death and hell. Death
being in its own nature the extremest of evils in this life, the king of
terrors to every living thing, and hell the most horrible dungeon of
everlasting torments: to the just fear of both which the wicked of the world
are every minute subject. None but those children of grace here, that are sure
of their salvation hereafter, can live this pleasant and fearelesse life. There
is a first and a second death, the death of the soul, (says Saint Augustine)
went before, in the souls departure from God, and the death of the body
followed, by the souls departing from the body, the soul first left God
willingly, yea wilfully; and therefore is compelled unwillingly to leave the
body. Now from both these deaths are we delivered by the Lord Jesus. For our
souls being by him freed from sin, are reconciled unto God, and so exempt
from that wrath to come; and from the power of the second death for ever. And
from the first death, we are so delivered from it, that albeit in the own
nature it be the center of all miseries, and a fearful effect of Gods curse
on man for sin; yet to the godly the nature of it is also changed; so as now
it is not the death of the man, but the death of sin in the man. Death (says
Ambrose) is the burial of all vices: for it is the progress and
accomplishment of the full mortification of all our earthly members, wherein
that filthy flux of sin is dried up in an instant, it as a voluntary
sacrificing of the whole man, soul and body to the Lord, the greatest and the
highest service we can do to him on earth. For where in the course of our
life we are continually fighting against our inordinate lusts and affections,
to bring them in subjection to Christ; by death (as it were by one stroke) they
are all smitten and slain: and the soul is offered up unto God in a sacrifice
of full and perfect obedience. And though this mortal tabernacle must be laid
to sleep for a time in the grave, (which is Gods m^^ld, wherein it shall be
new mo^ld^d and f amed fit for heaven) yet my blessed Savior, who ( Romans
4.24.) was delivered to death for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification, has by his most glorious resurrection, (blessed be his most
holy name) not only already made me partaker of the first resurrection in
this life, from the death of sin by grace, and on such the second death ^^^h
no power; but has also by my blessed union with him, as one of the sanctified
members of that mystical body whereof himself is the glorious head, assured
me of my bodies resurrection unto glory, and peace for ever; and that death
shall restore it again in better plight than ever it was before: to be again
reunited unto thee (my immortal soul) in joint glory and immortality for ever.

And what is this frail body to me, but my closet or inmost garment; which I
shall no sooner put off, but it shall be sure of repose, and thou (mine
enfranchised soul) of joy; and when I arise, neither of you shall fail of
glory. O then, (my soul) in this confidence and assurance of our final peace,
come let us join together in this last earthly duty we have to perform, of
offering up unto our most glorious and merciful heavenly father, in the name
and mediation of our most blessed Savior JESUS CHRIST, by the gracious
assistance of God the Holy Ghost, my self the whole man, soul and body, in an
humble, faithful, voluntary, and most obedient and free sacrifice; that he
mercifully accepting the same at our hands; I may securely, quietly, patiently,
nay, joyfully and thankfully depart hence in peace, unto the God of my
salvation, Amen, Amen.

The Sixth MEDITATION OF MOUNT TABOR. How rich and stately a thing it is to be
heir of glory. Places of Scripture showing how this transcendent privilege
belongs unto the faithful.
Esaias 43.6. Bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the
earth. (7.) Even every one that is called by my name; for I have created him
for my glory. Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers good
pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

John 12.32 He appointed us a Kingdom.

Psalm 84.11. For the Lord is the sun and shield: the Lord will give grace
and glory.

Luke 22.29. Therefore I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has
appointed unto me. (30.) that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom.

Romans 8.16. The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit that we are
the children of GOD.

(Verse. 17.) And if Children then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with
CHRIST, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified
together. (Verse. 18.) For J reckon that the sufferings of this present time,
are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us.

(21) Because the creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the gloriou^ liberty of the children of God. (30) moreover
whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he
also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified 2 Cor. 4.17. For
our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Gal. 4.7. Wherefore thou art no more a
servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ. Ephesians.
3.6. That the Gentiles should be fellow heirs, and of the same body and
partakers of his promise in CHRIST by the Gospel.

Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also
appear with him in Glory. Philippians 3.20. For our conversation is in heaven,
from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; (Verse 21.)
Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, according to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things to
himself.

1 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day, and not unto me
only, but unto them also, which love his appearing.

Titus 3.7. That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs,
according to the hope of eternal life.

1 Pet. 5.1. The elders which are amongst you, I exhort, who am also an elder,
and a witness of the sufferings of CHRIST, and also a partaker of the glory
that shall be revealed. (2.) Feed the flock of God. (4.) And when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fades not a
way. (10.) But the God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory
by CHRIST JESUS, make you perfect.

2 Pet. 1.3. According as his Divine power has given unto us all things, that
pertain unto life and godlin sse, through the knowledge of him that has
called us to glory and virtue. (11.) For so an entrance shall be ministered
unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. (4.) Jn
whom the God of this world has blinded the eyes of them that believe not, lest
the light of the glorious Gospel of CHRIST (who is the image of God) should
shine unto them. (5.) For we preach not our selves, but CHRIST JESUS the Lord
(6.) For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face
of JESUS CHRIST. (7.) But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us.

The sixth Meditation
NOw my soul are we (by Gods mercy) come to the sixth and uppermost step
propounded to us in these our meditations: namely, to ^onsider how rich and
stately a thing it is, to be an heir of glory, And this indeed must needs be
the most high and transcendent privilege of all, that can be bestowed upon
the children of men; who being by nature children of wrath, and in bondage to
sin, death and damnation, are by grace brought to this most blessed estate,
of changing sin into righteousness, death into life, and hell and damnation,
into heaven and glory. And how comes this blessed work to be effected for us
most unworthy wretches? but only by that most blessed Savior and redeemer of
ours (God in the flesh manifested) who brought us up the first step of these
our meditations; and so from step to step all along to this the highest of
heavenly glory. For he is the only natural son of GOD, and thereby the
only proper and immediate heir to that blessed inheritance: whereunto he
has a twofold right; one, by his eternal generation, and so he is the heir
of his Fathers Kingdom, in a manner proper and peculiar to himself alone: The
other right he has by purchase; for by the merit of his precious death and
passion, he has purchased eternal li^e for all the members of his Church;
whom having espoused unto himself by grace, we also by that ^lessed union
with him, became heirs annexed with him of the same glory. In the first right
he can admit no companion; in the second all the members of his mystical body
are made partakers with him. O my soul, what shall we say to this transcendent
dignity of all truly penitent believers? but as the Psalmist says ( Psalm
87.3.) glorious things are spoken of thee o thou City of God; so may we say of
every citizen of the holy City new Jerusalem, the Lambs wife, Rev. 21.3 For God
will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be
with them, and be their God, (4.) and God shall wipe away all their tears from
their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain. For, Psalm 144.15. Blessed are those
people whose God is the Lord, and are called to this happy fellowship and
union with him who is the king of Saints. O my soul, come let us with all
humble reverence, heartily love and adore the Lord, who has of his free grace
made us partakers of this unspeakable mercy: let us rejoice and be glad in the
Lord; and let my heart and mouth be filled with his praises for ever. For, Esaias
1.9. except the Lord had reserved mercy for us, we had been made like unto
Sodom and Gomorah; whereas by this blessed Savior of ours, our most gracious
Lord and husband, the lots are fallen unto us in pleasant places, and we have a
fair heritage. Blessed be the God of our salvation for ever and ever. And
although all the adopted children of God, members of Christ, are heirs of this
glorious inheritance; yet is not the same diminished to any one of them; for
the rich portion of one shall be no prejudice to another; but every one shall
be filled with the fullness of the glory of God.

But withal, we are to observe, that howsoever in earthly inheritances, the
father must first die before the son come to the full possession thereof; yet
for this heavenly inheritance, we our selves must first die, that we may
possess the same. For our Father is the ancient of days, the heavens are the
work of his hands: they shall perish, but he does remain; we all shall wax
old as does a garment, but he is the same, and his years shall not fail: for
he is the Father of eternity, in whom there cannot fall so much as a shadow of
change. But as for us, our condition is such, that by suffering death, we must
enter into the kingdom, we cannot see him so long as we live, nor be
satisfied with his image, till we awake in the resurrection. Therefore should
the day of death be a joyful day unto us, because it is the day of our
glorious inheritance. Dies mortis aeternae vitae natalis est; and as this
serves unto us, for a special comfort in the hour of temptation and day of
death; so it should provoke us, to answer this our heavenly vocation, by the
holy and heavenly disposition of our minds, and affections, whiles we live, and
a gracious and Christian preparation from day to day for the time of our
dissolution, waiting for it with cheerfulness and joy.

Seeing we are the sons of God, shall we not make it our study and care to
use all blessed means for renewing his image in us, which our former sins have
defaced? and to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the remaining days
of our life? seeing we are called to be heirs of an heavenly inheritance,
shall we any longer mind and affect earthly things? nay rather with the holy
Apostle ( Philip. 3.8, 9.) Let us account all things to be but dung in respect
of the excellent knowledge and fellowship of the Lord JESUS. Seeing CHRIST must
be our comfort in death, when all other comforts will forsake us; let us make
him out joy and pleasure, and our portion in this life, and so shall he be both
in life and death an advantage unto us.

O most gracious Lord God and our merciful heavenly father; give us grace, we
most humbly beseech thee, seriously to consider of this high calling of ours,
being by adoption made thy children, members of CHRIST, and heirs annexed with
him of glory of rebels and slaves of Satan, made the happy servants of our
blessed Redeemer: nay more then so; his friends, ( John 14.15.) Henceforth call
I you no more servants, but friends; yea, more then friends, for he has made
us his brethren. ( Heb. 2.11.) He that sanctifies and they which are
sanctified are all one; wherefore he is not ashamed to call them brethren. O
transcendent and wonderful comfort! God the Father cries from heaven, This is
my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased; hear him. The Son again
speaking unto us here on earth, says, ( John 20.17.) I ascend unto my Father,
and to your Father, and to my God, and your God. He that is my God and my
Father, is also your Father and your God. Therefore go ye unto him and with
confidence call upon him as your Father and your God; and he will hear you and
help you.

O most glorious and most merciful heavenly Father, confirm us more and more in
the assurance of thy eternal love, free grace, and unchangeable mercies
toward us in Christ Jesus: that in lively sense and inward assurance thereof
we may with comfort and cheerfulnes wait for, love, and long for his
appearing. (2 Timothy 4.8.) for our deliverance from this bondage of corruption,
and receiving of us to himself in glory. To whom, with thee (O Father of
mercies) and God the Holy Ghost, most holy, glorious, and ever blessed
Trinity, in the unity of one, only, true and everliving God, of
incomprehensible glorious essence, and most adored and coeternall Majesty, be
all glory, praise, dominion and thankesgiving ascribed, for ever and ever,
Amen, Amen, Amen.

FOR A Seventh MEDITATION OF MOUNT TABOR.
NOw (my soul) having by our most gracious GODS fatherly indulgence and
mercy, had time, and been enabled (though with much humane weakness) to
consider distinctly and severally of those six maine points of meditation
propounded unto us for Mount Tabor, (the same indeed comprehending all manner
of spiritual comforts and refreshings for the Christian soul) we are by
course and order come to a seventh stepp: which very name puts me in mind of
the seventh day of our week, the fittest of all the rest for heavenly
contemplations. Almighty GOD after his six days work of wonder in the
creation of the visible World, consecrating the seventh day for a holy rest to
himself and for his own immediate worship and service, which was the Jews
Sabbath; and the glorious resurrection of God the Son manifested in the
flesh, for the most gracious work of our redemption, being also celebrated in
the Church ever the seventh day of the week, which is the Christians Sabbath,
and both of them types of that everlasting Sabbath, which the triumphant Church
shall celebrate for ever in the kingdom of Heaven. The consideration of which
particulars might be a theme large enough and fit enough for a seventh
Meditation of Mount Tabor: But being sensible of my own weakness, I am
resolved here to set up my rest; and instead and place of this seventh and
concluding Meditation of mine to set down two exercises of this kind,
heretofore composed by me, the one, fitting the Christians Sabbath to the
worlds end: the other, a contemplation of the new Jerusalem, and heavenly
Sabbath, world without end: recommending the four other heads of meditation
set down by Master Down^m, and the twelve privileges of the faithful set
down by Master Byfeild, as fit arguments for divine contemplations to such as
are better able to travel therein; no day of the week, no, nor of our whole
life being to be exempted from that most necessary duty of daily renewing our
faith and repentance, whereof see Downam at large in his Guide to Godliness.
lib. 3. cap. 2.

A MEDITATION On the Incarnation and Passion of our most glorious Savior the
Lord Jesus, and our blessed union with him, alluding to the song of Simeon,
called Nunc Dimittis.
SImeon was one of those which waited for
the Messiahs coming, Isreal's consolation;
Whom that himself should see, before he died
was showed to him from God by revelation,
And when the Virgin mother brought her Son
up to the Temple to present him there,
Simeon by motion of the Holy Ghost,
came in, and praising God with joyful cheer:
The blessed babe with arms he gently claspt about;
This Swan-like song divinely warbling out.
O Lord since thou have let me live to see,
the Christ, thy promised salvation,
Whom thou have now prepared reveald to be
before the face of every nation,
A saving light unto the Gentiles, who
in darkness and in shade of death did dwell;
The glory, and the way of peace, unto
thine own beloved people Israel.
Now let thou thy servant (blessed Lord,)
Depart in peace according to thy word.
If Simeon at the sight of Christ a child,
new come into the world for our salvation;
That glorious work not then accomplished,
was yet so wrapped with joy and exultation;
As disesteeming all the world beside,
he had no mind of living longer here;
How then O Lord should I affected be,
who live in this thy Gospels light so clear,
My Saviors acts and sufferings all to see,
And know the benefit thereof belongs to me.
O thou divine peacemaker, how shall I
admi^e and praise thy mercy infinite?
That being God, our nature would assume,
and to thy sacred person it unite,
That so thou being God and man in one,
(...) perfect Mediator might become
To God for man, who else had perished:
and without thee been utterly undone.
Good Lord, how should my soul affected be,
At this thy wonderful humility?
That thou the almighty maker of the world,
(for by thy word, all things at first began
Should yield thy self a creature to become,
and to be made, twice made for sinful man:
Made of the blessed Virgin, so to take
with our frail nature, our infirmities:
And made under the law, to undergo
the burden of our sins and miseries.
How then (good Lord) should I affected be,
To this great work of mercy toward me?
That thou to whom all powers in heaven did bow
and thought it their honor to be serviceable;
Should for us wretched men descend so low,
as to be born heir in a homely stable;
Laid in a cratch, pursued by tyrants rage,
tempted by Satan, made of men a scorn,
Sold by thy servant, arraigned and condemned,
grievously scourged, then crowned with thorn,
Naild to the cross, twixt two thieves crucified:
Pierced through the heart, oppressed in soul beside.
(Most blessed Jesus) why should thou endure,
thy precious body peerlesly innocent,
Yea sacred and holy, by the cruel hands
of sinful wretches to be torn and rent
Was there no way to expiate my sins
but all these torments must be laid on thee:
O wretched caytive I that did offend,
most gracious Savior, thou thus pitying me,
O let my heart weep tears of blood within,
For these thy sufferings, and my grievous sin.
And thou (dear Lord) whose love unutterable
has made thee undergo all this for me,
Inflame my heart with holy fire that I,
with awful love again may worship thee.
(With true repent^nt tears, and contrite heart,
prostrate thy precious bleeding wounds before
My Lord, my God, thus crucified for me,
with humble faith and reverence to adore,
Hating my self for all my grievous sins,
Which caused those thy grievous sufferings.
O let mine eyes power forth whole streams of tears
my heart dissolved to sighs of true contrition,
So to bewail my sins and wickedness
and that most miserable and forlorn condition.
Which guilt of sin, sight of the wrath of God
desert of hell and utter condemnation,
Might threaten me, but that my hope is fixed
on thee (my Jesus) God of my salvation.
Thou only (blessed Lord) can succor me:
O save my soul, which only trusts in thee.
For when the people were in Moses time,
by fiery serpents wounded mortally,
The brazen serpent was lift up by him,
that such as look up to it, might not die:
If such great virtue in that figure were
the type of this thy cross and real elevation?
How much more virtue shall thy precious blood
afford my sin-sick soul for my curation.
Then let my humble faith cleave fast to thee;
Sweet Savior; let us never parted be.
For when I look up to this cross of thine,
five glorious victories my meditation
Observes, thereon to be atchiev d by thee,
for making sure the work of my salvation:
The law of grace against the law of works
prevailing, so to work my liberty:
Against my sin, thy self (dear Lord) made sin,
that it might righteousness become to me.
Thy death (O Savior) mine abolishing,
My soul unto eternal life to bring.
And thou the Prince of darkness conquering,
that I might still the child of God remain:
And lastly overcomming hell it self,
that I might heavens blessedness obtain.
Thus by thy precious death and passion,
my souls maine enemies are vanquished quite,
And I set free now under th'law no more,
but under grace, by thy rich grace and might.
O let thy spirit of grace still govern me,
That I may die to sin, and live to thee.
That whiles I live I may divide my time
between true godly sorrow for my sins,
And faithful praising of thy holy name,
from whence alone my hope of comfort springs.
And so by lively faith being knit to thee,
thou by thy spirit dwelling in my heart,
Soul of my soul, may day by day to me,
thy spiritual life and quickening grace impart.
And I by mystical injunction be,
Truly (though spiritually) made one with thee.
Of which sweet union thou have made me sure,
by those maine seals of thine eternal love;
Thy word of truth, thy Sacraments of grace,
thy spirit of peace inspired from above:
And so by matchless mercy on thy part,
(most blessed Lord) and humble faith on mine,
Thou have betrothed thy glorious self unto
my poor believing soul and made it thine,
One of thine own, to be disjoined ne^e^:
But live in thee, to thee, with thee for ever.
Why then should any mortal thing detain,
me longer in this veil of tears and sin?
Whose whole desire with blessed Simeon,
is to contemn the world and all therein.
To lay aside this robe of earth I wear,
that my redeemed soul may come to thee,
Whose blessed will is so declared, that where
Thou art, thine own shall also be.
Call then (sweet Jesus) as it shall thee please,
Into thy hands receive my soul in peace,
When my appointed time of change shall be,
For which my soul shall daily wait on thee
A Contemplative Meditation of the new Jerusalem and the triumphant Church,
celebrating an everlasting Sabbath in the kingdom of Heaven; entitled by me,
Halelujah to Heavens King.
LE^ve (O my soul) this restless veil below,
Which sin and sorrow by turns still overflow
Raise up thy thoughts to that supernall rest,
Which makes all the Saints and Angels blessed;
Who altogether do for ever sing,
Halelujah's to Heavens King.
There is erect the Godheads glorious throne,
More bright than many thousand suns in one;
Where thy dear Saviors body glorified
That body which for thee was crucified,
Now reigns with the Dietie,
In sovereign bliss and Majesty.
That sacred head, which here was crowned with thorns
A crown of heavenly glory now adornes;
That hand, which here did hold the scornful reed,
Now weilds the Scepter of al power and dread,
Those feet once naild unto the tree.
Trample on death and hell in victory.
^he holy city, new Jerusalem,
Is there prepared for just and perfect men;
With great high walls of Jasper, built four square
Whereof the length breadth depth all equal are,
Of twelve foundations, precious stone,
The twelve Apostles names thereon.
In twelve gates of pearls a piece, on each side three*
At which twelve Angels the attendants be:
The st eets pure gold, all shining like the Sun,
Through which the crystal stream of life does run,
From out the throne of glory flowing,
The Tree of life, on both sides growing.
Within those gates of glorious habitation,
None enter may, but heirs of salvation;
The Lambs redeemed, his espoused wife,
Whose names are written in his book of life*
The Church triumphant, there set free
Forever from mortality.
There live those blessed troops of purest spirits,
In such excess of joys and true delights,
As neither ear can hear, nor eye perceive,
Nor can the heart of mortal man conceive;
Prepared by the Lord of bliss,
Before all worlds, for all of his.
Who living here the blessed life of grace,
Are hence translated to that glorious place,
Where thy dear Savior keeps a room for thee;
Then look, and long for immortality;
Wait his good hour, and in waiting sin
Halelujahs to heavens King.
A Meditation of Man's mortality
MAn unto whom each hour in changes preaches
That all this Globe, earths glory, shall decay;
Believes that doom to mightier creatures reaches,
Yet dreams, it cannot hold in brittle clay;
So dull and heavy is his heart in ease,
To think of ought that may the flesh displease.
Then nearer come, to his dull senses cry,
All flesh is grass, worm-eaten flowers man's pride;
It Is true, says he, but tell him that himself shall die,
He rather thinks it true in all beside,
So (reason traind to be self-pleasures thrall)
He thinks that fails in one, which holds in all,
Thus he whose life should be deaths meditation.
Waiting for future immortality;
Forgets the end of his divine creation,
And feign would find on earth eternity.
O man, look up; thou must this mortal leave,
Before thou can the immortal robe receive.
1
Due thought of death and hell,
Would sinful thoughts expel.
Who so with careful thought
Would ponder as he ought;
How fearful it is to fl^t
From bed to loathsome pit:
From pit to easelesse pain,
For ever to remain.
Among the damned sprights
Whose mercy never lights;
Would not commit one sin,
Though it the world might win
2
As certain as it now is day,
so sure it will be night anon;
For time stands never at a stay,
but now is here, and now is gone;
Such is our life, whose minutes spend,
and every minute wastes the store,
Till all be out, and then an end;
we cannot live one minute more.
3
What thing is that each man does chiefly crave?
Contentment in his fortune and his mind.
What thing is that man here can never have?
Contentment in his thoughts and state to find.
What Is cause of both? That man who heaven minds not
May strive to seek that there, which here he finds not
4
Take from our life, these threefold parts of time
First, what we idly spend, and nothing do;
Then what we spend in evil, and heaven-h^ted crime
Last what in things, that us belong not to:
Alas! how small remain; how quickly told,
Is left well spent; in doing what we should.
Occasional Meditations.
Upon a sad and unseasonable Rain translated out of Latin.
WHence comes it, that this sad untimely showrs
Do choke the earth, and of our fruits bereave us?
F^ther to show in heavens angry lowres,
That God has left us as the Sun does leave us:
Or for that man his sins nor see, nor fears,
The heavens for us powers out it self in tears.
2 Upon a LOOKING GLASS, Translated out of Latin.
MAke this use of thy Looking-glass,
that if thy face seem fair;
With vicious manners, o do not
the grace thereof impair;
Or if thou find thy countenance.
such gracefulness denied,
Let that defect with inward grace,
and virtues be supplied.
3 Concerning an extraordinary veil which covered my body, at my coming into
the world.
THere be some things which belong to every child in the infancy; whereof the
certainty cannot be known but by relation of others, as the day or hour of our
birth, who were our sureties at baptism, and the like, of which kind there was
one special remarkable thing concerning my self, who being my parents first
son, but their second child (they having a daughter before me) when I came into
the world, my head, face, and fore parts of the body, were all covered over
with a thin kell or skin, wrought like an artificial veil; as also my eldest
son being likewise my second child was borne with the like extraordinary
covering: our Midwives and Gossips holding such children as come so veyled into
the world, to be very fortunate (as they call it) there being not one child
amongst many hundreds that are so borne; and this to fall out in the same
manner both to the father and the son, being much more rare. But whatsoever
old wives observations are, let us (both father and son) with all humble
thankfulness, look up to our heavenly father, (who made us and formed us in
the womb, and brought us from thence, and does preserve and govern us from
the cradle to the grave) to bless and praise his holy name, for the privilege
of our birthright which his favor has bestowed upon us, above the rest of
our brothers, and to study and endeavor to walk worthy of that dignity in
our care and endeavor to serve and please him, who has singled us out, as
fathers of the family in our several generations to that purpose; the first
borne of the sons amongst the Israelites being to be given or consecrated to
the Lord, Exodus 22.29. Numbers 3.13. Luke 2.23. And from those veiles
wherewithal we were borne, let us learn this Christian lesson, to veil our
heads and our hearts and all our affections, from the witcheries and vanities
of this world; and to look up, beyond the things here to our Savior JESUS
CHRIST within the veil in heaven, to long and wait for those blessed and
unchangeable comforts which are there treasured up for us in him: Not as we
came into this world hidden of nature, but as we are now born by his holy
spirit, children of grace and election. O merciful Lord God, we bring nothing
with us into this world, but that which might condemn us in the next, blessed
be thy most holy name, by whose eternal mercies we are born again of the Holy
Ghost, and our begun regeneration here shall be consummated in the world to
come. o sanctify and establish us by thy free spirit, that being by our new
birth made children of grace and adoption in Christ, we may mortify all our
old corruptions of nature, and serve thee faithfully in new obedience in the
short pilgrimage of this life, and be finally received in peace into thine
everlasting kingdom, as thine own redeemed ones, through Jesus Christ our
Savior, Amen.

4. Upon an extraordinary accident which befell me, in my swaddling clothes.
WHen we come to years, we are commonly told of what befell us in our infancy,
if the same were more than ordinary. Such an accident (by relation of others)
befell me within few days after my birth, whilst my mother lay in of me being
her second child, when I was taken out of the bed from her side, and by my
sudden and fierce crying recovered again, being found sticking between the
beds-head and the wall; and if I had not cried in that manner as I did, our
gossips had a conceit that I had been quite carried away by the Fairies they
know not whither, and some elfe or changeling (as they call it) laid in my room.

In the 12. Chap. of the Revelation we read of two great signs in heaven A
woman clothed with the Sun, great with child ready to be delivered, and a
great red dragon with seven heads standing before her, ready to devour the
child as soon as it should be born, but the child being c^^ght up unto God, and
the dragon disappointed of his prey, cast down into the earth, was wroth with
the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which kept the
commandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

By this woman I conceive the Church militant was prefigured, whom the Dragon
has persecuted and does continually labor to destroy in all her members: that
Dragon being there ( verse. 9.) expressly said to be that old serpent called the
Devil and Satan, which deceives the whole world, and ( verse. 10.) is the
accuser of our brethren, whom he accuses before God day and night. But to our
comfort it is added in the next verse, that they overcame him by the blood of
the lamb, and by the word of their testimony. And certainly, that attempt of
stealing me away as soon as I was born, (whatsoever the midwives talk of it)
came from the malice of that arch-enemy of mankind, who is continually going
about seeking whom he may betray and devour. But blessed be the Lord our most
gracious God and merciful father, that disappointed them then, and has ever
since preserved and kept me from his manifold plots and stratagems of
destruction: so as now in the seventieth year of mine age, I yet live to
praise and magnify his wonderful mercies toward me in this behalf.

O most blessed Lord Jesus (our most gracious Savior and Mediator) one part of
thy Church redeemed by thy precious blood, have already fought the good fight
of faith, and are translated hence into thine heavenly kingdom, with Abraham
the father of the faithful, and the rest of the glorified Saints, to celebrate
thy praises for evermore. The other part of this Church is militant here upon
earth, striving against their own natural corruptions, and the wiles and
power of thine and their enemies. (Good Lord) thou know the cunning, power,
malice, and cruelty of the adversary, and the great weakness of ^^^e own
children; and beholde^ their daily fightings and failings, and how ^^^ble we
are to stand in our selves; O merciful Savior, strengthen us with thy grace,
and show thine almightinesse in our weakness, that fighting under thy banner,
who have already in our flesh and for us conquered all our enemies to our
hands; we may be enabled to stand fast and unmoovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord; that so in the end we may be more than conquerors through
thee our glorious Captain and Savior; and when we have fought here below so
long as thou would have us, we may (when thou shall be pleased to call us
hence) be translated unto the fellowship of thy Saints and Church triumphant in
heaven, there to join with them in the new songs of thy redeemed ones, to
magnify and praise thy most holy and blessed name, from everlasting to
everlasting, Amen.

5 Upon my breeding up at School.
IT was not my happiness to be bred up at the University, but all the learning I
had was in the free Grammar School, called Christ's school in the City of
Gloucester, yet even there it pleased God to give me an extraordinary help,
by a new schoolmaster brought thither, one Master Gregory Downhale of
Pembrook-Hal in Cambridge, after I had lost some time under his predecessor.
This Master Downhale having very convenient lodgings over the school, took
such liking to me, as he made me his bedfellow (my fathers house being next of
all to the school) This bedfellowship begat in him familiarity and
gentleness toward me, and in me toward him, reverence and love; which made
me also love my book, love being the most prevalent affection in nature to
further our studies and endeavors in any profession, he came thither but
Batchelour of Arts, a good scholar, and who wrote both the secretary and the
Italian hands exquisitly well. But after a few years that he had proceeded
Master of Arts, finding the schools entertainment not worthy of him, he left
it, and betook himself to another course of being Secretary to some noble man,
and at last became Secretary to the worthy Lord Chancellor Ellesmere and in
that service (as I think) dyed. And my self his scholar following his steps,
as near as I could, (though furnished with no more learning then he taught me
in that Grammar School) came at last to be Secretary to the Lord Brook,
Chancellor of the Excheq^er: and after that to my ^^^ch honored Lord, the
Earl of Middlesex, Lord high Treasurer of England: and lastly to the most
worthy my most noble Lord, the Lord Coventry Lord-keepper of the great Seal,
in whose service I expect to end my days. And this I note, that though I were
no graduate of the University, yet (by Gods blessing) I had so much learning as
fitted me for the places whereunto the Lord advanced me, and (which I think to
be very rare) had one that was after a Lord Chancellors Secretary to be my
Schoolmaster, whom (by Gods blessing) I followed so close, that I became a
successor to his successors in the like place of eminent service and employment.

It is the almighty and al-governing hand of thy providence (O most glorious
Lord God) whereby all things are disposed amongst the children of men, let my
soul for ever praise thee, for this gracious work of thine toward me thine
unworthy wretch; whom thou have preserved and enabled from my weak and small
beginnings for those places whereunto I have been called, and which (by thy
grace) I have with credit and comfort discharged, O blessed Lord God, who have
led me from my youth up, forsake me not now in mine old age when I am gray
headed, and my strength fails me; but finish thy gracious work of mercy and
grace in me, to the consummation of it in thy heavenly kingdom, whereunto thou
have ^lected me in JESUS CHRIST thine eternal Son, the promised Messiah, God
in the flesh manifested, our most gracious Lord and Savior: unto whom with
thee (o father of glory and mercies) and God the Holy Ghost, the most blessed
spirit of grace and adoption, most holy, glorious, and ever blessed Trinity,
in the unity of one only true, immortal and everliving God of
incomprehensible glory, and most adored and coeternall Majesty, be al praise,
glory, dominion and thanksgiving for ever; Amen.

6 Upon an accident to me, when I was a Schoole-boy.
BEfore Master Downhale came to be our Master in Christ-school, an ancient
Citizen of no great learning was our schoolmaster; whose manner was to give us
out several lessons in the evening, by construing it to every form, and in
the next morning to examine us thereupon; by making all the boys in the first
form, to come from their seats and stand on the outsides of their desks,
toward the middle of the school, and so the second form and the rest in
order, whiles himself walked up and down by them and hearing them construe
their lesson one after onother; and then giving one of the words to one, and
another to another (as he thought fit) for parsing of it. Now when the two
highest forms were dispatched, some of them whom we called prompters would
come and sit in our seats of the lower forms, and so being at our elbowes
would put into our mouths answers to our masters questions, as he walked up and
down by us: and so by our prompters help, we made shift to escape correction;
but understood little to profit by it; having this circular ^e ^o^, like the
Mil-horse that travel^ all day; yet in the end finds hims^^^ not a yard
further, then when he (...). I being thus supported by my prompter, it fell out
one day th^^ ^^e of the eldest scho^ler^ (...) one of the highest form, fell
out with me upon occasion of some boyes-play abroad, and in his anger, to do
me the greatest hurt h^e could (which then he thought to be, to fall under the
rod) he dealt with all the prompters, that none of them should help me, and so
(as he thought) I must necessarily be beaten. When I found my self at this
strait, I gathered all my wits together (as we say) and listened the more
carefully to my fellows that construed before me, and having also some easy
word to my lot for parsing, I made hard shift to escape for that time. And when
I observed my adversaries displeasure to continue against me, so as I could
have no help from my prompters, I doubled my diligence and attention to our
masters construing our next lesson to us, and observing carefully how in
construction one word followed and depended upon another, which with heedfull
observing two or three lessons more, opened the way to show me how one word was
governed of another in the parsing: so as I needed no prompter, but became able
to be a prompter my self: and so the evil intended to me by my fellow
scholar, turned to my great good. Let all those who have found the like
gracious work toward themselves (as many have in matters of more moment, if
they observe it) come join with me in praising the Lord for the same, whose
providence governs all things, and who does powerfully declare himself to
be the only true God, by such over ruling the powers of darkness, and the
malicious and evil intentions of men, bringing light out of darkness, good
out of evil, life out of death, and making all things work together for the
good and comfort of them that fear him.

O merciful Lord God, who even in my childhood did show me this grace and
favor, as thou have often done since in many cases of extremity, give me
grace to magnify thy blessed name therefore, and of thy free grace and
unchangeable mercy, continue thy goodness to me thy unworthy servant, for my
support in my last need, that death may not be death unto me, but a passage
from temporal to eternal life, and a change of the one for the other, (as it
is to all thine elect) according to the mighty working of our Savior dying for
us, whereby he has purchased eternal life for every poor penitent soul that
believes in him. Blessed be the Lord our strength and our redeemer for ever,
Amen.

7 Upon six verses of the 12 Chapter of S. Luke,
IN one of my paper-books which I had when I was a schoolboy, I find this
short note written with mine own hand at that time, Lu. 12.35. to the 40. v.
whether it was the text of some Sermon I then heard, or upon what other
occasion I then wrote it, is forgotten (as all worldly things must shortly be
with me.) But now turning to the place of that Gospel. I find it to be a part
of our blessed Saviors Sermon to his Disciples, not long before his passion,
and to contain a most weighty and necessary duty enjoined to us all, for our
timely preparation for death, and our Lords second coming in these words
following, (Verse. 35.) Let your loins begirded about, and your lights burning.
(Verse. 36.) And ye your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord when he
will return from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open
unto him immediately. (Verse. 37.) Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord
when he comes shall find watching: verily, I say unto you, that he shall
gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and
serve them. (Verse. 38.) And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in
the third watch, and find them so; Blessed are those servants. (Verse. 39.) And
this know, that if the good man had known what hour the thief would come, he
would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken thorough.
(Verse 40.) Be ye therefore ready also; for the son of man comes at an
hour, when you think not.

In which word, our blessed Savior requires of us, for our own good and final
comfort an hourly watchfulness and preparation for the time of our change,
that we may be ready when it comes, telling us plainly that it will come at
an hour we think not; and therefore to be expected and provided for that
hour, if we will be safe: urging this most needful duty, by two examples or
parables, the one, from the happy reward of so doing; twice pronouncing those
servants blessed, whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching: the other
from the danger of neglecting this watch, wherein we wilfully give the thief
opportunity to break our house thorough, to our utter undoing. That if the
former reason of reward and blessing will not moove us, out of love and duty
to see so gracious a Lord, and for our own final glory, to be ready with our
loins girded (all carnal and worldly affections suppressed) and our lights
burning (in bumble (...), repentance and obedience) to open unto him at the
first knock, yet the very fear of being surprised by that cruel murdering
thief (our ghostly enemy) who every hour watches to take us at advantage,
for bringing us to utter confusion, should awaken us, and make us careful to
put this holy duty into serious and conti uall practice, for our own final
safety and peace, and the glory of our most gra^ious God in our salvation;
reckoning every day and hour to be our last, and so graciously employing our
few remaining days of mortality here, as neither desiring nor needing any
morrow: that so whenever we shall be called hence, we may be ready and enter
into the joy o^ our blessed Lord and Savior, and remain with him where he is
in glory for ever and ever. Here this weak meditation of mine I will conclude
with M George Withers, prayer and meditation, upon the 98. Psalm.

O Almighty Son of God; we bless and praise thee for the manifestation of thy
mercy to the whole world is the miraculous work of our redemption, thou did
come unto us, in despised weakness, yet have thou therein shown such
unresistable power, that it prevailed against the wisdom of the worldly wise,
and magnified thy derided cross, above all the most renowned deities of the
Gentiles. This thou did by appearing in a contemptible state: oh how glorious
and how powerful will thou be in thy second coming? It now draws ni^h: O,
let it not come upon us as a thief in the night, but as the travail upon a
woman who keeps a just reckoning, and joys in the hopes of her birth more
then she fears the pains of her tr^velling; so according to the counsel of
thy holy Spirit, we may expect and receive thee with praises, triumphs and
rejoycings, Amen.

Upon a Stage Play which I saw when I was a child.
IN the City of Gloucester the manner is (as I think it is in other like
corporations) that when Players of Enterludes come to town, they first attend
the Mayor to inform him what noble-mans servants they are, and so to get
license for their public playing; and if the Mayor like the Actors, or would
show respect to their Lord and Master, he appoints them to play their first
play before himself and the Aldermen and common Counsel of the City; and that
is called the Mayors play, where every one that will comes in without money,
the Mayor giving the players a reward as he thinks fit to show respect unto
them. At such a play, my father took me with him and made me stand between
his legs, as he sat upon one of the benches where we saw and heard very
well. The play was called (the Cradle of security,) wherein was personated a
King or some great Prince with his Courtiers of several kinds amongst which
three Ladies were in special grace with him; and they keeping him in delights
and pleasures, drew him from his graver Counselors, hearing of Sermons, and
listening to good counsel, and admonitions, that in the end they got him to lie
down in a cradle upon the stage, where these three Ladies joining in a sweet
song rocked him asleep, that he snorted again, and in the mean time closely
conveyed under the clothes where withal he was covered, a vizard like a swines
snout upon his face, with three wire chains fastened thereunto, the other end
whereof being holden severally by those three Ladies, who fall to singing
again, and then discovered his face, that the spectators might see how they
had transformed him, going on with their singing, whilst all this was acting,
there came forth of another door at the farthest end of the stage, two old
men, the one in blew with a Sergeant at Arms, his mace on his shoulder, the
other in red with a drawn sword in his hand, and leaning with the other hand
upon the others shoulder, and so they two went along in a soft pace round about
by the skirt of the Stage, till at last they came to the Cradle, when all the
Court was in greatest jollity, and then the foremost old man with his Mace
stroke a fearful blow upon the Cradle; whereat all the Courtiers with the
three Ladies and the vizard all vanished; and the desolate Prince starting up
bare faced, and finding himself thus sent for to judgment, made a lamentable
complaint of his miserable case, and so was carried away by wicked spirits.
This Prince did personate in the moral, the wicked of the world; the three
Ladies, Pride, Covetousness, and Luxury, the two old men, the end of the
world, and the last judgment. This sight took such impression in me, that
when I came toward man's estate, it was as fresh in my memory, as if I had seen
it newly acted. From whence I observe out of mine own experience, what great
care should be had in the education of children, to keep them from seeing of
spectacles of ill examples, and hearing of lascivious or scurrilous words: for
that their young memories are like fair writing tables, wherein if the fair
sentences or lessons of grace be written, they may (by Gods blessing) keep
them from many vicious blots of life, wherewithal they may otherwise be
tainted; especially considering the general corruption of our nature, whose
very memories are apter to receive evil then good, and that the well seasoning
of the new Caske at the first, keeps it the better and sweeter ever after, and
withal we may observe, how far unlike the Plays and harmless morals of
former times, are to those which have succeeded, many of which, (by report of
others,) may be termed schoolmasters of vice, and provocations to
corruptions: which our deprived nature is too prone unto: nature and grace
being contraries.

O blessed Lord God, grace is thine own free gift alone, the means of
conferring it thine own, and the blessing of the means thine also, let all
the glory and praise thereof be therefore thine own for ever: And let all the
children of grace with humble thankfulness magnify thy holy name, for the
measure they have, (be it never so little) and faithfully cherish it; for it is
a pledge of thine eternal love, in freeing us from the cradle of security and
the condemnation attending it, and an earnest penny of our eternal
happiness, in and by Jesus Christ our Savior, blessed for ever, Amen.

9. Upon the Dial of the Clock in the College Church of Gloucester.
IN the horologue or dyall of that Clock, in the four Angles of that square,
which lie without those circles (wherein the hours are distinguished) are
pourtraied four Angels; each of them seeming to say something to those that
look up to see what a clock it is, the whole written being two old Latin
verses made up in rythme, in this manner.

1 An labor, an requies,
2 Sic transit gloria mundi:
3 Praeterit iste dies,
4 Nescitur origo secundi.
Which may be thus englished.

Whether we rest or labor; work or play,
The world and glory of it pass away.
This day is past, or near its period grown;
The next succeeding is to us unknown.
Out of which verses I conceive we may observe two necessary and profitable
lessons: the one, that whether we do well or ill, live frugally or prodigally,
our time with the whole world and glory of it is transitory, and continually
wheeling about, like the minutes to the hour, or the hours to the day in the
clock; the other, that the time past is gone from us, and past recalling, and
the time to come unknown to us and uncertain: so as all the time we may reckon
of, is the present, this very instant, and yet this moment is of so great
moment and consequence to us, as whereupon depends eternity; either of glory
to all the children of grace, or of endless horror to the rest. From whence
we may learn, how much it concerns every one that would have comfort in the
world to come, to be seriously careful of well using the time of visitation
which God in mercy lends him, for his preparation here in this life, that when
our hour-glasse shall be run out, we may be translated into those heavenly
mansions which our blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST has provided for all
the faithful who wait and long for his appearing.

10 Of good counsel given by a rude Country Painter in a homely verse.
IN the mid way of the 24. foul miles between the City of Worcester and the
Town of Ludlow in Shropshire, where the Lord President and Council of Wales
do usually keep their residence, there is only one Inn, called the Hundred
house, where it seems the Justices and officers of that part of the shire do
meet for the business of that hundred. In the fairest room whereof, being a
low parlour, there was (when I traveled that way) no garnishing with wainsoot,
or so much as steyned clothes, but the bare loom walls whited over, with a
rude anticke or flowery work in black, painted upon it; leaving at the upper
end of the wall next the sealing a narrow white border, wherein was written in
one continued line, round about the room these verses, Since it is uncertain,
where death shall us meet,
And yet most certain that he follows our feet.
In all our ways, let us be so wise and steady;
That whersoere he meet us, he may find us ready.
Alas, how dull and slow are we to entertain this one most necessary
Meditation of our own mortality, when in our beds and at our tables, in our
restings at home, or travailes abroad, whatsoever we do, whatsoever we see, in
the clouds above, or the earth or sea below, we may observe such a vicissitude
of changes and alterations in all creatures and things, as might make us expect
in ourselvs a change too: yet such is our strong forgetfulness, as the complaint
of Cyprian* one of the ancient Fathers of the Church in his time, may be now
justly verified against us. Nolumus agnoscere, quod ignorare non possumus. We
will not acknowledge that, which we cannot possibly but know.

O blessed Lord God, pardon we beseech thee our former negligences and manifold
infirmities, and by thy grace sanctify and strengthen us to consider so
seriously of our own frail condition; that since every day that goes over
our heads, may be our last, we may live so graciously prepared both at home and
abroad, from day to day as needing no morrow; and then where or whenever
death shall meet us, our redeemed souls may welcome him, as the porter sent to
open heaven gates for us, for our final and everlasting peace, through Jesus
Christ our most blessed Savior and peacemaker* Amen.

11 Upon a pedigree found in a private man's house.
GOing with one of mine honest neighbors in a Town within the Marches of
Wales, to see a house which he had new built there; when we came into the
parlour, as the best room, I observed a table hanging over the mantletree of
the chimney, with two columns of Pedegrees crowned on either side one. The one
column containing a pedigree or descent from the princes of south Wales, the
other from the ancient princes of north Wales; and from both those descents,
the pedigree was deduced, and concluded in the foot of the table, with the name
of the good man of the house, as lineally descended from those two ancient
Princes, the lines of their principalities being cut off two hundred years
before. At the sight whereof, I bethought my self what a strange and poor
brag it was, for this mean neighbor of mine to fetch his pedigree from
Princes, when it might happen that the Smith, or the Shoemaker, should take
place above him, in all the public meetings in the Town; till withal I
considered, that there is not so contemptible a wretch in the world, but if he
could deduce his pedigree high enough, would be found of kin to nobles: and
the greatest Lord, if his pedigree were set forth in all the collateral lines
and branches thereof, should be found to have mean or poor creatures of his
kindred or alliance. It being certain that we all are one man's children, all
sprung from Adam by nature; who was made of the clay or dust of the earth,
Genesis 2.7. and he and his posterity to return to earth and dust again,
Genesis 3.19.

From hence we may observe the vanities of this transitory world, and the
glory of it: which howsoever it differenceth between one and another whiles
they are living; yet when we turn again into our dust, there is no such
inequality (for there is no disparity in death) and no difference at all
between the delicatest Lady and the fowlest kitchin-stuffe, when they lie both
in their dust. Mors Sceptra ligonibus aequat. And it may be observed, that many
gallants which have boasted of their great blood by many descents of gentry,
have by their pride and foolery, wasted the great estate, which their frugall
ancestors left them; and then may come to sit below the Smith or the Shoemaker,
with this goodman, who could fetch his pedigree from Princes. Since therefore
every man (none excepted) in his best estate is but vanity ( Psa: 39.5.) this
should teach us to be humble in our selves; and as we know more wickedness
and corruption in our selves then we can do in others; so in lowliness of
mind to esteem others better then our selves, as the Apostle requires (
Th^l. 2.3.) which would be a good mean to avoid contention and vain glory.

O blessed Lord God have mercy upon us poor wretches, that have nothing in our
selves from nature, but dust and corruption, and give us a new birth and
generati^n by thy holy spirit of grace, which only can truly enable us, making
us thy children by adoption in Christ Jesus, and heirs with him in the
kingdom of heaven, Amen.

12. Upon a pedigree seen in a Noble-mans house.
LVmley Castle in the County Palatine of Duresme, was built by that noble and
worthy Lord, John Lord Lumley, after the manner of some Castles he had
observed in his travailes beyond the seas; with two fair passages into it, up
two pair of stairs, large but short, both standing the one over against the
other, at the lower end of the Hall; all the rest of the maine rooms being of
the same floare equal with the Hall: the most eminent room whereof at the
upper end of the Hall, (being the great Chamber) was adorned with the pictures
of all the Barons of that family in their robes at full length, beginning with
the first, who was set forth kneeling before King Richard the second, and
receiving his Writ or Patent of creation at his hands, and so from one to
another, to that Nobleman himself that built the house; with the picture also
of his Lordships son and heir apparent, then a young man with a Hawke on his
fist. In that fair chamber, at the upper end of it* in a Bay window, I
observed a long Table hanging, fitting the one end of the window, containing a
fair written or painted Pedigree, setting out not only how the Barons of that
house succeeded one another, but also how the first Baron was lineally
descended from Adam himself. But he that lived to build the house, and to
adorn it with such Monuments of Noble Ancestors, from so high a descent as the
very Creation of the World, and having a son then living like to have
succeeded him in the Barronie, dyed himself childlesse in Queen Elizabeth's
time, and so the Barony dyed with him, and there was no Lord Lumley to
entertain King James there, at his first coming into England upon her
Majesty's decease, and so that pedigree which (I know not by what heraldry)
brought that worthy nobleman by many generations of Kings and Queens and other
famous ancestors, by a lineall descent from Adam himself, could not deduce it
one descent further, but it ends in him for whose honor it self was devised.
And that noble Lord when he was at the highest of the pedigree, what could he
find there of Nobility by it; when the meanest scullion o^ his kitchen, and
the poorest cripple at his gates, were thereby made their Lords Kinsmen, being
all Adams children as well as himself! And what pitch of honor had he gotten
from that common ancestor of al mankind, but (what we, all his posterity, by
woeful experience find to be pitch indeed) the guilt and infection of sin,
and the fruit of it death? Objects proper for shame, sorrow and humiliation; no
way for honor or vainglory: Adam himself being made but of red earth, and he
and his posterity to return to earth again.

O most blessed Lord God, blessed and magnified be thy most holy and glorious
name, who after many generations have raised up a mighty salvation for us in
the Lord Jesus the second Adam, son of thy servant David according to the
flesh as thou did speak by the mouth of all thy holy Prophets which have
been since the world began, by whom we have redemption and deliverance from
the guilt and punishment ^f the first Adams rebellion, and from all the power
and malice of that old wily serpent, who overthrew him in the terrestrial
paradise, and are by the blessed promised seed of the woman, the Lord our
righteousness, God manifested in the flesh for our redemption, restored to a
better inheritance, even the Paradise of God, his own heavenly Kingdom. Let
all the Monarchs and States of the world fall down before thy glorious
footstool (O most blessed Lord and Savior) and worship and rejoice in thee,
the only God of our salvation, and let no man glory in the antiquity of his
noble ancestors; for no man can go higher then the Lord Lumleys Pedigree. But
let every true Christian, (how mean soever or wretched here, and though by
nature in the first Adam a child of wrath and perdition) lift up his head with
joy unspeakable and glorious; being in and by this second Adam our blessed
Savior and his holy Spirit by adoption and grace, made the child of the most
High, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and thereby become truly noble
indeed. And let all the Potentates of the earth aspire to this spiritual
honor by regeneration in CHRIST, then to all the pomp and glories of a
thousand worlds, with the good Emperor Theodosius, who thanked GOD more for
his being made a member of CHRIST, then the Emberour of the world, for the best
and noblest nature amongst the children of men, brings forth nothing but
corruption; only grace makes truly noble and everlastingly happy.

13. Of a Felon making of a comfortable end at his Execution.
AMongst all other charitable deeds of that worthy man of God Master Perkins in
the University of Cambridg^, his manner was (as I have heard) to visit the
prisoners condemned at the Goal deliveries there, not only in the prison for
their spiritual instruction and preparation before their execution, but to
accompany them also at the place where they were to suffer; whither diverse
scholars and others of good ^ancke also usually resorted: one of which
spectators a fellow of Trinity College made relation to me, of a comfortable
work upon one of the felons at one of the executions, more remarkable then the
rest, to this e^^ect. The prisoner being a strong lusty fellow, in the vigor
of his youth, in his going up the ladder, discovered an extraordinary
lumpishnesse and dejection of spirit, and when he turned himself to sit upon
an upper round, to speak to the people, looked with such a ruefull and heavy
countenance, as if he had been half dead already; where good Master Perkins
standing at the foot of the ladder, labored to cheer up his spirits, and
finding him still in agony and distress of mind, called upon him in words to
this purpose: what man? what is the matter with thee, art thou afraid of death?
Ah no, (said the prisoner, shaking his head) but of a worser thing. Say thou
so? said Master Perkins; come down again man, and thou shall see what Gods
grace will do to strengthen thee: whereupon the prisoner coming down, Master
Perkins took him by the hand, and made him to kneel down with himself at the
Ladder foot, hand in hand; when that blessed man of God made such an eff^^tuall
prayer, in confession of sins, and aggravating the same in all circumstances,
with the horrible and eternal punishment due for the same by Gods justice; as
made the poor prisoner burst out into abundance of ^^^^es, as the fervencie
of the prayer gave occasion; and when the blessed Preacher found that he had
brought him low enough even to hell gates, he proceeding to the second work
of his prayer to show him being truly humble and unfainedly penitent, the Lord
Jesus (the Savior of all penitent and believing sinners) stretching forth his
blessed hand of mercy and power, to save him in that distressed estate, and to
deliver him from all the powers of darkness; did so sweetly press the same
with such heavenly art, and powerful words of grace upon the soul of the
poor prisoner, as cheered him up again to look beyond death with the eyes of
faith, to see how the black lines of all his sins and debts owing to Divine
Justice were crossed and cancelled with the red lines of his crucified Saviors
precious blood; so graciously applying it to the prisoners wounded conscience,
as made him break out into new showers of tears for joy of the inward
consolation which he found, and gave such expression thereof to the beholders,
as made them lift up their hands and praise God to see such a blessed change in
him, who upon the prayer ended rose up from his knees cheerfully, and went up
the Ladder again so cheered, and took his death with such patience and
alacrity of spirit, as if he actually saw himself delivered from the hell he
feared before, and heaven opened for the receiving of his soul, to the great
rejoicing of the beholders.

Blessed be thy most holy and glorious name (O Lord our good God) for all
those gracious endowments and abilities wherewithal thou have and do furnish
thy Ministers of the Gospel of peace for the converting of sinners unto thee,
and for bringing home the wandering ones, and rescuing their souls out of the
Lions mouth; not only amongst those many of the meaner sort that suffer in our
ordinary Circuits and Goal deliveries; but also amongst our great men and
Nobles (capital offenders) at the Tower; some of whom the spectators seeing
their Christian and gracious preparative for death, and their behavior in it,
have adjudged more happy in their ends, then in all the glorious pomp of
their greatness before. Good Lord, increase the number of thine able servants,
furnished both with gifts and willing minds, to visit comfort and help those
poor children of death, in that their greatest and last need; that they may
then (by thy grace,) feel that which all thy children do in their greatest
distresses^; that man's extremity is Gods blessed opportunity for their final
comfort and relief, Amen.

14. Upon the words (Hodie mihi, cras tibi*) commonly used for an Emblem of
our Mortality.
I Have often seen painted and set out for an Emblem of our mortality; a
naked boy with a dead skull in his hand sitting upon the ground, with this
motto subscribed, (Hodie mihi, cras tibi.) To day for me, to morrow for thee.
In which invention no doubt the Author intended well; and right good use* may
be made of it by the sober and humble minded, that if we should expect death
to morrow, we should be careful to spend to day well. But lately reading a
Treatise entitled (Learn to Dye) written by that holy man of God, Doctor
Sutton, and published Anno 1626. in the 3. Chap. and 28. page, I found these
words*

Thy neighbors fire cannot but give warning of approaching flames (mihi heri,
tibi hodie) yesterday for me, to day for thee; says the wiseman, whose turn is
next God only knows, who knows all. Whereupon finding those words differing
from the motto of the old emblem, I turned to the place there vouched; ( Eccl.
38.22.) and found the Doctors words agree with the text, which faith: Remember
my judgment, for thine also shall be so: yesterday for me, and to day for
thee: which saying, brings the remembrance of death and judgment nearer home
unto us; as to be thought upon to day, and not put off till to morrow; for it
is the tempters suggestion that cries, Cras, cras, to have our conversation put
off till to morrow; well knowing the old saying. Qui non est hodie, cras minus
aptus erit: whereas the spirit of grace says. ( Heb. 3.7.) To day if if you
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, least there be no after entering
into his rest.

O blessed Lord what a little distance of time is between to day and to morrow,
and yet what weighty consequence depends upon it; when it may so fall out that
if we use to day as the Holy Ghost requires, we may be in heaven, to morrow;
if we defer till to morrow, we shall never come thither.

O most gracious Lord God who call upon us, to day not to harden our hearts,
mollify them now, (even now O Lord) by thy powerful spirit of grace, that
being truly converted unto thee in this our day, we may be for ever delivered
from the law and bondage of sin, and from henceforth become the true and
faithful servants of righteousness: and so daily waiting for thy blessed
call, may be graciously fitted and prepared every day, with comfort and humble
confidence and thankefulnes, to deliver up our souls into thy blessed arms of
peace, through Jesus Christ our most glorious Savior and only peacemaker,
Amen.

15. Upon the observing of a Gravestone in Paul's London.
REading over a Christian meditation of death, in French, upon the 12. verse of
the 90. Psalm (So teach us to number our days, etc.) written by Francis
Lansberque, and reprinted the third time, ( Anno 1624) I observed a place (
page 136.) where the Author reprooving the vanity of some men, that even when
they are a dying, take care of eternizing their names by sumptuous tombs and
pompous burials, instead of virtuous and honorable actions, in their
lifetime, has a passage in these very words: Poor bones, and stinking prey
of worms, what does all this avail you? you seek to eternize your name in
things of frailty, and in forgetfulness it self to preserve your perpetual
memory. Think I pray you that the very stones, which cover your rotten bones
have their old age that the brass and Iron of your graves will be eaten with
rust, that the magnificent inscriptions are by little and little worn out, by
the feet of those who walk over you: Believe you not this? go to the Church,
and if you be not blind you shall see this made good. Which words pointing me
(as it were) to Paul's, for the proof of that is there alleged,) it brings to
my mind an observation of mine own concerning a gravestone in that Church,
as if it had been one of those very stones which the first author intended.
For at my first coming to London, about fifty years since, I observed a very
fair and large gravestone of a brownish color, in the pavement of the middle
walk of the body of that Church between the two pillars next the stairs that
go up into the chancell, wherein at the upper end thereof, was an inscription
engraven in the stone, in old Latin letters, which I could then perfectly
read, in these words, Non aspecies hominem ultra; and in the midst or heart of
the stone, this one word, oblivio: engraven in much larger and deeper letters.
About thirty years after, I found out the same stone removed into another place
in the same walk, but the upper inscription so utterly worn out, that I should
hardly have known it, but by that other word in the middle of the stone, the
letters whereof were about seven or eight inches long, and that word oblivio
was then to be read, though it may be worn out also by this time. This
observation of mine, besides that it is a demonstrative proof of the French
Authors proposition, to^ching the decay and wearing out of such kind of
monuments, whereby we seek to perpetuate our memories, may also be the
precedent of a strange kind of Epitaph; far differing from those large
inscriptions approved by the Author: this serving every man's turn, and showing
us all, what the greatest of us be, when we once are dead, covered with
oblivion, and never in this world to be seen again. And this meditation does
properly join with that foreign author, in producing this use of instruction
for us all; to leave those vain and pompous follies, and to draw near in time
before we go hence, to get our names written in the Lambs book of life in
heaven, and then we shall be sure to have an eternal name indeed, amongst all
the Saints and Angels for ever.

O blessed Lord for thine holy names sake, guide us by thy spirit in that
blessed way of grace whiles we live, that we may be assuredly thine, when we
die: and then how mean soever our names or Tombs be here, we shall be sure to
be raised again unto glory, to celebrate and praise thy holy and blessed name,
in the land of the living for evermore, Amen.

16. Upon a short Inscription upon a great man's Tomb.
I Observed upon a tomb where lay interred one in Barons robes, this short
inscription (Fuimus) which puts every reader, noble, or of mean condition,
(young or old) in mind, that howsoever we are yet declining ( sum or sumus)
in the present tense, ere long we must come to ( fui or fuimus) the
preterperfect tense, as well as those that are gone before us, and this gives
us a proper lesson of our mortality: and if we enquire further what was the
honor, high place, or dignity, of those that are gone to the grave, take but
the least letter, the middlemost* the iota out of this one word, and the rest
will answer (fumus) smoke, which also will teach us another lesson of the
vanity of all earthly things, and these two lessons well conned will bring us
from the consideration of the two former lessons, to bethink our selves of the
last, the future tense (Quid erimus) what we shall be hereafter: That like the
children of grace and wisdom whiles we are yet in the first tense, (the time
present) we may provide our selves of spiritual comfort against we come to
the following tenses, that when we are to say our last lesson, having learned
our Christ's cross well before hand in the present tense of this life, we may
by his merits and mediation, be finally received into the blessed mansions of
his heavenly kingdom, when time shall be no more, which the Lord of all grace,
glory, and mercy, grant unto us all of his infinite goodness, through JESUS
CHRIST our only Savior and redeemer, Amen.

17. Upon three words written with a Cole in a great Judges house.
THe noble Lord Chancellor Ellesmere, was wont every morning in term time,
after the dispatching suitors of the better rank, in his great chamber and
gallery in York-house, to come into the Chapel to public prayers, wherein
the meanest suitors might accompany his Lordship: who upon ending of prayers,
came through a waiting-roome down the stairs into the Hall, and so through it
into his Coach, that all petitioners might take their oppertunities to put up
their complaints or deliver their petitions to himself: Those stairs being
made with several half paces wainescotted on every side to a man's height,
with a fair white wall above it. In which wall in the most perspicuou^ place,
ob^ious to every man's eyes that should come down the stairs, one morning
against his Lordship should go to Westminster, there was written with a cole
in fa^re large Italique letters, these three words, (Tanquam non reverturu^)
which my self (having then occasion to att^nd his Lordship) did read, as
himself and others di^, or could hardly forbear to do, they stood so in the
eyes of all those that came down the stairs: wh ^her some scholar fearing
oppression y some mighty adversary, wrote the some, to give his Lordship that
necessary watchword, or upon what other occasion, or by whom the same was
written, I know not. But I am sure that both his Lordship then, and all that
did read it, or shall read this hereafter, may make good use o^ such a
memorandum (though but written with a cole) to make us the more wary and
watchful of our words or actions, when we go abroad out of our houses,
chambers, or closets; even for this reason, because we may happen not to
return again. How should such a meditation work in the Clyents mind for
peace and reconciliation, and the Lawyers tongue for syncerity and truth; in
the Judges conscience for justice and equity, in every man and woman's heart for
avoiding of evil doing, if they would but think of these few words, and
consider whether they would speak or do thus or thus, if they were presently
to die, or whether thus or thus behave themselves, abroad, if they were not to
return again to their homes?

O merciful Lord God, have mercy upon us poor wretches of frailty, whose
very memories are so depraved by our natural corruption, that what is
indelebly written in our hearts and consciences, we wilfully suppress, when
we are about any evil or mischief, how mischievous soever i^ prove
afterward to our selves or others. Pardon (good Lord) our former neglects of
such useful meditations of our own mortality, and howsoever we neglect these
and the like remembrances from mortal men; give us grace we beseech thee, to
show our obedience to the Commandment of our Savior, who must also be our
Judge, (Matthew 24 42) Watch, for you know not the hour.

18. Upon consideration of one Muscle of the eyes of man, more then of any
other creature.
IN the creation of man, Almighty God intending in that admirable and choice
piece of all his works, to join an heavenly soul and an earthly body
together, did even in the frame of that body, by that Muscle of the eye, give
man to understand his own excellency above all other creatures; which having
only muscles, for the use of their natures, his goodness added one to the eyes
of man, that he might look up directly to Heaven from whence his better part
came; the soul having especial use of that motion of the eye in prayer and
meditation; that this power of lifting up the eyes without, might put us in
mind of lifting up our hearts and souls within, to our good God, who gave our
eyes that motion to that purpose; as also that the body was to look unto, and
perform service to the Creator, as well as the soul, and to exercise that
muscle in the works of grace, as the other are used for the necessary works of
nature; and withal, to show us, that as when our eyes are intentively lifted
up toward heaven, we cannot look downward or to any thing below; so our
minds should be affected in all our spiritual duties to God, neglecting all
worldly things therein, and keeping our souls to him alone.

O merciful Lord God, pardon the errors of mine eyes forepast, and sanctify
them to make these gracious uses for the time to come; and that both mine eyes
and all other the members and faculties both of soul and body, may be
consecrated to thy faithful service, in universal obedience; that when these
eyes shall be shut up fr m this mortal light, my soul may be received into
the glorious light of thy heavenly kingdom, through the merits and mediation
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

19. Upon the name of God proclaimed.
IN the 34. Chapter of Exodus it is thus written, ( verse. 5) The Lord descended
in the clouds and proclaimed the name of the Lord ( verse. 6.) The Lord, the
Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth, (7) keeping mercy for thousands; forgiving iniquity, and transgressions
and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of
the Fathers upon the children and childrens children unto the third and fourth
generation. In which words of our heavenly fathers own proclaiming, what
blessed arguments of comfort are involved for the poor sinner; if he consider
the several titles, that the Lord has given himself, in this most gracious
proclamation? For though the two first titles proclaim his sovereign dominion
and supreme Majesty, for our most due and bounden humiliation before the Lord
our maker, and the last title shows his just hatred of sin, and his unpartiall
justice, to work his true fear into our hearts: yet all the rest which M.
Bolton (349.) reckons to seven times as many, proclaim nothing but his
superaboundant mercy and goodness, to show us how transcendent he is in pity
and compassion to the truly humbled and penitent sinner, for the strengthening
of his faith and hope, to rely constantly and confidently upon his infinite
mercies.

O blessed Lord God of our Fathers, who even in the time of the law, under the
covenant of works were thus good and gracious toward sinners, before the
manifestation of our blessed Savior, thine eternal son, in the flesh, and
salvation in him proclaimed to all nations, by the golden trumpet of the
Gospel; mercifully sanctify and strengthen us poor sinful wretches by thy
holy spirit, to lay fast hold upon those thine eternal mercies exhibited unto
us by thy new covenant in Christ Jesus, and sealed up unto us, in his most
precious blood, for the full and sure remission of all our sins in him: our
perfect reconciliation with thy Majesty: and the assurance of thine
unchangeable love, and our own final peace and salvation in him; whom thou of
thine incomprehensible mercies toward poor penitent sinners, have sealed and
sent into the world to be relied upon for salvation; that so by humble and
lively faith with true and hearty repentance, relying and resting upon those
mercies of thine, which have been ever of old, unto the end and in the end; we
may receive the end of our faith in the salvation of our souls; through the
precious merits and blessed mediation of that prince of peace, our most
gracious Savior and eternal peacemaker, Amen.

20. Upon the Greek word (...), which signifies, to breath.
THis little word consisting but of two letters, the first and last of the
Greek Alphabet, yet makes two syllables and gives a weighty signification, the
english of it being, (I live or breath) which in my conceit may note unto us,
the shortness of the life of man; and the neernesse of death to every man
breathing; when we cannot say (I breath) but the last letter must conclude it
as the first began it; the one following the other as close as the shadow does
the body, or the night the day; without any other letter interposed between
them, or so much as an aspiration to prolong the word; but no sooner Alpha
begins, but Omega concludes, and if all the other twenty letters of the
Alphabet should be interposed, and reckoned after the greatest computation of
man's life, not by days but by years, (where how many be there that come not
to so many months or weeks? (some, not to so many hours or minutes) yet must
we all that read that Alphabet come to Omega at last. And if any be so strong
as to read it over in the largest extent of years, there times and a half
over; yet were his life but labor and sorrow, so soon passes it away, and we
are gone.

O Lord my God; thou have prolonged my life to the 69. year of mine age, which
brings me to the confines of Moses his computation of the life of man; and
therefore howsoever others may reckon the Omega to be far off from them (which
no man can be sure of, for an hour,) yet must I continually expect it a^ at
hand.

O most merciful Lord Jesus, who have called thy self Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end, the f^^sh and the last, who art the author and finisher
of our faith, the beginner of every good work of grace in us, and (...)
perfecter of it, have mercy upon me, and by thy holy spirit perfect that good
work begun in me, for preparing my soul in true faith, repentance and
obedience, all the days of mine appointed time, so to wait till my change
comes, that when that happy hour shall come, J may be found ready for
heaven, and he finally received of thee in peace, into thine everlasting
kingdom, Amen.

21. Upon the words of S. Paul, 1 COR. 9.24. So run that ye may obtain.
IT is the saying of Theophylact, that o^ the children of God, Quidam sun^ in
patria, quidam in via ad patriam; some are at home in their country, some in
their way toward it: some have obtained the goal already, the rest are
running their race toward it: some have finished their course, have fought the
good fight of faith in grace here, and are now at rest in glory, some in the
beginning of their course, and others (in our apprehension) more forward, but
all tending to the end. And as it is with Gods children, that they are not yet
at home in their country, whiles they are in this world but are traveling
thitherward; so also the wicked whiles they live here, are not where they must
be hereafter* for they are runners too how well soever they think they have
settled themselves in this world, and must of necessity leave it. when their
turns comes. For there is one thing to be done by every man and woman living,
high or low, good or bad, rich or poor, one with another; which it concerns
every man, to be sure to do well, or else he can never come to heaven; it
being not possible to do it more t^en once, and that is to die. If thou run
well in the race of thy life, thou shall be sure to dye well, and he that so
does, is safely gotten in patriam; but if death once surprise thee in an ill
case, thou can never come to dye again in a better.

Therefore since the life of man, is a race to all men, and howsoever we run,
or walk, or play by the way, we must all come to the goal at last: what an
excellent caveat has the Holy Ghost given us here by the Apostle: so to run,
that we may obtain?

It is not in our choice, whether we will run or no; for we are all runners;
our life runs away like the sand in the houreglasse, without staying the
twinkling of an eye, whether we observe it or no: and it is no small matter
that lies at stake: even no less then salvation or damnation: a crown of
glory if we follow this gracious counsel or Commandment of God by the
Apostle, of so running that we may obtain: everlasting horror and confusion,
if we obtain not.

Men that use to run a race for a wager, walk over that piece of ground
often, where they are to perform their race at last: to observe on whether
side the advantage lies, at this down with or that rise of the way, and what
be the impediments which may hinder them in their speed, that they may avoid
them; and all to win the wager, which is but for a Nag or a suit of clothes, or
some other like trivial or transitory thing; how much more need have we then,
that have our souls at stake, to take a daily view of our way, and of the
short race whereupon eternity depends, not to be taken with the goodly
buildings, fair flowers, sweet valleys, or pleasant fields, and other delights
offered to our senses; but to mark seriously what dangerous letches, what
thornie passages, what nets or g^^ns, what bogs or false ground lie in our way,
that we may avoid them in our race, and run on without interruption in the
straight paths of grace and virtue, unto eternal glory. And so much more need
have we to look well to our way, and arm our selves well for it, if we
consider how dangerous a companion the soul carries with it, or rather is
carried by, in this dangerous race, even our own sinful and sensual flesh;
and withal how many ambushments of thieves, murderers, and robbers, lie in
the way, hunting for our souls as we pass by, and offering to the flesh any
manner of sensual delights, to betray the precious soul, which it should
carry straight to heaven, by getting it to turn aside into some other crooked
and bypath of sin and wickedness. Via vna, multa de via. How many bypath
cross the way of grace, to draw the soul out of the way of life, by the
allurements of honor, pleasure, profit, worldly-preferment, ease, good
fellowship, and a thousand varieties, to make the soul neglect that unum
necessarium, of walking in Gods fear, and keeping constant in the way to
heaven, we must not therefore think of sitting down, or standing still, or
frisking out and in, up and down, at our own pleasure or leisure. But the
pace he required is running, the most violent, earnest, and speedy pace of
all; whereby we are put in mind, that as our li e runs away without ceasing;
so our labor speed and endeavor should be constant and perpetual, after that
better life which shall never fade, and to contemn this, to obtain that.
Notwithstanding every speedy or hasty running in the race of this life, brings
not to heaven: but though we must run, yet we should so run, that we be
sure to obtain. There is a special manner of running required, a singular and
precise manner, which how contrary soever to flesh and blood, must be
undertaken and pursued, or else all is amiss. For there is a headlong running
down to hell; Facilis descensus Averni: and this is the way of good-fellowship
(as it is called) wherein a man shall be sure of company enough, but of such
as forget God: following the broad way of vanity which brings to destruction:
And there is a sidelong running of the hypocrite, who runs byas, as if he
would keep out of the broad way of destruction, but falls into it at the last.
But our running should be upright toward Heaven, up the hill, in the narrow,
strict and craggie way which leads unto life* we must run to obtain what
we run for, and mind nothing else but to keep our selves in that right way:
which will bring us to that end, happy then is the soul, that declines the
many bypath of sin, and vanity, and keeps constantly and carefully that
one strict way of holiness, righteousness and sobriety, which certainly
leads to eternal peace.

O merciful Lord Jesu, who are the way, the truth and the life, and know
whereof we are made, and how unable to stand of our selves, or to run the
way of thy Commandments: assist and strengthen us by thy blessed Spirit of
grace, to find out that gracious way of truth, which assuredly tends unto
life; and then constantly to keep in it all the days of our pilgrimage; that
living and dying in faith and obedience, we may finally obtain that crown of
righteousness, which thine own blessed self have purchased and prepared for
us in thine heavenly kingdom, Amen.

Eamus post Christum, quia veritas; per Christum, quia via; ad Christum, quia
vita. Bernard.

22. Upon a worthy Divines Letter resolving me in a case of conscience.
WHen it had pleased God to prolong my life beyond the great Climactericall
year, as it is called; I thought it high time for me, to retire my self from
worldly employments, that I might the better prepare my self for the time of
my change; and thereupon imparted my mind for ghostly counsel therein, to a
worthy and reverend Divine of my inward acquaintance, who returned me such a
gracious and learned answer by Letter, for directing the Christian pilgrim into
the right and safe way to eternal life, amongst the diverse opinions of th^se
later and worst times; as I thought fit to register it amongst the private
meditations of mine, that so pious a resolution in so weighty a case, (which
in mine opinion might be of good use to Gods Church) might not die with me, in
a private Letter; the words whereof are here faithfully set down, as follows.

Sir, I sent you in a Letter by my brother, etc. In mean while, to your case
of conscience, if I understand it aright, I think thus in few words. The
Gospel is a doctrine of mercy, but not of liberty. The Moral law, though it
cannot save, or condemn us who are in Christ; yet it still obliges us (no
less, if not more then others) to all acts of piety and justice. Our redeemer
freed us, not from the obedience, but from the penalty of it, the rigorous
sanction of it, is mitigated by the new covenant of grace, (for to us, is no
condemnation, and if any man sin, we have an Advocate) But the new Covenant
is so far from dissolving of any commandment, that it adds to them, the more
of faith and repentance. And faith it self, though it assure us of comfort in
Christ, yet it is under condition of our allegiance to God, not only in some
feeble good purposes and desires, but in a constant, universal, actual
obedience: For faith in the very nature of it, implies obedience, Romans 1.5.
and 16.26. 1 Peter 1.14. and verse 22. It purifies the heart; Acts 15.9. It
works by love, Galatians 5.6. And without doubt, the faith which is not thus
obedient, purging, working, is but a fancy. It Is true, the most holy Christian
may sometimes by his frailty or negligence be surprised by a sudden
temptation, or foiled y a violent: Jn that ease his comfort is in the merits of
Christ. But it is withal his duty, speedily to recover himself, and to walk
afterward more warily with his God. Good will, or good wishes are not enough,
where there is no more, I fear there is little grace, which where it is,
enables us to overcome the world. 1 Ioh. 5.4.5. To resist the Devil. Iam. 4.7.
nay, to overcome him. 1 Io. 4.4. Ephesians. 6.11.13. to do all actions of piety
in good measure. Phil. 4.13. Mar. 9.23. Ephesians. 3.20. Iud. 24. verse. to
mortify the deeds of the flesh. Romans 8.5.13. briefly, in spiritual
conflicts to be more then conquerors, Romans 8 37.

It Is true, the best of men, are but men at the best; now and then sinning, but
then quickly repenting, and for the most part carefully and conscionably
walking. And if you please to view and consider well these passages in Gods
book. Col. 3.9.10. Ephesians. 1.18, and 4.21.23.24. 2 Cor. 3.^8. Galat. 2.20. and
15.24.25. and ^ 14. Philip. 2.13. Romans 8.2. wherein the truly regenerate is
described by his Caracters and properties, you will fear that many (howsoever
they seem to themselves and others) taking little care to walk exactly.
Ephesians. 5.15. in a holy life, have little store of that grace and little hold of
that Savior, whereof they presume so much.

Shortly, as it is our great comfort that there is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus (Romans 8.) So that which follows must be our great care,
to walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. That new and living way by
the blood of Christ, will guide us straight to heaven between those two
dangerous rocks of despair and presumption.

Rec. 4. Nov. 1630.




In the conclusion of this Letter I was encouraged to continue my honorable
Lords service, which I did for the year following: and then (30. November.
1631.) being suddenly taken with a disease called (vertigo capitis) which I
doubted might turn to an Apoplexy, I withdrew my self home, and entered into a
course of Physic, under which I was holden so long, as I was by GODS mercy
taken off from my further worldly employments, and with my noble Lords
extraordinary favor in my farewell, retired my self into Northamptonshire,
since which time it has pleased our most gracious Lord God to add some more
years to my life, for my better preparation for the time of my change; blessed
be his most holy name for it, and let his holy spirit of grace (I humbly
beseech him) teach both my self and all others that shall read this worthy
letter, to learn and practice that most necessary and blessed lesson, of
joining faith and obedience, true belief, and holy life together, in the short
race of our earthly pilgrimage; that so being true children of grace here, we
may be assured to be heirs of glory in the life to come; through Jesus Christ
our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

23. Upon the words revealed to S. Augustine. In te stas, and non stas.
IT is written of Saint Augustine, that after his conversion to the faith, he
was grievously vexed with inward conflicts against his corrupt affections:
complaining of his inbred, hereditary, habitual, inveterate vices, and after
long struggling with them, by purposing and vowing, strong resolution, watching,
fasting, selfe-revenging, and other good means, finding still h^s own
weakness, and the increasing violence of his own corruptions; as he was
intentively musing and meditating what to do more, he heard a voice speaking
to him these words, Jn te stas, and non stas. Whereupon rightly apprehending,
that his own strength of wit, carnal I reason, and other powers and helps of
nature, could not serve the turn, for effecting that which was the peculiar
and proper work of grace; he betook himself to his Savior, by humble,
faithful, and fervent prayer, and at last found such inward assistance from
the holy spirit of grace, as strengthened him to stand and make good his
resolutions with more comfort then before.

Whether the Lord in special favor to this gracious servant of his, did
vouchsafe to give him this vocal instruction by words to his ears, or howeve^
the matter thereof was suggested or revealed to him by the Holy Ghost, I
enquire not; but sure I am they are words of great use and warning to us all,
not to trust to our selves, or any strength or power of nature, for any
spiritual work to be wrought in us, or by us* but to have our recourse to our
Savior, and to seek help from him and his grace, which cannot be had
elsewhere how often it falls out, that self opinion of a man's own wit, makes
his wit his own overthrow, and selfe-confidence of his own strength, in evil
company instead of reclaiming others, to make himself worse then they?

O blessed Lord Jesus, (our most blessed Savior) who know both the miserable
infirmities and debilities of our depraved nature, and the subtle and
advantageous power of our ghostly enemies, and having thy self in our flesh,
and for us, overcome them in all their temptations, do best know (Hebrews
2.18.) to succor them that be tempted: have mercy upon us thy weak and
unworthy servants, and give us grace to learn that necessary lesson of
self-deny all, and with humble faith to put our whole trust in thee for ever.
(Esaias 26.4.) For in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength; and (Jude 24.)
thou only art able to keep us from falling: that so being weak in our selves,
we may be strong in thee, and in the power of thy grace be enabled to stand
fast in the evil day, and in all things, (Romans 8.11.) through thee, who
love us, to he more then conquerors; for (2 Timothy 4.18.) Thou O Lord have
delivered us, and do deliver us, and we hope wilt deliver us from every evil
work, and wilt preserve us unto thy heavenly kingdom, to thee be all glory
and praise for ever, Amen.

24. Upon the building of Paul's Church in London.
Whenever that goodly monument of antiquity was built; it was evident to my
understanding, that the Christian Church of those times did hold, that not
Saint Peter, but the holy Christian faith was the rock or foundation whereupon
the militant Church of CHRIST was to be founded: for under the Chauncell of
that mother Church of the chief City of England, there is an under-Church
built with strong arches and pillars called Sancta Fides, usually called S.
Faiths; which is indeed the proper foundation of the Church of Paul's. By which
demon^^rative argument it appears, that the good people in those days, did
better understand the true meaning of our blessed Savior, in the 16. Chapter,
and 18. verse of Saint Matthew's Gospel, concerning the Rock, whereupon he
would build his Church: then the Romanists of later times have done, who would
make the world believe, that our Savior did then appoint S. Peter, and after
him his successors in the Cathedral Church of Rome, to be that rock of the
Catholic Church of Christ, and the supreme Vicar and head of the Church, in
whose breast all infallibility of judgment, and power of determining in all
matters of the Church should be only resident, For certainly if there had
been any such conceit broached at the building of Paul's, the fundamental
Church of holy faith should have been named Saint Peter's, as if our Savior
had meant to build his Church upon Saint Peter's person, and not upon the
Christian faith, which he (as the mouth of all the Disciples) professed that
our Savior was the true Messiah, Christ the son of the living God: our
Saviors question being made expressly to all the Disciples, verse 15. and he
answering for them all.

O most blessed Lord Jesu, who art the way, the truth, and the life, and see
into what miserable combustions the state of Christendom is brought, by these
antichristian wastings of thine own blessed works for maintenance of private
supremacy and Soveraigntie here, as if thy kingdom were of this world, which
thy self have, (Ioh. 8.36) expressly disclaimed; have mercy upon thy poor
distracted and distressed Church, and make up the breaches thereof against all
the wicked plots and machinations of the adversary, by inclining the hearts of
all that profess thy holy name, to agree in the truth of thy holy word, that
we may all live in Christian unity, peace, and godly love, waiting for the
accomplishment of the number of thine elect, that these days of sin, and
dissension being finished, we may be received into thine everlasting peace,
through thine own blessed merits and mediation for us, Amen.

25. Upon the reading of a paper casually taken out of an old bundle at my
first coming to Stanwick.
Upon my resolving to make Stanwick the place of my retiring my self from the
business of this world, that I might with more freedom prepare my self for a
better; amongst other necessaries sent thither from Westminster, there was
certain bundles of old letters, notes and writings, sent thither upon my
remoove, which was in June, 1632. that I might there peruse them before they
were laid aside for wast papers. And when I came thither, in the first bundle I
took to look over, I lighted upon a sheet of paper foulded up, and endorsed
only with the name of a very worthy Preacher of mine old acquaintance: and
having quite forgotten what it might con^erne* I opened it, and found it to be
an abstract of one of his Sermons taken by my self about 40. years before
upon this Text, ( Deuteronomy. 32.29.) (O that they were wise, that they would
understand this, and would consider that later end) wherein I found the
necessity of that Christian duty of preparation for the time of our
dissolution, so powerfully pressed by that man of God, as I was glad to light
upon it so seasonably, for a gracious introduction to my further meditations of
that necessary subject.

O blessed Lord God, what just cause have I to condemn mine own dulnes and
corruption, that having so long before by mine own hand taken an abstract of
such a precious instruction, did neglect the comfort and use th^reof more then
for the present, for many years not remembering that J had any such thing. But
withal how infinitely bounden am I to thy Majesty (O most gracious and
merciful Heavenly Father) by who^e special providence it was preser^^^ in my
many remooves to remote dwellings, and several alterations of (...) fortunes,
and now so season (...) brought to my hands, in this last (...) of my life,
when I have most (...) of holy preparation (...) to teach me (...) to (...) in
speedy and serious practice, that lesson which I took out so long a go. O Lord
my God, bury (J belo^^ thee) this neglect of mine with the re^^ of the manifold
sins of my youth in the bottomless seas of thy mercies* and by thy holy
Spirit sanctifi^ and strengthen me now at last, whiles it is yet called (to
day) blessed be thy most blessed name for it* and apply my self wholly to this
blessed learning of being wise to salvation, that by thy blessing and mercies,
J may by humble and steadfast faith, fruitful repentance, and new obedience, be
provide^ of that Savior, (besides whom there is no other) against my last
^eed, so to cover all my misdoings* and sins of all kinds, from being imputed
unto me, and to cloth me with his perfect righteousness, that when the hour
of my change shall come, I may be found of thee, in peace, through his merits
and mediation our eternal advocate and most blessed peacemaker, Amen.

And although this paper of mine be but a brief or abstract of that which was
largely delivered by that worthy messenger of God: yet as short and imperfect
as it is, I conceive good use may be made thereof, by the humble minded and
conscionable reader; and therefore being a relic of mine own hand for so
many years preserved, I have thought fit to annexe the original it self to
this meditation: in hope some gracious use may be made thereof for our
preparation for our later end, which cannot be far from any of us, for, Jnter
breve vitae spatium nihil p^^cul diei potest.

DEUTERONOMY. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they would understand this, and would
consider their later end.


THese words are part of the last song of Moses the man of God, which he sung
unto the people Swan like, at his being ready to leave the world. Dying men's
words have deepest impression, let these as Moses dying words are repuire your
attention: yea, and not as the words of Moses alone, but as the words of godly
Moses; for ( v. 20) The Lord said, I will hide my face from them, I will see
what their end will be, etc. and in the first verse, Hearken ye heavens and I
will speak, and let the earth hear the voice of my mouth. (2.) My doctrine
shall dropp as the rain, and my speech shall still as the dew, and the shower
upon the herbs, and as the great rain upon the grass. Hearken with your
earthly bodies, and with your heavenly souls, for you have all of you part o^
heaven within you, that both soul and body as herbs watered with April
showers, may bring forth fruit unto God that waters them; and wishes here the
best things unto you, wisdom and understanding, to provide for your later end:
for all flesh is grass and must have an end, a withering as well as a growing,
a harvest as well as a spring, happy is the soul that is so watered with
grace here, that he shall reap glory in the Lords great harvest to come.

This Text has two parts; the things recommended to them, and the inducment or
introduction thereunto. The wish, O that, The matter, that they would be, 1.
Wise, 2. Understand, 3. Consider their later end.

Here, when the Lord wishes that all men would be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, I presume not to enter into the secret cabinet of Gods
eternal counsel and election, but humbly content my self with what he has
revealed, namely, that God offers his grace to all and would have all men to
be saved, desiring not the death but the conversion of a sinner, Why will ye
lie O house of Israel? Perditio tua ex te.

Now when God recommends any thing unto us, we may conclude it to be
absolutely good and absolutely necessary for us* and therefore the greater
shall our sin be* if we neglect the counsel of God.

The matter recommended unto us is wisdom, to be wise to salvation; and this
extends to poor as well as to rich, generally to all, for all have souls, and
all are invited to be wise to save them. Does any man want wisdom. let him
ask of God* ( James 5.) who gives to all men liberally and repr ^^heth no
man* and it shall be give^ unto him. As there is a wi^dome^^ which me^ in the^
several callings do govern themselves and their worldly occasions; so there
is a wisdom whereby we are taught to govern our souls unto eternal life.
And if we were as profound in policy as Machiavillians, and had all the
wisdom of the learned for the managing of earthly things, yet all were nothing
without this wisdom to salvation; which we are here exhorted unto. The fear
of God is the beginning of wisdom, for this wisdom dwells not with wicked
men. This is not every man's wish or desire. The most affect worser things; some
worldly honor, some earthly riches, some sensual pleasure, but few that look
after this heavenly Kingdom, all for the body, none for the soul, as if we
had no souls to save; and therefore the Holy Ghost stirs us up to be wise,
that we may understand; which is the next part of the matter propounded;
understanding. What, do we not understand already? yes, but we understand not
what belongs to our peace, and as we should understand unto salvation. It were
a great step to grace, that we had so much understanding of GOD as the
honest Heathen had, who by their understanding and reason kept themselves from
gross sins, intemperance, injustice, anger, distempered passions, and kept
themselves in just dealing with others, and a tranquillity of mind to
themselves. But we come short of the fowls, for the Stork knows her
appointed times, and of the beasts, for the Ox knows his Master, but we know
not our maker, and even in the least of creeping things, the Ant provides in
Summer, what must keep her in Winter, and we should be likewise to gather
here what should be needful for us at our going hence. In every man and woman
God has infused a reasonable soul; and in every soul has set up a Candle,
the light of reason, to guide the understanding, and when we commit sin, this
candle is for the time smothered between Satan and our own corruption, or
else we should not sin with the greedines we do. How can ye say, that the
man has reason, that drinks himself into a beast, when no beast will be so
intemperate? How does the Gallant understand himself, when he lays his life
to pawn, nay, his soul with his life, in a trivial quarrel? What reason
has the blasphemer for his swearing, or the adulterer for hunting the houses
of death? Surely, if our understanding were clear, as God made it, we should
never sin, and therefore it is not without a cause, that Gods children are
wished here to be wise, and to understand, that so we may consider our later
end, which is the object, aim, and end of all our wisdom, and understanding;
and so we come to the last part.

Is there then so great wisdom, and understanding, to know that we must all
die, we all know that well enough. Oh, but to consider this, that is so well
known, as we should, is a point of highest wisdom and deepest understanding to
know it, so, as to consider it as it ought to be considered, is a point of
absolute necessity to him that will have any care of his salvation.

To consider our later end, is so to judge of earthly things that they may
help us to a blessed end, for finis coronat opus: and he that remembers his
later end as he should do, shall never sin, as the wise man says. It will
be a scar-crow to him to keep him from sin, when he considers of it, and
himself as he should do. Who is he amongst us all, that does consider of Gods
blessings heaped upon us, as he ought to do? He might have made us insensible
creatures, as stones in the wall, only vegetative creatures, as trees, or
herbs, sensible creatures, as Todes or the like: But he has made us
reasonable creatures; and that not Indians and Turks to worship the Devil and
the murderer Mahomet instead of GOD, but Christians; and amongst them, not
Idolaters, and Schismatics, but bred up with the sincere milk of the Word of
GOD, in the purest Church that God has now in the whole world. O who is then a
wise and understanding man, that will not consider this, to advance and
magnify the goodness of the Lord unto him, who by so many steps of mercy and
goodness has advanced him above all the creatures of the world? And as this
consideration should moove us to thankfulness to GOD; so it would keep us in
obedience toward him, for to what end have we all these preferments from God,
but that we should remember to glorify him that has bestowed them, and to fit
our selves for that future glory which he has reserved for us at our later
end.

Oh then that they would be wise, and understand, and consider their later end:
their later end, that is, their death; that they must die, consider it as well
as know it, and so wisely provide for that which cannot be avoided. Death shall
gnaw them as sheep, says the Prophet David, as sheep does the grass, some
now, some anon, the whole pasture over in a while, and then as the fresh grass
springs up, so death comes over again and crops it; yet still the root
remains; there is a root of eternity, which death cannot take from us: but
how soon we shall be cropped off by death no man knows, we may reckon of years,
and perhaps not live a week, or a day, nay this night the sheet that covers
thee, may be thy winding sheet before to morrow. What manner of men should we
be in holiness and righteousness of life, if we did thus consider of death; and
how much does it concern us, to consider and prepare for our later end, which
is so uncertain, unto us? All worldly things honor, riches, pleasures, nay,
life it self has an end, but that end is not the end of us: there is
something else to be considered in that word, namely what follows that end,
and that is judgment, for the same day we dye, are we brought to judgment,
and called to the strictest account that can possibly be imagined, not to
answer for our own sins alone, but for Adams, and for our corruption which
came from him, and for the sins of those that shall come after us, whom our
ill example, or neglect of instruction has corrupted; and not for deeds alone,
but for words also; and not for wicked and sinful words but for idle words,
even for every idle word, and for our very thoughts. O Lord, what shall we
sinful wretches do when we come to this account? who let us take as much care
as we can of our words, even in our prayers and best devotions, yet we shall
show our imperfections and weaknesses even then: how great then is the
numberless number of our iniquities when they shall be gathered together into
one total, how should we answer for one of a thousand? let us then consider
seriously of this great and strict account, and provide our selves of a Savior
that may cover our misdeeds, and the errors of our words and thoughts, that
they may not be imputed unto us in that judgment.

From which consideration of a judgment, there may be also further considered
that there is a Hell, a place of torment, where the wicked shall have their
particular being with the Devil and his Angels whom they served in this life,
separated from the joyful presence of our glorified Savior, in whose face, is
perfect joy for evermore, and if there were no further pain of sense in hell,
but this poena damni, only this deprivation of God's presence, that were a hell
sufficient of it self, whereunto there is added pains of sense, fire eternal,
utter darkness.

But withal, this consideration of the Judgment, which shows such terrible
things to the wicked, brings the faithful to another issue, the bliss and
heaven and everlasting salvation; the comforts and joys whereof it lies not in
my power to declare, nor in the heart of any man to conceive; but there will
be the full fruition of what we hope for here, and an absolute deliverance
from all those things, which trouble or fear us here.

And yet I have not done; one thing more this consderation of our end brings us
to; namely, that we must not end when we come to our end: but there is an
eternity that attends us after-wards, whether of life to salvation, or of
eternal confusion. And this is a consideration of weight indeed. I read of a
good Christian in time of persecution who being condemned to die for his
conscience, his wife persuaded him to yield to the kings will, and save his
life, why, (says he) how long think thou I may live if I should do so,
she answered twenty or thirty years perhaps. Alas says he, and if it were
so many thousand years, what were that to eternity? O let us make use of
this, and consider sadly and seriously of this maine point, that this thor^
lif^ of ours is but a moment whereupon eternity depends: and therefore it much
concerns us all to listen to this wish of th Holy Ghost, and to labor to be
wise, and understand, and consider our later end.

26. Upon the Turkies coming duly to their roost at night.
SEe how these silly fowls, which at their own liberty wander and feed
abroad, in Gardens, Fields, and Orchards, all the day long, and many times
far off, from their usual roosting places; yet (notwithstanding the company
of other fowls of their own kind met abroad, discovery of new places of
better feeding, and other enticements or impediments) do ever toward
Sunne-set, draw themselves homewards before it be dark, so to have time and
daylight enough, to fly up to their perches of roost, where only they look
for safety and quiet in the night approaching. This providence taught these
silly creatures by instinct of nature; as it directly shames, and condemns
some of us, who when we are got abroad, are easily drawn by ill company,
good-fellowship, or other idle vanity, to defer our coming home till we are
not able to come home, but must be led home like beasts, or lie in a ditch by
the way, (to the hazard of soul and body) so it may be a necessary
remembrance useful to us all; that in all our worldly occasions of this life,
we bethink our selves of the Sunsetting with us, I mean, the hour of
death: which must as certainly come upon every one of us at one time or other,
as the Sunsetting closes up every day that goes over our heads; that like the
sons and daughters of wisdom, we may everyday remember that our last night is
at hand, and so provide to make our peace with God by Jesus Christ (our only
peacemaker) whiles it is called to day, that that night do not surprise us,
or take us unprovided for it.

O merciful Lord God, strengthen my feeble soul, by thy holy Spirit of grace,
that with the humble wings of true repentance and a lively faith, J may before
hand fly up into the Arc of my Saviors perfect righteousness, that whenever
that night shall come upon me, I may be found there in safety, and so
received into thine everlasting peace, Amen.

27. Upon the remove of household from one dwelling to another.
THe day appointed for this remoove, was set down many days ago, and most of
the stuff packed up and made ready for carriage: yet see how full of trouble
and perplexity the day it self is: by taking leave of old friends and
neighbors, some things forgotten to be done before, some new interruptions
falling out in the instant: so that many times the carriages are benighted, and
fall short of getting to the new home in due time. We are all in this world
but sojourners, and our home is not here, but in Heaven: for which we should
be everyday so wise by preparing our selves, that we might not be combred
upon the day of our remoovall; but to have them nothing to do, but to lift up
our souls unto our Savior the Lord Jesus, and so depart in peace: yet how
contrary to this is the practice of many, who leave all their business to the
very remoove-day, the day of death; not having so much as settled their outward
estate, or made their wills before; whereby they grow so perplexed and distracted
with thoughts of this world, care of wife and children, visitations of
neighbors, pangs and distresses of sickness, fear of death inward horrors and
temptations, a^ makes their departure many times very discomfortable.

O most glorious Lord God, I know not how sufficiently (as I desire and ought)
to praise thy most holy name, for thy great mercy toward me in this gentle
visitation of sickness, which thy most gracious and tender hand has laid upon
me: whereby I am taken off from all worldly cares and thoughts; and have also
(of thine infinite goodness) such gracious times and opportunities to prepare
my self for my remove and change. O, let my soul for ever praise and magnify
thy holy name therefore. And withal J most humbly beseech thee to stretch thy
hand of mercy yet further upon me; that as my body shall decay, (wherein I most
humbly submit my self to thy blessed good will and pleasure) my soul may be
strengthened by thy powerful spirit of grace; and the good work begun in me,
made more and more perfect, that when this earthly tabernacle shall be
dissolved, my soul united by faith to my blessed Redeemer the Lord Jesus may
be then received of thee in peace, through his precious merits and mediation,
who is our alone Savior and peacemaker, Amen.

28. Upon the casual hearing of a verse in the new Testament read by a child.
AS I was to pass through the room where my little grandchilde was set by her
Grandmother to read her mornings Chapter, which fell out to be the ninth of
S. Matthews Gospel; just as I came in she was uttering those words in the
second verse; Jesus said to the sick of the palsy; son, be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. Which words sorting so fitly with my
case, whose whole left side is taken with that kind of disease, and whose soul
desires nothing so much as such a gracious word from my Savior; I stood at a
stand at the uttering of them, and could not but conceive some joy and comfort
in those blessed words, though by the childs reading, as if the Lord by her
had spoken them to my self, a paralytick and a sinner, as that sicke-man was:
who (for ought appears in the Text) expected only the cure of his bodily
infirmity: when behold the gracious redeemer of the World, who is wont to give
more unto us then we desire or deserve, begins first with the cure of the
soul, by remitting his sins, and then cures the body afterward.

O most blessed Savior, those words of grace which thou did vouchsafe to
that sick man, not des^ring it; speak thou of thy rich mercy by thy holy
Spirit to my sinne-sicke soul, which most humbly beggs it at thy most
merciful hands. My soul is grievously sick in the sight of my sins, sense of
the wrath of my displeased God, and desert of hell and utter condemnation. But
(Lord) speak these words only unto me, and my soul shall live, for (Lord) if
thou will thou can make me whole. O Lord, heal my soul, for I have sinned
against thee. As for my bodily infirmity, which thou (as the chastisement of a
loving and merciful father) have laid upon me, to weane me from the world, and
for my better preparation against the time of my dissolution by it; I do with
all humble thankfulness, and dutiful obedience submit my self thereunto,
therein* But my humble and earnest suite is for mercy; mercy (good Lord) for
the cure of my Soul, by the pardoning of my sins. O Blessed Savior, speak
those gracious words to me, one Paralyticke more; Son, be of good comfort,
thy sins are forgiven thee: that being absolved from them all by thee in this
life, who have already fully satisfied divine justice for them all, J may when
that hour of my departure comes, with comfort and cherefulnes deliver up my
redeemed soul, into thy blessed arms of mercy in peace, Amen, Amen.

29. Upon the w^rds of a child, intimating the necessity of my timely
preparation for death and heaven.
IF notice were taken of the speeches, which sometimes f^ll from children, I am
persuaded great use might be made thereof by those of ripe years, for their
instruction and good* which I lately observed in a short discourse had with my
little granddaughter, not yet seven years old, my self being entered into the
seventieth year of my age, and my left side taken with a disease called the
dead palsy; she seeing me to have my left hand rubbed after meals and my
left leg rubbed at my going to bed, and at my uprising, said to me.
Grandfather this you do, to make that side well* nay (child) said I, but to
preserve it so long (...) shall please God: but I look not to be well till I
be in heaven: whereunto she replied in these very words, yea grandfather, you
long to be there, and your leg would feign go to sleep in the grave. In which
words, how directly does the child teach me many things. 1. What I should do,
long to be in heaven* 2. That there is no passage thither for the soul, but
by the death of the body. 3. That when the body is ready for the grave* it is
high time for the soul to be longing for heaven. 4. That the grave is bu^ the
bodies bed to sleep in, for a time. 5. Intimating therewith th^^ there shall
be a time of waking. By which five particulars, how evident is it ( Psalm. 8.2.)
out of the mouths of very babes and children, has God ordained strength, to
witness his grace and praises, to the confounding of the enemy who would
suppress them.

O most blessed Lord God, let my soul first praise thy holy name, for giving
me those seasonable admonitions from one that comes in a second descent of mine
own loins: beseeching thee to bless those seeds of grace sown in her heart
in these her tender years, to make and preserve her thy child of grace all
her life long; that finally she may be heir of thy glory. And then for my
self, O good Lord, look graciously upon me thy most unworthy servant, who have
longed for thy salvation: for thou (Lord) art the thing J long for (Psalm. 71.4,
5, 8) thou art my hope even from my youth, through thee have I been holden up
ever since I was borne, thou art he that tookest me out of my mothers womb; my
praises shall be ever of thee. O cast me not away in the time of age, forsake
me not, when my st^^^^th fails, (10.) Go not far from me, O God; my God, ha^^
thee to h^lp me* that as this earthly tabernacle d caie* daily through old age
and infirmities, so thy grace may show it self powerful in my weakness, to
enable me to hunger and thirst after thy righteousness, in a true desire after
sanctification, and new obedience, for the remainder of my few days with
hearty sorrow and unfeigned repentance for my sins past, and faithful relying
upon thy mercies in Christ for the pardon of them; that when I shall leave this
house of earth, thy blessed Angel^ may ^onvey my soul into the glorious mansion
of peace, which I long for, and my Saviou^ has prepared for me in thy heavenly
kingdom, Amen

30. Upon a fight between two Cocks.
AT Stanwick, my son had going with his Hens, a young Cock of a stout and large
breed, with very large Iollops hanging down on either side of his beak, and a
friend of his giving him afterward a Cock and a Hen of the game, as they call
them (the Cocks-combe and jollops being finely cut off, close to the head for
advantage in fighting) It fell out that the two Cocks meeting in the yard
together, fell close to their fight; where the younger Cock fought stoutly a
good while, till the old Cock taking advantage of his large Iollops hanging so
low, took hold thereof, for raising himself to wound the young Cock at every
blow: which being observed by the spectators, they parted the fray for the
present, and caused the young Cocks pendant Iollops to be cut off, and his head
trimmed for the fight, as the old Cocks was, who had at first so beaten the
young Cock, that he durst not stay within his view: but after the sores of his
Iollops cut were healed, the young Cock coming abroad again, the old Cock
ran presently upon him to have made him run away as he was wont to do
before. But the young Cock turning again, and they falling to a new fight,
very sharp and eager on both sides, at last the old Cock finding his old hold
of the young Cocks Iollops taken from him, was feign to cry creake, and to
run away as fast from the young Cock as the young Cock did from him before;
and ever after the young Cock was master of the field.

In this fight of the two Cocks, me thinks I see represented by the old
Cock, the old wily se^pent, who by subtlety and advantage taking,
overcomming our first parents in Paradise, as if he were then the Prince of the
World, sets upon every one of their posterity to subdue them to his dominion,
insomuch as he presumed to set upon the Lord Jesus, (God blessed for ever)
finding him clothed in our flesh, though to his own utter overthrow in the
combat; our Savior the second Adam, becoming absolute conqueror, and that
for us also that do believe in him who are thereby made partakers of his
victory. In the young Cock, me thinks I see the natural and unregenerate man,
overladen with his own original corruption; who endowed with many gifts of
nature, and helps of good education, presumes of himself to stand against the
old cock in fight. But the old murderer (who never shows fair play, but
works upon any base or villainous advantage he can) laying hold upon his
natural corruption, and by help thereof gives him many a wound, and is like to
overcome and oppress him, through the treachery of his own flesh, by the m
ltitude of his sins; when behold the Lord Jesus (the blessed spectator of all
our fights and combats, and who is our only supporter and helper in them)
seeing the poor soul his soldier in this distress and danger, gives order
by the work of his sanctifying spirit, to cut off that traitorous corruption
(...) nature, and by the supply of grace to renew his strength against the
fiery assaults of the tempter: who missing his wonted hold of corrupt flesh,
and finding a new influence of grace from the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, which
ever overcomes him wheresoever it meets him, turns the back and flies away:
and so the man, (though but in part regenerate) becomes more then conqueror
through him that loved us, Romans 8.37.

Most blessed Savior, (who see our manifold weaknesses, and the enemies
great advantage over us, in these spiritual combats, strengthen us thy poor
weaklings, fighting under thy banner: that by thy grace we may be enabled to
stand fast and courageously in the evil day, and by the power of thy might put
all temptations to flight; and so finally obtain the Crown of victory, to
thy glory, and our everlasting peace, Amen.

31. Upon a childs asking blessing in the morning.
WHiles I was busy one morning in writing, my little grand child came into the
room where I was, falling down upon her knees, and desired me to pray to God
to bless her: and having so done, knowing that I heard her, she (without
expecting any verbal answer from me, out of the confidence of my fatherly
love) rises up, assureing her self of the blessing she desired, and so
betaketh her self to the employments of the day.

O blessed Lord God, our most gracious heavenly Father, thy love is the only
Fountain of all true fatherly love and affection; and the dearest love of the
tenderest parent, is but as a dropp from that ocean: why then should not I with
as much (or rather much more) confidence and assurance rely upon thy paternall
love, as the child does on mine? Why should any doubtings interrupt my
prayers, when I kn^w I put them up to so gracious a Father, whose love is all
infinite and unchangeable like thy self? why should my sins or unworthiness
deter me from that duty, when J know thy love and grace is free, and freely
bestowed out of thine own goodness, not for any merit of mine, nay, against
my sinful deservings? O blessed Lord God, seal up unto my conscience by thy
pacifying spirit, the assurance of mine adoption, and strengthen me by thy
grace, in all my poor prayers, (howsoever accompanied with humane infirmities)
to come unto thee with true filial confidence, and awful reverence, in the
name of thine only natural and eternal Son, my blessed Savior and only
Mediator; and so shall I be sure of thy Fatherly acceptance of me in him. O
then, let my soul for ever rejoice in this privilege of thy children; and
cheerfully, thankefully and constantly put my whole trust and affiance both in
life and death, in thine eternal and free love and mercy toward me in Christ
Jesus, Amen.

32. Upon one word attributed to God thrice, in three verses together in one
Chapter.
IN the last Chapter of Jonah, it is said ( verse 6.) that the Lord God
prepared a Gourd, ( verse 7.) that the Lord prepared a worm, ( verse. 8) and the
Lord prepared a vehement east-winde: three works of Gods omnipotent power, as
it were of three new creations; from thence to draw a most demonstrative
argument, for convincing the Prophets erroneous zeal, and to manifest the
glories of his own infinite mercies above all his works.

O most glorious Lord God, did the Prophet know indeed ( verse 2.) that thou
art a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness? and
should he now be angry because thou were slow to anger? and would he needs
die of the sullens, because thou would not destroy one hundred and twenty
thousand infants, when their parents repented? what strange passions are these
in a Prophet? had he forgotten so soon his own case, when so late before, for
his rebellious flying from thee and thy word, he was justly, even by his own
confession thrownover board into the sea, and yet of thine infinite mercy by a
miraculous deliverance was after three days and three nights together lying in
the deep, brought in life and safety to dry land again? was he glad and
thankful then for thy mercies in sparing of one rebel, and has he now so
little pity upon so many thousand innocents?

O blessed Lord God, how transcendent are thy thoughts (Esa. 558*) above ours,
and how contrary are our ways unto thine? Thine end in this Prophets
employment was for the Ninivites conversion, not for their destruction: And
when by thy blessed summons of prevention, thou did upon their repentance
save them; greater was thy glory thereby and the success more pleasing to thy
Majesty, then it would have been by their impenitencie and destruction: let
these two examples of thy mercy, upon the fugitive Prophet and the repentant
Ninivites teach us, to put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercies, for
blessed are all they that put their trust in thee, (Psalm 2.12. and 34.8.) O
Lord strengthen us by thy grace, to depend upon thee and thy goodness, both in
life and death, through Jesus Christ our Savior, Redeemer, and Mediator, Amen.
And again O Lord God, did thou here immediately prepare, both the refreshing
Gourd, and the smiting worm, and fainting heat, for thine own gracious end
with the Prophet; and does any matter of comfort or affliction b^fall any of
thy ^hildren, but by the hand of thine al governing providence? who in thine
unsearchable wisdom know what is best for them, and in thine unchangeable
mercy disposest thereof accordingly? O then (blessed Lord) give us grace
withal meekness to humble our selves under thy mighty hand, in all the
occurrents of this mortal life; and in all our troubles to depend and rest
upon thy mercies, for that blessed issue, which thou in thy boundless
goodness shall produce for thine own glory, in our final peace and
salvation, Amen.

33. Upon the great Clock in Westminster Palace.
THis Clock strikes four and twenty times a day,
And every striking shows one hour is past:
Thus hour by hour our days do wear away;
And one those hours must shortly be our last:
But which we know not: that poor sinners we
In faith, repentance, and obedience,
From hour to hour by grace prepared may be
For our last hour, and happy going hence:
When our dear Savior shall call us home in peace
And sin, death, sorrow, shall for ever cease.
34. Home.
LOrd Jesus, keep my heart, which by thy grace
would feign keep thee, excluding all beside
O let thy spirit sanctify the place,
and by his sacred influence still rule and guide,
My thoughts, words, actions, studies and desires
To heavenward, whereto my soul aspires.
For thence it came, I have no home but there,
and thitherward am traveling as I may;
A sojourner, and wearied pilgrim here,
waiting my calling home from day to day;
Till mine appointed time of change shall come,
And thou (dear Lord) my soul shall welcome home
Mean while, thy grace increase my faith in thee,
with true repentance, and obedience;
That these thy graces may abound in me,
and I may die in them, when I go hence:
And so by grace prepared as I should be,
(Sweet Savior) receive my Soul in peace to thee.
35. A Dialogue between an old sick man, and his neighbor visiting him.
Q. HOw do you Sir?

(A.) I praise God never better
Because I never was so near my home*

Q. What home mean yo^? nature to death is debtor
And old or young, we all must thither come.

A. True; death the common passage is, between
This mortal life and that which lasts for ever:
The body carries the immortal soul unseene,
Along with it so far: but their they sever:
The body dies; the soul to heaven straight,
From whence it came and where its dwelling is:
And that is the home I mean; for which I wait;
The glorious mansions of eternal bliss.

Q But ere you can get thither you must die.

A. My body must indeed, but that is not I.

Q. And should the bodies death so slighted be;
The king of terror to all living things?

A. I slight not death, Gods messenger is he,
And therefore welcome and good news he brings
T'uncloath me of this body, that I may
Be clothed upon with immortality;
And so brought home, to dwell in heaven for ay^
In glorious joys, and true felicity.
And though death lays my body in the dust*
As if I never should behold it more:
Yet rise it shall, and he restore it must;
In better plight then ere it was before.
The sooner I get home the better then,
Sweet Jesus take me home in peace

(Q.) Amen*

36. A Hymn for Christmas Day. Gloria in excelsis Deo.
ALL glory be to God on high,
and peace on earth, good will to men;
This was the Chore of Angels song,
at Jesus birth in Bethlehem;
For then the eternal son of God
became the blessed virgins son;
God manifested in the flesh,
to save mankind else quite undone.
Come let us magnify his name,
with Angels and Archangels still,
And sing, All glory be to God,
and peace on earth, to men good will.
For by this work of God made man,
both the heavens and earth have cause of joy;
The heavens new glory have thereby;
the earth does heavenly peace enjoy:
And both from Gods good will to man,
for lo, this blessed heavenly child
Has sinful Adam and his race redeemed,
and to his Father reconciled.
Come let us magnify his name,
with Angels and Archangels then:
And sing, all glory be to God,
and peace on earth, good will to man.
This babe though cradled in a cratch,
was yet the King of glory borne:
And came from heaven man to save,
who otherwise had been forlorn;
He is our only peace on earth,
the conscience pacifier here:
He is our glory in the heavens,
our blessed glorifier there;
Come then above all creatures we
should sing this Angels Antheme still;
All glory be to God on high,
and peace on earth, to men good will.
But first from men on earth below,
should glory mount to God on high:
Then God from heaven would shower down peace
to men on earth abundantly.
For God being now at peace with man,
through Christ the Lord both God and man,
The heavens and earth are likewise friends,
as 'twas when first the world began.
Come let us magnify his name,
with Angels and Archangels then:
And sing, All glory be to God;
and peace on earth, good will to men*
O what transcendent love was this,
of that great God to poor mankind*
When men and Angels both were fallen,
God took man up, left them behind:
And that man might be quit from hell,
and brought to heavens glorious bliss,
The Prince of heaven man became;
was ever mercy like to this?
Come then, and let us praise his name,
with Angels and Archangels still,
And give God glory in the highest,
that showed to man such high good will.
To thee (O most Almighty Lord)
most holy, g^^^ious Trinity,
The Father Go^ ^^d Holy Ghost,
in ever blessed n^^e;
From hearts and souls and all our powers,
all glory, pr^^^e, ^^^nksgiving be,
As in beginning was, is now,
and shall to all eternity,
For Christ the Lord our Jesus borne,
at time pr^fixt in Bet^lehem;
Let he^ven and earth with all their hosts,
come join with us and say Amen.
A Prayer and Meditation for my wife and my self to join together, she being
in the 67. year of her age, and I ^n the 74. of mine, and both full of bodily
infirmities; for our daily waiting for the blessed hour of our dissolution.
1
HEre at thy footstool (blessed Lord) do we ^cal^
Thy weak unworthy servants wait thy gracious
Our work draws to an end and now we come to thee
Whose blessed will is so declared, we shall.
Bless this our waiting time; and by thy grace,
Support us joyfully to end our race.
2
For thou already have of thy good will
In truth and mercy us espoused to thee,
Although the marriage day must rest, until
This mortal puts on immortality:
Mean while, thou have thy holy spirit us given,
To guide us all along our way to heaven.
3
Whose sacred hand, within the first degree
Of life eternal, has already brought us ^
Uniting us (renewed by grace) to thee
(Most glorious Savior) who have deerly bought us;
And by this first degree assures the rest;
To make us finally for ever blessed.
4.
The second step to life's eternity,
Is by deaths passage which we now attend;
Where laying down, all our mortality,
Our souls by Angels conduct shall ascend:
Members of thy Church thine own espoused wife,
Into thy palace of eternal life.
5.
Where we, instead of flesh, that is transitory,
And must be laid to sleep here in the grave;
Shall have new robes of everlasting glory,
As all our fellow members there shall have,
O what a blessed glorious change is this,
To leave this world for heavens endless bliss?
6.
And yet there rests behind a third degree,
When these frail bodies raised from death again
Unto eternal life, rejoynd shall be
Unto our souls; and glorified with them:
When all things shall receive their consummation;
Our souls and bodies both, complete salvation.
7.
Now whiles we wait in this our pilgrimage,
When our appointed time of chang shall come;
(Lord Jesus) help in this our life's last stage;
And our redeemed souls bring safely home;
To that safe home of thine: where al things be
In perfect peace and true security.
8.
For in this life such our corruptions are,
As hinder when we any good intend;
But headlong running into every snare,
To make us our most gracious God offend:
Under this bondage of corruption thus,
Lie we till thou good Lord) deliver us.
9.
Here then with panting longings after thee,
Most (glorious Savior) for our final rest:
With sighs of hope, and tears of joy, do we
Attend thy blessed call to make us blessed.
Call then (sweet Jesus) when it shall thee please:
Into thy hands receive our souls in peace, Amen.
Job 14.14. All the days of mine appointed time, will I wait till my change
shall come.

