PHYSIC, TO CVRE THE MOST dangerous Disease of Desperation.

Collected for the direction and comfort of such Christians as trauayling and
being heavy laden in their Consciences, with the burden of their sins,
stand in danger either in time of their sickness to fall away from their God,
through deep Despair, or else in time of their health, to yield to one
desperate end, or other, to the ruin and utter confusion of both bodies and
souls for ever.

By W. W.

Prou. 18.14. Who can bear a wounded spirit? Aug. in lib, de vtilitate
paenitentiae agendae. Ne desperatione auge^mu^ peccata propositus est
penitentiae p^^^u^ ^^^sus n^ sperando au^^amus (...) est ^^e mortis incer^^^ AT
LONDON, Printed for Robert Boulton, and are to be sold at his shop in
Chauncerie lane (...) Holborne. 1605.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Lord THOMAS HOWARD, Earl of Suffolk, Baron of
Walden, Knight of the most honorable order of the Garter, Lord High
Chamberlain to the Kings most excellent Majesty, and one of his most
honorable privy Counsel.
GReat, manifold, and terrible (Right Honorable) are the tumults, turmoyles,
troubles, fears, and anguishes, which the remembrance of sins bypast, and
present, conjoined with the careful contemplation, and inward consideration of
Gods grievous threatninges, and wrathful indignation set forth in holy
Scriptures, bring unto weak, troubled, and ignorant, consciences. Great again
is the diligence, and continual is the wandering to and from of Satan, that
deadly and mortal foe of mankind, to tempt and assault, to bring to
desperation, and devour sinners at all times, and in all places; but
especially in the days of affliction, troubles, plagues, pestilences, and
sicknesses; yea, and most of all at the hour of death, when man is at the
weakest, and most unfit and unable to withstand him; when man's memory fails
him, and his senses wax dull, his body is tormented and feebled, his heart
faynteth, his wits decay, and every part of his body ceasseth to perform and
fulfill his due office: then, even then I say, most vigilant, diligent, and
busy is that foul feende to vex, trouble, disquiet, to turmoyle men, and to
work blasphemy and desperation in their hearts by laying before the eyes of
their consciences al their former sinful manner of living, and ungodly
conversation, the breach of Gods commandments, and his grievous wrath
against offenders; the unsupportable pains, and torturing torments, death,
and damnation; which, are prepared for the wicked with the Devil and his
damned Angels. The consideration of these things, and the great negligence,
carelessness, and contempt of providing remedies and physic in due time,
against this dangerous disease of Desperation, has moved me at this present,
to employ my Pen, according to that one poor talent which the Lord God has
committed unto me to the setting forth of this Treatise following, thereby to
arm and furnish poor ignorant Christians with some necessary counsel,
comfort, and spiritual physic, whereby they may become the more able and
ready in time of need, to defend themselves; yea, and to propell and drive
back their common enemy: the Devil tempting and entising to the most deadly
sin of Desperation.

These my poor labors (written both for the comfort of my self, and
strengthening of mine own Faith, and for the like good of others, if they will
for their own good, take the pains to read, consider, and accept thereof) I
your Honors poor incumbent of the medietie of the Rectorie of Ruskington in
Lincolnshire, the true and undoubted Patronage whereof lately was the Kings
Majesty's, and now is yours to dispose at your Honors good lyking, have
attempted to send forth to the view of the world under your shielding
protection, and patrocinie. And so with my humble petition for the acceptance
hereof, with that submission that best befitteth my self, and belongs to a
person of so great place, and calling, I humbly lake my leave.

At Ruskington in Lincolnshire this first of November. 1604. Your Hon. ever
ready to be commanded in all Christian duty, William Willimat.

A PREFACE TO THE Christian Reader.
IT is a wonder of the world, a wonder to be seriously marked, and diligently
considered of; and a wonder being seriously marked, and diligently considered
of, worthy to be deeply waighed, and inwardly to be laid up in men's hearts as
a thing most necessary, profitable, and available to Christian piety, and
everlasting felicity both of soul and body, The first thing to be wondered a^
and seriousl^ to be cons^dered of.
to see and to think of it, how careful, watchful, diligent, earnest, and
painful, almost all the world every where is to avoid, to prevent, to cure,
and to remedy, all such troubles, crosses, griefs, maladies, infirmities, and
sicknesses, as do or may befall the body: And on the other side to see, or
find so few watchful, careful, and painful to avoid, prevent, cure, or
expel the most dangegerous wounds of the spirit, the troubles of the
conscience, or Desperation; a mischief of al other mischiefs, most needful
to be looked unto.

^he second thing to be ^onored at, (...) seriously (...) be con^^dered of.
It is a wonder to see, and consider, how many there are in the world which
either loath and are afraid of bodily sickness, or love and likes health,
will send for and seek, run and ride after bodily Physicians, and enquire
after the best, the most expert and most skillful of them, to learn by their
direction, and to be advised by their counsel (though it cost their pursse
full dear) how to purge and avoid such corrupt humors as may breed (though
not presently bring forth) noisome diseases, and sicknesses: how careful and
how scrupulous they are to keep a temperate order and a diet in eating and
drinking: and how moderate they will be in sleep, and all other bodyly
exercises: And on the other side, how few there be in the world that will
either abate their sleep, for-goe their pleasures, abridge their dyets, or
seek after the spiritual Physician or prepare physic to purge and expel
those dangerous and peccant humors, of notorious and heinous sins, which in
time will both breed and bring forth the most deadly disease of Desperation,
the very Peste of soul and body for ever.

It is a wonder to see, The third thing to be wondered at.
how many abhor, and are afraid of worldly poverty, and for the avoiding
thereof, and for the love and liking of transitory riches, will with great
carke and care rise up early, and late take their rest: they will fare hardly,
and go clad full barely: they will hazard both bodies and souls; they will
toil and tear their flesh in unmeasurable labors by land and sea, be the
weather fair, be it foul, per mare pauperiem fugientes, per saxa, perignes:
And yet on the other side, how few can abide any costs, charges, or pains, to
escape and remedy spiritual decays: to avoid poverty of conscience, or in
time before it be too late, to beware that they be not plunged ere they be
aware into the most deadly and devilish gulf of Desperation; as though
salvation, and peace of a godly conscience, were a matter not worthy the
talking of, or laboring for.

A thing to be lamented.
It is a lamentable thing to behold, how many in the world will undertake and
attempt any thing, be it never so chargeable and troublesome, not sluggish not
sleepie; not careless and slothful, but most earnest and watchful, most
careful and painful, at every assay; by prudence and prowess, by wit and
by wariness, by counsel and by cunning, by learning and by laboring;
ambitiously to hunt, gain, and gape after honor, and vnfatigablye seek to
attain fame, and highly account of it to be gazed on, and talked of, with the
eyes and tongues of all men: And again, how few take any cate at all, or once
endeavor themselves to avoid shame, and confusion in the presence of the
Almighty, to become glorious in the sight of God and his Angels, and to use
and exercise any of those good means and instruments ordained and appointed
of God for the increase of Faith, Hope, and Charity; and for the weakening and
abandoning of all desperation and diffidence in Gods infinite mercies, and
infallible promises.

It is a lamentable thing to mark and consider how vigilant, careful, The
second thing to be lamented.
and heedfull many of the wyser, and circumspecter sort of men of this world
will be to escape, and avoid, all the penalties, pains, and punishments,
provided and set down, for offenders of mortal men's laws; how painful they
will be in Penal Statutes, and how skillful in every branch of the Civil
Laws, least they should ignorantly incur the dangers of imprisonment, of
loss of lands, forfeytures of their goods, or death it self.

Many have greater ca^e of mortal men's laws ^hen of Gods laws.
But the mighty God, the only highest Lawgiver, that Lord of Lords, and King
of all Kings; Let him ordeyne, publish, and proclayme his Laws, Statutes, and
Ordinances, to be harkened unto, observed, and kept, and that under never so
rigorous and seueere conditions, punishments, and penalties, How few men will
search his Book of Statutes and Laws? How few are afraid of his not
temporary, but everlasting threatninges and punishments, contained in his
Laws? and how few men regard, esteem, an^ thankfully embrace his covenant of
Reconciliation, set forth in his most joyful, and comfortable Gospel?

And yet most certain it is, that all these aforesaid things, so much to be
wondered at, and so greatly to be lamented for; so lightly looked on, so smally
regarded, and so little thought on, and many such other of the like fraternity
and order of disorders, and sins, being delighted in, and securely continued
in, without all care or endeavor to forsake them in time, by repentance, and
true returning to the Lord, do first breed and engender, and afterward bring
forth Desperation; then the which, all the ^uries, and Devils in hell, can not
lightly excogitate nor find out a greater torment, or a more intolerable
pain, and that because that all other torments, penalties, and pains, are
but temporal, and pursue men no further then bodily death: but this ends not
with bodily death, but becomes eternal. Whosoever then he be, that is once
surely caught in this net of Desperation, he needs no more accusers to come
against him, then his former unrepented sins, which lie at the door to
arrest him; his own heart will give evidence against him, and his own
iniquity will plead him to be guilty, and that to his own face.

Upon consideration of these things, I have now in this Treatise following,
(good Christian Reader) endeavored my self to set down, First, a definition
of Desperation; then the greeuousnesse thereof: after this, certain principal
causes thereof; together with remedies for the same: and lastly, a general
Preservative against Desperation, arysing of what cause so ever: To the intent,
that the children of God, falling by some occasions into some degrees of it,
(for if it rage in extremities, in the opinion of some learned Writers, it is
an evil incurable, and unrecoverable) may with the more ease and quietness be
recovered, and saved as it were out of the Devils claws; even out of as great
danger as ever was the poor Sheep that David took out of the Bears or Lions
mouth. 1. Sam 17.34 35.


Accept hereof (gentle Reader) with no worse a mind, then I have attempted to
be the writer; and then I doubt not, but it shall either minister unto thine
heart some comfortable Physic, or else give thee occasion to seek, read, or
collect a better.

Thine in all christian affection, W. W.

The Contents of this Book, entreated of in every several Page as follows.
A Definition of every thing which is to be disputed, or reasoned of, is
necessary, and wherefore. Page. 1. The Definition of Desperation of two sorts.
Page. 1. and 2. Two kinds of Desperation: the one wicked, the other good and
holy. Page. 3. Three things especially to be noted in the Treatise of
Desperation. Page. 4. God is constant and faithful: and how, and wherein.
Page. 4. The duty of the faithful toward God, in regard of Gods
faythfulnes toward him. Page. 5. The horriblnes of the sin of Diffidence,
Mistrust, or Desperation. Page. 5. When especially the Devil deginneth to
tempt to Desperation. Page. 6. What kind of Physic and surgerie the Devil
practices. Page. 7. The absurd dealings of such as yield to desperatio^. Page.
8. What great inconveniences they fall into, that yield to Desperation. Page.
8. Saint Bernard his opinion concerning the heinousness of the sin of
Desperation. Page. 9. Scilla and Charybdis not so dangerous as Desperation.
Page. 9. The dangers of Desperation. Page. 10. and 11. Of the degrees by which
the Devil draws men into Desperation. Page. 13. The Devil the chief cause
of Desperation. Page. 13. The forerunners of Desperation. Page. 14. What the
Devil will obict to bring us to desperatio^. Page. 15. Ignorance the second
cause of Desperation Page. 16. Ignorance the mother of Desperation. Page. 17.
Servitude or bondage of sin, the third cause of Desration. Page. 17. The
woeful effects of sinne^. Page. 18. The fourth cause of Desperation. Page. 18.
The manifold adversaries of man's salvation: all which the Devil uses as
means to Desperation, Page. 19. The fifth cause of Desperation. Page. 20. and
21. The sixth cause of Desperation. Page. ^2. Long custom grows into a second
nature. Page. 22. The first preservative against Desperation. Page. 88. An
example showing that many men put more trust in mortal men then in God. Page.
89. An other proof, that many put more trust in mortal man then in God. Page.
90. The second general help against Desperation. Page. 91. The third general
help against Desperation. Page. 92. What soever could be looked for at Gods
hands, or what soever man could be charged with, that has Christ performed.
Page. 93. The fourth general help for the avoiding of Desperation. Page. 94.
The fifth general help against Desperation. Page. 95. Saint Paul and S. James
their counsel against the temptations and assaults of Satan. Page. 24. A
description of the armor with which S. Paul would have Christians to resist
the Devil Page. 25. The first kind of Armor to resist the Devil with. Page.
25. The second kind of Armor wherewith the Devil is to be resisted. Page. 25.
Whereby the Devil is imboldned to tempt, and whereby on the other side he is
discouraged. Page. 26. The third kind of Armor against Satan. Page. 27. The
fourth Armor against Satan. Page. 28. What Faith is. Page. 29. The fifth kind
of Armor to resist the Devil. Page. 29. Christ himself an example how to
resist the devil. Page. 30. The Scriptures do minister store of Armoure against
every kind of temptation. Page. 31. The sixth kind of Christian Armor. Page.
32. Remedies against Ignorance. Page. 34. The dangers of wilful Ignorance.
Page. 35. What the Ignorant must do. Page. 35. Counsel very necessary for the
Ignorant. Page. 36. What the Ministers of Gods word are. Page. 36. How the
Ministers of Gods word are to be accounted of. Page. 37. Of the great servitude
and bondage of sins, and of the remedies thereof. Page. 3^. Examples tending
to the strengthening of our Faith, Hope, and Patience against, Desperation.
Page. 39. and 40. Wherefore Christ came into this world. Page. 41. 42. and 43.
What manner of righteousness God requires at our hands. Page. 45. Sin
dwells even in the believers, and in the most righteous in the world; but yet
reigns not, neither can it condemn them, and why. Page. 46. and 47. Places
of Scripture setting forth Gods great mercy. Page. 49. A Catalogue or
rehearsal of many things whereby the Devil craftily tempts many men to
sin and Desperation. Page. 50. How the Devil tempts by riches. Page. 50.
How the Devil tempts by poverty. Page. 51. How the Devil tempts by
friends. Page. 51. How the Devil tempts by enemies, Page. 52. How the
Devil tempts by carfulness. Page. 52. How the Devil tempts by security
and carelessness. Page. 52. How the Devil tempts by strength, by health,
ableness of body, beauty; by honor and dignie, by quickness of spirit, and
sharpness of wit. Page. 5^. and 53. How the Devil tempts by Gods word, and
how he will abuse, wrest, and misapply Gods word. Page. 53. and 54. The true
use of those Scriptures which the Devil seeks to abuse, to bring men to
Desperation thereby. Page. 55. The comfort and commodities of the crosses and
afflictions of Gods children. Page. 57. and 58. Why God sends euilles to his
children, and how he sends comforts in the midst of evils. Page. 59. How
God loves, and deals with his children. Page. 60. Gods rods of what sort
they are. Page. 61. What God seeks to work by dealing hardly with his
children. Page. 62. Gods affection to his children like unto a kind loving
mothers affection. Page. 63. and 64. God deals with his children as
Physicians and Surgions do with their Patientes. Page. 66. God uses sometimes
the service and ministry of Devils and of wicked men. Page. 67. The wicked
are not be^ered by their troubles and afflictions. Page. 67. Whence it comes
that afflictions and crosses profit Gods children. Page. 67. The conceits and
opinions of the wicked in their adversities and troubles. Page. 68. and 69. The
ends that the Devil bringes the wicked unto by their afflictions, troubles
and crosses. Page. 70. Two commodities to be reaped by the lives, and manner of
the deaths of the wicked. Page. 71. The great danger of custom of sin, and
of delaying of amendment of life. Page. 71. and 72. A comparison showing the
danger of long custom and weltering in sin. Page. 72. and 73. Whence
repentance and amendment of life are to be had, and how they are to be come
by. Page. 74, Many are and may be deceived in the manner and time of their
repentance. Page. 75. A note for such as defer repentance unto their last
day. Page. 75. Examples showing that it is dangerous trusting unto the last
hour. Page. 76. Notable examples of sudden and unprovided death, out of holy
Scriptures and other writers. Page. 76. 77. 78 79. A catalogue or rehearsal of
sundry lets and impedimentes which oftentimes fall out when we come to our last
hour, to hinder and put by that late repentance, which so many trust to at the
end of their lives. Page. 81. and 82. The effects of choler in time of
extreme sickness. Page. 82. The manner how the Devil will busy himself to
hinder repentance at our last pant. Page. 83. The example of Joseph of
Arimathea most worthy to be imitated. Page. 85. The use and custom of the
Egiptians to bridle evil actions. Page. 86. The notable and imitable example
of King Ezechias. Page. 86.
FINIS.
Of Desperation.
CHAPTER. I.
The first Chapter containing the Definition, and Division of Desperation.

M. T. Cicero, that most worthy Father of the Roman eloquence, was of that
mind, A definition o^ every thing which is to be disputed or reasoned of, is
necessary, and wherefore.
that every thing which was to be reasoned and disputed of, should first begin
at the Definition thereof, that so it might briefly be understood what the
substance of the matter was, whereof reasoning or disputation was to be
holden: Of the like opinion and mind am I at this present, concerning the
dangerous peste of most wicked and damnable Desperation; being the matter which
now I have in hand (through Gods assistance) to write of.

Definition of D^speration is of two sorts.
The Definition then of Desperation, I find and read to be of two sorts as
concerning the words, and yet in sense, and substance of matter little
differing one from the other: The first Definition of Desperation
Whereof the one is, Desperatio est horribilis mertis and c^rdis seu
conscientiae trepidatio ex sensu irae diuinae propter peccatum concepta cum
metu aeternae damnacionis sine vlla expectatione veniae: Desperation is an
horrible fear, or trembling of the mind and heart or conscience, conceived
through a sense and feeling of Gods wrath for sin; with a fear of eternal
damnation, without all expectation or hope of pardon or forgiveness thereof.

The second Definition of Desperation.
The other (which is a far more ancient Definition) is this, Desperatio est
malum quo quis diffidit de voluntate dei, aestimans malitiam suam magnitudinem
diuinae mis^ricordiae and bonitatis excedere: Desperation is an evil through
which a man mistrusteth dispaireth utterly, and is past all hope of the good
will of God, verily thinking that his naughtiness, or sins, excel the
mercies and goodness of God; according to that saying of the f^rst desperate man
Cain; Genesis 4.13.
Mine iniquity is greater then can be pardoned. Genes. 4.13.

Thus it being made plain and easy what Desperation is, by these aforesaid
Definitions, it follows in the next place, (to proceed after the same order
that the said Cicero used) that I speak of division of Desperation; which I
likewise find and read to be of two kinds: Two kinds of Desperation: the one
wicked, the other holy.
the one a wicked kind of Desperation of Gods promises, power, goodness, and
mercy toward sinners, the matter which here I am to entreat of: The other
an holy Desperation of a man's own power in the obtaining of eternal life,
conceived and wrought by a sense or feeling of a man's own defectes,
infirmities, and corruptions. Concerning this former kind of Desperation, being
especially the mark which I would have poor silly distressed souls to have a
diligent and a watchful eye unto, to the intent that both my self, and my
poor brethren, living and warring yet with me in the militant Church of
Christ here on earth, may be the better forewarned (for that as the say Tela
praeuisa minus nocent) of this most subtle and deadly strat^geme, concerning
this most dongerous and fatal assaulting engine, of the arch-enemie of our
souls, this deep Despair, and devilish soule-poyson, I have thought good by
the penning of this short Treatise, to put my self and others in remembrance
of these three points; Three things especially to be noted in th^s Treatise of
Desperation.
to wit, first of the haynousnhsse, greeuous^esse, and perniciousnesse of
Desperation. Secondly, of the causes thereof: and thirdly of the remedies.

CHAP. II.
The second Chapter, wherein is described how heinous grievous, hurtful, and
pernicious, the sin of Desperation is.

IN sundry and manifold places of holy Scriptures are we taught, 1. Cor. 1.9.
2. These. 3.3. 1 John. 1.9.
that God is faithful: faithful in his words, and true in all his promises:
All the promises of God are Yea and Amen: 2 Cor 1.20. God is constant and
faithful, and how, or wherein. Revel 15.3. 2. Cor. 6.1^.
Faithful in his mercies, for they never fail: Faithful, just and true, are
his ways; according to the Song of the holy Angels, Reave. 1.5.3. Yea moreover,
God is careful for the Faithful, and has promised to be their God, and they
shall be his people. It is thy duty therefore, o man! to do God this honor,
to believe without all wavering, doubting, or despayring; that God has both
Power and Will to do all things that he promises, The duty of the faithful
toward God in regard of gods faythfulnes toward him.
and not to permit any such cogitations, thought, or conceit, once to enter
into thine heart, as that God should prove himself a liar; or that it shall
not come to pass, which he has promised. But if thou once suffer the distrust
and diffidence in Gods promised mercies (through the multitude of thy sins,
and the greeuousnesse of thine offenses, through the nature of sin it self
and the crafty ingestion and suggestion of Satan) to take hold of, and
possess thine heart: O horrible and grievous is this last sin of Despayring,
which thou addest to thy former sins. The horriblenes of the sin of
diffidence, mistrust, or desperation.
So heinous, so hurtful and pernicious, is this thy sin of Diffidence and
Distrust in Gods mercies to be obtained, according to his promised Word, that I
may say of thee, as S. Augustine said of Judas the traitor, Aug. in Lib. de
vtiliti to paenitentia agendae.
Non tam sc^lus quod comm^sisti, quam indulgentiae desperatio facit te penitus
interi^e: Not so much the sin which thou have done, as thy despai^e of
forgiveness, has utterly cast thee away. Surely Judas his despair and distrust
(according to S. Augustine his opinion) was a more grievous sin, then his
treason in the betraying of his Master. Whereunto agrees S. Iero. Magis
inquit offendit deum Judas in hoc quod desperando seipsum suspendit, quam in
hoc quod deum tradidit. Desperatio enim reddit hominem maledictum, and
protectione dei indignum. Ier. super Psalm. 108.
Judas (says S. Jerome) more offended God herein, that in despair he hanged
himself, then in that he betrayed his Lord and Master: For Desperation makes
a man accursed, and unworthy Gods protection. And thus likewise Cain his
despayring in Gods mercy after his murder committed, was a more grievous
sin, then the shedding of his brother Abel his blood: For to add Despair to
former sins, is to draw sin after sin as it were with Cartroopes, to
heap sin upon sin, to fulfill the measure of iniquity, and so to purchase
swift and most certain damnation. It is in deed the fashion and old wont of
Satan, When especially the Devil begins to tempt to despair.
to persuade man (when he has once committed many heinous sins) after his
other sins, to Despair, and so to commit the greater sin after the lesser:
which is as much as if an unlearned ignorant and a murdering Physician should
cause his Patient for the remedying of a little cold taken, to drink the juice
of Hemlocke, which by adding cold to cold, is most sure to bring present death:
Or as if a man having an Ach in one of his fingers, should cut off the whole
hand to take away the Ach of a finger. Even such like Physic and Surgery does
the Devil practice to minister unto lewd and wilful sinners, Note what kind
of physic and surgerie the Devil practices.
when he entiseth and draws them after many precedent heinous sins, through
despair of finding mercy and forgiveness to shorten their lives, by killing
and murdering themselves, by poisoning, by stabbing, by throat-cutting, by
drowning, by Iudas-like hanging of themselves; and finally by casting off all
use of Faith, all use of Hope, and so quite to despair of Gods mercy: then
the which, what can be a more dangerous course for any man to yield unto? What
can be more foolish or contrary to all reason, if a man's reason were not
blinded and bewitched that he could not see nor perceive, nor consider well of
it, then whiles a man is afraid of water, presently to cast himself headelong
into it, and so seeingly and wittingly to drown himself? The ol sur^
d^alinges of such as ea^^ly yield to desperation.
or then whiles a man is afraid of fire, presently to run into it and to
dispatch himself therein? Or whiles a man is afraid of hell fire, out of hand
most desperately to plunge himself into the dangers thereof?

And yet such as these are the persuasions, and temptations of the Devil, to a
man whole barking conscience continually pangeth and plagueth him for his
sins.

Such as these are the fruits of the most monstrous sin of Desp^aring of
Gods mercy and grace.

May not he be accounted worse the^ mad, that is to forward and ready to yield
unto, Mark this o man, le^st thou yield to desp^^^tion before thou be awa^e
wh^t great incon^^^^^^ces thou y^^ld^ (...).
and to follow after the Devils whistle, alluring and entising unto
desperation, seeing it is no means to diminish, but to increase sin, and the
rewards of sin; seeing that it is no relief, but an everlasting burden and
grief of the soul^ seeing that it is not a delivery of the soul, but a
certain destruction of the soul: seeing it is not a redemption, but an
undoubted condemnation of soul and body for ever.

And finally, seeing that it changes temporal grief into eternal grief,
and the panges of conscience into the pains of hell for ever. And thus is
verified that saying of Saint Bernard, Desperatio auget peccatum, Desperatio
mayor est omnibus peccatis, Desperatio peior est omni peccato: S. ^erbards
opinion concerning the hainousnes of the sin of desperation.
Desperation increases sin: Desperation is greater then all other sins,
Desperation is worse then all other sins.

This is a thousand times worse then the dangerous rock Scilla, against which
so many poor Mariners have dashed their Ships, Scilla and Charybdis not so
dangerous as desperation.
to the great loss both of Ships, goods, and lives: or then that no less
dangerous gulf Charybdis, which has deuowred up so many passengers: For at
this unfortunate and deadly rock of Desperation, many thousands of poor
souls, ouercharged with the burden of their iniquities, and turmoyled in
their consciences with the waves of fearful thoughts, and troublesome
conceits by the blustering blastes and surgy storms of Gods vengeance
threatened against sinners, both have and daily do make dangerous and fearful
shipwreck. This is a worse dungion for both souls and bodies of poor
desperate sinners, then was the Den of Lions into the which the Rulers,
Officers, and Governors of King Darius caused Daniel to be cast, Dan. 6.17.
and closed up: Yea, and this is seven times worse then the seuentimes hoated
burning Oven or Furnace, Dan. 3.19.
into the which that proud Idolatrous King Nabuchadnezzar commanded Sidrach,
Misa^h, and Abean^go, the true Servants and worshippers of the only true and
everliving God, to be cast in. This is that incurable remediless, and
desperate sore wound and m^ladie, which the Prophets of God Jeremy and
Micheas, Ierem. 3. Mich. 1.
in their days complained of among their people. This is that great stop and
let that hinders and resists Gods holy Grace from flowing and entering into
die souls of sinful men. This is the Axe that heaweth and choppeth a sunder
the Chains wherewith God in his great mercy and merciful kindness, would
draw the hearts of sinners unto himself by Repentance; Ozeas. 11.
whereof speaks the Prophet Ozeas. Trust in the Lord, and do good, Psalm.
37.3.
says the holy Glost by the Prophet David: where he places and sets trust
in God in the first place, and doing good in the second: trusting in God, goes
before as the Mistress, and doing good, follows and attends on as the
Hand-mayde. For as it is said, Spes alit agricolas, were it not for Hope, the
Husband man's heart would burst; Hope nowrisheth his heart: Even so Despair and
Diffidence, or distrust in God, is a Stepmother to well doing, and draws
back from doing good; according to the saying of a learned Writer upon the
said 37. Psalm, Musculus in Psalm. 37.3.
Desperatio and diffidentia abstrahit ab omni studio boni, nam cogitat omnia
fieri frustra: ita namque ex spe and fiducia promanant mortaliu^ conatus, vt ex
ipsis cenatibus satis liqueat quid quisque sperat: Desperation draws men
back from all well doing, and why.
Desperation and Mistrust draws back from all desire of well doing, for it
thinks all to be but lost labor: for so do all men's labors and endeavors
flow and spring from Hope and Trust, that every man's doings do plainly
testify what he hops or trusts for.

And now let this suffize briefly to give a taste how great and grievous
hurtful and pernicious this sin of Desperation is.

CHAPTER. III.
The third Chapter containing the chiefest and most principal causes of
Desperation.

THat memorable and notable saying of S. Gregory in one of his Homilies,
moves me to think, and here to commit it to writing, that one cause of
Desperation, and not the least, but rather the primarie and principal cause of
all other, aryseth from the subtle, cunning, and cosoning counsel,
inducement, persuasion, and allurement of the Devil: for says S. Grigorie,
Gre^. in qu^dam (...).
Qu^m in graui peccato miser homo libitur: si^ idet ei diabolus ne poe^iteat,
ne confi^^atur, peccatum leave et modicum in cord^ affirmat: misericordiam
praedicat, lo^gum spacium vitae promittit, permanere in peccato suggerit, vt
sic in contemtum dei, and desperationem sui inducat and pereat: When wretched
man slippeth into some grievous sin, the Devils counsel is, that he repent
not at all for it, that he confess it not: he tells him in his heart, The
degrees by which the Devil draws men on into desperation.
that it is but a light and small offense: he says, God is full of mercy, he
promises him long life, he suggesteth unto him to lie still in sin, that by
these means he may bring him at the last into contempt of God, and into utter
Desperation, and so he may become a castaway for ever. Here does S. Gregory
in most manifest and plain words describe, and decipher the Devil himself
to be the author, and so consequently the chiefest causer, and cause, of this
horrible soul murdering Disperation; and here also does he set down by what
steps and degrees he bringes and leads a poor careless wretched man into
Despair.

Now consider this moreover, that if Satan that archenemie of man's welfare,
Job. 1.
durst very boldly and sawcely without any bidding, presume to thrust himself
into Gods presence amongst his holy Angels; if he durst so subtelly and
cunningly, dissemblingly and lyingly, assail and assault our first Parents
Adam and Eve, being yet innocents, Genesis 3.
unstained, and pure from all sin: Nay more then all this, if he durst
approach, and with diverse temptations assault and allure Christ Jesus himself,
Math. 4.3.
both God and Man; and yet Man free from any spot or blemish of sin,
endeavoring himself to the uttermost of his skill and power, if it had been
passible, to have brought him, and wrought him to his own wicked will. Alas,
is it any marvel then if he do as diligently and busily bestirre himself
with his manifold wyles, and guyles, to assail us weak, poor, and miserable
sinners? Who (without the daily and howerly strenghthening of Gods holy spirit)
are of ourselves prompt, apt, and ready, every hour to decline and fall away
from God, The forerunners of desperation, except we look to our selves in
time.
and to fall unto Idolatry, blasphemy, perjury, murder, whoredom, theft,
pride, disobedience, and what not; wherein, after we be once plunged over head
and ears, and ouerrunne with the guylt of many sins, then will Satan lay
about him, and apply his business like a most valiant Champion, to catch us in
the most dangerous snare of all other, even deep Despair: He will challenge
our souls by the severe justice of God, let us say against him whatsoever we
can, and argue against him as long as we will, yet will he insult, rejoice, and
reply, saying: Neither Gods mercies, nor Christ's merits, can any thing help,
but thou must needs be damned, so lightly heretofore have thou esteemed God,
and his precepts; What the Devil will object against us, to bring us to
despair.
so smally have thou regarded Christ Jesus and his merits, or rather so
willingly, wittingly, and seeingly, have thou vilipended, and contemned them;
and so obstinatly, carelessly, and desperately, trodden them under foot, that
even as thou hitherto have made no reckoning of God, and have not opened the
door of thy heart to receive him, and give him entertainment when he stood
without and knocked to be letten in there; so now God will requite thee with
legetalionis, with like for like: he will make no reckoning of thee, he will
not open his ears unto thee when thou cryest unto him, he will not let thee
have though thou ask, he will not let thee find though thou seek, he will
not open unto thee though thou knock. Behold now art thou tossed like waves of
the Sea, thy Faith wauereth between Hope and Dread, and therefore can thou
receive nothing at the Lords hands: with these and infinite such like
disputations, will Satan set upon, and vex the very elect of God, to bring
them (if it were possible) to Desperation. And if the elect shall be thus
sitted, (as Peter was) in what case then shall the wicked and reprobate be?

CHAPTER. IIII.
The second cause of desperation.
THe second cause of Desperation, is ignorance of God, and want of knowledge of
the will of God, unto mankind revealed by his holy word: for as ignorance of
the Scriptures, Math 22.
as it was pronounced by the mouth of Christ Jesus himself speaking against
the Saduces, 2 king. 17.26 psalm. 35.10 11 Prou. 28.29.30.31. Esa. 1.34. Ho^e.
47. Ephesians. 4.18.
concerning the resurrection of the dead, was the cause of that their so great
error; Even likewise the ignorance of God, is oftentimes the occasion and
cause of Gods heavy displeasure; and so of diverse and sundry inconveniences
and mischiefs: Bern. super Cant.
and among the rest, it is also a cause of this cursed Desperation, as writes
S. Barnard: Vtraque cognitio dei scilicet et tui, tibi necessaria est ad
salutem, quia de ignorantia tui venit superbia, ac de dei ignorantia venit
desperatio. The knowledge both of God, and of thy self are necessary unto
salvation, because out of the ignorance of thy self, aryseth pride; and
likewise out of the ignorance of God, comes Desperation. Out of this
ignorance of God, must Desperation needs arise: Ignorance the mother of
Desperation.
for how can it otherwise be, but that he that is altogether without any
knowledge of God, must despair to receive any good thing of him? For as no man
can take pleasure nor any profit by hid and unknown Treasure: so no man can
look for grace, mercy, and forgiveness of sins, or any other benefit or
good gift at his hands, of whom he is utterly ignonoraunt, and of whom he has
no knowledge.

CHAPTER. V.
THe third Cause of Desperation is the great servitude or bondage of sin: The
third cause of desperation.
with which, who soever is clogged, he becomes thereby the Servant of sin;
John 8.34. And the woeful and hurtful effects of sins, are the procurements
of Gods cursses and plagues upon bodies, The woeful and hurtful effects of
sins.
souls, lands, children, stock, croppe, and every thing else that a man has,
or goes about, at home or abroad, in town or in field, in city or in
country, by land or by Water. Deuteronomy 28. Leuit. 26. Sin hardens the heart.
Heb. 3.13. It fights against the Soul. 1. Pet. 2.11. It gnaweth and
tormenteth the conference. 1 Samuel 25.31. And so brings men into the most
damnable gulf of Desperation, wherein multitudes of Worldlinges,
Matcheuillians, ^picures, and impious Atheistes are daily implunged, and
irreuocably drowned for ever.

CHAPTER. VI.
The fourth ca^se of desperation.
THe Fourth cause of Desperation do many gather to themselves upon the words of
Christ in Math. 7.13. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads
unto life, and few there be that find it. And again out of Math 20.16. Many
are called, but few are chosen. And again out of Luke 13.24. S^r^ e to enter
in at the strait gate, for many, Lay unto you, will seek to enter in, and
shall not be able: All which places do plainly teach, that few shall be saved;
for in bidding to strive to enter in, Christ gives us to understand that it is
not an easy matter, but a matter that requires great strife, pains, and
earnest diligence against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

Upon these considerations, The fear and doubt of many.
many begin to fear, and to tremble, to stagger, and to doubt, whether they
may think themselves to be in the number of those few that shall be s^^ed yea or
no^ and so are drawn into Despair, whiles that they find this present evil
world against them with all the baytes, snares, ne^^es, and lettes, pleasures,
and profits thereof, to catch them, letter them, and entangle them, whiles
they find their own flesh, The great and manifold aduersari^s to man's
salvation, all which the Devil uses as means to drawmen into desperation.
their own corrupted nature against them; their reason poisoned, their wills
and affections blinded, their natural wisdom, concupisences, and lusts,
ministering strength to Satan's temptations, taking part againg them, daily and
howerly ready to betray them into his hands, whiles that they see and perceive
even legions of Devils, even all the Devils in Hell against them, with all
their crafty heads, marvelous strength, infinite wiles, cunning devises,
deep sleightes, and tried temptations, lying in ambushe against their poor
souls; and who sees not that thousands are carried hedlong to destruction
through the temptations of either the world, the flesh, or the Devil. And thus
are we poor wretches in a most pitiful case assaulted and betrayed, on every
side.

CHAPTER. VII.
The fifth cause of desperation.
THe fifth cause of Desperation aryseth from the manifold crosses and afflictions
of this present life: for from hence it is that some men being daily ferrited,
followed on, and even almost pressed down with temporal afflictions and
troubles, Sundry kinds of crosses and afflictions.
as penu^^e, poverty, hunger, nakedness, sickness of body, troubles of mind,
unquiet suggestions of the flesh, temptations of the Devil, persecutions,
imprisonments, loss of friends, loss of goods, loss of good name and fame,
a wicked, crooked, and froward mate in matrimony, disobedient and untoward
children, unkind and unthankful friends, undeserved malice, envy, and hatred
of froward neighbors, and many other such like crosses, as daily in one sort
or other befall men: When they once feel them selves touched and tried
herewith, anon they take occasion hereby to cry out, and lamentably to howl,
Ierem. 20.
and curse the day wherein they where borne, to call that an unhappy hour
wherein their mothers brought them forth, Ierem. 15.
to wish they had died in their birth, Job. 3.
and that they had perished so soon as they came out of their mothers womb;
that some hill might fall upon them and ouerwhelme them, that so they might
shortly be rid out of their pains: Yea they will not be persuaded that these
things are sent of God (for the most part) to such as he loves, but rather to
such as he hates; and that never a loving Father will handle his children so
as they are handled. Now the Devil most subtly lying in wait for his
advantage, takes hold on this their weakness, and strives by little and
little by such occasions as these to work utter desperation in them; and by
these means oftentimes forces some to some sudden, wretched, and desperate
ends.

CHAP. VIII.
The sixth cause of desperation.
THe Sixth cause of Desperation is long custom of sin, whereby a man yields
and submits himself as an obedient and ready bondslaue to the Devil,
little respecting, if not utterly contemning both God and his word, whose dull
conscience through giving himself over to impuritie and filthiness of life,
is waxed hard in iniquity, and corrupt ways, and as it were burned with a
hot Iron, so that he is now past all sense and feeling of sin, and this long
custom grows as it were into a second nature (in process of time) which to
expel is a matter of great difficulty. Long custom: ^o with into a second
nature.
This is it which the Prophet Ierem. meant, where he affirmed that it is as
hard a thing for such to do any good that have been continually inured with
doing of evil, as it is to wash a Blacka-Moore or Ethiopian skin white: or
to change the spots of a Leopard: And therefore according to our English
adage, as that which is bred in the bone, will never lightly out of the flesh:
so an old wo^t or long custom of any vice, be it of lying, swearing, gaming,
drinking, whooring, or any other such like, will seldom or never be remedied:
whereby it oftentimes comes to pass, that in the end the Devil by this
means having laid a foundation so sitting his purpose to work on, brings
his old customers to despair.

CHAPTER. I.
The first Chapter concerning the Remedies against the temptations and
assaults of Satan, being the first spe^i^^l cause of Desperation, before
intre^^ed of in Chap. 3.

TO meet with the dangerous and manifold temptations of Satan, that great
enemy of mankind, wherewith he continually after other sins first
committed, laboreth to bring us into the deep gulf of Desperation; It shall
not be amiss, nay rather it shall be our best course and remedy, to learn
and practice that most sure, safe, and excellent counsel, which the holy
Ghost gives by those two worthy Apostles of our Savior Christ S. Paul and
S. Iam^s: Ephesians. ^ Iam. 4.
whereof S. Paul says, Saint Paul (...) S. I^mes (...) cou^^^^ ^^^^nst the
temptations and a^ ^^kes of Satan.
Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
assaults of the Devil etc S. James says, Resist the Devil, and he will slay
from you: that is to say, we must strive against all unlawful and forbidden
lusts by which he eggeth, draws, and haleth men from sin to sin, from
bad to worse, and finally to Desperation, the worst of all sins.

Had Cain thus resisted the Devil, he had never been so far drawn (as he was)
from faythlesse hypocrisy, to envy; from envy to murder, and from murder
to Desperation. Had Judas the traitor thus re^^^^^^d the Devil when he by his
entisement first yielded to covetousness, and so for a little filthy lu^re to
betray his most loving, gentle, and kind Lord and master, he had not from
those sins one in the neck of an other finally fallen into despair, wherein
he became his own hangman, to the everlasting testimony of his own damnation.

Full worthy therefore, and very needful in this case, is S. James his
counsel, (...) D^^^ll. etc. yea and that in the beginning.

And S. Paul goes further on with the like good counsel, A description of
the manner of armor wherewith Saint Paul would have Christians to resist the
Devil.
and sets down very plainly, with what manner of Armor he would have
Christians to buckle and furnish themselves with, that so they may be found the
more ready and able to encounter their general enemies temptations: As first,
with Verity, or Truth; The first armoure to resist the Devil with.
which is in the arming of themselves with true and sinceere knowledge of God.
Tit. 1.1. In the true service of God without hypocrisy, in Spirit and truth.
Joshua. 24.14. Ioh. 4.24. 3. Kin. 2.4. And likewise with upright true speaking
and dealing with our neighbors, in word and deed. Ephesians. 4.25. Exodus 23.1.

Secondly, The second kind of armoure wherewith the Devil is to be resisted.
with the Breast Plate of righteousness: that is, with the earnest applying
and endeavoring of our selves to all virtue and godliness in our lives and
conuersations: Where note, that the Apostle having placed Verity, Truth, or
true knowledge of God, in the first place: in very fit and good rank and
order, he placed this Righteousness; that is to say, practice of true
knowledge in holiness of life in the second place; as a godly Father hereupon
has very well observed in these words: Vera dei cognitione and animi
sinceritate, and puritate primum, deinde pia et sancta vita ^rna^ debent
Christiani milites: Christian Soldiers ought first to have their hearts and
minds decked and furnished with true knowledge of God, with true sincerity
and purity of mind; and secondly, with godly and holy life answerable to
their true knowledge. Hereby all sleightie cunning and forcible entries unto
Satan's engines and subtle snares, shall be debarred and shut up: hereby all the
passages of our thoughts and imaginations shall be prevented and taken up, that
he shall not so easily find any breach or weak place to invade. Wereby the
D^uel is emboldened to tempt, and whereby on the other side he is discouraged
and resisted.
For as on the one side, by losenes and licentiousnes of the flesh, by leawdnes
of our lives, by our iniquity and ungodliness, the Devil is an^^ated, fleshed,
and emboldened, daily to tempt and assault us: for he seeing in the corrup^ion
of our nature a forwardnes to wickedness, he blows the bellows, and
kindles the flame of our bad inclination; he stirs us up, and pricketh us
forward, till after the heaping up of one sin after an other, at the length
he casts us down headlong into the bottomless pit of Desperation: So on the
other side, by this Armor of righteousness, sincerity, and integrity of an
holy life, is the Devil withstood and resisted, and we become the more able
to stand fast in the day of our temptation: So that it is not without just
cause, that the Apostle compares this Righteou^nes, the second kind of
spiritual Armor, unto a corporal Breast Plate; for that like as a
Breast Plate saves and fenceth the vital parts of man, as his heart, liver,
and entrails; The good fruits of vprightnes, and holine^ of life.
which once being stricken and pierced, man's life is lost: so does uprightness,
and holiness of ^^e, preserve the heart and conscience of man free and safe
from the invasion and confusion wrought by Satan, from the sicrie darts of
infidelity, hardness of conscience, coldness in religion, wickedness of
life, corruption in conversation and finally from Desperation, the very vpshot
of al mischiefs.

Thirdly, The third kind of Armor for a Christian against Satan.
must we arm and furnish our selves to resist Satan the Devil, with the
Gospel of peace, that is, our hearts must be thoroughly acquainted, and fully
fraughted with the knowledge of that glad tidings of great joy, which the
Angels of the Lord brought at the birth of Christ; Luke. 2.10.
that tydinges of great joy, which must be unto all Nations, with that most
comfortable and joyful embassage of the Reconciliation of Man with God, which
may full well be called the Gospel of peace, for that it only makes the
Conscience of man quiet, and at peace with God, and it self: then the which,
what one thing in all the world, can set a man more free from all Desperation?

The fourth Armor. ^. Cor. 16.13
Fourthly, with Faith in Jesus Christ; wherewith the same S. Paul arming men
against spiritual assaults by Satan and his ministers, and preparing them to
the spiritual battle against the Devil and his members, encourages them not
to shrink, but to cleave fast to this Faith, whereby we may resist and beat
back our spiritual enemy.

And likewise S. Peter instructing us to prepare and make our selves strong, to
encounter with the common enemy the Devil, teaches us to resist him by Faith
especially: ^. Pet. 5.8
Be sober (says he) and watch, for your adversary the Devil, goes about
seeking whom he may deuowre, whom resist steadfast in the faith.

For this cause Saint Basil upon the 32. Basilius in Psalm. 32.
Psalm says, What man is able to wage war with the Devil, unless he flee
for help to the Captain of the Host through Faith in him, to wound and
thrust through his enemy?

And likewise S. Augustine accounted this Faith to be so powerful, Augu. lib
3. Cap. 20. de lib. a^bi trio
that it resists, vanquisheth, and overcomes the Devil.

And this true Christian Faith which is of such power as is aforesaid, What
faith is.
is a sure trust in the mercy of God the Father, through the merits of Christ
Jesus, when we do persuade our selves most certainelye of the pardon of our
sins through Christ's righteousness; and of eternal salvation by his passion,
hereby obtaining peace in our conscienses with God, and rest, and walk in
obedience to his will and commandments by his word unto us revealed. Of this
kind of Faith is entreated in Abac. 2.4. Romans 3.28. Romans 5.1. Ephesians. 2.8.

The fifth kind of Armor to resist the Devil with, The fifth kind of Armoure.
whereof S. Paul in the catalogue of a Christian Soldiers armor makes
rehearsal, is the Word of God: this is the Sword of the Spirit, whereby the
suggestions and wicked temptations of Satan, are beaten back, propelled, and
kept off, even as a man keeps back his enemy at the point of his Sword.

With this kind of Armor did our chief captain Christ Jesus in his manhood
here on earth, resist and put back all the Devil his subtle and false
temptations, answering every one of them with Scriptum est, It is written:
Whence we may learn by the like means, Christ him self an ex^mple^ how to
resist the Devils temptations
after his most excellent example, to combat with the D uell, and to give him
the foil, when soever by him, or any his wicked instruments, we shall be
tempted to this Desperation, or any other sins whatsouer.

If we be tempted to swear and blaspheme the holy name of God, it is to be
resisted with Scriptum est, It is written, Thou sh^lt not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain. If to pollute and break the Lords Saboath day through
either laboring about our pleasures or profits, answer, It is written
Remember that thou keep holy. etc. If to murder, and shedding of blood, by any
forbidden way or means, or upon any unlawful occasion what soever; a^swere,
It is written, Thou shall do no murder. If to steal and purloyne by any
unlawful means, directly or indiractly; answer, It is witten, Thou shall not
steal. If we be tempted to Usury, Exodus 22.25. Deuteronomy 23.19. Leuit. 25.37
Psalm. 15.5.
let us draw out this Sword of the Spirit, Thou shall not give to Usury unto
thy brother, Usury of money, Usury of meat, or of any other thing. If he
move us to deceit and fraudulent dealing, let us resist him with, It is
written, 1. These 4.5. Leuit. 25.14.
Let no man oppress or deceive his brother in bargoning, for the Lord is a
Judge in such things. If we be solicited to Disloyalty, and disobedience to
Princes, let us strive against that, with, It is written, Let every Soul be
subject to the higher powers. and. Finally to be short, Romans 13.1.2.3.
to what kind of sin, mischief, or inconvenience so ever any of us all
shall hoppen to be drawn, intised, or inueigled, The Scriptures do minister
store of swords against every kind of temptation.
let us search the Scriptures, and we shall soon find stoore of Swords, of
one kind or other to answer, foil, and recoyle, what soever this mortal
enemy of ours can use or object against us: here is armor enough to find him
occupied with.

The sixth kind of Christian armor.
The sixth kind of spiritual Armor, and heavenly furniture, wherewith Saint
Paul, or rather the Holy Ghost by Saint Paul, would have us complet and
furnished against all the dangerous combats, conflictes, and wicked suggestions
of this wicked and damned spirit, thereby to avoid, repel, and vanquish him
utterly, is devour, hearty, zealous, and godly prayer. Over and besides S.
Paul his instruction, and most needful exhortation, in this case his and our
Lord, Master, and Savior Christ Jesus, has commended unto us this kind of
weapon, when he taught to pray with this Petition, And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil. Let us then apply this Armor, this kind
of propulsatiue weapon, and fervently and heartely use it: And firmly believe
that which David the Prophet for our good encouragement has written in Psa.
145.19. God is near: to those which call upon him, and will fulfill the desire
of them that fear him, and deliver them. Whenever therefore we are tempted,
allured, and drawn on by Satan through covetousness to riches, through
ambition to honor, through envy to murder, through concupisence to adultry,
through intemperance to gluttony; or to be short through any other sin to
iniquity. Let us straight ways by prayer, crave for power and strength from
above, to overcome these temptations, and especially the most dangerous
suggestion of Despair.

This kind of Armor is always ready at hand, so that Satan can no sooner
attempt any thing against us, but this weapon is as soon ready (if we heartely
and zelously lay hold thereon) to repel and vanquish all his practices against
us: And therefore, Pray, pray, pray.

CHAP. II.
The second Chapter concerning remedies and helps against Ignorance, the
second cause of Desperation, entreated of before in Chapter. IIII.

COncerning the Second cause of Desperation, to wit, Ignorance; Our Lord Jesus
Christ who was nothing ignorant of the manifold mischiefs, and of the
manifest dangers that the Devil leads silly men into, as it were
blindfolded through blind Ignorance: and he knowing that Ignorance is rather
the mother of Desperation (as heretofore in the iiii. Chap. of the Causes of
Desperation has been sufficiently proved,) then of Devotion, as the Papists
have in this point ignorantly taught and maintainde: has in his own person,
and with his own mouth exhorted and admonished all men, John. 5.29.
to Search the Scriptures, which is a lesson in this case most necessary for
all men, to learn thereby to deliver themselves out of the dangerous gulf of
Ignorance, and so consequently out of many other sins, and finally out of
Desperation; whereinto thousands through Ignorance, have been implunged and
drowned for ever.

Remedies against Ignorance.
Let us therefore for the remedy and avoiding of final Desperation, whereunto
so many run headlong through Ignorance, little knowing, and less regarding
what they do, until it be too late, receive the word of God, which (as S.
James says) Is able to save our souls: with all readiness like unto the Noble
men of Berea, and search the Scriptures daily. Act. 17.11.
Let us seek after the knowledge of God in time, And as the Prophet Esai said,
Esai. 55.6.
Seek the Lord whiles he my be found, and call upon him whiles he is near.
The danger of wilful Ignorance.
And let us be assured of this, that all manner of Ignorance is perilous; but
wilful Ignorance, of all other is most perilous: For it is (as a learned
Writer has affirmed) a plain Prognostication, A. D. in the plain man's path
to heaven.
and a demonstratiue argument of eternal death. It is a most horrible and a
fearful thing for a man to refuse Instructions, depise Counsel, harden
their Hearts, stop their Ears, and close up their Eyes against God: this is
the very vpshot of everlasting ruin.

Let the Ignorant therefore that stand in this dangerous estate, What the
Ignorant must do.
repair with all diligence and attentiveness unto the learned Mimisters and
dispensers of Gods most sacred word, and at their mouths enquire the knowledge
of Gods Laws. This does God himself command us by the Prophet Malachie,
Malach. 4.
And when we feel our Consciences wounded, let us, after the example of the
godly, faithful, and devout people, who after the hearing of Gods word
preached, came unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles, saying, Men and
brethren, Act 2.
what sh l^ we do? Even thus I say, let us come unto Gods Ministers, Counsel
for the inorant very necessary.
and confess and acknowledge our great blindness and ignoraun^^, and say unto
them, Help us, instruct us, teach us, set us in the way, and guide us in the
paths of the knowledge of God, and of our salvation: for surely they are the
Physicians and Surgions of our souls, Wh^t the tru^ Ministers of god^ word
are.
so that if we repair unto them, they shall give us to drink of the wholesome
Waters of knowledge, to quench our thi^^t of Ignorance: they are the di p^ncers
of the mani^olde graces of God, and the Lords Stewardes to giu^ each one of us
our portions in due time.

We have not Christ always amongst us (as appertayning to his bodily
presence.) but as himself says, we have the Po re always amongst us: Even so
also we have not Christ himself (that body I mean, which sits at the right
hand of God the father) always with us: but yet our Lord Christ, ascending up
on high, gave unto men among other gifts, this gift also (if we could rightly
consider of it) of no small value, even Pastors and Doctors; that is, the
Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, that might instruct, inform, and teach us
in the way of life, that might declare unto v^ the secret counsels and hidden
mysteries of God, that might arm us with the Sword of the spirit, How the true
ministers of gods word are to be accounted of.
which is the word of God, to encounter and resist our deadly enemy the Devil
therewith. Let us joyfully receive rhem; for who so receaueth them as they
ought to be, receaueth also with them, him that sent them, whose Messengers
they are: Let us hear them, for they bring unto us the word of life: Let us
give credit unto the Lords Ministers, and Glory unto the Lord himself, that
has given in his great love this blessing unto us, to have his Messengers and
Ambassadors abiding among us, to declare and make known unto us by them, what
his own good will and pleasure is in all things, to the avoiding of this
blind Ignorance, the very mother of D^speration, and so consequently of
eternal Damnation with the author thereon, and his cursed Angels for ever.

CHAP. III.
Of the great servitude and bondage of sins, and of the remedies thereof.

Concerning the great seruitud and bondage of sin, being the third (before
noted) cause of Desperation, for the helps and remedies thereof this have I
briefly to say, that what though we have been servant unto sin, and have
been pressed, and surpressed with the bondage thereof, so that we must needs
confess, (unless we should prove our selves liars, and that there were no
truth in us) that we through our often doing of those things which we should
not have done; and on the other side, through our leaving off those things
undone which we should have done, have most justly deserved Gods threatened
cursses and plagues to light on our bodies, our souls, our children, our
stocks, our croppes, and every thing else we go about, and put our hands unto.
What though our sins fight against our souls, and gnaw our consciences, and
be ready even out of hand to lead us into the most dangerous state of
Desperation? What though we have contended and fallen out with our brethren? as
did Paul and Barnabas, Examples tending to the strengthening of our faith,
hope, and patience against Desperation.
who were so h^at in contention one against an other, that they forsook one
another company in high displeasure and heat of their stomachs, the one
taking with him Luke, the other John? What though we have yielded unto,
practiced, and followed Oppression, Extortion, polling, pilling, and wresting
what we can by hook or crook from our brethren? Luke. 19.2.
So did Zacheus, yet notwithstanding after his repentance, his forsaking and
ceassing from bad getting, his restitution, and alms giving, received that
most cheerful and comfortable saying of Christ, Luke. 19.^.
This day is salvation entered into thine house. What though we have been
Thieves, robbers and stealers of our neighbors goods? so was the Thief that
was crucified with Christ; and yet upon his humble, contrite, and sorrowful
confession of his sins, he heard this most sweet word from Christ, This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. What though we have murdered and shead the
blood, or caused the blood to be shed of some of our brethren? so did David to
Vrias, and yet upon his zealous, inward, and true unfeigned sorrowfulnes and
repentance, he was not taken away in his sin, but found pardon. And so did
the Jews which put to death the Lord of life.

King Manasses was an Idolater, he defi^ed the Temple of God, he withstood and
did beat down the truth, he set up Idolatry, 2. Kin. 21.
he was a Coniurer and a Southsayer, he shed a boundance of Innocent blood, so
that the streets flowed therewith, he committed more abominations then the
Cananites or Amorites whom for their filthinest the Lord cut off out of the
land of the living; he sacrificed his sons and daughters to Devils: and yet
upon his true returning to the Lord from the bottom of his heart, he found
favor and mercy,

2. Chro. 33.
If our sins then, or the sins of any one of us, were as grievous as ever
were the sins of Manasses, yet upon our true and unfeigned return to the
Lord, shall we despair of his mercy? shall we, or may we, or dare we think
that the mercy and power of the Lod is shortened? or that God is not the same
God he was? Is he not as ready to pardon and forgive sins, the sins of a
man repenting, returning, and faithfully calling upon him, as ever he was the
sins of Manasses?

All these examples, and many more, are written for our learning, comfort, and
strengthening of our faith; hope, and patience, that we should in no wise
despair upon our true repentance, neither for the multitude, nor greeuousnesse
of our sins.

And likewise also it is written for the brusing, and as it were even for the
breaking of the back of all damnable. Desperation, and to hold the hearts,
and to restore the faynting and dullie sprites of all such as the servitude and
bondage of sin, this our third cause of Desperation does vex and press
down: It is (I say) written, Luke 9.56.
that the Son of man is come to save men's lives. And he him self has said,
I am come to call not the just, but sinners. Math. 10. Math. 20. Ioh. 3.
Wherefore Christ can into this world.
And again, Jesus Christ is come to give his life a redemption for many. Also,
God the Father has not sent his S nne to judge the World, but to the end the
World may be saved by him.

Now what is it to save, and not to judge? but to deliver from death and
damnation; wherein we lay in the midst of the bondage of sin; for sin is
the death and damnation of the soul: Now he can not save us except sin be
first taken from us; And therefore, and for this cause came Jesus Christ the
Son of God, Ioh. 8.
and he has declared himself to the world, to the end that he should take
away sins, and should destroy the works of the Devil. If it be so that
Jesus Christ be come into the world to take away sins; and if the same were
his intent and his message, the purpose of Jesus Christ shall not fail at all,
and his message remains steadfast and true; he then without all doubt, has
taken away this which the Devil would persuade us to be a cause of
Desperation, this great servitude and bondage of sin, from all those that
trust in him, and do verily believe and persuade themselves in the bottom of
their consciences that it is most true: but yet how comes this to pass? to
wit, by Jesus Christ only, by his own free grace and mercy; by the benefits
and merits of himself, who is our only Savior, Ioh. 1.29.
without any other mean or merit; for he is the only Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world. Act. 4.12.
As also S. Peter said to the Jews, There is none other salvation, but only
in Jesus Christ; for among men there is given none other name under heaven
whereby we must be saved. And so Christ himself said after he was risen from
the dead. It must needs have been, that Christ must have suffered death, Luk
24.44.
and that he must have risen the third day from the dead, and that amendment
of life, and forgiveness* of sins must be preached in his name to all
people, and to all nations. O how sweet and comfortable are these words and
sayings of God, which is the only eternal truth in deed? O how worthy are
they to be laid up in the deapth of our hearts, and to have our whole
confidence reposed freely upon them. Colloss 2.
And to the Collossians it is said, God has quickened us which were dead in
sins with Jesus Christ, forgiving us all our trespasses, and has put out the
handwriting that was against us, he even took it out of the way, and fastened
it on the Cross. What means he by this, but only that Jesus Christ has
taken away the Obligation of our debt? to wit, that we did owe for our sins,
and has taken it and tide it with him self upon the Cross, and has in deed
paid it full bitterly: who also is for us, and will surely take away this
great servitude and bondage of sin, (which the Devil would use as an
instrument of Desperation against us) in case we will believe his word, and
that we can settle out minds, and quiet our hearts, to account and esteem his
bitter passion and merits to be so great and of such value, th^^ they are
able, effect^all, and of sufficient strength, to obtain these aforesaid
things for us. And Christ's prayer to his heavenly Father is heard, and
remains heard continually when he prayed, ^o. 17, 20.
saying, I p^^y not for these alone, (^eaning his there present Disciples) but
for them al o which shall believe in me through their word: Wherefore the
same prayer includes every one of us, so far forth as we believe, and place
the same in our hearts, and wholly repose our selves thereon.

^ct 10.42.43.
And S. Peter says, Jesus Christ has commanded us to preach unto the pe^p^e,
and to test^fie that it is he that is ordained of God a Judge of the quick
and the dead, and that to him all the Prophets give witness that through his
name all that believe, should receive remission of sins.

Moreover, S. Paul says, 2 Cor. 5.21.
God has made him which knew no sin, sin for us, to the end that we
should be made the righteousness of God in him.

And here is to be noted, What manner of righteousness God requires at our
hands.
what Righteousness, or Justice and Goodness that is, which God requires and
esteems; which is no other, but that only which dwells and holds upon
the Justice, Goodness, and Merit of Jesus Christ, being utterly ignorant of
the Justice, or R ghteousnesse and Goodness which many do seek in their own
good works.

But yet when I stand so much upon this point, to prove that our sins
should be no cause of Desperation, (a thing which the Devil greatly urges and
obiecteth against the conscience of an ignorant man) for that our sins are
taken away by the innocent Lamb Christ Jesus, that he has sufficiently pai^e
the ransom thereof, and that we are become righteous by the righteousness of I
sus Christ, it is not here my meaning, neither would I have any man so to
mistake me, and misvnderstande me, that I think, or would have any other men
to think hereby, that there is no more sin in us, or that sin dwells not
in these our mortal bodies: Sin dwells even in the believers, and in the
most righteous men in the world: but yet reigns not in them
for I confess it plainelye, and it is too true, that sin indeed dwells
in us; but yet to the great comfort of an afflicted conscience against
Desperation I affirm it (having the holy Scriptures for my teachers herein)
that although the root of sin, the naughty disposition, and inclination to
sin remains always strong in a Christian, and never can be wholly
vanquished before we put off by death, this sinful flesh of ours; although (I
say) it do dwell in us, yet it does not reign in any Christian believer; yet
it is not able to damn a true faithful believer: It can not (I say) damn us,
for as much as we are in Jesus Christ, and that we do fight and strive against
the remanent of sin, albeit we stagger and waver sometimes, and do feel and
perceive our selves to be assailed sometimes by the strong temptations of the
Devil, and the flesh. This is it that S. Paul writes of when he says, There
is now no dampnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.^.
which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.

The remaynent and root of sin dwells always in us, but we like unto
licentious worldlinges, give it not the bridle, and suffer it not to range too
far, and to take too deep a root, but we break it, tame it, and make it
subject unto us by walking after the spirit. etc. and then nothing more sure
then that there shall be no condemnation at all unto us thereby, neither any
cause of Desperation thereby, for that we are justified by our Faith and
delivered from sin; to wit, these sins which might condemn us, the root,
original, and mother of sin yet notwithstanding still abiding, remaining,
and dwelling in us; against which we war and strive, as long as we continue
in this life; but the victory remains to our Chieftaine and head-Captaine
Jesus Christ, by the law of his spirit, which makes us to live in him, and
has set us free from the right of sin and death (in such sort that we may no
more fear sin, nor death) by Jesus Christ, who has overcome all for our
wealth, and has reconciled us eternally to his Father; who as our dear
Father, from hence-foorth will show favor unto us, for the love of Ies s
Christ his dear Son, and so will take from us all our sins as though we
had never committed them: Even so does he promise, saying, Mich. 7.18.19.
God is one God, willing to show us grace and mercy, he will ^u^^e to us, and
will be favorable, and he will t ke away our iniquitus, and cast our sins
into the deapth of the Sea. And again it is said of Gods wonderful mercies,
The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, (...). 10^.8.^.10. etc.
long suffering and of great goodness: He will not always be chyding, neither
keeps he his anger for ever. He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor
rewarded us according to our iniquities: For look how ^igh the Heaven is in
compa iso^ of the Earth so great is his mercy also toward them that fear him
Look how wide also the Fast is from the West so far has he set our sins
from us. Yea, lik^ as a Father pittieth his own children, even so is the Lord
merciful unto them that ^^^^e him: For he knows whereof we be m^^e; he
remembers that we are but dust. etc.

Of the great mercies of God toward sinners, read more in Psalm. 145 8.9 and
147.8.10 and in Joel. 2.13. Math. 18 11. 2. Cor. 1 3. Places of holy
Scriptures, setting forth gods great mercies.
Ephesians 2.4. 1. Tim. 1.13. unto the 18. verse.

Surely these places are words of most rare and singular comfort, and they be
certain, sin, sure, and unchangeable, spoken and pronounced by the eternal
verity it self, and therefore not to be mistrusted or despaired of. But yet
let us take heed, least that verse be verified in us, Stulti dum vitant vitia
in contraria currunt. Let us not abuse Gods mercies, making a cloak thereof to
cover our sins: Let us not presume too far, and say as in Ecclesiasticus
5.6. The mercy of God is great, he will forgive my manifold sins: for
mercy, and wrath comes from him etc.

CHAP. IIII.
The fourth Chapter concerning the Remedies to be used against the Fourth cause
of Desperation, arysing of the doubts suggested by the Devil unto many men to
bring them into despair of their salvation, by means of the small number of
those that shall be saved, in comparison of the great number of the reprobate.

GReat in deed is the power, and manifold and marvelous are the policies,
devices, wyles, subtilties, assaults, and suggestions, wherewith and whereby
that wily Fox, A catalogue or rehearsal of many things ^hereby the Devil
craf^ily temp^eth men to sin and des^eration.
that old bitten Dog, that subtle Satan the Devil, daily and howerly
practices to entice, allure, and even as it were to force multitudes of men
here on earth, into one sin or other, whereunto he finds and proves them
to be naturally enclyned; and last of all upon one occasion or other, into
Desperation.

How the di^^l tempts by riches.
If he espieth a man to he rich, and to have worldly blessings through the gift
of God, then will he apply him earnestly by his prosperity to lull him asleep
(...) the forgetfulness of God, in world Pleasures, pleasant Vanities, and
transitory delights, comfortes, and solaces; and by trusting in his Riches to
lift up himself arrogantly above others; to swell in pride, and to contemn
his brethren, committing (and that with great sauciness and boldness) many
fond, palpable, and gross errors and follies, against Gods word, even as if
he should say, Who is the Lord?

On the other side, if a man be poor, How the devil tempts by poverty.
he laboreth thereby to make him contemptible before the world, to pinch and
nipp him with the want of many things necessary both for back and belly,
that he sees before his face many others have in great and in abundant
measure: Prou. 30 9,
he soliciteth him to steal, to take the name of God in vain, to seek after
gain by dishonest, unlawful, and ungodly means; to murmr, distrust,
blaspheame, and despair.

If a man have Friends, How the Devil tempts by friend^ (...) Genesis 3.6.
he will use them as his instruments, to tempt unto some evil by their leawd
and wicked counsel, as he did procure Euah to do unto Adam, Job his Wife to
Job. Haman his Wife unto (...) man. Job. 2.9. ^ster. 5.14.


How the (...) tempts by enem^^^.
If thou have enemies, then will he prick thee forward by their proceedinges
and dealinges against thee, unto unjust choler, wicked anger, and devilish
revenge.

H^^ the (...) ^^mpteth by carefulnes.
If thou be careful for thy family, wife and children, he will take hold upon
that occasion to stuff thy heart with too much desire of having, and getting by
right or by wrong, and thereby through extreme covetousness, make thee to
forgo all godlynes and piety.

On the other side, if thou be careless, that is it that he can make use of
also; (...) the (...) by (...) or ^l^^nes.
for as S. Bernard says, Infert diabolus securita^^^, vt inferat etiam
perditionem. etc. In In heaven Angels became Devils. In Paradise Adam and Fuah
fell into disobedience. In the Schole of Christ, Judas became a ^raytor to his
Lord and Master: and all this (says S. Bernard) through security and
^etchlesnes to keep themselves in that good state wherein they were once set.

Ho^ the di^^^ ^^p^th by strength, by health, and ablenes of body and beauty.
Have thou strength? thereby will he t^ke occasion to embolden and harden thee
to do injury and wrong, and to set upon thy weaker.

Have thou health and a strong able body? by those will he induce and entice
thee to one kind or other of leawdnesse and dissolutnesse.

Have thou beauty? that will he make an instrument for bawdrie; an inticement
and an allurement to voluptuousnes and wanton delights.

Have thou honor and dignity in the world? How the devil tempts by honor
and dignity.
thereby will he blow the bellows of pride, audacitie and boldness, to
oppress, to crush, and tread under foot thine inferiors.

Have thou Viuacitie, How the devil tempts by quicknes of spirit and sharpnes
of wit.
or quicknes of spirit, and sharpness of wit and learning? these also will
he strive to abuse and wrest to serve his turn to excogitate, invent, and
devise a thousand vanities: yea, and all the rare and excellent gifts of God,
which God does bestow on any man: this Devil, this arch-enemie of mankind,
will leave no ways, nor means unattempted, to procure man to abuse the same
to a clean contrary end (if it were possible) to that for which they were
bestowed.

And finally, the very Word of God, How the ditempteth by Gods word.
given through Gods great and infinite goodness, to be our spiritual Sword, to
resist and encounter the Devil with; which as S. James says, is able to save
the souls of men: which as S. Paul says, is the power of God to salvation to
every one that believes: which as holy David says, was a lantern unto his
feet, and a light unto his paths. This, even this, will the Devil so far
forth as ever he may, with all the cunning fetches, crafts, and policies
that ever he can devise, seek to abuse, wrest, and misapply, How the Devil
will abu^e, w^est, and mis-apply Gods word.
from the true meaning sense and signification thereof, to confirm lies,
untruths, and heresies thereby: he will draw some textes and sentences
thereof, to bring men into presumption of their own Virtues, Woorthines, and
Merits, to their utter overthrow. And likewise with some other places and
sentences thereof, he will bestirre himself to bring men to waver in Faith, to
doubt of Gods graces and mercies through Christ, and so finally to fall into
utter desperation. And thus does he daily abuse and wrest all those places of
holy Scriptures before noted and alleged in the Fourth cause of Desperation,
tending to prove the small number of those that shall be saved, in comparison
of the huge and great number of the reprobate.

Those places I say, does he urge upon the consciences of many in the world,
and by his misapplying of them, and by his misconstruing of Christ's purpose,
drift, and meaning therein, draws and dryueth them to fear and to tremble,
to doubt and despair, that they are none of that small number, seeing so few
shall be saved.

But o thou man that art thus tried, tempted, and drawn toward temptation!
for thy remedy and help herein, Search the Scriptures, and consider upon those
places, to what end and purpose Christ delivered this doctrine, and thou shall
anon prove and find, that his meaning was nothing less then to drive men
into despair, The true use of those Scriptures which the Devil seeks to
abuse to ^r^^g men to desperation thereby.
but rather hereby to exhort, persuade, and to give caueats, and warning pieces
unto all men that run at random after the world, to remember them selves, and
their dangers, and tickle states; to awake and rouse them up that are so fast
lulied a sleep in the dangerous cradle of security, and wretchlesnesse, that
so they might be touched, moved and stirred up to embrace in time when time
serves, a far more diligent and watchful care of their salvation, that by
such means, they may be found in the number of Christ's little flock, and of
those few that shall be saved; whom the Apostle Paul exhorted to make an end of
their salvation with fear and trembling: Phil. 2.12.
by which they might be made more careful and more diligent in that their so
weighty a business.

CHAP. V.
The Fifth Chapter wherein are contained the comforts, helps, and remedies
against the fifth cause of Desperation, which is the heavy and great weight of
crosses, afflictions, troubles, and necessities, that God suffers to full
upon many in this life.

MOst true, most notable, and most confortable for the distressed and afflicted
children of God, is that golden sentence of the holy Ghost, penned by his
chosen vessel S. Paul, Romans 8.28.
Romans 8.28. All things work together for the best, to them that love God. For
even the afflictions and troubles of Gods children are so sanctified unto them
by the spirit, Heb. 12 10.
that by the same they are made pertakers of Gods holiness. Heb. 12 14.
By the same they enjoy the quiet fruit of Righteousness. 1 These. 1.6.
By the same they attain unto a greater measure of Joy in the holy Ghost. Gal.
6 14.
By the same the world is crucified to them, and they to the world. By the same
they are made conformable to Christ's death. 1 Cor. 11.32.
By the same they are kept from the condemnation of the world. By the same they
learn experience, Romans 5.5.
patience, hope etc.

So that these things rightly pondered, The comfort, and commodites of crosses
and afflictions to Gods children.
weighed, and considered, their Crosses are mercies, their losses gaynes, their
afflictions are their schoollinges, and their adversity their learned
University. Avoid thou Satan, thou can not make these afflictions crosses
and troubles, neither good nor likely causes of Desperaration, so they be
taken, borne, and used as they ought to be, for it is written for the learning,
comfort, help, and remedy of all Gods afflicted children, whom thou would
^est ^ull gladly persuade, that their afflictions are signs and
prognosticating tokens of Gods wrath; and so consequently if thou could,
thou would draw them thereby to despair of Gods love and mercies. It is
written I say, Prou. 3.12.
That the Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as the father does the child
in whom he delights. And again, My son, Heb 12.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. etc.
despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of
him, for whom the Lord loves, he chastineth; and he scourges every son that
he receives. If ye endure chastening, God offers himself unto you, as unto
sons; for what son is it whom the father chasteneth not? If therefore ye
be without correction, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and
not sons, and so forth unto the 12. verse. These and many other such like
sayings and sentences of the holy Scriptures, are most evident testimonies,
that afflictions, troubles, crosses, and vexations, are sure tokens of Gods
grace, mercy, and favor, whereby God assures us of his merciful will and
fatherly good heart toward us, and not signs of his wrath and heavy
displeasure, as the Devil would perswad us, thereby to cause us to despair.

God in deed oftentimes sends euilles even upon his own beloved children;
Why God sends evils to his children, and how he sends comfortes in the
midst of evils.
but yet to the intent to do them good thereby: and withal in the midst of
those evils which he touches them with, he sends them some comforts to hold
their hearts with. Examples hereof you may see in Adam and Euah, for when for
their disobedience God would banish them out of that most pleasant place in all
the world, wherein at the first he had placed them, yet in the midst of that
punishment which he had laid upon them, his fatherly kindness showed it
self; for before he drove them out, he made them coats to arm them against
all weather, Genesis 3.12.
and he comforted them with a promise of the blessed Seed (Jesus Christ) which
should restore that salvation to mankind, which they had lost by yielding to
the Serpents entysings.

This was, and this is, the most kind and loving dealing of God with man, he
will make us to smart a little for our sins: here is his justice; but yet
so, that he will not utterly forsake us, nor give us over for ever: here is
his mercy. Avoid therefore Satan, once I say again avoid: cease to suggest
or to ingest into any man's heart, that he should think because that God does
cross and afflict him, that therefore he does hate, forsake, and utterly
casts off those with whom he so deals: for this is most true, that as
Christ Jesus has taught us to call upon him by the name of a Father, saying,
Our Father which art in heaven. etc. so he loves us as a Father for his sake:
and again he will be more mindful of us, then our own Mothers; for why?
himself has so taught us, and so promised, as appears in Esa. 49. Esa. 49.


Examine and consider but a little the proceedinges and dealinges of Mothers
and Fathers with their children, How God ^o^eth and ^ealeth with ^^s children
and thereby shall you see and perceive more clearly, how God handles his
children under their afflictions, troubles, and crosses.

It is the fashion and manner of a good, kind, and natural Father, that feign
would see good proof of his child, first to instruct and teach him in the
virtuous course and ways of well doing: Secondly, to give him o^tentimes
warning ^^d monition, to keep him in that good way which he has taught him:
Thirdly, if words will not serve, then to iercke him now and then with the
rod: Fourthly, in case his child being now grown up, wax stubborn,
malapart, and disobedient, if he will needs spend his thrift wantonly,
prodigally, and ryotously, in ill company, then comes his Father and draws
him out by the ears, and with a whippe or cudgel, beats him till his boones
crack.

All this he does, and yet with a fatherly love, and a natural kind affection,
to fear him, and to tame him; and as it were with violence, to bring him to
amendment, not minding to forsake him, nor utterly to cast him off for ever.

Even such as this, is the dealing of our heavenly Father with his untowardly,
stubborn, and disobedient children: For, first be teaches and instructs
them by the Ministers, Teachers, and Preachers of his holy word and will: he
gives them often monition and warning to walk in his ways, and to live in
his obedience; which if they despise and will not follow, then he uses his
rods, as poverty, sickness, diseases, Gods rod of what so they are.
crosses in their children, in their stock, in their crop, and such like: and
when this will not serve, nor do any good, but still on they wax obstinate and
stubborn, and care not neither for words nor warning, for stripes nor gentle
correction; then God sends upon them more heavy and grievous punishments, as
plages, pestilences, dearth, casualties of fire, wars, loss of victory, fire
and sword, captivity, and other such like great and almost intolerable
mischiefs: and all these to work in them acknowleging of God, humbling
themselves under the mighty hand of God, that God ^eketh to ^orke by ^aling
^^dly with (...) children
sorrowfulnes of heart for their negligence in serving of God, and true unfeigned
repentance, and turning again unto God, who then is as ready to receive them
as ever he was before, and with mercy and loving kind benefits to bless
them: Examples hereof, holy Scriptures afforde us not a few, but especially in
the gouenement of Gods chose^ people the Israelites, wherein it does plainly
appear, that although God did often times punish the disobedience and falling
away of those his people; yet it ever proved nothing else, but the displeasure
of a kind and loving father, which sought not their utter overthrow, but rather
their reformation and amendment. Let us therefore in the like cases, not
despair of Gods mercy, but amend our former wicked course of life, and yield
our selves patiently unto our heavenly father, and rejoice in him, in the
midst of our troubles and afflictions, for as much as there is nothing more
sure the^ that if we return to him, but he will likewise turn again unto us
with a gracious and fatherly mind, heart, and goodwill.

In this behalf also is God compared and likoned unto a kind loving Mother;
Gods affection to h^^ children like unto a kind loving Mothers section.
for like as a natural Mother is very careful, watchful, and diligent about
her child, she trimmeth it, she dresseth it, feeds it, nourishes it, prays
to God heartily for it, and does all the good she can for it with a most loving,
tender, and motherly affection; and yet now and then she is so disquieted in
her mind, so moved and provoked by her child's peltishnes, frowardnes, and
unruliness, that she is even against her own nature, forced to be angry with
it, to chide it, and sometimes to beat it: Even so like unto this motherly
dealing, is the property and natural affection of God toward mankind, who
as he would not the death of a sinner, so neither delights he in any manner of
grief, sorrow, trouble, or misfortune of man, were he not sometimes stirred
up, moved, and provoked, through our frowardnes, unthankfulness, and unkindness,
to chasten and correct us. And like as a Mother, though she be angry and
offended with her child for a time, yet her displeasure soon passes away, she
gives it not over, she forsakes it not, she forgets it not for ever: Even
after the like fashion does God our heavenly Father deal with man. Nay more
mindful, more kind, and more pitiful is God toward us. This is most true,
the mouth of God himself has spoken it; for these are his words. 9.15.
Can a Woman forget her own Child, and not have compassion on the son of her
womb? though she should forget, yet will not I forget thee. And finally (to
draw to an end of this comparison) even as a Mother when her child is impish,
peevish, and wayward, manaceth and threatens it to throw it away to a Beggar,
and scarreth it with some Bugges, Throstes, Hobgoblines, or such like, and all
to make it quiet, and to cling the more unto her: so likewise our good Father,
when he sees that we forget him, make smaller reconing of him then becomes us,
and wax unthankful and untowardly to all goodness, declyning and hasting on
apace to follow all sin and iniquity; then he sometimes shows us the
terrible faces of fearful troubles and dangers, and he will bring us into
great perilles: yea, and for our unthankfulness, and other such like offenses,
he will now and then take away by one means or other, our health, our wealth,
our peace, our liberty, our safety. etc.

And all this does he to cause us to turn back again unto him, to cleave
and cling the faster unto him, to pray and call upon him the more faithfully,
heartily, and zelously for his help and deliverance, to esteem better of his
gifts when we enjoy them, and to be more thankful for them when we have them.

So that the very causes of all our troubles, crosses, and calamities, are not
to work in us murmuring, and grudging, and despair; but if we will weigh them
and consider them thoroughly, to make good use of them, they may turn to our
great profit and benefit, and not to our hurt: For like as a natural Father
and Mother do, so does God love us when he smites us; he favors us, when he
seems to be most against us; when he seems to be most angry, he aymeth most
at our good, for as S. Augustine says, Meltus nouit medicus quid expediat quam
aegrotus, The sick man the patient, never knows so well what is good for him
as does the Physician. God deals with his children as Phi^^tions and ^urgions
do ^ith their ^acientes.
And therefore the Physicians and Surgions when they see no other remedy for
the recovery, curing, and amending of their sick corrupted and infected
pacients, use to minister unto them tart, bitter, harsh, and unpleasant things,
and to sear, burn, and cut away corrupted, rotten, and dead flesh with sawes,
iron, and other such like instruments, and all to save and cherish the sound
and whole parts, Ne pars sincera trahatur, least that which is whole, should
by the other be corrupted, infected, and poisoned: Even so does God sometimes
(when he sees it best for us) plague our bodies sharply and grievously, that
our souls may be preserved and saved. The Physician in compounding of his best
Triacle, uses Serpents, Adders, and other poisoned things, that with the same
he may drive out one poison with an other: Even so God (as by Histories
plentifully in Gods Book it appears) uses the ministry, help, How God
uses sometime the service and ministry of Devils and wicked men
and service of Devils, and of most devilish and wicked men, by them to
afflict and chastise us, and yet to do us good withal; and afterward burns
the rods when he has corrected and beaten his children with them awhile. It
is not given to every man (I must needs confess) to understand this, and to
make this good use of afflictions, crosses, and troubles laid upon them for
their sins sake; The wicked are not bettered by their troubles and afflictions,
for then should Pharao and many of his wicked courtyers, like himself then
should Cain, Saul, Judas Ischariot, and many other vile lewd and desperate
persons beside, in their manifold crosses, troubles, and adversities, have
turned unto the Lord and been saved. But we must learn and know, that
adversities, troubles, and afflictions, of themselves, and of their own proper
nature, Whence it comes that afflicti^ and cross^s profit Gods children.
can not work and bring such profits, and so much good unto men: But it is
the spirit of God, which resting in Gods faithful children, purges,
reformeth, comfort, and strengthens them, and by these outward means
works all these good things in us: And so whatsoever goodness has been
spoken of heretofore to befall men by means of adversities, crosses, and
troubles, is to be understood only of the faithful and godly, which are
taught and led by the spirit of God, to consider rightly of them, and to make
such use of them, that according as in the beginning of this Chapter it is
truly said, to them that love God, all things work together for the best.
Romans 8.28.


Whereas on the otherside, in the unfaithful, unrepentant, and wicked ones,
they work after an other fashion, and are of clean contrary operation, The
conceits and opinions of the wicked in their adversities and troubles.
whiles that they ascribe their adversities and troubles, either to blind
Fortune and Chance; as though Fortune had a certain power to work, without
the working and providence of God; or else, unto them that are not of their own
sect, faith, and religion, as did wicked Ahab to godly Elias, 4. King. 18.
or to the Magistrates, or to the Ministers of Gods word, or to Faith and
Religion it self, or to the Planets, Stars, and influences of the Elements;
yea, and some will blame God him self, as though they them selves were so
innocent and blameless, that God deals not well with them to lay upon them
such crosses and punishments: and so very busy they make themselves, to shift
off all blame ever to otheres faults.

And although their sins be multiplied to exceeding multitudes of offenses,
yet they will not see nor confess any such things in them selves, nor any
thing consider, nor regard the punishments of God laid upon them, and
cleaving unto them for the same. But through their hardness of heart, and want
of faith (which is the mother of all blasphemy and abomination) they can not
spy whose hand it is that is against them, nor wherefore; or else being even as
it were violently forced to know it, that it is the working of the Lord against
them, and his vengeance in heavy displeasure upon them; yet they will not be
moved thereby, nor any thing at all stirred up to amend their lives but like
unto King Pharao, the more God corrects them, the more obstinatly they
swerve, decline, and fly away from him, being like unto graceless children,
with whom neither words, threatninges, nor beating, can prevail. Like unto
them that will neither dance with the piper, Math. 11.17. Luke 7.31 32
nor lament with the mourner: And so far off are they from being recovered,
won, and reformed by means of any crosses, afflictions and troubles lighting
on them; and following them even as the shadow does the body; that they will
sooner burst out into all manner of impatientnes, bitterness, and spightfull
poysonfull railing and blaspheming words against the righteousness of God,
saying, That their punishment is greater then their sins, and heavier then
they can brook or bear: and that they are wronged, and are not indifferently
dealt with, and so at the length after heaping one sin in the neck of an
other, the Devil brings them on, and by little and little winds them into
that he gapes for, The ends that the Devil bringes the wicked unto by their
afflictions, troubles and crosses.
namely into a reprobate mind, and deadly Desperation, in so much that at the
last they fall to, and yield to murdering, hanging, drowning, or by other
such means most miserably, to dispatch themselves with their own hands, like
unto Saul, Achitophel, and Judas, so giving them selves over to the Devil;
and as they lived for a while most wretchedly, so they depart out of the world
as diuellishly, forgetting utterly, and altogether inconsiderate, retchlesse,
and careless what shall become of them afterward for ever. By whose lives,
Two commodities to be reaped by the lives and manner of the death of the wicked.
and manner of deaths the children of God may yet reap two commodities: first,
they shall be eased of the great troubles, disturbance, and discommoditis, and
of the leawd and evil examples which they gave to others whiles they lived.
And secondly, they which remain alive after them, may learn and take warning
by their shameful falls, and by their terrible examples, and desperate deaths,
lay hold on repentance and amendment of their lives before it be too late.

CHAP. VI.
The Sixth Chapter concerning the Remedies against Desperation, arising and
growing by long custom of sin, and by delaying and putting off the forsaking
of sin from day to day.

IT is written, that the continual and long custom of sin, and the
delaying, and putting off from time to time of the amendment of life, The
great danger of custom of sin, and of delaying of amendment of life.
is one of the greatest and most dangerous deceites, and cunning stratagems and
policies which the enemy of mankind does use toward the children of Adam:
for he is not ignorant how that like as Linkes in a Chain one catches hold
and hangs by an other, and one draws an other: Even so by continuance, long
custom, and secure sleeping in sin, one sin draws on an other, and so
every day sin is added to sin, so that by tolleration and procrastination,
sin so mightily increases, and by this means waxes so headstrong, that in
the end, the saying of the Poet proves very true; to wit, Qui non est hodie,
oras minus aptus erit. He that is not ready to day (to forgo and forsake
sin) to morrow-day shall he be more unfit. A comparison showing the danger of
long custom and weltering in sins.
The Devil knows well enough, how that like as old festered and long growe^
soars and diseases of the body, are far more dangerous, more troublesome,
and harder to be healed, and require a longer time by much to be cured, then if
they had bin looked to at the first: Even so the diseases of the soul, as
swearing, theeuing whoring, drunkenness, and such like, being once long
accustomed, settled, and having gotten an habit, are either never, or seldom,
and that with greater difficulty afterward rooted out, then at the first
beginning they might have been.

And so by these diseases of the soul, the habit thereof having once taken
root in man and the Devil by them having gotten the surer hold and
possession, he endeu^reth and most diligently by all ways and means applies
to keep men still on in ure, and practice with old and long accustomed sins,
until at the length in extremity of sickness toward the hour of death (if
not before) he may by such causes and occasions plant and work in the heart
of man deep despair, to his utter confusion for ever.

To resist therefore, to remedy and help this cankerlike creeping and
infectious evil, let us to day while it is yet to day, study to turn again
unto God, cast out the Devil, and with him this great cause and occasion of
Desperation, even long custom of sin, and delay of amendment of our lives,
the thing that so hangs on, and presses us down, and let us in time while
we have time, take a better course, looking up unto Jesus Christ, and set him
before the eyes of our faith, as the only mark to shoot at. And for as much as
we can not turn again unto the Lord, and forsake our former wallowing in our
former long accustomed sins, except the Lord our God reach us his helping hand
to turn us unto him; and that repentance is not in our own power to take it
up, Whence re^entance and ^mendeme^t (...) life are to (...) had, and ^ow they
^e to be ^me by.
and lay it down at our own pleasure, and that of our selves we can not put
it into, nor plant it in our hearts when and where we list, except it first
come from above; for that it is an excellent and a rare gift of God: Let us
earnestly and heartily with our humble and fervent prayers beg and crave the
same at Gods hands: Let us practice much and often hearing, reading and
meditating the word of God, and with care and diligence use all ordinary means
for the better, more ready, and speedy attaining of it: for it is not so easy
a matter to be come by, as the world thinks it: It is not an hours work
when we lie on our deathbeds, that will serve the turn: It is not, Cry God
mercy a little for fashion sakes that will do it: Many are (...) may be
d^ceiued in the manner time of their repentance.
It is not a coursing or mumbling up of a few Prayers at a man's last farewell,
that will avail: And yet if we were sure that that would serve, yet we are
very unsure, whether we shall have time and leisure, wit, senses, reason, and
remembrance at our last gasp to do that yea or no. To trust to do it at our
last hour, is but a broken staff to be relied on and trusted unto: And yet it
is not so uncertain, but on the other side it is as certain, that then we
shall have many byasses and bars, many rubbes and stops, Note the you that
^fer^e rep^tance vn^ your last end.
many lets and impedimentes to lie in our ways, and to hinder our course in
going forward at that time with last gasping repentance, which many
infatuated, fond, and foolish men rely so much upon, and trust so much unto,
passing away their days, and carelessly neglecting good opportunity when time
serves, like unto those five foolish Virgins that made no preparation
aforehand to be in a readiness to enter in with the Bridegroom, till it was
too late: this is I say, a very broken staff to trust unto, and a thing very
doubtful and uncertain to depend upon, or to make any reckoning of, for a
man to repent and cry God mercy, and make himself fit and ready for God at
his last hour, because that very many in all ages, and in all places have been,
and are taken away oftentimes with a sudden death, and have neither that
hours nor half hours leisure that they before spoke so much of, and trusted
so much unto.

^uke 17.^7. ^amples ^ewing that ^s dange^s trust^^ to the (...) hour. ^n
19.23.
When the World was eattng and drinking, planting and buylding: when they were
most secure and careless, then suddenly came the Flood, and overwhelmed them
all. Though it were a fair morning at Lots going out of Sodom, yet by and by
when they least thought of any such matter, they were all suddenly destroyed.
When Nebuchadnezzar was most brag, ^ni. 4.12.
and thought himself most safe and sure, suddenly (never dreaming nor once
suspecting any such things) was he pulled on his knees. ^ke. 12.20. ^es. 5.
are ^o notable ^^mples of ^aine and provided ^th, in ^nias and (...) wife.
The Rich man thought himself never more like to have lived, then when he so
busily made such great provision, and laid up stoore for many years: yet was
his soul suddenly taken from him the very same night. And what know thou o
man! that trustest so much, and put off till the last day and hour,
whether that day and hour may not come as suddenly on thee, and as unlooked
for, as it did on any of these?

Augustine and Ambrose did write one of them to the other, what his opinion was
concerning the state of an old Adulterer which in their time, as he was going
in the night time to his Whore, passing over a Bridge in his way, fell into
the River; and so being drowned, was taken away suddenly in the very purpose
of his wickedness, having neither hour, half hour, nor minute, to cry God
mercy, to repent and to pray in.

Ioannes Riuius, a learned Writer, Lib. 1. ^stultia^ mortali^ in procr^nanda
rection vitae.
and of good credit, affirmed that in his time, and in a Village of his
country, two old men lying with their Whores whom they had aforetime haunted,
in one and the selfsame night dyed, suddenly taken as it were with the manner;
having likewise neither hour nor half hour to prepare themselves in: for the
one was suddenly stabbed to death; the other was taken with a sudden
Apoplexy, whereof he presently gave up his Ghost.

And what knows any of us all, or what greater priuildge has any of us all,
but that we may be suddenly prevented, and carried away in the midest of our
sins as these were? And whether we have not the like examples of such hasty
deaths here in England, whereby many of us have been disappoynted of these
two or three hours at their last end, to make us ready in, I report me to the
deaths of Earl Godwin, ^e God^ his so^e and ^efull ^h.
and Grimwood of Hitcham? whereof the Earl after he had traitorously slain
the brother of King Edward the third, being charged afterward by the King
therewith at Windsore (where he happened to sit at table with the King) he
falsely denied the fact, and for his better excuse, he falsely forsware it;
and besides all this, he moreover took a piece of bread and put it into his
mouth, wished that he might be choked thereof, if he were guilty of his
blood; and it followed in deed according to this desire: for he being choked
therewith, yeeled up his Ghost, and fell down dead in the presence and sight
of all at the Table, and from thence was had to Winchester to be buried. And
likewise the said Grimwood of Hitcham in the County of Suffolk, Grimwood his
sudden and fearful death.
known to be a wilful forsworn man, in the Harvest time next after his
perjury, feeling no pain, complaining of no disease, being strong and able to
labor, as he was stacking up Corn, suddenly his Bowels fell out of his body,
whereof immediately he dyed most miserably.

But what need I to stand bestowing time, paper, and incke, troubling both my
self and future Readers, in setting down the manner of the sudden deaths of
many men, seeing that both holy and profane Writers, and daily experience it
self, may fully fraught, store, and furnish us with infinite examples of this
sort? And what charter, privilege, or certain hold of life has any of us
all, more then these here before recited, or thousands of others in the like
case have had?

O let us not presume therefore to run on headlong in the long and hardened
custom of our sins! nor to delay and put off the reforming of our wicked
lives until the last hour: And although we be not stricken with sudden death,
but have both certain days and hours before our death, yet (as I before
said) full many are the stoppes; lets, and impedimentes, which both may, and
also daily do fall out to hinder and put by this late repentance, that so many
will needs trust unto, A catalogue of lets and impedimnts which oftentimes
fall out when we come to the last hour, that hinder and put by that late
repentance, which so many trust unto.
and make all their reckoning of, putting off from day to day, and from year
to year, till this last time approach and f^l on them in deed: For so long as
the extremities of sickness do nippe and pinch our mortal bodies, the doloure,
panges, and pains racking and tormenting our flesh, will keep our minds so
occupied, sometime calling on the Physician for help, sometime turning,
tossing, and seeking for ease in every corner of the bed; yea, and from bed to
bed, while strength does serve: sometime taking this Receipt, and sometimes
that, as the Physicians shall minister: sometimes turmoyled and occupied both
in mind and body by the working and purging of the Apothecarie^ drugges
received, sometimes disquiet and brawling with those that are attending about
us, crying out on them, as though their using and handling of us were the
occasion of our greater panges and pains: with these and such like
circumstaunces, are both bodies and minds exercised and vexed, so long as the
vigor and strength of flesh and blood are able to endure and hold out, and so
busied herewith continually, that we seldom have any rest or leisure to frame
our selves to any quiet calling on God; to any repentance, or unfeigned and
zealous crying for mercy: for if we sometimes endeavor our selves to begin to
go about it, yet behold one thing or other soon strikes all out of mind, and
disturbes us so, that never a whit the better: But if after the powers and
senses of our bodies be once worn and weakened, and the feeling of the
extreme dolours and pangues of the sickness be mittigated, whereby the body
after a time of wrestling and wearying of it self is now somewhat quieted, More
lets (...) impediment of late repentance (...) converting to God.
and so the mind more settled, we then begin again to take better hold, yet
still on either the care of children and wife, for want of sufficient provision
for them, or grief to depart from them, or the remembrance of lands, goods,
houses, and possessions, and other worldly treasures; the love, liking, and
delights whereof have possessed our hearts all our life time before, will now
so afresh enter and trouble our heads and minds; that yet time serves not for
to continue any such godly and christian exercises as we in health time when we
should have done it, made no account of, and deferred until the last hour.
The effects of choler, in time of extreme sickness.
Sometimes are we troubled and diseased with melancholy and frensies, choler
shooting up into our brains, and with such crampes and convultions caused by
much euacuation, and such abundance of choler in our veins, that hereof
follows the natural effects, rauinges, blasphemings, insensible talking,
wrything of the lips, strange and unaccustomed wresting and turning of the
neck, buckling of the joints and whole body; yea and often times such
extraordinay strength, that three or four men can not hold us nor rule us
without bonds. With these and such like strange effects, are many men
deprived not only of the right use of the parts of their bodies, but also of
their reason and right wits, and last of all of life it self. Are not here
then lettes and stays enough from the performance of that amendment of life,
prayer, and crying God mercy, which we proroged and put off in our life time?

Put case that we be neither cut off with sudden death, nor annoyed at our
last end with any of these aforesaid lets and impediments of strange diseases
and extraordinary effects thereof, nor with any other such like noisome and
troublesome circumstaunces or sicknesses, but that we have time, leisure, and
quietness to do all such things as any of us al trusted unto at our last
farewell with the world? The Diuel^ will be mo^^ busy to hinder repentance at
o^^ last hour.
yet will that deadly enemy, that mortal aduersay of ours Satan the Devil,
at that time above all other apply himself; and let us look for no other, but
what vile sin we have committed and delighted in in all our life time, that
will he lay to our charge, and clogge our conscienses with, and to bring us
into desperation with and by them, he will put us in mind, and terrify us
with Gods severe threatninges against sin. He will object against us that
saying of our Lord Christ, Matthew. 19.
that if we would have entered into life, we should have kept his
Commandments. Math. 7.
He will tell us that not he that says Lord, Lord, but he that does the
will of the father of he uen, shall enter into the kingdom of God. He will
put us in mind that, Not the hearers of the Law, Romans 2. Romans 8.
but the doers shall be justified. He will threaten us, that because we have
lived according to the flesh, we shall die. He will crack us, ^. Cor. 6.9.10.
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God: and that neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Wantons, nor Buggerers, nor
Thieves, nor the Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Raylors, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God.

And that such as have lived according to the works of the flesh, which are
repeated up Gala 5. 2. Cor. 5.
shall not attain to the kingdom of God. ^er. 2.
And that we must be presented before the judgment seat of Christ, Apocal.
20.
and every man receive particularly according as he has done in this life, 2.
Peter. 2.
good or evil: every man shall receive according to his works. And that God
spared not the Angels when they sinned. 1. Pet. 4.
And if the Just shall scarce be saved, where shall the Wicked man and sinner
appear?

When all these, and a great deal more, describing and setting forth unto us
the rigor of Gods seueare justice, and the reckoning whereunto we shall be
called, shall be put into our minds on our deathbeds; and that damned Satan,
which all the days of our lives before, labored to make us careless and
negligent of the knowledge, or consideration of any of these things, that so
he might make us the more boldly and blindly to run headlong into sin,
shall charge us with this, and much more like stuff, appealling to our own
consciences for witness hereof, and so hereupon plant in our guilty hearts
deep Desperation, Alas in what case shall our poor souls then stand? Would a
man then for a thousand worlds, and all the profits and pleasures thereof, be
brought to such a quandarie?

O thou therefore that read or hear this damnable and miserable state
that silly souls may be implunged into, for the better avoiding of these
perilles, read, and read again, meditate, ponder, and put in practice the
direction, advice, and counsel in the beginning of this present sixth Chapter.
The example of Joseph of Arimathia, most worthy to be imitated.


And take this lesson of Joseph of Arimathia, that like as he in his life time
had made ready a Sepulcre in the midst of his Garden, which was the place of
his pleasure (as all Gardens of great men most commonly are:) Even so thou in
the midst of these things wherein thou take thy greatest felicity and
delight, remember yet thy Grave, and what one day (thou know not how soon)
shall become of thy poor soul, and afterward of thy soul and body for ever.

Remember and learn likewise at the Egiptians, who perceiving the mindfulnesse
of death to be a good help to bridle their evil actions, ^he use and ^ustome
of ^^e^ Egipti^ns.
used to bring a Picture or Image resembling Death, into their great and
solemn Feasts; which fearful and ouglie sight, trembling and shaking they
took to be a special occasion to keep the beholders in sobriety, by the
remembrance of their end, which they must all come unto sooner or later.

And finally, learn at the good King Ezechias, ^he notable and imitable
^xample of ^ing Eze^hias.
when thou shall be by any occasion put in the remembrance of death, be
af^aide of Gods threatninges, and sorrow a little before hand, least thou be
constrained to sorrow, howl, and cry remeddesse always afterward: for
according to the old saying, Qui ante non cauebit post dolebit, he that will
not beware before, shall afterward be sorry. Ecclesiasticus. 7.40.
And he that in all his doings remembers the end, shall never lightly do
amiss: The which wise remembrance of our ends, he vouchsafe to plant in our
hearts, who has full dearly bought us, Jesus Christ, the righteous; to whom
with his, and our heavenly Father, and the holy Spirit, three persons; and one
eternal majesty of Godhead, all worthy glory, honor, and praise, be
worthily attributed for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. VII.
The seventh Chapter containing the General Preservative against the despair
or doubting of Gods mercy arysing upon any cause whatsoever.

FOr as much as it is a thing manifestly to be proved by holy Scriptures, that
a man endued with true faith it self, may notwithstanding now and then be
toubled and assaulted with motions of doubtinges, wavering; yea and of
despairing: therefore for the brideling, suppressing, and ouercomming of these
assaults, it shall be good to put in practice these five things especially.

First, we are to think and consider thus much, The first preservative against
Despair.
that as not to murder, not to steal, not to commit adultery, and all the
rest of the Decalogue or ten Commandments, are the Commandments of God,
and we are careful, and strive with our selves that we should not break any
of them; least that in breaking any of them, we should so highly offend God,
that he would therefore power down upon us his heavy wrath, and in his
indignation severely punish us, as by many examples we see he has done to
others in the like offenses: So also it is Gods commandment as well as any of
the other are, 1. Ioh. 3.23.
That we believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ: and therefore we must
think we offend against God as grievously, or rather far more grievously
in violating and breaking this Commandment by incredulity, doubting,
wavering, and despairing, as if we should shed man's blood, commit whoredom,
theft, perjury, or any other such like notorious sin.

O what a heinous sin must it needs be to cast no doubts, nor despair in
the help of a mortal man in the time of need! and yet to mistrust and
despair of the like in God? As for example: We can settle our hearts to
believe in our mortal Fathers if we stand in need of meat, drink, or
clothes, An exam^^^ that man men put more tru^^ in morta^ man ther^ God.
we then call on them: and if they promise us any such things, we can set our
hearts at case, and count it as a thing done; we doubt nothing of their good
will toward us, nor of the performaunce of their word unto us, we depend
upon them, we rely only on them and none other, and what they give their
word to do for us, we make as sure reckoning of it, as if it were already in
our hands.

Again, if we stand in need of a piece of money as of x. another ^xample
^ewing ^at many ^on put ^ore trust (...) mortal ^^n, then (...) God.
xx. li. xxx. li. or be it more or less, to discharge some dangerous Bond, or
for any such like use by a set day, or to save our bodies out of prison; and in
the mean time, before the day appointed come, some one of our honest rich
neighbors, that is counted an honest substantial man, and of good credit,
promise us certainly so much money as we want, and stand in need of to serve
our turn with, and bids us trust unto it, that before that day he will be sure
to help; we hereupon trust his honest promise, we believe his word, and make
as sure account of it as if we had it already in our purses, and take no more
thought nor care for it. O how much more should we trust Gods most faithful,
just, and true word and promise; believe him without all distrust, doubting, or
despair, and depend upon him who is a thousand times more able and more
willing to do us good, and to keep touch with us, then ever was, or ever
shall be any mortal earthly Father, or friendly neigbour?

The second thing in this case to be considered of is, that every one of us,
The second general help against desp^^ation.
is particularly to believe that he is in the number of those that shall be
saved, by the merits of Christ's death and passion: for the promises of
salvation in Christ are indefinite, excluding no particular man, as for
example: God so loved the world, John. 3 16.
that he gave his only beloved Son, to the end that all that believe in him
should not perish, but have life everlasting. In which general words, is
included every particular believing person, although he have not his name
severally and particulerly set down: and here God excludes none from his
promise, unless through their unbelief and despair, they exclude their own
selves. If the King of Great Britain, of his own mere mercy, and motion of
compassion, or at the sure and mediation of some Noble man or other that is
dear unto him, should freely pardon and forgive all the malefactors and
prisoners of any Gaile, within his Kingdoms, may we not account them very fond
and foolish men, and not worthy the benefit of the Kings gracious Pardon, if
some two or three should doubt and despair that this general Pardon
appertained not unto them, because their own particular and several names
were not therein specified and expressed? Even thus is our case.

Let not therefore any illusion of Satan, nor fear of our own unworthiness,
nor want of our particular names, nor any other argument or reason whatsoever,
withdraw us from challenging our own portions and parts of Gods most
merciful promises, of his free pardone, and remission of our sins: Let us
not doubt nor distrust the performaunce and truth of Gods promises.

^^e third ^^nerall ^^pe against ^speration.
Thirdly, to comfort our selves, and to suppress Satan's temptations to
despayring, we may further meditate and ponder with our selves these two
points especially: First, that seeing the Lord has promised to forgive our
sins, and to put all our wickedness out of his remembrance (as by plain and
most manifest evidence of holy Scriptures it may easily be proved) then it
stands with his justice and truth, to perform the same, and that upon such
a necessity, that he must either forgive us our offenses according to his own
word, or else we must count him unfaithful for the breach of his promises; or
else (which were horrible to think) judge him an hipocrite or a dissembler, if
he should pretend one thing, and intend another; or at the least wise
unconstant in altering and changing that which he has spoken with his own
mouth, and so to be thought (which is monstrous) to be unjust: For the second
point, we may consider likewise to our comfort, and to the weakening and
overthrow of all desperate conceits, Esai. 75.
that God has already punished Jesus Christ for our offenses, and therefore
can not in justice punish them again in us. We offended, and Christ was
punished for the same. what so^^ could b^ looked at man hands what s^ man co^^
be cha^ with, t^^ Christ forme^ discha^
What soever in justice God could either demand, or man owed, that paid our
Lord Christ. Man ought to die, Christ satisfied for the same: Man ought to have
borne the heavy wrath and dispeasure of ye father, Christ did bear the same:
Man ought to have bin cast down into hell, Christ satisfied for that also:
yea, he so fully contented, paid, and pleased God the Father, for all
whatsoever the Lord could look for at man's hands, that the Father himself
acknowledged, and in thunder from heaven confessed the same, in the hearing of
many witnesses present; and hearing the same at the baptizing of our Lord
Christ by John Baptist in the Flood Jorden: And so all faithful believers
hereof, are hereby fully and freely acquitte and discharged from all debt of
sin they owed unto God, for ever.

Why should thou then, o Satan! so busily charge us with any such matter, to
drive us into desperation, seeing that Sublata causa tollitur etiam and
effectus? The cause whereby thou so vrgest desperation by Jesus Christ, being
taken away, the effects also must needs then cease.

^^e fourth ^^pherall ^^pe for (...) auoy^^g of des^ring.
The fourth thing to be used and practiced for the better avoiding of Despair,
is that at what time soever we feel our hearts through Satan's crafty
suggestion assaulted and molested with this venomous sting of Desperation, we
should then straight way convey our selves into some quiet and secret place,
and there in some humble manner power out our hearts before God with inward
hearty, and zealous prayer, desiring him of his infinite mercies to work in our
hearts increase of faith, and to suppress and vanquish all our unbelief, and
utterly to expel from thence all despair.

The fifth and last Remedy that now I purpose to handle here against
Desperation, The (...) ^^nerall (...) against operation.
is that we frame our selves carefully, diligintly, and with godly zeal to
use, and ofentimes to frequent such godly means as God has appointed and set
forth unto us, for the obtaining and increasing of faith, as (over and besides
earnest prayer, last before spoken of) the use of reverent reading, hearing,
and meditating of Gods word, and the receiving of the Sacraments, being holy
Signs, and as it were Scales seen with our outward or bodily eyes, which
inwardly do signify, and set forth to our hearts the secret and inward
graces of God.

FINIS.

