HEXAPLA IN DANIELEM: THAT IS, A SIX-FOLD COMMENTARY upon the most divine
prophecy of DANIEL, wherein according to the method propounded in HEXAPLA upon
Genesis and Exodus, six things are observed in every Chapter. 1. The Argument
and Method. 2. The diverse readings. 3. The Questions discussed. 4. Doctrines
noted. 5. Controversies handled. 6. Moral observations applied. Wherein many
obscure visions, and divine Prophesies are opened, and difficult questions
handled with great brevity, perspicuitie, and variety, which are summed to
the number of 536. beside the Controversies 134. in the Table, in the end of
the book: and the best Interpreters both old and new are therein abridged.
Divided into two books: the first containing the historical part of this
Prophecy, in the 6. first Chapters: the prophetical, in the 6. last.

By ANDREW WILLET Professor of Divinity.

THE FIRST BOOK.

Ezekiel. 28. 3. Behold thou art wiser then Daniel, there is no secret that they
can hide from thee.

Printed by CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1610

TO THE MOST CHRISTIAN, RIGHT NOBLE, MOST excellent, and mighty Prince, JAMES
by the grace of God, KING of great BRITAIN, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the true Christian Faith, etc.
THat which PLATO saw but in contemplation, Tum de number beatas fore respub. cum
aut eas regerent Philosophi, aut reges philosopharentur.
that Commonwealths should be then happy when either Philosophers governed
them, or the governors became Philosophers; we see by Gods goodness now brought
into action (your Christian Majesty being not only a princely Patron of
humane learning, and Philosophy, but a peerless professor of Theology.)
King HENRY the eight your Highness noble predecessor in the royal Diadem of
this Imperial Kingdom, for writing against Luther in defense of the Papal
religion, had given unto him the Title of Defensor Fidei: but that princely
Epithete is more due unto your Majesty, who both by your pen and sword do
uphold and maintain the truth, Scripsi^i tu^ totam epistola^ manu, vt ipsi
apices fidem tuam, pietatemque loquerentur: Epist. 26.
that the saying of Ambrose of the Emperor GRATIAN may be worthily spoken of
your Majesty: You wrote (not an whole Epistle only as he says, but whole
Books) with your own hand, that the very letters do proclaim your faith and
piety. This your divine favor unto Religion and princely exercise in writing,
has emboldened me diverse times heretofore to present my Commentaries upon
certain Hexapla on Genesis. Harm, upon the 1. of Sam. Hexapla on Exodus
books of the Scripture unto your sacred hands: and your gracious acceptance
of them has emboldened me also to exhibit this Work unto your princely view.
Here in all humble duty I do offer a Treatise and explanation of the most
difficult book of the Old Testament the Prophecy of DANIEL: what I have
performed therein, and especially in the unfolding of Daniels 70. weeks, the
Work it self shall testify. I trust, that by this my travel, that which
seemed before obscure, will appear plain and easy; and the depth which would
before have taken up an Elephant, Prophetia obscura est, quod alio tempore
canitur, alio cernitur. De vi^. perfect.
will affoard footing for a lamb. Hierome says, A prophecy is obscure,
because it is said at one time, and seen at an other: But now we see that
which the Prophet said, and so that which was wrapped up in obscurity, is now
fulfilled in history.

These my labors I most humbly submit to your princely judgment and
direction, and your MAJESTY with bended knees of my heart, I commend unto the
divine and highest protection.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, ANDREW WILLET,

THE PREFACE TO THE Christian Reader.
AUGUSTINE thus wrote to a friend of his, excusing the prolixitie of his
Preface, August. praefat ad Valeri^m.
Scio me non esse oneri tibi, si prolixum aliquod mitto, quia legendo diutius
sis nobiscum, I know I am not burdensome unto you, if I send you any prolix
writing, because you are so much the longer with me: But I will forbear by any
long or tedious Preface to keep the Reader in suspense; though if I should, I
presume of his courtesy, that he would vouchsafe it the reading. The length of
the Work, does make me more short in the Preface: a small entrance in, may
serve to a large house: and the greatest cities have not the greatest gates. I
shall not need in many words to show the excellent use of this prophecy of
Daniel, nor what I have performed in it: the general Questions set before the
Book, shall satisfy the Reader in the one, and the work it self shall
speak for the other. I have gathered together the best things, and most
worthy of observation, out of writers both old and new, both Protestants and
others: that the Reader may in few hours find that, which I was many weeks
in setting together: for here I say and profess with Hierome, ad Vigilant.
Operis est and studij mei, multos legere, vt ex plurimis diversos flores
carperem, non tam probaturus omnia, quam bona electurus: assumo multos in
manus, vt a multis multa cognoscam: It is mine endeavor and study, to read
many, and out of sundry to take diverse flowers, not to that end to approve
all, but to sort out the best: I take many into mine hands, that from many I
may know much; and impart to others, that which I know.

In the reading of this Book, let the Reader take these directions: I have
followed the same course, which I propounded unto my self in other
Commentaries, as the title of the book shows: But I thought it best to set
down the whole text, for more plainness and perspicuitie, and not the diverse
Readings only: wherein C. stands for Chalde: H. for the Hebrew: L. for the
Latin: S. for the Septuagint: P. for Pagnine: A. for Arias Montanus: V. for
Vatablus: B. for the great English Bible: G. the Geneva translation: I. for
Iunius: det. is put for detract: add. for adding: The Authors names which are
cited in this Book, are summed in the Epistle set before the second part
thereof.

If by these my travels I may profit the Church of God, I have my desire: it is
mine only terrene reward and encouragement, if my poor labors may find
acceptance: other rewards they sooner carry that labor not, then they which
labor: Hos ego v^^iculos feci, tulit alter honores. Virgil.
as the Poet sometime complained, that he made the verses, and other had the
honor: As for my self, I find by experience that saying of Augustine most
true, In eo quod amatur, aut non labor autur, aut labor ipse amatur: in that
which one delights in, either there is no labor at all, or the labor it
self is loved: and it gives me encouragement, that I am not in the number of
them, Metth. 6. 2.
of whom our blessed Savior says, Receperunt mercedem suam, they have
received their reward. God grant us all faithfully to labor in our vocations
in this life, that we may receive our everlasting reward in heaven with Christ
our blessed Lord and only Savior, to whom be praise for ever.

THE PROPHECY OF DANIEL EXPLANED. General observations upon the whole Book.
1. The sum, argument, parts, and contents of the whole Prophecy.
IN this heavenly prophecy of Daniel is set forth in general Gods fatherly
care, and watchful providence over his Church: the use whereof is extended
generally to the Church of God in all ages, but more specially it concerned the
state and condition of the Jews then being in captivity: wherein to their
comfort three things specially are declared and foretold. 1. The diverse
changes and accidents, calamities and afflictions, which should befall the
people of God, under the kingdoms of the Chaldeans, Persians, and Grecians;
First, under Alexander the great, then under his successors, which divided his
Empire among them. 2. The coming of the Messiah is pointed out, the time when,
and end wherefore he should come. 3. with such innouations as should follow,
as the ceasing of the ceremonies, and the abdication of the Jews: Iun. And all
to this end, that the people of God might be prepared, not to expect any
terrene happiness in this life, but with patience to wait the time of the
restoring of all things in the resurrection of the just, which is touched, cap.
12.

The parts of the book are these: It is partly historical, partly
prophetical.

1. The historical part, is either concerning certain kings, or Daniel, and
his godly companions: and these things are handled jointly together. The Kings
whose history is set down, were Nebuchadnezzar in the 4. first chap.
Balthazar in the 5. Darius in the 6. The history of Daniel is continued in all
these chapters, only the third excepted: and of his godly companions, in the
1. and 3. Polan.

And in this first part 3. special virtues of Daniel are described. 1. His
sobriety and abstinence, cap. 1. 2. His wisdom and divine understanding in
the opening and revealing of dreams and hid mysteries, c. 2. c. 4. c. 5. And
3. his piety toward God, c. 6. So he is commended propter sobrietatem,
sapientiam, pietatem: for his sobriety, prudencie, piety. Hugo Car. in
proleg. in Daniel.

And by these divine testimonies God gave witness unto Daniel, that the
mystical prophesies following might be received with greater authority.

2. In the second part: the prophetical predictions, either concern the
enemies of Gods Church, as of the judgments of God upon Nebuchadnezzar, c. 4.
and Balthazar, c. 5. or they belong unto the Church, either showing their
afflictions and calamities. c. 10. 11. or their deliverance begun in this
life by the redemption purchased by the Messiah, c. 9. and perfected and
consummate in the next in the resurrection. c. 12. Polan.

Pereri^s another way deuideth this book into three parts. 1. It consists
either of bare visions and prophesies, as cap. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 2. Or of
prophesies and visions mixed with histories, as c. 2. 4. 5. 3. Or of histories
alone, as c. 3. and 6.

2. The diverse language and readings observed in this Book.
The original text in this book is partly written in the Hebrewe language,
partly in the Chalde: from the beginning of the 1. Chap. to the 4. ver. of the
second, and the five last chapters are all written in the Hebrewe tongue. And
from the 4. v. of the second chap. to the end of the 7. chap. the history is
penned in the Chalde dialect. Polan. The reasons whereof, are yielded to be
these. 1. For the credit of this history, the Lord brings forth foreign
nations, annalesque eorum testes, and their Chronicles as witnesses, least any
should doubt of the truth thereof. Iun. 2. An other reason is, because God
would have some part of this history come to the knoweledge of the heathen, as
it was requisite, that the Chaldes should know the sins and impieties of
that nation, and the judgments which should befall them, ad testandam omnibus
Dei veritatem, etc. to testify unto all the truth of God: therefore in
general the alteration of the terrene states and kingdoms, and the power of
Christ's kingdom are shadowed forth. c. 1. and c. 7. and published in the
Chalde language, that the Gentiles might take knowledge thereof, but the
particular histories of the coming of the Messiah, of his office, kingdom,
and of the calamities and afflictions which should befall the people of God,
are set forth in the Hebrewe tongue, in the five last chapters, as most
specially concerning them, Iun. in cap. 7. 3. A third reason is, that the
history of Daniels acts, set forth in the 6. first chapters, being expressed
in the Chalde speech, might give testimony unto Daniel, that the Jews might
receive him for a Prophet of God. qui erat admirabilis etiam profanis gentibus,
etc. who was admired even of the profane nations: Calvin. Proleg. in Daniel. 4.
Unto these may be added, that for better credit of the history it pleased God,
that the history of such things, as were said and done in Chaldes, should be
written in the same language, wherein they were first spoken: like as in Ezra
the epistles and rescripts of the kings, are delivered in the Chalde speech, as
taken out of their public acts and records. Iun. in proleg.

Beside the original text thus consisting partly of the Hebrewe, partly of the
Chalde tongue: there was the translation of the Septuagint, and three other
Greek translations beside, of Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion. But Hierome
shows that the translation of the Septuagint, whatsoever was the cause
thereof, whether they did not express the Chalde phrase, Hieron. proleg. in
Daniel.
or some one ignorant of the Chalde tongue did set it forth under their name,
multum discordat a veritate, does dissent much from the truth, and recto
iudicio repudiatus est, etc. and therefore was upon a right judgment rejected
of the Church: And therefore in the stead thereof the translation of Theodotion
was received of the Church: as the same Hierome shows, Lib. 2 contr. Ruffin.
which notwithstanding is in many places erroneous, as shall appear in the
differences of the reading throughout.

The latin translation also fails in many points, as afterward shall be
showed, though Pintus give it this commendation, Pintus in pro^^m.
that it is nitore veritatis, grauitate, authoritate, omnibus alijs illustrior
and praestantior: in the evidence of truth, gravity, authority, more famous
and excellent then any other, etc. but the contrary shall afterward be proved
in the general controversies following; that the vulgar Latin is in many
places corrupt, and erroneus. And herein they attribute more perfection to
Hieromes translation, then he himself would have acknowledged, thus modestly
confessing, qui mihi videbar sciolus inter Hebraeos, caepi rursus discipulus
esse Chaldaicus: I that seemed to know somewhat among the Hebrews, began
again to be a scholar in the Chalde: in proleg.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. Of the author of this prophetical book of Daniel.
1. Wicked Porphirie in the 12. book of those which he wrote against the
Christians, contendeth that this prophecy was not written by Daniel, but by
some that lived in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, or after when all these
things here prophesied of were fulfilled: but his cauillous objections were
long since refuted by Apollinaris, Methodius, Eusebius: and the falsehood
thereof is convinced by this, that the Septuagint, who lived almost an 100.
years before that Antiochus, did translate this book into Greek: and
Josephus in his 11. book Antiquitat. Judah. reports how Iaddus the high
Priest showed unto Alexander the great this prophecy of Daniel, which foretold
of a king, that should destroy the Persian Monarchy, in confidence whereof
Alexander proceeded to that battle, and this was 60. years before Antiochus.
2. The Hebrews think, Lib. 6. Etym.
with whom Isidore consents, that this book of Daniel, of Ezekiel, and of
the 12. Prophets, were written by the wise men of the great Synagogue, who were
in the time of Ezra. 3. But that this book was written by the Prophet Daniel,
who was so famous among the Kings of Chaldea, and of Persia, beside the title
of the book, which is called in the Hebrewe sepher Daniel, the book of
Daniel; our blessed Savior does witness the same in the Gospel, When ye
shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, etc.
Matthew. 24. 15. Perer. Osiand.

Quest. 2. Of the signification of the name Daniel.
1. The name Daniel signifies the judgments of God, or God is my judge, which
name was given him by the singular providence of God, for both per eum
annntiata sunt iudicia Dei, by him the judgments of God were denounced and
declared, and God was present with him, as his defender and judge against his
adversaries. Bullin.

2. Lyranus then is deceived, who thinks that in this name there is relation
to that judgment which Daniel awarded against the two adulterous Elders, which
wrongfully accused Susanna: for that story was not of Dauiels writing, neither
is found in the original, as afterward shall more fully be declared.

3. There was another Daniel David's second son by Abigail, who also is called
Chileah: but he was long before those times: 2. Sam. 3. 3. 1. Chron. 3. 1.

Quest. 3. Of the kindred of Daniel.
1. Hierome in his preface to Daniel writes, that the Septuagint in the
beginning of the history of Susanna, which they make the 14. chapter of this
book, do affirm that Daniel was of the tribe of Leui: whereupon Bellarmine
thinks that there were two Daniels, Bellar. lib. 1. de verb. Dei. c. 9.
one of the tribe of Judah, who writ the prophecy, the other of the tribe of
Leui. But herein Perfrius, of his own sect and society, contradicts him,
Perer. praesat. i^ Daniel.
showing that neither the Synagogue of the Jews then, nor the Church of Christ
now, ever acknowledged any more, then one Daniel to be a writer of Scripture.

2. Dionysius Carthusianus thus remooueth the doubt, that Daniel was by his
fathers side of Leui, Lib. de vit. and obit. sanct. vet. testamen^.
by his mothers of Judah: so also Isidore thinks, that Daniel was both of the
kindred of the Priests and the kings: because it was usual for those tribes to
match together in Marriage: Pererius also rejects this as an humane conjecture
without any ground of the Scripture: Praefat. in Daniel.

3. His opinion then is that Daniel was of the kings stock, and that in him
and the rest was fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah to Hezekiah, that his
sons, that is, his posterity should be carried captive into Babylon. Of the
same opinion that he was ex genere regio, 2. king. 20. v. 17. Lib. 10. antiqu.
c. 11.
of the kings stock, are Bullinger, Osiander, with others: Josephus also says
that he was of the kinsmen of Zedekiah king of Judah.

But this is no necessary argument, for that prophecy might be accomplished
in either of the kings stock, as well as in Daniel: And Josephus may be
deceived in this, as in the like conceit that Daniel was a gelded man, and made
an Eunuch: Orig. hom. 7. in Matthew.
so thinks also Origin: their conjecture is, because As^penaez to whose care
and charge Daniel was committed, is said to be the chief Sarisim of the
Eunuchs; but this is no sure argument: for Pharaoh, Genes. 37. is called by
that name, who had both wife and children. Calvin.

4. Wherefore concerning Daniels kindred somewhat is certain, that he was of
the tribe of Judah: which is evidently expressed, c. 1. v. 6. Polan. some
things are uncertain, as, 1. Whether he were of the kings seed: for they were
of the kings seed, and of the Princes, v. 3. therefore not all of the kings
seed. Iun. 2. It is uncertain likewise that Daniels fathers name should be
Zabaa, Epiph. cont. Melchesedek.
as Epiphanius. 3. Or that Bethoron the upper, which first belonged to Ephraim,
and afterward to the Levites, was the country of Daniel, as In Synop.
Dorotheus and Lib. de vit. and obit. Prophet.
Epiphanius.

Quest. 4. Why Daniels kindred is not particularly expressed in the text.
1. Some think the reason is, because this is an historical, rather then a
Prophetical book: but this is no good answer: for so the book also of
Nehemiah is historical, and yet his kindred is expressed, the words of
Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah.

2. Some make this the cause: Daniel his kindred was well known, and therefore
it needed not to be expressed: So was Isaiahs and Ieremiahs, and their kindred
well known, and yet it is set down in the beginning of their prophecy.

3. Neither was this the reason, why Daniel inserteth not his name, because
among the Chaldes he was called by another name, Belthazar: for c. 10. 2. he
says, I Daniel was in heaviness.

4. Pererius says, causam satis idoneam and probabilem, etc. I can find no
meet or probable cause hereof, why Daniels genealogy is not expressed.

5. Unless this reason may be yielded, that those Prophets have their kindred
expressed, which were specially sent from the Lord upon some message and
embassage to his people, as Isaiah, Jeremiah, with the rest: not they which
only had visions, without any such special commission: which observation
notwithstanding does not always hold: for Solomon had no such prophetical
commission: and yet he is described by his parentage, Prove. 1. 1. Solomon the
son of David.

Quest. 5. When Daniel began to prophecy, and at what age.
1. Pererius thinks that Daniel was some 10. year old when he went into
captivity, in the third year of king Iehoiakim, being borne, as he
supposes, about the 25. year of Josias reign: but this cannot be so, that
Daniel was then so young: for 5. years after this he expounded Nebuchadnezzars
dream, which was the 2. year after they stood before the king. c. 2. 1. their
three years of education being expired. c. 1. 5. And upon that occasion
Daniel began to be famous for his wisdom, celebrated by the Prophet Ezekiel,
c. 28. 3. thou art wiser then Daniel. And before that the same Prophet makes
mention of Daniel for his piety, joining him with Noah and Job: of whom the
Lord says, that they should only save their own souls, they shall neither
deliver son nor daughter, c. 14. 20. it seems then that Daniel was of
years to have sons and daughters. Daniel then within five years of his
captivity growing into such fame for his wisdom, could not be so very a
child, as Epiphanius makes him, and Isidorus, the one calling him infantem, an
infant, the other, puerum, a boy, when he went into captivity: he was rather
17. or 18. year old, as Osiander coniectureth. The ground of Pererius opinion
is, because Daniel in the story of Susanna is called a young child, when he
delivered her from her false accusers: which he thinks to have fallen out in
the beginning of Daniels captivity, in the 12. year of his age: but that is a
weak ground which is taken from an Apocryphal story.

2. Some think that Daniel began to prophecy one year after Ezechiel, who
prophesied the year of the world 3359. and Daniel ann. 3360. Polanus: but that
is not like: for Daniel prophesied in the 5. year of his captivity, when he
interpreted the kings dream, which was in the 8. year of Iehoiakims reign,
for in the third year he went into captivity: but Ezekiel began to prophecy
in the 5. year of Iehoiakims or Ieremias captivity, Ezekiel. 1. 3. which was 8.
years after the 5. year of Daniels captivity. And how could Ezekiel in his
prophecy commend the wisdom of Daniel, if before that time he had not showed
it in the interpretation of dreams.

Wherefore it is more probable, that Daniel began his prophecy before Ezekiel:
yet not so long before, Praefat. in Dan.
as Theoderet thinks, that is 12. years: for so long it was from the 3.
year of Iehoiakim, who reigned 11. years, when Daniel was carried away, to
the 5. year of Iechonias captivity. But we must not begin Daniels prophecy
so soon, which was in the 5. year of his captivity, after the three years
of his education, and two years more of his service and ministering before the
king: though the history of Daniel take beginning from the 3. year of
Iehoiakim when Jerusalem was besieged: Daniel then beginning to prophecy in
the interpretation of dreams, in the 5. year of his captivity, which was the
8. year of Iehoiakim, began some 6. or 7. years before Ezekiel to show his
prophetical gift.

Quest. 6. Of the time when Daniel had his several visions.
1. Pererius thinks that Daniel expounded the Kings first dream, c. 2. when
he was 35. year old: but that can in no wise agree with his former opinion
concerning Daniels age, that he was but ten year old, when he went first
into captivity: for this dream was expounded in the 5. year of Daniels
captivity: so that though we hold him to be toward 20. when he was carried
away, he could not then be altogether 30. years of age, when he opened the
meaning of the Kings first dream. Pappus also is deceived, who thinks that
this very year Ezechiel commended Daniel for his justice and piety, c. 14.
for this commendation of Daniel by the Prophet Ezechiel, was at the least in
the 6. year of Iechonias captivity, Ezech. 8. 1. which was the 14. year of
Daniels being in Babel: for he going thither in the 3. year of Iehoiakim, who
reigned 11. years, was there eight years of Iehoiakims reign, and then
followed the 6. years of Iechonias captivity: but the occasion of Pappus
error is, for that he makes the third year of Iehoiakim, which he counts
from the time when he became tributarie to the King of Babel, which was in his
8. year; in deed the eleventh year of his reign: which shall be showed
afterward to be otherwise, in the 1. v. of the 1. chapter.

2. But Pappus collecteth well, that 5. years after this, the same year
wherein Jerusalem was taken, that Daniel was celebrated by Ezechiel for his
singular wisdom, c. 28. 3. which was in the 11. year of Iechonias captivity,
Ezech. 26. 1. and the last year of Zedekiah his reign: which was in the year
of the world 3365.

3. When Nebuchadnezzer set up the golden image, c. 3. it is uncertain, the
time being not expressed: but it is like it was after the destruction of
Jerusalem and other nations, when Nebuchadnezzer was now become great, and
puffed up with his victories.

4. Pappus thinks that 10. years after, in the year 3375. Nebuchadnezzer
had his second dream of the great tree, c. 4. but that cannot be: for this
dream the King had after he had conquered the nations, and subdued Egypt,
which was the last, and this was after the 27. year of the captivity of
Iechonia, Ezech. 30. 1. but the 3375. was but the 21. year of his captivity,
10. year after the taking of Jerusalem, in the 11. year of Zedekiah.
Therefore I think rather with Iunius, that this second dream of the King,
Annot^o Ezekiel. c. 30. 1.
was some 10. years before the end of Nebuchadnezzers reign, about the 27.
of Iechoniah his captivity, in the 37. year of whose captivity Evilmerodach
began to reign after Nebuchadnezzer, 2. king. 22. 27. and it was in the 35.
year of Nebuchadnezzers reign, and the year of the world 3382.

5. Then follows in order, within one twelve month after, how the King was
taken from among men, and lived among beasts 7. years: after which time being
restored, he reigned not 7. years, from years 83. to 90. as Pappus, but only
two years. Iun. ibid.

6. The visions which Daniel had in the 7. and 8. chapters, which were in the
1. and 3. year of Belthashar, were showed him when Daniel was 80. year old,
as Pererius thinks: but he was then at the least 90. years of age: for he
had been in captivity 75. years: from the beginning of Nebuchadnezzers
reign (which concurred with part of the 3. and 4. year of Iehoiakims reign,
Ierem. 25. 1.) who reigned 45. years, and Evilmerodach his son 30. Bulling.
chron. and Daniel is supposed to have been 17. or 18. year old, when he first
was carried unto Babel.

7. Pererius takes it, that Daniel expounded the writing upon the wall to king
Balthazar, when he was an 100. year old: but that cannot agree with his former
computation, seeing he holds that he was but 80. year old, when he saw these
visions in the 1. and 3. year of Balthazar: for he reigned in all but 3.
years: though indeed Daniel was then toward an 100. year old. Again, Pappus
is deceived, who makes 10. years space between the time of these visions, c.
7. and 8. and the vision of the handwriting upon the wall, which was, as he
sets it down, ann. 3434. the other vision being ann. 1423. as he casts
it: for Balthazar had but three years in all, as it may thus be gathered: The
captivity continued 70. years: which must begin from Iechoniah his
captivity, in the 37. year whereof began Evilmerodach to reign 30. years:
and after him Belthazar 3. years, which in all make 70. years.

8. The next year following, which was the first of Darius, Daniel was
advanced to be one of the 3. chief Rulers, c. 6. and the same year he had
that prophecy revealed of the 70. weeks. c. 10. 1. Perer. Papp. About this
time was Daniel toward an 100. year old: and this was in the year 3425.
Bullinger, not ann. 3435. Pappus.

9. The next year after this was Daniel cast into the Lions den, as is
declared c. 6.

10. The visions in the 11. chap. Daniel had in the first year of Darius: the
visions in the 10. chap. in the 3. year of Cyrus, which Pappus reduces to the
year 3438. but it was the year 3427. Bullinger.

Quest. 7. Of the whole time of Daniels age, and time of prophesying.
1. Isidorus gives unto Daniel an 110. years, and thinks he lived unto the
reign of Darius Hystaspes: but this assertion overthrows it self: for from
the third year of Iehoiakim, when Daniel went into captivity, until the
reign of Darius Hystaspes, are counted an 128. years, unto the which the age
of Daniel being added, which Pererius holds to have been but ten, all his
years will make an 138. Perer. praefat.

2. Pappus counts from Daniels first captivity ann. 3354. unto the 3. year
of Cyrus, which he makes ann. 1438. 92 years: but he is much deceived: for
they can come but to 82. years: for the 3. year of Iehoiakim, was 8. years
before Iechonias captivity, from the which the 70. years must be numbered,
which ended the first year of Cyrus, then 2. year more of Cyrus reign must
be put too, which in all make but 82.

3. Therefore Osianders reckoning has the best ground; who judges that Daniel
lived an 100. years: he was 18. when he went into captivity, in the third
year of Iehoiakim, from whence to the 3. year of Cyrus, are years 82. which
being added to the former number, make just an 100. years.

Quest. 8. Why Daniel is not mentioned to have returned with the rest out of
captivity.
Josephus writes, lib. 10. Antiquit. that Daniel built at Ecbatane in media a
goodly tower, which remained unto his time, so fresh and beautiful, as if it
had been but lately builded: which the Kings of Persia made such account of, as
that they made it the place of their sepulture, and committed the keeping
thereof to one of the Jewish Priests: but Daniel himself was buried at
Babylon: whereupon this question is moved, seeing Daniel lived unto the third
year of Cyrus reign, after the Edict was sent forth for the restitution and
return of the Jews, why that he returned not with the rest: To the which it
may be answered: 1. That Daniel being now stricken in years, an 100. year
old, was unfit in respect of his great age, to take so long a journey. 2. Or
rather that he remained to be the protector or defender of the Jews which were
left behind in Babylon, as many there stayed still. 3. But of all other it is
most like, that he was thought a necessary man to be employed about the king
for the good of his Nation, and to help forward their cause: as Theodoret
thinks, that Cyrus was taught of Daniel that prophecy of Isai, c. 45.
wherein Cyrus is brought in by name, that he should procure the deliverance of
the Lords people.

Quest. 9. Of the times wherein Daniel lived, compared with f^rr^n Curonicles,
and of the memorable things which happened therein.
1. The third year of Iehoiakim, where Daniel began his captivity, Pererius
thinks to fall out just in the 32. Olympiad, and the 105. year from the
building of Rome, and the 3. year of Cyrus reign, unto the which Daniel
attained, he makes to concur with the 3. year of the 55. Olympiad, and from
the building of Rome 200. Bullinger accounts it otherwise: the first time,
which was the 3. year of Iehoiakim, he makes answerable to the 3. year of
the 38. Olympiad, and the 125. year from the building of Rome: the 3. of Cyrus
he sets against the 59. Olympiad, and the 209. year from the founding of
Rome: therefore of these things there is no great certentie.

2. The memorable things which happened in the time of Daniels captivity,
which Pererius makes to contain 90. years, but in just account they make but
82. years (as is before showed) were these: for within this compass of time
happened three captiuities of the Jews, under Iehoiakim, Iechonia, and
Zedekiah, with their deliverance, and return into their country: three great
Prophets were amongst the Jews, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel. Among the Romans
were kings Ancus Martius, Tarquinius Priscus, Seruius Tullus: among the
Grecians flourished the 7. wise men: At this time was Craesus king of Lydia:
among the Chaldeans Nebuchadnezzar: of the Medes Cyaxares: and Cyrus founded
the Empire of the Persians: the kingdoms of the Jews, Chaldeans, Medes were
dissipate, and three famous cities, Jerusalem, Nineueh, Babylon destroyed.
Perer.

Quest. 10. Of the excellency, use, and utility, of this book of Daniel.
1. This book is commended by the worthiness of the author, the Prophet Daniel
a man beloved of God, to whom he revealed the mysteries and secrets of his
will, whom the Prophet for his piety and uprightness joins with Noah and
Job, Ezech. 14. 14. and commends for his wisdom, Ezech. 28. 3.

2. Beside, the excellency of the matter does set forth the price of the
work. 1. First, concerning civil matters, it treats of the change and
alteration of states and kingdoms: 2. For Divine it has the most clear
prophesies in all the old Testament of the time of the Messiahs coming. 3.
Therein are set forth examples of excellent virtues, of abstinencie in Daniel:
of constancy in the three children, which were put into the fiery oven: of
piety in Daniels thrice praying in a day unto his God. 4. Therein are
contained the heavenly doctrines of the blessed Trinity, of the resurrection
of the body, c. 12. of redemption and remission of sins purchased by Christ
death. c. 9. 5. Many admirable and miraculous things are here set forth, as the
walking of the three children untouched in the fiery oven, of Daniels being
in the Lions den, of the transplantation of Nebuchadnezzer from being a
king, to live amongst brute beasts. 6. yea therein are contained all ways of
Prophesying, which are either by dream, or vision, sensible apparitions, or
illumination of the mind, all which ways and means the Lord used to reveal
and declare his will to his servant the Prophet.

Quest. 11. Of the authority of the prophecy of Daniel.
1. The Jews do derogate much from the authority of this book, not counting
it among the Prophetical writings, of the which there are three opinions: 1.
Some think that the Jews do not reject the prophecy of Daniel, but only
count it among the books called (...), holy writings: for they divide the old
Testament, into the law contained in the five books of Moses, and the
Prophets which are eight, Joshua, the Judges, Samuel, the Kings, Isaiah,
Jeremy, Ezekiel, the twelve Prophets: and into the holy writings, as they call
them, whereof there are nine, Job, David, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the
Canticles, Hug. in prologom. Hieron. in Daniel.
the Chronicles, Daniel, Ezra, Ester. So Pererius praefat. Likewise Hugo
Cardinal, who makes two kind of Prophets, some that had only gratiam
prophecialem, the gift and grace of prophecy: others, which beside the gift
were especially called and sent to that end to prophecy, and in this sense
only the Jews hold neither David, nor Daniel to be Prophets.

2. Theoderet does simply reprehend the Jews for denying Daniel to be a
Prophet, Theodoret. praefat. in Daniel.
and this book to be any of the prophetical writings: so also Iunius
affirms, that the Jews deny this book to be counted among the Hagiographa,
or holy writings.

3. But the truth is, as Polanus sets it down, that the Elder Jews did
acknowledge this book to be authentical and canonical, and equal in
authority to the book of the Psalms, the Proverbs of Solomon, the
Lamentations of Jeremy, and diverse of them have written commentaries, upon
this book, as R. Solomon, R. Leui, Ben Gerson, R. Abraham, Aben Ezra, R.
Saadia, with others: but the later Rabbines do deny the book of Daniel to be
authentical, and therefore seldom read it, as he speaks of his own
experience, how diverse Rabbines in Moravia whose help he used, Polanus in
Prologo^^
did confess, that they seldom did read the prophecy of Daniel: the
occasion whereof he thinks to be this, because Daniel does so evidently point
out the time of the Messiah his coming.

4. But this error of the Jews in rejecting this prophecy of Daniel may thus
further be refuted. 1. The books which are called Hagiographa, holy writings,
were of three sorts; either they are taken for those books which were laid up
by the Arc, and had the miraculous and extraordinary approbation by the Vrim
and Thummim, and other visible demonstrations: or for such canonical books,
which though they had not that allowance, being written after the captivity,
when those visible monuments of the Arc, the Vrim and Thummim ceased, yet were
written by the spirit of God, and commended to his Church: and thirdly, those
books were called holy writings, which were not made of Canonical authority,
but only preferred before other humane writings, and received of the Church
into some higher order, though not made equal to the the Scriptures. Now
though the prophecy of Daniel be not of the first sort, yet that it is
authentical and canonical of the second, it thus may appear.

The authority then of this book is set forth by testimony both internal and
external: the external is either divine or humane: the divine, essential or
accidental: the humane is either Ecclesiastical and domestical, or foreign
or profane: these further shall thus be declared in their order.

1. The internal testimony est spiritus testificatio, the inward witness of
the spirit, which clears our understanding: that by the same spirit we
acknowledge the Divine prophecy of Daniel, by the which he wrote it.

2. The Divine external testimony, which is called essential, is consensio
cum diuino canone, the agreement which this prophecy has with the rest of the
Scriptures: and the warrant which Daniel has from the testimony of Christ,
Matthew. 24. 15.

3. The Accidental is a signis, and euentis, from the signs which God joined
with the prophecy; as Daniels interpretation of dreams, and his preservation
from the lions, c. 6. The events were the true and sensible accomplishment of
the predictions and prophesies contained in this book, as all histories, which
do write of these Kingdoms do bear record: and where these two do concur
with the truth of doctrine, namely, the signs and events, they are diligently
to be regarded, Deuteronomy. 17.

4. The Ecclesiastical testimony, is the consent of Gods Church, and general
approbation of the servants and worshippers of God; which though it be not so
forcible to persuade us as the former, yet it is a good motion and inducement
joined with the rest: hereunto may be added that testimony of Josephus,
Joseph. lib. 2. contr. Appio.
that all the books which were written unto the time of Artaxerxes were of
divine authority.

5. The foreign testimony is the authority and allowance, which this book
found even among the Heathen: as is evident in that a great part of this
prophecy is written in the Chalde tongue, which shows that the truth thereof
was even evident to the Chaldeans: Iunius. And here may be remembered, how
laddus the high Priest, showed Daniels prophecy unto Alexander the great, and
by name that vision, c. 8. how the goat, which signified the Grecians,
overcame the ram, which betokened the Persian Monarchy, as Josephus
reports: whereupon this book was had in great admiration of Alexander.

Quest. 12. Of the difficulty and obscurity of this prophecy.
Pererius gives these four reasons, and causes thereof. 1. Because diverse
things are otherwise reported of foreign historiographers, then they are
remembered in this book: as in the 2. chap. Nebuchadonazer is made the
mightiest King upon the earth, whereas Herodotus much more extolleth the power
of Cyaxares, who reigned about that time among the Medes. c. 5. Balthazar is
said to be deprived both of life and kingdom by Darius king of the Medes,
whereas other writers ascribe it to Cyrus. c. 11. the Angel foretells but of
three kings after Cyrus unto Alexanders time, whereas there were many more.

2. The transposing of the story, which is often used in this book, is an
other cause of the darkness and obscurity: as the prophesies contained in
the 7. and 8. chap. which were showed unto Daniel under the reign of
Balthazar, in order should be set before the 6. c. Pererius adds, that the
history of Susanna, which happened when Daniel was yet a child, and the story
of Bell and the dragon, which was done the Empire of the Chaldes yet standing,
should be placed the one before the second, the other before the 5. chap. But
concerning these two pretended histories, there is no certainty of the truth
of them, at the least when and at what time they were done, and therefore this
instance might be spared.

3. The prophesies and visions themselves are dark and obscure, as that c. 9.
of the 70. weeks, which term when it should take beginning, and how it
proceeded, and was continued, is a matter of deep understanding.

4. The variety of histories, which must be used as helps for the
understanding of this prophecy: and the change and alteration of so many
states and kingdoms, in this book decyphered, do make this prophecy
intricate: specially because many of those historical writers, whose works
are necessary for the opening and unfolding of this mystical prophecy, are
now lost and perished. As Hierome sends us to the histories of S^et^nius,
Callinicus, Possidonius, Thean, Andronicus, Polybius, Diodorus, Titus Linius,
Tr^gus Pompeius; whose histories concerning these matters here prophesied of by
Daniel, are now either in part or in whole wanting.

5. And thus much was signified by the Angel, that this history should seem
obsure, until the things therein contained were accomplished: as he says to
Daniel, Go thy way Daniel, for the words are closed up, and sealed, till the
end of the time: until then they should be obscure to all: but even afterward
also, when the fullness of time is come, none of the wicked shall have
understanding: and least we should be discouraged altogether, it is added, but
the wise shall understand. Dan. 12. 9, 10.


4. Places of doctrine.
1. The doctrine of Gods providence notably is set forth in this book, that he
then most of all takes care for his Church, when he seems most to neglect
it: 1. Doctr. Of Gods providence.
that nothing falls out by chance, but that the confusion and alteration of
states and kingdoms are by the providence and disposing of God: Matthew. 10 29
for a sparrow cannot fall upon the ground without Gods will: much more is the
fall and ruin of kingdoms disposed of by the Lord, Calvin.

2. In this book many profitable doctrines are laid forth, as of the Trinity,
c. 7. of the redemption and remission of sins by Christ, c. 10. of the
resurrection, 2. Doct. Of the Trinity, of the passion of Christ, of the
resurrection.
chap. 12. Pere.

3. In this book is set forth the continuance and perpetuity of Christ's
kingdom, when all terrene and earthly dominions shall cease: regna mundi
caduca esse ostendit, he shows that the kingdoms of the world are vain, and
the kingdom of Christ only shall continue as the stone, Dan. 2. 36. Isa. 4. 7.
which was cut without hands, broke the image in pieces, as the Prophet
says, the increase of his kingdom, etc. shall have no end. Bullinger.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. The vulgar Latin translation not the best.
1. Pintus in his Prooeme upon Daniel says, that the vulgar Latin translation
is, omnibus alijs illustrior and prestantior, is a more excellent and worthy
translation then any other: and so he prefers it before the original Hebrew
and Chalde text: therefore that the blind presumption and boldness of these
Romanists may herein appear, it shall not be amiss to note some special
places wherein the Latin translation has greatly erred.

1. c. 6. v. 15. The Latin translator reads, Viri intelligentes regem
dixerunt, etc. the men understanding the king, said, etc. whereas in the
original the word is, hargishu, they came together. A. I.

2. c. 7. v. 18. The Saints shall take the kingdom. L. where it is truly
translated thus: they shall take the kingdom of the Saints. A. P. I.

3. c. 8. 2. I was by the gate of Vlai. L. but in the original, I was by the
river Vlay: A. P. I. V. the word is vbal, a river.

4. c. 8. v. 9. and against strength, L. against or toward the pleasant or
delectable ( land.) V. A. P. I. G. hatzebi, beauty or delight it self.

5. c. 8. v. 13. and he said to him. L. he said to me. A. P. V. I. etc. the
word is eelai, to me.

6. c. 11. 6. to make friendship. L. to make an equal ( peace.) A. P. I. V.
mesharim, rectitudines, equality, rightnes.

7. C. 11. v. 8. he shall carry captive their gods, and their graven images,
L. their gods and their Princes. A. P. V. G. I. nesichehem, their princes:
nesich, a prince.

8. C. 11. v. 22. the arms of the fighter shall be subdued. L. the arms of
the ouerflowing shall be overthrown. A. P. V. I. shataph, to ouerflow.

9. C. 11. 45. he shall plant the tabernacle of (Apadno.) L. the tabernacle of
his palace. A. P. V. I. G.

10. C. 12. 2. some to shame, vt videant semper, that they may always see. L.
some to shame and perpetual contempt. A. P. V. G. I. the word is diron,
contempt.

By these few places given in instance, a conjecture may be made of the rest of
the translation, that being so erroneous it can not be compared for gravity
or authority to the original. The other places of moment, wherein this
translation often slippeth, shall be noted in the diverse readings upon every
Chapter.

2. Controv. The history of Susanna, the Song of the three children, and of
Bell and the Dragon, are no parts of Daniel, nor of the Canonical Scripture.
The Romanists would thus persuade, that these histories which are annexed to
Daniel, and make in the vulgar Latin translation the 13. and 14. chap. to be
Canonical.

1. Because the Council of Trent has so defined them to be held for
Canonical Scripture.

2. They are used and recited in the Roman leiturgie and Mass as Canonical
Scripture.

3. They are cited and alleged by diverse of the Fathers.

4. Diverse of the Fathers of the Greek Church, as Origin, Athanasius,
Chrysostom, Cyril, do hold these parcells to be Canonical. Thus Bellar. lib.
1. de verb. Dei. c. 9. Pintus in prooem. Perer. lib. 16. in Daniel, in praefat.

Contra. 1. The Tridentine Council or Chapter rather, was no true general
Council; but a partial conuenticle of the Romanists, wherein there were not
so many Bishops congregate or assembled together, as have been in many
provincial Synods. 2. And though it had been a lawful Synod, yet it had no
lawful authority to make the canon of the Scripture, which belongs only
unto God: the Church only is to declare, not to constitute the sacred Canon.
3. Neither can they produce any general Council, wherein the Pontificiall
canon of Scripture has been confirmed.

2. Pererius himself gives instance of many things which are rehearsed in the
Popish Mass, Peter. ibid.
which are not canonical: as the legend of S. Catharine, how her body was
placed by the Angels in mount Sinai: the Mass of the immaculate conception of
the virgin Marie: and somewhat is taken out of the 4. book of Esdras: all
these he himself confesses not to be of Canonical authority, though
publicly recited and sung in their Mass: the argument therefore follows not.

3. Neither is all taken to be Canonical, which is cited by the Fathers: for
they many times do allege the testimonies of Poets, and heathen writers: and
the later writers do produce the authorities of the Elder fathers, Iustine,
Tertullian, Ireneus, Cyprian, Origin: are their works therefore to be held
canonical?

4. Though some of the Greek Fathers, therein following the Greek
translation, which was of great authority, do make these histories
Canonical; yet their testimony is not sufficient to make that part of
Scripture, which is not. And against their judgment, we may oppose the
sentence of other Fathers, as of Hierome, Hieron. prolog. cum Paulum and E^
stach.
who doubts not to call the historical narrations of Bell and the Dragon,
fables: likewise he alleges how Eusebius and Apollinarius would not answer
Porphirie his cauillous exceptions against these supposed parcels of Daniel,
because they were not found in the original, neither were held to be of divine
authority. Pererius here answers, Nobis cuae non sit, quid isti senserint,
quidve scriptis prodiderint: mihi pluris est divus Ignatius Martyr, Athanasius,
Chrysostomus, etc. We need not care what these thought, or what they set forth
in writing: I make more account of holy Ignatius Martyr, Athanasius,
Chrysostom, etc. In which indifferent answer, he teaches us what to say: If
he care not what Eusebius, Apollinarius, Hierome think or write on this
matter; why should it move us, what Ignatius, Athanasius, with the rest,
testify in this cause? neither do I see why the one should be more accounted
of, or held of greater authority then the other.

Our contrary Arguments against the Canonical authority of these additions,
are these which follow:

1. They are not extant in the Hebrew and Chalde original.

2. They contain some things contradictorie to the Canonical histories: as
the Apocryphal story says that Daniel was of the tribe of Levi, whereas he is
said in the true story to be of the tribe of Judah, c. 1. v. 6.

3. Josephus making mention of all the other histories recorded in this book,
Lib. 10. antique.
yet omitteth these two as Apocryphal relations.

4. Hierome touches certain objections propounded by a Jew against these
Apocryphal additions. Prolog. in Dan.
1. That it is not like, that the three children had so much leisure, as to go
through all the elements and creatures in their hymn or song. 2. It was no
such miraculous thing, but a natural work to kill the Dragon with gobbets,
and balls of pitch. 3. And it is without example, that any Prophet was so
transported in body, as Abacuk was taken up by the hair of the head to go
and minister unto Daniel.

Answ. Here the Romanists do give us this slender satisfaction. 1. That this
book might be translated by Theodotian out of the Hebrew or Chalde, which is
now extant: or it might be written in the Greek tongue originally, by some
stirred by the spirit of God, as the author of Ecclesiasticus was. Perer.

2. There might be two Daniels, one of Judah, an other of Levi. Bellarm.

3. Josephus omitteth many things in his history of the Jews antiquities.
Perer.

4. 1. So Jonas prayed in the Whales belly, being in great danger, as the
other were in the fire. 2. Solomon though moved by the spirit of God, yet by
humane wisdom decided the controversy between the two harlots. 3. Henoch and
Helias were translated in their bodies. Hug. Card. in proleg. Hieron. in Daniel.

Contra. 1. It is evident that this book was not translated either out of
Chalde or Hebrew, by the Greek allusion: (...), as if one should say, alluding
to a cutting or pricking tree, he will cut thee: and in the Greek tongue
originally were none of the Canonical books of the old Testament written: for
unto the Jews were committed the oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. but the books set
forth in the Greek could not be committed to the Hebrews.

2. If there were two Daniels, why are those additions annexed to the prophecy
of Dani^l, as parts thereof, he being not the author?

3. Josephus omitteth many matters of circumstance, but complete histories, and
the same memorable, he seldom omitteth: but this argument is urged, not as
necessary, but only probable.

4. 1. It is one thing to pray in distress as Jonas did, an other to give
thanks at large unto God, before riddance from the danger: for that had been
in some sort to tempt God, to stay longer in the danger then there was cause.
2. That experiment of Salomons wisdom is set forth as an act of a prudent and
wise man, directed by the spirit of God: but the other is set down as a
prophetical act: therefore the instance is not alike. 3. Henoch and Helias
were translated out of the world, but not from place to place, as this Abacuk
is supposed to have been: and it cannot be gathered, that they retained their
bodies still, when they were taken up: but rather, that by the power of God
they were dissolved: which we are to think for the honor of Christ, who was
the first that in his whole humanity entered the heavens.

6. Moral observations.
1. 1. Obser. The infallible certentie of faith in Christ to be the only
Redeemer.
In that in this prophecy of Daniel, there is a manifest prophecy pointing
out the very time of the coming of Christ, c. 9. quam clarum and firmum est
hoc testimonium, etc. what a clear and sure testimony is this, which we may
oppose against Satan, and all Atheists, and other gainsayers, that Christ is
the true Redeemer, that was to come into the world. Calvin.

2. 2. The profit that comes by affliction.
In that the Lord did such wonderful things for his people in captivity, in
so much that the glory of God was propagated more, disperso and afflicto
populo Dei, quam regnante, and agent^ in pace, etc. the people of God being
dispersed and afflicted, then while they reigned and lived in peace: it shows
the profit that comes by the cross, Bulling. both in general to the whole
Church, and in particular to every member thereof, as the Prophet David says,
It is good for me, that I have been afflicted, Psalm. 119. 71.

3. 3. The wicked though never so mighty shall be punished.
Further, illustria gloriae divinae documenta sunt iudicia in reges, the
judgment of God upon Kings and upon their kingdoms, are notable
demonstrations of Gods glory, Polan. as the Prophet Isai says, Topheth is
prepared of old, it is prepared for the king, Isa. 30. 33.

4. 4. The Church of God must still look for afflictions in this world.
In that Daniel after the prophecy of the coming of Christ, yet foretells
many afflictions, c. 10. 11, 12. which should befall the Church of God in this
world, until the blessed day of the resurrection which is spoken of, c. 12.
when all tears shall be wiped from our eyes; thereby is declared that the
Church of God, and the faithful members thereof must look for no firm and
sure state in this world to continue, but make account through many afflictions
to enter into the kingdom of heaven: sic Genev. in the argument of the book:
for as the Apostle says, Here we look for no continuing city, but seek one
that is to come, Heb. 13. 14. But now by the grace of God I will proceed to
the book it self, having stayed long enough in these general observations.

CHAP. I.
1. The Argument and method.
THis Chapter has three parts. 1. The first shows how that after the King of
Babel had besieged and taken Jerusalem, he carried diverse into captivity. 1. c.
1, 2.

2. In the next part the education of Daniel and of his other companions is
described, from v. 3. to v. 18. where these three things are contained. 1. The
Kings charge unto the chief of the Eunuchs for their education, to v. 7. 2.
Daniels abstinence and refusal to eat of the Kings meat, whereunto was made
a way by that favor which God gave unto Daniel in the sight of the chief of
the Eunuchs, to v. 14. 3. The success thereof, they were increased with gifts
both of mind and body. v. 15, 16, 17.

3. Then the event follows, their ministry before the King, and their
advancement, especially of Daniel, v. 18. to v. 21.

2. The diverse readings.
1. v. In the third year (in the years of three. C. for so shalash signifies
(three,) not the third, but when it is joined with an other word of a cardinal
number, it becomes an ordinal, that is, a number of order) of the reign of
Iehoiakim (not Ioachim. L. for he was the son of Iehoiakim, 2. King. 24. 6.
whom Matthew calls Ieconias, c. 1. and the one is written with kaph, the
other with caph. Iehoiakim signifies the resurrection of the Lord, or the Lord
taking revenge) came Nebuchadnezzer king of Babel (not into Jerusalem. L. for
at the first coming he entered not into the city) and besieged it.

2. v. And the Lord gave into his hand (not in his hand. L. into his power. V.)
Iehoiakim king of Judah, and part of the vessels of the house of God, which he
carried ( that is the vessels, not the persons, as Iun. Polan. for he spoke
only of Iehoiakim before) into the land of Shinar, into the house of his God (
not the house. Polan, for the whole land was not the house of his god. I. his
gods. V. and he brought the vessels into the treasure house of his god ( his
gods. V. the treasury. G.

3. v. And the king had said to Ashpenaz the master of the Eunuchs (the master
of the palace. V. of the Courtiers: for so saris signifies, as Potiphar is so
called, Genesis 37. 36. who had a wife: but properly it signifies an Eunuch, so
called of keeping the chamber, of the Greek word (...), a chamber, and (...),
to keep: Elias Levita notes, that only the ministers or Courtiers of the
Kings of Egypt, Babylon, Medes, and Persians were so called) that he should
carry away, I. P. ( rather, then bring. G. or bring in. L. V. for the same word
is used in the same sense, to carry away, v. 2. and this charge was given at
the taking of Jerusalem) some of the children of Israel, and of the kings
seed, and of the Princes (of the tyrants. L. but that word, though sometime it
were taken in the better part, is now out of use: the word is (partemim) which
Kimhi takes for the princes about Euphrates: but Mercerus thinks rather
thereby to be signified the chief princes, and governors of the Provinces.

4. v. Children in whom there was not any blemish, and well favored ( heb.
good to the sight) and instructed in all wisdom, and skillful in knowledge,
and endued with much understanding, and in whom there was faculty; that they
might stand in the kings palace: I. P. (better then, which were able to stand
in the kings palace: for the distinction coming between does divide the
sentence) and that they might teach them the learning, ( heb. letters. I. P.
L.) and tongue of the Chaldeans.

5. v. And the King appointed them provision for every day ( heb. the thing of
the day in his day) of a portion of the Kings meat, and of the wine which he
drank ( heb. of his drinks) and so to nourish them three years: that at the
end thereof they might stand before the King.

v. 6. Now there was among these of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah,
Mishael, and Hazariah:

v. 7. Upon whom the master of the Eunuchs imposed other names: for he
imposed upon Daniel (he called Daniel. G. but the word shum in the original,
signifies to put on or impose) the name Belteshazzer, and on Hananiah, the
name Shadrach, and on Mishael, the name Meshach, and on Hazariah, the name
Abednego.

v. 8. But Daniel had purposed in his heart ( heb. put it in his heart) that he
would not defile himself ( be defiled. L. V. but the word is, in hithpael, and
has a compound signification) with the portion of the Kings meat (not, with
the Kings table, L.) and with the wine which he drank: ( heb. of his drinks)
therefore he required of the chief of the Eunuchs, (not, the chief of the
Eunuchs. G. for then the Hebrew preposition should be omitted) that he might
not defile himself.

v. 9. Now God had brought ( heb. gitten) Daniel into favor and tender love (
heb. rachamim) with the chief of the Eunuchs (or prince of the Eunuchs. I.
master of the palace. V.)

v. 10. And the chief of the Eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my Lord the
King, who has appointed your meat and your drink: for wherefore ( who if. L.
V. G. but asher is here put for a causall (for) and (lammah) signifies not
(if) but ( wherefore) should he see your faces worse liking ( leaner. L. but
the word properly signifies, sadder, heavier, because they which are lean,
are sad and heavy) then the children which are of your sort. G. (your
companions. L. equals, heb. which are according to your revolution, that is, of
like time and standing, and are appointed likewise three years for their
education) and so ye should make me loose my head. G. (condemn mine head. L.
make me subject unto a capital sentence. V. make me guilty of my head. I.
heb. endebted for my head) unto the King.

11. Then said Daniel to the butler, I. Pol. (not to Melzar. L. V. A. G. for it
is was a propername, as appears by the article (ha) set before it (hamelzar)
whom the chief of the Eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and
Hazariah:

12. Try, I beseech thee thy servants tenue days, and let them give unto us
of pulse that we may eat, and water, that we may drink.

13. Then let our countenances be looked on before thee, and the countenances
of the children that eat of the portion of the kings meat, and as thou see,
deal with thy servants.

14. So he hearkened unto them in this thing, and tried them ten days.

15. And at the end of ten days, their countenance appeared fairer, and
they were better liking ( more corpulent. L. heb. fatter in flesh) then all the
children which did eat of the portion of the kings meat.

16. Then the butler (not Melzar, see before v. 11.) took away the portion of
their meat ( heb. was taking away) and the wine, that they should drink, and
gave them pulse ( heb. seed.)

17. And unto these four children ( children. L. (four) is. omitted) God gave
knowledge and understanding in all learning ( sepher, in books or letters) and
wisdom: also he gave Daniel understanding ( heb. made Daniel to understand) in
all visions, and dreams.

18. Now when the days were expired ( heb. in the end of the days) which the
king appointed ( heb. said) to bring them in; the chief of the Eunuchs
brought them in before Nebuchadnezzar:

19. And the king communed with them, and there was not found of them all like
unto Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Hazariah: therefore stood they before the
king:

20. And in every matter of wisdom and understanding, which the king enquired
of them, he found them by ten parts ( ten fold. L. ten times. G.) better
( heb. above, or superior) then the Magicians, and Astrologers, that were in
all his kingdom.

21. And Daniel was unto the first year of king Cyrus.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. v. 1. Of the third year of Iehoiakim, which is called the fourth,
Ier. 25. 1. how these places are reconciled.
1. Polanus says, that the prophet Jeremy there speaks not of the
captivity of Iehoiakim, as here Daniel does, but only of a certain prophecy
delivered by Jeremy in the fourth year: so that he thinks the third year
here named, and the fourth year there mentioned, not to concure together: But
that the same time and year in both places is signified it is evident, because
the fourth year of Iehoiakim, is said there to be the first year of
Nebuchadnezzars reign. Ier. 25. 1. And the last year of Iehoiakim which was
the 11. is elsewhere found to be the 7. of Nebuchadnezzar, Ierem. 52. 28. and in
the 8. year of the king of Babels reign, 2. King. 24. 12. that is in the end
of the one and beginning of an other; so that if the seventh or eight year of
Nebuchadnezzar fall into the 11. year of Iehoiakim, then the first year must
concur with the others third and fourth.

2. Calvin thinks to dissolve this knot by the distinction of Nebuchadnezzer
the father, and Nebuchadnezzer the son: that in one place the one is spoken
of, and the other in the other: but the question is not concerning the year of
Nebuchadnexzars reign, but the year of Iehoiakims reign, wherein Jerusalem
should be besieged: so that the doubt remains still.

3. Therefore the best solution is, that the first year of Nebuchadnezzar did
concur with the end of the third and the beginning of the fourth year of
Iehoiakim, Vatab. Iun. Genevens. factum est inter annum tertium ^t quartum, it
came to pass between the third and fourth year, etc. Pintus: who thinks
that after the same manner the Evangelists may be reconciled, Mark, who says
that Christ was crucified about the third hour, and John, who writes that he
was crucified at the fixed hour: because Christ was crucified Intervallo illo,
in that space which was between the third and sixth hour: but though this
solution be not so fit for that place, which otherwise may be reconciled, yet
it may serve very conveniently here.

But Calvin takes hereunto this exception: that Nebuchadnezzars first year
cannot concur with Iehoiakims third and fourth, because Daniel three years
after was brought before Nebuchadnezzar in the second year of his reign. Dan.
2. 1. Answ. That is not to be referred to the year of the kings reign, but
rather to the time of Daniels ministry and employment with the king, that in
the second year of his service he expounded the kings dream.

Polanus obiecteth thus, that this confusion of years, that the end of one
should be the beginning of another, is observed in the reign of diverse kings,
the one succeeding another: but here the history of one king only is set
down: But this comparing of years is more usual, in setting together the
reigns of diverse kings at the same time, then of diverse kings one suceeding
another: as is most evident in the comparing of the years of the reign of the
kings of Judah and Israel together, throughout the books of the kings: here
then the years of one and the same king are not compared together, but the
years of Nebuchadnezzar, and Iehoiakims reign.

Quest. 2. How this third year of Iehoiakims reign is to be counted.
1. Josephus thinks that it was the 8. year of his reign, Josephus lib. 10.
antiquit.
so also the author of the Ecclesiastical history following Josephus, when
Nebuchadnezzar came and besieged Jerusalem: and of the same opinion are
Lyranus, Hugo Cardinal. Dyonis. Carthusian. Bullinger, Polanus, Pappus, that
the third year must be counted not from the beginning of Iehoiakims reign,
but from the time, that he was made tributarie to Nebuchadnezzar, which was in
the 8. year of Iehoiakims reign: and from that time he served Nebuchadnezzar
3. years: so that the third year from the imposition of tribute concurreth
with the 11. year of Iehoiakims reign, Polanus: who thus reasons for his
opinion,

1. The third year of Iehoiakim here spoken of, was the seventh year of
Nebuchadnezzar, Ierem. 52. 28. when 3023. Jews were carried into captivity:
but the third year of Iehoiakims reign was but the first of Nebuchadnezzars.
2. If this were the third year of Iehoiakims reign, and consequently the
first of Nebuchadnezzars, then it would follow that Zedekiah was taken in the
21. year of Nebuchadnezzar, which was in the 18. year, Ierem. 52. 29.

Contra. 1. He is deceived in thinking that the captivity there spoken of,
Ier. 52. 28. in the seventh of Nebuchadnezzar, was that first captivity, when
Daniel was carried away: for there were two assaults and invasions of the land
in the reign of Iehoiakim, one in the third and fourth year of Iehoiakim, and
the first of Nebuchadnezzar, an other in the 11. year, which was the 7. of
Nebuchadnezzar, whereof Jeremy speaks.

2. The collection and inference of 21. years has no consequence: for from
Iehoiakims 3. year, who reigned in all but 11. years, to the last of
Zedekiah, who also reigned 11. years, which make in all but 22. years, three
being deducted, there are but 19. years.

2. Wherefore the truer opinion is, that this year here mentioned must be
understood to be the 3. year of Iehoiakims reign, and not from the time of
the tribute imposed. 1. Pererius says, it is violenta and dura interpretatio,
a forced and hard interpretation, the third year being simply named, to
understand it otherwise, then of the third year of his reign. 2. Iunius
yields this reason, because Ierem. 25. 1. the fourth year of Iehoiakims
reign inchoate or begun concurreth with the first of Nebuchadnezzar, then it
must of necessity follow, that Nebuchadnezzars seventh must fall into
Iehoiakims eleventh year: add hereunto an eleven years of Zedekiahs reign,
and so it will fall out that Zedekiah was taken in the 18. year of
Nebuchadnezzer, as is set down by the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 52. 29.

Melancthon herein consents, that Nebuchadnezzar came against Jerusalem in
the third year of Iehoiakims reign, and imposed tribute upon him, and carried
away some pray: and after he had served him 3. years, and he then would have
cast off the king of Babels yoke, then the seventh year after, which was in
the 11. year of Iehoiakims reign, Nebuchadnezzar came up and carried away
Iehoiakim, and his son Iechonias reigned in his stead.

Quest. 3. Of Iehoiakim and Iehoiachin, what difference between them.
1. Josias had 4. sons, the first was Iochanan, called also Iehoachaz, the
second Iehoiakim or Eliakim, who is here mentioned, the third Matthanias,
called also Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum, 1. Chron. 3. 15. this Iehoiakim is
also called Shallum, Ierem. 22. 11. so Epiphanius testifies, tom. 1. sect. 8.
that he was called Sellus.

2. Iehoiakim written with koph and mem, was the name of the father, Iehoiachin
written with caph and nun, was the name of the son, Pintus: and before him
Hierom in 1. Matthew.

3. Rupertus then is deceived, in Daniel. c. 2.
who confounds these two, and makes but one Ioachim, in whose third year
Nebuchadnezzar came up and besieged Jerusalem, and carried Ioachim captive:
whereas it was Iehoiakim the father, in whose third year Nebuchadnezzar came
up, and Iehoiachin, or Iechoniah his son, who was carried captive to Babylon.

4. But whereas Matthew. 1. 11. there is mention made only of Iechoniah: Josias
begat Iechoniah and his brethren, etc. and again verse. 12. Iechonias begat
Salathiel; Pererius observes out of Epiphanius, and Beza also is of the same
opinion, that in the first place Iechonias is taken for Iehoiakim the father,
in the latter for the son, for otherwise there are not 42. but only 41.
generations there rehearsed.

Quest. 4. Why the King of Babel had such an envy against Iehoiakim.
1. First, Nebuchadnezzar came against him, because he was made king by Pharaoh
Necho king of Egypt, with whom Nebuchadnezzar had war and subdued his
country: and thereupon Iehoiakim became tributarie to the king of Babel. 2.
But Nebuchadnezzars hatred was more increased afterward, when as after three
years Iehoiakim rebelled against him, and would have cast off his yoke: then
the king of Babel came up the second time, and carried Iehoiakim away captive,
who after he was dead, was cast out and lay unburied, according to Jeremy his
prophecy. c. 22. 19. 3. But the greatest cause of all was the purpose of God
to punish the wickedness of the king and his people, for he killed the Prophet
Viiah, Ierem. 26. cut Jeremy his prophecy with a knife, and cast it into the
fire, Ierem. 36. beside there were found in his body when he was dead marks
of idolatry, as Lyranus following the Hebrewe notes upon that place, 2.
Chron. 36. 8. Concerning the rest of the acts of Iehoiakim, and his
abominations, which he did, and that which was found upon him, etc. God
therefore for his cruelty, impiety, idolatry, brought this judgment upon
him. Pere.

Quest. 5. Of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babel, and how many there were of that
name.
1. Pintus thinks that Nebuchadnezzar was a general name to the kings of
Babylon, as the kings of Egypt were called by the name of Pharaoh, and the
kings of the Philistines of Abimelek. And he further is of opinion, that this
Nebuchadnezzar had a son of the same name: and that neither of them are the
same with that Nebuchadnezzar mentioned in the story of Judith, who sent
Holofernes against the Jews: for that was after the return of the Jews out
of captivity, as appears, Judith 5. beside he thinks, that neither
Nebuchadnezzar the father, nor the son, was that Nebuchadnezzar, which
destroyed Tyrus according to the prophecy of Ezechiel, 26. 7. which he takes
to be Cyrus or Alexander. But Pintus is in many things here deceived. 1. It is
not to be showed out of the sacred history of Scripture, that all the kings of
Babylon were called by the name of Nebuchadnezzar, but the contrary rather
appears, for this kings sons name was Evilmerodach, 2. King. 25. 27. and
his son Balthazar, Dan. 5. 2. And this Nebuchadnezzar was the son, not the
father: and the second was called great Nebuchadnezzar, for his great exploits,
and many victories: for next unto this succeeded Evilmerodach. So throughout
the whole prophecy of Daniel we must understand the second Nebuchadnezzar.
Iun. 3. We easily agree, that neither of these could be that Nebuchadnezzar
mentioned in the book of Judith: for who that was it is uncertain, and there
is small certainty of any thing in the book beside: for Pintus will have that
story referred to the times after the captivity: Pererius thinks it was
done before the captivity in the time of Manasses: but neither of these can
stand: not the first, for we read of no Nebuchadnezzar after the captivity,
when the kingdom was translated from the Chaldeans to the Persians: nor the
second, for that story of Judith makes mention of the casting down of the
Temple, cap. 5. 18. which had not yet been done in the days of Manasseh. 4.
This Nebuchadnezzar was the same which besieged Tyrus, which he besieged 13.
years as witnesses Josephus, lib. 10. c. 11. he could not be Cyrus or
Alexander, for he is called the king of Babel, Ezekiel. 26. 7.

2. Pererius acknowledges that there were two Nebuchadnezzars, the one here
spoken of, and in the Prophets, the other, whereof mention is made in the book
of Judith; whom he takes to have been before this: and he misliketh their
opinion, who take this Nebuchadnezzar some for Cyrus, some for Cambises, some
for Artaxerxes, or Darius Ochus, the last king but one of the Persians: for
neither was the Temple yet built again under the reign of Cyrus and Cambises,
as is mentioned, Judith 5. and Artaxerxes was 200. years after the return of
the Jews from captivity: whereas the story of Judith seems to have fallen
out immediately after: Judith 5. 19. Pere.

Contra. 1. It appears what small certainty there is of the Apocryphal
book of Judith, seeing it cannot be agreed upon, who that king Nebuchadnezzar
was. 2. He could not be the Elder Nebuchadnezzar: for in his time the temple
was not destroyed, but in his sons: but before the time of Judith it had
been destroyed, Judith 5. 18.

3. Wherefore their opinion is to be preferred that make two Nebuchadnezzars,
the father, and the son, who was called Nebuchadnezzar the great: Iun.
Calvin, Bullinger. Polanus, so also Josephus, who gives unto the reign of the
Elder 23. years, and to the other 43. This Nebuchadnezzar seems to be the
same, whom Ptolome calls Nabopolassar, in the 19. year of whose reign he
says the captivity of Babylon began. Polan.

Quest. 6. Of the acts and exploits of Nebuchadnezzar.
1. Josephus out of Berosus who wrote of the Chalde affairs, reports of
Nebuchadnezzar the second, that being sent by his father the Elder
Nebuchadnezzar against the king of Egypt, who revolted from him, and in the
mean time hearing of his fathers death, returned to Babylon, and took the
government upon him: where he did many princely and sumptuous works: he
beautified the temple of Belus, repaired the edifices of the city, enlarged the
river, compassed the city with a treble wall: built a goodly palace, in the
space of 25. days (which seems incredible,) and built high rocks and
mountains upon vaults of stone, and upon them planted orchards as hanging
aloft, because his wife being brought up in Medea, desired to see some
resemblance of her country: for the like acts he refers us to the histories
of Megasthenes the Indian historiographer, and Diocles who wrote of the Persian
histories, and Philostratus of the Pheniceans, who witnesses that
Nebuchadnezzar besieged Tyrus 13. years, which began in the 7. year of his
reign: as Pererius notes.

2. His acts set down in the Scriptures were these: in the third year of
Iehoiakim he besiedged Jerusalem, and carried the spoil of the city into
Babylon: in the 11. year he came again, and took the city and carried many
into captivity, and slew Iehoiakim, who wanted the honor of burial: then he
set in his place his son Iehoaichin, whom after 3. months he removed, and
appointed Zedekiah in his place, in whose 11. year, which was the 18. of
Nebuchadnezzar, he took Zedekiah and put out his eyes: and the 19. year he
burnt the city and Temple, and carried away the people captive: these things
are thus testified. 2. King. 24. 25. Ierem. 52. And of Nebuchadnezzars
expedition against Cyrus, Ezekiel makes mention, c. 26. to c. 30. In the 25.
year of Nebuchadnezzars reign he subdued Egypt, and removed all the Jews
that were thither fled, to Babylon: Pererius adds further that in the 25.
year of his reign he had that vision of the image, c. 2. but that was rather
in the 5. year of his reign, as is before showed, quest. 6. general. After
this he set up the great golden image, c. 3. and was translated from the
company of men, and lived among brute beasts for the space of seven years,
cap. 4. then he was restored to his kingdom, which he enjoyed peaceably to the
end of his days. Pere.

Quest. 7. Of the time of Nebuchadnezzars reign.
1. Josephus thinks that Nebuchadnezzar reigned 43. years: so also Eusebius,
(...). cap 9.
and Pererius consents: wherein he does not much vary from the years of his
reign which may be collected out of Scripture.

2. Some think that all his reign made up 45. years: Bulling, rather 44.
between both: for in the 8. year of his reign he took Iechonias prisoner, 2
King 24. 12 and c. 25. 27.
in the 37. year of whose captivity, Euilmerodach the son of Nebuchadnezzar
began to reign, who lift up the head of Iehoiachin out of prison; these two
numbers put together, 8. and 37. make 45. and one year must be deducted,
because Nebuchadnezzar is supposed to have died in the 36 year of Iechoniahs
captivity, the last year of his reign, and so the whole sum of years
remains 44.

Quest. 8. Of the city of Babylon.
1. The occasion of the first founding of this city and of the name thereof, is
declared Genesis 11. so called first Babel of the confusion of tongues, and
afterward Babylon, and the country about Babylonia: 2. Nimrod who was the
first king or tyrant rather after the flood, in which sense he is called a
mighty hunter, is held to have been the first founder of Babylon: which was
afterward enlarged by Semiramis, Hierom comment in Oseam.
whom Julius Solinus, and Diodorus Siculus, whom Hierome follows, think to
have been the first builder of Babylon: but she only enlarged it, and raised
up the walls. 3. In this city and the country thereabout the Jews were held
in captivity 70. years: which term being the stinted time of man's life,
Psalm. 90. 10. shows that man during the time of his life, and aboade in this
world, is but a captive, and stranger: as Iaakob called his life a pilgrimage,
Genesis 47. 9. Pintus.

2. Polanus thinks there were 3. cities of this name Babylon, one in Assyria,
whereof mention is made, 2. king 17. 24. an other in Chaldea, which is here
called the land of Sennaar, and the third in Egypt, which is now called Alcayr,
the seat of the Sultanes of Egypt.

But I think the received opinion is more probable, that there were only two
Babylons, one in Chaldea, the other in Egypt, or in the confines of Arabia:
whereof Raphael Volateran. treats lib. 12. now called Cayro, Pintus, that
Babel mentioned 2. King. 17. 24. from whence the king of Ashur brought some to
inhabit Samaria, is Babylon in Chaldea, which was then subject to the king of
Ashur.

3. Stephanus also is deceived, who thinks this Babylon to be the same city,
Stephan. de vrbib.
which was called Seleucia, built by Seleucus Nicanor, which was indeed built
not far off from Babylon, some 300. stadia or furlongs, by which occasion
Babylon became desolate, and not so much frequented: but they were not all one
city: Polanus.

Quest. 9. ver. 1. Of the city Jerusalem.
1. Jerusalem it was the chief city of Palestina, first founded by
Melchisedech, as Josephus thinks, who Genesis 14. is called the king of Shalem:
2. It had diverse names, it was first called Shalem, Genesis 14. Psalm. 75. 3. then
Iebus, of Iebusi the son of Canaan, Josh. 18. 28. afterward it was named
Jerusalem, which signifies the vision of peace; and last of all Aelia, of
Aelius Adrianus the Emperor, who built mount Caluarie, and diverse other parts
of the city. Volat. l. 11. 3. It was divided into two parts, the upper city
where was mount Zion, the city of David, and the Temple, and the nether or
base city, which was under the hill. Pol. 4. The city Jerusalem is sometime
taken in Scripture for the Church of God, as Hebr. 12. 22. Ye are come to Mount
Sinai, to the city of the living God, to celestial Jerusalem. Pintus.

Quest. 10. v. 2. What this phrase means, To be given into ones hand.
v. 2. And the Lord gave Iehoiakim, etc. into his hand, etc. The hand is
diversely taken in Scripture. 1. As first to put the soul or life in the hand,
signifies to put the life in danger, Judge. 12. 3. Iepthah says, I put my life
in my hands. 2. The hand signifies a league or covenant: as the giving of the
hand, implies the plighting of the troth: as Esech. 17. 18. He has despised
the oath, and broken the covenant, yet lo, he had given his hand! 3. It
signifies ministry and service: as Exodus 38. 21. These are the parts of the
Tabernacle, etc. for the office of the Levites by the hand of Ithamar. 4. The
hand signifies help and assistance, as 1. Sam. 22. 17. Saul commands the
Priests to be slain, because their hand was with David, that is, they were
aiding and helping unto him. 5. To lift up the hand against a place, is to
assault it, and threaten against it, as Isa. 10. 32. He shall lift up his hand
toward the mount of the daughter of Sion. 6. To lift up the hands is to pray:
1. Tim. 2. 9. I will that the men pray every where, lifting up pure hands. 7.
To wash the hands, is to purge the heart and works from impuritie and
uncleanness, as Psalm. 26. 6. I will wash mine hands in innocence, O Lord, and
compass thine altar. 8. To put the hand to the mouth, signifies to eat, 1.
Sam. 14. 27. as Jonathan is said to have put his hands to his mouth, when he
did eat of the honey. 9. To lay the hand also upon the mouth, is a figne of
silence: Job. 29. 9. The Princes stayed talk, and laid their hand on their
mouth. 10. By the hands also are understood the works and labors of men's
vocations, as Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather
labor, and work with his hands. 11. To do a thing with an high hand, is to
do it presumptuously: Numb. 15. 30. 12. To touch with the hand, is to humble or
afflict: Psalm. 32. 4. Thy hand is heavy upon me day and night. 13. But to give
into the hands of any, is to bring under their power and subjection, as Judge.
7. 1. The Lord gave them into the hands of Midian seven years: and so it is
taken here. Pintus.

Quest. 11. How Iehoiakim was given into Nebuchadnezzars hand, whether he
carried him to Babylon.
1. Some think that Iehoiakim was bound in chains and carried to Babylon: as
the Latin translatour reads, 2. Chron. 36. 6. and vinctum in catenis duxit
in Babylonem: and being bound in chains he carried him to Babylon: but the
true reading is, he bound him in chains to carry him to Babylon. Iun. Vatab.
Genesis

2. Hugo Card, to justify the Latin translation, thinks that he was carried
to Babylon, and brought back again to Jerusalem, and there killed, and his
body cast without the walls unburied, which was after, at the request of the
citizens, suffered to be buried. But this had been an idle and superfluous
course, to carry him to Babel, and recarie him. And beside it is against the
text, that he was buried at all: Ierem. 22. 19. He shall be buried, as an ass
is buried, even drawn, and cast forth without the gates of Jerusalem. and, c.
36. 30. His dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the
night to the frost.

3. Lyranus and Caietane think, that Nabuchadnezzar caused Iehoiakim to be
bound, having a purpose to carry him to Babylon, but afterward he changed his
mind, and only imposed a tribute upon him: but no such thing can be gathered
in the text, that the King altered his mind for that matter, or laid any
imposition upon him.

4. Josephus thinks that Nabuchadnezzar commanded Iehoiakim to be killed at
Jerusalem, and his body to be cast out of the gates: but the phrase used, Lib.
10. antiq. cap. 8.
2. king. 24. 6. Iehoiakim slept with his fathers, seems to import, not a
violent, but a natural death. And if he were killed at Jerusalem, he needed
not to have been bound in chains to be carried into captivity.

5. Wherefore the more probable opinion is, that at this expedition Iehoiakim
only became tributarie to the king of Babel, 2. king. 24. 1. but he died
afterward in the way, as he was going into captivity (the second time that
Nebuchadnezzar came up against him, which was in his 11. year) before he was
past the borders of Judea, and it may seem not far from Jerusalem: and so he
may be said to be cast out of the gates, that is, the borders and confines
thereof. Iun. Polan.

Quest. 12. Whether Daniel at this time went into captivity with Iehoiakim.
1. Lyranus and Dionys. Carth. do refer the captivity of Daniel to the 11.
year of Iehoiakims reign: but the text here is contrary, which makes
mention only of the third year of Iehoiakim, when Daniel went into
captivity, and other children of the Princes of Judah.

2. Hierome thinks, that Daniel and Ezekiel were carried away captive together
with Ieconias, Hier. sup. 1. ^^se^chiel.
who reigned but 3. months after his father Iehoiakim: but this text evidently
shows, that Daniel was carried to Babylon the 3. year of Iehoiakims reign,
which was 8. year before the captivity of Ieconias.

3. But Josephus is in a greater error, who thinks, that Daniel was taken
captive together with king Zedekiah: for this was 18. years after: Daniel went
into captivity the 3. year of Iehoiakim; the next year was the first of
Nabuchadnezzar. Ierem. 25. 1. But Zedekiah was carried away in the 18. year of
Zedekiah. Ierem. 52. 29. Peter.

Quest. 13. Why it pleased God that Daniel and others that feared God should
be taken captives.
Though God sometime think good to exempt and deliver the righteous from
temporal calamities, as Noah from the flood, Lot out of the flames of Sodom,
the Israelites from the plagues of Egypt: yet sometimes it pleases him that
such temporal chastisements should fall upon the righteous, as this captivity
upon Daniel for these causes.

1. The general reasons may be yielded to be these. 1. God gets himself
hereby greater glory in the deliverance of his servants, as he did when the 3.
children were cast into the fire, and Daniel into the Lions den, and yet they
escaped the rage of the one, and Daniel the cruelty of the other. 2. Hereby
also the patience of the godly is tried and exercised, and others by their
godly example are encouraged. Pin.

2. The special reasons why Daniel went into captivity were, 1. that he might
be as a guide and comfort to the people to keep them in the fear of God. 2.
that by this means Daniel might become more famous, and be advanced for the
good of his Church. 3. that by his means these idolatrous Kings and people
might come to some knowledge of God. Pererius.

Quest. 14. Of the meaning of these words, ver. 2. Which he carried into the
land of Shinar to the house of his god.
1. Iunius understands this clause of Iehoiakim and the rest which were
carried captive into Babylon into the land of Shinar: and the vessels were
brought into his gods treasury: so also Polanus. But this exposition seems
not so fit: 1. it is not like that the men were carried into the house of their
God, but rather the vessels, Calvin, Polanus thinks that the land of Shinar
is called the house of his God. But beside that this were an improper speech,
to call the whole region an house, which is otherwhere named the land of
Shinar, Genesis 11. 2. this house is expounded to be the temple, 2. Chron. 36. 7.
Nebuchadnezzar carried of the vessels of the house of the Lord to Babel, and
put them in his temple at Babel. 2. Here only Iehoiakim is mentioned to be
given into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar: but the Hebrew affix is in the plural
number, and therefore is better referred to the vessels, which also is the
nearer antecedent. 3. Neither was Iehoiakim carried at this time into
captivity nor brought at all to Babel, as is showed before, Quest. 11.

2. Therefore both these clauses are better referred to the vessels, that he
first brought them into the house of his god, and then laid them up in his gods
treasury, not converting them unto any civil use, Osian. Pintus. Some think
the last clause is added, because the treasury was a special place in the
temple where such things were laid up: first then he brought them to his own
palace, and then to the treasury of the temple of his God, which was also in
his house. Vatabl.

Quest. 15. Of the land of Shinar, or Shingar.
1. This land of Shinar or Shingar was the lower part of Mesopotamia, which
contained Chaldea and Babylon, lying under the mount Sangara, whereof there was
a town so called: the Hebrewe letter aijn is pronounced often as the Greek g,
as in these words, Gomorrha, Gaza, which begin with that letter, and are
pronounced with a double aspiration, as Hhamarrha, Hhaza, Iun. Polan.

2. This was the land wherein the towes of Babel was built, Genesis 11. 2. whereof
the whole region was called Babylonia; whereas then 2. Chron. 36. 7. he is said
to have carried the vessels to Babel, there is no contradiction: for they were
both names of the same country. Polan.

Quest. 16. Of the gods and idols of the Chaldes.
Ver. 2. To the house of his God. The Chaldeans had five idols, 3. gods, and
two goddesses: 1. their first god was Bell, a name contracted of Behel, which
comes of Bahal, which signifies a Lord: Berosus says this was Jupiter Belus
the son of Saturn, to whom was erected a temple in Babylon, with a vast and
huge tower in the mids, which continued unto the time of Vespasian the
Emperor, as Pliny witnesses, lib. 6. c. 26.

2. The second god was the Sun which they called rach, that is a king,
because he is the chief among the planets: and the Persians call him Mithra,
as Justinius Martyr says, dialog. in Tryphon. the priests of this idol were
called Raciophantae, obseruers of the Sun.

3. Their third god was Nego the fire, so called of the brightness, which was
carried about among them.

4. Their first goddess was Shacha, which was the earth, worshipped also of
the Romans under the names of Opis and Tellus: of the Syrians called Dorcetha.
In the honor of this goddess they used to keep a feast five days together
in Babylon: during which time the masters were under the dominion of their
servants: this festival: time was called Shache, whereof Babylon was called
Sheshach of keeping this feast, Ierem. 25. 27. and 52. 41.

5. Their other goddess was Mulitta which was Venus, whose priests were called
Natitae or Natophantae, the obseruers of fair Venus. Polan. But the chiefest
of their idols was Bell, Isay 46. 1. Bell is bowed down: which Iunius in that
place thinks was taken for the Sun, whom the Assyrians and Chaldeans
worshipped: But he was the same who was called Jupiter Belus, Plin. 6. 26. as
is before showed: they worshipped the Sun and the fire beside.

Quest. 17. Ver. 2. What is to be commended, what discommended in
Nebuchadnezzar in carrying away part of the vessels of the Temple.
Ver. 2. With part of the vessels of the house of God. 1. Herein he is
commended for his moderation, that he would not as an insatiable conqueror,
that came only to spoil, carry away all the vessels of the temple, but
contented himself with part: which notwithstanding was Gods special work so
moving the heart of Nebuchadnezzar, that the temple yet standing should not be
stripped of all the ornaments. Pere. 2. In that he put them not to any civil
house, neither enriched himself by them, but laid them up in the temple of his
god: vnde aliquam religionem Deo exhibuit, wherein he showed some reverence
unto God in reuerencing the vessels of the Sanctuary: gloss. ordinar. Pere. 3.
But herein the gross blindness of Nebuchadnezzar appears, who gives the
honor of this victory unto his idols, which was only due unto God: as
Habacuk says, they sacrificed unto their nets, cap. 1. Iun.

Quest. 18. Why it pleased God to suffer that the vessels of the Temple should
be carried away.
1. God thereby would punish the wickedness and impiety of the Jews, for it
is no small judgment, rebus sacris priuari, to be deprived of sacred things.
2. Herein also the Lord showed his just indignation against the sins of the
people, that he would rather abijcere res suas, cast off his own things which
were dedicate to his service. And for the same cause he refused their
oblations, saying, incense is abomination unto me, Isay. 1. 13. 3. The Lord
herein also reproved their carnal confidence, thinking that the Temple and the
vessels thereof were sufficient defense unto them: therefore the Prophet
Jeremy says, cap. 7. 4. trust not in lying words, saying, the temple of the
Lord, the temple of the Lord. 4. And by occasion of the transporting of these
vessels, the Lord showed his wonderful and strange works in Babylon, as by
the writing of an hand upon the wall, when Baltazar profaned the vessels of the
Temple. The like work the Lord showed among the Philistims, when at the
presence of the Arc, Dagon their idol lost both his head and hands, Pere.
While the kings of Babel did regard with some reverence the holy vessels, they
pr^spered, as Nebuchadnezzar, and Euilmerodach his son: but when they grew to
be presumptuous and profane in abusing them, as Baltazar did, the Lord judged
them for their contempt. 5. God also hereby signified, that he needed not any
thing of theirs, as any vessels of gold and silver, but such things being
offered unto God tended only to the good of the offerer. Pintus.

Quest. 19. Of Ashpenah the master of the Enuches his name and office.
V. 3. And the king said to Ashpenah etc. 1. there are three parts of the kings
charge unto this Ashpenaz: first concerning the transporting and carrying of
certain children of the Kings seed, and of other nobles: for at this time
Iehoiakim the king himself went not into captivity: then what choice was to
be made of them, both for their kindred, and for their qualities of body, and
mind, v. 4. and to what end, that they might stand before the king: And in
the third place order is taken v. 5. for their provision and diet.

2. Concerning the name Ashpenaz it signifies in the Chalde tongue, magistrum
obiurgantium, the master of the controllers, that is, the chief controller and
governor of the kings house: as Ctesias uses the word Ashpamitres, which
signifies the master or chief of the Priests, Iun.

3. The kings of the Chaldeans, Persians, Egyptians, at the first used
Eunuchs, which were gelded men, as their chamberlaines, specially for the
custody of their concubines: in Hebrew they are called sarisim of saras, which
signifies to pull away: but afterward the principal officers and servants to
the kings were called by that name, as Potiphar Pharaohs chief steward or
captain is called an Eunuch, that is a Courtier: And the Queen of Ethiopia
her Eunuch whom Philip baptized was her treasurer, Act. 8. the word Eunuch is
derived of (...), a chamber, and (...), to keep; they first attended upon the
king in his chamber: So this Ashpenaz was a chief minister or officer to the
king: Polan, Osian, Pin.

Quest. 20. Whether Daniel may be proved from hence to have been an Eunuch in
the first sense.
1. Of this opinion are Lib. 10. antiquit. c. 11.
Josephus, Hom. 4. in Ezekiel.
Origin, in vita Dan.
Simon Metaphrastes, that Daniel was indeed an Eunuch: and in him, and the
rest of the kings ^eed, some think that prophecy of Isaiah to Hezekiah to be
fulfilled, that his sons should be Eunuchs in the King of Babels palace, 2.
King. 20. 18. But it is not necessary, as is showed before, to take an Eunuch
always in that sense: for that name generally is applied to the principal
officers and ministers of the king.

2. Some are of opinion, that Daniel was called an Eunuch because of his
perpetual virginity: Dorotheus in Sinops. Epiphan. in vita Daniel. so also
Damascen. lib. 4. de fide orthodex. cap. 25. but this may be gainsaied by that
place, Ezekiel. 14. 20. that Noah, Daniel, Job, should deliver neither son, nor
daughter: it may seem then that they all had sons and daughters: P^rerius
hereunto answers, 1. that by sons and daughters here are meant the things
most dear and precious: but this is a forced and wrested sense: for the text
speaks evidently of the delivering of the persons of men, not of any other
precious things. 2. it is sufficient (says he) to understand some of these
only to have had sons and daughters, though not all, etc. But Daniel by this
text can be no more denied to have had sons and daughters, then either Noah
or Job: yet, I confess that this being but a supposition, and conditional
speech; that if these three Noah, Job, Daniel, were in the midst of it, they
should deliver neither son, nor daughter, does not necessarily conclude that
Daniel had sons and daughters, and yet he might have both. 3. Now howsoever
it was for his virginiti^, certain it is he was no Eunuch, as Lyranus, and
Carthusianus, and Pintus infer upon these words, ver. 4. they must be
children without blemish: which collection though Pe^^^^us mislike, yet it may
be warranted, Leuit. 21. 20. where this very kind of defect in the secret
parts is counted among other blemishes. And whereas Perer, says, that they
were only to respect the outward comeliness and beauty, which he says is
held longer to continue in Eunuchs, I rather think with Lyranus, taliter
castrati sunt male gratiosi etiam in facis, that such as are deprived of their
vitilitie, have for the most part less grace in their countenance.

Quest. 21. Who are understood here by the Princes.
1. The word is partemim, which R. Joseph Kimhi would derive of the word
Perath, which was the name of the great river Euphrates: and that thereby are
signified the Princes of the region about Euphrates: but this agrees not to
this place, as Calvin notes, for these princes were of Judah whose children
were taken, they inhabited not near Euphrates. 2. Some derive the word of
Pharah, to fructify and increase: noting such as were truly noble, and
excelling others: some of Parath, which signifies to divide: because the
Magistrates and Judges, which decided controversies, were of the nobler sort.
3. Some rather think that it was a strange word taken up in the Chalde tongue:
Mercer. Iunius conjecture in that parthani may come of the Greek word (...),
and so it generally signifies the first, chief, or principal men. 4. The
Latin interpreter it expresses by the word tyrannorum, the seed of the
tyrants: but that word, howsoever at the first in the Greek tongue it was used
in the better part to signify great and excellent men, yet now it is applied
unto such which are cruel governors, and are usually called tyrants:
thereforre it is no fit word to express the sense here. 5. The Septuagint
retain it as a proper name and title of dignity, Pharthammin, but that is not
like: for the Princes among the Persians were so called, Ester. 1. 3. there
were not the like titles of honor among the Jews, which were among the
Persians: I therefore prefer before the rest, the opinion of Mercerus and Iun.

Quest. 22. Why the children of the Princes and Nobles were taken captives.
The reasons hereof may be these. 1. the king herein showed his triumph and
victory in carrying away the more principal men's sons. 2. And because such
having had noble education, and not trained up as the vulgar sort, were meetest
to attend upon the king: to the which end he sorted them out from the rest. 3.
And this might be his policy also herein, that these principal men's sons
being brought up with the king of Babel, and so instructed in the manners and
religion of the Chaldeans, might thereby have their hearts, and affections
enstranged, and alienated from their country. 4. And he might have further
this purpose therein, to keep them as pledges, and hostages, the better to
contain the Jews in obedience and subjection. Calvin.

Quest. 23. How the Lord performed his promise to David that his kingdom
should be established for ever, 2. Sam. 16. seeing Iehoiakim was given into
Nebuchadnezzers hand.
1. We must consider, that the promise in respect of David's temporal seed was
conditional; that the Lord would make sure the kingdom so long as they
continued in obedience: but if they brake the condition, the Lord was not tied
to make good his promise. 2. Yet the spiritual kingdom in the Messiah, which
was of the seed of David according to the flesh, shall remain for ever
without any condition or exception. 3. And although Iehoiakim were given into
Nebuchadnezzars hand, yet the kingdom well nigh continued after this 20.
years in David's posterity: and the Lord by degrees did proceed to take away
the scepter from Judah, which for David's sake he would have continued still if
they would have taken any warning. 4. But it must not be thought that Gods
purpose and promise to David was changed and ouerturned by any superior power:
and even Nebuchadnezzar herein was the minister of God, to execute his
judgments: for it is said, that the Lord gave Iehoiakim into his hand, v. 2.
Polan.

Quest. 24. Whether it were lawful for Daniel to be taught the learning of the
Chaldeans.
v. 4. And whom they might teach the learning, etc. Though among the Chaldeans
there were curious and superstitious arts, for both iudiciarie Astrology, and
Genethlialogie, the casting of men's natiuities, and (...), divination by the
dead, are held to have been invented by the Chaldeans; yet they had other
profitable sciences, as Astronomy, Geometry, and other liberal arts, which
Daniel might safely learn, as Moses was brought up in the knowledge of the
Egyptians, whose superstitious inventions notwithstanding he abhorred: and if
Daniel refused to be defiled with their meats, which were but for the body,
much more did he take heed not to have his soul defiled with superstitious
inventions. Calvin.

Quest. 25. Of the Chalde language, and the difference between it, and the
Hebrew.
1. The Chaldeans called in Hebrew Chasdim, had their original from Arphachsad
the son of Sem: the Chaldeans at the first comprehended the Hebrews also,
for Heber the son of Selah, the son of Arphacsad, was the father of the
Hebrews: and Abraham the Hebrew was borne in Vr of the Chaldees. 2. At the
first the knowledge of God did flourish among the Chaldeans, till idolatry and
superstition increasing, it pleased God to single out Abraham, in whom the
true religion should be preserved. 3. The most ancient tongue was the Hebrew,
which was preserved in Hebers family, and so descended to Abraham, who also
because he lived among the Chaldeans, could speak the language of that nation.
4. But seeing Daniel here being an Hebrew borne, was to be taught the Chalde
language, then Philo is deceived, who thinks the Chalde and Hebrew to be all
one. 5. Neither was the Chalde and Syrian tongue the same, In (...).
which is the opinion of Mercerus: so thinks also Hugo Cardinal. following
the ordinary Gloss: some think that the Syrian tongue differed not much from
the Chalde, but was the more eloquent language, and therefore used of the
learned, Genevens. Dan. 2. 6. But I rather think with In (...). Chald. and
(...).
Tremellius and Polanus, that howsoever in times past there was small
difference: for that part of this book which is written in the Chalde tongue
from the 4. v. of the 2. chapter to the end of the seventh, is called also
the Aramites or Syrians language, c. 2. 4. yet now they do manifestly differ,
the ancient Chalde speech, and the common Syrian language. 7. Now the Chalde
tongue is either that purer kind of speaking and writing which is used here in
Daniel from 2. c. v. 4. to the end of the seventh, and Ezra c. 4. unto the
seventh, which was then commonly used in Babylon: or else it was more impure,
such as the three Targums are written in, namely of Onkelus, Ionathas, and the
Hierosolymitan: as also the two Talmuds, the one of Babylon, the other of
Jerusalem. ex Polan.

Quest. 26. v. 4. Of the necessary institution of schools, and the manner and
order thereof.
v. 4. Teach the learning and language of the Chaldeans. 1. Hence appears,
that the institution of schools, wherein youth should be brought up in good
letters, was very ancient: for here in Babylon, such as were afterward to be
employed in the state, had their education in learning. So among the Egyptians
they had the like use, where Moses was taught the learning of the Egyptians.
Among the Israelites 48. cities were appointed for the Levites, which were as
the common Schools and Universities for the whole kingdom. Samuel and Elizeus
had their Schools and Colleges of Prophets. Among the Grecians, Athens was
famous for the study of Arts: and in Egypt Alexandria: yea, the rude Indians
had their Gymnosophistes: and the Romans had their Colleges of Augures.

2. Beside hence it is gathered that the chief care of the promoting of
learning belongs to the King, as here Nebuchadnezer gives it in charge.

3. And because kings being occupied with other affairs cannot themselves
attend that business, they are to set over such places good overseers, as here
the King commits the care of this business to Ashpenaz.

4. And as here choice is made of the best wits, and such as were not deformed,
to be brought up in learning; so such should now be preferred to places of
learning, as are like to profit well in that profession: and not every spittle,
and dulhead to be obtruded and thrust into such places by favor, to make a
scholar of, being fit for no other employment.

5. These upon whom this learned education is bestowed, were the sons of
Nobles; whereas in many places noble men think it a disgrace to be learned:
whereas there cannot be a greater ornament unto true nobility, then learning.

6. Here also it is showed what they should learn, to be instructed in the
knowledge of the tongues, whereby a way is made for other learning.

7. And they must not be always learning: a time is prefixed here of three
years, to take trial how they profit: they which are put to learning must not
be non proficientes, but after some time make some proof how they profit.

8. The king also provides su^ficient maintenance for them, a competent diet,
not superfluous: but in times past Abbeyes had too much, and now Schools of
learning have too little. Bulling.

Quest. 27. Why other names were given them.
1. Quia nomina Iudaea oderant and fugerant, because the Chaldeans did hate and
shun Hebrew and Jewish names, Iun, so also Hugo Card, indigne ferebat quod
vocarentur nominibus Iudaeae, the king could not endure that they should be
called with the names of Judea: to the same purpose Lyranus, nomina Hebraica
erant Babyloniis abominabilia, the Hebrew names were abominable to the
Babylonians.

2. In changing of their names, the conqueror showed his power over them, and
that by this mutation of their names, they might know themselves to be
servants: for it is a sign of superiority to impose names: as Adam gave names
unto the creatures; he also gave a name unto his wife: so conquerors used to
give names to them whom they subdued: As Pharaoh king of Egypt, would have
Eliakim king of Judah called Iehoiakim: and Nebuchadnezzar called Mattaniah the
last king of the Jews Zedekiah: Polan. Among the Romans they which were
adopted and received into the number of the citizens, did change their names
for a remembrance and memorial of that benefit: and servants likewise, when
they were manumitted did take unto them the names of noble and free men.
Alexander. Alexander ab Alexandr^, lib. 4. Gen^al. dierum.


3. But there was a further reason in it: vt deleret rex memoriam propriae
gentis, that by this means the king might blotte out the memory of their own
nation and kindred.

4. And beside the names were abolished, which had any mention of God, as El.
Iah. as one of these was in all their names: Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael,
Azariah, and in the new names given unto them there were quasi trophaea deorum
suorum, as monuments of their gods: So by this means they thought to
extinguish all memory of their religion. Iun. Polan.

Quest. 28. Of the signification of their names both the new, and the old.
1. Daniel signifies the judgment of God, or whom the Lord judges, Hananiah
is named of grace and favor: Mishael some interpret, asked of God: Pap.
Osiander: but the better deriuation is, which is of God: Iun. Azariah helped of
God.

2. Their new names are thus interpreted: Belteshazar some would have
signify, scrutator the saur^, a searcher of treasure, Pintus: some custos
insignis thesauri, a keeper of a notable treasure, Bulling: some take it to
signify divine treasure: Osiand, or the keeper of Bell, their idol: Pap. But
the true sense is: one laying up or keeping the treasury of Bell: for the word
is compounded of Bell and teshah to lay up, and atzar treasure, Iun. Polan. this
name was given by Ashpenaz to Daniel, but at the kings appointment, and
therefore it is said, that the king named him Belthazar, cap. 5. 12. Shadrach,
some expound a legate or ambassador, Osiand. some delicate, Bullin. Pap. some
a delicate field: Pintus. but the true notation is this: 1. the inspiration of
rach that is the sun: for shadah signifies to inspire, and rach, a king,
which name they give unto the Sun. Meshach some interpret prolonging, Pintus:
some industrious, Pappus: some precious; Bullinger, Osiander: But it is
compounded of Meh, which, and shach the name of Venus their festival gods:
Meshach, that is, who is of the gods shacah, the festival goddess: for the
Babylonians used upon the 16. day of the month Loy to celebrate the feast of
their gods shacha for 5. days together, during which time one of the
servants was Lord and ruler of the family, apparelled in a princely robe
called Segane, the Hebrews call it Saga: Iun. ex Athenaeolib. 14.
dipnosophrast. Abednego some interpret servus lucis, servant of the light, Pap.
some servus illustris, a famous servant; Osiander. some the servant of Nego
which was the star of Venus: Bullin. some think it should be read Abednebo,
the servant of Nebo the God of the Chaldeans: some give the sense servus
anxius, a careful servant, Pintus: But the true deriuation is, of ghebat a
servant, and Nego fire, which the Chaldeans worshipped as a God: So then in all
these four names, there was some memorial of the Chaldean idols; of Bell in
the first, rach which was the Sun in the next, of their goddess Shacah,
which was Venus in the third, and of their god Nego in the last. Iun. Polan.

Quest. 29. Ver. 8. Why Daniel refused to eat of the kings meat, and of the
diverse kinds of abstinence.
Ver. 8. D^^iel had determined in his heart, that he would not defile himself
with the portion of the kings meat: 1. here we may remember that there are
four kinds of unlawful abstinence.

1. Some of the Philosophers, Philostrat. in vita Apollon. Laertius in Pythago.
Porphyr. lib. de abstinentia.
as Pythagoras, Empedocles, Apollonius, Porphyrius, because they imagined that
the souls of men did pass into the bodies of beasts, and in varia se corpora
endure, and did as it were cloth themselves with diverse bodies: for this cause
they abstained from the eating of flesh.

2. There were certain heretics, who therefore would eat no flesh, because
they held them to be evil by nature, and a malo quodam principio conditas, and
made at the first by some evil powers: such were the Heretics Marcion,
Tacianus, the Encratites, the Manichees: against whom Augustine did write, at
large confuting their errors, but specially in his books against blasphemous
Faustus the Manichee.

3. Some were in an other error, who at the first being converted from
Iudais^e, did think they were bound to abstain from certain meats as
unclean, according to the law of Moses, concerning whom the Apostles made a
decree. Act. 15.

4. And some other there are, which have a perverse opinion of fasting, which
think that the perfection of a Christian consists in fasting; or they fast
only for the praise of men, and opinion of the world. All these are in great
error, and do offend in their fasting, but Daniels abstinence was of none of
these kinds. Pere.

Quest. 30. The causes which moved Daniel to forbear the kings meat.
There were many pollutions in the meat, which served at the kings table: 1.
they might eat such flesh as was counted unclean by the law of Moses; as
swines flesh, hares and conies, were held to be unclean by the law of the
Hebrews, and diverse others both beasts, fish, and foul, as is declared,
Deuteronomy. 14. which might be notwithstanding used as delicate meats in the kings
court. Pap, Bullinger: which meats though of their own nature they defiled
not, yet by the institution of God being forbidden, they defiled the eater, in
respect of his disobedience to the law.

2. Beside they in the beginning of their feasts did praise the gods of gold
and silver, and so consecrated their meats and table to their idols: for which
cause Daniel and the rest abstained. Iun. Polan. Lyran. Hugo Cardi. And though
the first observation of meats was only legal, and ceased with the rest of
the ceremonies: yet the abstaining from things offered to idols was perpetual
afterward observed of the Christians, as both is evident by S. Paul, 1. Cor. 8.
10. where he speaks of those that sat down in the idol temples; and by the
practice of the Primitive Church, as Caecilius objected to the Christians, Apud
Minut. Foelic. lib. 8. Arnob.
praeceptos and delibatos altaribus cibos abhorretis, etc. ye abhor meats
commanded, that are consecrate to idols.

3. Beside sciebat perturbationum fontem esse intemperantiam, he did know that
intemperancie was the fountain of all distemperature: he remembered that Adam
was cast out of paradise, for eating of the forbidden fruit, and Esau lost his
birthright for a mess of pottage: Daniel therefore and the rest abstained,
least they might be entangled with the desire of their delicate meats. Pintus.

4. An other reason was that the king by this sweet poison should not cause him
to forget his religion; Geneuens* ne inescaretur talibus illecebris, least he
should have been caught with such baits: he therefore shunneth the occasion.

Quest. 31. verse. 8. How Daniel should have been defiled with the kings meat.
Though that the meat it self in it own nature could not have defiled
Daniel, as our Blessed Savior says, that which goes into the mouth, defiles
not the man, Matthew. 15. 11. yet four ways Daniel should have defiled himself
and others.

1. He had offended the godly if they were weak, in following his example, so
wounding their own conscience; if they were strong, yet they would have
grieved, to see the law of God transgressed.

2. The profane should have been scandalized, if they were enemies, in causing
them to blaspheme, if they were indifferent, and such as of whom there might be
hope, in putting before them a stumbling block, they might have discouraged
them from embracing their religion, in seeing them to do contrary to their
own profession.

3. Their own conscience they should have defiled in sinning against the
^nowledge, and disobeying the law.

4. God they should have contemned, in neglecting his law, and so in a manner
have polluted him: as in another case the Priests are said to have polluted
God, for offering unclean bread upon his altar, Malach. 1. 7. Polan.

Quest. 32. Whether Daniel ever after abstained from the kings meat.
It is like that Daniel afterward did both eat and drink of the kings
provision: for he was of the kings Court, and was the chief officer about the
king, and sat in the kings gate, cap. 2. 49. therefore it is not unlike but
that he did live at the kings diet, neither do we read of Joseph, that was in
the like estimation with Pharaoh, that he refused the kings meat. Calvin. The
reasons why Daniel abstained now, and not afterward may be these. 1. Daniel,
principio abstinuit a lautitijs aulae ne inescaretur, at the beginning
abstained from the delicats of the court, lest he should have bin entangled,
Call. but afterward there was not the like fear, when Daniel was called to
place of government, and depended not upon the command and authority of
others, as now he did. So also Pellic^iam grandaevus and extra periculum
constitutus, vinum bibisse legitur, etc. when he waxed old and was out of
danger, he is found to have drunk wine, etc. 2. this must be admitted
ceremonialia cedere magnae, necessitati, that the ceremonialls must give place
unto extreme necessity: It is no question, but the people of the Jews being
in captivity did sometime eat of the meats forbidden by the law, rather
then they should be famished: but if the eating of such meats had been a
denial of their faith and religion, in that case, they should rather have
chosen to die, then in the least ceremony to deny their faith: Osian. Daniel
might then in his captivity upon such necessity eat such things, as in their
country were not lawful, as other of his brethren did: but at this time his
profession being called in question, least by such baits and enticements he
might have been drawn away from it, he did in a godly resolution abstain.

Quest. 32. Ver. 9. What favor it was which Daniel found with the chief of
the Ennuches not obtaining his request.
Ver. 9. Now God had brought Daniel into favor, etc. 1. Some think, that
whereas the chief of the Eunuchs after excuses himself by his fear, lest
if he should have granted his request, to allow him other diet then the king
had appointed, these two effects should have followed, their countenances would
look worse, and his life should be in danger, that the Eunuch did deny his
request: quod tentara, tnon successerat, that which he tried did not take
place, Bulling* repulsam est passus, he suffered a repulse, Calvin. Pelican.
impetrari non potuit, that could not be obtained which he desired. But this
opinion is contrary to the text: which says that God gave Daniel favor with
the chief of the Eunuchs: but if he had altogether taken the repulse, he had
found small favor.

2. Wherefore herein consisted the favor, which Daniel found. 1. in that he
was not angry with Daniel for making such a bold request contrary to the
kings commandment. 2. neither does he urge him to keep the kings order for
his diet. 3. or complains of him to the king. 4. but chiefly herein his
favor appeared, in that he pretending his fear and danger, did insinuate,
that he could be contented, so that it might be done without any such danger or
inconvenience, Polan. And he secretly might also give him an hint to go unto
the under officer the butler, that attended upon them, who was the fitter man
to wink at it, if question afterward should have been made: for it is like
the butler afterward being found so willing, that he knew the chief officers
pleasure therein. Iun. Polan.

Quest. 33. Of Daniels request to the butler or officer.
Ver. 12. Prove thy servants I pray thee ten days, etc. 1. Daniel first
propounds his request simply, that he would prove them 10. days with course
bread of pulse, and water to drink: he sets only ten days, neither too
long a time, vt de facili posset impetrare, that he might more easily obtain
his request: nor too short, that the truth might appear, and some experience
be had in that time, Lyran. for in the space of 10. days it might well be
seen, whe^^ their bodies macrescerent, vel pinguescerent, did wax leaner or
fatter. Pelican.

2. Then follow the conditions of his request: the one is expressed, that
unless their countenances should be in as good liking as theirs, which fed
of the kings allowance, they would ask no further favor: so he does wisely
antevertere, prevent what might be objected: for Daniel knew he would insist
upon the same reasons which the chief of the Eunuchs had done, v. 10. that
their faces should be worse liking, and so he might be blamed. Calvin.

3. An other condition or supposall though not expressed, yet may be supplied,
is that they did not purpose to make unto themselves any benefit of the kings
meat, but they were contented it should be to his use that attended upon them,
as may be gathered, v. 16. where it is said, that the butler took from them
the allowance of the kings meat and wine, and gave them pulse. Iun.

Quest. 34. Whether Daniel tempted not God, in setting a certain number of
days.
1. In the Apocryphal history of Judith, c. 8. 12. Judith charge Ozias and
the other governors of Bethulia, that they had tempted God in prescribing the
space of five days, within which time, if they had no help, they would give
up the city: But here Daniel does not of any temeritie, or presumption set
this prefixed time, but fidei magnitudine, by the greatness of his faith, as
Hierome says: Pere. so also Hugo Cardinal. he was certior factus a Domino de
foelici euentu, he was assured by the Lord of happy success. Calvin. And
Daniel herein and his companions, did not only depend upon Gods general
promises out of his word, but they had some particular revelation and direction
for this thing. Iun.

2. But it will be objected, if Daniel had such assurance, why then speaks he
so doubtfully, as referring the whole matter to his discretion: saying, ver.
13. as thou see deal with thy servants: to this it may be answered, Daniel
allocutus est altorem humanitus, vt tamen de re diuinitus confirmatus esset,
Daniel indeed speaks unto his keeper after an usual manner, yet was in
himself confirmed from God in this matter. Iun.

3. Daniel then having both the word of God to abstain from such meats as
were forbidden, Deuteronomy. 14. and Gods general promise beside, that God would
bless their bread and water, if they would serve him, Exodus 23. 15. and
further ex arcana renelatione certior factus, being assured by secret
revelation, of the event, was moved to propound this term of 10. days.
Polan.

Quest. 35. verse. 12. Why Daniel did choose rather to eat of pulse, then of the
kings meat.
1. Daniel here preferred not this course diet before the kings delicates upon
any superstitious opinion, as thinking thereby to merit with God, and to be
more acceptable for the meats sake; for according to the Apostles rule, both
he which eats, eats to the Lord, and gives God thanks, and he that eats
not, eats not to the Lord, and gives God thanks, Romans 14. 6. every creature
is good, and we may thankefully take whatsoever the Lord has prepared for our
food. Polan.

2. But this may be one reason why Daniel made choice of pulse and seeds,
herbs and such like, because such things were not at any time forbidden unto
the Jews, before or under the law, neque de talibus fiebat oblatio idolis,
neither of such things did they use to offer unto idols: And therefore the
Apostle says, Romans 14. 2. that he which was weak (not in body but in mind)
did eat herbs, least he should chance to eat things offered to idols. Lyran.

3. Daniel might have eaten course bread, and other viler meats, but he
contented himself with seeds and herbs, as the word hazeroghim signifies,
vt scilicet assidne gemeret, etc. that he might daily mourn, and remember his
afflicted country, which he might easily have forgotten, if he had given
himself to a delicate life. And thefore Moses also did forsake Pharaohs Court,
and chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God.

Quest. 36. verse. 15. Whether the beauty and strength in Daniel and the rest
feeding of this course food, was a natural work.
1. There are diverse reasons in nature, why they which live of simp^^ and
course food, should be better liking, then many which live in fullness and
plenty: (...) the variety of meat causes variety of diseases, the more
simple the food then is, the more agreeable it is to nature, Osiand. 2.
continual use and custom to keep a slender diet, does make it familiar and
most wholesome to the body. 3. the strong constitution, temperature, and
complexion of the body does cause unto some better nourishment and strength,
then a better diet does unto those, that are of a bad constitution. 4. the
cheerfulness of the mind, and inward contentednes helps much, even in a
thin diet to strengthen nature: Pere. As the wise man says, that a morsel
of (...) with peace, is better then a house full of sacrifices with strife,
that is, with disquietnesse of mind.

2. But this great increase of beauty and favor in Daniel and his companions,
proceeded rather of the singular and extraordinary blessing of God, then of
their thin diet: for they only did not exceed those in the goodness of their
complexion, which fed of the kings meats, but their countenance in
themselves appeared faiter and better liking, then at any time before. Pere.

Quest. 37. ver. 17. Of the knowledge and understanding which God gave unto
Daniel and the other three, whether it were natural or supernatural.
1. This knowledge which was given unto them all was partly ordinary in all
humane learning, which was common unto them all: the Vulgar latin interpreter
reads, in omni libro, in every book: but the word sepher is as well taken
for the literature, the knowledge of arts and sciences, as for a book, Polan.
partly this knowledge was extraordinary in the understanding of visions and
dreams, which was peculiarly above the rest given unto Daniel. Iun.

2. The knowledge of arts is obtained three ways: either naturally as
Aristotle and Plato attained unto their learning: or supernaturally as Adam and
Solomon had their wisdom and knowledge infused of God: or partly by natural
means, partly by supernatural, as here Daniel and the other three used
instructors, and other helps to come unto their knowledge, but yet it was
specially the gift of God.

3. For, whereas they attained unto a greater perfection, then any other, and
that in so short a time, in the space of 3. years, it is evident, that they
had more by Gods special gift, then by any humane industry. Pere.

Quest. 38. Whether Daniel and the rest learned the curious arts of the
Chaldeans.
1. Pererius opinion is that whereas the Chaldeans had many vain and curious
arts, as Magic, Coniecturing, Enchanting, Iudiciarie Astrology, and such
like, that they might learn and know these speculatiue, by way of
speculation, to confute them and avoid them, not to practice or exercise them:
as God himself and the Angels have the knowledge of such things: and the abuse
in such knowledge, is either in the too great desire and affection, which they
have unto them which learn them, or in the evil end, which they propound,
seeking their own gain, or others commodity therein.

Contra. 1. But that the very study and knowledge of such damnable arts is
unlawful, by this it appears, because they which were converted to the faith
in Ephesus burned their books of such curious arts: which they needed not to
have done, if the having and reading of such books had been lawful, Act. 29.
2. God knows all things, and is perfectly good, and cannot be tempted of
evil: but man is easily seduced and perverted: and Angels have not their
knowledge by labor and learning as man has, but by the light of their nature:
therefore those examples are not alike: 3. even profitable humane arts may be
by these means abused: but unprofitable in their best use are unlawful.

2. Osiander thinks, that their Chaldean instructors would have obtruded upon
them their superstitious precepts among other instruction: but as they
abstained from the kings meat, not to be defiled thereby; so it is like they
did take heed of such corrupt and unlawful arts.

3. But it is more like, that as the kings meat was withdrawn from them, so
by Gods providence they were preserved from all contagion of their
superstitious inventions, only being trained vp^^ their commendable learning,
as Muses was in the Egyptian sciences. Calvin.

Quest. 39. Whether it be lawful to use the arts and inventions of the
heathen.
1. The profitable inventions of the heathen, Christians may safely and
lawfully use: for like as in a tree, there are leaves for ornament, as well as
fruit for necessary use: so the soul must be adorned as with the sound
precepts of Theology in stead of fruit, so it must be garnished with the
knowledge of the arts, as the ornaments and leaves. But when any thing
erroneous does offer it self in their writings, (...) must either shun it
altogether, or cautelously read it; as we gather roses in a garden, but take
heed of the pricks and thorns. Deuteronomy, 21. when any of Israel took a maid in
battle, whom he liked, he was first to pair her nails, and shave her head,
before he married her^so we must cut away in humane secular learning such
things as are noxious and superstuous, and then captive it to the use of
Christian religion. Pintus.

2. The books then and writing of the Heathen are fit and convenient to be
read: first in regard of some truth, which is set forth in them: 1. for every
one naturally desires to understand and apprehend the truth. 2. yea and the
spirit of God is the author of all truth: so that the light which shined in the
darkness and blindness of the Heathen proceeded from the spirit of God, the
true illuminator of the world. 3. their writings contain many profitable
inventions and precepts for man's life, as in the handling of moral virtues, of
politic precepts, of mechanical arts.

Secondly, even the knowledge of their errors is profitable. 1. that we may
know them to confute and abhor them. 2. that knowing their errors we may the
better avoid them our selves, and win others from them. 3. to show the
excellency of the Scriptures, wherein is no error or impuritie, before all
other humane learning and writing: for there are five things requisite and
necessary for every one to know: 1. that the soul is immortal: for he will
never be persuaded to virtue, that thinks there is nothing to be feared, or
hoped for after this life. 2. what is the chief end and happiness, which
every man is to propound unto himself. 3. which is the way whereby that end
may be achieved. 4. whether God not only in general, but in particular watch
over us by his providence. 5. how this watchful God, and most vigilant
heavenly father is to be served and honored. All which things so necessary to
be known, are either not at all handled by the Philosophers, or very
absurdly, deceitfully, erroneously. Perer.

3. But it will be thus objected. 1. seeing the Scriptures are alone sufficient
to salvation, what need we foreign helps? 2. S. Paul Coloss. 28. seems to
condemn Philosophy, beware least any man spoil you through Philosophy. 3.
Julian the Apostata, thus objected, Cur abhorrent Christiani a sacrisiciis
Gentilium, cum non abhorrent a libris Gentilium, why do Christians abhor the
sacrifices of the Gentiles, seeing they do not abhor, not abstain from
reading of their books?

Answer. 1. The Scriptures are indeed alone sufficient for such things as
belong unto salvation, neither to any such end do Christians crave help from
the heathen; but they use them only as supplies concerning things belonging
unto this life: therefore as kings and princes use the service of artificers,
husbandmen, cooks, for inferior services, so it is not unbeseeming a Christian
to make use of the Gentiles inventions.

2. S. Paul simply condemns not philosophy, as that which consists of
physical, moral, or political principles and observations: but he speaks
against that erroneous part of Philosophy and vain speculation, as in the
adoration of Angels, and such like: and thus the Apostle expounds himself,
in the next words, let no man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit.

3. There is not the like reason between the writings and sacrifices of the
Heathen, for their books may be read without hurt, one may choose the good
and leave the evil; but the sacrifices are altogether evil and idolatrous:
yet the things in themselves, which they offer in sacrifice, the abuse set
apart, Christians abhore not, as wine, bread, flesh; for they are the good
creatures of God: but the abuse of them to most filthy idolatry, they only
abhor and condemn. Per.

4. Notwithstanding therefore whatsoever is, or can be objected, there is a
lawful and commendable use of humane arts and learning among Christians: like
as Moses made use of the Egyptian, and Daniel of the Chaldean learning, and S.
Paul in his writings of the sayings of the heathen poets: So the Christian
Fathers armed themselves against the heathen with their own weapons: as
Cyrillus Alexand. against Julian, Origin against Celsus, Methodius against
Porphyrie, Hieronimus against Iouinian, the Apologies of Quadratus and
Aristides Christian philosophers which were presented to Adrianus the Emperor
in the behalf of the Christians, are fraught with great store of heathen
testimonies: so also are the writings of Justinius, Tertullian, Eusebius,
Lanctantius, Augustine, with others.

Quest. 40. Of the dreams and visions which Daniel had understanding of.
1. The visions were such, as were showed unto men waking: which were of two
sorts, either, expressae signis corporalibus, such as were indeed expressed and
represented by corporal signs, as the hand which appeared unto Balthazar upon
the wall, and left a material writing behind it; or else per similitudines
imaginarias effectae, such as were exhibited by certain imaginary similitudes:
such were diverse visions, which Jeremy and Ezekiel had, and the visions
showed to Daniel in this book: by dreams are understood such visions, as were
represented unto men in their sleep. Per.

2. But this must be understood neither of natural and humane dreams, the
interpretation whereof belongs unto Physicians and Philosophers, but of
divine dreams.

3. And hereby also is signified that Daniel excelled in all kind of propho^^e,
which is understood by these two, visions and dreams, Numb. 12. 6. Iun. so
that Daniel only of these four was endued with the gift of prophesying.
Genevens.

Quest. 41. Whether this gift of understanding visions and dreams were in
Daniel as an habit permanent and remaining always in him.
Lyranus seems to be of opinion, that this gift was habitual in Daniel, and
that it was always present with him: 1. because as God gave the other
knowledge, which was an habit in them, so he gave Daniel this gift of
understanding dreams: 2. there are but three things in the soul, potentiae,
passiones, habitus, powers and faculties, as to will, to understand, passions
and affections, and habits as of virtues, arts, and such like: But this gift to
expound dreams, was no faculty of the mind, for then it should have been
general, and much less was it any passion, which are most seen in the
sensitive part; therefore it was an habit.

Contra. 1. Both knowledge was given to the rest, and this special
understanding to Daniel by the Lord the only fountain and author of every
good gift, but they were not given in the same manner. 2. naturally in the
soul these three things are to be found, but this gift in Daniel was
supernatural, and therefore is not comprehended in that division of the
natural faculties and parts of the soul.

2. Wherefore I subscribe rather unto Pererius, donum illud non fuisse in
Daniele tanquam habitum permanentem, etc. that this gift in Daniel was not as a
permanent habit always remanying with him, as may be thus showed. 1. An
habit which is always permanent, one may use when he will, where, and how he
will; but so could not Daniel use this prophetical gift of interpreting
dreams: for when the first dream of the king was propounded to him, he
obtained the interpretation thereof by his and his brethrens earnest prayers,
and he desired the king to give him leisure, c. 2. 16. likewise when he heard
the other dream, he held his peace by the space of an hour, c. 4. 16. in his
heart beseeching the Lord to cause him to understand it.

2. As it was in other Prophetical gifts, so in this: but the Prophets did not
always prophecy, but at such time as the spirit of God came upon them, and
did illuminate them: as the prophet Elisha caused a Musician to play before
him, and then he prophesied: Nathan when first David consulted with him to
build God an house, had then no prophecy or revelation till the night
following, 2. Sam. 7. the prophetical illumination then is like unto the
light, not which is always inherent in the body of the Sun, but which at
times shines in the air, and sometime is ouercast: so the prophets could not
prophecy when they would themselves, but as they received present
illumination, and direction of the spirit.

3. Now yet they were still called Prophets, even then, when they prophesied
not, both because of their vocation and calling, they were threunto appointed
by God, as Jeremy, was sanctified in his mothers womb to be a Prophet, or
because they did often prophecy, ex frequentia prophetandi, they had the name
of Prophets. Pere.

Quest. 42. Of the diverse kinds of dreams, and whether there be any divine
dreams.
Dreams usually are divided into these three kinds, natural, humane, which
are called animalia, and supernatural. 1. Natural are such, which are chiefly
raised by natural objects, as when men dream of meat and drink being hungry
or thirsty: of such dreams speaks the Prophet Isay, 29. 80. And these
dreams are incident to bruit beasts. 2. Humane dreams are such as are raised
by the multitude of the business, wherein men are occupied in the day: such
dreams the Preacher describes, Eccles. 5. 2. A dream comes by the
multitude of business. 3. Supernatural dreams are of two kinds, either divine,
which are sent of God for some spiritual instruction and admonition, or the
signification of some things to come: such were the dreams of Pharaoh, Genesis
41. and Nabuchadnezzar in this book, c. 2. 4. and c. 4. There are also
Diabolical dreams, which are wrought by Satan to se^^ce and deceive: for if he
can by inward suggestions delude and deceive the mind, he can also as well by
vain dreams and fancies insinuate himself to deceive: such were the vain
visions and illusions which he deceived the priests of Baa^ by, when he went as
a lying spirit in the months of them all, to persuade Ahab to go and fall at
Ramath in Gilead. Pappus.

Quest. 43. Whether there be any divine dreams.
1. Aristotle in his book (...), of divination by dreams, denies that there
are any divine dreams at all: he confesses that there are somnia daemonica,
dreams demonicall or spiritual: but there also he ascribes unto nature: his
reasons against divine dreams are these,

1. If there were any such divine dreams, they should be sent and showed to
the best and most wise and virtuous men, and not to men of every sort, as they
are.

2. If God would teach men, he would rather do it by day then by night.

3. Where God instructs men, he does it plainly and manifestly, not obscurely
and doubtfully, as is the revelation by dreams.

4. Bruit beasts have their dreams, therefore they are not divine.

2. Contra. These arguments are soon answered. 1. Such dreams are for the
most part showed unto good men, but not always, least they should think that
by their worthiness they had deserved that grace: and when it pleases God to
manifest himself by such dreams to other then to the righteous, it is for
their conversion, or for the common good of his Church: such were the dreams
which Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar had.

2. To appoint the Lord to instruct men by day, rather then by night, is to
prescribe laws unto him: he best knows the ways and means, when and how to
speak unto men's souls.

3. Though dreams are in themselves obscure, yet God gives also the
interpretation of them, as of Pharaohs dreams by Joseph, of Nabuchadnezars by
Daniel: he leaves not men in doubtfulnes and suspense, as Apollos ambiguous
oracles did.

4. Beasts have in deed some kind of dreams, namely such as are natural and
caused in the fantasy and sensitive part: but this kind of divine and
supernatural dreams they have not: such as was Pharaohs and Nabuchadnezzars
dreams, and Joseph's, Matthew. 1. Papp.

Quest. 44. Whether there be any truth or certentie in dreams.
1. As Cicero said, that there is nothing so absurd, which is not found to have
been said by some of the Philosophers; so some of them have maintained, that
all dreams were true, and had their certain signification: of which opinion
was Protagoras, with other Stoikes, whose general opinion was, that the truth
consisted not in the nature of things, but only in the opinion of men: and
that some dreams were held to be vain and frivolous, the reason they said to
be this, because they are difficult, ambiguous, and obscure, and so are not
well perceived and understood.

Contra. But this opinion is confuted by the Scriptures, beside daily
experience, which shows that men have many thousand dreams, which never take
effect: and if one of a thousand agree with the event, it is accidental, and
by some casual occurrent, and not otherwise: The Preacher says, in the
multitude of dreams and vanities are many words, Eccl. 5. 6. he joins
dreams and vanities together. The Prophet gives instance of such vain
dreams, in an hungry man that dreameth, and behold (in his imagination) he
eats, and when he awaketh, his soul is empty, Isa. 29. 8. what is this else
but a vain dream? Such are the dreams of drunken, frantic, covetous men,
who dream of such vain things as their mind is occupied in: such dreams are
like the apparitions in the clouds, many forms and fashions are there seen,
which are soon dispersed of the wind, and come to nothing.

2. Some held the contrary opinion, that no credit was to be given to any
dreams at all, as Xenophanes, Caliphonius, and the Epicures, for seeing all
dreams were of the same nature, and some were vain and frivolous, all must be
held to be so. Again say they, if there were any certentie in dreams, they
must proceed from some certain causes: either God, or nature: but it is not
like Deum obire lectos dormientium, that God should compass men's beds when
they are asleep, and cast dreams into their minds: and nature is the cause of
order, but in dreams there is confusion and disorder.

Contr. 1. All dreams are not of one nature, therefore it follows not, if
some be vain, that all are. 2. Gods providence watches over men both waking
and sleeping: he passes not from place to place, but being in heaven
beholds all things, and does whatsoever it pleases him in heaven and in
earth. 3. Nature works certently and orderly, when it works by certain and
settled causes: variable and turbulent causes must bring forth the like effects:
but true and divine dreams are most certain, constant, and orderly, as
proceeding from him, who is the author of order.

3. Wherefore the resolution here is, that as there are some vain and
phant^sticall dreams procured by men's distempered humors in their bodies, or
their disordered and unsettled imaginations in their mind; so there are divine,
profound, and holy dreams: as were the dreams and visions by night of
Abraham, Abimelech, Iaakob, Laban, Joseph, Pharaoh, Solomon, Nebuchadnezzer,
Paul, Act. 16. 9. which holy dreams and visions had their evident
signification, and sure effect. Perer.

Quest. 45. Of the causes of true dreams.
1. Plato his opinion was, Plato in convivto.
that dreams were procured by spirits, who were the mediators that went
between God and man: he thought that God himself did not meddle with humane
affairs, but by the mediation and intercourse of such spirits, and that by
them therefore all dreams were procured. But the contrary is evident, that
some dreams are wrought only by natural means, as by the multitude of
business in the day, Eccles. 5. 2. and where there is any spiritual cause, that
the Lord himself sometime is the agent, as it is said, God came to Abimelech
in a dream, Genesis 20. 3.

2. Aristotle on the contrary held, that all true dreams proceeded of
natural causes: but that is untrue also: for the prediction and foretelling of
things to come, which often is showed in dreams, cannot by any natural means
be searched out.

3. The Stoikes made three causes of dreams, God, fatal necessity, and the
liberty of the soul, which in sleep is free from all other perturbations.
Contr. The first cause we allow, but not of all dreams: but fatal necessity
there is none, for then God who is most free, should himself be tied to such
fatal necessity, and connection of causes: and if the freeness of the soul
in sleep caused such dreams, then one should as well have such dreams as an
other: for in the time of rest every man's soul is free from the business of the
day.

4. Porphyrius thinks, that the notions which are naturally in the soul,
which it brought with it into the body, are the causes of dreams: which
notions show more freely in the night, then in the day. But Christian religion
acknowledges no such former notions, or preexistence of the soul before it
came to the body: for the Lord forms the spirit of man within him, Zachar.
12. 1.

5. Synesius makes the fantastical part of the soul to be the cause of
dreams: that as the representations of diverse things are raised in the
fantasy, so the soul thereupon conceiueth dreams: and therefore Pythogoras
going to bed used to fall asleep with the sound of the harp, and so prepared
himself to have quiet and pleasant dreams. But yet the cause appears not,
why such imaginations and representations should be raised up in the fantasy:
the fantasy affects the soul, but how comes the fantasy to be so
affected first?

6. Hippocrates makes two causes of dreams, Lib. de insomnijs.
the divine and supernatural instinct, which is infused of God, and the
natural disposition of the body: for as the humors are affected; if there be
emptines or fullness, or any distemperature in the body, the dreams are
answerable. But as these are the true causes of divine, and natural dreams:
so of other dreams other causes must be found out. Hippocrates then touches
the true causes of some, but not of all dreams.

7. Gregory makes six causes of dreams: 1. the fulness or emptines of the
body: 2. the diu^ne cogitations: 3. the illusion of Satan: 4. the illusion of
Satan and man's thoughts together: 5. the divine revelation: 6. the divine
instinct and humane thoughts concurring together. But as Hippocrates alleged
not all the causes; so Gregory makes more causes then he needs, as now
shall be showed.

8. As then there are four sort of dreams, as has been before declared,
Quest. 42. so there are four causes of the same.

1. Natural dreams proceed of natural causes; as cholerike men dream of
fire, phlegmatike of water, melancholic men of darkness and blacknes: and any
distempered humor or affected part of the body often raises a dream
agreeable, Lib. de prae^agijs.
as Galen reports of one that dreamed that one of his legs was made of
stone, and presently after he was taken with a palsy and nummenesse in that
leg. Lib. 7. c. 50.
And Pliny writes how P. Cornelius Ruffinus in his sleep thought that he
suddenly became blind, and when he awaked, he was blind in deed.

2. Of humane dreams, humane affairs are the cause, which leave a strong
impression in the mind, whereby such like dreams are engendered in the night,
as the thoughts were in the day: so mariners dream of the sea and fish,
husbandmen of the fields, shepherds of their sheep: of this kind was
Hannibals dream, who having now swallowed Italy in his desire, as he
transported his armies from Spain thither he had a dream, wherein he saw a
most hideous serpent destroying and devouring all where he went: this dream
was answerable to his desire, and seemed to issue forth of his former thoughts.

3. The third sort of dreams is Diabolical, which Satan casts into men's
minds to seduce and deceive them, and of these the Devil is the author, who
is the third general cause of dreams: for if some dreams were not caused by
Satan, why should the Lord condemn such dreamers of dreams, which should go
about to seduce and deceive the people, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. Of this kind may be
thought Alexanders dream to have been, who (coming to Ptolome the next king
of Egypt after being sore wounded by a venomous dart, and of that wound like
to die) fell asleep by him, and in his sleep saw a serpent bringing a root
in his mouth, showing the place where it grew, whereby Ptolome was healed.

These Sathanicall dreams are of two sorts: for some of them do prognosticate
of things to come, which Satan can foretell two ways, either by natural
causes he can foresee the events, or he does foretell such things as he knows
he is permitted of God to do: the other kind of Diabolical dreams tends to
the inciting and stirring up of men to sin, as murder, lust, or other
ungodliness.

4. The fourth cause of dreams, is God himself, who by dreams and visions in
the night diversely instructs men, and teuealeth unto them things to come. ex
Perer.

Quest. 46. How Diabolical, and Divine dreams may be discerned.
1. Diabolical dreams are discerned, 1. by the matter, if they be unchaste and
unclean dreams provoking unto any vice or impiety: 2. by the end, if one
shall have a revelation in a dream of things to come, whereof there is no
profitable end, but only the feeding of men's curiosity, or the maintaining
of superstition. 3. by men's persons also a conjecture may be made; as if
unclean and corrupt dreams be offered unto godly and righteous men: therein
they are to suspect the craft of Satan, that he goes about to assault and
tempt them.

2. Concerning Divine dreams they are two ways principally discerned: by the
excellency of the matter, as when things to come are revealed, the knowledge
whereof only belongs unto God, or the Lord discovers man's secret thoughts,
which he only can descrie: the other way is by the illumination of the mind,
when the Lord does so evidently reveal himself unto the soul and mind of
man, that he nothing doubts of the author of those dreams, but knows
assuredly, that the Lord spoke unto him in a dream: such were the dreams
which Abraham, Joseph, Daniel, Paul had: for like as naturally the soul has
light to discern of the first notions and principles; so the mind in this
case is illuminate to acknowledge the divine instinct.

3. In diverse manners and to diverse purposes does the Lord speak unto men in
dreams: 1. sometime he terrifieth and fears them, as he stayed Abimelek and
Laban by fearful dreams, that they should do no hurt, the one to Abraham,
the other to Iaakob. 2. sometime the Lord encourages men by dreams to
enterprise some great work, as he did Gedeon, Judge. 7. 9. 3. he admonishes
some by dreams, what they should do, as Paul, Act. 16. and Joseph, Matthew. 1.
4. God instructs by dreams concerning things to come, as he did in Pharaohs
and Nabuchadnezzers dreams.

4. And as the ends, and purposes are diverse, why the Lord sends dreams; so
also the kinds are diverse. 1. some divine dreams are plain and manifest, and
need no interpretation; such were the dreams of Joseph of the stars, and
the sheaues. 2. sometime God speaks with them himself in their dreams, as
with Abimelech, Genesis 20. sometime an Angel appears, as to Joseph, Matthew. 1.
sometime a man, as to Paul, Act. 16. 3. sometime God sends dreams not
expected or desired, such were Pharaohs and Nebuchadnezzers dreams: sometime
they are first craved and desired, as God revealed unto Daniel in a vision by
night the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzers dream, which he himself had
before begged and entreated by prayer. 4. and some divine dreams are
answerable to the precedent thoughts of the heart, as Joseph's dream was to
direct him what he should do with Marie, whom he was careful of before, and
much troubled in himself about that matter.

Quest. 47. Why it pleased God by visions and dreams to instruct his servants.
1. One reason Hippocrates yields, Lib. de insomnijs.
because in the day time men are distracted with many affairs and much
business, so that the mind is not so free and apt in the day, to receive such
spiritual direction, as in the night.

2. Aristotle says, that dreams come in the night, propter noctis silentium,
and sens^um exteriorum vacationem, Lib. de divinat. somnijs.
because of the silence of the night, and the rest and intermission of the
senses: and the soul then being not hindered, neither by the occurrent business
of the day, nor by the employment of the senses, is more ready and free to
attend upon God.

3. Beside the night is secret, and so the Lord may then secretly insinuate his
will without any disturbance of the party, or observation of others, etc.

4. By this it appears also quanto sit Deus potentior ad hominem docendum,
etc. how much more powerful God is to teach and instruct man, then any other
can: for one man only can instruct another waking, and giving attention; but
God can instruct men in their sleep. in lib. Aristot. de divinat.
Averroes has this opinion, he denies not but that a man in sleep may have a
prophetical instinct, yet he thinks that other arts and sciences cannot be
inspired by that means, which are only attained unto by precept and
experience, and by the help of the outward sense. But herein he shows his
ignorance, not knowing the Scriptures, and the power of God: for though
ordinarily arts are learned by such means, yet God has infused knowledge
without any such ^elps: as into Noah, Bezaleel and Aholiab the builders of the
Sanctuary, Solomon, the Apostles.

5. Add further, that seeing sleep is an image and representation of death,
by this means we are taught, that the soul lives after the death of the
body, and has more perfect knowledge and illumination, then while it was in
the body: as more visions and revelations have been showed unto men in their
dreams, their body being asleep, then when they were awake.

Quest. 48. Why visions and dreams are often showed unto simple and unlearned
men.
1. By this one reason Aristotle, and after him Cicero would eleuate the
authority of divine dreams: for thus they object, that if there were any such
divine dreams given unto men by God, ea non obscuris and indoctis hominibus,
sed viris sapientia praeditis dari par erat, it was meet they should be given
not unto obscure and unlearned men, but unto such as were wise, etc.

2. To this objection we thus answer: 1. that such Sathanicall dreams as were
used among the heathen, were inspired into the simple, ignorant, and
superstitious, that were apt to believe any thing, that they might not perceive
the fraud of those spirits, whose oracles were vain, and void of truth,
doubtful and ambiguous. 2. but divine dreams in deed were for the most part
revealed unto wise and prudent men, as unto Abraham, Joseph, Solomon, Daniel.
3. sometime also such dreams were sent upon mean men of no great learning or
wisdom in the world, but they were such as were devout and religious: which
their holiness and piety did make them more capable of heavenly visions and
revelations; whereas the wisdom and greatness of this world does puff man up,
and so is an impediment and obstacle to such mystical instructions. 4. God
also has sometime given such dreams unto wicked and impious men, as to
Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzer: but then such dreams were showed them, not for their
own benefit, but for the good of Gods Church: and beside though they had
dreams, yet they had not the interpretation of them, but therein used the
help of Gods servants, as Pharaoh of Joseph, Nabuchadnezzar of Daniel.

Quest. 49. Why dreams are not always clear and manifest, but darkely and
obscurely propounded.
1. The reason why diabolical dreams, such as were usual among the Heathen,
were obscure and doubtful, may readily be rendered; because the spirits which
deceived them, had no certain knowledge of things to come, and therefore the
dreams and oracles which they gave, were so doubtfully and obscurely
propounded, that howsoever the event was, it might seem answerable to the
dream: and if they failed in their hope, the interpretation should be laid not
upon the revelation which was given, but upon themselves, that could not
rightly understand it.

2. But Divine dreams either were evident, plain, and manifest, as the
dreams which Abimelech, Solomon, and Joseph had, Matthew. 1. or if they were
obscure, it was for one of these causes: 1. that they might seek unto the
servants of God for the interpretation of their dreams, as Pharaoh did unto
Joseph. 2. that the servants of God themselves might by earnest prayer beg of
God the understanding and interpretation of such dreams. 3. the manifold
mysteries shut up in such short visions made them the more obscure: as c. 2.
the vision of the image comprehended more, then could be contained in a long
process of speech: such visions the more compendious, so much the more obscure
were they. 4. the Lord thought good obscurely and darkely to reveal his will
in dreams, that the truth might lie as hid for a time, till such time as they
were fulfilled and accomplished: as Joseph's dreams of the bending of the
sheaues and bowing of the stars, were not perfectly understood, till he was
advanced in Egypt.

Quest. 50. What dreams may be observed, and by whom.
1. To observe all dreams is frivolous, and superstitious: 1. for this were
much like to the ridiculous customs of the Heathen, that took upon them to
conjecture by the flying of birds, and looking into the entralls of beasts. 2.
beside it sauoureth of the Stoicall fatal necessity, to think that all things
necessarily should follow, as men surmise by their dreams. 3. And if
starre-gazing be condemned of the wise, and curious Astrologicall observations,
much more is such coniecturing by dreams to be contemned, which has more
uncertainty in it then the other.

2. Some dreams notwithstanding (though not all) may be marked: but yet
Iamblicus rule is frivolous; that such dreams as happen either in the
beginning of sleep, before the mind be ouercast with the fuming vapors of
meats and drink, or in the end when now all such vapors are concocted and
digested by sleep, are worthy of observation: but those which come in the
mids of sleep, the body then being drenched as it were, and fuming with
such vapors, are not at all to be regarded: for this were to limit God, to
appoint him his times and seasons, when he should inspire men.

3. There are then natural dreams, which may be observed for a man's health:
by such Physicians do judge of the distemper of the humors, and of
inclination to diseases: there are also other humane dreams, wherein men's
infirmities do show themselves, and so thereby perceiving what vices they are
subject unto, they may be admonished to amend them: such dreams may lawfully
be observed, which tend either to the health of the body, or the soul. But
divine dreams are most worthy of observation of all other, whereby the Lord
does often signify his will concerning things to come: which kind of dreams
cannot be interpreted but by the same spirit whereby they are sent: as Daniel
says to the King, The secret which the king has demanded, can neither the
wise, the Astrologians, the Inchanters, and Soothsayers declare unto the King:
but there is a God in heaven which reuealeth secrets. c. 2. 27, 28.

Quest. 51. Whether in divine dreams there is a free use of reason and the
will, and the same acceptable to God.
1. Pererius thinks that in such dreams and visions, there is soluta vis
rationis, but not perfectus liberi arbitrij vsus, a free use of reason, but not
the perfect use of freewill, for to that there is required the liberty of all
the senses, and powers, that then homo should be Dominus sui, Lord of himself.

2. Contra. 1. In that sense, man has no perfect use of free will neither
waking nor sleeping, to be as Lord of himself* to evil man's will is free; but
he cannot bonum agere, nisi a bono agatur, do any good, unless he be drawn
thereunto of God, which is good: 2. but the use of the reason and will is
otherwise as free in such visions and dreams, as when men are waking: for the
soul and understanding sleeps not, neither is bound in sleep, but the sense
only: And this notably appears by that heavenly dream and vision, which
Solomon had, 1. King 3. 5. wherein both God first bid Solomon ask what he
would, and he asked wisdom; and God approved this his petition, and actually
gave him his request: and all this was done while he was asleep: Solomon could
not have made such request of God, nor the Lord accepted it, if it had been a
fancy and imagination only in his sleep: But to this diverse answers are
made;

1. Pererius says, that Solomon had before made that petition unto God for
wisdom, which his petition the Lord approved in his sleep, not because it
was made then, but before; But no such thing in extant in the text, of any
former petition: the first motion and occasion was given by the Lord himself,
who said to Solomon in his dream, Ask what I shall give thee, and thereupon
he made his request for wisdom.

2. Tostatus has an other answer, which Pererius rather approoueth then the
former, that whatsoever is said there to be done, non revera, sed per
imaginariam tantum dormientis visionem esse factum, was not verily done, but in
the imaginary vision of Solomon being asleep: But this cannot be admitted,
imaginary petitions are not accepted of God, and they only have imaginary
effects: but here Solomon was verily endued with wisdom even in his sleep:
for presently after he waked, he perceived that it was a divine dream, and
felt himself increased with that excellent gift of wisdom, which immediately
after he put in execution.

3. Therefore it may safely be held, that this was more then a simple dream:
for dreams are but representations of things past, present, or to come, but
here there was an actual collation of that, which was showed in the dream: It
was therefore both a dream, and a vision concurring with the dream; a dream
it was, because it fell out in sleep, but in this dream Salomons soul had
free conference with God, in which respect it may be said to be a vision.

Quest. 52. verse. 21. How Daniel is said to have been unto the 1. year of
king Cyrus.
1. Some think that this is to be understood of the time of Daniels
prophesying: Theoderet: so also Calvin: among the Assyrians, and Chaldeans,
agnitus erat pro summo propheta, he was taken for a great prophet: but this
cannot be the meaning: for he had some prophetical visions in the 3. year of
Cyrus, cap. 10. 1.

2. Much less can it be referred to the time of Daniels life, as Pelican
seems to think: for he lived to the 3. year of Cyrus, how long after it is
uncertain: upon which reason Hierome resolves, non vitae illius tempus
accipiendum est, the time of his life cannot be here taken.

3. Osiander thinks that hereby is signified, that ^e lived and continued so
long, that he saw to his great joy the return of his people out of captivity,
which was in the 1. year of Cyrus: This indeed is most true, but in this
place, mention being made of Daniels standing before the king, that is, his
ministering in the Court, there is more understood then simply his continuing
and remaining until that time.

4. Vatablus gives this exposition, that so long he was minister in aula
regis, a principal officer in the kings Court: but so was he afterward also a
chief governor under Cyrus. c. 6.

5. Lyranus thinks that hereby is signified the honor and glory of Daniel
in regno Chaldaeorum and Persarum, in the kingdom both of the Chaldeans and
Persians: but the words unto the first year of Cyrus, are exclusiuely rather
then inclusiuely to be taken: as though that time determined the space here set.

6. Therefore the purpose and intent of these words is, not to show the term
when Daniels prophecy or state in honor ended, but to signify that during
all the time of the Chaldean Monarchy he continued in great honor and
reputation in Babylon and Chaldea: postea a Dario in Medos translatus est,
afterward he was translated by Darius unto the Medes; Hierome, Iun. Polan. and
among them also he was in great honor: But from the time that he first stood
before Nebuchadnezzar and served him, he was in estimation all that kings
days, and in the reign of Evilmerodach his son, and of Balthazars his
son: though it may seem that he was not altogether so much set by in
Balthazar time, as before. Osiand.

4. Places of doctrine.
1. Doct. verse. 2. The translating of kingdoms, subduing of cities, is ordered
and disposed by God.
Verse. 2. And the Lord gave Ieh^iakim, etc. into his hand, etc. which shows,
that all things are ruled and governed by Gods providence: that kings and
princes, states, cities, and common wealths are in Gods hand, to alter and
turn them, as it seems best to himself: whereof we may make a double use:
for as it is to our comfort, that we are in Gods hand, and under his
protection: so in that he delivers the impenitent into the hands of Tyrants,
by them to be corrected and chastised, it ought to terrify and move unto
repentance. Bulling.

2. Doct. verse. 8. That men's hearts are in the hand of God.
Ver. 8. He required the chief of the Eunuchs, that he might not defile
himself: Hence it is evident, seeing this chief officer of the kings took no
exception to this free speech of Daniel, charging the kings table and meats
with pollution* that God ruled and inclined his heart, to favor Daniel, and to
take all in good part, which he said: Some would have said to Daniel, what?
do thou charge the kings Court and religion with impuritie and uncleanness?
are ye Hebrews only the pure men, and is there no religion good beside yours?
This then was Gods work thus to qualify the heart and affection of Ashpenah
toward Daniel: so it is here found to be true, as the wiseman says: The kings
heart is in the hand of God, etc. he turns it whithersoeuer it pleases him,
Prou. 21. 1.

3. Doct. verse. 12. Of the commendation of fasting.
Verse. 12. Let them give us pulse to eat: By this example of Daniels
abstinence, who preferred a thin and course diet before the kings full and
delicate dishes, we see how excellent a thing frugalitie and temperance is:
Even among the heathen Philosophers parsimonie and sparing diet was much set
by: Socrates being asked, wherein he differed from other men, answered, illi
vivunt vt comedant; ego edo vt viuam, they live to eat, but I eat to live:
the sobriety of Democritus, and Demosthenes is much celebrated among the
heathen: The Egyptians lived of herbs, and the fruits o^ trees: the food of
the Argiues in time past were pears, of the Athenians figs, of the Medes
almonds, of the Ethiopians locustes, of the Arabians milk.

They say that the spittle of a man fasting kills a serpent: So fasting
joined with prayer, is a spiritual remedy against the spiritual serpent, and
his tentations. Hierome calls it, caeterarum virtutum fundamentum, the
foundation of other virtues: Chrysostom, alimentum animae, the nourishment of
the soul: Basil says it is similitudo hominum cum Angelis, that which makes
men like unto Angels.

Christ sanctified fasting and abstinence by his own example: and Satan
sought to interrupt and break off his holy fast: thereby showing how
sovereign a remedy it is against his tentations, seeing he would not suffer
Christ to hold out his fast: for as a ship the lighter it is being unloaded of
the burdens does better brook the water, and endure the force of the winds:
so he which is given to a temperate and sober life, melius effugit fluctus and
nymbos tentationum, does better escape the floods and tempests of temptation.
Pintus.

4. Doct. That true virtue consists in the inward purpose of the heart, not
in the outward appearance.
Verse. 8. Daniel had determined in his heart, that he would not defile
himself. Daniels continency was not in outward show, but rooted and grounded
in the heart, which is the seat of virtue: for that is not virtue which is
done only to the sight of others, and for ostentation to seek the praise of
men, but that which lies hid in the heart: The Pharisees gave their alms,
prayed, fasted, to be seen of men; but Christ teaches his Disciples to pray
and fast in secret, that the Lord may approve their work, and not men, Matthew.
6. And S. Paul says, that he is not a Jew, which is one outward, etc. but he
is a Jew, which is one within, etc. whose praise is not of men, but of God.
Polan.

5. Doct. Of worldly fear which carries away carnal men.
Ver. 10. The chief of the Eunuchs said to Daniel, I fear my Lord the king,
etc. This man feared more the terrene power of the visible Emperor, the^ the
celestial majesty of the omnipotent and invisible God: as Tertullian objected
to the Romans, maiore formidine Caesare^ obseruatis, qua^ ipsum de Olymp^
Ioue^, with greater fear ye observe Caesar, then Jupiter himself of Olympus,
etc. they stand more in awe of their great commander in earth, then of their
supposed gods in heaven: But the Apostles had a contrary resolution, whether
it be right in the sight of God to obey you rather then God, judge ye, Act. 4.
19. Polan.

6. Doct. ver. 12. Prove thy servants ten days, of the certainty of faith.
Bullinger hereupon notes fides non fallit, nec deserit Deus consta^ter
inherentes verbo, etc. faith falls not, neither does God forsake those which
constantly cleave unto his word, etc. Daniel with his three brethren and
companions were assured, that God would give success according to their faith:
and if they in this particular thing, which concerned but an outward
observation of the law, had such assurance and confidence: much more ought we
to be assured of such things, which God has promised concerning everlasting
life: for all things (as our Blessed Savior says) are possible to him that
believes, Mark. 9. 23.

7. Doct. That learning is necessary in Kings.
Ver. 19. And the king communed with them: Nebuchadnezzar being a great
warrior and conqueror, yet was himself so well seen in the knowledge of the
Chaldeans, who were held to be the most learned in the world, that he was able
himself to sift and examine these 4. men, whom he found in wisdom to go
beyond all his wisemen and soothsayers in Babylon. Such learned princes, among
the people of God, were David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Josias: among the Heathen,
Alexander the great, Scipio Africanus, Julius Caesar, with others: and among
the Christian Emperors, Constantine the great, who decided the controversies
and questions among the Christian Bishops: And this famous kingdom of England
has had most learned princes: Henerie the 8. Edward the 6. Queen Elizabeth of
late blessed memory, and our now Sovereign king James, who is able to
confer learnedly with any man in his faculty, as here Nebuchadnezzar does
with Daniel and the other three.

8. Doct. That the perfection even of humane arts and learning is to be found
in the Church of God.
Ver. 20. And he found them ten times better, then all the enchanters, and
Astrologians, etc. Like as these four fearing God obtained greater wisdom
even in the Chaldean learning, then any of the other cunning men: So it may be
seen this day, that even the liberal sciences, which were invented among the
Heathen, have been much perfited among Christians; who have added unto their
beginnings: for seeing God is the giver and author of every good gift, who are
more like to receive such gifts, then his own people, who can tell how to ask
them of him: they therefore are in great error, who either in times past gave
the pre-eminence of learning unto the Gentiles before the Christians, or now to
the Papists and Romanistes, before the professors of the gospel: it is evident
to all the world, that neither for the knowledge of tongues or arts, we are
any thing inferior unto them.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. Whether the changing of the Popes name be grounded upon the
example of Peter.
Verse. 7. Unto whom the chief of the Eunuchs gave other names: hereupon
Pintus takes occasion to speak of that custom of the Roman Bishops, who at
their inauguration do take unto them new names: Celius Rhodiginus out of
Platina alleges this to be the reason thereof, because Sergiu^ the second
had but an homely name before, he was called os porci, swines face, and
thereupon would be called by a new name, as being ashamed of his old: But
Pintus thinks rather, that it took beginning from Peter, whose name the Lord
changed, calling him in the Syrian tongue Cephas, which in the Greek
signifies ( petros) a stone: and out of this he falls into an other matter,
that this was not that Cephas mentioned, Galath. 2. who was not Peter, but one
of the 72. disciples: for it is not like that S. Paul would reprove Peter
Pontificem maximum, the chief priest to his face; neither is that John the
Apostle, who is there also spoken off, but one of the disciples, for Paul
himself says, c. 1. 19. that he had seen none of the Apostles, but James the
Lords brother: and again it appears, c. 2. 70. that James, Cephas, and John
speak of Peter as of an other man beside themselves, when they saw that the
gospel of the uncircumcision was committed to me, as of the circumcision to
Peter, etc. to this purpose Pintus.

Contra. 1. Platina one of their own historiographers may be credited for a
matter of fact and story, who was best acquainted with the doings of that Sea:
Pintus conceit comes too late to check their own register: and if the
changing of Popes names be grounded upon the change of Peter's name by Christ,
why did not the Popes before Sergius alter their names: or why do they not
expect the authority of Christ to innouate their names, but take them up
themselves?

2. As for that Cephas or Peter whom S. Paul reproved, he was no other but
Peter the Apostle. 1. for be it admitted, that one of the disciples was called
Cephas, yet he was not named Peter too: but this was reproved under the name
of Peter: 2. that Peter which was a pillar of the Church, and to whom the
Apostleship of the circumcision was committed, was reproved by S. Paul: but
none of the disciples were Apostles, or any Apostleship committed unto them. 3.
this Peter was one of the chief, Galath. 2. 6. but the disciples were not
counted among the chief.

Neither do the contrary arguments conclude any thing. 1. for whence can they
prove, that Peter was the chief of the Apostles: the contrary is enforced
here, that Peter with the rest gave unto Paul the right hand of fellowship,
therefore there was an equality among them: and in that Paul so boldly
reprooueth Peter, it shows that there was no superiority. 2. S. Paul
speaks of his twice coming to Jerusalem, first after three years, and then
he saw none of the Apostles but James: then after fourteen years, Galat. 2.
v. 1. when he found at Jerusalem, James, Peter, and John. This then is a simple
collection, that at his first coming he saw none but James, therefore he saw
no more of the Apostles at his second coming. 3. Neither does the construction
of the words help him any thing at all: for, v. 7. it is only said, when they
saw, etc. James, Cephas, John, are not there named: and if they were, if we
understand it thus, when James, Cephas and John saw that the Gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the Gospel of the circumcision was to
Peter, or Cephas, it does not follow, that Peter should be none of those three:
for it is an usual Hebraisme, to repeat the antecedent in stead of the
pronoun^, as Exodus 10. 13. He (that is Pharaoh) thrust them out from the
presence of Pharaoh: who is so simple to gather hereupon, that there were two
Pharaohs. 4. Whereas Pintus names Clemens, Oecumenius, Theophylact, as
favorers of this opinion, that this Cephas was an other beside Peter, many
Fathers of greater authority may be produced, which hold that Peter the
Apostle was reproved by S. Paul, as Cyprian, Hierome, Augustine, Ambrose, with
others: as is elsewhere showed at large, Synops. p. 139.

2. Controv. That fasting is not meritorious, nor satisfactorie.
Upon this example of Daniel, verse. 8. who determined with himself not to be
defiled with the kings meats, Pererius takes occasion to set down generally
the ends of Christian abstinence, which he makes to be these eight. 1. to
mitigate and oppress the anger of God kindled against sin. 2. to obtain
somewhat at the hand of God. 3. to imitate the abstinence of Christ and his
Apostles. 4. to satisfy God for their own sins and others. 5. to overcome
the tentations of Satan. 6. to prevent sins to come. 7. to subdue the
concupiscence of the flesh. 8. to make the soul more prompt and ready for
spiritual exercise and meditation.

Contra. The rest of the causes of abstinence being admitted, three of them we
worthily take exception to, namely the 1. 3. 4.

1. Gods wrath can not be appeased by any work of ours: it is only Christ, in
whom God is well pleased with us, and who has made an atonement for us, he
only has offered a sacrifice of sweet smelling savor unto God for us, Ephesians.
5. 2. 2. Neither can we imitate the miraculous fast of our blessed Savior, who
continued 40. days and nights without eating any thing: neither did Christ
fast to that end, to give us an example to do the like: but wherein we should
imitate Christ, he himself teaches us, saying, learn of me, that I am meek
and lowly in heart. 3. And that fasting does not satisfy for sin, it is
evident by the example of the vainglorious Pharisie, who boasted in his prayer,
that he fasted twice in the week, and yet he was not thereby justified: see
more hereof Synops. p. 955.

3. Controv. That the prescript of fasting days for religion, and forbearing
of certain kinds of meat, is not warranted here by Daniels abstinence.
Pintus upon this example groundeth the lenten-fast of 40. days, and other
fasts observed in the Papal Church; and thereupon inueigheth against
Protestants, calling them heretics, because they do Ecclesiae ieiunia
aspernari, despise the fasts of the Church: and says whereas we pretend to
have reformed the Church, non Ecclesiae, sed sectae Epicureae reformatores,
etc. we are not reformers of the Church, but of the Epicures sect: Pintus, p.
18.

Contra. 1. Protestants only reject their superstitious and hypocritical
fasts: true fasting (which is an abstinence from all meats and drinks for a
time, to make their prayers more fervent) they practice more then Papists, who
know not what such fasting means. 2. Who are the Epicures and belly gods of
this age, their fat Monks and Abbey-lubbers are witnesses: who while they
forbear eating of flesh, do feed upon other delicate meats and daint^e
confections, with drinking of wine, which do more pamper the flesh and inflame
the lust. 3. This example of Daniel does nothing at all fit their turn: 1.
Daniel kept this abstinence 3. years together. 2. he abstained as well from
eating of fish as flesh. 3. neither did he drink any wine all this time of
abstinence: let them go now and imitate Daniels fast themselves; which they
would take to be a very hard penance. Polan.

4. Controv. verse. 20. What the wisemen of the Chaldeans were: and whether the
wisemen which came to Christ were kings.
Pintus upon this place gives this note, that the wise men among the Chaldeans
and Persians were called Magi, which is a Persian word, and was the same with a
Philosopher among the Grecians, and a Gymnosophist among the Indians: and
because the kings of the East were philosophers, they were called Magi,
wisemen: and so the wise men which came to Christ, Matthew. 2. are held by an
ancient tradition of the Church to have been kings, as Tertullian, Hierome,
and Augustine affirm, with other. Pintus, p. 24.

Contra. 1. Hierome writing upon the 72. Psalm, calls them not reges, but
regum typos, lib 3. de mira^. scrip. c. 4.
kings, but types of the kings: Augustine says, monente subdolo sermon regis,
alacres eunt, being craftily warned by the king, they go cheerfully: not as
it is corruptly read, reges alacres eunt, the kings go on cheerfully: 2.
Tertullian indeed says, nam and Magos reges fere oriens habuit: in the East,
they had for the most part the Magi or wisemen for their kings, etc. But this
can hardly be proved: the wise men were of great authority with the Persian
kings, and did usurp the kingdom a while, before Darius was chosen king: but
the Magi were not kings. 3. And if this be such a firm tradition of the
Church; that these 3. wisemen were kings, what tradition have they for the
rest, that these three kings lie buried at Collen, and that their names, were
Gaspar, Melchior, Balthazar: which three names written in parchment, and hung
about the neck, they say are available to drive away any disease from the
body. 4. If they had been kings, Herod would have been afraid to have
entertained them being jealous of his kingdom, neither is it like that the
Evangelist would have omitted it, it being much for the honor of Christ, that
he was adored of kings in his infancy: see Beza, in his annotat. Matthew. 2. 1.

5. Controv. v. 20. Of the Magicians among the Chaldeans, and how that such
were always opposite to the true Church of God, as diverse of the Popes were
such.
1. The word chartummim, is a strange and foreign word, and is taken properly
(as Aben Ezra) for the Magician, or Genethliake, the caster of men's natiuities.

2. In the beginning the term of Magicians was honorable among the Persians*
for they were such as professed the knowledge both of divine and humane things,
Clem. Alexand. lib. 1.
and were assistant unto Kings: they were the same among the Persians, with the
Priests or Prophets in Egypt, the Philosophers in Greece* among the French the
Druidae, among the Indians the Gymnosophistes: among the Bactrians the Samanaei.

3. But afterward these Magi fell to practicing of unlawful arts, to invoke
spirits, and to confederate themselves with devils: of whom they learned
their enchantments and coniurations, as Theodoret alleges out of Porphirie.

4. Such were the Magicians and Sorcerers in Egypt, of whom Iannes and Iambres
were the chief, which resisted Moses.

Most of the Heretics were Magicians, as Simon Magus, and Menander his
successor, and Marcion, as Justinius witnesses, Apolog. 2. pro Christian. and
one Marcus, who by his magical impostures deceived many, Ireneus lib 1.
advers. haere^. c. 8. 9.
as Ireneus. Many of the Popes were professed Magicians, and by such
Diabolical practices obtained the Popedom: as Sylvester the 2. Sylvester the
3. Gregory the 6. Benedict the 9. John the 12. who in playing at dice was wont
to call upon the devil, as Luitprandus, and to offer wine unto him, as
Fasciculus temp. Gregory the 7. did use to carry about with him a book of
Necromancie, and was condemned as a Magician and Sorcerer in the Synod at
Brixia, as Abb. Vrspergens. and Benno Cardinal. write, Polan. Thus in the
adversary Church Magicians have been had in great reputation; as here they
were accounted of among the Chaldeans: But as Daniel by his godly wisdom
obscured them all; so the light of Gods truth and Gospel has prevailed agrinst
all such abominations.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. v. 2. That victory and conquest is to be used moderately.
V. 2. With part of the vessels of the house of God. Although this was
especially wrought by Gods providence, that Nabuchadnezzar carried away only
part of the vessels of the Temple, that some might still remain for the
service thereof; yet in this victorious king is set forth an example of
moderation, who is contented to take part of these holy vessels, and carries
away part of the chief men into captivity: he makes not havoc and spoil
of all: which teaches, that Princes should not use their victory, to make
desolation, and lay all wast, but rather to help to bring things to better
order. Bulling.

2. Observe. Princes can do no more then God permits.
Herein also evidently appears Gods work, Nabuchadnezzer had no power to
carry away more of the men or vessels, then God gave into his hand: for the
text says, God gave Iehoiakim into his hand, etc. with part of the vessels of
the house of God. If God had given all into his hand, he had taken all: but now
he is limited, he takes no more then God would he should take, Papp. So like
as, though the Sea rage, and the waves thereof rise, yet the Lord keeps it
within the bounds, and binds as it were with swaddling bands, Job. 38. 9. So
the Lord staieth the rage and fury of the mighty men of the earth: they have
no power to do any thing* but from God: as Jesus said unto Pilate, Thou
could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above,
Ioh. 19. 11.

3. Observe. The Lord punishes by degrees.
At this time Nebuchadnezzer only carried away part of the holy vessels, and
some few, Daniel with other persons, but afterward he took Iechonias the king
himself, and carried him into captivity; and last of all he put out Zedekiahs
eyes, burnt the Temple, and made havoc of the city, and removed the most of
the inhabitants into captivity. Thus the Lord proceeds by degrees, to see if
he can draw the people by his smaller corrections to repentance, till he power
out the whole viole of his wrath at once upon them, Osiand. This manner of the
Lords proceeding in his judgments by degrees is well expressed, Levit. 26. v.
18. 21. 24. how the Lord still punishes his people seven times more, that is,
with more grievous judgments when they do not profit by the former.

4. Observe. God will not be honored with evil gotten goods.
Nebuchadnezzer ha^ing taken the vessels of the Temple, does offer them in the
house of God, thus honoring his idol with unjust spoils: but our God will not
so be served: the wise man says, Honor the Lord with thy riches, that is,
Prove. 3. 9.
thine own, and not an others: They which offer unto God, or give unto the
poor of that which is gotten by extortion, are herein like unto
Nebuchadnezzer: and they be compared unto the Eagle, which lives of the pray
of other birds, and that which she leaves, does distribute among the rest,
Pintus. The law of Moses forbids, that any should bring the price of a whore
into Gods house, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. nothing is acceptable unto God, which is gotten
by unlawful and dishonest means.

5. Observe. v. 8. Against the riotous living, and excessive expenses of
students.
Verse. 8. Daniel had determined not to defile himself with the kings meat^,
etc. This great abstinence in Daniel and the rest, who were sequestered, and set
apart for the study of wisdom, Bull. well applies against the evil use of
students in these days, which are not mediocri mensa, and honesta vest
contenti, content with moderate fare, and modest garments, but do exceed both
ways: Many which live of exhibition, and upon the foundation of liberal
patrons, do frequent tavernes, and ruffle in their silks, to the great
offense and scandale of that kind of University life, and to the hinderance of
much benevolence, which otherwise would be bestowed that way.

6. Obserua. verse. 18. That time is to be redeemed.
Verse. 18. When the time was expired, that the king had appointed to bring them
in, etc. The time appointed for the instruction of Daniel, and his fellows was
3. years, this time being expired, then the king calls them to account, to
see how they had profited: which example is worthy to be followed, by those,
who are set over Colleges of students, to see, that they mispend not their
time in vain, but go forward in their studies. Bullinger. As there is nothing
more precious then time, so the loss of nothing is more to be lamented:
therefore the preacher would have a young man remember his Creator in the days
of his youth, before the evil days come. etc. Eccles. 12. 1.

CHAP. II.
1. The argument and Method.
THis chapter consists of 3. parts, 1. of Nebuchadnezzars dream, with the
inquisition after the meaning thereof, to verse. 14. 2. the interpretation given
by Daniel, verse. 46. 3. the effects that followed.

1. Nebuchadnezzars dream is described by the circumstance of time, and the
effects, it troubled his spirit, verse. 1. The inquisition follows, consisting
of the calling and conuention of the wisemen. v. 2. 2. The conference between
them and the king, which is threefold: In the first the king simply propounds
his motion, to have his dream expounded, verse. 3. and the Chaldeans promise to
declare it, so they knew it, ver. 4. In the second the king requires of them
two things, to tell him his dream which he had forgotten, and to declare the
meaning, both threatening punishment, ver. 5. and promising reward, ver. 6. and
the Chaldeans answer as before, ver. 6. In the third the king urges them sore,
that if they did not, as he requires, he would hold them to be imposters and
deceivers, and punish them, ver. 8. 9. The Chadeans excuse themselves, 1. by
the impossibility of the thing. 2. by the example of other kings. 3. by the
difficulty, that none could do such a thing but the Gods; ver. 11. 3. Then
follows the event, they are commanded to be slain, ver. 12.

2. In the second part, there is, 1. the preparation to the interpretation,
ver. 14. then the interpretation it self to ver. 46.

1. In the preparation, 1. is set forth the occasion, Daniel is sought for with
his fellows to be killed, ver. 13. whereupon follows his persuasion with
Arioch, ver. 16. his motion to the king. ver. 17. 2. then the means are
expressed which he used, first prayer with the effect thereof, ver. 18, 19.
then a thanksgiving unto God both general to ver. 23. then particular, ver. 23.

2. The interpretation follows, where, 1. the opportunity is showed, how he
is brought in unto the king by Arioch, ver. 24. 25. 2. the preamble to the
interpretation, consisting of the kings demand, ver. 26. and Daniels answer,
in these 4. parts, concerning the Astrologians; that they could do nothing,
ver. 27. touching God, that he only revealed secrets, ver. 28. concerning the
king, how he was affected, when he dreamed, ver. 29. touching himself, that he
imputes it not to his own wisdom, ver. 30.

3. The interpretation consists of the simple narration of the dre^me, which
consisted of two parts, the vision of the image to ver. 34. and of the stone
which dashed it in pieces, ver. 34, 35. 2. of the exposition, first of the
image and the parts thereof, to ver. 44. then of the stone, verse. 44. 45.

3. The effects are three. 1. the reuerencing of Daniel, ver. 46. 2. his
confession of God, ver. 47. 3. the rewarding of Daniel with gifts and honors,
ver. 48. and the advancing of his fellows at his request, verse. 49.

The diverse readings.
v. 1. In the second year, in the reign of Nebuchadnezzer, I. Pol. (not of
the reign of Nebuchadnezzer) L. V. G. for the distinction coming between,
seuereth these two clauses) Nebuchadnezzer dreamed dreams, wherewith his
spirit was troubled ( troubled it self, Chald.) and his sleep was upon him.
G. I. Pol. (better, then left him. V. or was broken upon him. Page.) or fled
from him. L. the word is (haiah) was, and the preposition ghal, does not
signify from: the meaning is, while he was in a deep sleep or slumber.

2. Then the King commanded to call the Magicians, and the Astrologians, and
Sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, to show the King his dreams: so they came and
stood before the King:

3. And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit was
troubled ( Chald. troubled it self) to know the dream.

4. Then spoke the Chaldeans to the king in the Aramites language, O King, live
for ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation.

5. The King answered, and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone from me: if
ye will not make me understand the dream, and the interpretation thereof ( not
the conjecture thereof. L.) ye shall be rent in pieces, ( ye shall perish. L.
ye shall be made pieces. Chald.) and your houses shall be made a iakes. G.
(dunghill, Chald. I. not your houses shall be confiscate. L.)

6. But if ye declare the dream and the interpretation thereof, ye shall
receive of me gifts, and rewards, and great honor: therefore show me the
dream, and the interpretation of it.

7. They answered again ( the second time, Chald.) and said, Let the king tell
the dream to his servants, and we will declare the interpretation thereof.

8. The king answered and said, I know certainly that he would gain time (
redeem, or buie time, Chald.) because ye see the thing is gone from me.

9. But if ye will not declare me the dream, there is but one judgment, (
sentence. L. V. I. or law. A.) for you: for ye have prepared lying and corrupt
words to speak before me, till the time be changed. G. I. (the time be passed.
L. till there be an other state of things, V.) therefore tell me the dream,
that I may know, if ye can declare the interpretation thereof.

10. The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said ( Chal. and saying) there
is not a man upon the earth ( Chal. upon the dry ground) which can declare the
kings matter: therefore not any king, nor prince, or ruler ( mighty Chald.)
ever asked such a question ( such a saying. C.) of any Magician, Astrologian,
or Chaldean.

11. And the matter ( the saying. C.) which the king requires, is precious. I.
(rare. G. of great weight. L. A.) and there is not any other ( to be found. L.)
which can declare it before the king, except the gods, whose dwelling is not
with flesh ( with men. L. with mortal men. V.)

12. For this cause the king was angry, and in a great fury, and gave charge
to destroy all the wisemen of Babel.

13. So the sentence was given, and the wisemen were slain: and they sought
Daniel, and his fellows to be slain.

14. Then Daniel enquired of the counsel and decree. L. Po. (returned the
counsel and decree. C. not answered with counsel. G. or interceded. V.) of
Arioch the captain of the guard. I. (or chief marshall, or executioner. V.
the captain of his army. L.) to the king, which was gone forth to slay the
wise men of Babel.

15. Yea, he answered and said unto Arioch the kings captain, why is the
sentence so hasty from the king? then Arioch made known ( declared. G.) the
thing ( the word. C.) to Daniel.

16. So Daniel went in, and desired of the King, that he would give him time (
leisure. G.) and he would declare the interpretation to the king.

17. Then Daniel went to his house, and made known the matter ( the word. C.)
to Hananiah, ( Chananiah. C.) Mishael, and Hazariah his companions.

18. And that they should beseech mercy from the God of heaven in this secret
( sacrament. L.) that Daniel with his fellows might not perish with the rest
of the wisemen of Babel.

19. Then was the secret reucaled to Daniel in a vision by night; therefore
Daniel blessed the God of heaven.

20. And Daniel answered, and said, The name of God be blessed for ever and
ever: for wisdom and strengh are his.

21. And he changes times and seasons ( moderateth. V.) he takes away kings,
( not kingdoms. L.) and establishes kings ( sets up. G. creates. V.) he
gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to men of understanding: ( to them
which know understanding. C.)

22. He discovers the deep and secret things: he knows what is in the
darkness, and the light dwells with him.

23. I thank thee and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, that thou have
given me wisdom and strength, and have made known unto me ( made me to
know) that which we desired of thee: for thou have made known unto us the
kings matter: ( word. C.)

24. Wherefore Daniel went unto Arioch, whom the king had appointed to destroy
the wise men of Babel: he went, and said thus unto him, Destroy not the wise
men of Babel, bring me in before the king, and I will declare unto the king the
interpretation.

25. Then Arioch in have brought in Daniel before the king, and said thus unto
him, I have found a man of the children of ludah taken captives ( children of
the captivity of Judah. C.) that will make known unto the king the
interpretation.

26. Then answered the king and said unto Daniel, whose name was Beltshatzar (
Balthazar. L. Beltsazar. V. Belteshazzar. G.) art thou able to make known unto
me the dream, which I have seen, and the interpretation thereof?

27. Daniel answered before the king, L. A. (to the king. I. V. in the presence
of the king. B. G.) and said: The secret which the king has demanded can
neither the wisemen, astrologians (magicians. L. wisards. V. soothsayers. B.)
magicians. I. V. (enchanters. G. wise men. B. coniecturers. L.) soothsayers
(such as gave conjecture by the entralls of beasts, aruspices. I. L. readers of
destinies. V. B.) declare unto the king.

28. But there is a God in heaven the reuealer of secrets, who has made known
unto king Nebuchadnezzar, what shall be in the days following. I. V. (in the
latter days. L. G. B. A. P. but many of these things fell out not long after
Nebuchadnezzars time) in the consequence or following of days. C.) Thy dream,
and the vision of thine head upon thy bed, is this.

29. O king thoughts came ( ascended. C.) to thee upon thy bed, what should
come to pass hereafter; and he which reuealeth secrets, tells thee what
shall come.

30. As for me, not for any wisdom which is in me, more then in any living,
is this secret revealed unto me, but for this, that they might ( not that I
might. B. or that it might. L. that, some, might. V. for their cause which
might. I.) make known unto the king the interpretation, and that thou might
know the thoughts of thine heart.

31. O king, thou saw, and behold a great image: this large image whose
glory ( and the glory thereof. C.) was excellent, stood before thee, and the
form thereof was terrible.

32. This images head was of fine ( good, C.) gold: the breast thereof, and the
arms thereof of silver; his belly and his sides. I. (thighs. caeter.) of
brass.

33. His legs of iron, his feet were part ( some of them. C.) of iron, part
of clay:

34. Thou beheldest till a stone was cut out, which was not with hands, ( that
is cut out: without hands, caeter. but then the relative (which) should be
omitted) which smote the image upon his feet, which were of iron and clay, and
brake them in pieces.

35. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold broken
altogether, and became like the chafe of the summer floates, ( where the wheat
is threshed) and the wind carried them away, that not any place was found for
them: and the stone that smote the Image became a great mountain, and filled
the whole earth.

36. This is the dream, and we will declare the interpretation thereof before
the king.

37. O King, thou art a King of Kings: for the God of heaven has given thee a
kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

38. And in all places, where the children of men dwell, the beasts of the
field, and the fowls of heaven, has he given into thine hand. A. P. G. B.
(not, all those places, where, etc. V. L. for here the preposition (in) is
omitted, or where the children of men, the beasts of the field, etc. dwell. I.
these are rather said to be given, as Ier. 27. 6.) and has made thee ruler
over (in. C.) them all: thou art this head of gold.

39. And after thee shall rise an other kingdom inferior to thee ( of silver.
L. G.) but this is inserted by way of exposition) and an other third kingdom
shall be of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth.

40. And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: for as iron breaks in
pieces, and subdueth all things, and as iron, which bruiseth ( as iron
bruiseth. L. V. G. B. here the relative (which) is omitted) all these things,
so shall it break in pieces, and bruise.

41. Where as thou saw the feet and toes, part of potters clay, and part of
iron; the kingdom shall be divided, but there shall be in it of the strength
I. V. G. (of the planting. L. A.) of iron, for so much as thou saw iron
mixed with clay, and earth.

42. And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay, so shall
the kingdom be partly strong, and partly broken.

43. And whereas thou saw iron mixed with clay, and earth, they shall mingle
themselves with the seed of men, but they shall not join one with an other (
this with that. C.) as iron cannot be mixed with clay.

44. And in the days of these kings ( not kingdoms. L.) shall the God of
heaven raise up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and this kingdom
shall not be left ( given over. B. G. delivered over. L. to an other people,
but it shall break and destroy all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for
ever.

45. Whereas thou saw, that a stone was cut out of the mountain, which was
not with hands, I. (without hands, caeter. see before, verse. 34.) and that it
broke in pieces, the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold: so
the great God has made known to the King, what shall be hereafter, and the
dream is true and the interpretation thereof faithful. V. L. I. (sure. B. G.)

46. Then king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and bowed himself. G. B.
(worshipped L. V. I.) unto Daniel: and charged oblations V. (sacrifices. L.
meat offerings. G. rewards. B. gifts. I. the word is mincah which signifies
gifts and oblations offered) and sweet odors, to be offered ( to be ordained.
B.) unto him.

47. Also the king answered unto Daniel and said, Of a truth it is that ( I
know of a truth. G. of a truth your God. etc. L. B. but here the word
translated (that) is omitted) your God is the God of gods, and the Lord of
kings, revealing secrets, seeing thou wast able to reveal this secret.

48. So the king made Daniel a great man ( magnified him. C. I.) and gave him
great gifts, very many: and made him governor over the whole province of
Babel, and chief of the rulers, above all the wisemen of Babel.

49. Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set over the business I. L. P.
(the charge B. G. V.) of the province of Babel, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego; But Daniel was ruler in the kings gate. I. (sat in the kings gate. B.
G. was in the kings gate. L. was in the court.V.)

1. The questions discussed.
Quest. 1. verse. 1. How the second year is to be counted wherein
Nebuchadnezzar had this dream.
1. Theodoret thinks that it was the second year from the beginning of his
reign: but that cannot be, for Nebuchadnezzars reign began in part of the
3. and 4. year of Iehoiakim, cap. 1. 1. and Ierem. 25. 1. and 3. years after
that were appointed for Daniels education, c. 1. 5. while those 3. years were
expired, there was no proof or trial had of Daniels wisdom; therefore it
can not be, that the story in the first chapter is set down by way of
recapitulation, as Theodoret thinks: for till the three years were past,
they were not brought before the king.

2. Some think that this was the second year of Nebuchadnezzars reign by
himself alone, who also reigned after a sort with his father, who also was
called by the same name: Calvin. Geneuens. But this cannot stand, because the
first year of Nebuchadnezzar his sole reign was in the 3. and 4. reign of
Iehoiakim. Ierem. 25. 1. after which three years must be counted for Daniels
education: this then could not be the second year of his reign alone.

3. Some understand here two Nebuchadnezzars, the father mentioned before, cap.
1. 1. and his son, brother to Euilmerodach, who being the younger was
preferred before the other, and the Elder because of his wickedness was put by
the government, ex Lyran. so also Emmanuel Sa. But this Nebuchadnezzar could
not be son to Nebuchadnezzar the great, Ierem. 27 7.
and brother to Euilmerodach, for the Lord had given the kingdoms of the
earth, but unto Nebuchadnezzar, and his son: that is Euilmerodach, and his
sons son, which was Balthazar the son of Euilmerodach: but if there were
a Nebuchadnezzar brother to Euilmerodach, then should there be three beside
Nebuchadnezzar the great, and not two only as Jeremy says: there were
indeed two Nebuchadnezzars, one called Nebuchadnezzar priseus, the ancient,
the other Nebuchadnezzar magnus, the great: who began his reign the same
year Daniel went into captivity, in the 3. and 4. year of Iehoiakim.

4. The usual interpretation is, that it must be understood of the second
year of Nebuchadnezzars absolute Monarchy, after the subduing of Egypt: so
Josephus lib. 10. cap. 11. of the same opinion is Hierome, and of the later
writers, Lyranus, Hugo Cardi, who thinks it was the 26. year of his whole
reign, and the second of his Monarchy, Peter. also Pintus, Bullinger,
Pelican, are of the same opinion: But this cannot stand: for Nebuchadnezzar
conquered Tyrus, before he subdued Egypt: for Egypt is given him for his wages
for his service against Tyrus, Ierem. 24. 18. 19. but Daniel was famous for his
wisdom, (which was not known till he had expounded Nebuchadnezzars dream)
before Tyrus was destroyed: for he is celebrated for his piety, and therein
joined with Noah and Job, Esek. 14. and for his wisdom, Esek. 28. 3. And then
immeadiately in that chapter follows the prophecy of the destruction of
Tyrus.

5. Wherefore this second year must be counted from the time when Daniel first
stood before the king: in the second year then of his service and ministry,
Nebuchadnezzar had this dream: but where it is added, in the reign of
Nebuchadnezzer, these words are not to be joined with the former, in the second
year, as appears by the Hebrew distinction, rebiah, set over the word
shetaim, second: this then happened in the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, which is
mentioned by way of distinction, because in the last words of the former
chapter, it is said that Daniel was to the first year of King Cyrus; least any
should think that this was done in the second year of Cyrus, direct mention
is made of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar. Inn. Polan. Pappus.

Quest. 2. What Nebuchadnezzar this was, and whence he was so called.
1. Some think, as is touched in the former question, that this was the son
of Nebuchadnezzar the great, brother to Euilmerodach: but it is before showed
that there were but two kings of this name, Nebuchadnezzar called priscus, the
ancient, and Nebuchadnezzar called magnus, the great: Lib. antiq. 1^. c. 13.
of these two Josephus makes mention, the first reigned 21. years, the second
43. years after his computation: then after him succeeded, not an other
Nebuchadnezzar (which Pintus thinks, but without any ground, to have been a
general name to all the kings of Chaldea, as Caesar was to the Roman
Emperors) but his son Euilmerodach, Lib. 10. antiq. c. 13.
whom Josephus calls Abilamarodachus: This Nebuchadnezzar then here
mentioned, was he which was surnamed the great. 2. Some think, that there was
a third Nebuchadnezzar held to be the son of Cyrus, in whose time fell out
the history of Holofernes and Judith, Lyran. but it is evident in Scripture
that no kings of the Persians, but only of the Chaldeans were called by that
name. 3. Concerning the notation of Nebuchadnezzars name, Lyranus has this
narration, that he ws so called of this event: being a child he was cast out,
and suckled by a shee-goat under a tree, in the which sat an owl, which a
certain leper passing by wondered at, to see an owl set there in the day, and
by that occasion looking about he espied the child, which he caused to be
nursed and brought up. So of these three is the name compounded, of Nabu which
in that language signifies an owl, and chodo a goat, and nosor a leper: But
this seems to be a fabulous narration: for whereas Nebuchadnezzar the great
is imagined to have been so called upon this occasion, that is not like,
because his father was called by that name before him.

Quest. 3. verse. 1. Why he is said to have dreamed dreams.
1. Though he dreamed here but once, and in respect of the time had but one
dream, yet it is called in the plural cholmoth, dreams, not somnium, a
dream (as the Latin translatour interprets) because many matters were
contained in this dream: it was somnium multiplex, one dream, yet consisting
of many parts, Inn. Polan. 2. As also, because in that one image, which he
saw, there were diverse metals, which were types and representations of diverse
Monarchies, one succeeding another, Pappus. so that this dream was diverse,
both in respect of the matter and object thereof, and the diverse interpretation
and signification of the same.

4. Quest. What manner of dream this was which Nebuchadnezzar had.
1. Dreams are either natural, which the mind causes of it self, but upon
some occasion or beginning either external or internal, or they are somnia
immissa, dreams which the mind of it self procures not, but are sent and
wrought upon it by some other power: and they are of two sorts, either (...),
sent of God, or (...), sent of evil spirits.

2. Divine dreams are such as God offreth to the mind, and sometime such
dreams are showed to the faithful, as to Iaacob, Joseph, Daniel; sometime to
those which were not of the people of God, as to Abimelech, Genesis 20. Laban.
Genesis 31. Pharaoh. Genesis 41.

3. Divine dreams are all (...), that is containing some divination of things
hid and secret, and afterward to come to pass, and they are of two sorts, nuda
(...), naked visions, simply and plainly expressing the meaning, scope and
purpose of the dream, as that was which was showed to Joseph concerning Marie,
how he should dispose of her, Matthew. 1. or else they are (...), mystical
dreams, folded up in types and figures, which cannot be understood without
some signification: such was Pharaohs dreams of the 7. fat and lean kine, and
of the 7. full and 7. thin and lanke cares, Genesis 41.

4. This dream which Nebuchadnezzar had, was both a divine dream, and of this
last sort, obscure and dark, which could not be understood without an
interpreter: for though Nebuchadnezzars thoughts, who was desirous to know
what should come to pass after him, ministered some occasion, yet the cause of
this dream they were not; but Gods hand was in it, as both may appear by the
effect which it wrought, his spirit was sore troubled, verse. 1. As Abimelech
also was in a great fear, after he had the vision in his sleep, Genesis 20. and
Pharaoh was perplexed after his dream, Genesis 41. Polan. As also Daniel himself
tells the king afterward, verse. 28. that God himself showed the king, what
should be in the latter days. Pap.

Quest. 5. Why it pleased God to send this dream upon Nebuchadnezzar.
1. The Lord did it for Nebuchadnezzars sake, that thereby he might be humbled,
and acknowledge the true God of Israel, and thereupon be favorable to his
people, whom he held in captivity.

2. It was done also in respect of Daniel, that by this means he might be had
in reputation, and so be exalted for the comfort of the Lords people: as Joseph
for the same cause was advanced in Egypt, to be a softer father to his brethren.

3. The use hereof also is general concerning the whole Church of God, that as
these four great Monarchies were dissolved by the power of Christ, whose
kingdom only is invincible: so God will destroy the mighty kingdoms and
potentates of the earth, who shall band themselves against Christ and his
Church.

4. Gods glory also herein is set forth, to whom belongs all power, and who
knows all secrets, Pap. So also Hugo Cardi. vt Daniele interpretante
glorificetur Deus, etc. that by Daniels interpretation God might receive
glory, and the captive people comfort.

5. Lyranus adds an other reason: specialis Dei prouidentia circa principes
magnos, etc. the special providence of God is over great Princes, because the
common wealth depends of them, and therefore the Lord does often reveal unto
them things to come, as unto Pharaoh the famine which should follow.

Quest. 6. verse. 1. Of the meaning of these words, and his sleep was upon him.
1. The Latin interpreter reads his dream fled from him: which reading
follow Lyran. Hu. Car. Pere. Pin. Pap. Pel. but the word shenah here used,
signifies sleep, not a dream: and the preposition ghall, is not from, but
upon, or in: Lyranus hereupon takes occasion to show the cause of the
oblivion and forgetfulness of dreams: for oblivion comes of the commotion
and stirring of humors, which is the cause that children and old men are so
forgetful, terror autem facit magnam humorum commotionem: and terror makes a
great commotion and stirring of humors, which invaded Nebuchadenezzar here. But
this anno^ation has no good ground here, because as is before showed, the text
spenketh not of the passing away of his dream, but of his sleep being still
upon him.

2. Some read, his sleep was interrupted, or broken off, Pagnin. or
destistuit ipsum, his sleep left him. Vatab. Bullinger. for so the word nihiah
of haiah in niphall sometime signifies, as Dan. 8. 27. but the preposition is
ghall, upon, not from: the true reading thenis; his sleep was upon him.

3. Iunius gives this sense, that his sleep was yet upon him, his spirit was
troubled in his sleep, when he had this dream: so that he could not sleep
quietly, vt ne somnus ipsius tranquillus esset, his very sleep was unquiet:
But the troubling of his spirits shows that he awaked from his dream: as is
said of Pharaoh, Genesis 41. 8. that when the morning came, his spirit was
troubled, where the same word pagham is used, to be troubled, perplexed.

4. Polanus gives a contrary sense, that he was somno oppressus, in a sound
sleep, lying astonished, as if he were dead: but the troubling of his spirits
argues some interruption and discontinuing of his sleep.

5. I rather therefore here approve Caluins judgment, quod attonitus iterum
dor^i^rit etc. that being amazed and astonished with this dream, he fell
asleep again: whereupon came the forgetfulness of his former dream: so also
Geneuens. he was so heavy with sleep, that he began to sleep again.

Quest. 7. Of the four kinds of wisemen whom the king sends for.
1. The first are called chartummim, which Hierome translateth harialos, qui
verbis rem peragunt, which do all with words: so the Septuagint read, (...),
cuchanters: Hugo Cardi. says they were such, qui per sacrificia and aras, etc.
which by sacrifices, and altars did require the answer of their doubts of
spirits. so also gloss, ordina, and Lyranus. These enchanters took their
beginning from Zoroastres the king of the Bactrians, who only of all men is
said to have laughed as soon as he was borne, Pin. ex Plin. but these
chartummim, were rather their wise men, or Magi, which were as their
Philosophers, yet mingled the study of natural things with damnable arts:
Iun. Aben Ezra says they were the Magi or wisemen: they were such as professed
hid and curious learning, called among the Chaldeans, chartummim, as the
Hebrews called their doctors, and learned men, Scribes: The old Latin
translation, (as Hierome says) called them Sophistas, wisemen.

2. The second sort are ashaphim: which are usually translated Magi, qui de
singuli^ philosophantur, which take upon them to give the reason of any thing:
Hier. Pere. Hu. Car. Pelican. These which professed art Magic Origin
thinks to have had their beginning from Balaam: Pin. R. Abraham thinks,
that by this word are understood Medici, physicians, which by the inspection of
the vtine, or feeling of the pulse, do give conjecture of the state of the
body: but the king had no occasion here to use his physicians: this was no
natural accident, but a supernatural work: Some would derive it of the Hebrew
word nashaph, signifying inspiration: but it seems rather to be a strange
word, being only read here in Daniel. Therefore R. David Kimhi better takes
them for Astrologers: and the word signifies such as observe the heavens
crepusculo, in the twilight: whom Plin. calls Hesiophantas, Plin. lib. ^.
ca^. 26.
for Rekiophantas, that is, obseruers of the element or sky. Iun. in Daniel.

3. The third sort is mecashphim, which Calvin professes is not certainly
known, what it signifies, because the names together with the things are out
of use: cum res ipsa sepulta sit, quis distinguet inter voces, seeing the thing
it self is buried, who can distinguish between the words: the Septuagint call
them (...), the Latin maleficos, sorcerers, witches, doers of mischief.
Hierome describes them, qui sanguine and victimis viuntur, which use blood,
and sacrifices, and consult with the dead: these had Cham for their founder:
Pin. so Hugo Cardi. Pint. Pelli. but they are better understood to be
praestigiatores, counterfetters, deluders of the sense, iuglets, which do cast
as it were a mist before the eyes, and deceive the sense: such as were the
Egyptian sorcerers, which made counterfeit serpents: which delude the external
sense, as phrantike persons are terrified with inward fantasies, which rise of
a distempered brain, Polan. Inn. And they themselves also are deluded and
deceived with fantastical visions of Satan, and sic. auersis sensibus aliqua
illis occulta reuelantur, and while their sense is held, turned aside, or
otherwise occupied, certain secret things are revealed unto them. Lyran.

4. The fourth sort, are called chaslim, the Chaldeans: Some take this for the
general n^me comprehending all other diuiners whatsoever in Babylon, Iun. and
therefore they are all afterward called Chaldeans, v. 4. Calvin. Pererius
thinks that these called Chaldeans, being the more principal and excellent
of the rest, had conference with the king. These Chaldeans then, though it were
a general name of all the inhabitants of Chaldea, yet it was appropriated unto
a certain sect and profession of learning among them, which seemed to be more
excellent then the rest. Hierome says, they were called mathematici,
Mathematicians: Astrologi, Chaldaeorum Philosophi, they were Astrologians, the
Chaldean Philosophers: Gloss. interlin. Strabo says, that the Chaldeans were,
Assyriorum philosophi, the Assyrian Philosophers, lib. Geograph. 16. These
took upon them to cast men's natiuities, and by the sight of the stars to
foretell things to come: whereupon the three wisemen that came unto Christ by
the leading of the star, are held to have been Chaldeans, Gloss. ordinar.
and therefore in the time of Hezekiah, the king of Babylon sent to know the
reason of the going back of the Sun, 2. Chron. 32. 31. Lyran. This kind of
Astrology is thought to have been invented of Jupiter Belus, as Philo, in
lib. de Abrah. Diodorus Siculus thus writes of them, Chaldaei Babyloniorum
antiquissimi eo loco sunt apud Babylonios, quo in Aegypto sacerdotes, the
Chaldeans the most ancient of the Babylonians, are in that place among them,
as the Priests are among the Egyptians: they are deputed to the service of the
gods: they spend their whole life in Philosophy, etc. take upon them to
interpret dreams and prodigious thing, and to foretell things to come, etc.
they are much addicted to the knowledge of the stars, thereby divining what
shall happen to every man in his life: These foretold unto Alexander the death
of Darius, the like they foreshewed to Antigonus, Nicanor, Seleucus, etc. All
these do make the Chaldeas a certain profession of Philosophers, and
Astrologians in Babylon.

8. Quest. Why Daniel was not called and sent for among the rest of the
Chaldeans.
1. Osiander thinks the reason was, because the king did know, that Daniel
was not exercised in their Magical arts: but that is not like, for seeing the
king had given order, that they should have been trained up in the learning of
the Chaldeans, c. 1. 5. it would have much offended him, if he had known his
order had been neglected.

2. It may be therefore that the wise men were afraid to take Daniel with them,
least he might have obscured them all by his wisdom: and they being ancient,
thought scorn that such a young man should be joined unto them. Perer.

3. The king also might spare Daniel, as having yet had no great trial of his
faithfulness, and therefore he would not at the first commit his secrets to a
stranger. Calvin.

4. Peretius thinks that Nebuchadnezzer might have forgotten him in the space
of 22. years, for so long it was since Daniel first stood before the king. But
that cannot be: for this year wherein Nebuchadnezzer dreamed, was but the
second year from the beginning of Daniels ministie and service in the Court,
as is before showed, Quest. 1. upon this chapter.

5. But herein chiefly we are to acknowledge Gods providence, who so disposed,
that Daniel should not be admitted, neither before, nor together with the
Chaldeans. If he had been called first, the Magicians might have said, that
they could have interpreted the dream, if they had been called. If he had
come with them, and expounded the dream, the Chaldeans would have ascribed it
to their own skill; and so the ignorance and folly of them should not have so
manifestly appeared. Polan.

6. And further God to this end would not have Daniel present with the rest,
to signify that he would not have the professors of the truth, matched or
mingled with the assemblies of liars and hypocrites. Polan.

9. Quest. v. 4. Of the Aramites language, whether it differ from the Hebrew*
and be all one with the Chalde.
v. 14. Then spoke the Chaldeans to the King in the Aramites language. 1.
Hierome by this argument confuteth the opinion of Philo, who takes the Hebrew
and Chalde language for all one; because Daniel then needed not to have learned
the Chaldean tongue, c. 1. 5. And further that they differed, it is manifest by
that speech of Eliakim to Rabshakeh, Speak to thy s^ruants in the Aramites
language, 2. king. 18. 26.
for we understand it, and talk not with us in the Jews tongue: So the Lord
threatens by his Prophet, that he will bring a nation upon them, Ierem. 5. 15.
whose language they understand not, meaning the Chaldeans.

2. Now although the ancient and pure Hebrew tongue differ much from the
Chalde, yet after the captivity the usual language of the Jews did borrow
much of the Chalde tongue, by reason of their long captivity among them: and
was compounded partly of the Chalde, partly of the Hebrew, from their return
from Babylon, until the days of out blessed Saviors being in the flesh.
Perer.

3. But concerning the Syrian tongue, some take it and the Chalde for all one,
Osiand. some think that they differed only as the tongue of the learned and
unlearned, Lyran. that the Syriake was held to be the more eloquent tongue,
Genevens. some think the Chaldean and Babylonian tongue was when called the
Syrian or Aramites language, because Chaldea was counted part of Syria, Iun.
And it seems that in times past there was small difference between them,
though now the ancient Chalde tongue, wherein part of Ezra and Daniel is
written, be far diverse both in character and sound from the Syrian tongue,
wherein the learned Jews write and speak at this day: see more hereof, Quest.
25. c. 1.

10. Quest. Why the Chaldeans speak in the Aramites language.
From the beginning of this book unto the 4. v. of this chapter, all is
written in the Hebrew words and characters: from this place to the end of the
7. chap. the Prophet uses Chalde words, but Hebrew charactrs: and then the
rest of the book follows in the Hebrew tongue and writing, as before: now
the reasons why these Chaldeans use the Aramites language, were these. 1. These
wise men were of diverse countries, and so of diverse languages: therefore they
spoke in the Syrian or Chalde tongue, which was known and understood of all.
Perer. 2. Some think they used it, as the more eloquent tongue, Genevens. 3.
Or because it was the language which the king used, Perer. 4. Or rather the
Syrian was the Babylonian tongue, which in that respect, was fittest for them
to use. 5. And the Lord hereby so disposed, that the knowledge of these things
should be manifest unto the Chaldeans, that even they might be convinced of the
truth out of their own acts and records: which also was the cause, for the
more credit of this history among the Chaldeans, that Daniel sets it down
in the very same language wherein it was acted. Polan.

11. Quest. v. 8. Why the King says, They would gain or redeem time.
1. It is the third interrogation or question, which the king propounds unto
them: the first was cum simplici denuntiatione, v. 3. with^^ simple prolation
and propounding of his dream: the second, v. 5. cum forti comminatione, and
praemij promissione, with a vehernent commination and threatening, with promise
also of reward: the third, v. 9. cum falsi suspicione, with a suspicion of
falsehood, etc. You have prepared lying and corrupt words.

2. By gaining or redeeming of time, is understood occasionem, quaerere
evadendi pericula, to seek occasion to escape the danger: as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 5. 16. Redeeming the time, for the days are evil: as travelers
that fall into foul weather do watch their times and opportunities, how to
escape it, and so to go on in their journey, Pintus: some understand by time,
spatium vita, the term of their life, which they desired to be prolonged,
Gloss. Lyran. but it is more fitly referred to the interpretation of the
dream, which they would have shifted off, and so quarebant dilationem
temporis, they sought to prolong the time, that some other thing falling
between, the king might forget to urge that matter, Osiand, and sic daretur
effugiendi ecoasio, and so they might have occasion to escape, and avoid the
danger.

3. But the kings conjecture is not good, that they which do not presently
make answer to the king, do it to gain time, and so to delude the king: for
there may be diverse and different causes of suspending ones answer; as cu^
officium pi^tatis and charitatis vetat, when as the office of piety or
charity enioyneth silence, as the Martyrs, which were urged to bewray their
fellows, would not make direct answer, Iun. lection. in Daniel.

4. But the kings other argument is good, which he urges against these wisemen
and Chaldeans, v. 9. Tell me the dream, that I may know if you can declare me
the interpretation thereof. The argument is this framed, They which can give
the interpretation of a dream, can find out the dream it self: for the one
is of a divine instinct as well as the other: And to God nothing is hid, he can
as well tell what the dream was, as open the meaning of it: But ye cannot tell
me my dream: therefore neither can you interpret it though you knew it: you
are then but impostors and deceivers. Polan. But Osiander collecteth otherwise,
non rest argumentabatur rex, etc. the king reasoned not well: as though it
were all one, somnia divinare and interpretari, to divine what the dream was,
and to interpret it. But I rather herein consent to Pererius, recte redarguit
eos Rex, the king does with good right reprove them: for if they could not
tell the dream, which was now in act, how could they have told of things to
come by that dream, quae nunquam actu fuerunt, etc. which never were in act,
etc. Indeed if it belonged unto humane skill and conjecture to interpret
divine dreams, it were possible to do the one and not the other; as
Physicians can interpret natural dreams: but what the dream was, if it be
not declared, they can not guess: and the reason hereof is, because humane
skill and art is finite, and has certain limits and bounds: but seeing it
proceeds of a divine instinct to interpret divine dreams, by the same
instinct, which is not limited, he taht can do the one, can the other also.

12. Quest. v. 10. Of the Chaldeans answer unto the King.
The Chaldeans and wise men do seem modestly to excuse themselves by these 5.
arguments: 1. From the impotencie and weakness of man's nature, v. 10. There is
no man upon earth, that can declare the kings matter: they thus reason, That
which is in no man's power to declare, the king ought not to enquire of any: but
to tell a dream that is forgotten, is in no man's power to do.

2. Ab exemplo, from the example of other kings: never any asked any such thing
of any Chaldean; and therefore it beseemed not the king to propound that
question, which never any did before.

3. From the quality of the thing: it was a rare and precious thing which the
king demanded, exceeding the wit of man.

4. A comparatione, from the comparison with others: there is none else that
can declare it: they dare undertake to do as much as an other.

5. A causa efficiente sola, from the sole efficient cause, which is God, who
only can declare such secrets: whose habitation is not in the flesh, that they
might confer with him.

13. Quest. Of the impostures and falsehoods in the answer of the Chaldeans.
1. They promise and undertake to expound the dream, if they did know it, v.
4. but the king afterward by experience found the contrary, c. 4. 4. for though
he told them his dream, yet could they not expound it. Perer.

2. They say none else living could tell the dream: whereas Daniel was then
living, and afterward did both show the dream, and the interpretation of it.
Bulling.

3. They superstitiously affirm a multitude of gods, saying, Except the gods:
so they ignorantly worshipped many gods. Polan.

4. They deny Gods providence, as though he had nothing to do here with
mortallmen that live in the flesh. Bulling.

5. They seem to affirm, that man can know nothing of God, unless he
cohabited in the flesh with them. Polan.

6. They also deny the incarnation of God: Whose dwelling (say they) is not in
the flesh: wherein they bewray their ignorance and misbeleefe. Bulling.

14. Quest. What the Chaldeans mean in these words, Except the gods whose
dwelling is not in the flesh.
1. Although they erred in holding a multitude of gods, yet herein they were
right, that God only had the knowledge of things to come: Pint. Some think
that by gods, here they understand not only the superior gods, but the Angels
also, who might know and understand their dreams, which being in a material
and corporal object, are comprehensible of the Angelical power: Perer. But it
seems rather that these Magicians, who were not ignorant of the power of
spirits, with whom they had familiarity, and now they failed them, do mean
hereby the superior divine power only. Indeed natural dreams being
certain corporal affections and qualities, spirits may find out; but divine
dreams are of a spiritual nature, and are wrought by the act of the
understanding, which is not known unto the spirits: and beside, divine dreams
have a signification of things to come, which are manifest only unto God.

2. Concerning the cohabiting or being present of the gods with flesh, that
is, with mortal men, the Gentiles had diverse opinions. 1. The Epicures
thought, that the gods, nihil extra se agentes, etc. did nothing at all in the
world without themselves, neither were occupied in doing any thing, but made
them idle gods doing nothing. 2. The Peripatetikes following Aristotle, did
make the gods only to have their dwelling in the heavens, and to be occupied
in the motion of the celestial orbs, but had nothing to do, cum rebus
sublunaribus, with things done under the Moon. 3. The Platonists and Stoikes
placed the gods only in heaven, but they held that there were otehr spirits
good and bad in the air, which did converse with men: and that the gods
immediately had nothing to do with men, but per daemones tanquam internuntios,
by the spirits, which were as messengers coming between God and man. 4.
Wherein they diversely erred; 1. in making many gods: 2. in holding that God did
nothing in the earth, but by the mediation of such spirits: 3. and that some
spirits were good, some evil by nature: whereas the Angels were all created
good in the beginning, but some fell through their pride, and were cast down
to hell.

5. But concerning the conuersing of Angels with men, the truth is this, that
both good Angels (whose chief employment is in giving attendance upon God in
the heavens) yet sometime have appeared unto men, as unto Abraham, Lot, laakob:
the evil Angels also more often do intermedle with humane affairs, for the
probation and trial of men, and to their own just condemnation: whereof there
are two notable experiments; the one is, in those which are called energumeni,
Two experiments showing the mystical working of Satan in the world.
possessed or bestraughted: some such being very idiots, unlearned, and
unlettered men, have spoken Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and disputed of profound
questions in Philosophy, and Divinity: the other experiment is in the
Magicians themselves, which work by such spirits, and effect strange things,
as in counterfaiting the shapes of beasts, in causing images to move and
speak, in telling strange things done far off in remote countries: these
strange works either to ascribe to melancholy, as some Physicians do, or to
the operation of the stars, as Astrologers, est perquam ineruditum and
insulsum, etc. it is both an unlearned and unsavory shift: and to deny these
former experiments, extremae impudentiae and contumaciae videtur, it seems to
be extreme boldness and contumacie: therefore these strange things must of
necessity be referred to the operation of spirits, etc. Perer. lib. 2. in
Daniel. in v. 10. c. 2.

15. Quest. v. 12. Of the Kings rash sentence in commanding all the wise men of
Babel to be slain.
1. Though by the law of God these Sorceres and Soothsayers had deserved
worthily to die, and so in respect of the divine justice, were justly put to
death; yet in respect of the King, who looked not unto the Law of God, but
followed his own irefull affection, the proceeding was unjust: Polan. beside
their deuillish profession, it seems they were ambitious and insolent, and
envious against Daniel, and the rest of the people of God, therefore in respect
of themselves their punishment was just. Bulling.

2. Lyranus excuses the Kings fact, because he had been at great cost in
maintaining these Inchanters and Soothsayers: he had raised them to honor,
given them great gifts; and now when he requires some service of them, they
are able to say nothing.

3. But yet Nabuchadnezzer was diverse ways faulty in this action: 1. in his
rash and inconsiderate sentence, which he pronounced against them in his rage
and fury: whereas the sentence of death should proceed with mature
deliberation and advice: for like as Saturn the highest of the Planets has
the slowest motion of them all; so Princes which sit in their high thrones of
majesty should be most considerate in their actions. And as a musician does
not presently cut away his strings, if they be out of tune, but does wind them
to and fro, to bring them to a right harmony; so neither should a Prince
punish every disorder in the Commonwealth presently with death. Pintus. 2. An
other point of injustice is, that he had not yet called all the wise men of
Babylon, and yet unheard and uncalled, commands them to be slain. 3. It was
also unjust for some few men's fault, to take revenge of the whole profession,
and so to punish one for an others offense. Osiand.

16. Quest. v. 13. Whether the wise men in deed were slain.
1. Some think, that praeparabantur tantum occidi, they were only prepared
and appointed to be slain; not that they were indeed slain, so Lyran. gloss.
interlin. Hugo Car. But the contrary is evident in the text: for the sentence
being gone forth, that is proclaimed, and published, it islike some execution
followed: otherwise the proclamation should have seemed to be ridiculous,
Calvin. And beside seeing Daniel was also sought to be slain, it seems, that
all they which were in the way, and at hand, and needed not to be sought for,
were put to the sword.

2. Wherefore it is certain, that many of these wisemen were smitten with the
sword, though the execution of many of them were deferred upon Daniels offer
and undertaking to expound the dream: v. 24. Genev. like as under Ahab and
Iehu Baals priests were put to death. And Galerius Maximinus being overcome of
Licinius, he caused the Idol Priests to be slain, as impostors, and deceivers.
Bulling.

Quest. 17. What office Arioch had, to whom Daniel makes this motion. verse. 14.
1. R. Shelemo takes the word tabacaia, for carnifices, executioners, he
thinks that Arioch was set over these, which had the charge to put others to
death: but it seems, that he had a better office: for he was a chief man
about the king, and brought Daniel in to the king. verse. 25.

2. The Septuag. interpret here (...), the chief cook: but it appertained not
to that office, to see execution done upon men.

3. Some call him the kings chief steward, Genevens. but neither is it
incident to that office, to ouersee the punishment of offenders.

4. The vulgar Latin interprets, praefectum militiae, captain of his army:
but here was no army levied, or battle proclaimed.

5. Therefore rab tabachim, is better interpreted, praefectus satellitum, the
captain of the guard, or high Marshall: such an one was Potiphar unto Pharaoh,
Genesis 37. 36. who had the chief charge of the kings prisoners, Genesis 40. 3.
Polan. Iun.

Quest. 18. verse. 15. How Daniel was ignorant of the kings decree against the
Soothsayers.
1. Some think that Daniel of purpose did forbear to go with the rest, least
he might seem ambitiously to have sought honor and reward, See before Quest.
8.
which was promised to them, which should interpret the kings dream: gloss.
ordinar. but there was no such reward promised, till they appeared before the
king: and if Daniel had received any message with the rest of the wise men, he
might easily have gessed at the cause of that hard sentence.

2. But it is like that the Chaldeans concealed this matter from Daniel,
whereof two reasons may be given, it proceeded, ex inuidia and cupiditate, from
their envy and covetousness: Lyran. their envy, in that they thought great
scorn, that so young a man as Daniel, should be called to counsel with the
grave sage counselors, who were in great estimation with the king for their
long experience: Iun. their covetousness also herein appeared, that they might
have the reward only to themselves: soli ingressi, tanquam soli praemia
percepturi: they only went in, that they only might receive the reward,
Bulling. they were also ambitious, they were loath that any strangers should be
admitted to the kings presence, or any had in reputation but themselves. Iun.
annot.

3. But specially this fell out by Gods providence, that Daniel being sought
for unto death, might by this means be brought forth, and the gift of wisdom
in him be made manifest: and that by this means his life should be preserved.
Polan.

4. And herein appears the malice of the Chaldeans, qui in periculo voluerunt
habere consortes, which would have Daniel and his fellows partakers of their
punishment, whom they refused to have any part before in the reward. Pelican.

Quest. 19. verse. 19. How this secret was revealed unto Daniel in the night.
1. Some think that this vision was showed unto Daniel by an Angel, because
such revelations are usually made by the ministry of Angels: Pintus ex Dyonis.
But Daniel acknowledges in his thanksgiving, that he received this revelation
only from God, and to him only he gives the praise.

2. And for the manner, Hierome thinks that it was showed unto him by dream
in the night: so also Gloss ordin. somnium regis discit suo insomnio, he
learneth the kings dream by his dream: so also Osian, Lyran. gives this
reason, because the night is fittest for such revelations, the senses being
quiet ab exterioribus tumultibus, from all outward tumults: and that the vision
in the night is by dream, he would prove by that place, Job. 33. 15. God
speaks, etc. in dreams and visions of the night, when sleep falls upon
men, etc. But this place proves not, that every night vision is by dream:
but that in the night when sleep falls upon men, the Lord sometime speaks
unto them by dream, sometime by vision.

3. Albertus magnus, as Pintus reports his opinion, thinks that Daniel had
this revelation, vigilia noctis, as he watched in the night: and this is the
more probable opinion, 1. because it is called a vision: now visions and
dreams are distinguished, as the two usual ways, whereby the Lord reuealeth
himself unto his Prophets, Numb. 12. 6. Polan. 2. Daniel and his three
fellows were occupied in prayer while other slept, Pellic. and it seemed as
they prayed, that this vision was sent, as he says, Thou have showed now the
thing that we desired of thee: it is not like that Daniel and the rest being
full of care in this so weighty a business, would give themselves to rest; but
they awaked, when other slept. So Hugo Card. gives this as a reason, why this
vision came in the night, quod tempus magis orationi competit, because that
time is fittest for prayer. 3. And presently after this thing was revealed, it
is said that Daniel answered and said, The name of God be praised: but he could
not thus answer and praise God in his sleep. It was then such a vision in the
night as Paul had, Act. 16. 9. when a man of Macedonia appeared unto him, and
said, Come and help us.

4. Yet this further must be added, that visions come not only by day but by
night, and not only when men are awake, but when they sleep: as Daniel saw a
dream, and had visions in his head as he lay upon his bed, c. 7. 1. such
visions are more then dreams, and differ in respect of the more clear
illumination, and evident demonstration of things: such was Salomons dream
wherein he had a vision beside, when actually the gift of wisdom was conferred
upon him, 1. king. 3. whereof see c. 1. qu. 51. Yet dreams and visions do
differ in nature still (though they may concur together) the one being but a
representation of the image and similitude of things, the other a demonstration
of the things themselves.

20. Quest. Of the form and order of Daniels thanksgiving.
Daniels thanksgiving is of two sorts, either general v. 20. to 23. or
special and particular: and either of them consists of the proposition
containing the doxologie or thanksgiving, and the probation thereof. 1. In the
general benediction, in the proposition is expressed, who is to be praised,
the name of God, not the letters or syllables, as the Jews adore the name
Jehovah, the Papists the name Jesus: but the name of God, is God himself: and
the adiunct of the time also is added, for ever and ever.

2. The probation is set forth briefly, for wisdom and strength are his: then
it is amplified by the effects; first his power is declared by two effects, the
changing of times and seasons, and the taking down and setting up of Kings:
then his confidence by three effects: 1. in giving wisdom for action: 2.
understanding for contemplation: 3. and in discovering secret things: which is
amplified by the cause, taken from the essential property of God; he knows
what is in darkness, because with him is light.

3. Then follows the special thanksgiving, with the proposition, wherein
Daniel gives thanks for himself: and the probation taken from two effects; in
opening unto them the Kings dream according to their desire, and giving them
power and strength, thereby to prevail against, and overcome the imminent
danger and peril of death: the latter effect is set forth in the first place.

Quest. 21. v. 19. How Daniel is said to have blessed the God of heaven.
1. The Lord is called the God of heaven, 1. because he made the heavens, but
other gods have not made the heaven and the earth, Ierem. 11. Hug. Card. 2. And
this shows a difference between the true God and idols herein: because they
are worshipped only in the earth, and not in heaven, Pint. 3. And God is so
called, because he is habitator coeli, he inhabiteth and dwells in the
heavens, and therefore he says, heaven is my seat or throne, Isa. 66. 1. not
that God is limited and confined in the heavens, but there are the most
glorious and visible signs of his presence. Pintus. 4. And by this title is
set forth Gods glory, greatness, and power, because the heavens are the most
glorious of Gods creatures, and do sway things below in the earth. Polan.

2. To bless is taken diversely in Scripture: 1. when God is said to bless
man, benedicere, to bless, is the same that benefacere, to bestow benefits:
as the Lord says to Abraham, I will bless thee, and make thy name great,
Genes. 12. 2. to bless here, is to increase, and multiply him, and make him
great: 2. when one man blesses another it signifies, to wish well unto them,
and to pray for them: as Rebekahs mother and brother are said to bless her,
Genesis 24. 60. 3. but when man is said to bless God, it signifies to praise
him, and give thanks unto him: as Psalm. 54. 1. I will bless the Lord for
ever, his praise shall be in my mouth continually: and so is it taken here.

22. Quest. verse. 21. How the Lord is said to change times, and seasons.
1. He changes times, 1. he makes day and night, summer and winter, ipse est
primus motor coelestium corporum, because he is the first mouer of the
celestial bodies, which do rule the time: 2. and he changes and altreth the
times, either according to the course of nature, ordinary, as in
distinguishing days, months, and the times of the year, or extraordinary,
as when the seasons of the year keep not their kind, but many times the
Summer weather is changed into the winter rain, and cold, and the winter into
Summer: Call. and he altreth the times against the course of nature, as when he
caused the Sun to stand still in Iosuahs time, and to go back in the days
of Hezekiah. Pere.

2. He also changes the particular seasons, both of the air and weather,
sending sometime heat and drought, sometime rain and cold: Polan. as also he
disposes of the age and years of man's life, in general, as man's age was
shortened after the flood: and in particular, sometime shortening man's days,
as he did unto Moses, not suffering him to live to see the land of Canaan,
sometime prolonging it, as he added. 15. years to Hezekiahs life. Pere.

23. Quest. verse. 22. What secret things the Lord is said to discover.
There are three kinds of secret things, which the Lord is said to discover. 1.
The mysteries of religion, as concerning the blessed Trinity, the incarnation
of the Son of God, the life to come: the knowledge of which things a man
cannot attain unto, unless it be revealed unto him from God.

2. There are the secrets of the heart, which none knows but God, who is the
searcher of the heart, save the spirit of man which is in him: 1. Cor. 2. 11.
to none other are the thoughts of the heart known, but only unto God.

3. The things to come, are great secrets, which only are manifest unto him,
by whom all things are acted and governed, both past, present, and to come.
Pere.

24. Quest. How light is said to dwell with God, v. 22. whereas it is said,
Psalm. 18. 11. he made darkness his secret place.
1. God is said, 1. to be light in himself, in his essence, because there is
nothing in God but most pure, sincere, clear, as also because he communicates
of this light unto others: as John 1. 9. he is the true light that lights
every one, that comes into the world: both the light of nature and the light
of grace proceed from him: and therefore as Basil well observed, prima vox Dei
lucem creauit, the first voice, that God in Scripture is found to have uttered,
created the light: for like as a most goodly picture, if it be laid ina dark
cave, makes no show at all: so the goodly workmanship of God in the
creatures had been obscured, if God had not made light to cause the beauty of
it to appear. Pint.

2. God also is said to be in light, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. because he can endure no
falsehood, hypocrisy, or untruth.

3. The Lord also is said to dwell in light, that none can attain unto, 1.
Timoth. 6. 16. because we through the weakness of our understanding, and
blindness of our minds, are not able to comprehend any thing of God, unless
he by the illumination of his grace do make a way for us to come unto him.

4. Now whereas it is said, Psalm, 97. 2. that clouds and darkness are round
about him, and 1. king 8. 12. God is said to dwell in the cloud: the Scripture
by this Metaphor shows only Deum esse inaccessum, that God is inaccessible
unto us, not what he is in himself: and the cloud was a sign of Gods
presence, as he said to Moses, Leuit. 16. 2. I will appear in the cloud:
Polan. And therefore the Lord, when he appeared in Mount Sinai, covered all the
mountain with a thick cloud: to show that no man is able to comprehend the
brightness of his glory.

Quest. 25. verse. 24. Whether Daniel did well in staying the execution of the
kings sentence upon the wisemen.
Verse. 24. He said unto him, Destroy not the wisemen, etc. Whereas if the
sentence of death had been executed upon these superstitious Chaldeans, the
Church of God should have been delivered from pestilent enemies, and they
beside had justly deserved to die, because of their fraud, and impostures; it
may seem, that Daniel might have done much better to have suffered the
sentence to proceed against them.

1. For answer hereunto, Osiander thinks, that there might be some innocent
men among them, which erred only of simplicity, and did not maliciously by
their wicked arts oppose themselves against the truth, and therefore Daniel
would have them spared: But it is evident by the text, that Daniel would
generally have all the wisemen spared, which yet remained, for some of them had
been slain already.

2. Calvin thinks the reason was, quia nondum maturuerat ipsorum iniquitas,
because yet their iniquity was not come to the full, they were reserved to a
further punishment.

3. Bullinger thinks they were spared, that by Daniels means in vera
sapientia proficerent, they might come to repentance, and profit in true
wisdom: these ends indeed the Lord might propound to himself in sparing
these hypocrites, but the question is what appa^ant reason moved Daniel to
entreat for them.

4. Bullinger again thinks, that God stirred up Daniel to do it, because he
would have his judgments tempered with clemency: some of them were put to the
sword, the rest the Lord would have spared, that his mercy and clemency might
appear in judgment: This being admitted to have been the secret cause
before God of this work, yet it is not showed, what stirred up Daniel to do it.

5. These two reasons then remain which persuaded Daniel. 1. his charity and
love even toward his enemies, non vult eos perire propter quos erat ipse
periturus, he would not have them perish, for whose cause he was like to have
perished, Hierome. Lyran. wherein he imitateth the clemency of Christ, who
prayed for his enemies: Pelican. he might by this means win them, or else
heap coals upon their head, and make them less excuseable. 2. Daniel in
equity considered causam non esse iustam, that the cause was not just, which
moved Nebuchadnezzar to command them to be killed: but he did it in have and
rage, and therefore Daniel not so much looking unto their persons, as to their
cause, desires that they might be spared. Polan.

Quest. 26. verse. 25. Whether Arioch lied unto the king! in saying, I have
found a man, etc.
1. Some think that Arioch which knew that Daniel and his companions were
wiser then the rest of the Chaldeans, had indeed sought them out ad solutionem
faciendam, to give solution of the kings demand, Hugo. but it is evident out
of the text, ver. 13. that they were no otherwise sought for but to be put to
death.

2. Most do think that Arioch here played the cunning courtier, qui sibi
vsurpant aliorum inuenta, which do take unto themselves, that which other men
find out: Bullinger. for he had not sought for Daniel, vltro se obtulerat, he
had offered himself of his own actord, Lyran. Dei gratiam ad suam refert
diligentiam, the grace and gift of God he ascribes to his own diligence:
Pelican. fallebat regem, etc. he deceived the king herein, as though he had
found out Daniel, whereas he offered himself. Pintus. But he could not without
the kings great offense and indignation have told such a palpable lie, seeing
that Daniel had before presented himself to the king, ver. 16. and desired
some time, to show the king his dream. Polan.

3. Therefore to meet with this doubt, Calvin thinks, that Daniel had not
conference before immediately with the king, but Arioch fuisse internuntium,
that Arioch was the messenger between them, when the king granted him some
time: But the text is rather to be taken according to the letter, verse. 16.
that Daniel (himself) went, and desired the king: for Arioch durst not have
moved any such thing, having strait charge given him to put all the wisemen to
death forthwith.

4. Va^ablus to help the matter, reads in the passive; he said, quod
repertus est vir, that a man was found out, etc. but the word in the Chalde
hashcacath, is in the active; I have found: And yet it had not been true in
the other sense, for Daniel was not found, but offered, and he was not now first
known, or found, but he had made himself known to the king before.

5. Polanus makes this therefore to be his meaning: that in this speech, he
does, gratulari regi, etc. congratulate with the king, and ascribe as unto his
fortune, that such a thing had happened: But the phrase it self, I have found,
shows that he does attribute somewhat in this matter unto himself.

6. Therefore I think with Iunius, that the meaning of these words, I have
found a man, is nothing else, but incidi in hominem, I have met with the man,
not that he first found him out, but that now he fell upon him, or he came unto
him to bring him to the king: so is the word used, 1. King 22. 20. where Ahab
going down to take possession of Noboths vineyard, said to Elias, Have thou
found me, O my enemy, that is, have thou met with me.

Quest. 27. verse. 25. Why Arioch names Daniel to be one of the captives rather
then of the wisemen.
1. Some think he names him of Judah, because he had heard, that diverse
excellent Prophets had been of that tribe: Lyran. Pintus. but that is not
like, for the famous Prophets, which lived about that time in the captivity,
were Jeremy, and Ezekiel, who both were of the kindred of the Priests, Ierem.
1. 1. Ezeck. 1. 3. and so not of Judah.

2. Therefore Gods providence rather appears herein: that as Daniel was not
before in the assembly of the wisemen, so now he should not be counted among
them: that the interpretation of the dream should only be acknowledged to
proceed from God, and not be ascribed to the skill and cunning of any wisemen.

3. Hugo Card. following the ordinary gloss. notes here, that Daniel was of
the tribe of Judah, and not a priest, sicut in fine continet fabulae Belis, as
is contained afterward in the fable of Bell, etc. he calls that supposed
history of Bell and the dragon a fable, which among the Romanists is held for
canonical.

4. Bullinger here observes well, in that the Lord refused the great wisemen
of Babylon, who were had in great reputation for their learning and wisdom,
and prefers a poor captive, infirma mundi fortissimis esse robustiora, that
the weak things of the world are stronger then the mighty: as the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 1. 27. God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound
the mighty.

Quest. 28. verse. 26. How the king is said to answer no question being
demanded.
The word hhanah, or ghanah, which properly signifies to answer, is taken
simply for to speak, as Job 3. 2. Job cursed his day, and Job answered and
said: so is the word (...) used in the new testament, as Math. 11. 25. at that
time Jesus answered and said, I give thee thanks O father, etc. and yet no man
asked him there any question. Pintus. so Mark 11. 13. when Jesus came to the
figtree, and found nothing but leaves, it is said, Jesus (...), answering said,
where the word answered, is superfluosly added, as it is used in the Hebrewe
tongue: and therefore the Syrian interpreter only reads, and he said: so in
this place, then answered the king and said: the word ganah, answered, is
added, ex abundanti (as we say) more then need: see Beza in his annota. upon
that place.

Quest. 29. verse. 27. Why Daniel denies that any of the wisemen of Babel could
expound this dream.
1. Daniel reckons up 4. kind of wisemen among the Chaldeans: the first are
called cachinim, wisards, which by conjectures and casting of lots did guess of
things to come: the second ashphin, which by the aspect and sight of the
stars did make conjecture of things: the third, chartummim, which consulted
with spirits: of these three see before, Qu. 7. the fourth sort are called
gazrin, of the word gazar, to cut: and they were they which did open and cut
the entrals of sacrifices, and by the sight thereof diuined of things to come.
Polan.

2. All these Daniel denies to be sufficient or able to find out this secret,
and that for these causes; 1. least men should arrogate unto themselves divine
knowledge: 2. that from henceforth the king should not exact any such thing of
his wisemen, which was far beyond their reach: 3. that he might stay from
putting in execution his bloody sentence against the wisemen, Iun.

Quest. 30. verse. 28. Whether God only be the reuealer of secrets and things
to come.
It will be objected on the contrary, that the heathen often had dreams,
whereby they knew things to come, and the like oracles they received at
Delphos: which were not given by God, but uttered by spirits. Hereunto we
answer, 1. that many of those oracles were false, ambiguous, and doubtful, as
those which were given to Craesus, and Pirrhus. 2. many of them were devised
either by them, who affirmed they had such dreams, or by the writers, to win
more credit thereby. 3. And if some such dreams and oracles took place,
either very sewe of them did hit, which might be by chance and hap hazard, as
we say, a few only of a great number falling out: or the devil by the
subtlety of his nature by some natural signs might foresee the effects and
events which should follow; or he might foretell such things, as by Gods
permission he should effect himself. Pere. Polan.

4. And as their dreams were uncertain, so were they as uncertainly
interpreted: as the dream which Darius had, before he encountered with
Alexander, some expounded to signify the victory that he should have against
him; some gave a contrary sense, as Q. Curtius writes, lib. 3. Tullie gives
an other instance, how one going to the Olympike games had a dream, that he
was turned into an eagle: one wisard interpreted it, that he should overcome,
because the Eagle is superior to all other fowls: an other turned it the
contrary way, that he should have the worse, because the eagle driving other
birds before her, comes last of all: so then the Gentiles had neither any
divine dreams, and such as they had, they could not interpret. Pere.

Quest. 31. verse. 28. What Daniel means by the latter days.
1. Some do expound it of all the time from thence, when Daniel expounded this
dream, vsque ad consummatione^ seculs, unto the end of the world, Hierome,
which were then to be fulfilled, complenda, modo incepta, but already begun,
Hugo. But Nebuchadnezzars thoughts extended not so far, to the end of the
world, but only to know what should come to pass after him: and according to
his thoughts, so was the dream answerable, as Daniel shows, verse. 29.

2. Some by the latter days, understand the coming of Christ, extremitas
dierum vocatur Christi aduentus, the extreme or latter days are the coming
of Christ, because the Gospel is as it were the perfection and renewing of all
things; Calvin. Bullinger. so also Lyranus, because mention is made in this
vision of the kingdom of Christ, quod est vltimum regnorum, which is the last
of all kingdoms: but if it were only understood of Christ's coming, then all
the times following between Nebuchadnezzars reign and Christ's coming should
be excluded.

3. Much less for the same reason is it understood, de vltima mundi aetate, of
the last age of the world, from the coming of Christ unto the end of the
world, as Pintus: for then Nebuchadnezzar should have had no revelation of the
times which should immediately follow, wherebout his thoughts were most of all
troubled.

4. Wherefore by this word acharith, are signified posteriora tempora, the
latter times, Pelican. or consequentia, the times following, Polan. as the
word is taken, Genesis 49. 1. where Jacob declares to his sons the things which
should come to pass in the latter days, that is, in the days following, not
in the end of the world: but he shows their diverse lots, which should befall
them, when they came into Canaan: And Daniel thus expounds himself in the
next verse, 29. Thoughts came into thy mind, what should come to pass
hereafter. Iun.

Quest. 32. verse. 29. Whether Nebuchadnezzars thoughts were the cause of his
dream.
1. There are four causes of dreams: either the disposition of the body and
the humors thereof, which procure natural dreams, as cholerike men dream of
fire, phlegmatike of water, and such like: or else the affection, thoughts, and
passions of the mind in the day, which cause the like dreams in the night,
and these are humane dreams: or the revelation of Gods spirit, sometime
concurring with men's thoughts, sometime without them, whence are divine
dreams, of which kind this was: or the illusion of Satan, which causes
diabolical dreams.

2. Now men's thoughts sometimes are the cause of dreams, as the preacher
says, dreams come through the multitude of business, Eccles. 5. 2. but such
dreams then do not prognosticate things to come, but are a representation
only of things done and past: Ly. sometime they are not the cause, but the
occasion only and preparation of the mind for the dream which God purposes
to send; as Joseph's careful thoughts, what he should do with Marie whom he
suspected to be with child, were but forerunners of that direction, which God
gave him by a dream, correspondent unto his former thoughts, Matthew. 1. Pere.
So Polanus distinguishes well, that the cause of this dream was twofold;
either (...), the preparatiue cause, or occasion rather, which were his pensive
thoughts; or (...), the efficient and working cause, which was God himself.

Quest. 33. verse. 29. Why it pleased God to impart unto Nebuchadnezzar this
dream.
Verse. 29. He which reuealeth secrets, tells thee what shall come: 1. God
sent this dream upon Nebuchaddnezzar, for certain particular causes, that his
mind might thereby be humbled, when he should consider the mutable and
variable state of his kingdom, that he might submit and subject himself unto
God. 2. That hereby his heart might be moved toward the Lords people, not to
tyrannize or bear rule cruelly over them, seeing there was an higher and
mightier then himself. 3. Other general causes there were beside: that all
earthly Potentates should hereby be admonished, how frail and of what short
continuance their earthy dominions are. 4. And withal, that they might hereby
be occasioned to look unto the spiritual and everlasting kingdom of Christ,
that should shake all other kingdoms, and that they should all be in
expectation of that kingdom.

Quest. 34. verse. 30. This secret is not showed me for my wisdom: Whether
Daniel by any natural wisdom could have attained to the knowledge of this
dream.
It is evident he could not: 1. for then the Magicians, and Chalde philosophers
might also by their natural skill and long experience have founded the depth
thereof. 2. As the dream is, so must be the interpretation: a natural dream
may be expounded by natural means, but this heeing a divine dream sent of God,
must be interpreted by a divine instinct. 3. This dream being a
premonstration of things to come, whereof God only has the knowledge, could
not be opened but by the spirit of God, who reuealeth secrets and things to
come. 4. This dream containing a signification of things to come, was either a
natural, or voluntary sign: a natural sign it could not not be; for then
there should be some affinity between it, and the things to come; it was
either as the cause or effect, or had some other agreement and coherence: but
the vision of an image could have no such natural affection or disposition to
or with the conversion and alteration of kingdoms thereby fignified, and
shadowed forth: It was therefore no natural, but a voluntary sign, not
appointed by the will of man, but by the will of God so disposing: therefore it
could not be interpreted, but according to the mind and will of him, by whom
it was assigned. Pere.

Quest. 34. verse. 30. Why Nebuchadnezzar could not understand the dream which
he same.
1. Augustine gives the reason of it, Tom. ^. 1. cont. Adinant.
non est propheta very Dei, qui oblata diuinitus visa, etc. he is no Prophet of
the true God, which sees either with his body, or with that part of the
spirit, which receives the images and representations of bodily things, yet
sees not with his mind such visions as are effred of God, etc. therefore
Nebuchadnezzar seeing one ly the vision, but having no prophetical gift to
interpret it, could not understand it, sed ad interpretandum visum suum
aspectum quaesivit alienum, but he used an others spiritual sight to interpret
his vision, etc. Augustine, ibid, and so else where he concludes, de Genes. ad
li^. lib. 12. c. 9.
magis propheta erat, qui interpretabatur, quod alius vidisset, quam ipse, qui
vidisset, and so he he was rather a Prophet, that could interpret that which an
other saw, then he which saw it, etc.

2. And Augustine further makes here three sorts of men, the first is, when
one rerum quae significatur sola signa vider, etc. does only see the signs of
such things, which are signified, etc. and he (as he says) minus propheta est,
is no Prophet: the second is, when one solo earum intellectu praeditus est, is
only endued with the understanding of them, and he is rather a Prophet:
August. ibid.
such an one was Joseph who expounded Pharaohs dream: sed maxim propheta, qui
vtroque excellit, but he is most of all a Prophet, which excels in both: as
Deniel both saw the king, vision and dream, and gave also the interpretation
of it.

Quest. 36. verse. 30. Of the two ends, why it pleased God to reveal unto the
king his dream.
1. One cause was that by this occasion the Church of the Jews might ^^re the
better, seeing that by their pr^yers the king had the interpretation of his
dream: the words are thus to be read, that they might ratify or make known
unto the king the interpretation: they (not the Angels, as Vatab.) but Daniel
and his fellows, which joined in prayer: some read that the interpretation
might be made manifest, as the Latin, whom Lyranus follows: some translate
it in the first person, vt exponerem, that I might expound or declare to the
king the interpretation, Calvin: but the word is iehoreghun, that they might
notify: this was the first reason, that by this means the Jews might receive
more favor, unto whom God revealed the meaning of this vision.

2. The other cause was, for the instruction of the king himself, that he
might know and understand the thoughts of his heart: both these reasons, why
the Lord gave unto Daniel both the knowledge of the dream, and the
understanding thereof, are expressed by Augustine, Hoc factum est, vt Regi
Daniel summi creatoris notitiam insinnaret, ^^b. 2. de mirab. Scrip. c. 30.
and plebs in seruitute and captiuitate pos^a, aliquod solatium haberet, etc.
this was done that both Daniel might insinuate to the king the knowledge of the
high Creator, and that the people being in servitude and captivity, might
have some help and comfort.

Quest. 37. verse. 31. Of the vision which the King saw in his dream the
manner and parts thereof.
First, Daniel rehearses the kings dream, what he saw, and then he gives
the interpretation thereof, from verse. 36. to ver. 45.

The vision consists of two parts: of the image which the king saw in his
dream, to v. 34. and then of the stone, which broke it in pieces, ver. 34. 35.

The image is described, first by the adjuncts, then by the matter.

The adjuncts are five, 1. it was but one. 2. it was great. 3. glorious and
excellent. 4. it stood before him. 5. it was terrible.

The matter was either distinct, as the head of gold, the arms and breast of
silver, the thighs and belly of brass, the legs of iron; or else mingled
together, as the feet were part of iron, part of clay.

Then follows the description of the stone, by fix arguments. 1. of the
place, it was taken out of a mountain, which though it be not expressed here
is supplied, ver. 45. 2. of the manner, it was cut out without hands. 3. by the
effects, it brake the image in pieces. 4. by the event, the image became as
nothing, it was as the chafe, which the wind carries away. 5. by the
adiunct, it became a great mountain. 6. by the effect, it filled the whole
earth.

2. This vision represents two kingdoms; the image the earthly, and the
stone the heavenly: in the earthly 4. things are observed, 1. the variety of
administration, and great difference of government in respect of time, and
place. 2. the great pomp and glory. 3. the terror and tyranny. 4. the
uncertainty and mutabilitie.

In the spiritual kingdom of Christ 4. things are also expressed: 1. the
beginning thereof, from heaven. 2. the administration thereof, not by any
humane or worldly means. 3. the increase thereof, through the world. 4. the
continuance thereof for ever, when all other earthly kingdoms and regiments
shall be dissolved.

Quest. 38. Of the diverse kinds of signs of things to come, and of which kind
this image was.
The Lord uses 4. kind of signs to foreshewe and signify things to come: 1.
the first is of those, which are only signs, and serve to no other end, then
to shadow forth things to come; such were the signs showed unto the Prophets
in visions, and dreams. 2. There are signs, which are not only types and
figures of things to come, but serve also to other purposes; such were the
ceremonies of Moses law, which were shadows of sprituall things, but had also
their present use, serving as rites and ceremonies of the law. 3. Some signs
did signify something which was presently done and effected, as Naamans
washing of himself seven times, did betoken that he was in that instant cured
of his leprosy. 4. Some figures did not only show a present effect, but did
also shadow forth some more excellent work afterward to be effected, as the
blowing of the trumpets of rams horns about the walls of Jericho, did not
only assure them of the present subversion and overthrow of Jericho, but it
signified the overthrow of idolatry by the preaching of the Gospel: so the
setting up of the brazen serpent did not only give present health of body to
them that looked upon it, but it did also promise spiritual health of soul to
all which with the eyes of faith should behold Christ: now this vision which
Nabuchadnezzer saw was of the first kind: it was a mere sign serving to no
other purpose, then to signify and show unto the king, what should come to
pass afterward. Perer.

39. Quest. What kingdoms of the earth are not comprehended in this vision.
1. Those kingdoms which were already destroyed, as the Assyrian Monarchy,
whose chief city was Ninive, are not contained in this prophetical vision;
hic agitur de rebus futuris, this vision chiefly concerns things to come.
Calvin. 2. The petie and smaller kingdoms of the world are omitted, as of the
Sycionians, Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Lydians, which though they were
flourishing kingdoms, and had command over the countries next adjoining, yet
they had not such universal dominion, as the great Monarchies of the
Chaldeans, Persians, Grecians had. 3. Such Monarchies and kingdoms are here
described, which had some coherence and dependence with and of the other, the
ruin of the one, was the raising of the other: as the Persian Monarchy
subdued the Babylonian, the Greeks the Persian: therefore the great and
flourishing kingdoms of the Scythians, Egyptians, Carthaginians, are exempted,
which had not that succession one to another, as the great Monarchies of the
world had. 4. Those great kingdoms are only here decyphered, which ruled in
the world till Christ's coming, who was the stone cut out of the mountain
without hands: therefore the kingdom of the Goths, and Vandals, Saracens and
Turks, which have risen up since Christ's being in the flesh, are without the
compass of this vision. Perer.

40. Quest. Why the Chaldean Monarchy is compared to the head of gold.
v. 38. Thou art this head of gold: 1. Thou, and thy succession: for this is
not only understood of Nabuchadnezzers person, but of his sons Euilmerodach,
and his son Balthazar who succeeded him; under whose reign the Chaldean
Monarchy flourished for the space of 70. years. And that not only
Nabuchadnezzer, but the rest of his successors are here comprehended, is
evident, Ierem. 27. 7. where the Prophet says, All nations shall serve him,
and his son, and his sons son. 2. He is compared to the head, because the
Babylonian Empire was primum temporum ordine, the first in order of time, as
the head in the image was the first part thereof. Iun. 3. It was likened to
gold, 1. propter maximas divitias, because of their great riches, Lyran. and
abundance of gold, in which respect it is called golden Babylon. Hug. Card. 4.
Because their government was more tolerable toward the people of God, though
hard enough, yet it was more equal then the regiment of the Persians in
general. 5. Beside being compared with the rest, it was more golden-like in
respect of their flourishing peace: for after that Nabuchadnezzer had subdued
the nations round about, that Monarchical state enjoyed tranquillity and peace
50. years; twenty years of Nabuchadnezzers reign, and thirty years under
Evilmerodach his son. Bullinger.

6. So in this short sentence, Thou art the head of gold, there are as many
figures, as words. 1. Thou, that is, thy kingdom, as v. 39. it is said, After
thee shall rise an other kingdom, that is, after thy kingdom, not after his
death. 2. Thou art, that is, signified and represented by this head of gold: as
the Apostle says, The rock was Christ, that is, signified Christ. 3. There is
a metaphor in the word head, which signifies the antiquity and prioritie of
that kingdom, and the knowledge and wisdom of that nation. 4. An other figure
there is, in that he is likened to gold, which betokens their riches,
prosperity, and flourishing estate.

41. Quest. Of the largeness of the Empire and dominion of Nabuchadnezzer.
v. 38. In all places, where the children of men dwell, the beasts of the
field, and the fowls of heaven, etc. has he given into thine hand.

1. The Scripture does evidently testify what large dominions the king of
Babel had, Ierem. 27. 6. I have given all these lands into the hand of
Nabuchadnezzer king of Babel my servant, and the beasts of the field have I
also given him to serve him, and all nations shall serve him, etc. And the
Prophet Abacuck says of the Chaldeans, They shall gather the captivity as the
sand, and they shall mock the kings, and the Princes shall be a scorn unto
them, etc. c. 1. 9, 10.

2. Foreign writers also have ginen the like testimony of the greatness of the
Babylonian Empire: Berosus, who wrote of the Chaldean affairs, prefers him
before all kings that were before him. Megasthenes lib. 4. de reb. Indicis,
witnesses, that Nabuchadnezzer beside the Provinces of the East, subdued
Egypt, Africa, Spain, and makes him in courage and magnanimity superior to
Hercules: so likewise Strabo lib. 15. Geograph. writes, that this
Nabuchadnezzer was the mightiest of all other kings, and held of the Chaldeans
to have exceeded Hercules. Tertull. lib. advers. Iudaeos.
Tertullian says, that his dominion extended from India to Ethiopia.

3. But whereas it is said, that God had made him ruler in all places, this is
not so to be taken strictly according to the letter: for neither
Nabuchadnezzer, or any other Monarch ever had the dominion and rule of the
whole world: as witnesses the altar of Alexander, the pillars of Hercules, and
Ctesiphon the bounds of the Roman Empire toward the East. 1. Some therefore
think that this is spoken in respect of the opinion of the Chaldeans, who held
him to be an absolute Monarch over all the world: 2. or that all, according to
the Scripture, is taken for the most, or many: as Genesis 22. 18. the Lord says,
that all nations should be blessed in Abraham: that is, many: as c. 17. 5. the
Lord says, A father of many nations have I made thee: Perer. But this example
is unfitly alleged, for in the one place the Lord speaks of Abraham's
carnal generation, in the other of the spiritual benediction, which in Christ
should come indeed upon all nations. 3. some take it therefore for an
hyperbolicall speech. Pintus. 4. Hugo thus expounds it, he is said to rule
over all, quia nihil ei resistebat, because no country resisted him. 5.
Lyranus takes all places, for all kind of places; as the cities where men
dwelt, the fields where beasts ranged, and the woods where the fowls made
their abode: and therefore both men, beasts, and fowls are said to be given
into his hand. 6. Some admit here a synecdoche, that part is taken for the
whole, all for a great part: Lyranus also. 7. But this universal particle
(all) must be restrained unto all the regions next adjoining: as it is taken,
Genesis 41. 57. All countries came to Egypt to bui^ corn of Joseph, that is, all
the countries near unto them. And so here all the regions in those East parts,
were subdued under the kingdom of Nabuchadnezzer.

42. Quest. Whether Nabuchadnezzers dominion were at that time the greatest in
the world.
It will be here objected, that the Empire of the Medes was at this time very
mighty, as Herodotus lib. 1. makes mention of the greatness of Cyaxares king
of the Medes, who ruled over all Asia, and subdued the Assyrians, the
Babylonians only excepted. And it is evident by Herodotus Chronology, that
Cyaxares reigned about this time: for from the beginning of his reign unto the
first of Cyrus, he counts 75. years: 40. years under the reign of
Cyaxares, and 35. under Astyages: so if the Babylonian captivity took
beginning from the 19. year of Nabuchadnezzer, as Pererius reckons, Cyaxares
began his reign in the 14. year of Nabuchadnezzer: but if the 70. years
captivity be counted from the carrying away of Iechonias captive, which is the
more probable, which was in the 8. year of Nabuchadnezzer, 2. king. 24. 12.
then Cyaxares began his reign 5. years before, about the 3. year of
Nabuchadnezzers reign: they reigned then much about the same time,
Nabuchadnezzer in Babylon, and Cyaxares among the Medes.

2. Pererius gives this solution, that, the kingdom of the Medes was much
wasted by the other Nabuchadnezzer father unto this king, who warred against
Arphaxad king of the Medes, and took the chief city thereof Ecbatane, as is
set forth in the story of Judith: and beside by the incursion and invasion of
the Scythians those parts of Asia were kept under the space of 28. years, so
that all that time Cyaxares was of no great power, which was during the reign
of Nabuchadnezzer: then after his death, the Scythians being destroyed and
expelled, Cyaxares kingdom flourished for the space of 12. years.

3. Contra. 1. The history of Judith could not fall out in the reign of the
Elder Nabuchadnezzar: for at that time the Apocryphal story says, that the
Temple had not been cast down, Judith 5. 18. but the Temple was not destroyed
till the 19. year of this Nabuchadnezzer, which was about 12. years after he
had this dream, which was in the 5. year of his reign, as is before showed,
Qu. 1. 2. Cyaxares could not survive Nabuchadnezzer so long, but it seems
rather that Nabuchadnezzer suruiued him: for Nabuchadnezzer reigned 45. years:
8. years before Iecouias captivity, 2. king. 24. 12. and 37. years after, 2.
king. 25. 27. Cyaxares reigned 40. years and began in the 3. year of
Nabuchadnezzer, as is proved before: then his reign must determine in the 43.
year of Nabuchadnezzer: therefore neither of these answers are sufficient.

4. The best solution then is this, 1. that Cyaxares might be a king of power
in the remote parts of Asia beyond the Medes toward the Indians Eastward; and
yet Nabuchadnezzer about Babylon and those countries extending North and South,
lib. 8 de pa^ia Cyri.
as in Egypt, Tyrus, and in the regions of Asia minor, might be of the greatest
command. 2. If otherwise Herodotus affirm, more credit is to be given to the
sacred story, then to his uncertain report.

43. Quest. v. 39. Of the second Monarchy described by the arms and breast of
silver, what it was.
1. The Rabbis because they would avoid this so manifest a prophecy of the
coming of Christ, do join two Monarchies together, of the Persians and
Grecians, Calvin. so confounding the histories; whereas they were two
kingdoms, one succeeding an other: but here Daniel points out but one
kingdom, After thee shall rise an other kingdom, etc.

2. Theodoret by the right arm, understands Cyrus kindred of the fathers side
of the Persians, and by the left, his kindred on the mothers side of the Medes.

3. Pererius thinks that the Persian Monarchy is described by two arms;
because the Chaldean state was subdued by Darius the Mede Cyrus uncle, and by
Cyrus the Persian,

4. But by the two arms rather are understood the two nations of the Medes and
Persians, which were first two kingdoms, the Medes under Darius, and the
Persians under Cyrus, but after Darius death they were joined in one, as the
two arms did meet together in the breast: Lyran. so also Iun. Pintus.

44. Quest. v. 39. Why the Persian Monarchy is said to be inferior to the
Babylonian.
The Persian Monarchy was not inferior in glory, power, or dominion: for
Assuerus king of Persia reigned from India unto Ethiopia over an 127.
Provinces, Est. 1. 1. And Xenophon also testifies, that the Persian Monarchy
was so large, that it had for the bounds on the East, the red Sea, on the
West, Cyprus and Egypt, on the North, Pontus Euxinus, on the South Ethiopia.
And seeing Cyrus joined the Empire of Babylon to his own dominions, it could
not choose but be greater.

1. Some think therefore that it is said to be inferior, in respect of the
continuance, for the Persian Monarchy exceeded not above 240. years, whereas
the Chaldean and Assyrian Monarchy from Ninus continued a 1500. years: Perer.
But Daniel ascends not so high in this comparison: he says, it shall be
inferior to thee, that is, to thy kingdom, as it now stands.

2. Pererius has an other answer, that the Persian Monarchy is said to be
inferior in respect of the present time, not as it should be afterward: but it
is evident that Daniel speaks of it, as it should be then, when it should
rise up after the other, that it should then be inferior.

3. Calvine understands it of the general corruption of manners, which wax
worse, that mundi conditio deterior esset, etc. that the state of the world
should be worse under the second Monarchy: but these Monarchies are compared
one with an other, that as silver is worse then gold, so the second Monarchy
should be inferior to the other.

4. Polanus thinks that it is said to be inferior, because the Babylonian
regiment, plus habuit regiae tranquillitatis, had more princely rest and
tranquillity: but the Persian state was full of trouble: for presently after
the death of Cyrus, his sons Cambises, and Tana^zares contented for the
kingdom: and after Cambises the Magi usurped the kingdom, and after them
Darius Hystaspis was chosen king by the neying of his horse.

5. But I think rather with Iunius, that it is called inferior, and
siluer-like in respect of the others golden state, because their government was
more tolerable and equal toward the people of God.

45. Quest. Whether the Monarchy of the Chaldeans or of the Persians was more
cruel toward the Jews.
1. Though Cyrus first gave liberty to the people to return, and afterward
Artaxerxes gave license to Ezra and Nehemiah to build the Temple; yet other
kings of Persia hindered the building of the Temple, as Cambises, and
Ahassuerus, who by the fraudulent and malicious device of Haman, would utterly
have destroyed the people of the Jews: So that this comparison is not in
respect of some one or two particular persons of their kings, but of the
disposition of the whole state, which was harder toward the people of God, then
was the first Monarchy of the Babylonians.

2. For Nabuchadnezzer, though under him the people of God was afflicted and
endured much, yet he showed them some clemency and favor: As first when he
besieged Jerusalem in the 3. year of Iehoiakim, he made not havoc of all,
but carried away part only of the vessels of the Temple, and a few of the
noble men's children: And after that for the space of 19. years he suffered the
kings of Judah to have their kingdom, till he was provoked by the
unfaithfulness of Zedekiah to take revenge: and yet when he had set the city
and Temple on fire, he suffered the people to inhabit the country still, to
plant vineyards, and till the ground, and he set over them Gedaliah a good man,
one of their own country. So that in respect of these heroical and princely
parts in Nabuchadnezzer, the Persian Monarchs were but as silver, and far
inferior unto him. Osiand.

46. Quest. Why the Persian Monarchy is compared to silver.
1. Pererius thinks this resemblance to be made, propter immensam Persici
imperij opulentiam, for the great wealth and riches of the Persian Empire: for
Cyrus overcame Craesus the rich king of Lydia, of whom that proverb was taken
up, ditior Craeso, richer then Craesus. Pliny writes that Cyrus when he
overcame Asia, Lib. 33. c. 3.
got 34. thousand pound wait of gold, beside golden vessels, and wedges of
gold, and 500. thousand talents of silver, which may amount of our money to
300. millions: beside he took craterem Semiramidis, the great bowl or
standing piece of Semiramis, which waighed 15. Egyptian talents, and an
Egyptian talent is 80. pound. And what the wealth and magnificence of the
Persian Monarchs was, that sumptuous feast shows, which Assuerus made to his
Princes, Est. 1. and the great expedition of Xerxes in that huge army, which
he prepared against Greece. This is agreeable to that prophecy of Isai long
before of Cyrus, The Lord says, I will give thee the ireasures of darkness, and
the things hid in secret places. Isa. 45. 3. Lib. 12. sub initio.
Athenaeus also writing of the great wealth of Darius the last king of Persia,
tells how that the Persian kings were grown to such delicacie, and excessive
riches, that in the upper end of the kings bedchamber in a little closet there
was always in store 5. thousand talents of gold, which makes 3. hundredth
times an hundredth thousand crowns: and this closet ws called the kings bolster
or pillow: and at the beds feet there was an other closet, wherein there were
laid up 3. hundredth talents of silver: beside in the bedchamber, there was, an
ouerspreading vine made of gold, beset with precious stones: the bunches of
grapes were also made of most costly precious stones. Q. Curtius writes, that
the treasure which Alexander took from Darius, was an 159. thousand talents:
Strabo names an 180. thousand talents, which makes of Italian money, a
thousand and eight hundredth thousand crowns.

2. Lyranus thinks this Monarchy is compared to silver, quia multum vacabant
sapientia and eloquentiae, etc. because they gave themselves much to the study
of learning and eloquence, which is signified by the brightness and clear sound
of silver.

3. But the reason rather of this comparison is, because this Monarchy had
less majesty, then the first, and was not so equal and favorable toward the
people of God. Polan.

47. Quest. Why the third Monarchy is likened to the belly and the thigh, and
unto brass.
1. This Monarchy must needs be understood of the kingdom of Alexander the
great, who ruinated the Persian Monarchy: be therefore succeeding next unto
them, must needs make the third. The Rabbis here very ignorantly instead of
Alexander the great son of Philip, whose kingdom they confound with the
Persian, and make them both but one, do supply Alexander the son of Mammea,
Emperor of Rome, because they would avoid so clear a prophecy of the
kingdom of the Messiah. But herein they show their great blindness and
ignorance: for this Alexander was Emperor, when the half part of the
Provinces almost were fallen from the Roman Empire, and he had never any
absolute government, but was as it were pupil unto his mother: and he had an
ignominious death, being slain of his own soldiers in his Tent. Calv.
Prosper also, whom Paulus Orosius follows, Prosper* in lib. de promi^^ (...)
2. c. 33.
are deceived, who take this third Monarchy for Carthage: for it succeeded not
any of the other Monarchies.

2. This third Monarchy is resembled to the belly and the thighs: 1. because,
as the belly is the next to the breast, so this Monarchy succeeded next unto
the Persian. 2. like as the meat passes through the belly, but there staieth
not; so Alexander got many kingdoms, but he long enjoyed them not: they were
quickly after his death divided among his captains. 3. This resemblance also
fitteth the intemperancie and incontinencie of the Greek state, which
Alexander was not so much touched with, as his captains that succeeded him. 4.
And further the belly signifies gluttony, excess, and riot, to the which
Alexander was much given: for his intemperate drinking of wine, obscured all
his other virtues: he would drink wine so excessiuely, that he did lie
sometime three days, till he had slept it out: he also appointed games and
prizes for the best drinkers: one Protarchus for drinking up four great
measures of wine, called congij, which every one contained a gallon, and a
pint, was rewarded of him with a talent, but within three days he died of
drunkenness, and so did 41. more. In his drunken fit, at the enticement of his
harlot Thais, he commanded the most famous city of the East, of the Persians
called Persepolis, to be set on fire: And at an other time in his drunken mood
he killed Clytus his faithful counselor, which afterward so grieved him,
that his friends could hardly stay him from killing himself: Hereupon this
saying was taken up of Alexander, that he was more gentle toward his enemies in
battle, then toward his friends at bankers. Some do excuse this his
immoderate drinking of wine, by the hot and fiery constitution of his body:
which is thought to be the cause of the sweet smell, that came from his body:
as in hot countries there are the sweetest smells and perfumes. But the
drinking of wine did more inflame him, being hot by nature: as we see, that
for the same cause in hot and burning fevers, Physicians forbid the use of
wine, or any hot drink: therefore this does nothing excuse his insatiable
appetite that way.

3. By the brass, 1. some understand the eloquence of the Grecians, quia as
tinnit clarius, because brass makes a better sound then other mettalls,
Lyran. 2. some interpret it of Alexanders great fame, cuius sonus long lateque
diffusus est, whose sound was spread far and wide, Hug. 3. some apply it to
his warrelike disposition, for they used brazen armor in times past: and
hereby is signified the troublesome and unquiet state of that kingdom: for in
12. years space he conquered all the East part of the world. Polan. 4. But
this Monarchy is compared to brass rather because it was more hard and
troublesome not only to other nations, whom Alexander would never suffer to
be in rest, insomuch that the Macedonians rejoiced when Alexander was dead, as
thereby gaining their rest and quietness; but also to the people of God: for
first he came against Jerusalem with an hostile and cruel mind, if the Lord
had not stayed him by a vision in the night, as he himself confessed, when
Iaddua the high Priest met him the next day: and after that he gave wicked
Samballat leave to build an other Temple in mount Garizim, which enterprise
Nehemiah by his faithful endeavor had hindered before, whereof he made
Manasses, the brother of Iaddua, Priest: and by this means, both the state of
the Church and Commonwealth was much weakened among the Jews. Joseph. lib. 11.
c. 8. Alexander also was himself of a restles nature: for when he had heard,
that his father Philip had conquered any city, he would say, that his father
left nothing for him: and when he likewise had heard of the Philosopher
Anaximander, that there were many worlds, he wept, because he yet had not
conquered one. Thus this Monarchy was brasen-like to the rest, because the
state of the people of God more declined still, and waxed worse and worse.

48. Quest. Of the largenes of Alexanders Empire, and of other memorable and
notable things in him.
1. This was admirable in Alexander, that at 20. years of age after the death
of his father Philip, he enterprised to conquer the world: unto which years,
such constancy, fortitude, wisdom, counsel, experience, as appeared to be in
Alexander, are very rarely incident.

2. It was also wonderful, that Alexander with so small an army, having not
above 40. thousand, with so small provision, carrying but vittaile for 30.
days, and but 70. talents, should take in hand such a great enterprise.

3. His success in battle was admirable, he never encountered any enemy, but
he overcame him; never besieged city, but he took it: and in 3. battles, one
at the flood Granicus, an other at Issus in Cilicia, the third at Arbella, he
overcame all the power of Asia, Darius having in his army 10. hundredth
thousand men, above one for ten.

4. As was his success in battle, so was (as the Gentiles call it) his good
fortune for himself, or rather his prosperous deliverance from many dangers:
that oftentimes he had received deadly wounds, and yet recovered; was in a
manner dead, and yet revived: insomuch that Curtius writes of him, cum
plurimum virtuti debuerit, plus eum fortunae debuisse, etc. as he did owe much
unto virtue, so yet he owed more unto fortune, which of all men living he
seemed only to have power of: yet Plutarke in his two orations, which he made
of that argument, shows that more is to be ascribed to Alexanders virtue,
then to his good fortune.

5. The largenes of his Empire was wonderful: for he subdued the more noble
part of Europe, Syria, Lib. 6. c. 16.
and Egypt, all Asia, and India unto the river Ganges: yea Pliny writes, that
in the utmost bounds of the Sogdianes he built the city Alexandria, where
Hercules, Semiramis, and Cyrus had set up altars before him, as bounds of the
Empire: Lysippus the painter hereupon made the picture of Alexander looking up
to heaven, with this posie, Jupiter asserui terram mihi, tu assere coelum,
Jupiter I have taken the earth to my self, take thou heaven, etc. with which
picture Alexander was so delighted, that he proclaimed, none should take his
picture but Lysippus.

6. Such was his celeritie also, that in the space of 13. years he conquered
more nations, then one would have thought he could have traveled over in so
short a time: Apelles therefore pictured Alexander with a thunderbolt,
signifying his great swiftnes and agilitie in his exploits.

7. Alexanders great ^ame also may be counted among other parts of his
greatness: by the which he subdued more nations, then by war, for the very
terror of his name made many Kingdoms submit themselves unto him: and at the
same time when he died, he expected Ambassadors from all the Nations of
Europe, from France, Spain, Italy, Sicilie, and from Africa: for if he had
not then died, he had taken order, to provide him a great navy, to have
compassed Arabia and Africa, and so to have surprised Spain and Italy.

8. The acts and monuments of Alexander are to be counted among other memorable
things, as first the Cities which he built, which Plutarke names to have been
70. then he brought the barbarous nations to civility: he taught the people
Hyrcani the use of marriage, the Arachosians tillage and husbandry, the
Sogdians that they should nourish and not kill their parents: the Persians to
honor their mothers, and not to use them for their wives: the Scythians that
they should not eat the dead, but bury them.

9. Add hereunto his singular virtues: his constancy and patience in enduring
of labor, his clemency toward those whom he conquered: the same day he took
and restored again to the king of India his kingdom: Darius mother he
honorably entertained as a Queen: his continency was singular, Darius wife,
and his most beautiful daughters he touched not, but preserved their
chastity, neither would he see them. But his liberality and magnificence
exceeded his other virtues: Alexanders virtues.
he gave 23. thousand talents among his soldiers to pay their debts: he bid to
one feast 9. thousand ghests, and gave unto every one a cup of gold: to one
that asked a reward of him, he gave a city: which he refusing as too great a
gift for him, Alexander said; Non quaero quid to decet accipere, sed quid me
decet dare, I stand not upon it, what it is meet for thee to take, but what it
is fit I should give. And to conclude this point, Plutarke says, that those
virtues for the which severally certain worthy men have been commended, did
all concur in him, as the valor of Achilles, the chastity of Agamemnon, the
piety of Diomedes, the courage of Cyrus, the policy of Themistocles, the
boldness of Brassida, the wisdom of Philip his father.

10. This was also part of his terrene happiness, that as he counted Achilles
happy, because he had Homer to set forth his praise, so he had diverse
excellent writers to register his acts: as Ptolome King of Egypt, Hecataeus,
Aristobulus, Callisthenes, Onesicratus, Diodorus Siculus, Trogus Pompeius,
Justinius, Q. Curtius, with others.

Quest. 49. verse. 40. Whether this fourth kingdom must be understood to be
the Roman Empire.
There are here two opinions: some take the Roman Empire to be understood by
this fourth kingdom, which is compared to iron, and the same to continue after
the coming of Christ to the end of the world, as Lyranus interprets the two
legs of the division of the Roman Empire into the Occidentall and Oriental
at Constantinople: of the same opinion are Rupertius, Hugo Cardinal. Pintus,
and of our writers, Bullinger, Pelican, Geneuens. Calvin, Melancthon, Osiand.
Some do here comprehend the Roman Empire, but until the coming of Christ,
as Pererius in verse. 32. We will examine their reasons.

1. Verse. 28. Daniel says that the Lord showed the king what should come to
pass in the latter days, therefore all the Monarchies to the end of the
world are here signified.

Contra. The word acharith as is before showed, does not only signify the
latter or extreme days, but the time following, as it is taken, Genesis 49. 1.
and the Prophet expounds himself, verse. 29. what is meant by the latter
days, that which should come to pass hereafter.

2. It is not like, that the Lord would conceal this thing from his Prophet,
and that Daniel speaking of three of the Monarchies, should omit the fourth,
which was the greatest of all: neither would the Lord leave his Church without
comfort herein.

Contra. 1. As God revealed not his whole mind unto the rest of the Prophets,
so neither had Daniel a clear vision of all, which should happen in the world.
2. he touches all these four kingdoms and governments, which should be the
chief oppressors and afflictors of his people until the rising of Christ's
kingdom; until which time they had not endured much at the Romans hands, but
by their own procurement: Daniel therefore speaks of those kingdoms only,
which meddled most with the people of God then; it much belonged not to their
present comfort to hear of those kingdoms which should come afterward.

3. Daniel prophesies of the kingdom of Christ, which should still increase
unto the end of the world, verse. 44. And cap. 12. 2. he evidently speaks of
everlasting life, and of the resurrection.

Contra. 1. The Prophet does but touch that by occasion in a word, to show the
perfection and consummation of Christ's kingdom: it follows not, that
therefore he should describe all the Monarchies to the end of the world.

4. But the event of things answering to this prophecy, shows that it is
most fitly applied to the Roman Empire.

1. Because as iron the Roman Empire subdued all other kingdoms: for whereas
Alexanders kingdom was divided into four, Prolome had Egypt, Seleucus Syria,
Antigonus Asia the less, and Antipater Macedonia, who also obtained Antigonus
regiment; all these four dominions were dissolved and dissipated by the
Romans. Paulus Aemilius overcame Perseus king of Macedonia, and led him with
his two sons, Philippui, and Alexander in triumph: Lucullus and Pompeius
subdued Mithridates and Tygranes, and brought under the Syrian kingdom: and
Augustus Caesar overcame Antonie with Cleopatra his wife, and made a Province
of Egypt: And all the East countries Pompey the great subdued, and joined to
the Roman Empire, as Asia, Pontus, Armenia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Cilicia,
Syria, with others, waging battle with them 30. years together, having
slain, put to flight, or taken an 121. thousand, and 83. thousand, and taken
846. ships, and a 1538. cities and castles: Plin. lib. 7. cap. 26. Bulling.
Pap. and Lyranus shows 3. ways whereby they became such conquerours,
sapientia, exercitio armorum, bon^ regimine, by their wisdom, exercise of
warlike feats, and good discipline and government.

2. The two legs do signify the diversity of government, which was
evidently seen in the Roman common wealth: first, they were governed by
Kings, then by Consuls, afterward by Tribunes, they had their decemviri, their
Dictators for a time, then they came to their triumviri, when three did bear
the greatest sway; as Augustus, Antonie, Lepidus: and then the government fell
to dunmviri, into the hands of two, Augustus, and Antonie, and at the last one
had the Sovereignty, and so it continued under one Emperor, until Marcus
Antonius Verus, then there began to be associates, and diverse Emperors at
once. Perer.

3. The feet partly of iron, partly of clay, signify the division and
dissension of the kingdom, which is manifest in the Roman government: for
there were four notable divisions among them: first between the Senators,
and ordinem Equestrem, the gentry of Rome, concerning the authority and power
in matters of judgment: there was also bellum sociale, the sociall war, or
of confederates, whereof Drusus was the author; and bellum servile, whereof
Seriorius was the beginner: then followed the most deadly civil wars
between Sylla and Marius, Caesar and Pompey, between Octavius with Mar.
Antonius, and Brutus and Cassius, and between Octavius and Antonie.

4. Whereas the feet were partly of iron, partly of clay, which is expounded
to signify that the kingdom should be partly strong and partly broken: this
also is thus applied to the Roman state: because they were sometimes
conquerers, sometime they were conquered: As the French brake in to the very
Capital: Pyrrhus king of Epyrus did afflict the Romans with fierce war, and
overcame them at Trebia, and Trasimenum: Hannibal made a great slaughter of
them at Cannas: Crassus was overcome of the Parthians, and the Roman ensigns
taken: Bullinger. Some understand the iron and clay feet, of the kingdoms,
which did spring out of the Roman Empire, as of France, Spain, Germany, the
Turks, whereof some were more victiorious, warlike, and yron-like then others:
Melancthon. Some apply it to the Emperors of Rome, whereof some were valiant,
some cowardly and slothful. Osian.

5. Whereas the mingling and tempering of the iron and clay together is
expounded of their marriages; they show likewise how this was accomplished and
fulfilled in the Roman Empire: for Pompey took to wife Iulia daughter to
Julius Caesar, and Antonie married Octauia Augustus Caesar's sister, whom he did
afterward repudiate, and married Cleopatra Queen of Egypt: so that those
conjunctions did not hold: Bullinger. Pere. Pin.

Contra. 1. True it is, that the Romans did subdue unto their Empire all other
nations of any fame or power: but it is not so much to be considered, how they
were yron-like toward other nations, but how they were affected toward the
people of God, toward the coming of the Messiah: But until then the Jews had
not felt such hard service under the Romans, as they had under other cruel
Lords: for the innouations which were made in the Jewish state by Crassus and
Pompey, were done rather by the consent of the Jews themselves, and their
kings striving about the kingdom, then by conquest: and the interest that
Antonie had there, was by the right and title of the Ptolomies, whose daughter
and heir Cleopatra he married: But of all other the Syrian tyranny under
Antiochus was most cruel and yronlike toward the Jews, and therefore to that
state this description rather agrees, as shall afterward be showed.

2. The division of the kingdom, signified by the two legs, cannot be
understood of the diverse regiments and gouernements, one succeeding another:
for it was still the same kingdom; and being the same, it cannot be said to
be divided into two diverse parts, as the legs are perpetually divided, and
are not joined together again.

3. And for the same reason the division of the kingdom cannot be understood
of the Civil and domestical dissentions: for there was a reuniting of it
again, after these sturres and tumults were appeased, but these kingdoms here
spoken of, as two legs, were divided and kept a sunder still.

4. The iron and clay signified, that the kingdom should be partly strong and
partly weak: but this respect of their strength and weakness must not have
reference to other foreign nations, but to the people of God, for whose comfort,
this prophetical vision was sent: But toward the Jews the Roman state was
not partly strong, partly weak, until the coming of Christ; that sometime
the one had the better, sometime the other: But thus the case stood between
them, and the Seleucians in Syria, and Ptolomies in Egypt, that sometime they
prevailed against the people of God; sometime God gave them victory against
their enemies, as is evident in the story of the Macchabees.

5. The conjunctions in marriage must be of diverse kings between themselves
after the division of the kingdom, not of the same kingdom within it self:
and therefore that interpretation of the mutual marriages between Caesar and
Pompey, Octauian and Antonie, can here have no place: for it is evident, verse.
44. that diverse kings, and at the same instant, are understood, who joined in
marriage.

Reasons showing that the Roman Empire cannot be here understood.

1. In the end of this fourth yronlike Monarchy the Messiah should come, and
his kingdom be set up; but Christ came not in the end, but in the beginning
of the Roman Monarchy. Polan.

2. At the coming of the Messiah all these kingdoms must be dissolved, and
broken in pieces, verse. 44. Now the Roman Empire ended not at Christ's coming:
But it will be answered, that Daniel speaks of the second coming of Christ,
when all these kingdoms should be destroyed. Contra. That cannot be, for after
the dissolution of these kingdoms, that stone which dashed them in pieces,
shall grow into a mountain, and fill all the earth, ver. 35. which cannot be
otherwise understood, then of the propagation of Christ's kingdom, which must
be before his second coming.

3. This kingdom here spoken of was divided into two, signified by the two
legs: but the Roman Empire continued one until the time of Constantine,
after whom it was divided among his three sons, bot into two, but three parts.

4. They cannot show in the Roman state, such conjunction in marriage between
diverse kings, and kingdoms: but they of whom they give instance for such
matrimonill conjunctions, were of one and the same kingdom.

5. That fourth kingdom must continue until the coming of Christ; but if
they understand this prophecy of Christ's second coming, the Roman Empire
has been dissolved long since.

6. These kingdoms were one to succeed another, and to possess the others
dominions: the Persian obtained all, that was under Babylon, Alexander gained
all, which the Persian had: but the Romans had only Syria and Egypt of the
Babylonian Empire, and only Asia minor of the Persian Monarchy, whereas there
were under the Persians an 127 provinces from India to Aethiopia, Ester 1.
therefore this last ktngdome cannot be the Roman state, for it must make one
body with the rest, as in the image of a man's body is represented. Polanus.

7. In this vision the special intention of the Prophet is to describe such
kingdoms, as were adversaries to the Jews, and pressed them most, but the
Jews endured not much affliction under the Romans till the coming of Christ:
they endured more under the kings of Syria, and Egypt, especially the first, as
is evident in the books of the Machabees: that kingdom which was most cruel
and yron-like toward the Jews is here understood: but so was not the Roman
Empire; therefore that is not here comprehended: Iun. annot.

Pappus answers, 1. that it is false, Iudaici tantum populi conditionem hac
visione describi, that the condition only of the people of the Jews is
described in this vision. 2. he says it is likewise false, a Romany Iudaeos
nihil passos, that the Jews suffered nothing at the Romans hands.

Contra. 1. But seeing that the end and use of this prophecy, was for the
comfort of Gods people; it must needs follow, that such alterations and changes
of kingdoms are here described, which most nearely concerned the people of
God: thus then we may reason, The end of these prophesies, as also of all
Scripture, is for the comfort of Gods people, Romans 15. 3. but the prophecy of
such things, as concerned not the people of God, was not for their use and
comfort; therefore such prophesies are not contained here.

2. It is not affirmed, that the Jews endured nothing of the Romans, but that
their government was nothing so hard and yron-like as was the tyrrannie of the
kings of Syria.

8. The vision of an humane image signified one united body, consisting of
diverse kingdoms one succeding another, as the parts of the body do one
join unto another; the beginning and head of which body was in Babylon: but
the Roman Monarchy being distant at the least a 1200. miles from Babylon,
could not make one united body with it: therefore that Monarchy cannot here
fitly be understood. Polan.

Quest. 50. That this fourth Monarchy divided into two kingdoms, resembled by
the two legs of the image, was the kingdom of Syria and Egypt.
When Alexander was dead, which happened in the 33. year of his age, his
kingdom was divided into four parts: Seleucus had Babylon and Syria, Ptolome
Egypt, Cassander Macedonia, and Antigonus held Asia: but the two first were the
mightiest kingdoms, and did most afflict the people of God, which are here
shadowed forth by the two iron legs; as thus may be showed.

1. The occasion of Nebuchadnezzars dream is an argument thereof, which was to
know, what should become of his kingdom after him; the greatest part whereof
fell unto the share of these two, Seleucus that obtained the kingdom of Syria,
and Ptolome of Egypt.

2. The scope and end of this vision, was to describe unto the Jews their
state and condition under these kingdoms until the coming of the Messiah:
which was most hard and yron-like under the tyrannical command of these two
houses, the Seleucians, and the Ptolomies: so the captivity and bondage of the
Israelites in Egypt is compared to an iron furnace, Deuteronomy. 4. 20. and now under
Egypt again they endure an other iron furnace.

3. This vision is opened and expounded by other visions, and prophesies
afterward, cap. 7. 8. but most evidently, cap. 11. 4. where the kingdom of
Alexander is foretold shall be divided into 4. parts, and that among the rest
the king of the North, which is Babylon and Syria, and the king of the South,
namely of Egypt, shall be the chief: But the Romans could neither be this
king of the South, nor of the North.

4. The event in these two kingdoms answers to the prophecy: for here 4.
things are foreshewed. 1. the condition and manner of government toward the
people of God, which should be yron-like, ver. 40. and so indeed were the
kings of the North and South hard as iron, and cruel toward the people of God.

2. The constitution of these kingdoms is set forth, verse. 42. which as two
legs did issue forth of the brazen belly and thighs, that is Alexanders
Monarchy, the strength whereof remained in them.

3. Then the inconstant and variable state of these two kingdoms is described,
they should be part of iron, part of clay: sometime one should be the stronger,
sometime the other: as Ptolomeus Euergites, had the better against Seleucus
Callinicus, and Ptolomie Philadelphus to revenge his daughter Berenice her
death, against Antiochus Megas: but for the most part the king of the North was
the stronger.

4. The matrimonial league between these kingdoms is also foreshewed, which
yet should not hold: Ptolome Philadelphus, gave his daughter to Antiochus Theos
to make perfect agreement between them: but this bond could not hold: for
Antiochus had a former wife, Laodicea, who caused Berenice to be poisoned,
whereupon ensued great wars between these two kings: likewise Antiochus
surnamed the great, gave his daughter Cleopatra to Ptolome Epiphanes: and thus
every part of this prophecy was truly fulfilled in these two kingdoms, as
shall be showed more at large, in the opening of the 11. chap. Iunius.

5. The prophecy of Ezekiel against Gog, cap. 38. herein concurreth with this
vision; which is there ver. 15. expounded to be the kingdom of the North: that
used the help of the Persians, who were tributarie unto Antiochus Epiphanes:
1. Mac. 3. 31. and of the Arabians, ver. 5. against the people of God.

6. It is well observed by some learned men, that the Romans are but thrice
mentioned in all the prophecy of Daniel, once, cap. 11. 18. where it is said,
a Prince shall cause his shame: the Romans sent their Consul against Antiochus
Megas: again in the same chapter, verse 30. the ships of Cittim shall come
against him: the Romans sent Popilius to stay Antiochus Epimanes, and chap. 9.
26. where it is said, the people of the prince which shall come, and destroy
the city, the Romans are understood. In other places of his prophecy no
mention is made of them: this prophecy then is not extended unto them.

But it will be thus objected on the contrary, that this last Monarchy cannot
be interpreted of these two kingdoms of Syria and Egypt.

1. Object. It is said, that in the days of these kings, the kingdom of the
Messiah should be set up: but these kingdoms were destroyed and dissolved by
the Romans before the Messiah came: Pappus.

Answ. The kingdom indeed of Syria was before subdued by Pompey, and the
house of the Seleucians was then extinguished, which might be about 70. or 80.
years, or thereabout before the birth of Christ: but the kingdom of Egypt
continued still until the reign of Herod, (under whom Christ was borne) who
was confirmed in his kingdom by Antonie and Cleopatra the daughter of the last
Ptolomie surnamed Piper: so that Egypt had some part of the Images toe until
the Lords birth.

2. Object. This last Monarchy is called a kingdom, it was then but one, but
these were two kingdoms, one of the South, the other of the North: they
therefore cannot be understood to be the fourth Monarchy.

Answ. 1. It is called one kingdom in two respects. 1. because they both
issued out of the kingdom of Alexander, which after his death was divided: as
also because one of these two kindomes was of greater strength, and had the
chief superiority, which was the kingdom of the North. 2. it is evident in
the text that diverse states and regiments are comprehended in this fourth
Monarchy: for it is said, ver. 43. in the plural number, they shall mingle
themselves with the scede of men: and they are said to be Kings, ver. 44. in
the days of these kings, etc.

3. Object. Alexanders kingdom was divided into 4. parts, as is before showed:
but here by the two legs two kingdoms only are signified.

Answ. 1. Though Alexanders kingdom were divided among his four chief
captains, Cassander, Antigonus, Seleucus, Ptolome, yet soon after Seleucus
vanquished and killed Antigonus, and Cassander of Macedonia was not of like
power unto the rest. 2. wherefore these two kingdoms are only spoken of, as
the mightiest, and because they two only had to do with the people of God,
oppressing them continually, and keeping them under.

4. Object. The Empire of the Romans is held of all to be the fourth Monarchy
of the world, and the most flourishing: This image therefore representing the
four great Monarchies of the world, is to be extended to the Roman state.

Answ. It is not denied, but that the Roman dominion makes the fourth
general Monarchy of the world: yet this remains to be proved, that in this
vision, the general state and condition of the world is described: the
argument therefore follows not, Four principal kingdoms and Monarchies are
set fourth in this vision: therefore the Roman is one of them: for only these
kingdoms are here described, which then had to deal with the people of God,
and which did bear sway until the coming of Christ, and then determined:
Iun. annotat. But seeing we are fallen to make mention of these 4. general
Monarchies; it shall not be amiss briefly to show the beginning and
continuance of them.

Quest 51. Of the beginning and continuance of the four general Monarchies of
the world.
1. The Babylonian Empire, which is made one with the Assyrian, took beginning
from Ninus, of whom the city Niniue is thought to have been so called, and it
continued above, a 1000. years: yet it never flourished more then under
Nebuchadnezzar the great; who subdued unto his kingdom, all Syria, Phoenice,
Judea, Idumea, Egypt, Lybia, with other countries: And this his large dominion
began in the first year of his reign, when he besieged Jerusalem, but it was
not at the height till the 23. year of his reign, in the 38. Olympiad. and so
it held 60. years unto the reign of Cyrus, which was in the 55. Olymp.

The Persian Monarchy beginning in Cyrus, flourished about 230. years, as
Pere. 228. as Bullinger, and was dissolved by Alexander in the 112. Olympiad.

3. The Grecian Empire was first founded by Alexander, who held the same 6.
years, then it was divided into four kingdoms, which were soon turned to
three: the Syrian kingdom, whereunto was annexed also all Asia Minor, which
Seleucus possessed, continued in that house unto Olympiad 175. and afterward
was held by Tygranes king of Armenia, 12. years, and then in the 179.
Olympiad, was by Pompey subdued to the Roman Empire. The second kingdom,
which was of Macedonia, in the 150. Olympiad, was made subject to Rome, with
Perseus the last king thereof. The third kingdom of Egypt held out unto the
187. Olympiad, and then Antonie who had married Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, was
overcome of Augustus Caesar.

4. The Roman kingdom simply began from the building of Rome in the 7.
Olym. but it was not an absolute Monarchy until the 44. Olympi. after the
end of the second Punike war: for then all Italy, Spain, Sardinia, Sicilia,
and Carthage, were brought under the Roman obedience. And their dominion was
much enlarged in the 147. Olympi. when Antiochus the great was vanq^ished by
the Romans: but most of all in 179. Olympiad: when Pompey subdued the East
countries: So that Asia the less, which was before the bounds of the Roman
Empire, was then but counted in the mids: In this glory it continued the
space of 500. years from the second Punike war, till it was taken of the
Goths: unto which time from the first building of the city were a 1164.
years, or thereabout: Varr^ writes lib. 18. Antiquat. that Vectius the Augur,
by those 12. vulturs, which Romulus coniectured by when he built Rome, did
forespeake that Rome should continue so many hundred years: but this may
worthily be held to be a fable. ex Pere.

Quest. 52. verse. 43. Of the meaning of these words, they shall mingle
themselves with the seed of men.
1. Vatablus understands it of the diverse nations and people which should be
admitted into the commonwealth, and were donati ciuitate, privileged with the
immunities of citizens: but the phrase of mingling themselves with the seed of
men, signifies more.

2. Osiander thus expounds it, that the princes of the Roman state iuncturi
essent affinitates cum Regibus, should join in affinity with other kings: but
the text shows, that the kings of this fourth Monarchy should be joined in
marriage among themselves.

3. Pappus with others interpret it of the affinity between Caesar and Pompey
who married Iulia Caesar's daughter: and when she was dead he would have given
him in marriage Octauia his sisters daughter: and desired also to have married
Pompeys daughter: so Augustus gave unto Antonie his sister Octauia: But Calvin
calls this frigidum, a weak conceit, to aim at some special marriages: he
thinks it was the continual practice of that state, to combine and link
themselves together by mutual marriages: But this matrimonial conjunction here
spoken of, is between diverse kings; not in the same slate and commonwealth.

4. Some understand it of the society and league between the Romans and
Macchabees, which first began under Judas Macchabeus: but the phrase, as is
before showed, does signify a league and conjunction by marriage.

5. Some refer it to herod, who being a stranger, would have married one of
the Macchabees daughter, that his son might peaceably enjoy the kingdom: but
the maid killed her self for grief, and he is said to have abused her being
dead: ex Lyran. But the kingdom of the Jews was no part of this fourth
Monarchy.

6. The true meaning then is, that these two kingdoms, signified by the two
legs, that is, the kings of the South and North, should link together in
marriage, as is showed before, Quest. 46. argum. 4.

Quest. 53. verse. 44. What manner of kingdom the Prop^et speaks of, which
God shall set up.
1. Porphyrius and the Hebrews do interpret this of the kingdom of the
Jews, which in the end of the world shall, as they dream be most mighty,
and subdue all other kingdoms: lib. 10. antiquit. cap. 11.
it seems also that Josephus had some such conceit: for when he comes to
make mention of this stone, he forbeareth to give any interpretion of it,
putting off the matter thus; mihi hoc narrare non libuit, cui propositum est
non futura, sed praeterita scribere, etc. Daniel also gives an interpretation
of the stone: but it liked me not to declare it, whose purpose is to write of
things past, not of things to come. It seems he was loath to offend the
Romans, of whom he had received so great grace and favor, which he should
have done, if he had given his opinion, that the Roman Empire should in the
end have been ruinated by his nation.

But how unlike a thing this is, that the Jews should obtain such a temporal
dominion, it is evident to all the world, they being now a dispersed nation,
without either king or priest, Church or commonwealth: And our Blessed Savior
has assured us, that his kingdom is not of this world: they then dreaming of
such an outward kingdom, do therein show their infidelity, that they have
no part in the true Messiah, who is blessed for ever.

2. The heretics called Chiliastes, which hold that 6. thousand years expired
from the creation of the world, there shall be a resurrection of just men, who
shall reign with Christ a thousand years in the earth, do expound this place
of that terrene kingdom: But their heretical fancy is confuted by the very
words of this text: for the kingdom here spoken of shall stand for ever: it
shall not then only continue for a 1000. years.

3. Wherefore this Scripture evidently describes the spiritual kingdom of
Christ, in this world ruling and governing the hearts of his servants by his
grace, and propagating his truth and Gospel over all the world, exercising his
power upon the enemies of his Church: which kingdom shall be perfected in his
everlasting glory: of this eternal, and euerduring kingdom, the Prophet Isay
says, the Increase of his government and peace shall have no end. Isay 9. 7.


Quest. 54. Whether the stone cut out of the mountain, do signify Christ or
his kingdom.
1. The most do understand this of Christ himself, who is signified by this
stone, of which opinion are of the ancient writers, Justinius Martyr, dialog.
cum Tryphone: Ireneus lib. 3. aduers. haeres. cap. 28. Cyprian, lib. 2. aduers.
Iudaeos, sect. 17. and sometime Augustine enarrat. in Psalm. 98. and so
interprets Lyranus: and of the new writers, Bullinger by this stone would
have Christ understood: as Psalm. 118. 22. the stone which the builders refused,
is become the head stone of the corner: and Isay 28. 16. Behold I will lay in
Sion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: to the
same purpose Melancthon: likewise Perorius beside these testimonies of
Scripture, shows how Christ this precious stone was prefigured by certain
typical stones in the old Testament: as by the stone Jacob pitched, and
anointed it with oil: and the rock which Moses smote with the tod, and water
gushed out: by the stone that bare up Moses hands, Ezod. 17. and by that rock
where Moses was set when he saw the Lords back parts, Exodus 33. Further in
these four respects Christ is compared to a stone. 1. for the continuance. 2.
for the strength, he is the fundamental stone. 3. a rock of refuge unto them
that believe. 4. and a rock of offense for the wicked to stumble at.

2. Some do by this stone understand the kingdom and Church of Christ: as
Augustine in Psalm. 42. and 44. so also Calvin, comparat regnum Christi cum
omnibus illis Monarchijs, etc. he compares the kingdom of Christ, with all
those Monarchies, etc. so is the Church of God likened to a stone, Zach. 12. 3.
in that day I will make Jerusalem an heavy stone for all people, all that lift
it up shall be torn, etc.

3. But these interpretations are not contrary one to another; they may well
stand together: for Christ is not here considered apart by himself, but
together with his Church, he as the head, and the other as his body; So the
Apostle sometime by Christ understands the whole mystical body consisting
of Christ and his Church, as 1. Cor. 12. 12. As the body is one, and has many
members, so is Christ: so the Church is called the body and fullness of
Christ. Ephe. 1. 23. Then in this place, Christ is not understood without his
body the Church, but both Christ and his kingdom, which is the Church, are
joined together: for ver. 44. Daniel speaks of a kingdom which God should
set up. Polan.

Quest. 55. Whether this prophecy be fulfilled in the first, or second coming
of Christ.
1. Tertullian expounds it of Christ's second coming, lib. contra Iudaeos. So
also Theodoret, being moved with this reason; because at the first coming of
Christ all these kingdoms were not destroyed, for the Roman Empire then
flourished, but at his second coming this prophecy shall be fulfilled: but
this argument is soon answered: the kingdoms here spoken of, were all
dissolved at the coming of Christ in the flesh: the Roman Empire is not
comprehended in this vision, as is before showed at large. quest. 49.

2. Some think, that this prophecy agrees unto the first coming of Christ,
inchoate and aliquatenus, in some sort and by way of beginning, and that in the
end, it should dash in pieces the Roman Empire: but it shall most fully and
absolutely be accomplished at Christ's second coming: Pere. Pap.

3. But it shall appear by these arguments, that this Scripture must only be
referred to the first coming of Christ, and not at all to the second, but
only by way of analogy, and by a consequent.

1. This kingdom shall be set up in the times of these Kings: but in the
everlasting kingdom of Christ in the next world, there shall be neither any
such kings, nor any more time.

2. This stone was but small at the beginning, but afterward it grew into a
mountain: but Christ, when he comes in his glory, shall then show himself
in his greatness: he shall not be as a small stone.

3. And this stone became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth: which
shows, that Christ's kingdom here spoken of, should increase by little and
little: but after his second coming, it shall be at the full, not still
increasing: therefore the kingdom of Christ here in this world of necessity
must be here described.

4. Yet by way of analogicall collection, this prophecy may be applied unto
Christ's second coming: when as Christ shall make a perfect conquest of all
earthly kingdoms and powers, and of all other adversaries unto his kingdom.

5. Of this opinion, that this prophecy concerns the first coming of
Christ, are all they which expound this phrase, of the cutting out of this
stone without hands, of the miraculous conception and birth of Christ, of the
virgin Marie, as Lyran. gloss. ordinar. Vatab. Pin. with diverse of the
ancient fathers: Calvin also, though he refuse that interpretation of Christ's
birth; yet holds the first coming of Christ to be here signified: by this
reason: propheta admonet exordia regnt Christi fore contempta, the Prophet
admonishes, that the beginning of Christ's kingdom shall be base and
contemptible, etc. because he likeneth it to a small stone at the first: but
the second coming of Christ, shall be glorious.

Quest. 56. The description of the kingdom of Christ by the Prophet, verse. 44.
45.
1. It is described by the adiunct of time, when it should come, in the time of
those kings, which held the fourth Monarchy, toward the end thereof. 2. by
the manner it shall be raised up as from a small beginning. 3. by the
efficient, it shall be set up by God. 4. by the eternity of it, it shall stand
for ever, neither apt to fall of it self, neither shall it be surprised by any
other: for these two are the causes of the alteration of kingdoms; internal
within themselves, or external by foorren power. 5. by the effects, it shall
break and destroy all other kingdoms, as the Prophet Zachatie shows, cap.
12. 3. 6. by the firmenes and surenesse thereof, compared unto a stone. 7. by
the original or beginning, it was cut out of a mountain: the beginning
thereof was from heaven, from abnue, as our blessed Savior himself, John. 3.
13. no man has ascended into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the
son of man which is in heaven. 8. by the manner of his coming, which shall
be sudden and unlooked for, as a thing that is cut out at once. 9. by the
manner of administration, it shall be cut out without hands, that is, any
humane help. 10. by the power thereof, it shall break in pieces, etc. Polan.

Quest. 57. That this kingdom which God shall raise up must be understood of
the kingdom of Christ.
Verse. 44. The God of heaven shall set up a kingdom. Calvin here sets down
certain reasons, out of the Rabbine Barbinel whereby he would prove, that
this kingdom cannot be referred to Jesus the son of Mary: his reasons are
these six in all.

1. Seeing these four kingdoms here described are terrene and visible, the
fifth also which should destroy the other must be also visible, for unlike
things cannot be compared together.

Contra. 1. It is not necessary, that all things should be like in a
comparison: nay here is rather an opposition between the 4. kingdoms, and
this fifth, then a comparison, and in that it is to destroy the rest, it must
be unlike unto the rest: the Rabbines argument therefore follows not; The
fifth kingdom shall destroy the former four, Ergo it shall be of the same kind
with the rest: the contrary is better inferred, that therefore it shall be
unlike unto the rest.

2. Ar. If religion made a difference between these kingdoms, then were they
not four but one: for all of them were given to idolatry, and so followed the
same superstition.

Contra. 1. It is necessary that the 5. kingdom, which should abolish all the
rest, should differ in the truth and sincerity of religion from them: but it
is not necessary, that the four Monarchies one destroying and confounding
another, should be of diverse religion: for kingdoms that are of the same
superstition, may be one enemy unto another, as one error may be contrary to
another.

3. Argum. It is said of this kingdom, that it shall not be given unto an
other: but the Turk now possesses a great part of the kingdom of Christians:
And among themselves also religion is divided, and many distaste the Gospel;
therefore this cannot be understood of the kingdom of Christianity.

Contra. 1. By this kingdom, which God should raise up, is not understood any
visible or external kingdom: though the Turk have surprised the terrene
kingdoms and nations, which sometime the Christians possessed, yet the
spiritual kingdom of Christ is not resigned unto them, nor to any other. 2.
Even among Christians there may be divisions, and many carnal men may live in
the Church, but they belong not to the spiritual kingdom of Christ, though
they remain in the external society of the visible Church.

4. Argu. If this be the kingdom of Christ, who was borne under Augustus
Caesar, when the Roman Monarchy in a manner began, then the fourth
Monarchy, and this fifth kingdom should begin together, which cannot be,
for the one must be the ruin and destruction of the other.

Contra. 1. To this Calvin answers, that the Monarchy of the Romans began
not with the Caesar's, but long before, when the Macedonian kingdom was
dissolved.

2. But this is an insufficient answer: 1. because it was no Monarchy, till
the time of Julius Caesar: but the government before that was sometime
Democraticall, and popular, sometime Aristocraticall, governed by Consuls:
therefore till it became a Monarchy, it could not be the fourth kingdom here
spoken of. 2. Though the fifth kingdom and the fourth began not together, yet
the same inconvenience follows, if they continue together: for the fifth
kingdom, when it comes must be the ruin of the other: this argument
therefore of the Rabbine is invincible against their opinion, which make the
Roman Monarchy this fourth kingdom.

3. Therefore to the Rabbines argument we make this further answer, that this
fourth kingdom divided into two, as consisting of two legs, was the
Monarchical state of Syria and Babylon where the sons and offspring of
Seleucu^ reigned, and of Egypt, where the Ptolomies succeeded one another, as
is before showed, quest. 50. And so indeed this fifth kingdom was the end of
the other.

5. Argum. The fourth kingdom and the fifth can not stand together, the one
being the ruin of the other: but under Constantine and other Christian
Emperors of the Roman state, the Gospel of Christ flourished; therefore it
cannot be meant of that kingdom.

Contra. 1. Calvin here answers, that the kingdom of Christ, non debet
referri ad tempus natiuitatis, must not be referred to the time of his
natiuitle, but to the preaching of the Gospel: and when the gospel began to
be published, then the Roman Empire after Traianus time was translated to
strangers, to heardmen, and swineards, and beastly monsters.

2. This answer is likewise insufficient: 1. for as soon as Christ was borne,
his kingdom began in the days of his flesh: as the Angel in the
annuntiation of Christ's birth to the virgin Marie, tells her, that God would
give him the throne of his father David, Luke c. 32. 33.
and he shall reign over the house of Jacob, etc. 2. the gospel was never more
published in the world, then in the Apostles time, while yet the Roman Empire
continued in the name and stock of the Caesar's. 3. though the Empire was
deuolued to strangers, not of Caesar's family, yet was it still the Latin and
Roman Empire, and therefore was the same Monarchy.

3. Wherefore unless the Roman Monarchy be disclaimed here from being this
fourth kingdom, this argument cannot be answered, for the fourth kingdom, and
the fifth cannot stand together.

6. Argum. The Roman Empire yet in some sort continues, therefore this fifth
is not the kingdom of Christ, which must not be raised until the other be
destroyed.

Contra. The Roman Monarchy is long since dissolved, and there remains
nothing but an image and shadow thereof, therefore this reason concludes not.

Quest. 58. That this kingdom of Christ's is a spiritual, no temporal
kingdom.
1. Some think that Christ was the temporal king of the Jews, and that the
kingdom of David descended lineally unto him by right of inheritance; which
they would further confirm by that prophecy of Iaacob. Genesis 49. 10. the
scepter shall not depart from Judah, till Shilob come, etc. whence they
infer, that the kingdom of Israel shall be restored by the Messiah.

Contra. 1. It can not be showed, that Christ descended by such a right line,
as that the kingdom came unto him by lineall descent: for the line which
Matthew and Luke set down, are of Joseph, not of Marie, which shows that
they were both of the same tribe: but that lineall descent will derive the
temporal kingdom rather to Joseph then to Marie. 2. The contrary rather is
inferred upon that prophecy, that the scepter should then, and not before
depart from Judah, when the Messiah should come: and he says not, that he
should be expectatio Iudaeorum, the expectation of the Jews, but the
expectation of the Gentiles, as the Latin translator reads: or the people or
nations (not the Jews) should be gathered unto him: Pintus.

2. Now that Christ's shall be no temporal, but a spiritual kingdom, neither
that he had any temporal kingdom by succession from David, it may thus
appear,

1. Iehoiachin the last king of the Jews beside Zedekiah, whose sons were
killed before his face, had none of his seed to sit upon the throne after him,
Jeremy, 22. 30. but if the kingdom of Christ were lineally derived from
David, it must be counted from him.

2. Christ refused to be made a king, and when he perceived the people had such
an intent, he conuaied himself from among them, Ioh. 6. 15. he likewise
refused to entermeddle with the office of a king, as to be a judge in civil
causes, Luke 12. 14.

3. No temporal kingdom is eternal, but the kingdom of Christ is eternal,
therefore it is no temporal kingdom.

4. What manner of kingdom Christ's is, the Prophet Zachary shows, Behold
thy King comes unto thee, etc. poor, and riding upon an ass: if Christ's
were a temporal kingdom, where is the pomp, riches, and glory of his
kingdom?

5. As Christ's kingdom is, so was the oil wherewith he was anointed, and the
sword wherewith he was girded: but he was anointed with spiritual oil, and
the sword of his kingdom is also spiritual, Psalm. 45. 3. 7. therefore so is
his kingdom, Pintus.

59. Quest. v. 44. In the days of what kings Christ's kingdom should be raised
up.
1. The Latin interpreter reads, in the days of these kingdoms, which
Lyran. Pint. with others, understand of the Roman Empire, which is called
kingdoms in the plural, quia multa regna continebat sub se, because it
contained many kingdoms under it: and they give this sense, that while the
Roman Monarchy yet continued, the kingdom of Christ should begin. Pappus.

2. Bullinger somewhat diuerslly by these kings understands ^^iuers princes
of the Roman Empire, as Augustus and Antonius, between whom Herod went unto
the Capitol, being by them confirmed in his kingdom.

Contra. But that these times can not be understood of the Roman Empire at
all, hence it is evident; because this 5. kingdom must be raised up in the
end of the other: Now the Roman Empire most of all flourished when Christ was
borne: it was not then the fourth kingdom here spoken of: See other arguments
against this opinion* question 49.

3. The Jews do understand this fourth kingdom of the Turkish dominion, and
they confound the Macedonian and Roman Empire together, making them both one,
because they say the Romans had their original from the Grecians: and this is
their devise, that they should not be forced to find the beginning of Christ's
kingdom under the fourth Monarchy of the Romans.

Contra. 1. The fourth kingdom cannot be the Turkish segnorie, which came 600.
years at the least after the other 3. kingdoms were dissolved; but by Daniels
description, the fourth kingdom must follow immediately upon the dissolution
of the other. 2. Though the Romans had their beginning from Troy in Asia
minor, yet that was destroyed a 1000. years well nie before the end of the
three first Monarchies: therefore the Romans could not then be counted one
kingdom with the Grecians. 3. Likewise the Turks came from the mount Caspian,
and out of the greater Asia: then by this reason they might as well confound
the Turkish government, with the Babylonian or Persian Monarchy, which had
their chief dominions in the greater Asia.

3. Therefore the times of these kings must be referred unto the last kings of
the fourth kingdom, which consisted of Syria, and Egypt, as the two legs
thereof, as is before showed, quest. 50. And so Hugo very well expounds, in
diebus vnius ex illis, in the days of these kings or kingdoms, that is one of
them: and in the end of them as the word is taken, Ezech. 7. 12. the time is
come, that is the end: to the same purpose, gloss. ordinar. his regnis
pracurrentibus, these kingdoms going before, as being forerunners, the
kingdom of Christ was both prophesied of and came.

This being agreed upon, that this time is the end of these kingdoms: yet
there is this doubt. Iunius seems to understand this king to be Herod, who
was an Arabian, and so of the kindred of the kings of Syria, who usurped the
kigdome of the Jews: and in his time Christ came: But this cannot be so fit to
find this forth kingdom, among the people of God in Judea, it must be a foreign
kingdom that was cruel and yron-like toward that nation.

And the kingdom of Syria was dissolved a good while before by Pompey before
Herod was king.

Therefore I rather consent to them, which understand this time to be the end
of Ptolomies house and race: for until Herod the house of Ptolomie continued:
for Antonie, who confirmed Herod in his kingdom, married Cleoptra the daughter
and heir of Ptolomie Piper.

60. Quest. How Christ's kingdom is said to destroy other kingdoms.
1. Seeing that three of these Monarchies and kingdoms were destroyed before
Christ's birth, how is Christ's kingdom said to destroy them: and seeing
kingdoms are set up by God, and the Apostle says, that the powers that be,
are ordained of God, Romans 13.
how is Christ said to destroy that, which he sets up?

Answ. 1. Though those kingdoms were in act dissolved before Christ's coming
in the flesh, yet because Christ's kingdom is everlasting, and began not with
his incarnation, those kingdoms were destroyed by the power of Christ's
eternal kingdom: for as the Lord says concerning Cyrus, I guided thee,
though thou knew it not, Isa. 45. 5. As the Lord Christ was the founder and
setter up of Cyrus kingdom, to deliver his people; so the same kingdom, when
it opposed it self against Christ and his Church, was by the same power of
Christ pulled down.

2. Christ indeed sets up kingdoms in respect of the power and authority
given unto them, which is of God: and he maintains upright and just kings, as
the wise man says, Prove. 8. 15. By me kings reign, and Princes decree just
things. But unjust kings, and tyrannical kingdoms Christ destroys: not that
he is an enemy to the place and government, but he sets himself against
all such kingdoms, as oppose themselves to the Church of God: so it is true,
conteri and comminui a Christo terrena imperia accidentaliter, that, as it were
accidentally Christ does diminish and break in pieces terrene kingdoms, as
they are adversaries to the kingdom of Christ. Calvin.

61. Quest. Whether Christ at his coming did in deed destroy the temporal
dominions.
1. Pererius thinks that Christ is said to destroy them, non eversa temporali
dominatione, sed sublata idololatria, not in overthrowing their temporal
dominion, ^ut in taking away their idolatry.

Contra. But this can not be the meaning: for the idolatry of the heathen
governors was not abolished till the time of Constantine, which was 300.
years after Christ: beside the three first Monarchies were dissolved, of the
Chaldeans, Persians, Grecians, and yet they were not purged of their idolatry.

2. Therefore the destruction of these kingdoms must be understood of the
outward ruin and fall of them: as both in fact was evident, that the four
kingdoms described by the image were so dissolved, and this was best
answerable to the vision, wherein the image was seen to be broken all to
pieces, and dashed together by the stone cut out of the mountain.

62. Quest. How Christ is said to be the stone cut out without hands.
1. Augustine by this mountain understands the people of the Jews, de quo
monte exciditur, nisi de regno Iudaeorum? out of what mountain is he cut, but
out of the kingdom of the Jews? Tractat. 9. in Ioann. but at what time Christ
was borne, the kingdom of the Jews being fallen into the hands of a
stranger, when according to Iaakobs prophecy, the scepter was gone from Judah,
could not be compared to a mountain.

2. Ambrose reading, in stead of the stone cut out of the mountain (the
mountain cut out of the mountain without hands) expounds it of the eternal
generation of Christ of the father; mons de monte sine manibus, hoc est filius
de patre sine aliquo creationis accessu, the mountain cut of the mountain
without hands, that is the son of the father without any creation, etc.
Sermon. 7. So also Justinius Martyr understands it of the eternal generation
of Christ. Dialog. cum Tryphon.
But Daniel here speaks of a kingdom to be raised up by God, it had then a
beginning: but the kingdom of Christ as he is the son of God, had no
beginning: this therefore must be understood of Christ's kingdom as he is the
Mediator both God and man.

3. Hyppolitus refers it to Christ's second coming, and that clause without
hands, signifies, secundum Christi adventum fore improvisum, that the second
coming of Christ shall be sudden, etc. so also Osiander, it signifies that
Christ the rock subito superventurum, shall come suddenly to judgment: but
this cannot be understood of Christ's second coming, as is before showed, Qu.
51. because this stone after it is cut out shall grow into a mountain, and
fill all the earth: but the knowledge of Christ shall have filled all the
earth, before his second coming.

4. But most interpreters do interpret it of the miraculous generation of
Christ of the virgin Marie: so Hierome, Theodoret, Lyran. Vatab. and without
hands, signifies, sine operatione humana, without the help of man: and the
virgin Marie is compared to a mountain, propter excellentiam virtutum, because
of the excellency of her virtue. Pintus.

5. Bullinger puts these together, understanding by the word mountain,
partim locum excelsum, etc. partly the high place of heaven, partly the people
of the Jews, because he was borne of the virgin Marie, etc.

Contra. 1. But this cannot be so applied to the virgin Marie, for she in no
sense can be said to be a mountain in respect of Christ, and he to be a small
stone in respect of her: Marie was no ways greater then her son. 2. Although
Christ was borne of Marie without the company of man, yet his natural
generation was not altogether without the help of mankind, because he was
borne of a woman: and therefore Justinius better applies these words to Christ's
eternal generation, which was altogether without hands: it was non humanum
opus, sed diuinae voluntatis propositum, no humane work, but the decree and
purpose of the divine will. 3. The words are not as they are usually read, cut
out without hands, but cut out of the mountain (which is not in hands) that
is, which stone is not at all guided or framed with hands: that is, Christ's
kingdom and government is not administered by any humane policy: this is then
to be understood, not of the manner of Christ's birth, but of the administration
of his kingdom.

6. Wherefore the meaning is, he was cut out of the mountain, that is, e
coelis, and loco Dei altissimi, he was sent from heaven, from the place of the
highest, Iun. Polan. divinitus missus est, he was sent from God, Calvin. And
therefore it is here said, the God of heaven shall set him up. Our blessed
Savior also to the same purpose says, Ioh. 3. 13. No man has ascended to
heaven, but he which descended from heaven, the son of man, which is in
heaven.

63. Quest. In what sense Christ is compared to a little stone, and how it
filled the earth.
1. Christ is resembled to a small stone in diverse respects. 1. in regard of
his incarnation, in taking man's nature upon him, he abased himself, and made
himself of no reputation, Philip. 2. 7.

2. His smalnes was in the opinion of the world, who made no reckoning of
Christ, but despised and contemned him, Isa. 53. 3. he is despised and rejected
of men.

3. His life was poor, without any pomp or worldly glory, he was hungry,
and thirsty, and others ministered to him of their substance, who gives unto
all abundantly.

4. He was small in respect of his small and little flock, and of that small
number which believed in him.

5. Likewise in regard of his bitter passion, and ignominious death, he seemed
to be little.

2. But yet the small stone increased, and grew into a mountain, filling the
whole earth: 1. with the preaching of the Gospel, which was published through
the world. 2. in illuminating the world with the knowledge of his truth. 3.
with the fame of his miracles, which were spoken of wheresoever the Gospel was
preached. 4. the Church of Christ increased, and replenished the whole earth.
Perer.

64. Quest. v. 46. Whether Nabuchadnezzer did well in bowing unto Daniel, and
commanding odors to be offered unto him.
v. 46. And he bowed himself unto Daniel. 1. Some think that this was a
civil adoration, as it is the use in the East country for the subjects to
adore and worship their prince: Bulling. but it is evident by the offering of
incense, that it was a divine honor which he gave unto Daniel. Polan. Papp.

2. Calvin says, quod ita se coram Daniele prostrauit, signum est pietatis,
quod Deum reueretur, in that he does thus postrate himself before Daniel, it
was a sign of his piety, that he reverenced God. But it showed superstition
rather then piety or true devotion, to ascribe divine honor unto a mortal
man, and Calvin a little after confesses, Danielem fuisse inconsiderate
cultum, that Daniel was inconsiderately worshipped.

3. The Romanists do justify this fact, that Nebuchadnezzar did no otherwise
adore Daniel, then now they worship Saints: Emman. Sa. non tam Danielem, quam
in Deo Danielem coluit, he did not so much worship Daniel, as God in Daniel,
Pintus. Contra. but to offer incense and sacrifice, as the Latin translateth,
hostias, sacrifices, is a part of divine honor, which is not to be given unto
any creature: and therefore Lyran. better answers, that the king commanded
this to be done, but it is not read, that it was done.

4. Porphyrie here obiecteth, 1. that it is not like that such a proud king
would so abase himself to worship his servant, at the least to give him divine
honor: Contra. 1. it is no marvel that the king being ravished with
admiration of Daniels great wisdom, did thus humble himself before him. 2.
and for the rest the Scripture, as Hierome says, simpliciter refert quae gesta
sunt: does use simply and nakedly to rehearse the things as they were done, not
giving any censure of them: as Act. 14. the men of Lystra offered divine honor
unto Paul and Barnabas, calling the one Jupiter, the other Mercury, the like
Nebuchadnezzar does here.

Quest. 65. Whether Daniel refused this worship offered unto him.
1. They which think that Nebuchadnezzar adored Daniel as the servant of the
most high God, as now the Romanists worship Saints, as Emmanuel Sa. cannot but
think that Daniel might accept this religious adoration yielded unto him: But
neither is any religious adoration to be given unto Saints: as the Angel
refusing to be adored of John, bid him worship God, Apocal. 22. 9. and beside
to offer incense and sacrifice is a part of divine worship due only unto God:
and therefore David says: let my prayer be directed in thy sight as incense,
and the lifting up of my hands, as an evening sacrifice, Psalm. 141. 2. it had
been sacrilege then, as in the one to offer any part of divine worship, so in
the other to accept it.

2. Calvin seems to incline, that this might be some error and corruption in
Daniel, which he had learned in the kings Court, in passing it over in silence,
and suffering this to be done: neque tanti esse debet nobis hominis defensio
licet perfectissimi, neither need we so much to stand upon the defense of any
though the most perfect man, etc. so also Geneuens. Daniel herein erred if he
suffered it: they speak doubtfully, yet both do thin^ it more credible, that
Daniel did not accept of this honor, but admonished the king: But in this
matter there is no doubt at all: for it is certain, that Daniel so holy a man,
and so jealous of Gods honor, would never have endured any part of Gods honor
to be diminished.

3. Hierome whereas Porphyrie objected, and took exception against this book,
because Daniel refused not this divine honor exhibited unto him, makes this
answer, that all this was Gods work, the sending of that dream, and the
interpretation thereof, vt Daniel inde cresceret, etc. and omnipotentia Dei
nosceretur, that Daniel by this means might increase in honor for the comfort
of Gods people, and that Gods omnipotency might be known: So likewise
Theoderet here has recourse unto Gods wonderful providence. But all this
being admitted, that herein Gods providence is evidently seen: yet thereby
Daniel cannot be excused if he should have arrogated any divine honor to
himself.

4. Pelican thinks that these sacrifices were not offered to Daniel, but unto
God: because the king says, I know of a truth, that your God, is a God of
gods: for Daniel anteverterat regem, etc. Daniel had prevented the king before,
verse. 30. that he could not do this by his own wisdom: but God only was
the reuealer of secrets: Contra. It is evident by the text, verse. 46. that the
king commanded that these things should be offered unto Daniel, yet as Lyranus
thinks, though the king commanded it to be done, Daniel impediuit fires,
Daniel hindered it to be done.

5. Wherefore the truth is, that Daniel utterly refused these divine honors,
though it be omitted, breuitatis causa, for brevity sake: Osiand. And thus it
may be showed. 1. Because such was Daniels piety, that if he refused to be
defiled with the kings meat, much less would he have endured such gross
superstition. 2. It is said the king answered unto Daniel, verse. 47. it seemed
then that Daniel used some interlocutorie speech, though it be not expressed,
reclaiming Nebuchadnezzar from these errors. 3. This is evident also by that
singular confession which Nebuchadnezzar made of God, that he was otherwise
instructed by Daniel. Iun. Polan. Pappus. 4. This further is proved, for that
Daniel afterward would not intermit the service of God, and invocation of his
name, though it were with peril and danger of his life. cap. 6. Bulling. 5.
Likewise Daniels behavior here may be measured by the like in other the Saints
and servants of God: as Peter would not suffer Cornelius to lie at his feet,
Act. 10. nor Paul and Barnabas the men of Lystra to sacrifice unto them, Act.
14. nor the Angel, the Evangelist John to worship him, Apocal. 22. Bullinger.
6. Pererius affirms as much, that Daniel refused these sacrifices; because
afterward the Lord did so greatly honor him, and reward his faithfulness with
working miracles for his delirance, and revealing unto him many secrets and
mysteries in vision.

Quest. 66. verse. 47. Of Nebuchadnezzars ample and large confession of God.
Nebuchadnezzar being stricken with admiration of Daniels great wisdom in
revealing of his dream, breaks out into a notable confession of Daniels God,
being so taught by Daniel to give all the honor unto God. 1. He acknowledges
the God of Israel to be the God of gods, not of Angels, or of Princes, who are
called gods: but he means the gods of the heathen; above whom he extolleth
the true God: Pere. Iunius thinks it is a phrase of speech, signifying God to
be the supreme God, as before he called Nebuchadnezzar king of kings, ver. 37.
but it signifies more, cogit in ordinem ipsum Belum, and totam illam faecem
falsorum deorum, he brings into order Bell himself, and that filthy rabble
of the false gods. Polan.

2. As by nature he confesses the Lord to be the true God, so for his power
and authority he says, he is the Lord of kings, whereby he subiecteth his
kingdom and Dominions to the power of God.

3. He says he is the reuealer of secrets, thereby acknowledging him to be the
true God, who only has the knowledge of things to come.

Quest. 67. Whether Nebuchadnezzar had the true knowledge of God.
1. Bullinger thinks, that Nebuchadnezzar thus confessing was vera fide
imbutus in Deum, endued with a true faith toward God, though afterward he set
up an idol: for S. Peter after Christ had commended him for his confession of
him, yet deserved to be called Satan for his carnal counsel given unto
Christ, which yet proceeded from a good intention, as might Nebuchadnezzars
setting up of an idol.

Contra. 1. It is not possible that any endued with a right and true faith,
should commit idolatry, which is indeed a denial of the faith: the Apostle
says, Galath. 4. 8. even then when ye knew not God, ye did service unto
them, which by nature are no gods, while men then are idolaters they have not
the right knowledge of God. 2. there is great difference between sins of
infirmity, which even the faithful are subject unto as Peter was, and open
apostasy, and idolatry.

2. Wherefore I rather condescend to Caluins judgment; hoc fuit momentaneum,
etc. that this was but a momentanie and sudden affection in Nebuchadnezzar, as
was that also in Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 27. Geneuens. for there is a twofold
knowledge of God, momentanea, a knowledge for a moment, such as profane men may
have, which are stricken with some sudden admiration, as Nebuchadnezzar here,
and there is stabilis cognitio, a stable and permanent knowledge, such as is
only in the elect, Polan. And this is an evident argument that the king was
not wholly converted to the knowledge and worship of the God of Israel; alias
non erexisset idolum, for otherwise he would not have set up the golden idol.
Osiand.

Quest. 68. Whether Daniel did well in accepting of the gifts and honors,
which the king bestowed on him.
1. Porphyrie also obiecteth this as a fault in Daniel, because he received of
the king these gifts and preferments: But Daniel did accept them, not of any
ambitious, and covetous mind, sed in captiuorum consolationem, but for the
comfort of the captives: so Joseph was honored of Pharaoh, and Mordecai of
Assuerus. gloss. ordi.

2. It must be considered, that some men may lawfully accept of gifts and
honors, using them to the common good of Christ's Church, namely such as are
thereunto called: and some may commendably refuse them as Eliseus did Namaans
gifts, least he might have been thought to have sold the gift of healing.
Polan.

3. Further, though it be not lawful, aliquid ex part accipere pro
spiritualibus, to receive any thing by way of compact or composition for
spiritual things, yet he which ministers spiritual things, may receive
temporal gifts by way of recompense, as Daniel here does of the king. Lyran.

4. Neither are the gifts so much here to be weighed, as animus suscipienti^
the mind of the receiver: Pelican: who intended herein not his own private
commodity, but the common good of his brethren.

Quest. 69. Whether Daniel with a good conscience could be set over the wise
men and soothsayers of Babylon.
1. In three things was Daniel rewarded of the king: with gifts, with civil
authority, being appointed chief governor over the province of Babel, and
with ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the schools of the wise men, Iun. as it
were their Superintendent. Osiand.

2. In this office of his superintendentship, 1. such laudable sciences as
might safely be learned, he promoted and furthered. 2. such corruption and
superstitions, as were practiced among them, he corrected and reformed. 3. but
such abuses, as could not be taken away, he for his own part forbeared and
kept himself free from. Iun.

3. Calvin thinks, quod repudiauit hunc honorem, he refused this honor, in
cap. 5. ver. 10. but this would have been evil taken of the king: it is more
like that he used the place with such moderation, as is before showed.

Quest. 70. How Daniel is said to have sat in the kings gate.
1. Some give this sense, that Daniel sat in the gate, vt ius diceret, etc. to
give judgment; because they used to that end to sit in the gate, Vatab. Pint.
But the other three also were made governors over the Province of Babel, to
whose office it belonged to give judgment: this then was rather some
particular dignity, which Daniel had.

2. Some expound it, that he was, a latere regis non recedens, one that
departed not from the king, but was always at hand: gloss. interlin. and thus
Daniel did, least in his absence some might bring him out of the kings favor:
Lyran. But yet this had been no peculiar thing to Daniel, for there were many
beside, which were near the king.

3. Some think, that this is expressed to show a difference between Daniels
office, and the other three; that they were employed abroad in their places of
government, and Daniel stayed still in the Court: Bulling. but this had been
no special prerogative more then other of the kings Court had.

4. Some so take it, that Daniel only of these four was advanced to the
office of government, and the other three were made ourseers of men's labors
and task, ex Lyran. But this had been no such place of authority, for Daniel
to make request for unto the king.

5. Calvin thinks that Daniel had such an office in the Court, that no man
could enter into the kings palace, sine eius permissu, without his leave: but
that was the porters office to keep out strangers from entering into the kings
Court or Palace.

6. Therefore this rather is the meaning, admissionis ius ad regem Danieli
commissum, that the power of admitting men unto the kings presence was
committed unto Daniel: for it was* not for every one to come into the kings
presence, but for certain of the chief nobles thereunto appointed of the
king. Iun. Polan. Genevens.

Quest. 71. Whether it be lawful for a Christian to live in an idolatrous
kings Court.
1. It may appear by the examples of Joseph, who lived in Pharaohs Court, and
of Mardocheus, who was near unto king Assuerus: and by Daniel here, that it is
not unlawful to bear office in foreign Princes Courts: but two things must
advisedly be considered, and thought upon: 1. that they do not propound unto
themselves such places of honor for their own advantage, but to seek the
welfare of the people of God, as Daniel here does. 2. that they defile not
themselves with the superstitious and idolatrous vsages in such places, as
these three in the next chapter, being chief officers, yet refused to worship
the kings golden image.

2. And as it is lawful to enjoy such places of honor, so it is not
inconvenient for kings to set sometime strangers in place of government, such
as for their wisdom and piety, are fit: but not to that end, to make a pray
of such places of government.

4. Places of doctrine.
1. Doct. That God only has the knowledge of things to come.
Verse. 11. There is none that can declare it except the gods: Hierome hence
infers, that even in the opinion of the wisemen and Soothsayers of Babylon,
none has the knowledge of things to come, but only God, by the which it is
evident, that the Prophets foretelling things to come spoke by the spirit of
God, Bulling. By this argument the Prophet shows the vanity of the Idols of
the heathen, and conuinceth them to be no gods, Isay, 41. 23. show the things
that are to come hereafter, that we may know, that ye are gods.

2. Doct. Of the immortality of the soul.
Verse. 4. O King live for ever: These heathen men void of the true knowledge
of God, in wishing eternal life unto the king, do show their opinion of the
immortality of the soul: which shall further be proved, 1. by the testimony
of Scripture. 2. by the demonstration of reason. 3. and by the evidence of
foreign and heathen witnesses.

1. The Scripture plentifully testifies, that the soul lives after it is
separated from the body: as in that the Lord calls himself, the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Iaacob, long after their death, Exodus 3. 6. whereupon our
Savior infers, that he is not God of the dead, but of the living: So Elias
prayed unto God to have his hostesses child restored to life in these words, I
pray thee let this child's soul return unto him again, 1. King 17. 22. his
soul then was alive, for otherwise it could not return to his body. Solomon
says that the spirit returns to God that gave it, Eccle. 12. 7. In the
parable Luke 16. the soul of Lazarus was carried by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom.

2. 1. Seeing God is most just, and will recompense every man according to his
life, the righteous shall have reward, and the wicked punishment, which is not
always seen in this life, it must needs be, that God should execute his
justice in another life. 2. Seeing virtue, which is in the mind is immortal;
the subject also thereof, the soul must also needs be immortal. 3. And the
soul being not subject to corruption, is consequently immortal: for that
which is incorruptible is immortal. 4. All things have a place of rest, as the
center is unto bodies: the soul is restless in the body, and never is at
quiet; if then it should not have a place of rest elsewhere, it should be more
miserable then any other creature. 5. And how could the soul think of things
immortal or desire them, if it were not it self immortal.

3. By these reasons, and such like the heathen being persuaded, believed the
immortality of the soul: as Antiochus in his epistle to Lysias, that
begins, Since our father is translated to the gods, etc. 2. Macchab. 11. 23.
In the funerals of such Roman Emperors as had deserved well of the
commonwealth, they used to set an eagle, and to put fire under, which the eagle
feeling soared aloft: whereby was signified, that the soul or spirit ascended
up into heaven: Herodian, Pythagoras, and Thales Milesius, were strong
maintainers of the immortality of the soul, likewise Plutarkain epistol.
consola. and Seneca, lib. de morte immatura. Euripides held coelos esse aeterna
animarum domicilia, that the heavens, are the eternal houses of the souls.
Many such like testimonies and examples might be brought from the heathen to
this purpose.

3. Doctrine. Of the vanity of Soothsayers.
Verse. 4. Show thy servants the dream, and we shall show thee the
interpretntion. These foolish Soothsayers promise much unto the king, but they
were able to perform nothing: for afterward cap. 4. when the king told them
his dream, they could say nothing: so they are liberales in verbis, etc.
liberal in words, but they can not perform that which they promise: It is
evident then, that there is no art or certain rule to interpret dreams, or to
conjecture of things to come; but it is an extraordinary gift, that comes
from God. Po. So the Lord says by his Prophet: Isay 44. 25. I destroy the
takens of the Soothsayers, and make them that conjecture fools. etc.

4. Doctrine. Of the mutabilitie of Princes favors.
Verse. 12. He commanded to destroy all the wisemen of Babel. Nebuchadnezzar who
had before highly rewarded the wisemen, and greatly favored them, now in his
rage, without any just cause, commands them to be slain: such small
certainty there is in the favor of Princes. David at his first entertainment
was in Saul's favor, but not long after he hated him as much, wen he returned
from the slaughter of Goliath. Joseph at the first was much favored of
Potiphar, but upon the false suggestion of his wife, he soon cast him out of
his favor. Alexander the great made great account of his friends Parmenio,
Philotas, Clitus, Calisthenes, but in the end he so hated them, as that he
would never be reconciled unto them, but killed them: therefore the Prophet
David says, it is better to trust in the Lord, then to have any confidence in
princes: Pintus.

5. Doct. The sentence of death ought not hastily to be executed.
Verse. 15. Daniel said, why is the sentence so hasty from the king? Daniel
finds fault with the hasty execution of the kings sentence; showing that in
such cases long deliberation should be used, and great aduisement taken: This
was the error of Theodosius the Elder, who when one of his governors was
slain in a commotion at Thessolonica, commanded a great number of the people
to be put to the sword: for which his bloody fact he was excommunicated of that
courageous and religious Bishop S. Ambrose: Theodoret lib. 5. Tripart. 9. Polan.

6. Doctrine. Of Gods providence.
Verse. 21. He changes the times and seasons: This is an evident place to show
that things are not governed by chance in the world, but ruled by Gods
providence: Meminerimus in tot mutationibus, etc. fulgere Dei prouidentiam,
etc. let us remember that Gods providence shines in so many mutations and
changes in the world, etc. Calvin. If things that seem so uncertain, as times
and seasons, the change of weather, the variable disposition of the air, be
yet directed by Gods providence, then all other things must depend of the same
cause. This alteration cannot be altogether ascribed to nature, for natural
causes work certainly and orderly, and to chance much less, for that were
to take God out of the world, as either he were careless thereof, or impotent,
as not being able to guide it, but leaves it to chance: But the Prophet
shows that all creatures do wait and depend upon God. Psalm. 104. 27.

7. Doct. Of the mutable state of kingdoms.
Verse. 22. He takes away kings, he sets up kings, etc. The state then and
condition of kings, though it seem to be least subject to change of all other
callings, unto men, yet God, the king of kings, can turn and wind them at his
pleasure, the preacher says, that out of prison (one) comes to reign, when
he that is borne in his kingdom is made poor: Thus Balthazar, Cyrus,
Alexander, Caesar, Pompey, soon lost both their kingdoms and lives: Pere. And
as these ancient kings and kingdoms were soon ouerturned: so it is still:
Anno 1523. Christierne king of Denmark, with Isabel his wife sister, to
Charles the fifth, was driven out of his kingdom and realm, and died in
prison, when he had lived 27. years in captivity. Anno 1567. John Duke of
Saxony, was deprived of his dukedom, and carried captive to Maximilian the
Emperor. Anno 1568. Ericus king of Suetia the son of Gostavus, was deposed
from his kingdom, and died in prison.

And as God pulls down kings, so he sets other up: Matthias Hunniades was
taken out of prison to be a king: So was Elizabeth, our Late renouned
Sovereign, succeeding her sister Marie: Anno 1577. Ioannes king of Suecia, was
from the prison advanced to be king: Polan.

8. Doct. A good King has many careful thoughts of his kingdom and
commonwealth.
Verse. 29. O King, when thou wast in thy bed, thoughts came into thy mind:
This great king even in the night thought of his kingdom, what should befall
it after his days: even the care thereof made him he could not sleep.
Bulling. he was not addicted altogether to his ease and pleasure: as Balthazar,
who the same night that the city was taken gave himself to eating and
drinking, Dan. 5. Like unto this Nabuchadnezzar, was the great king of Persia
Assuerus, who when he could not sleep, caused the Chronicles to be read unto
him, Ester 6. 1.

9. Doct. Of the kingdom of Christ, as he is God, and as he is Mediator, God
and man.
v. 44. The God of heaven shall set up a kingdom. The kingdom of Christ, is
either his natural kingdom, which he had from all beginning together with the
Father and the holy Ghost, which is called the universal kingdom whereby he
rules in heaven and earth: which kingdom as he assumed not, so he shall never
lay it down.

There is also regnum donativum, the kingdom which is given to him of his
Father, as he is Mediator, God and man: whereof he speaks, Matthew. 28. 18.
All power is given unto me is heaven and earth: this is that special and
particular kingdom, which he exercises more specially in his Church, in
protecting and defending the same against all the enemies and adversaries
thereof.

This kingdom given unto Christ, is likewise considered two ways, it is
either the kingdom of grace, whereby he guides his Church in this world,
directing them unto everlasting salvation; or the kingdom of glory in the
next life, when he has brought his Church and company of the Elect unto
everlasting salvation in heaven, there to reign for ever: Polan.

10. Doct. Daniels prophecy of Christ's everlasting kingdom, contains the
whole sum of the Gospel.
v. 44. A kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, etc. This everlasting
kingdom of Christ, resting not in his person alone, but being communicated to
all his members, comprehends the whole sum of Evangelical doctrine: for
the Elect cannot reign for ever with Christ, but death must first be
destroyed, and sin the cause thereof: the bodies also of the Saints must rise
again from death: so then in this prophecy of Christ's euer-during kingdom,
is included the faith of remission of sins, of the conquest of death, and of
the resurrection. Bulling. Melancth.

11. Doct. Of the certentie of our salvation.
v. 44. And it, shall stand for ever. As Christ's kingdom is sure and cannot be
shaken in himself, so neither can it have any alteration or change in his
members: Christus tam in se, quam in suis membris citra vllum mutationis
periculum dominatur, Christ as well in himself, as in his members does rule
without any fear or danger of change, Calv. for he has made us partakers of
his kingdom by faith, by which we stand: for he by his grace is able to make
us stand: of our selves by nature we are changeable every moment, but by the
power and grace of God, our state in Christ is certain and unchangeable, as S.
Peter says, We are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation,
which is prepared to be showed in the last time, 1. Pet. 1. 5.

12. Doct. Religion overthrows not the policy and form of Commonwealths.
v. 48. He made him governor over the whole province of Babel. Daniel being
made a chief governor in Chaldea, did (no doubt) judge the people according
to the laws of the country, which differed much from the political state of
the Israelites: by the which it is evident, that necessarily every country is
not now tied to the judicials and policy of Moses; neither is religion an
enemy to the form of government in Commonwealths, being grounded upon
equity: Papp. for the Apostle says, The powers that be, are ordained of God,
Romans 13. 1. wheresoever, and howsoever, the administration and government
being just and equal.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. That the Scriptures should be extant in the vulgar and known
tongue.
v. 4. Then spoke the Chaldeans to the King in the Aramites language. This
tongue not much differing then from the Chalde, was the known and usual
language wherein they spoke that they might be understood of all. Afterward the
Greek tongue was generally used: and therefore Ptolome. caused the Scriptures
to be translated into the Greek tongue, and the Apostles writ the new
Testament in the same language. This evidently shows, that the Scriptures
should be set forth to the people of God, in such a tongue as they know and
understand: and hereupon Justinian appointed, I^stinian constitut No^. il. 123.
that Bishops and other Ministers should use such a tongue in the
administration of baptism, and of the Lords Supper, which was known and
understood of all. The Romanists then are too blame, which cause the Scriptures
to be read publicly in an unknown tongue: and though upon better aduisement,
they have thought good to set forth a vulgar translation of the Bible, yet they
allow not privately every one to use it:

2. Controv. That prayer must only be made unto God.
v. 18. That they should beseech the God of heaven. God only then must be
prayed unto, who is called the God of heaven, because he is the creator
thereof, that is the seat and habitation of his glory, from thence he sees
all things, and reuealeth secrets, and from heaven he sends all good things.
Angels and Saints have no such title, they are not gods of heaven: they neither
create it, nor can they from thence reveal secrets, or send down heavenly
graces: therefore they are not to be inuocated, or called upon. Polan. Bulling.

3. Controv. That prayer is not meritorious, but grounded only upon Gods
mercy.
v. 18. For grace (or mercy) in this secret. All our prayers then must lay
their foundation in Gods mercy, that he would first forgive us our sins, and
then freely and graciously confer upon us such things, as we ask: Polan,
then the servants of God do not place any merit or worthiness in their prayers,
Bulling. which is the opinion of the Romanists, that the prayers of the Saints
are meritorious: for first our prayers tend altogether unto our good, God
receives nothing thereby: as Job. 33. 11. Elihu says, If thou be righteous,
what give thou unto him. or what receives he at thine hand? there can not be
any desert, where he is not benefited or furthered, at whose hands we should
deserve. Again, that which should merit at Gods hand, must be perfect and
absolute: but in our prayers there are many wants and imperfections, Romans 8.
26. We know not what to pray as we ought.

4. Controv. That matrimony is no sacrament.
v. 18. Whereas the word raza is by the Septuag. here translated (...), a
mystery or secret, and so also read P. A. V. I. with others, the Latin
translateth, a sacrament: and yet in the next v. he retains the word
mystery: whereupon it is evident, that in the vulgar Latin translation, the
word sacrament is diversely taken, not always for the sacraments of the church
properly so called: but for any mystical or secret thing: as here the
interpretation of this dream, which Daniel prays for, he calls a
sacrament, that is, a secret or mystery. Therefore it is but a weak
collection of the Rhemists, and of other Romanists, upon the Latin text, which
reads Ephesians. 5. 32. This is a great sacrament, to infer thereupon, that
marriage is a sacrament: for they might as well conclude here, that this Image
which Nabuchadnezzer saw in his dream was a sacrament.

5. Controv. That the Saints merit not.
v. 23. O thou God of my fathers, etc. Pintus hereupon gives, this note, that
Daniel in his thanksgiving makes mention of his fathers, Abraham, Izaak, and
Iaakob, that he should not seem to attribute this thing only to himself,
which he obtained of God, sed potius illorum insignium virorum meritis and
institiae, but rather to the merits and justice of those excellent men, etc.

Contra. Whereas Daniel makes mention of his fathers, he does it not, as
relying upon their worthiness or merits: for he groundeth his prayers only upon
Gods grace and mercy, v. 18. but for these two causes: 1. he remembers the
promise and covenant, which God had made to and with their fathers, to be their
God, and the God of their seed: which promise the Lord graciously performed
now, in granting Daniel his request, Polan. 2. because they were worshippers of
the true God, hereby he excludes all false gods, whom they worshipped not.
Genevens.

6. Controv. v. 21. That the Pope has no power committed unto him to put down
Kings.
v. 21. He takes away Kings. This being here by Daniel ascribed unto God, as
his peculiar work, to remove Kings from their thrones, and to plant others in
their place, the arrogancy of the proud Bishop of Rome is made manifest to all
the world, who takes upon him Gods office, to depose and set up kings at his
pleasure: Polan. As Platina writes of Gregory, that he uttered these
presumptuous words, Nos, nos imperia, regna, principatus, and quicquid habere
mortales possunt, auferre and dare posse, etc. That we, (even) we have power to
take away, and give Empires, Kingdoms, principalities, and whatsoever mortal
men have. Thus Julius 2. gave the kingdom of Navarre to the Spanish king,
because he took part with Jews the 12. king of France: likewise the Bishop of
Rome stirring up Matthias king of Hungary against the Hussites of Bohemia,
(...) 33. p. 258.
promised him, quicquid Boemiae, etiamsi totum regnum caperet, suae fore
ditionis, that whatsoever in Bohemia, though it were the kingdom, should
belong unto him.

This shows the presumptuous insolency of that proud Sea, to challenge that
right and power, which belongs only unto God: 1. Kings only are to be
deposed by him, from whom they receive their power, and authority: but that
they have from God, as the Apostle says, Romans 13. 1.
The powers that be, are ordained of God, not of the Pope; therefore by him
they are not to be deposed. 2. The Pope himself is subject to the Emperor, as
the same Apostle says, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: he
therefore has no superiority over them.

7. Contr. That the Pope can not be Christ's Vicar general in earth.
v. 44. The God of heaven shall set up a kingdom. This kingdom of Christ is
no visible, but a spiritual and universal kingdom thorough the world:
wherein though he use Ministers, as Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Doctors, to
reconcile men unto himself by the preaching of the Gospel, yet Vicar general
he has none.

1. The embassage which Christ has committed to his Ministers in his stead, is
to reconcile men by the preaching of the word, as the Apostle says, We are
Ambassadors for Christ, etc. we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto
God. But the Pope can not in Christ's stead reconcile men unto Christ: but this
is the duty of several Pastors and Ministers, who are in Christ's stead, and
as his vicars to beget men unto the faith: Polan. one man alone, unless he
were of infinite power, can not suffice to execute this embassage of
reconciliation through the Church.

2. Christ's kingdom is eternal, the kingdom of the Pope is temporal, he
therefore can not be Christ's Vicar in his eternal kingdom: Osiander.

3. Christ's kingdom is spiritual, the Popes is external: he therefore can
not be Christ's Vicar in his spiritual kingdom.

8. Controv. That the time of Christ's coming to judgment can not be gathered
from Daniels prophecy, v. 44.
Some do make this conjecture, that seeing the kingdom of Christ should be
raised up toward the end of the fourth Monarchy, which they suppose to be the
Roman Empire, which is now decayed, and almost at an end, they would hence
gather, that the coming of Christ is at hand. Contra. 1. If their meaning be,
that Christ's coming is nearer at hand, then before, that is most certain: if
that a small time remains in respect of Christ's everlasting kingdom, it is
confessed: but if they would hence prove, that the coming of Christ is now
presently to be expected, because the Roman Monarchy is at an end, they are
deceived; because they build this collection upon two vncertenties: 1. this
fourth Monarchy is not the Roman Empire, but the kingdom of the Seleucians in
Syria, and of the Ptolomies in Egypt, as has been proved at large before,
qu. 49, 50. 2. the kingdom of Christ here prophesied of, is not his second,
but his first coming, as has bin also before showed, q. 55.

9. Controv. v. 45. Whether the virgin Marie be the mountain out of the which
the stone was cut.
Pererius applies this to the virgin Marie, 1. because it is not unusual in
Scripture to express the generation of man by this phrase: as Isa. 51. 1.
Look unto the rock, whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit, whence
ye were dug, etc. 2. And she is compared to a mountain, propter
excellentiam virtutum, because of the excellency of her virtues: cuius
fundamenta super culmina sanctorum locata sunt, etc. whose foundations are
placed upon the top and height of the Saints. 3. he applies unto the virgin
Marie those places in the Psalms: as Psalm. 68. 15. The mountain of God is a
fat mountain, etc. God delights to dwell in it, yea the Lord will dwell in
it for ever: and, Ps. 87. 1. His foundation is among the hills.

Contra. 1. The Prophet in that place by the rock understands Abraham, and
by the hole of the pit Sarah, as it follows in the next verse, Consider
Abraham your father, and Sarah that bare you: but Christ had no father, out of
whose loins he should be taken forth, and as it were cut out: therefore this
phrase of speech nothing helps his conceit of the virgin Marie.

2. The question is not, how Marie may be said to be a mountain in respect of
other Saints (and yet it may be doubted of, whether Marie do so far excel
in virtue all the Saints, that ever lived) but the doubt is, whether Marie can
be said to be a mountain in comparison of Christ, who is the stone cut out of
this mountain: to make Marie the mountain, and Christ the little stone cut
out thence, is a presumptuous comparison: for so Marie should be greater then
Christ.

3. It is evident, that the Psalmist speaks there of the hilly country of
Canaan, and specially of mount Sion, where the Lord had made choice to make his
habitation: and so, Psalm. 87. he expounds himself in the second verse, The
Lord loves the gates of Zion above all the habitations of Iaakob: glorious
things are spoken of the city of God, etc. Wherefore it is a fond exposition,
to appropriate that to Marie, which is spoken of the whole Church of God:
neither can they show how Marie, being a mortal woman, could be the
habitation of God for ever.

4. This mountain then is not understood of Marie. 1. she can not be likened
to a mountain, and Christ to a little stone, as greater then he. 2. this stone
is cut out without hands, that is, without any humane help at all: but in the
incarnation of Christ, woman was an instrument, though not man, therefore it
was not without hands. 3. Marie does make her self of low degree, Luke 1. 52.
she was then more like a valley then a mountain: see more of the true meaning
of this place before, qu. 54.

10. Controv. Whether Christ verily increased in the gifts and graces of his
soul.
Pererius handling this point how Christ, compared here unto a stone, which
grew into a mountain, and filled the earth, increased; affirms that in
respect of the graces of his soul he increased not, quam inde ab exordio sui
conceptus tantam habuit, quam iam nunc habet, etc. which he had as great from
the beginning of his conception, as now he has it.

Contra. Though we also agree, that this growing and increasing of Christ, is
not meant of his personal growing in respect of his body or soul in the
days of his incarnation, but of the growth of his Church in the world; yet
Pererius assertion is false: for the Scripture is evident, that Christ
increased in the gifts and faculties of the soul, as he did in stature of
body: Luke 2. 52. Jesus increased in wisdom and stature. As it pleased him to
take upon him an infants statute and body, which still increased, so also he
increased in wisdom, and other graces of the soul: see more hereof, Synops.
Controv. 5. err. 2.

11. Controv. That the Pope is not to be reverenced, honored, and worshipped
through the world.
Pererius in the same place showing how Christ has filled the earth, not only
with the knowledge of himself, preaching of the Gospel, fame of his miracles,
but also with the worshipping and reuerencing of his name, adds further, and
of that man, who is his Vicar, the high Bishop, quem vniuersus Christianus
Catholicus orbis honorat, colit, veneratur, etc. whom the universal Christian
Catholic Church does honor, worship, reverence: and his answers and decrees
receives with no less reverence, then the divine oracles, etc.

Contra. 1. It is a frivolous application, to expound that of the fame of a
mortal man, whose kingdom is transitory and temporal, which is understood
of Christ, whose kingdom shall stand for ever.

2. If the Pope be to be honored no otherwise then Christ's Vicar, then he must
not be honored at all: for Christ's Vicar he neither is, nor can be, as is
before showed, Controv. 7.

3. Neither is it true, that the universal Catholic Church does so honor, and
reverence him: for neither the Greek Church does give him such honor, and
well-nie the third part of Christendom does hold him to be Antichrist: he is
in deed honored of the Roman Church, but that is not the Catholic Church:
for a particular, and universal Church, which is signified in the word
Catholic, are diverse. The Pope if he were a good Bishop, which now were a
miracle in that seat of pestilence, should be reverenced, as other good Bishops
are, but not as having any superiority above the rest.

4. But to receive his decrees, as the oracles of God, as holding them to be
equal thereunto, unto, is an horrible blasphemy: to equalize the corrupt and
erring decrees of ignorant, profane, erroneous, if not heretical Popes, to
the most sacred rule of truth.

12. Controv. That it can not be proved out of Daniels prophecy, that the
Pope is not Antichrist.
v. 44. It shall break and destroy all these kingdoms. Bellarmine taking it
for granted that the fourth kingdom here mentioned is the Roman Empire,
which must be dissolved before Antichrist shall come, as S. Paul shows, 2.
Thessal. 2. 7. Only he which now withholdeth, (shall let) till he be taken out
of the way: but the Roman Empire is not yet dissouled: for the Emperors of
the West do still remain one succeeding an other: therefore Antichrist is not
yet revealed to the world: to this purpose Bellar. l. 3. de Romans Pont. c. 5.

Contra. 1. Bellarmine takes that for granted, which is denied; as that the
Roman Empire is the fourth kingdom, which is proved to be otherwise before,
qu. 49. For seeing this kingdom is understood of the first coming of Christ,
(for after his second coming, his kingdom should not increase and fill the
earth, being then at the full perfection) and at Christ's coming, the Roman
Empire was in the pride and height; it can not be the fourth kingdom, which
the kingdom of Christ as soon as he comes in the flesh, shall destroy.

2. The Roman Empire is long since dissolved, both in authority, and in the
name and title: he is now called not the Emperor of Rome, but of Germany:
neither has he any Imperial authority save in some few cities of Germany:
over other kingdoms, which were sometime subject to the Roman Empire, he has
no jurisdiction: So that there remains now nothing but the image of the
former beast, as it is called, Apoc. 13. 14.

13. Controv. Of the lawfulnes of Magistracy against the Anabaptists.
v. 48. He made him governor over the whole province of Babel. In that Daniel
was advanced by Nabuchadnezzer to this high place of government, and he
accepted of ^t, it is evident that the calling of a Magistrate is lawful, and
that a Christian may please God in that place and function: which further
appears against the wicked opinion of the Anabaptists, which allow no
Magistracy among Christians: 1. by the author and founder of Magistrates,
which is God himself, by whom the powers that be, are ordained, Romans 13. 1.
2. by the examples of good kings and governors, as David, Iehosaphat,
Hezekiah, Josias, who were acceptable unto God by their faithful service in
those places. 3. by the end of Magistracy and government, which is for the
praise of well doers, and the punishment of the wicked, Romans 13. 3, 4. 4. by
the effects, namely obedience, which every where the Scripture commands to be
given unto Magistrates, as Romans 13. 1. 7. which were not to be yielded unto
them, if their authority and calling were not of God.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Witches and Sorcerers are not to be sought unto.
v. 2. Then the King commanded to call the Inchanters, etc. Like unto
Nabuchadnezzer here, who in this his perplexity of mind sought not unto God,
but unto Sorcerers and Inchanters, are carnal men, who when any thing befall
them in their body or goods, resort unto Wizzards, Witches, Sorcerers, and
such like. But as the king found no help at their hands, so they which take
such courses, do but weary themselves in vain: So Ahaziah that idolatrous
king of Israel, who lay sick on his bed upon an hurt, which he had by falling
through a lattice window, sent unto Beelzebub the god of Ekron, yet he found no
ease thereby, but died miserably. God, if it had pleased him, could have caused
Daniel to be sent for at the first: but this made more to Gods glory, that the
blindness and impotencie of these Chaldeans might first appear, Polan.

2. Observe. Of mutual prayer.
v. 17. Daniel showed the matter to his three companions, that they should
beseech the God of heaven, etc. Daniel though an holy man, yet trusts not to
the strength of his own prayers, but requires the help of his godly
brethren: So James when any is sick, would have the Elders sent for, that they
may pray for him, c. 5. 14. the joint prayer of many is more effectual, then
of one. And to this purpose may be applied that saying of the Preacher, Two are
better then one, etc. if two sleep together, they shall have heat, etc. Eccl.
4. 11. so the prayers of many together are the more zealous.

3. Observe. Of the efficacy of faithful prayers.
v. 19. Then was the secret revealed to Daniel. God heard the prayers of
Daniel, and his other faithful companions: for as S. James says, the prayer
of the righteous avails much, if it be fervent, c. 5. 16. so also the Prophet
David, Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord is near unto all that call upon him, yea unto
all that call upon him faithfully: he will fulfill the desires of them that
fear him: he will also hear their cry, and save them. The prayer then of the
righteous is never in vain: for either he presently attaineth his desire, or
at a more convenient time, or else a better thing: and if God sometime defer
the desire of his children, it is because the physician better knows what is
good for his patient, then himself.

4. Observe. The understanding of the Scripture is obtained by prayer.
As Daniel here by prayer had opened unto him the secret of this dream, so the
special way whereby to attain to the understanding of the Scripture is by
prayer: which should well be considered of Divines, who many times trust to
their own wit, in searching the sense of Scripture. Polan. But David besought
the Lord, saying, Psalm. 119. 17. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts,
and I will meditate in thy wondrous works.

5. Observe. We must love our enemies.
v. 24. Daniel having obtained of God the revealing of this dream, went unto
Arioch, and said unto him, Destroy not the wise men of Babel. They bare a
spiteful and envious heart against Daniel: for they would not call him with
them, when the king sent for them: and beside afterward they practiced against
his life, c. 6. ye^ Daniel does recompense them good for evil, he spares
their life, who sought for his: and seeks their welfare, who would have
rejoiced at his fall. By this example we are taught to love our enemies, to
pray for them that curse us, and to do well unto them that hate us; according
to the holy doctrine of our blessed Savior, Matthew. 5. 44.

6. Observe. Of the frail and mutable state of of the world.
v. 31. Behold a great image. The state of the kingdom of this world, is
compared to an image, and that in a dream, which shows the frailty thereof
and this image has feet part of clay, part of iron: by the mixture of clay is
signified the brittle estate of the world, wherein there is nothing firm and
permanent: Bulling. as the Apostle says, The fashion of this world goes away,
1. Cor. 7. 31. Like as the Sea sometime ebbeth, sometime flows, the Moon
increases, and decreaseth: so the world continually alters and changes.

7. Observe. The Church of God in the world is kept under by affliction.
v. 40. The fourth kingdom shall he strong as iron. It should be as iron, that
is, hard and heavy to the Church of God, which endured much under all these
four Monarchies, though some were more tolerable then other. Even the
Monarchy of the Babylonians, which in comparison of the rest was as gold, yet
was sharp enough to the people of God. The Lord would give unto his Church a
continual prosperous estate, but he sees it better for the Church to be kept
under by affliction: 1. thereby carnal security is shaken off. 2. the
servants of God are taught to put their hope and confidence in God. 2. Cor. 1.
9. 3. the cross makes us more earnestly to call upon God. 2. Cor. 1. 11. 4.
it occasioneth other also to give thanks for our deliverance. 2. Cor. 1. 11. 5.
we are purged and perfited by affliction, 1. Pet. 1. 7. 6. our affliction
tends to the consolation and comfort of others, 2. Cor. 1. 6.

8. Observe. Godly reprehension is patiently to be heard, and endured.
v. 47. The king answered unto Danial, Of a truth your God is the God of gods,
etc. Nabuchadnezzer, though Daniel had prophesied hard things unto him, of the
ruin and subversion of his kingdom; yet because he delivered the truth, he
patiently hears him: much unlike was Pharaoh with Moses, and Saul with
Samuel, for telling him of the loss of his kingdom: Nabuchadnezzer therefore
shall stand up in judgment against all such kings and Princes, which cannot
endure to hear of any thing, contrary to their pleasure and desire: Bulling.

9. Observe. Of the thankefulnes and liberality of Kings.
v. 48. So the king made Daniel a great man. Nabuchadnezzar does reward the
wisdom of Daniel with great honors and rewards: not as Ahab, who rewarded the
Prophet Micaiah with prison, and Jeroboam, who commanded the man of God to be
apprehended. Herein this king may be a mirror and example to all Princes, how
they should respect their faithful counselors; who tell them truth, and
flatter not: and in what estimation they should have godly wisdom and
learning, not to suffer such excellent gifts to be unrewarded or unregarded.
Bulling.

CHAP. III.
1. The Method and Argument.
IN this Chapter is set forth the singular example of the piety and constancy
of the three Fellows and companions of Daniel, and it con^isteth of three
parts: 1. the occasion of their trial, to v. 13. 2. their probation it self,
to v. 22. 3. the events that followed from thence, to the end of the chapter.

1. The occasion is double. 1. the fact of Nabuchadnezzer, in setting up a
golden image, with his decree adjoined thereunto, v. 8. 2. the accusation of
certain Chaldees.

1. In the first accusation is set forth, 1. Nabuchadnezzers act, in erecting
an image, which is described by the matter, preparation, and place, v. 1. 2.
Then follows a double decree, 1. to summon and call all the Nobles together,
which accordingly was done, v. 2. 3. 2. to command all to fall down, as soon
as they heard the sound of the instruments, upon pain to be cast into the
furnace, v. 4. 5. which accordingly is performed by the people, v. 7.

2. The other occasion is the accusation of the Chaldees, which contains, 1.
their salutation, and insinuation to the king, v. 9. 2. a narration of his
decree, v. 11, 12. 3. then follows the accusation it self: they are charged
with unthankfulness, and disobedience, v. 12.

2. Their probation is seen, 1. in the kings examination. 2. in their
suffering. 1. in the examination, there is 1. the kings speech, which
contains both a friendly persuasion, and a severe threatening and commination,
v. 14, 15. 2. their answer is disi^nctiue, of two parts: 1. that God it able to
deliver them. 2. though it please him not at this time to do it, yet they are
resolved not to worship his image, v. 17, 18.

2. The second part is their suffering. 1. there is the kings charge, that they
should heat the furnace seven times more, and cast them bound into it, v. 19.
2. the execution follows, v. 20.

3. The events are three. 1. their accusers are destroyed of the flames, v. 21.
2. the three servants of God are delivered from the fire: which is set forth in
3. degrees. 1. they are described walking in the furnace without hurt, and a
fourth with them, which is set forth dialogue-wise between Nabuchadnezzer and
his Nobles, v. 24, 25. 2. they are bid to come forth, v. 26. 3. the manner of
the miracle is declared, neither their bodies, hair, or garments had so much
as any smell of fire.

3. Then follows the third event, the conversion of the king with the fruits
and effects thereof: the several particulars see afterward, quest. 37.

The diverse readings.
1. Ver. Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, the height thereof was
threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in the
plain of Dura, in the province of Babel.

2. Then king Nebuchadnezzar sent to gather together, the nobles, the princes,
and the dukes, the judges, the treasures, the counselors, the officers, and
all the governors of the Provinces ( see the difference of these officers,
quest. 8) that they should come to the dedication of the image, which
Nebuchadnezzar had set up.

3. So the nobles, princes, dukes, the judges, the treasurers, the counselors,
the officers, and all the governors of the Provinces, were assembled unto the
dedicating of the image, which Nebuchadnezzar had set up: and they stood before
the image, which Nebuchadnezzar had set up.

4. Then an herald cried aloud ( with strength C.) to you be it spoken. I. L.
V. (saying or speaking. C. not be it known. G. be it commanded. B.) O people,
nations, and languages.

5. At what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, pipe, ( trumpet. G. B.)
harp, sack but, (or shawme. B.) psalteries, dulcimer, (or symphonie. I.) and
all instruments of music: ye shall fall down, and bow unto the image, A.
(worship the image. caeter.) but then the preposition (unto) is omitted) of
gold, which Nebuchadnezzar the king has set up.

6. And whosoever falls not down, and boweth, A. (worshippeth not) shall in
the same hour be cast into the mids of an hot fiery furnace, C. a furnace
of burning fire.

7. Therefore as soon as ( at that time, when. C.) all the people heard the
sound of the cornet, pipe, harp, sackebut, psalterie, and all instruments of
music, all the people, nations, and languages, fell down and bowed
themselves to the image of gold, which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

8. Hereupon at the same time came men of the Chaldeans, and grievously accused
the Jews. G. I. (cried out accusations of the Jews. C.)

9. And they spoke and said unto Nebuchadnezzar the king, O King, live for ever.

10. Thou O king have set forth I. (made. G. B.) a decree, that every man that
shall hear the sound ( voice. C.) of the cornet, pipe, harp, sackebut,
psalterie, and dulcimer, and all instruments of music, shall fall down, and
bow himself unto the golden image.

11. And whosoever falls not down, and boweth himself, shall be cast into
the mids of the hot fiery furnace.

12. There are certain Jews, whom thou have set over the business of the
province of Babel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: these men O King, have not
regarded thy decree. G. B. (put or set their heart, upon thy decree. C. have
had no respect unto thee. I. but the word teghem, is before ver. 10. taken for
a decree) neither will they worship thy gods, nor bow unto the golden image,
which thou have set up.

13. Then Nebubhadnezzar in his anger and wrath commanded, that they should
bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: then these men were brought before the
king: ( were hastily brought. L. but that word is added.)

14. And Nebuchadnezzar spoke ( answered. C.) and said unto them, of set
purpose. I. P. (better then, what disorder. G. or desolation. A. or is it true.
L. V. B. S. the word tzedah (as R. David, signifies to lie in wait to move a
question) will not you worship my gods, nor bow. A. P. (worship caeter.) unto
the image of gold, which I have set up?

15. Now, if ye be ready, I. L. V. (be ready. B. are ye ready. G. behold ye
are ready. A. but cheen here must signify (if) as appears by the other
clause of the verse, if ye worship not, etc.) that when ye hear the sound of
cornet, pipe, harp, sackbut, psalterie, and dulcimer ( or symphonie) ye fall
down and bow unto the image, which I have made, it is well: (this must be
added to make the sense full) But if ye will not bow down, in the same hour
shall ye be cast into the mids of an hot fiery furnace: for who is that
God, that can deliver you out of my hands?

16. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered, and said unto the king, O
Nebuchadnezzer, we are not careful, I. V. A. (it behooves not us. L. P. the
word cashach, signifies both, but it is here most proper in the first sense,
as R. David, and R. Shelemoh here take it) to answer thee in this matter.

17. Either it will be, our God whom we worship, being able to deliver us out
of the hot fiery furnace, and out of thine hand, O King, will deliver us:
(better, then, behold our God etc. is able to deliver us out of the furnace,
and to deliver us out of thine hand, L. for the latter word is in the future
tense (will deliver) or then, he will deliver us, G. B. for they were not
assured of present deliverance, as appears in the next verse, (but if not)
or, whether God be able to deliver us, V. or not, V. for this had been to
doubt of Gods power: if it will be (Polan. that is, that we be cast into the
furnace: but this must be referred to their deliverance, as the other opposite
part is, (but if not) we resolve then upon the first interpretation: the word
is, is divided by the distinction (rebia,) from the sentence following, and so
cannot be joined with (God.)

18. Either it will not: yet be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not
worship thy gods, nor bow unto the golden image, which thou have set up.

19. Then was Nebuchadnezzer filled with rage, and the form of his visage, G.
(the image of his face, C. I. the countenance of his face. B.) was changed
upon, B. L. (or against. V. G. I.) Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: and he
answering gave charge, C. I. (charged and commanded, G. B. commanded, L.) that
they should heat the furnace at once seven times more, then it was wont (
seemed good, C.) to be heat.

20. And to the most valiant men of strength, which were in his army, he gave
charge to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, to cast them into the hot
fiery furnace.

21. So these men were bound in their coats ( breaches. L.) their bonets. L.
(their hosen. V. I. G. B.) and their cloakes. G. I. (their shoes. L. bonets.
V. B.) with their other garments, and cast into the midst of the hot fiery
furnace: ( see the diverse readings. quest. 25. following.)

22. Therefore because the kings word was strait (or urgent. C.) that the
furnace should be exceeding hoate, the flame ( sparks. I. A.) of the fire slew
those men, which had put in. B. thrust in. I. or sent in. L. not brought forth.
G. V. the word properly signifies to cause to ascend: they had brought them up
to cast them down into the furnace. Pel.) Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

23. And these three men Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down into the
mids of the hot fiery furnace, bound.

24. Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonished, and rose up in have (with a
troubled mind, or being perplexed. I. the word ( behal) signifies both have
and perplexity, but the first rather, both because his perplexity is
expressed in the former word, and the preposition (^eth) more properly
signifies (in) then (with) and spoke and said unto his counselors (or
governors. I. or nobles. I. V.) Did we not cast three men bound into the midst
of the fire: who answered and said to the king, True O king. ( truly O King.
L. V.)

25. He answered, and said, Lo I see four men loose, walking in the mids of
the fire, and they have no hurt ( no corruption. C.) and the form of the
fourth is like the Son of God. L. I. B. G. (of the gods. C. V.)

26. Then the king Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth. G. B. (the door. C.
cum caeter.) of the hot fiery furnace, and spoke and said, Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, the servants of the high God, go forth and come hither: then
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, came forth of the mids of the fire.

27. Then the nobles, princes, and dukes, and the kings counselors ( mighty
ones. L. governors. I.) came together to see these men, because the fire had
no power over their bodies: for not an hair of their head was burnt, neither
were their coats changed, not any smell of fire came ( passed. C.) upon them:

28. Wherefore Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, who has sent his Angel, and delivered, his servants,
that put their trust in him, and have altered the kings commandment, and
yielded their bodies, that they should not serve, nor bow unto any god, save
their own God.

29. Therefore I set forth a decree, that every people, nation, and language,
which shall speak any blasphemy ( error. C.) against the God of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, shall be drawn in pieces ( shall perish. L.) and his
house be made a iakes ( be vasted. L.) because there is not any other God (
there is no God. B. G. but here the word (other) is omitted) which can deliver
after this sort.

30. Then the king advanced ( caused to prosper. C.) Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, in the Province of Babel.

1. The questions discussed.
Quest. 1. At what time Nebuchadnezzar set up this great image.
1. Some think that this was done not long after the former dream, which
Nebuchadnezzar had: as the Rabbines that imagine this image to be set up by the
king, as an amulet or defense to prevent the effect of his dream. ex Calvin.
But it is not like that the great impression, which that vision left behind it
in Nebuchadnezzars mind, could be so soon extinguished.

2. Theodoret and Chrysostom, in his sermon of the three children, following
some greek copy, read, that this image was set up in the 18. year of
Nebuchadnezzars reign. But then it should have been made before the
destruction and desolation of Jerusalem, which is not like: for when
Nebuchadnezzar had made an end of his conquests, then it is probable he set up
this image by way of triumph: and Azarias in his prayer, (though that part be
Apocryphal, yet it may have some probability, for matter of story) makes
mention, that they had neither prince, nor sacrifice, or burnt offering: which
shows, that this fell not out before the destruction of Jerusalem: likewise
Theodoret, who says that this fell out paruo tempore, a small time after the
first dream, which was in the second year, is contrary to himself: for
between the second and 18. year, there are 16. years, which is no small time.

3. Pererius also is deceived, who thinks that this was done after the 25.
year of Nebuchadnezzars reign: for the second year of his Monarchy he
reckons to fall out in the 25. year of his reign: but this is before
confuted, quest. 1. c. 2. where it is further showed, that this second year
which is to be understood of Daniels service and ministry, was in the 5.
year of Nebuchadnezzars reign.

4. Pelican says this story happened 16. years after the dream; but that
is uncertain.

5. Wherefore here somewhat is certain, that this story came after the
interpretation of the kings dream set forth in the 2. chap. because ver. 12.
mention is made of the advancement of Daniels three fellows, which was
immediately after Daniel had interpreted the kings dream, cap. 2. 49. somewhat
is probable, that it was after the sacking and taking of Jerusalem, as is said
before, Pap. for many of the Jews were now in captivity, ver. 8. something is
uncertain, how long this history followed after the interpretation of Daniels
dream.

Quest. 2. To whom Nebuchadnezzar errected this image.
1. Lyranus thinks that Nebuchadnezzar set up this image for himself,
requiring divine honor to be given unto it, as Caligula caused his image to be
carried about the Roman Empire to be adored: so thinks Hugo Cardinal. Pere.
Pin. Pelli. But it is not like, that he which had so humbled himself before
unto Daniel, could be so lifted up in pride, to make himself a god.

2. Neither is it like, that Nebuchadnezzar set up this image of a good
intention, to the honor of the true God, as Bulling. Osiand. for then he would
not so cruelly have persecuted the servants, and true worshippers of God.

3. Therefore, as Calvin writes, videtur hanc statuam consecrasse alicui
deorum, It seems he consecrated this image to some of his gods, as to Bell, or
some other: as it appears both by the kings speech, ver. 14. will ye not
serve my god? and by their words, that refused to worship the image, we will
not serve ^hy gods, Pap.

Quest. 3. To what end this image was set up.
1. Some think, that by setting up this image Nebuchadnezzar would retain a
memory of that image, which he saw in his dream, thinking thereby to please
God, Pap. But then he would not have made such a cruel edict against the
servants of that great God.

2. Again it may be thought, that he did it, to have an uniformity in
religion, through all his dominions, which consisted of diverse nations, but
then he would have commanded the like image to be set up in every province.

3. Calvin thinks he did it to this end to settle the superstitious worship
of idolatry, least the Jews might have sought some innovation in religion.

4. But it is most probable, that Nebuchadnezzar did it by the advice of his
nobles, and princes, of envy against the Jews, especially those which were
advanced to place of government, that they might thereby entrappe them: which
may appear so to be by these reasons. 1. by the like practice against Daniel,
cap. 6. 2. by the general accusation of the Jews, ver. 8. 3. to what end else
tended the cruel edict of the king, but to be executed upon the Jews, whom
they imagined would be offenders, Inn. Polan.

5. Theodoret thinks that he made this image all of gold, to disgrace and
discountenance the image, which he saw in his dream, the head whereof was
only of gold. But that dream stroke him with such a terror, as that it is not
like he would contemn it.

6. He might also in making such a huge and costly image intend therein to set
forth the magnificence and riches of his kingdom; Pere.

Quest. 4. How it came to pass that Daniel ^indred not the kings purpose, in
setting up this image.
1. Some think that Daniel being present, tacuit videns se nihil proficere,
did hoid his peace seeing that he could prevail nothing, but that the king was
resolute in his purpose: Lyran. But Daniel had sinned if he had been silent,
be should have used the means and left the success unto God.

2. Osiander thinks that Daniel used what persuasion he could, but seeing he
was not heard he withdrew himself. But if Daniel had been present at all, it
would have been suspicious, if he had now hid himself.

3. Pappus is of opinion, that Daniel was employed in some remote place of the
province at this time: But though Daniel were now absent, he could not be
ignorant of the kings purpose before, this great image was not made in a short
time.

4. Wherefore it is not to be doubted, but that Daniel did discharge the office
of a faithful servant unto God and counselor to the king before this, and did
use all means to stay this ungodly enterprise, so far as he might go,
without exasperating of the king too much, which would have kindled his anger
against the whole nation: Therefore Daniel not prevailing, gave way unto the
time, expecting some other means how it should please the Lord to convert the
king.

Quest. 5. Of the place where this image was set up.
Verse. 1. In the plain of Dura. 1. Symmachus calls the place Soraum, the
Septuagint as Heirome says interpreted (...), which he translateth viuarium, a
place enclosed to keep beasts in; but these are far wide, it is a proper
name, called Dura.

2. The interlinearie gloss, and historia scholastica, take it for the name of
the floode, which compasses that plain or field, where the Giants after the
flood first builded Babel.

3. Some think it was the town Doraba, situate upon the river Euphrates in
Babylonia.

4. But it seems rather to be that place, which Ptolome calls Deera,
situate between Chaltopis and Cissia, in the region Susiane: Ptolome lib. 6.
Geograph. cap. 3. Iun. Polan.

5. It is like it was set in a plain, where no hills were, that it might not be
ouertipped by them, Pin.

Quest. 6. Of the greatness of this image compared with others and in it self.
1. Some greater images have been made in the world: as the image of the Sun
at Rhodes, called colossus solis, was 70. cubits high; which was 12. years in
making, and cost 300. talents: 56. years after it was made, it was cast down
by an earthquake, and then the hugenes thereof appeared: few men could fadome
that thumb thereof, and the fingers were bigger then ordinary images: it
broke in pieces in the fall, and great caves and hoales were opened, wherein
were couched huge stones to keep the image upright, Plin. lib. 34. cap. 7.
Greater also then this was the colossus of Nero, which was an 110. foot long,
and an another picture made of him in cloth, an 120. foot high: yet this image
because it was of gold, in value may seem to exceed all other: the ordinary
cubite is foot and half, but the Babylonian cubite as Herodotus says, was 3.
fingers greater then the common cubite: so that by this account, this image
might be 67. ordinary cubits high. Herodotus writes that in his time there
was a golden image at Babylon, which was 12. cubits high, which might be that
image, that every stranger was required to worship before he was permitted to
come into Babylon to see the city, as Philostrat. says, de vita Apollin. cap.
19.

2. This image was made proportionable to a man's body, every part answerable
unto the other in due form and measure, by which proportion the greatness of
every part of the image may be taken: there is the same distance between the
ends of the fingers, the arms spread abroad, from one extremity to the
other, which is between the crown of the head, to the soale of the feet,
Plin. lib. 7. cap. 17. the face from the chinne to the top of the forehead,
is the tenth part of the length of the body. And the face is divided into
three equal parts, from the chinne to the nose, the length of the nose, and
the breadth of the forehead: the length of the eye from one corner to another
is the 45. part, and so is the distance between the eyes: the length of the
nose is the thirtith part, and the widenes of the nostrils the 180, part: the
compass of the ear and of the mouth, is the 15. part: the head from the
chinne to the crown, is the 8. part: the length and likewise the breadth of
the breast, the sixth part: the nauill is in the midst of the body, dividing
it into two equal parts, the length of the hippes, thighs, and legs is
almost the half part: the length of the foot is the sixth part, and so is the
space from the shoulder to the elbowe, and from the elbowe to the hand: the
hand is the 10. part.

3. After this proportion, the whole image being 60. cubits in height, the
face must be six cubits, the chinne two cubits, the nose and forehead as
much, the nostrills must contain half a foot, the compass of the ear and
mouth 4. cubits, and so much the neck: the breast 10. cubits, the length of
the thighs and legs 29. cubits, the foot ten, and the hand six: thus
Pererius casts the proportion of every part.

4. But herein is his error, he takes the height of the body of the image to
be 60. cubits, whereas, as Lyranus well notes, in this measure is
comprehended the foot also or foundation whereupon the image stood: for
otherwise it should not be proportionable, being 60, cubits high, and but
six cubits broad: for the length of a man is but six times to the breadth,
and ten times to the thicknes: If the body be six cubits high, it is but a
cubite broad: then 6. cubits broad will have but 36. cubits in height.

5. As this image was huge in the height and stature, so it was very costly,
being all of gold, though it be not necessary with Hierome, to think that it
was made of solid gold, but either the outside only of it, was gold, or it
was made hollow, as Lyranus well coniectureth.

Quest. 7. Of the mystical application of this image.
1. Chrysostom by this golden image, would have covetousness resembled, which
S. Paul calls idolatry, Ephesians. 5. 5. for the covetous man does addict all
his desire, 18. hom. in 2. ad Corinth.
and as it were consecrate his soul to the love of money.

2. Hierome compares false doctrine unto this image, In hunc locum.
which heretics and false teachers do adorn and set forth with their wit
and eloquence, as this image is made of gold.

3. Irenaeus makes this image a pattern of the worldly happiness, lib. 5
aduers. haereses.
which the devil entiseth and seduceth men to embrace, and as it were worship,
setting aside the desire of heavenly things.

Quest. 8. Of the several names and titles of the kings nobles and officers
here rehearsed. ver. 2.
1. The first are called in the Chalde tongue, achashdarpenaija, which R.
Joseph Kimhi deriueth of these three words, achash, which signifies in the
Aramites language great, and dar, to stay or remain, and panim, the face: they
were such as always remained in the kings presence, and were next unto him.
Montonus reads, secund^s a rege, the next to the king: Satrapae, the great
and highest men in the kingdom: L. V. Iun. Lyranus says they are so called,
ta^quam satis rapientes, because they do take and snatch from the people: but
that is no fit annotation here: the Septuag. call them (...), chief men, or of
high place.

2. The second is signaia, which some translate, pontifices summons, the high
priests: Page for sagan is so sometime taken for the second priest next to the
chief: but it seems here to be a civil office, as all the rest are: some
read duces, captains. V. as the Septuag. interpret, (...), chief commanders
or captains, so also Bulling, princes, Genevens. it rather signifies here
magistrates, governors. L. A. so Polan. Antistites, men of pre-eminence, Iun.

3. The third are called pachavatha: pecah, as R. David signifies, a
provincial, one set over a province: Iudices, judges appointed to hear causes
in their circuites. L. duces, dukes. I. A. P. Geneuens. the Septuag. call them
(...), they which were set over some special places and countries: praesides
prouinciarum, the presidents of provinces. V.

4. The fourth are Adargazaraija, which signifies Senators, as R. David, and
R. Saadiah: so also Iun. Judges, Geneuens. duces, dukes, L. rather (...), the
keepers of the laws, to see that they were executed, Page Vatab. Bulling.

5. The fifth are Gedaberaija, which signifies those, which are set over the
treasure, questores, V. P. the questors or receivers, Geneuens. not tyraennos.
L. which Lyranus expounds exactors of tribute: but the word tyrant, is in
this sense improperly used.

6. The sixth dethaberaija, derived of dath, a sentence, and bari, pure or
fat, R. Saadiah: they were the lawyers or counselors, I. V. so also Bulling.
Polan. Geneuens. the L. reads optimates, the nobles, but that is too general
a word.

7. The seventh Tiphtaice, which I. translateth, exactores, the exactors: the
executioners of justice, V. Bulling. officers, Geneuens. such as had the charge
and care to see justice executed.

8. The eight shiltonee medinatha, the governors of provinces, Gene. Iun.
Vatab. of the word shelet, to rule: it is a general name comprehending all
those which had any office or government in the provinces.

Quest. 9. Why Nebuchadnezzar only called his nobles and officers.
1. All the people could not possibly come together to one place, therefore the
nobles are called, vt per principes seducantur and gentes, as Hierome says,
that by the nobles the people might be seduced.

2. These are first summoned, vt regi consentientes, as consenting to the king,
and most forward to follow his mind: Lyran. for such are the nobles, pendent a
nutu regis, etc. and ad quaslibet flectuntur auras: ready to serve the kings
humor, and are turned by every wind, Calvin.

3. And the Nobles are conuented for the greater magnificence and majesty,
that this image might have the greater reverence, and remain as a monument for
a long time after, Osiander.

Quest. 10. ver. 5. Of the diverse kinds of instruments here rehearsed.
1. The first is in the Chalde called karna of keren, a horn: the Septuag.
translate (...), of the trumpet, tubam, Lat. which Lyranus takes for the
usual instrument, which is sounded in the war: Pintus says it was a crooked
instrument made of brass: but it properly rather signifies a horn or cornet:
which is so called either of the matter, whereof it is made, or for the
fashion, because it was like unto an horn. So the same word keren, signifies
the trumpet made of rams horn, which Iosuah was commanded to make, when he
compassed the walls of Ierecho: Josh. 6. an other word chatzotzeroth, is used
to signify trumpets made of metal, Number. 10. 2.

2. The second is called mashrokitha, which the Septuag, interpret by the word
(...), a pipe or whistle, of sherach to whistle: the L. reads, fistula, a
pipe or flute: an instrument made of wood, with diverse hoales, to be played
upon with the hand, Pin. such as sheepe-heards use, it is not a trumpet, as
Geneuens.

3. The third is kathrom, whence comes the Greek word (...), cithara, the
harp, we have the like English word a citherne, but it is taken for an other
kind of instrument: the harp is an instrument well known: it is in form like
a triangle, played upon with the fingers, Lyran, made of wood, and the strings
are seen on both sides, Pintus.

4. The fourth in the Hebrewe is called Sabca, the Septuag. (...), which
comes near the Chalde word: by the interpreters it is generally translated
sambuca, which some think was triquetrum instrumentum imparibus sidibus, a
threefold instrument with unequal strings, Iun. tetrachordum, with four
strings, Athen. which was made of iron or brass, and played upon with an iron
rod: Pint. But Lyranus rather thinks it was a wind instrument, made of
reed, and he deriueth it of sam, which signifies the Suune, and buca, a
trumpet, because it was used only in summer: but it is not like, that such
rusticall oaten pipes were used in this solemn assembly. Hugo thinks it was
a kind of rural harp so called of the tree sambucus, whereof it was made,
which was the elder tree: But I rather think with our english interpreters,
Geneuens. that it was the sackebut, as the agreement with the Chalde word sabca
shows.

5. The fifth pesanterin, (...), Sep. the psalterie. L. A. P. I. nablium, V.
which is the same with the psalterie: the word seems to be derived from the
Chalde, psanterie, with the change of one letter. Lyranus thinks it was an
instrument played upon with a quill, which we call a citherne. Pintus
describes it to be an instrument four square with ten strings: some think
it was like an harp, but of more pleasant sound, to the which they used to
sing holy hymns and psalms, whereupon it had the name psalterie; such as
David used: and this is most like.

6. The sixth is called in the Chalde sumphonia, which is the very same word in
the Greek (...), a symphonie, which R. Saadiah deriueth of the word (...), a
pipe, with a bag joined unto it, a known rusticke instrument: but it is
rather, as Lyranus thinks, that usual instrument, which blind men carry
about, and play upon it with their fingers: and with the other hand make it
sound with turning about of an iron, Pintus.

11. Quest. v. 5. Of their falling down and worshipping this image.
1. Hierome upon these words, thus writes, Hierome noted of great oblivion and
forgetfulness.
that unless my memory fail me, if I run over the whole Scripture, I can
not find, quod sanctorum quisquam Deum cadens adoraverit, that any of the
Saints falling down worshipped God, but they which worshipped idols or the
devil fell down, and worshipped, as Satan said to our blessed Savior, All
these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, etc. to
this purpose Hierome: so also following him the ordin. gloss. and Hugo.

2. But Hieromes memory did here greatly deceive him indeed: for it is more
usual in the Scripture for the Saints to fall down and worship God, then
otherwise: as, Psalm. 95. 6. the Psalmist says, Come let us worship, and fall
down, and kneel before the Lord our maker: the three wise men, Matthew. 2. fell
down and worshipped Christ: so did the blind man, Ioh. 9. the Angels, Apoc. 7.
11. fell down upon their faces before the throne and worshipped: Pere. Abraham
fell on his face, while God talked with him, Genesis 17. 2. so did Ezekiel, c. 1.
29.

12. Quest. That it is not lawful to bow unto an image, though one in his
heart abhor it.
1. There are three sorts of men, which do think they may be dispensed
withal for the outward reverent gesture yielded unto an image, having their
heart free: as they which do it to conform themselves to please the Prince,
or for fear to escape the peril of death, or some other grievous punishment:
or such which do come unto idolatrous service, only to see the manner of it,
and the pomp of Papal superstitious ceremonies.

2. But all these are found to be in great error. 1. the Lord in the second
commandment directly forbids to bow down unto such images. And the Lord
says to the Prophet Elias, that he had reserved seven thousand, that had not
bowed their knees unto Baal, 1. King. 18. 19. 2. Our bodies together with our
souls are the temples of the Spirit, and therefore neither the one, nor the
other should be defiled, but preserved pure and holy for the Lord, Polan. 3. It
satisfies the idolaters themselves, if men be but conformable in their outward
gesture, to their idolatrous service: as here Nabuchadnezzer exacteth no
confession of the mouth, or subscription with the hand of or unto this image,
but only to fall down and worship it. Calv. 4. In the purer ages of the Church
even they were held to be idolaters, which being constrained by force, did
yield the least outward service unto the idols of the Gentiles: as Origin, as
Suidas writes, was excommunicate of the Church, for holding a little incense
in his hand before an idol. 5. The Romanists will not come at our Churches and
service, where yet there is no external object that may offend them, therefore
much less should Protestants show such weakness to assemble with them in their
idolatrous temples, which lay so many stumbling blocks before the eyes.

13. Quest. Of the malicious accusation of the Chaldees against the Jews.
1. The malicious Chaldees were so incensed against the servants of God, that
refused to worship the image, that they could not stay at all, but presently at
the same instant they made complaint of them. 2. They bend their accusation,
not only against those three, whom they held to be offenders, but against the
whole nation of the Jews, v. 8. they grievously accused the Jews. 3. They by
flattering speech insinuate themselves to the king, that they might be the
better heard, O king live for ever, v. 9. 4. Then they subtly seek to bring
their persons into disgrace and hatred, 1. by their nation and country, they
were Jews, the kings captives and vassals. 2. by their unthankfulness for the
benefits which the king had bestowed upon them, who had made them gouerners,
and chief officers, Bulling. 3. by their apostasy, that being called by
Babylonian names, Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego, and so incorporated into that
nation, yet were of a diverse religion and usage, Iun. 5. Then follows the
crime, which they object against them, which was threefold. 1. contempt of the
kings commandment and decree. 2. irreligion in not worshipping the kings gods.
3. mutiny and sedition, in being singular among the rest, in that they did not
fall down before the kings image.

14. Quest. Why they say in the plural they will not serve thy gods, v. 12.
when as there was but one image.
Lyranus thinks, that this image is called in the plural, gods, after the
manner of the Jews, which use to call an idol so, though it be but one: as
they said of the golden calfe, Exodus 32. These are thy gods: but it is evident
in the text, that by gods, they mean not the image; because they complain of
2. things, they would not serve thy gods, nor worship the image.

2. The ordi. gloss. which Hugo follows, so also Pintus, think, that the
gods here spoken of were diverse from the image: for this he set up for himself
to be worshipped in it; but his gods he worshipped himself. But that they were
not here two such distinct things, it appears; because the kings decree was
only that they should fall down, and worship the image: which they
transgressing, are said, therein also to have refused to serve the kings gods.

3. Wherefore it is evident, that this image was set up by the king to the
honor of his gods, Calvin. which are so called in the plural, because they
worshipped many gods: so that in one and the same action, in refusing to bow
unto the image, they are held to be contemners also of the kings gods.

15. Quest. Why these three, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego are only accused.
1. It may seem that the principal and chief men were only or especially
called, and that the vulgar and common sort of people were not all present: or
at the least, the principal men were most marked, and observed, whose example
the rest might follow, Pere, but it seems, by their general accusation of the
Jews, v. 8. that there were more Jews present then these three.

2. It may be also supposed, that the vulgar sort of the Jewish people, which
were present, did for fear do as the rest did, fall down and worship,
therefore they were not complained of, Perer. It is very like indeed, that
many Jews did fall away in time of captivity to worship the Chaldean images,
because many of them had been idolaters in their own country, for the which
they were carried into captivity: but that some other of the Jews beside
these three, refused to fall down, may be gathered by the general accusation
against the Jews, but principally against these three.

3. Wherefore this is like to be the cause, why these three are singled out,
because they were advanced to honorable place of government, and for this
cause were envied and maligned of the Chaldees: and this may be gathered by
their manner of accusation, v. 12. wherein they specially urge that point, that
the king had set them over the province of Babel, that seemed to be an
eye-soare and a grief unto them. Why Daniel was not accused with the rest, it
was by reason of his absence, as is showed before, quest. 4.

16. Quest. What age these three were of, when they were brought before the
king.
1. Chrysostom thinks, that these three were infantili aetate, but as
infants and children, when this was done, homil. de trib. pueris. Augustine
also, hom. 24. calls them pueros, children. But this is not like that the
king would set children in the place of government: for before this, at Daniels
request, they were made governors over the province of Babel, c. 2. 49.

2. Theodoret gesseth they were young men, in aetatis vere, in the spring, and
(as we say) in the flower of their age.

3. Pererius thinks they could not be less, then 35. years of age: for he
supposes they might be 10. year old, when they went into captivity, and in
the 25. year of Nabuchadnezzer he had that dream of the image: But though
Pererius opinion be probable for their age, yet his ground is uncertain: for
the second year mentioned, c. 2. 1. was not the 25. but the 5. year of
Nabuchadnezzers reign, as is showed, c. 2. qu. 1.

4. But Pererius labors to clear this point, because in their Missals they
are called the three children: either for that they were children at their
first going into captivity, or they are so called according to the phrase of
Scripture, that young men, and they which were of perfect age are so called
pueri, as Joshua, Exodus 31. being then above 40. year old, is called puer, the
lad or servant of Moses.

Contra. 1. The word puer, when it is so applied, is referred rather to their
ministry and service, then age. 2. we do not stand upon it how they are
called in their Missals, it suffices us, that in the Scripture they are not
called children, but gubhraia, men, v. 23. of the word gabbar, to be strong:
they were then men of perfect age and strength.

17. Quest. Why Daniel made not intercession to the king for his three friends.
1. They which think Daniel was present, and that he either stood by the king
who did not worship his own image, as gloss. ordin. Hugo. or that they did
forbear to accuse him, because he was in great grace and favor with the king,
Polan. which conceits see refuted before, quest. 4. those which affirm Daniel
to be present, consequently must hold, that Daniel was silent, and spoke not in
the behalf of his friends: and Lyranus says, vidit regem obstinatum in
malicia, and ideo tacuit, etc. he saw the king settled and obstinate in his
malice, and therefore held his peace. But Daniel had offended much, if being
present, he should by his silence and connivence have betrayed these innocents,
as the wise man says, Prou. 24. 11. Will thou not preserve them, that are lead
to be slain?

2. Pererius thinks that Daniel being a great Prophet might foresee that God
would deliver them out of this danger by some great miracle, that thereby the
power and glory of God might be set forth: as our blessed Savior suffered
Lazarus to die, that he might get greater glory by raising him up again out
of his grave.

Contra. 1. Our blessed Savior and Daniel, the master and the servant, are not
well matched together: Christ had all power and knowledge in himself, so had
not Daniel. 2. he knew not of his deliverance from the Lions himself, when he
was cast into their den: for then it had been no trial of his says, if he
had bin sure to be delivered, much less is it like, that he foresaw the
miraculous deliverance of these.

3. Therefore Daniel is excused by his absence, and ignorance: he neither was
present, and so consequently was ignorant of all that now happened, being done
speedily and in have: see before qu. 4.

18. Quest. Of Nabuchadnezzers speech unto those three brought before him.
1. The equity of the king herein deserves commendation, that would not
presently give sentence against these persons, till he had heard their defense:
as it was the commendable custom of the Romans not to deliver any unto death,
before he that was accused had place to defend himself, Act. 25. 16. Bulling.

2. But herein appears the wilful blindness of the king, that being seduced
to set up such an abominable idol, he proceeds to maintain it with cruelty.
Pelican.

3. He does first seek to win them by gentle speech: as though he could not
believe it to be true, that they had done this thing, or if they did, it was of
some oversight, rather then of purpose: which he was content to pardon, if now
they would worship the image: but beside these fair speeches, he adds also
threatening. Bulling.

4. He peremptorily enioyneth obedience to his decree, not suffering it to be
disputed or called into question, whether it were just or lawful: but it was
his will so to be. Calv.

5. And at the last he ends with blasphemy, extenuating the power of that
great God, whom before he had acknowledged to be the God of gods, c. 2. 47. so
Rabsakeh said to Hezekiah, that the Lord could not deliver Jerusalem out of his
hand, 2. king. 18. 35.

19. Quest. Of the religious and resolute answer of these three conuented
before the king.
They answer with godly resolution and courage to every part of the kings
speech.

1. Whereas the king first insinuates himself, as though he did not believe,
that they would do such a thing, and thereby suggesteth unto them, that they
should be better advised: which kind of humane and favorable questioning
Suetonius notes to have bin much used by Augustus, who in examining those
which were guilty, would seem as though he believed not any such thing to be
done by them: to this uncertainty in the kings demand, they answer resolutely,
that they needed no consultation in that matter, they had their answer ready,
and were determined both what to say and do, to answer and suffer, We are not
careful to answer thee in this matter.

2. To the kings blasphemy, that there was no God to deliver them out of his
hand; they reply, that their God, whom they served, was able to deliver them
out of his hand.

3. Touching the kings threatening of the fiery furnace, they answer in effect
that it did not move them, they feared it not, though their God for some
causes known to himself, should leave them in his hands, yet they would not
worship the image.

4. And as the king would admit no discussing of his decree, but would have it
absolutely obeyed: so they could not be removed from their religion: neither
desired to have the same discussed or sifted: they would by no means consent
to worship the image.

20. Quest. Why the Lord does not always deliver his out of temporal dangers.
v. 18. But if not: These valiant servants of God, were certain of Gods favor,
that he would assist them with his spirit to suffer for his glory, but they
could not certainly promise themselves temporal deliverance: wherein the Lord
always shows not his power for these reasons.

1. If the Lord should continually by some miraculous deliverance, rid his
children out of danger; then would not the miracle be so great, and so neither
Gods glory nor power therein so much magnified, nor men thereat so much
moved. Perer.

2. God suffers his children to fall into temporal dangers, for the trial
and probation of their faith and patience.

3. Thereby also God does chastise his servants, to bring them to more
effectual repentance. Papp.

4. And the Lord permits his children to be temporally tried, inuisibiliter
eos ad gloriam transferendo, to bring them inuisibly unto everlasting glory.
Lyran. ex Augustine.

21. Quest. Why they are so resolute not to worship the golden image.
1. The godly Hebrews were not ignorant how often they were charged by Moses,
and the Prophets, not to bow unto, or worship images, as Exodus 20. in the
second commandment. Deuteronomy. c. 4. and c. 27. Isa. 44. and Ierem. 10. and in many
places beside: that no one thing in Scripture is more straightly given them in
charge.

2. They had the example of the godly Patriarchs and kings, and other holy men,
who had a perfect detestation of idols: as Iaacob burned all the images in his
house under an oak, Genesis 35. Hezekiah pulled down the brazen serpent, when they
began to abuse it to idolatry.

3. Yea in the most corrupt times after their return out of the captivity,
the Jews abhorred images: for when Pilatus and Petronius the presidents of
Iewrie had secretly brought the images of Tiberius and Caligula into the city,
to be worshipped of the Jews, they manfully resisted, offering their necks and
lives, rather then they would contrary to their law worship any images.
Joseph. lib. 18. antiquit. c. 4. and 10. who further writes, l. 2. cont.
Appia. that when Alexander the great would have repaired the Temple and
sepulcher of Bell the Chaldeans god at Babylon, and therein used the help of
the Jews, they utterly refused.

4. Therefore that is a most malicious lie reported by Appollonius, Appian the
Grammarian, and Cornelius Tacitus, that the Jews in the inwards of the Temple
kept an asses head of gold, which they worshipped. ex Perer.

22. Quest. Whether the Prince is by fire and sword to root out them which are
of contrary religion.
v. 19. Nabuchadnezzer commanded these three holy men to be cast into the
fiery oven: wherein he offended three ways: 1. in the action it self, in
forcing his religion by torment of death. 2. in the manner, he did it in his
rage. 3. in respect of the persons persecuted, they were innocent, they
suffered for keeping of the law of God: But that generally religion is not to
be forced by torment, it may be thus persuaded.

1. It is against the nature of faith to be forced unto by violence: doceri non
cogi vult fides, religion must be taught, not enforced. Polan.

2. Idolaters, heretics, and persecutors of the true faith, by unspeakable
torments, and cruel death, did urge their heresies, idolatry, and
superstitions to be kept: As this was the engine, wherewith the heathen
Emperors assaulted the Christians, persecuting them by fire and sword: As
Cornelius Tacitus writes of Nero, that he caused the Christians to be burned
specially in the night, in vsum nocturni luminis, in stead of night lamps: So
the truth is not to be defended and maintained by the same weapons, wherewith
false religion fights: for the fruits of the spirit, are love, peace,
gentleness, Gal. 5. 22.

3. But it therefore follows not, because religion is not to be forced by
punishment of death, that therefore every one is to be left unto himself:
there are other forcible means by penal laws to contain men in an uniform
profession of the true faith, then by death. Josias put down the Chemarims
idolatrous Priests, but he put them not to death. 2. King. 23. 5.

4. Yet such as are manifest blasphemers and heretics, are to be cut off by
the sword, as Servetus was at Geneva: so that in the inflicting of the
punishment of death for false religion, a double difference is to be made: 1.
between those, which do maintain manifest heresy and blasphemy, and such as
hold other unsound opinions: and in the first sort, between such as are
obstinate and perverse, and those which are seduced of ignorance and
simplicity.

23. Quest. Of the extraordinary beating of the furnace.
v. 19. He charged, that they should heat the furnace seven times more. 1. In
the Apocryphal narration here inserted in the Greek translation, it is added
further, that the king commanded the furnace to be made hot with pitch, and
towe, and a kind of liquid brimstone called naptha, and small twigges and
spriggs of vines, or such like called malleoli, which some take for the small
brush wood, apt to be set on fire, as Theodoret: some for such stuff besmeared
with pitch, as Pererius shows out of Nonius Marcellus.

2. And concerning naptha, whereof there are fountains in Babylon, which is an
hoate country full of brimstone, and in diverse places flaming out with fire:
and as Plutarke writes, the earth is so hot, that they are constrained to lie
in water: this naptha is of such force, that whatsoever is besmeared therewith,
takes fire in such sort, as that it can not be quenched but with vinegar and
allume, and such like, as Sirabo writes, lib. 16. how Alexander to take trial
of the nature thereof, caused a boy being in the water to be anointed with
naptha, and so a candle put to him, who so burned, that if they had not with
much water, mire, and such like, quenched it, he had been consumed before
them. Plutarke also in the life of Alexander reports, how the Barbarians, to
show the operation of this naptha, did cast certain drops upon the way,
which in the night took the flame one from an other, that all the way seemed
to be of a light fire.

3. But because in the original history there is no mention made of these
things, that the fire should be tempered with: nor yet that the furnace should
flame 49. cubits, v. 46. in the Apocryphal addition; we need not busy our
selves with searching out the nature of these things: it suffices to know, as
it is in the text, that the furnace was made hot 7. times more, then usually
it was.

24. Quest. Of the exquisite cruelty and torments which these three were put
unto.
1. Whereas in the punishing of offenders, Tyrants have satisfied themselves
with simple death; in the persecuting of the servants of God, they used
exquisite torments: as here the furnace is made seven times more hot: if any
malefactor had bin condemned to this punishment, the ordinary heat would have
sufficed. Bulling.

2. Then he commands the strongest men to bind them, that they might use no
resistance, and might be more strongly bound: and God so disposed, that the
king should use the ministry of his most valiant men, that both the miracle
might be the greater, in that the flame consumed these men, and exercitus
cladem persentisceret, and he should be punished in the loss of his martial
men: Lyran. and here appears the madness of persecutors, who refuse not to
be hangmen and tormentors themselves of Gods servants, which they would be
ashamed to do in the execution of ordinary malefactors, Osiander.

3. They are bound in their apparel, vt nihil ex illis reseruandum, etc. that
nothing might remain or be reserved of them: and because they were in such
have.

4. They are cast into the mids of the furnace, that the fire might have the
greater power over them, Bullinger.

25. Quest. Of the apparel, which they were cast into the fire with.
1. The first garment is called sarbal, which the Septuag. interprets (...)
sarabaris, by the change of one letter: Hierome reads, cum braccis, with
their breeches or hose: for so he says, that saraballa in the Chalde language,
signify the thighs: so also Hesychius interprets (...), to be the couerings
of the thighs: and in the Sclavonian tongue, the wide slippers are called
sarabarh, Polan. so also Pagnin. But it seems rather to signify the close
coat, which covered not only the nether but the upper parts: as Tertullian. in
lib. de pallio, writes thus of Alexander, triumphalem cataphractam amolitus in
captiva sarabara incessit, that laying aside his triumphant complete harness,
he went up and down in a captive garment called sarabara, etc. it seems then
it was such a garment, which covered those parts which used to be harnessed,
the breast and upper parts, as well as the nether. Ab. Ezra and R. Levi take
it for the upper garment, but that is rather the last, here named: it is more
fitly taken for the coat, Genevens. or the short cloak and inward garment, as
Iunius and Vatablus express it by the word chlamys, which signifies a short
cloak.

2. The next garment is taken by some for their breeches, fem^ralia, Mont.
tibialia, the hose, Vatab. Genevens. subligacula, their slops: but the word
petaschon, their bonets, comes near the word petasus, which signifies an
hat or bonet: and so the Septuagint and Hierome express it by the word tiara,
a bonet, Polan. Lyran. and Hugo Card. think that tiara signifies both pileum,
and palliolum, an hat, or Persian cloak: but it rather here signifies the
covering of the head: the other garments are here named beside: and it is the
use of the Turks to this day to use certain bonets of fine linen wrapped
together. Calvin.

3. The last word chirbelathhon, some interpret, tiaris, their bonets. V.
cucullis, their boods, Montan, some, their shoes, L. boots, sep. but it
rather signifies their cloakes, Genevens. and upper robes, paludamenta, Iun.
for so the word chirbel signifies to cover, Polan. as Pagnin translateth
operimenta, their couerings.

26. Quest. Why Daniel was not cast into the fiery furnace with the rest.
The diverse opinions here of this matter, are of two sorts: some think that
Daniel was absent, some that he was present.

1. They which hold him to have been absent, 1. some think he might be
detained by sickness, and infirmity, Lyran. but that is a mere conjecture. 2.
some think he was employed in the kings offices, in some remote country,
Papp. but Daniels office was to sit in the kings gate and to attend the court,
c. 2. 49. 3. some think that Daniel, seeing the king fully bent to go
forward, withdrew himself home, and would not be present, Osiander. but this
he could not have done without the kings great displeasure. 4. some that the
king in favor sent him back, that he should not be brought into danger, Hug.
Card. But the kings fury was such, that he would have spared none, that
misliked his proceedings.

2. They which think Daniel to have been present: 1. some judge, that the
Chaldeans would not accuse Daniel, because he was in such favor with the king,
Calvin. Polan. but he was in as great favor afterward with Darius, and yet he
was cast into the lions den, c. 8. 2. some think that Daniel stood by the
king, who did not worship his own image, and so Daniel doing as the king did,
being the next man unto him, was not found fault withal. But the text
overthrows this conceit, the decree was general, v. 11. that whosoever did
not fall down, should be cast into the fiery furnace: Daniel then could not
be exempted from so general a decree. 3. some think that Daniel did in
outward gesture do as the rest did, and by this example the Nicomedians would
justify their dissimulation, in bowing their knee unto an idol, and yet
keeping their heart for God. But seeing Daniel refused to defile himself with
eating the kings meat, much more would he have counted this a pollution, to
have bowed to this filthy idol.

3. Wherefore the safer opinion is, that Daniel was not at this time present:
his charge was to keep the kings palace, and he was chief governor over the
whole province of Babel: the king then being absent from Babylon, to solemnize
the dedication of this image which was in the region Susiane, by all likelihood
committed unto Daniel the government of the city and province of Babel, till
his return.

27. Quest. How the flame of the fire slew those which were the ministers of
the kings cruelty.
v. 22. The flame of the fire slew those men, etc. 1. Lyranus well observes,
that this is set down by anticipation: for first the three men were cast into
the fiery furnace, and then at the coming of the Angel, the fire was kept
from their bodies, and raged upon their enemies.

2. It is like that these men had been the chief perswaders of the king, to
devise this torment, and were the most forward in this cruel execution, and
therefore they taste of the same punishment, which they had prepared for others:
as they which accused Daniel, and caused him to be cast into the lions den,
themselves were devoured of the lions, Pintus. and they are justly punished,
because they yield obedience to the king, in re scelerata, in a wicked matter,
Bulling.

3. It pleased God, that the fire should first destroy these wicked
instruments, both for the more certentie of the miracle, seeing the same fire
preserved some, and consumed others: and that the king might be more nearely
touched: punitis principibus rex corripitur, the king is touched and chastised
by the punishment of his Princes. gloss. Hug.

28. Quest. How these three men cast into the fire were preserved.
1. Some think, that the fire was by the power of God kept from their bodies,
and so issued forth upon them which were without: so Theodoret, ex hac
dissipatione flammarum and ^epulsione a corporibus in tantum ignis e furnace
essusus est, etc, by this dispersing of the flames, and repelling it from their
bodies, the fire was shed out so far out of the furnace, that it went out
49. cubits: but first this opinion is contrary to the text, which says they
walked in the mids of the fire, and had no hurt, verse. 25. there was then
fire, in the mids of the furnace where they were. 2. they were cast into the
furnace bound hand and feet, bu^ as soon as they came near the fire, it
burnt the bands wherewith they were tied, so that they walked loose, the fire
then was near them: Pintus answers, that as they entered into the furnace,
their bands were loosed by the fire.

Contra. The text is otherwise, that they fell down bound into the mids of
the furnace, ver. 23. they were then in the mids, before the fire consumed
their bands.

2. Some think, that the Angel did cause a cold air to blow in the mids of
the furnace, and so they were delivered from the heat of the fire, interponendo
corpus frigidum, by the enterposing of some cold body, Perer. this also is
affirmed by the Apocryphal story, ver. 49. fecit medium fornacis quasi ventum
roris flantem, etc. the Angel made the mids of the furnace as it were windy
with a dew.

Contra. 1. But this were to add miracle to miracle: for as it was one
miracle, that the fire did not so much as touch their garments, as they passed
through the flames, so it should be another, for the fire not to be quenched
with this dew: but miracles must not be multiplied without cause. 2. this also
derogateth from the power of God, as though he could not immediately by his
own power restrain the force of the fire, but by the ministry of another
creature.

3. The third opinion is, that God restrained the burning quality of the fire:
for he that first endued the elements with their several qualities, can
withhold and suspend them at his pleasure: thus thinks Basil, that vis
vrendi, the force of burning, did not fungi suo munere, in Psalm. 28.
at this time exercise his force; like as the fire which Moses saw, consumed
not the bush: of this opinion are also Albertus magnus, and Dyonis.
Carthusianus, which is the most probable.

Quest. 29. Of the seven miraculous things concurring in this preservation of
them from the fire.
1. The first is, that whereas the fire has two properties concurring
together, the light and the heat, that now by the power of God they are
separated: here is light without burning; and in hell fire there shall be
burning without light: as Basil notes in the former place, talis est ignis
inferni, vt cum maxim vret, minime tamen luceat, etc. such is the fire of hell
that when it burns most it gives least light, Pere.

2. This fire has contrary effects, it preserves those which are within, and
consumes those which are without: like as the waters of the red Sea, were a
defense unto the Israelites, and a confusion to the Egyptians: and the lions
which spared Daniel, devoured his accusers, Bulling.

3. The fire burned asunder their bands, but their bodies and garments, it had
no power to touch: so observes Hierome, ardent vincula, sed vinctorum corpora
non tangit, etc. their bands are burnt, but the bodies of the^ which were bound
the fire touches not: so also Chrysostom, 4. homil. ad popul. Antioch. lib.
3. dialog. cap. 18.
Compedes disrupit ignis, talos non tetigit, the fire brake their fetters, and
yet touched not their ankels; so Gregory, vt haberet flamma virtutem ad
solatium, non haberet ad tormentum, etc. so that the flame had it force for
their comfort, but not to their torment.

4. In the fire they breathed and walked, whereas the fire and smoke uses to
suffocate, and stop the breath: Pererius adds further, that in the mids of
the fire, they made an extemporall song or psalm, to the praise of God. It is
not to be doubted, but that they praised God; but that long himne, which is
extant in the vulgar Latin edition, it is not like they uttered: because it is
not extant in the original: so that it seems to have been added by some
interpreter to set forth the piety and devotion of these holy men.

5. Pererius following the vulgar Latin, makes this another miracle, that a
pleasant cool wind with a moist dew was sent of God into the mids of the
furnace: But no such thing is extant in the original: thus much may be
gathered out of the text by their walking in the mids of the fire, that
neither the smoke nor heat, was any annoyance unto them at all, but they had
their free liberty, as though they had walked in the cool and fresh air.

6. This was admirable, that not only their bodies, but their garments, yea
the hair of their head, was kept from the fire: and there was not so much as
the smell of fire about them, ver. 27.

7. Lastly, it seems that Nebuchadnezzar only, whose conversion the Lord
principally intended by this miracle, saw the Angel of God walking in the
fiery furnace in the form of man.

8. The like narration Pererius reports out of Gregory, lib. 3 dialog. cap.
18.
of a young man called Benedictus, who kept in a cell in Campania, within 40.
miles of Rome: whom the Goths assayed to burn in his cell, and set fire round
about it, but all other things being consumed, his cell remained untouched;
whereupon they drew him out, and cast him into a fiery oven: but he the next
day was found without any hurt of the fire, not so much as his garments
touched. But the report of this miracle I leave to the judgment of the
understanding reader: this we know, that that age was given too much to such
miraculous reports: and that many fabulous narrations have been thrust under
the name of the fathers.

Quest. 30. Whether any thing without miracle may be preserved from the fire,
being in the flames thereof.
1. Some do think that by natural means certain things are and may be
exempted from the violence and rage of the fire: Pliny writes of the stone
Aetites, lib. 10. c. 3. histor. natural.
which is found in a certain kind of eagles nest, that it endures the fire,
and wastes therein nothing at all. And in another place he makes mention of
Pirrhus, whose body being consumed by the fire, yet the great toe of his right
leg could not be burned: the same author reports, lib. 7. cap. 2.
that their hearts, which die of poison, or morbo cardiaco, the disease of the
heart, cannot be burnt. Aristotle writes of a certain stone called anthrax,
which the fire cannot work upon, lib. 11. cap. 37.
no not so much as to heat it: the same author also writes of a certain
little beast with feet, and yet flies, lib. 5. de histo. animali. cap. 19.
about the bigness of a fly, which comes out of the brass furnaces in
Cyprus, which as long as it is in the fire lives, but if it fly far from
the fire it dies: The like report there is of the Salamander, that it
extinguisheth the fire, non alio modo, quam glacies, like a piece of ice, Plin.
lib. 10. cap. 67. so also Aelianus, lib. 2. cap. 20. And Olympiodore the
philosopher confirms the same by his experience, that they which kept
fornaces in his time, would shake the faggots which thy burned, least the
Salamanders might be among them, which by experience they found to put out the
fire. Iamblicus writes, Iamblic. de myster. Egypt.
that the Egyptian Prophets, when they were inspired of their gods, could walk
through the mids of the fire, lib. 7. cap. 2.
and not be burned: Pliny also makes mention of certain families among the
Faliscians called Hyrpiae, which in the yearly sacrifice of Apollo, could
pass through an heap of wood, set on fire, and not be burned.

2. 1. Concerning those stones given in instance, it is like because of their
cold and solid constitution, that they a good while may resist the fire, but
at the length, the fire by the extreme heat thereof will work upon them. 2.
touching those beasts which are said to live in the fire, it must be so
understood, that they live in hoate places, near unto the fire, but not in the
flames, as those little creatures which we call crickits, do keep altogether
in ouens, and chimnies, and other hoate places, but they cannot endure the
flames of the fire: and it is Aristotle's principle, lib. 2. de genera. animal.
c. 3.
nullum animal nasci, vel viuere posse in igne, that no creature can be
engendered, or live in the fire.

3. As for the Salamander, by reason of the cold constitution thereof, it may
resist the fire, and somewhat slake the heat of it, as any other thing will,
that is extreme cold and moist; but at the length the fire will consume it: as
Mathiolus writing upon Dioscorides, lib. 2. cap. 56. says he found by
experience.

4. These examples given in instance of such as walked through the fire without
hurt, are either not to be credited, as many such fabulous tales are reported
by the heathen writers: or else such things were done by the operation of
Satan: who either by slaking the force of the fire, or by suborning some
imagined fire, or by interposing some cold body, or by some like means, can
work such feats. So then it remains a strong and firm conclusion, that
without a miracle, nothing can endure the fire without wasting and consuming.
ex Perer.

Quest. 31. That those three were true Martyrs, though they escaped by miracle
the danger of death.
1. There are three things required to make a Martyr, the goodness of the
cause, the present danger of death, and a willing resolution to suffer it: all
these three here concurred: the cause was for the maintenance of Gods glory,
the danger of death was present, and without Gods miraculous deliverance
inevitable, and their resolution was constant to die. This testimony Cyprian
gives of these martyrs, and of Daniel, who escaped the lions: In confessoribus
Christi dilata martyria non meritum confessionis minuunt, sed magnalia diuinae
protectionis ostendunt, etc. 3. lib. epist c ^.
in the confessors of Christ the deferring of their martyrdom does not
diminish the worthiness of their confession, but sets forth the greatness
of the divine protection, etc.

2. So as Thomas distinguishes them, there are three kind of Martyrs: 1. they
which are so only in fervent desire. 2. such as are in the present peril of
death, in lib. 4. sent^nt distinct. 49.
which they cannot escape without the miraculous deliverance of God. 3. they
which are offered unto death, and do suffer it.

3. Bernard also makes three kinds of martyrdom: some are voluntate martyrs,
and non opere, martyrs in will, and not in act, as John the Apostle: some
opere, non voluntate, in act, though not in the will and purpose, sermon. de
nata. Innocent.
as those innocents, which were put to death for Christ: some are both opere
and voluntate, martyrs both in will and work, as the holy Apostles, all save
John.

Quest. 32. Whether all those are to be held Martyrs which die constantly and
courageously.
1. They which show a kind of fortitude and courage in enduring of torments,
their cause being not good, are not held to be martyrs, as the Anabaptists
show themselves very resolute in suffering for their wicked heresy and sect.
Balthazar Gerardus the Burgundian, which slew the prince of Orange, Ann. 1584.
the 30. of June, endured very grievous torments, but it was pertinacie in him,
rather then patience, a stupiditie of sense, not a soliditie of faith, a
wretchlesse desperation, not a confident resolution. Augustine says well,
sermon. 50. de sanctis.
ibierat Christus vbi latrones, similis causa, sed dissimilis poena, Christ was
in the same place where the thieves were, the cause was like, but the
punishment unlike: therefore S. Peter, discerning the cause wheresore one
should suffer, says, let none of you suffer, as a murderer, or as a thief,
etc. 1. Pet. 4. 15.

2. They which have a good cause, may fail also in the manner, as if they do
procure their own death, and lay violent hands upon themselves: when any are
urged mala facere, vel mala pati, to do evil, or to suffer evil, they must
rather choose to suffer evil, and to yield themselves into the hands of their
enemies, as those three men did: but they which kill themselves, are now doers
of evil, and not sufferers: the devil tempted Christ to cast himself down
from the pinnacle, but he resisted him: all such motions then tending to
voluntary death, are diabolical. Augustine hereof thus writes, Cont.
Ga^^^nt. cap. 2.
When Job was stricken with botches from the head to the foot, vtique hoc
vestrum compendium habuit in promptu, etc. he might have used this compendious
way if he would, etc.

Quest. 33. Why it pleases not God always to deliver his servants out of
danger, as he did these and at this time.
Rupertus moves the like question, lib. 6. de victor. verb. c. 25.
why the Lord did not as well defend his Temple from the fire, as the bodies of
his servants here.

1. If God should do so ordinarily, then the miracle should not seem so
great, not the power and glory of God so much thereby advanced.

2. It is in God hand, and in his choice, whether to deliver his Saints from
temporal danger, or to translate them to immortality: he best knows what
is fit for every one.

3. God does send temporal deliverance to such instruments, as he purposes
still to use in his service: as these three were delivered, because they were
special means to set forth Gods glory among the Chaldeans: but when any has
finished their course, and accomplished that service for the which they were
sent, then the Lord thinks best to receive them into his kingdom, as Peter
was delivered out of prison by the Angel, Act. 12. because the Lord was yet to
use him in his service: but afterward when he had finished his course, the Lord
suffered the persecutors to deprive him of his temporal life, Polan.

4. Further it must be here considered, that there are two kinds of delivering
the servants of God, there is occulta liberatio, and manifesta, a secret
deliverance, and a manifest: the secret deliverance concerns their souls,
whom the Lord translateth to glory: wherein the Lord shows two great works,
both in giving them strength by their patience to triumph over the cruelty of
their persecutors, and in bringing them unto glory. And the Lords power is no
less seen intheir patience, (...)
then if he had temporally delivered them: as Rupertus speaking of the holy
Martyrdom of Laurentius* who was broyled upon a gridyron, says, gloriosius in
eo triumphauit, quam si excussisset carbones, the Lord did more gloriously
triumph in him, then if he had put out the coals. The other kind of
deliverance is notorious and manifest, which is seen in the safety of their
bodies, as these three were now delivered out of the fire: which kind of
deliverance God sometime sends for the confirmation of his Saints, and for
the confusion of the wicked, Polan.

Quest. 34. verse. 25. In what sense the king says, that the fourth was like
the son of God.
1. Some think that the king imagined, that the fourth was like the son of
God, that is, was one of the inferior or second sort of gods: for the Gentiles
thought, that the gods begat children of women, as Jupiter had Hercules and
Apollo, and these were called semidei, half gods: this opinion is mentioned by
Dyonis. Carthusian. and so Osiander says, that the king thought, that the gods
had sent, quendam ex minoribus dijs, some one of the less or inferior gods.
But this sperstitious and impious conceit of their half gods, was afterward
taken up by the Greeks, it was not at this time current among the Babylonians:
whose chief God Bell was, and next to him they adored and worshipped the Sun
and the stars.

2. Some do indeed take this to be understood of an Angel, as Hierome, Angeli
filij Dei nuncupantur, the Angels are called the sons of God: as Job: 1. 6.
and psalm. 89. 7. so also Calv. Perer. Polan. and their reason is, because the
king afterward says, that God had sent his Angel, v. 28. But 1. it is not
unusual in Scripture, for the son of God to be called an Angel, as Malach.
3. 1. the Angel of the covenant. 2. and though this phrase be used in
Scripture, to call the Angels the sons of God, yet it may be doubted, whether
the Gentiles used so to speak. 3. And though the king might take him to be an
Angel, yet the question is, whether he were an Angel, or indeed the son of
God.

3. Some add further, that this was an Angel, but likened to the son of God,
because he was a type of the incarnation of the son of God: that the son of
God should descend from heaven, suos e peccatorum flammis erepturus, to deliver
his out of the flames of their sins: Pintus, and before him Apollinarius. But
although this typical application may be made of it, yet Nebuchadnezzar being
utterly ignorant of the mystery of redemption, could not so understand it.

4. Some do think that Nebuchadnezzar means Christ the son of God: and
this opinion is divided: some take it, that Nebuchadnezzar had learned the
mystery of the incarnation of the Son of God of Daniel, as it was in some
sort declared unto him, in the interpretation of his dream, Pintus. But
Nebuchadnezzars gross superstition and idolatry, evidently shows, that he
had no such knowledge of Christ to come, Rupertus thinks, that mente non sua
locutus est, Nebuchadnezzar spoke he knew not what, as Saul and Caiphas
prophesied: and adds further, that it pleased God by the mouth of an heathen
man, to reveal this mystery, non enim tutum erat, aeternam filij ex patre Dei
generationem Iudaeis carnalibus enuntiare, for it was not safe to declare unto
the carnal Jews, the eternal generation of the Son from God the father,
Rupertus ibid.

But 1. it is evident by the text, that Nebuchadnezzar knew what he said,
calling him afterward an Angel, whom here he says, was like to the Son of
God. 2. and the mystery of the Trinity, and of the incarnation of Christ,
could not be more strange no not to the carnal Jews (among whom
notwithstanding were many believers) then unto the Gentiles.

5. Some take it, that this was but a phrase of speech to liken him to the
son of God, that is some excellent person, as excellent and eminent things
are so named; as the mountain of God, the army of God; that is, a great
mountain, a great army, Perer. as Homer called such (...), like unto God, or
borne of God, Iun. he saw in the countenance of the fourth, supra vultus
humani splendorem radiare aliquid, something to shine beyond the brightenesse
of man's countenance, Hug. Car. so also Lyranus. This is true, but not all.

6. Therefore these two things may be safely here affirmed, 1. that
Nebuchadnezzar here in this saying determines not what manner of person it
should be, whether God, or an Angel precisely, but in general, that it was
some divine presence. 2. yet in truth and in very deed it was Christ the
son of God, who appeared at this time in humane shape, and came to deliver
his servants: As Rupertus thereof yields this reason, it was a sign of that
which the Son of God was to do in his Church; quando enim non adfuit filius
Dei agonizantibus? for when was not the Son of God present with his servants
in their agonies? etc. This application is better then that of Lyranus, who
also understands that this was Christ the Son of God, but would have
thereby prefigured Christ's descension into hell, vbi animae sanctorum
tenebantur, etc. where the souls of the saints were held, but not burnt, that
they might be delivered, etc. But this is new and strange doctrine, that any
in the flames of hell should be delivered, or that the flames of hell should
not burn: of this opinion also are Pelican, and Osiander, that this was
Christ the son of God, their reason is, because he often before appeared to
Abraham, and Moses, and other Patriarchs and Prophets, assumpta humana forma,
assuming humane shape.

Quest. 35. Of the apparition of Angels in humane shape, what manner of bodies
they appeared in.
Because the opinion of the most is, that this was an Angel, which was here
seen in the mids of the furnace by Nebuchadnezzar, it shall not be amiss to
insert something of their manner of apparition.

1. That Angels, yea and the son of God himself sometime appeared visibly
unto men, though in their nature they are invisible spirits, it is most evident
by the manifold visions and apparitions, which were showed unto the
Patriarchs, and Prophets, so that this needs no further proof.

2. They appeared not in show only, as it were in imaginary, and
fantastical bodies, as Marcion held, whom Tertullian confuteth, but in very
sensible and palpable bodies, which might be felt, handled, and touched: such
bodies had those Angels, which came unto Lot.

3. Nor yet were their bodies taken out of any celestial matter, such as the
stars are made of, which was the fancy of Apelles, whom Tertullian
confuteth, lib. de carne Christ. but rather they consisted of some terrene
matter, because their bodies were palbable, and they did eat and drink.

4. Neither were these the proper bodies of Angels, which are of a spiritual
nature: we must not think, Angelos propriam carnem gestasse, that the Angels
did bear their own flesh, neither was it hypostatically united unto them, as
part of their person, but as Augustine says, tanquam vestes sumebant and
dep^nebant, they did assume them, and lay them down again as garments.

5. Great difference there was between the bodies, wherein the Angels
appeared, and the body which Christ walked in: for this body Christ took by
birth; so did not the Angels, as Tertullian says, non venerant mori, ideo nec
nasci, they came not to die, therefore they needed not to be borne.

6. And some difference there was between the bodies, which the Angels
assumed, and wherein Christ manifested himself in the old testament: for
Christ made unto him a body for the time of nothing, and laid it down again,
as it pleased him: but the Angels could not make their bodies, but they were
prepared of God, either of nothing, or out of some preexistent matter: but this
beginning rather their bodies had, the other of nothing was Christ's: Tertullian
then has here a bold assertion, lib. 3. aduers. Marcion.
proprium esse Angelicae potestatis, ex nulla materia sibi corpus sumere, that
it is proper unto the Angelical power to take unto them a body of no matter,
etc. but this power belongs only to the creator.

7. Now these bodies, if they were made of nothing, they were annihilated
again; if out of some matter, they were resolved again into it, as Tertullian
says, corpus Angelorum eadem ratione interceptum est, qua and editum, the
body of Angels was by the same means intercepted, and dissolved, by the which
it was made and came forth: si non fuit initium visibile, nec finis, as the
beginning of them was not visible, so no more the end, Polan.

Quest. 36. Why the Angels used to appear in humane shape.
1. One reason is, because of all sensible and visible creatures none comes
nearer the nature of Angels, then man, and therefore Angels have assumed unto
themselves the shape of man. 2. If the Angels should in any other form have
appeared, using the speech of man, it would have seemed monstrous. 3. And by
this the Angels did testify their love unto man, similitudo conciliat amorem,
for likeness of things begets love. 4. Because Angels do count men their
fellow servants: they propound unto them both the same end, everlasting
glory in heaven: they are both under the same head Christ. 5. the Angels did
so appear for the honor of Christ's incarnation, who they knew, should take
our nature upon him: they therefore by this means did dignifie the nature of
man. 6. Beside, the parts of man's body do express and set forth diverse
Angelical properties: as the head their understanding, the eyes their
knowledge, the hands their ministry, the feet their readiness and agilitie,
etc. these reasons may be rendered, why it pleased God, that the Angels should
manifest themselves in humane shape, Perer.

Quest. 37. Of the sudden change and conversion that was in Nebuchadnezzar with
the parts thereof.
Nebuchadnezzars conversion appears both by his religious actions toward God,
and by his thankful rewarding of his servants, ver. 30.

1. His religious acts consist. 1. in his confession of the praise of God. 2.
in the decree which he made concerning the name and worship of God.

1. Gods praise is set forth: both by his own work in the delivering of his
servants, by sending his Angel; and by the constancy of his servants, set
forth by two effects, in that they refused to obey the kings commandment, and
because they did rather chose to give their bodies to the fire, then to worship
any saving the Lord.

2. In the decree, there is first expressed the offense, if any should
blaspheme the name of God: then the punishment, which is twofold, upon their
bodies, they shall be drawn in pieces, and on their houses, they shall be made
a iakes: then the reasons added from the power of God.

2. Then is expressed, ver. 30. how Nebuchadnezzer promoted these three men in
the province of Babel, ver. 30.

Quest. 38. Whether this were a true conversion in Nebuchadnezzar.
1. Pererius thinks that Nebuchadnezzar was truly and indeed converted,
which he would prove by the effects thereof, namely these four. 1. the
confession of his error. 2. the advancing of true religion. 3. the exalting of
those that feared God. 4. and severe punishing of all blasphemers and enemies
unto God. But these were temporary effects, they continued not, they were
therefore no signs of a true conversion.

2. The truer opinion then is, that Nebuchadnezzar was but moved and affected
for a time, by the strangeness of this miracle, he was not truly converted.
1. As were the effects of his faith, such was his faith; but the effects were
but temporary, they lasted but a while, for presently after in the next
chapter, he seeks again unto his sorcerers, for the interpretation of his
dream, Iun. 2. he could have no true faith, because he had no true knowledge
of God, seeing in the same hour as it were, a little before, he had commanded
the golden image to be worshipped. 3. permiscuit idola sua vero Deo, he did
join his idols with the true God, Calvin. yet some think that he not long
after caused the image to be pulled down, Osiander. It is more like he did
not, because he continued in his old superstition, in being addicted still to
his enchanters, and sorcerers. 4. here was only a naked miracle, which is but
a preparatiue unto faith, here was no doctrine or instruction out of the word
of God, whereby faith is begotten in us, Calvin.

3. But Rupertus, although his opinion be right, lib. 6. de victor. verb. c. 23.
that this confession of Nebuchadnezzar, was tota respersa fermento tumidae
vanitatis, besprinckled with the leaven of swelling vanity: yet his reason is
not good, because he says, placuit mihi, it pleased me to declare the signs,
which God had wrought, apud me, with me, as though he should have said, nisi ob
gratiam mei, he did them only for my cause, whereas they were wrought against
him. Contra. 1. the words well interpreted are, it became me, not it pleased
me. 2. And these miracles and signs were wrought toward him or with him,
because he was thereby brought to acknowledge and confess his error, and to
give the praise unto God.

4. But Oecolampadius goes yet further, and gives such commendation of this
confession of Nebuchadnezzar: fungitur in hoc non solum poenitentis, fed and
Apostoli offici^, he herein discharges not only the duty of a penitent
person, but even of an Apostle also in writing of epistles, etc. But the king
confessed as much in effect before, cap. 2. 47. that the Lord was a God of
Gods, and the Lord of kings, and yet after that he made the image.

5. Yet on the other side, are we far from the opinion of Apollinarius, that
the king regio fastu condiderit hanc legem, etc. of princely pride and vanity
did make this law against blasphemers: But although these were but temporary
effects and fruits of his faith, yet for the time they were in truth: for if
the king had sought his pomp, he would not in this manner have laid open his
error to all the world, and praised the constancy of these men.

39. Quest. Whether blasphemy is to be punished with death.
1. Apollinarius thus objected, that the punishments which the Lord inflicteth
in his law, are executed (...), by way of amendment, not (...), by way of
retribution: for no punishment can counteruaile the greatness of sin: and
therefore in such sins such severity is not to be used.

2. Contra. 1. Deus internam pravitatem suo iudicio reservat, etc. God
reserueth the inward impiety for his own judgment, but the outward offense
the Magistrate is to restrain by law, Oecolampad. 2. By the law of God the
blasphemer was put to death. 3. And if an heathen Prince, did decree such a
severe punishment against blasphemy, much more ought a Christian Magistrate,
Polan. 4. Origin says, Hom. 11. in Lev.
si patri maledicens morte multatur, etc. if he that curses his father be put
to death, how much more he which blasphemeth God our heavenly father: the Canon
says, Can poenit. ^^
blasphem^us secundum legem est decapitandus, secundum canonem
anathematizandus, a blasphemer according to the (civil) law is to be beheaded,
according to the Canon, to be anathematized and held accursed.

In the Laterane Council thus it was provided against blasphemers, A notable
decree against blasphemers. Council. Later. sess. 9.
si munus publicum gesserit, etc. if he bare a public office, the first and
second time he should loose the benefit of his office for three months, the
third time he should be deprived: si Clericus, if he were a Clergy man, the
first time he should loose the profits of one whole year, the second, he was
to be deprived of his benefice: and the third time, inhabilis reddatur, he was
made incapable of that function: si nobilis, etc. if he were a noble man, the
first time he should pay 25. ducats, the second 50. the third time that he
offends, nobilitatum perdat, he should loose his nobility.

If he were a common person, he should be imprisoned: if he offended more then
twice, he was to be enjoined to stand one whole day before the Church door: if
yet he continued in the sin of blasphemy, ad perpetuos carceres, vel ad
triremes damnetur, let him be condemned to perpetual prison, or to the galleys.

40. Quest. Whether the three last verses do belong unto this second chapter.
v. 31. Nabuchadnezzer unto all people, nations, and languages, etc. The vulgar
Latin following the Septuag. so also Pererius, do make these three last
verses part of the third chapter: some also of the Hebrews do the like. But
they are better referred unto the history of the next chapter, as Iun. Vatab.
Calvin. Oecolampad. Pelican. Osiand. Bulling. so also Lyran. gloss. ordin.
Hugo Cardin. do think that this Epistle was written by the king, after the
Lord had humbled him, and deprived him of his understanding, and afterward
restored him again, as it follows in the next chapter: the reasons for
proof hereof are these.

1. Because the style and manner of writing in the first person, the epistle
begins thus, Nabuchadnezzer king, To all people, etc. and v. 32. I thought
it good: agrees with the first words of the next chapter, I Nabuchadnezzer,
etc. 2. He intends to declare the signs and wonders, which God wrought
toward him, such as specially concerned him, and none did more particularly
touch him, then his transformation into the life of a bruit beast. 3. If this
epistle should not have coherence with the narration following, it should be
much imperfect: for he says, I thought good to declare the signs and wonders:
and yet he declares none, if this epistle should not have relation to the next
chapter: Seeing then that these 3. last verses are a part of that chapter, the
questions here arising, shall be there handled.

4. The places of doctrine.
1. Doct. That the godly have always some enemi^ or other to encounter with.
v. 1. Nebuchadnezzer the king made an image of gold, etc. Many are the
adversaries and diverse the assaults and combats, which are opposed to the
faithful: their enemies are cither internal, which is their own corrupt
concupiscence, whereof S. Paul speaks, Romans 7. 23. I see an other law in my
members rebelling against the law of my mind: or external, which are enemies
spiritual and invisible, as Satan with all his temptations: as S. Paul says,
We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, etc.
against spiritual wickednesses, Ephesians. 6. 12. or enemies visible, which are
either Gentiles and idolaters, or heretics and schismatikes: as the Apostle
says, he was in danger among the Gentiles, and among false brethren, 2. Cor.
11. 26.

2. Doct. Of the manner of accusation, which the wicked lay in against the
servants of God.
v. 8. That same time came men of the Chaldeans and grievously accused the
Jews. 1. As the Chaldeans were the first that gave counsel to the king to
make this image, to entrappe the faithful Jews; so it is the guise of the
enemies of Gods Church to lay stumbling blocks before the servants of God, and
to make laws to entangle them: as they practiced against Daniel, c. 6.

2. They are ready to take any occasion to accuse them, as the Chaldeans here.

3. They omit no time, they use all speed and opportunity, to prosecute their
wicked enterprise: as the Chaldeans came the same time and hour, and made
their complaint.

4. They are flatterers, and make Princes believe, that they are very obseruant
of their laws, and pray for their prosperity: as here they wish the king may
live for ever: whereas they do only make a way hereby to work more mischief.

5. They do set themselves specially against poor strangers, and make them
odious by their country: as they say, v. 12. There are certain Jews.

6. They accuse them of unthankfulness, mutiny, and rebellion: as these
Chaldees do here, v. 12. and it is the usual accusation against the servants
of God, as though they were contemners of the laws and decrees of Princes.

3. Doct. That God is one.
v. 12. Neither will they serve thy gods, etc. The Gentiles brought in an
infinite number of gods: Hesiode says, that they worshipped 30. thousand gods:
the same also is testified by Eunomius, lib. de falsit. or aculor. Tertullian
in Apologet. alleges out of Marcus Varro, that they had thirty gods, called
by the name of Iuppiter.

1. But the Scripture evidently testifies, that God is but one: as, Deuteronomy. 6.
4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, is the Lord only. Deuteronomy. 32. 39. Behold,
hear O Israel, for I, am he, and there is no gods with me. Psalm. 86. 10. thou
art great, and do wondrous things, thou art God alone. Isa. 45. 5. I am the
Lord, and there is none other, there is no God beside me.

2. yea the Philosophers and wise men among the heathen, though the vulgar sort
worshipped a multitude of gods, did hold that there was but one beginning of
all things: as Trismegist. 4. dialog. Pymandri says, Vniuersum mundum verbo
non manibus fabricatus est opifex, etc. that one workman made all the world
with his word, not with hands. Orpheus in his verses calls God, protogon^^,
the first begotten, that nothing was before him, and, that all things were
created by him. Justinius Martyr alleges out of the verses of Sybil, vnus
Deus solus etc. that there is one God alone, unbegotten, omnipotent, invisible.
Sophocles both a Philosopher and a Poet, does affirm the one God to be the
creator of the world: so Thales, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Chrysippus, did
all affirm, that there was one God, whom they called a divine Spirit, and as
it were the soul of the world. And it is said of Aristotle, that, when he was
at the very point of death, he cried out, causa causarum miserere me^, O thou
cause of causes have pity on me. And they were induced thus to think by these
and such like reasons:

1. Because they saw, that in a Commonwealth the Monarchical state was the
best: in a kingdom one Prince, in an army one general, in a ship one
governor, in a beehiue one master-bee: so in the world there is one chief
Ruler and moouer of all things.

2. God is an infinite spirit: but one infinite thing can not stand with an
other.

3. God is love, unity, concord: but where many gods are, there is variety,
not unity, discord, not peace.

4. Like as in the body, though there be many and diverse parts, there is but
one soul, the fountain of life and motion in the body: so is it in the greet
world.

4. Doct. We must be resolute in religion.
v. 16. We are not careful to answer thee in this matter. These three holy men
could not be neither by hope of the kings favor, and of great rewards entised;
nor yet by fear of punishment terrified from their profession: Nay they would
not so much as admit of any deliberation in so evident a matter: As Cyprian
when he was required to take some time to pause, and consider with himself,
what he would do, uttered that worthy saying, In re tam certa nulla
deliberatio, in a matter so certain there need no further deliberation: So
these here answer, that they took no care how to answer the king: according to
that saying of our blessed Savior, Mark. 13. 11. When they lead you and
deliver you up, take ye no thought before, neither premeditate what ye shall
say, but whatsoever is given unto you at the same time, that speak, etc.

5. Doct. Of the difference of temporal and eternal promises.
v. 18. But if not, be it known unto thee, etc. Although God should not
deliver them out of this temporal danger, yet they would not leave their
profession: for they knew, that God being able to deliver them, yet he might
not show his power at this time for some causes best known unto himself.
There is a double kind of deliverance, one from everlasting death, which we are
absolutely sure of without any condition: there is a deliverance from temporal
danger, which we are assured ordinarily no otherwise of, then it pleases God,
and as he sees it may stand best with his glory and our good. In such
temporal cases, the Apostle teaches always to presuppose this condition,
Iam. 4. 1^.
If the Lord will.

6. Doct. Obedience is not to be given unto Magistrates in all things.
v. 22. The flame slew those men, etc. Because these tormentors and
executioners did yield obedience unto the king in a wicked and unjust thing,
they are worthily punished: God commands obedience unto princes, but not
against himself: so after this manner, the two captains with their fifties,
whom the king sent to take Elias, were destroyed with fire from heaven. Our
Savior says in the Gospel, that if the blind lead the blind, they shall both
fall into the ditch: both of them, not only the captain and ringleader, but
he also that is seduced and misled. Bulling.

7. Doct. Of the certentie of the resurrection.
v. 27. Not an hair of their head was burnt, etc. Tertullian collecteth from
hence, lib. de resurr. caruis.
that if God by his power preserved even the garments of these men, and the
hair of their heads from the fire; much more able is he to preserve the bodies
of his Saints from everlasting and final corruption, and to raise them up at
the last day: hence then he concludes, Dominum potentiorem omni corporum lege,
etc. that God is of power and might beyond the law of corruptible bodies. And
in that one hair of theirs was not burnt, here is verified that saying of our
blessed Savior, Matthew. 10. 30. All the hairs of your head are numbered, etc.

8. Doct. The maintenance of true religion belongs unto the civil Magistrate.
v. 29. Therefore I make a decree. Nebuchadnezzer here makes a severe law
against those, which should blaspheme the true God, whom these three
worshipped: whereupon Augustine infers well, that it belongs unto the
Magistrate to be conseruators and preseruers of true religion, poenam capitalem
constituit in eos, qui Deum illorum invenumblasphemarent, etc. he appoints a
capital punishment against them, 11. tractat. in Ioann.
which did blaspheme the God of those young men, etc. The Apostle says, that
the Magistrate is the minister of God, to take vengeance on him, that does
evil, Romans 13. 4. Therefore heretics and blasphemers, who are evil doers,
are to be censured and punished by civil laws, as well as other malefactors.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. That an image used for any religious use and an idol are all one.
v. 1. Nabuchadnezzer made an image of gold. The word is tzelem, which the
Septuag. translate (...), and image: so also Pagnin, Montan. Iun. and yet it
was a plain idol. Here then appears the vanity of that curious and
frivolous distinction of the Romanists, between an image, and an Idol: as
though an image should be only the true similitude of a thing, an idol the
representation of a thing, which is not: as were the idols of the heathen: for
this great idol represented no special person, it was erected for the honor
of their gods, yet is it called an image: see more of this question, Synops.
Cent. 2. err. 42.

2. Controv. Against the adoration of Images.
1. Hierome upon this example of these young men, that refused to fall down
before Nabuchadnezzers image, thus infers, Cultores Dei statuas adorare non
debent, etc. the worshippers of God must not worship images: therefore they
which worship the images of Emperors do that, quod tres p^eri facere
noluerunt, which these three children would not do. Pererius here answers,
that Hierome speaks against the worshipping of the Emperors images, not of
Saints, and of giving divine adoration unto them, after the manner of the
Gentiles. Contra. 1. If it be unlawful to adore the images of men living, much
more of them that are dead: A living dog is better then a dead lion, Eccles.
9. 4. 2. Hierome speaks not of adoring images, as gods, but simply of adoring
them: for the Gentiles did not hold their images to be their very gods, but
only representations of them: and therefore in the same place Hierome notes
these as two distinct things, Deos coli, imagines adorari, quod vtrunque servis
Dei non conuenit, for the gods to be worshipped, and the images to be adored,
both of which do not beseem the servants of God.

2. Lactantius urges these reasons against idolatry. 1. Imago hominis tum
videtur necessaria, cum procul abest, etc. the image of a man is then thought
to be necessary, when he is absent and far off, but then it is superfluous,
when he is present, and at hand. But the Spirit of God being every where
dispersed, can never be absent, therefore an image of God is always
superfluous, lib. 2. Institut. c. 2. 2. Images are but the portraitures and
pictures of men: now it is inconvenient, vt simulachru^ hominis, a simulachro
Dei homine adoretur, that the image of a man should be worshipped of man, who
is the image of God. l. 2. instit. c. 18.

3. Worshippers of Images do offend in these 3. things: 1. in worshipping that
which is not God: for the images and idols, which they worship, are not gods:
so Ierem. c. 2. charge the Israelites, because they dug unto them pits,
which could hold no water. 2. They offend, quando colitur Deus, sed non solus,
when God is worshipped, but not only: as the Israelites in Elias time served
God and Baal together, which he calls, an halting between two opinions, 1.
king. 18. 3. Though they intend Gods worship only, yet they sin in
worshipping him after an other manner, then the Lord has prescribed in his
word: as Jeroboam brought in new rites and ceremonies, and other Priests, then
were appointed by the law. Bulling.

4. The beginning and invention of Idols was from the heathen: as in the book
of wisdom it is said, c. 14. 13. The vain glory of men brought them into the
world: so Gregorius the Bishop of Neocaesarea said, Council. Nicen. 2. action. 6.
Gentilit as inuentrix and caput imaginum, Gentilitie was the inuenter and head
of images. Eusebius speaking of the images of Christ, of Peter and Paul, says,
lib. 7. c. 18^
hoc mihi videtur ex gentili consuetudine obseruatum, this seems to me to be
observed according to the custom of the Gentiles: for they use to honor those
whom they count worthy of honor. So the Emperors H^liogabalus, Adrianus,
Alexander Severus, used to set up in their Chapels the images of Abraham,
Moses, Christ. Likewise the Gnostike and Carpocratian heretics did worship the
pictures of Christ, of Paul, Pythagoras, Homer, as Iraen. (...).
witnesses, l. 1. c. 24. Athanasius therefore well says, simulachrorum
inuentio non a bono, etc. that the invention of images came not of any good,
but evil: as it is said, Wisd. 14. 11. The beginning of idols was the
beginning of whoredom, and the finding of them is the corruption of life.
Hereupon it is, that the Jews suffer no image painted or graven in their
Synagogues, Dion. l. 37. nay Orig^n testifies, they would not suffer any
caruer or painter to remain in their countr^y, lib. 4. cont. Celsum. See more
of this Controv. Synops. Cent. 2. err. 44.

3. Controv. Whether images in Churches may be tolerated, though they be not
adored.
1. Pappus here makes 3. kind of Images: some were set up for idolatry, and
these he would have removed: there are two other kind: some do set forth the
histories of the old and new Testament, some are only for ornament in
Churches: neither of these are prohibited, as evidently appears by the
building both of Moses Tabernacle, and of Salomons Temple: but here it is the
part of the Minister to admonish the people to take heed of idolatry: so he
concludes that the use of Images in it self is to be counted among
indifferent things.

2. 1. This distinction of images and pictures, as some were set up for
superstition, some are for history, some for ornament, we greatly mislike not:
but if he grant, that all images set up for idolatry ought to be demolished,
then all such likewise, which may be abused to idolatry; as all carved and
graven images are of that kind. 2. Such kind of images, which are carved and
fashioned with proportion, and not painted only and pictured, serve not at all
for history: therefore by that pretext they cannot be excused. 3. And though
there may be an outward comelines to the eye, in the gilding and garnishing of
images; yet such comelines must serve unto edifying: but if offense rather and
occasion be feared thereby, the inward comelines and decency is more to be
respected, then the seemelines of the object to the eye. 4. It is a more
compendious way to remove the stumbling block, then to put it before the
feet, and then bid men to take heed of it: so it were better to take away the
very occasion of idolatry, then it remaining to warn the people to take heed.
5. And the use of images for religion is no indifferent thing: as the very
place does show, that images set up in Churches, have a certain religious
respect. 6. Lastly the Apostles saying, Babes keep your selves from idols, 1.
Ioh. 5. 21. does not only will them to take heed of idolatry, but even to
shun the occasion, and to remove the stumbling block.

4. Controv. Of the ways and means, whereby idolatry is promoted.
1. As here this image is set up by the authority of the king: so the
Romanists do by the authority of Princes get the adoration of images
commanded.

2. He causes it to be made of gold, that it might allure them the more: and
so the Papists do adorn their images and Temples with gold.

3. The image is made of an huge bigness, that it might be the more admired for
the greatness thereof: so in the Popish Churches they have their Crucifixes made
of great proportion, and other images, as of S. Christopher, that they might
draw the eyes of the people unto the^.

4. Nabuchadnezzer makes choice also of a convenient place, in a great plain:
and the Romanists think to grace their images by the place, setting them up in
Churches and Churchyards, in crosses and high ways.

5. The king has here the consent of all his nobles for the setting up of this
image: so was it a decree among the Romans, that no god should be consecrated
of the Emperor, unless the Senate approved it: and therefore when Tiberius
moved that Christ should be received into the number of the gods, because the
Senate would not consent, it was not done: hereupon Tertullian says, nisi
homini Deus placuerit, Deus non erit, unless God be pleasing unto man, he
shall not be God. After this manner the Papists do urge consent and agreement,
of all states among them, of Princes, Dukes, Nobles, Cardinals, Bishops.

6. Here was a bloody decree made against those, that would not worship this
image, they are threatened the fiery furnace: So in the persecution under the
Roman Emperors, the Christians were put to unspeakable torments, as
Tertullian describes, Apologet. c. 12.
crucibus and stipitibus imponitis Christianos, etc. you put Christians upon
crosses and stakes: you tear and scratch their sides with claws and nails,
etc. we are cast unto beasts, burnt with fire, etc. Even these also are the
engines and instruments wherewith the Papists persecute the servants of Christ,
the fire and sword.

7. This idolatrous service of the Image is set forth with all kind of variety
of music, to affect the minds of the simple, and to stir up their
superstitious affections: So among the Romanists their service is attended upon
with instruments of music, which make a dumb sound, nothing being understood
that is sung or played.

8. Thus by all these means superstition and idolatry is countenanced by
authority of Princes, consent, severity of decrees, and such like, and yet
prevails not; whereas the truth is naked, has neither consent, nor
authority on it side, but all things against it, yet it prospers, to make
that saying good of the Apostle, The foolishnes of God is wiser then men, and
the weakness of God is stronger then men, 1. Cor. 1. 25.

5. Controv. Of the use of Church music, and musical instruments.
v. 7. As soon as the people heard the sound of the trumpet, cornet, etc.
Because Idolaters abuse musical instruments to insinuate their superstition,
it follows not, that there can be no right use of them in the Church of God.

1. It is evident in the titles of diverse Psalms of David, that they were sung
and played upon instruments, which should not have been used in the Church of
God, if they had been simply unlawful, Papp. neither can it be said, that
the use of such musical instruments then was altogether ceremonial: for they
used them as well in their civil reioycings, as in their Ecclesiastical
assemblies: the use thereof holding still in the one, can not be utterly
condemned in the other. Concerning singing, S. Paul allows speaking in hymns
and Psalms, and spiritual songs: the Christians, as Plinius secundus writ
unto Trajane, had their antelucanos hymnos, their morning songs, which they
song before day unto Christ: Flavianus and Theodorus at Antioch, Basil in the
East Churches, and Ambrose at Millaine brought up the use of singing.

2. Yet Christians now are not to take the same liberty in these external
parts of Gods service, as the Church of the Jews did: but as they kept their
Sabbath with outward observations, much respecting the corporal rest: but
Christians now make the outward rest the least part of the Lords day,
consecrating the same chiefly to spiritual exercises: So now the greatest part
of the service of God must be spent in spiritual instruction: the other must
be used only as an handmaid.

3. These rules then ought to be observed in Church songs and music: 1. that
it ought to be grave and sober, and musical instruments should so be handled,
vt ad cantus solennes Ecclesiasticos adhibeantur, that they be applied unto the
songs of the Church, non ad vagam and inanem aurium delectationem, not for the
wandering and vain delight of the ears, etc. that all things in the Church may
be done to edifying. 2. Vt non mayor pars temporis illis instrumentis
tribuatur, etc. that the greater part of time should not be given unto those
instruments and songs, and the less to the word of God and the Sacraments: but
as the Apostle says, that all things be done, (...), in order, and decently:
that every part of divine service, as it is more necessary, so it should have
the most time: Papp. 3. We must not rest in the outward sound, to imagine that
God is pleased and satisfied with such melody: for this was the difference
between the use of instruments in the Church of God among the Jews there, and
among the idolatrous Chaldeans: they used them as helps of their infirmity,
yet manebat illud principium, spiritualiter Deum esse colendum, that principle
remained, that God was spiritually to be worshipped: But the other, putarunt se
Deo satisfecisse, thought they had satisfied God, if they did heap together
musical instruments. Calvin. We may then sing and speak in hymns and
psalms, but we must make a melody also in our hearts, Ephesians. 5. 19. whosoever
sings with his voice and not with his heart, mocketh God, and deceives
himself. This then is the difference between religious, and superstitious
devotion: true devotion is first wrought within by the preaching of Gods word,
and then is helped without by such external means: but superstition and blind
devotion first begins with the ear and eye, and then affects the heart:
where the Lord then is rightly served, they that worship him first do believe
with the heart, and then they confess with the mouth, Romans 10. 10. Concerning
the moderate use of Church music, see more Synops. papism. p. 594.

6. Controv. That the multitude of professors does not argue the truth of the
profession.
v. 3. All the gouerners of the Provinces were assembled to the dedicating of
the image. If the truth should here have been tried by the multitude, then
Nebuchadnezzers idolatry should have had the approbation, which was received
of so many thousands, whereas here were only three found to be the true
worshippers of God. It is true therefore, as Cyprian says, multitudo errantium
non parit errori patrocinium, that the multitude of those that err, is no
patronage for error: Our blessed Savior says, Broad is the way that leads
to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: and the way is narrow
which leads unto life, and few there be that find it, Matthew. 7. 13, 14. Then
the Romanists do in vain object and obtrude their universality and
multitudes: for never was any sect or profession in the world more universally
received, then was the Pagans idolatry: and the number of true professors,
has always been the smallest: as our blessed Savior calls his flock, A
small flock, Luke 12. 32. see further, Synops. Cent. 1. err. 19.

7. Controv. Of superstitious dedications.
v. 3. They were assembled to the dedication of the image. Nabuchadnezzer in
the dedication of this image, offended two ways, 1. in the end and use, in
that he dedicateth it to an idolatrous purpose, for the which he had no
warrant. 2. in the manner, he did dedicate it only by a pompous, and
theatricall solemnity, with all kind of lasciuiousnes and excess, as the
Israelites did consecrate their golden calfe: Such like dedications have the
Papists of their Churches to this day, 1. they consecrate them to a false end,
as dedicating them unto Saints, and making them temples of the breaden body of
Christ: 2. they use diverse superstitious toys, as oil, salt, ashes, tapers,
and such like: whereas it is prayer and the word, whereby Churches, as all
other things are consecrated to their proper end and use: Bulling. see more
hereof Synops. Cent. 2. err. 58.

8. Controv. That Councels and general assemblies may err.
Verse. 4. Be it known unto you all people, nations, and languages: Here was a
very general assembly, and Council gathered together, out of the most famous
kingdoms and provinces of the world: who all notwithstanding erred and were
deceived, in setting up and adoring this image: And not only were the great
councels of the heathen and Gentiles thus deceived, but even among the people
of God also: as Aaron with the greatest part of Israel did all consent and
join together to make a golden calfe: therefore the Romanists, standing upon
the decrees and constitutions of their general Councels, which they
erroneously hold, cannot err, do therein deceive themselves and others,
Bullinger, See further Synops. Cen. 1. er. 33.

9. Controv. The fire, and sword, and other cruelties the weapons of idolaters
and superstitious men.
Verse. 6. Whosoever falls not down, etc. shall be cast into the mids of a
fiery furnace. After the same manner were the holy martyrs used in the most
cruel and bloody persecutions under the Emperors of Rome, Apologet. c. ^.
as Tertullian complains, ad bestias impellimur, ignibus vrimur, in metalla
damnamur, in insulas relegamur, we are forced unto the beasts, burned with
fire, condemned to the metals, banished into the Islands, etc. with these
engines have the Popes of Rome raged against the servants of Christ, in
Germany, Italy, France, Spain, England, Scotland, condemning them to the
fire, as our Blessed Savior foretold, it shall come to pass that whosoever
kills you, will think he does God service, John. 16. 1.

10. Controv. That these three servants of God were not delivered from the fire
for their virginity or abstinencie.
Verse. 25. VValking in the mids of the fire, and they have no hurt: Damascene
thinks that they were not hurt of the fire, because they kept their
virginity: lib. 4. but no such thing appears in this story, that they lived
unmarried: Basil in a certain homily of the praise of fasting, does ascribe
this their deliverance unto their fasting. But the Apostle puts us out of
doubt, that they were preserved by their faith, Heb. 11. 33. through faith they
stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire: As Pintus well
observes.

11. Controv. Against the Vbiquitares.
They which maintain the omnipresence of Christ's flesh, and that the body of
Christ may be in the Eucharist without the essential properties thereof, as
circumscription, quantity, visibilitie, and such like, do thus reason out of
this place: the burning heat is an essential property of the fire, but this
was separated from the fire, and yet the essence of the fire remained:
therefore the essential properties of a thing may be separated from it, the
nature still remaining.

Contra. 1. The burning faculty of the fire is not an essential property,
but an effect of the heat, which is an essential quality of the fire. 2. the
heat was not separated from the fire, for then it should have been no longer
fire: but the heat thereof was only restrained, and hindered from working, and
that not generally, but only where the servants of God were, for without the
furnace the flames killed the kings ministers: and if the fire had lost the
heat, the miracle had not been so great, for a thing not being hot, not to
be burnt, Polan. 3. If all this were admitted, it serves not their turn; for
here the Scripture testifies, that there was fire, and yet it burned not: they
must then show the like warrant for their miracle in the Eucharist, that a
body should be there without the due properties: it follows not because it
pleased God at this time to show a miracle to set forth his glory, that he
should do so continually.

12. Controv. That miracles are not always a note and sure mark of the Church.
1. The true notes and marks of the Church are such as are always seen in
it: but the Church of God always has not the power of miracles, neither is it
always necessary. Again, the true marks of the Church cannot be found else
where, but miracles may be wrought by those, which are not of the Church, as by
the forcerers of Egypt: and Antichrist shall work wonders, 2. These. 2. and
false Prophets may give signs, which may come to pass, Deuteronomy. 13. 1.

2. But it will be thus further objected: that, whereby God is acknowledged, is
a note of the Church, but God is here confessed and acknowledged by
Nebuchadnezzar by this miracle, therefore it was a note of the Church. Ans. 1.
That whereby God always and only is acknowledged is a note of the Church: but
such are not signs and miracles, for sometime they may seduce and draw away
from God. 2. God is in some sort known by miracles, but only in respect of
his power, he is not sufficiently known, but by his word, and therefore by
this reason the word of God is the proper note of the Church, whereby the Lord
is most absolutely known: and yet this is denied by the Romanists, Polan. 3.
This must be understood of true miracles, which are wrought by the spirit of
God, and are applied to a right end: this reason holds not for false
miracles. 4. true miracles then do for that time demonstrate the Church, while
that gift and power remains: but a perpetual note it cannot be of the
Church, because that power always remains not. See more hereof, Synops.
Centur. 1. err. 22.

13. Controv. Whether a contrary religion may be tolerated in a commonwealth.
1. Nebuchadnezzar here makes a decree, that whosoever spoke any blasphemy
against the God, whom these three worshipped, should be punished: hereupon this
question is moved by Polanus, whether the prince is only to suffer the true
religion to be professed in his kingdom: wherein these three considerations
are to be had.

1. If the kingdom is such as has an absolute government, and the true
religion is already settled and established: in this case no mixture of
contrary religion is to be admitted: As diverse good kings of Judah are
reproved, because they removed not the high places: But Josias for his
faithfulness is commended, who put down the Chemarims, and abolished all
monuments of superstition.

2. If the kingdom be such, as professes corrupt religion, which cannot be
removed all at once, then the godly prince intending reformation, must content
himself to do, what he may; and to follow Nebuchadnezzars president, who
although idolatry were not then abolished, yet provides that no iuiurie
should be offered unto true religion, nor blasphemy uttered against the true
God: So where true religion cannot be drawn in altogether, it must set in
foot as it may: as now is seen in the kingdom of France.

3. Sometime where true religion is professed in a state not of absolute
government, for peace sake, and to avoid sedition, the magistrates are
constrained to tolerate some errors, as wise pilates for the time giving way
unto the tempest, Polan. as the Israelites suffered, the Cananites to dwell
among them, whom they could not expel at once.

14. Controv. That the conversion of Nebuchadnezzar here does not signify the
conversion of the devil in the end of the world.
Lyranus here notes the opinion of some, which think that Nebuchadnezzar this
proud king was herein a type of the devil, who in the end and consummation of
the world, should receive and embrace the true knowledge of God.

But this heresy is opposite to the Scriptures, which calls it everlasting
fire which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew 24. 41. and S. Jude
says, that the Angels which fell are reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness, Jude 6. And the Devils cannot be converted or saved but by a
Mediator: Christ is no Mediator for them, for he in no sort took the Angels,
that is, their nature, Heb. 2. 16.

6. Moral observations.
1. Obseruat. The mutable state of religion in kingdoms.
Verse. 1. Nebuchadnezzar, etc. made an image. Not only the favor of the king
was mutable, for whom he lately extolled, he now adiudgeth to the fire, but his
mind was variable concerning religion: he which before confessed the God of
Israel, now sets up idolatry in despite of God. Thus in the time of the
kings of Judah religion often altered, and changed, sometime the true worship
of God flourished, as under Hezekiah and Josias, but their wicked sons after
them set up idolatry, Bulling. Thus was it in England, King Edward maintained
the Gospel, Queen Marie brought in the Mass again: Thus there is no
certainty of any thing in this world: the Church is like the Moon, sometime
increasing, and again sometime decreasing: which teaches us, that the members
of the Church, should in the prosperity thereof look for change: that they
may not be unprepared, but say with Job, the thing which I feared is come upon
me. Job. 3. 25.


2. Obseruat. That not every one, which upon a sudden passion confesses God,
is truly converted.
This notably appears here in Nebuchadnezzar, who before being astonished at
the interpretation of his dream, confessed the true God, and yet after this he
sets up an image: So Herod did reverence John, and heard him gladly, and did
many things, yet was he but an hypocrite: We must not then be hasty to give
approbation of such, as do show some sudden fruits and effects of religion,
nor be too forward to commit our selves to their trust, but we must expect a
while, and we shall soon see them to return unto their old guise, Po. to this
purpose says the wiseman, be that praises his friend with a loud voice, (that
is, without cause) it shall be counted to him as a curse, Prou. 27. 14.

3. Obseruat. We ought rather to die, then to deny our religion.
As these three faithful servants of God are willing not only to loose their
honor and place of dignity, but their life also rather then to dishonor God.
Some write that there is a certain little beast called the mouse of Armenia,
which will rather die, then be defiled with any filth or unclean thing, in so
much, as if her hole be desmeared with dirt, she will rather choose to be
taken, then to be polluted: Such ought the servants of God to be, to endure any
thing, rather then to corrupt and defile their consciences, Pin. Such was the
excellent resolution of S. Paul, Act. 21. 13. I am ready not to be bound
only, but to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

4. Obseruat. We must obediently submit our selves, and all we have to the
Lords good will and pleasure.
Verse. 18. Our God, whom we serve, it able to deliver us, but if not, etc. Here
these holy men do commit themselves to Gods providence, whether he deliver
them or no, they are contented; they will not be unfaithful: they will not
condition with God, as though their present deliverance should be the reward of
their service: but they refer themselves wholly to his will and pleasure: as
Theodoret excellently says, gubernatori nostre, quocunque ei libuerit, nauem
dirigendam committimus, we do commit our bark to our Pilate to be guided,
which way it pleases him, Perer. Act. 21. 14.
So the disciples answ^red Paul when they saw him so resolute, the will of God
be done.

5. Obseruat. Of the utility of affliction.
Verse. 25. I see walking in the mids of the fire, and they have no hurt. As
this fiery furnace hurt not the bodies of these three men, so affliction is
profitable, not hurtful to Gods children: thereby their patience is tried, and
God glorified: like as the most wholesome medicines are most unpleasant, so
affliction, though profitable to the soul, is unsavory to the flesh, Pintus.
So the Prophet David says, Psalm. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted.

6. Obseruat. Of the contentment of Gods children in the mids of their
affliction.
Verse. 26. As here these holy men would not come forth of the fiery furnace
until Nebuchadnezzar called them, but had their comfort and contentment in
God: so the servants of God in their affliction do patiently expect and wait
the end and term, which God has set for their trial, Polan. as Job
excellently says, cap. 13. 15. Lo, though he slay me, yet will I put my trust
in him: and David says, Psalm. 39. I held my peace because it was thy doing.
Such comfort did the holy martyrs find in their greatest torments, that they
made no have to come out of them, nay they most desirously ran unto them.

CHAP. IIII.
1. The Argument and Method.
THe sum of this chapter is to show how Nebuchadnezzar was after a most
extraordinary manner humbled for his pride in the which narration, the
efficient cause of his humiliation is described to be God, the material cause
Nebuchadnezzar himself, the formal, it is set down in the manner of an
epistle, the final cause is the conversion of Nebuchadnezzar to Gods glory,
and the comfort of his Church.

The Chapter has two parts. 1. the inscription of the epistle, in the three
last verses of the last chapter, which are rather to be referred unto this, as
is showed before, cap 3. quest. 40. the order and parts of the inscription are
also showed before, cap. 3. quest. 37.

1. The body of the epistle consists. 1. of the exordium, or beginning,
describing in general, 1. the dream of the king, who, where, and in what
manner he dreamed. 2. the inquisition for the interpretation thereof, of the
wise men, which was frustrate, to ver. 6.

2. The narration follows: where 1. there is the declaration of the dream to
verse. 16. 2. the interpretation thereof, verse. 26. 3. the accomplishment, ver.
26. to the end.

1. In the declaration: there is, 1. the description of the tree, verse. 8. 9.
2. of the overthrow of the tree with the manner thereof, ver. 13. 3. the
certainty of it with the end, v. 14.

2. In the interpretation. 1. there is the preamble to it, wherein is contained
Nebuchadnezzars request unto Daniel, v. 15. and Daniels delberate answer after
a certain pause, v. 16. 2. then follows. 1. the interpretation it self,
consisting of the exposition, both of the tree and the beautiful state
thereof, verse. 19. then of the overthrow of the same, what is signified
thereby, ver. 20. to verse. 24. 3. the counsel of Daniel to the king, v. 24.

3. The accomplishment comprehends. 1. the occasion, by the proud words of
Nebuchadnezzar, where are expressed, the time, place, and words, which he
uttered, 27. 28. 2. the judgment. 1. denounced, verse. 28. 29. 2. executed in
his humiliation, ver. 30. restitution to his humane condition and
understanding, 31. and to his kingdom, verse. 33. 3. the effects are the
praising of God, and confessing of his power, ver. 32. 34.

2. The diverse readings.
1. ver. Nebuchadnezzar king unto all people, nations, and languages, that
dwell in all the earth (world. G.) peace be multiplied unto you (this with the
two verses following, though they are usually put to the third chapter, yet are
better joined with the fourth chapter, as the argument of the epistle shows,
which is but a preface unto the narration following, and thus. V. I. L. B. do
divide and distinguish the chapter.

2. It seemed good unto me ( it was meet before me. C. it became me. I. it was
my duty. V. it pleased me. L. but these do omit the word (kadam) before) to
declare the signs and wonders, which the high God has wrought toward me.

3. How great are his signs, and how mighty are his wonders, his kingdom is
and everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to generation, (
with generation, and generation.)

4. I Nebuchadnezzar being at rest ( happy. V.) in mine house, and
flourishing, ( like the spreading boughs. C.) in my palace.

5. I saw a dream, which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed and
the visions of mine head troubled me.

6. Therefore I set forth a decree, to bring before me all the wise men of
Babel, to make known unto me ( to show unto me. caeter.) the interpretation
of the dream.

7. So came the magicians, astrologians, Chaldeans, and Soothsayers, and I told
the dream before ( to them. G. B.) but they could not make known unto me the
interpretation thereof.

8. Till at the last Daniel ( Daniel the colleague. L. S. but acharin being
only found in this place, as R. Kimhi, is better interpreted here at the last)
came before me, whose name was Belteshazzar, according to the name of my God,
which has the spirit of the holy gods in him, and before him I told the dream.

9. O Belteshazzar, chief of the Magicians, because I know that the spirit of
the holy gods is in thee, and not any secret puts thee to business ( is
impossible unto thee, L. or escapes thee. V. or troubles thee, G. B. or
oppresses thee. I. the word (anas) signifies to trouble, to put to
business,) tell me the visions of my dream, which I have seen, that is, I.
(and caeter* but it is not here a conjunction copulative, for he desires only
the interpretation of his dream, ver. 15. he declares his dream himself)
the interpretation thereof.

10. Thus were the visions ( not vision. L.) of mine head in my bed: I did
behold, and lo a tree in the mids of the earth, and the height thereof was
great.

11. A great tree and strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and
the sight thereof to the end of all the earth.

12. The boughs thereof ( bough. C. the singular is put for the plural, not
the leaves thereof. L.) were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was
meat for all: the beasts of the field took shade, I. B. (not it made shade.
G. or the beasts dwelt) under it, and in the boughs thereof dwelt the fowls
of heaven, and all flesh fed of it.

13. I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and behold a watchman, and
an holy one came down from heaven.

14. And cried aloud ( with strength. C.) and said thus, Hew down the tree,
and break off his branches: shake of his leaves, and scatter his fruit, that
the beasts may flee from under it, and the fowls from his branches.

15. Nevertheless leave the stumpe (not the budde) of his roots in the earth,
and with a band of iron and brass bind it, among the grass of the field (not,
which is without) and let it be wet ( dipped. C.) with the dew of heaven, and
with the beasts ( beast. C.) let his portion be among the grass of the field.

16. Let his heart be changed ( let them change. C.) from a man's ( from a man)
and let a beasts heart be given unto him, and let seven times be passed (
changed. L.) over him.

17. The sentence is according to the decree of the watchmen, and the request
according to the word of the holy ones. B. I. V. not, and the word of the holy
ones, and the request, (and) is but once in the original, nor according to the
word of the holy ones the demand was answered. G. for this last word is not in
the original) to the intent that ( until. L.) the living may know, that the
most high has power over the kingdom of men ( man. C.) and gives it to whom
he will, and appoints over it the most abject of men.

18. This is the dream that I king Nebuchadnezzar have seen, now thou
Belteshazzar tell the interpretation thereof: for all the wisemen of my
kingdom are not able to make known the interpretation: but thou art able, for
the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.

19. Then Daniel whose name was Belteshazzar was amazed. I. (stood as
astonished. V. held his peace. L. B. G. S. but the word (shamam) signifies
properly to be astonished, amazed, to wonder) by the space of an hour, and his
thoughts troubled him: and the king spoke and said, Let neither the dream, nor
the interpretation thereof trouble thee: then Belteshazzar answered and said,
The dream be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine
enemies.

20. The tree which thou saw, which was great and mighty, whose height
reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof through all the earth.

21. Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat
for all, under the which the beasts of the field dwelt, and the fowls of the
heaven did sit.

22. It is thou O king, that art great and mighty, for thy greatness is
grown, and reaches unto the heaven, and thy dominion is to the end of the
earth.

23. Whereas the king saw a watchman, and an holy one, that came down from
heaven, and said, Hew down the tree, and destroy it, yet leave the stumpe of
the roots thereof in the earth, and with a band of iron and brass bind it,
among the grass of the field, and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and
let his portion be with the beasts of the field, till seven times pass over
him.

24. This is the interpretation O king, ( not of the king. I.) and this is the
decree of the most high, which is come upon my Lord the king.

25. That they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the
beasts of the field, and they shall make thee ^ate grass like the oxen, ( thou
shall ^at. L.) and they shall wet thee with the dew of heaven, till thou know
that the most high bears rule over the kingdom of men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will.

26. And whereas they said (not, he said. L.) that they should leave the stumpe
of the tree roots, thy kingdom shall be stable unto thee ( or remain unto
thee. L. B. G.) after thou shall have known ( have learned to know. L.) that
the heavens bear rule.

27. Wherefore O king let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off
thy sins by righteousness, I. G. B. (not redeem thy sins. V. L. by alms
deeds. L. for (pharach) signifies to break off, as it is taken, Genesis 27. 40.
and the other word ( tzidecah,) signifies righteousness) if so be thy peace
may be prolonged. I. A. P. V. (better then, that there may be an healing of
thine error. G. B. or God may forgive thy sins. L. S.

28. All these things came (not shall come. G. or touch. B.) upon the king
Nebuchadnezzar.

29. At the end of twelve months, he walked in the palace of the kingdom of
Babylon.

30. And the king spoke and said, Is not this great Babel, that I have built,
for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of
my majesty?

31. While the word was in the kings mouth ( the word being yet in the kings
mouth, C. V. A. I.) a voice came down from heaven, saying, To thee be it
spoken ( they speak, C.) O king Nabuchadnezzer, thy kingdom is departed from
thee:

32. And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the
beast of the field: they shall make thee to ear grass ( they shall cause thee
to taste grass. C.) like the oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee,
until thou know, that the most high bears rule over the kingdom of men,
and gives it to whomsoever he will.

33. The very same hour was this word ( this thing, G. this matter, B.)
fulfilled upon Nabuchadnezzer, and he was driven from men, and did eat grass
as the oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were
grown, as eagles feathers, and his nails as birds claws.

34. And at the end of these days, I Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes to
heaven, and mine understanding (or mind. V. I.) returned unto me, ( was
restored unto me. L. B. G.) and I blessed the most high, and I praised and
glorified him, that lives for ever, because his power ( whose power. B. G.) is
an euerl^sting power, and kingdom is from generation to generation.

35. And all the inhabitants of the earth, are reputed as nothing: and
according to his will he works in the army of heaven, and in the inhabitants
of the earth: and there is not any that can stay ( resist. L. B.) his hand, or
say unto him, What do thou?

36. At the same time did mine understanding return unto me, and I returned to
the glory of my kingdom: my glory and my beauty was restored ( returned.
C.) unto me, and my counselors and my princes sought unto me, and I was
established in my kingdom, and my glory was augemented toward me.

37. Now therefore I Nebuchadnezzar, praise, and extol, and magnify the king
of heaven, because all his works are truth, and his ways judgment, and those
that walk in pride he is able to abase.

3. The questions discussed.
Quest. 1. Of the kings epistle, the sum and parts thereof.
This epistle of the king consists of the exordium, or beginning in three
verses: which some make part of the third chapter, whose opinion is refuted
before, quest. 40. 3. chap. and the narration in this whole chapter.

The exordium or beginning, which is the general inscription, contains 1.
the salutation. 2. the general argument of the whole epistle. 1. the
salutation shows, 1. the author and writer, Nebuchadnezzar. 2. the persons to
whom he writes, to all nations, and languages, under his kingdom. 3. the
salutation it self* peace be multiplied.

2. In the argument three things are declared. 1. what he will set forth, the
signs and wonders of God, which are amplified by two adjuncts, of the
greatness and strength. 2. what moved him to declare them, because they were
showed toward him, he had particular experience of them. 3. to what end, to
make known the power of Gods everlasting kingdom.

Quest. 2. At what time Nebuchadnezzar wrote this epistle.
1. It is evident, by the salutation of the epistle, wherein the king wishes
peace unto all nations, that as Oecolampad* notes, quietus erat in regno, and
militiae finem fecerat, he was now quiet in his kingdom, and had made an end
of war, etc. it is clear then that this epistle was written after he made an
end of conquering, and subduing the nations round about.

2. Further the conquest of Egypt fell out after the 25. year of Ieconias
captivity, Ezec. 29. 17. which was 10. year before the end of
Nebuchadnezzars reign, for in the 37. year of Iechonias captivity began
Euilmerodach the son of Nebuchadnezzar to reign.

3. This fearful and strange accident then of Nebuchadnezzars transmutation,
his deiecting from his throne, and restoring again, might fall out some 9. or
10. years before the end of his reign, Perer: and this epistle might be
written two years before his death, Iun. for one year after this dream, ver.
26. he was driven from among men, and lived 7. years among the beasts.

Quest. 3. How Nebuchadnezzar could write unto all the people in the world.
1. Calvin thinks, that here the king superbe locutus est, spoke proudly, as
making himself Lord of the whole earth: as the Romans, because they had a
large dominion, called Rome Dominam totius orbis, the Lady of the whole world:
so also Polan. But that Nebuchadnezzar did not this of any ostentation, may
appear both by the end of his writing, which was to set forth the power of
Gods kingdom, and by his style, he contenteth himself with one title, calling
himself king, whereas the Emperors of Rome used many swelling titles of their
conquests, as Parthicus, Persicus, Germanicus, etc. of Parthia, Persia,
Germania, and such like, Bulling.

2. The same author makes this the reason, because now this epistle, being
preserved unto our times, as the rest of the Scriptures by the spirit of God,
is indeed written and made known to all people: but this seems not to be the
literal and historical meaning.

3. Pappus says he writ to all people and languages, not only to those
which were subject unto him, but he was desirous to make known the works of
God to all people in the world So also Oecolampad. under these nations
comprehends the South and West parts of the world, as Mauritania, Spain, for
he was known in those parts as Strabo writes, lib. 15. non enim praecipit, sed
hortatur, for he in this epistle commands not, but only exhorts: But it is
evident by the form of the decree which he made before, concerning every
people, nation, and language, where he only means such nations, as were
subject unto him: for his law could not bind those which were not subject:
that the inscription of this epistle must be taken in the same sense.

4. Wherefore as R. Saadiah, well expounds, he understands here only his
own kingdoms, as of Persia, Assyria, Egypt, which are said to be the whole
earth: because he was monarcha orientis, the Monarch of the East parts, Lyra,
which was the most famous and flourishing part of the earth: the principal
part then is taken for the whole, Geneuens.

Quest. 4. Of the signs and wonders which Nebuchadnezzer declares.
1. Some seem to confound these two signs and wonders, making them all one,
as Oeco. Osian. 2. some make this distinction: those are signs, qua fieri
videntur contra naturam, etc. which seem to be done against nature: wonders
and miracles are those works, which are admiratione digna, worthy of
admiration, Hugo. but this is no difference at all, for whatsoever is done
above or against nature, is worthy of admiration.

3. They are thus rather to be distinguished: the same things in diverse
respects are both signs and wonders: signs, because many things are thereby
signified; and miracles or wonders, because they are done above and beyond
nature, I^n. They are signs, because they are evident testimonies of Gods
wisdom, justice, power: and wonders, because they were things wonderful, and
indeed to be wondered at, Polan. as that Nebuchadnezzar so mighty a king,
should be chased from among men, and live among brute beasts seven years,
deprived of humane understanding, and afterward be restored again: Lyranus
says, they are called signs, because they were done to bring men to
repentance: and wonders, as exceeding humane capacity.

Quest. 5. Whether Nebuchadnezzer were now at the last truly converted.
1. Calvin is of opinion, that for all this, non exuerit suos errores,
Nebuchadnezzar left not his errors. But howsoever twice before this he was
only astonished and moved for the time, and afterward fell again to his
superstitions, yet he was at the length truly humbled.

2. I embrace therefore the contrary opinion of Bullinger, Ostander,
Oecolampadius, which think that at this time he was truly converted unto God:
Osiander says he did declare, veram humilitatem, true humility, which was an
evident sign and effect of his conversion. Oecolampadius gives these two
reasons: 1. being now called to the true knowledge of God, Deicogniti mores
imitatur, he imitateth the properties of God, which is to be gentle, merciful,
wishing peace unto all. 2. he exhorts all men to the knowledge of the true
God, exemplum meum emendet omnes, let all men learn to amend by mine example,
etc.

6. Quest. Of the author of this Epistle.
1. The author of the Scholasticall history denies that Daniel was the author
of this Epistle, but was written by Nebuchadnezzer for eternal memory of this
thing, which happened unto him: But how should the writing of a profane king,
that was no Prophet come to be counted Canonical Scripture, if the Prophet had
no hand in it.

2. Neither yet do I think with Calvin, that Daniel hic loquitur sub regis
persona, that Daniel here speaks (only) in the person of the king: for the
very form and style of the epistle, Nebuchadnezzer king, to all people, etc.
peace be multiplied, shows, that these things were written by the king, and
rehearsed by Daniel.

3. Therefore the truth is, that Daniel takes all this narration, out of the
acts and Chronicles of the Chaldees, where this epistle was registered, not for
more brevity sake, as Osiander, least he should be constrained to rehearse the
same things often: but rather, that by the authority of the king the truth of
this history might be commended: which would have been suspected, if it had
been penned originally by a Jew, Polan. And yet, though it were first written
by a profane man, that was no Prophet, yet it was approved by Daniel the
Lords Prophet, Bulling. as in the old Testament, not only those writings are
received for Canonical, which were originally written by the Prophets, but
such also, as being written by others, were approved by the Prophets; as the
epistles and decrees of the kings of Persia inserted into the books of Ezra
and Nehemiah.

7. Quest. Whether this history contained in this chapter of Nebuchadnezzers
transmutation, were so done in deed.
1. Hierome here reports the opinion of some, which were of the sect of the
Origenists, which thought, that these things set down of Nebuchadnezzer were
not historically done, but that under his fall is prefigured and shadowed forth
the fall of Lucifer the devil from heaven: their reasons are these.

1. In other places of Scripture, as Isa. 14. under the fall of the king of
Babylon, is described the fall of Lucifer.

2. Diverse things here repeated are impossible, as that a man should be
transformed into a beast: that a king delicately brought up, should eat grass
like an ox.

3. And all this time of Nebuchadnezzers savage life, which was 7. years, the
kingdom of Babylon was not without a governor, who, it is most like, would
not have given place again to Nebuchadnezzer.

4. If any such thing had been historically done, they which have written
diligently of the Chaldean affairs, as Berosus, Megasthenes, Diocles,
Philostratus, would have made mention thereof.

Contra. 1. That prophecy of the ruin and fall of the king of Babylon, is by
some of the Fathers typically applied to the fall of Lucifer, yet it was
historically fulfilled in the king of Babylon: But here they would so make this
a type of the fall of the Devil, as that they take away the truth of the
history: he reason then is not alike.

2. It is no strange thing for men beside themselves, deprived of
understanding, to live among beasts: neither are the other things unlikely, or
impossible, as shall be seen in the several handling of them.

3. Neither was it an hard thing with God, to cause the government to return
unto Nebuchadnezzer, as he says, v. 33. that his counselors and Princes
sought unto him. It might be the kingdom was governed by his son, or Daniel,
which did willingly give place: Lyr.

4. To the last argument it may be answered diversely: 1. that it is not
necessary that the sacred histories should have the testimony of foreign
writers: for the standing still of the Sun in Ioshuahs time, and the going
back of the Sun in Hezekiahs reign, the story of Esther, and many beside,
have not the witness of profane writers. 2. the evidence of this history was
registered in the Chalde Chronicles, which being perished, the memory of this
fact among the Gentiles was extinguished also. 3. And Gods providence is seen
herein that the Gentiles should not put their unclean fingers to the sacred
histories, which they did much abuse, and corrupt: as it shall suffice to give
inflance only in Iustine, who manifestly commits these errors in history.
1. that the Jews had their beginning from Damascus in Syria. 2. that Damascus
reigned in that city first, and Abraham next unto him. 3. Joseph he makes the
youngest son of Israel, and says he learned art magic in Egypt. 4. Moses
he makes Joseph's son. 5. the Israelites he says were expelled Egypt,
because of the leprosy. 6. Xerxes king of Persia he thinks first to have
subdued the Jews, whereas an 150. years before his time, Nebuchadnezzer
conquered them.

4. The Gentiles also might be afraid to meddle with the sacred stories of the
Jews, as Demetrius Phaelereus answered Ptolome Philadelphus (whom he had set
over the great library of Alexandria) being terrified by the examples of
Theopompus, and Theodectes, who attempting to insert the Jewish histories into
their writings, the one was stricken with madness, the other with blindness, as
Iosep. l. 11. antiq. and Eus. l. 8. de praep. Evang. do testify.

5. Neither are the Gentile writers altogether silent in this matter* for
Alpheus an ancient Greek writer (as Eusebius writes, lib. 9. c. vlt.) makes
mention how Nebuchadnezzer, as it were, ravished upon a sudden in his mind,
told the Chaldeans, that there was a calamity approaching, which Bell their god
could not prevent; that Persa semiasinu^, the Per^ian being half an ass
(meaning Cyrus who was borne of a noble mother the daughter of Astyages king of
the Medes, but of a mean father, one Cambises) should come, and bring them
into servitude, and then he suddenly vanished away: the Chaldeans in Abydenus
fragments record, that he was blasted by some god, and spoke of Babels fall by
the Persians: H. B. consent.

2. But that this was a true history, and not done in figure, type, or vision,
it may thus appear: 1. if this be no history, no more should the rest be,
written in this book, and so we should have no certentie of any thing. 2.
Daniel himself rehearses this as a matter of fact before Balthazar, how
Nebuchadnezzer was deposed, c. 5. 20. 3. there are many things in this chapter,
which can in no wise agree unto the devil: as how Nebuchadnezzer dreamed, and
asked counsel of the wise men: and Daniel wishes him to break off his sins
by repentance: none of these things can be said of the devil. ex Perer.

8. Quest. Why Daniel was called by the name of Belteshazzar.
1. Dorotheus in synops. and Epiphan. lib. de vit. and interit. prophet. do
think that Daniel was so called after the name of Balthazar the kings son,
because he purposed to make him heir with him of the kingdom. And this
opinion may seem somewhat to be favored by the vulgar Latin translation:
which reads, v. 5. till Daniel, collega (my colleague or companion in the
kingdom) came in: which Pererius understands so to be said, because
Nebuchadnezzer had joined Daniel with him, as his fellow in the kingdom.
Contra. 1. There is no word of that sense, to signify a colleague or fellow, in
the original, and therefore we will not insist upon this reason. 2. But the
name of Belteshazzar, and Belshazar are diverse in the the original: the one
consists of 7. letters, Beltheshaatzer, the other only of six, Belshazzer.
And Daniel was so called before this time, when as Balthazar the king was not
yet borne, nor named in story.

2. Suidas and Josephus think, that Daniel was so called because of the
interpretation of hid and secret things: but that is not so: for he was thus
called before he had yet expounded any of the kings dreams, c. 1. 7.

3. The most think, that this was the name of the god of the Chaldees, and
given unto Daniel because of his divine wisdom, Lyran. Hugo. Vatab. but the
name of the Chalde god, was Bell, Isa. 46. 1. not Belteshazzar.

4. Therefore Daniel had not the very name of his god: but the king says, he
was called after or according to my God: the first syllable only is borrowed
from the name of his god Bell: the whole name consists of three Babylonian
words, signifying keeping, or laying up the treasure of Bell, Iun. as is showed
before, qu. 28. c. 1.

9. Quest. In what sense Nebuchadnezzer says, that Daniel had the spirit of
the holy gods, v. 5.
1. The S^ptuag. read in the singular, (...), the holy spirit of God, thinking
to excuse the king and free him from idolatry: but the word in the original
is in the plural, elohim, gods.

2. Some think that by gods, are here understood the Angels, who are sometime
called gods in Scripture, Pint. but the knowledge of secrets the Angels have
not, because they know not things to come: and the magicians, who had
conference and familiarity with spirits, not being able to tell the king his
dream, which he had forgotten, excuse themselves, because none but the gods
could declare such things, c. 2. 11.

3. His meaning then is, that the gods above only knew secrets, whose divine
spirit Daniel was endued with: loquitur more gentilium, he speaks after the
manner of the Gentiles, who held that there were many gods, Lyran. And it was a
received opinion among them, that it was a divine thing to interpret dreams,
as Socrates answered the Athenians, that he was ignorant of that divine
science. Lyran. ex Albert. mag.

10. Quest. Of Nebuchadnezzers dream, and the sum thereof.
There are two parts of his dream, the first contains a description of a
goodly fair tree, v. 7. to v. 10. the second the overthrow and cutting down
of this tree, thence to v. 15.

1. The tree is described, 1. by the situation of it in the mids of the
earth. 2. by the height, which reached unto heaven, which Theodoret expounds
of his pride, so also gloss. ordin. Lyranus, of his high advancement to such a
great Monarchy. 3. by the spreading of it to the ends of the earth, is
understood the largenes of his dominion, which extended very far.
Megasthenes, as Josephus cites him, thinks, that he subdued part of Spain.
4. by the utility thereof, which was double, it gave meat and shadow unto all
both fowls and beasts: that is, all kind of people, both of civil and
uncivil life, both had nourishment and peace under the reign of
Nabuchadnezzer.

2. Then the destruction of this tree follows. 1. by whom, by a watchman,
which is interpreted to be an angel. 2. the manner is described how this tree
should be served, the tree is broken down, that is, the king is cast out of
his kingdom; the branches are broken off, his nobles and princes are removed
from him: his leaves are shaken off, his glory and renown is taken from him:
the fruit are scattered, the riches of the kingdom every one snatcheth and
divides: the birds and beasts fly away, many taking occasion by the fall of
the king, withdraw themselves from his yoke.

3. Then follows the limitation and qualifying of the punishment of this
tree, a stumpe of it shall be left, (that is, his kingdom shall be reserved
for him still, gloss. interlin.) with the condition thereof; set forth first
metaphorically, it shall be bound with chains of brass, whereby is signified
his frenzy and madness: because mad men are bound with chains, Bulling.
then literally or historically his state is described both outward, that he
should live with the beasts of the field, and inward, his heart should be
changed, which is amplified by the circumstance of time, till 7. times, that is
years be passed over him, v. 13. So this dream was propounded in allegory in
such manner, vt tamen Deus aliquid permiscuerit* vnde colligeret aliud notari,
that yet God mingled withal some thing, whereout he might gather, that some
other thing was signified, Calvin. for a tree, from whence he borrowed this
allegory, needed not to be bound with chains, neither has any heart.

5. Lastly, the certentie of this decree is set down, by a general consent of
God, and his Angels, v. 14.

11. Quest. Why this tree is said to be in the mids of the earth.
1. Hugo Card. thinks it to be so said, because Nebuchadnezzer had Judea
subject unto him, which is thought to be in the mids of the earth.

2. Some of the Rabbis think, that Babylon is signified, because it is in the
same line or parallel with Jerusalem, which is in the mids of the earth. And
of this opinion are Hierome, and Origin: but now no such thing is found, that
Jerusalem should be in the mids of the earth. Calvin.

3. Alfragane, with whom Pintus consents, thinks that Babylon it self is
situate in the 4. climate, which is in the mids, the whole earth being
divided into 7. climats: but this is too curious.

4. By the mids of the earth, is better understood the mids of his
kingdom, Osiand. so that this is spoken, not in respect of the situation of
the place, as of the quality and strength of his kingdom.

12. Quest. Why Nebuchadnezzer is compared to a tree.
v. 8. A great tree and strong. 1. Hierome seems to be here of opinion, that
the wicked specially in Scripture are compared to trees, as Nebuchadnezzer
here, and he alleges that place, Psalm. 37. 35. I have seen the wicked
strong, and spreading himself like a green bay tree: But it is evident, that
the righteous are also compared to fruitful trees, Psalm. 1. 3.

2. Generally a man is likened to a tree, as Ezekiel. 17. 24. All the trees of the
field shall know, that I the Lord, have brought down the high tree, etc. that
is, all the people of the world shall know: a good man is resembled to a good
tree, and an evil man to an evil tree, Matthew. 7. 17. Aristotle, and before
him Plato, did call a man, arborem inuersam, a tree turned vpside down: that
as the tree has his root and sprigges coming out below, so man has his head
and hair uppermost. Wicked men are like unto corrupt trees without fruit, Iud.
12. such as the figgetree was, Matthew. 21. which had leaves; but no fruit: good
men are like unto good trees, Ierem. 17. 8. for like as a tree brings forth
fruit, not only as an ornament to it self, but to be commodious to others: so
the righteous are fruitful unto many: and as a tree the deeper it rooteth
downward, the higher it spreads upward; so the more lowly a man is in his
own eyes, the more he is exalted before God. Pint.

3. Now as men are compared unto trees in general, so Princes and great men,
are expressed and set forth by high and tall trees, as Ezekiel. 17. 12. Zedekiah
king of Judah is likened to an high cedar: so the king of Asshur is said to be
like a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, Ezekiel. 31. 3.

4. But in that Nebuchadnezzer is here thus resembled to a goodly great tree,
thereby is not signified the perfection of his government, and his princely
virtues: for even Tyrants and evil governors are as trees, whose government,
as a shadow, brings some comfort unto their subjects: for better is a bad
government, then none. Calvin.

13. Quest. v. 11. Who are understood by the beasts and fowls.
1. Some by the beasts understand simple men, by the fowls, garrulos and
mendaces, pratlers and liars, such as aspired and looked high. gloss. Some by
the one mean such as were rude and barbarous, by the other, such as were of
most civil life, Perer. Others by the beasts interpret them of inferior sort
and condition, by the fowls, the more noble sort, which dwelt in the branches
of this tree, in the cities and towns. Hug. Card.

2. But by these two kinds in general are signified all the inhabitants and
subjects in his kingdom: as Ezekiel. 39. 17. Speak unto every feathered foul,
and to all the beasts of the field, assemble your selves, and come: good men,
are compared unto sheep for their innocence, to serpents for their wisdom,
and evil men for their cruelty to lions, and bears, for their craft unto
foxes, as our Savior says of Herod, Tell that fox: so likewise the righteous
are likened to doves for their simplicity, and cruel men and oppressors are
as ravening eagles, Ezekiel. 17. 4. So it is an usual thing for men to be
compared unto such beasts and fowls, quorum mores imitantur, whose manners and
conditions they imitate. And this some think was Pythagoras meaning, that held
the transmigration of humane souls into the bodies of beasts. And so Iamblicus
understands it of the similitude and likeness of brutish manners, though
Plotinus absurdly think the contrary, that the souls of men do in deed
pass into the bodies of beasts: But Hermes Trismegistus shows the absurdity
hereof, thus resolving, non permittere legem diuinam animi humani transitum in
bestias, that the divine law will not admit the passage of humane souls into
beasts. ex Pint.

14. Quest. v. 12. How Nebuchadnezzer was bound with a band of iron and brass.
1. Pererius thinks in deed that he was first bound with chains and fetters
as a mad man, and afterward let loose, and so wandered up and down among bruit
beasts: so also Osiander thinks he was tied with chains, least he should
have hurt himself and others: but if this were meant literally, then he
remained still tied among the grass and beasts of the field, as the words are.

2. They which take exception to this history, taking it to be an allegory,
do make this one of their objections, Why they did not rather tie him up,
being beside himself, then suffer him to range abroad: and how he could live
7. years among bruit beasts, and not be slain? Lyranus answers, 1. that if
he had been chained up, infirmitas fuisset aggrauata, his infirmity or
malady would have been more grievous, as we see by experience, that mad men
being tied up, are more furious. 2. to the which it may be added, that they
did even in this time of madness show some reverence toward the person of the
king.

3. But the best answer is, that they left him to himself, that this prophecy
of Daniel might take place: they knew he should be restored to his kingdom
again: and so he was also by the divine providence, preserved and kept from
the rage and violence of the beasts.

4. This phrase then, to be tied up in chains, is here used to express his
madness: because it is the use to bind mad men in chains, Bulling. and hereby
is signified the certentie of this punishment decreed by the sentence of God,
which can not be broken, Lyran. so that the meaning is, stet inter gramina
tanquam vinctus catenis ferreis, he should continue in this savage life in the
grass, as one bound with iron fetters, Oecolamp. Pelican. he should have no
power to come out of it, until his time was fulfilled.

15. Quest. v. 11, 12. Why this prophecy is uttered in the imperative mood,
Hew down the tree, etc. leave the stumpe.
1. It is usual with the Prophets to deliver their prophecies in this manner,
as Isa. 2. 10. Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust: for thou shall
enter and hide thee: so Isa. 13. 6. Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is at
hand: for, ye shall howl: and, c. 14. 21. Prepare a slaughter for his
children: that is, ye shall prepare. Polan.

2. There may be an other reason yielded in this place: this speech of the
Angel, hew down, shows a general consent of all the Angels, one
encouraging an other to effect and execute the decree of God, and therefore it
is called, v. 14. the decree of the watchmen, that is, a joint consent of all
the Angels: And, postulat ab hominibus fieri, quod Deus imperat, he desires
that, what God has commanded, may accordingly be performed by men. Iun.

16. Quest. v. 14. Why the Angels are called Watchmen.
1. The Angels are so called, because of their spiritual, and incorporeall
nature, Ab. Ezr. for bodies only need sleep: and because they have no
bodies, and so neither eat nor drink, which are the causes of sleep, they
are always watchful, Calv. quia homines laborant and fatigantur, somno egent,
etc. because men do labor and are wearied, they need sleep: therefore the
Angels, which labor not as man, neither are wearied, are free from sleep.
Perer.

2. And by this word is not only expressed the spiritual nature of Angels,
but their watchful office also: they do always wait and attend upon God to
fulfill his will: as the Prophet David sets them forth, Psalm. 103. 20.
Praise the Lord ye his Angels, which excel in strength, that do his
commandment in obeying the voice of his will: in which sense, they are said to
be full of eyes, Ezekiel. 1. Iun. annot.

3. But because evil angels are watchful also, 1. Pet 5. 8.
as S. Peter says, The devil goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom
he may devour; an other title is given unto these watchmen, v. 10. the Angel
is called a watchman, and an holy one, ad differentiam d^monum, etc. to show a
difference between good Angels, and devils, who are also spirits, Lyran.

4. And whereas v. 10. the word is used in the singular, a watchman, but here
in the plural, multos intelligere debemus, etc. we must understand, that there
were many Angels, which were employed in this business, Oecolamp.

5. This term of watchman, is used also, as fitting the present matter, for
as watchmen, explorant singula facta, etc. do observe all our doings,
Oecolampad. so the Angel here observed Nabuchadnezzer narrowly: for while the
word was in the kings mouth, v. 28. that proud word, whereby he boasted of his
power and magnificence, the sentence decreed from God, was pronounced from
heaven against him. Iun. annot.

17. Quest. By whom the 14. v. was pronounced, by the Angel, or by the King.
v. 14. The sentence is according to the decree of the watchmen. 1. Some
think, that these are the words of the king: for the Angel would not have
called the decree of God, the decree of the Angels: and in the next verse
following, v. 15. Nabuchadnezzer speaks in his own person, This is the
dream that I Nabuchadnezer have seen. Contra. 1. It is called the decree of
the watchmen in respect of their ministry, the decree came from God, but was
executed by them: as Ephesians. 2. 20. the Apostle ^aith, the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, because they were Gods ministers in laying of it. 2. It
is not necessary, because the next verse is uttered in the kings person, that
this should be so likewise.

2. Wherefore these words are also delivered by the Angel, 1. because if
Nebuchadnezzer had so said, he even then had attained to the understanding of
the dream, he needed not to have any further help. 2. these words following,
according to the word, or request of the holy ones, could not be uttered by the
king: for how should he know what was the desire and request of the Angels?

Quest. 18. ver. 14. Of the meaning of these words, according to the request of
the holy ones.
1. Osiander expounds these words of the blessed Trinity: as though post
rogatas sententias fecerint senatusconsulum, after they had asked voices they
made the decree against Nebuchadnezzar: so also Pintus thinks it may be
understood of the Trinity: But neither can the Trinity in the plural be
called watchmen, which word notes not their persons, but their nature and
office: nor yet can God be said to make any request.

2. Vatablus by the watchmen understands the superior, by the holy ones the
inferior Angels: that these ask of the other a reason hereof: and the answer
to their demand, is, that which follows to the intent that men living may
know, etc. But this is too curious: that the watchmen, and holy ones are the
same is evident, ver. 10. where the watchman is called an holy one.

3. Some by holy ones understand the Saints in earth, that this question should
be asked of them, and the Angels made answer: thus seems Oecolampad. to
interpret, erat petitio, and interrogatiue respondent, there was a certain
petition, and they answer by way of interrogation, etc. so translate Geneuens.
the demand was answered: but the text admits not this sense: for the word
sheel^a, which signifies request or petition, is joined to the first clause of
the sentence, and divided by a perfect distinction, from the sentence following.

4. Pelican thinks, that the Jews, hearing what calamity had befallen
their king, prayed unto God to restore him to his right mind: But these words
were uttered, and this petition made, before this sentence was executed upon
Nebuchadnezzar.

5. Lyranus thus understands ad petitionem sanctorum in terra, quam Angeli
praesentant in coelo, at the request of the saints in earth, which the Angels
did present in heaven, etc. but the Angels would not have presented a request
(if any such office were committed unto them) contrary to the decree of God.

6. Calvin gives this sense, that Angeli vno ^re te accusant, etc. the Angels
with one mouth accuse thee before God, and Deus annuens eorum votis decreuit te
abijcere, and God consenting to their motion has decreed to cast thee off. So
also Hug. the Angels desired that this decree should be made against him. But
the Angels request procured not this decree, it followed upon Gods decree, as
the order of the words shows.

7. The meaning then is no more but this, that the Angels with one consent
desire, that Gods decree might take place, and that the sentence given by God
in heaven, might be executed by men in earth. And therefore the Angel said
before, hew down the tree, break off the branches, that men might in earth
fulfill, what God had purposed in heaven. Iun. Polanus.

Quest. 19. Of the meaning of these words, ver. 14. and appoints over it the
most abject of men.
1. Lyranus thinks, that this is to be understood of Christ, who was humbled,
and abased in this world; but afterward God exalted him, and all power was
given unto him in heaven and in earth: But it is evident, that this is spoken
of the terrene and external kingdoms of this world, that God sets up some,
and pulls down others, but Christ's kingdom was not of this world.

2. Lyranus also has an other exposition, that hereby is signified, that
Nebuchadnezzar was advanced from low degree unto the kingdom, and that he was
per humilitatem restitutus, restored again by humility.

3. But the use is rather more general: that by this deposing of
Nebuchadnezzar so great a king, men might learn, that all kingdoms are at
Gods disposing, seeing many times most base men have been advanced to the
kingly dignities: and so as Calvin well notes, hoc non tantum in vno Rege
contigit, etc. this has not fallen out only in one king. It is notorious,
that among the Roman and Greek Emperors, some had been ^eateheards, as
cruel Maximinus, some swineheards, as Justinius the father of Justinian.

Quest. 20. Why Daniel held his peace for the space of an hour.
Diverse reasons may be yielded of this silence of Daniel. 1. Some think that
in this space Daniel prayed unto God for the interpretation of the dream: as
Theodoret says, prime ostendenda erat humana infirmitas, etc. first humane
infirmity was to show it self, and then inspired grace to be manifested,
etc. so thinks Dyonis. Carthusi. intra hanc horam fuisse ei ostensam, etc.
that in this space was showed unto him the interpretation of the dream: se
totum ad Deum extulit, cum pijs precibus, he lifted up his prayers unto God.
Pint. feruids Dominum orauit, etc. he earnestly besought the Lord. Bulling.

2. But this seems not to have been all the cause: for it is said Daniels
thoughts troubled him: not because he was afraid of the king, ^^d dolebat pro
eo, he grieved for him of whom he had received such honor: Hierome: so also
Lyran. Iun. Polan. for the holy prophets had a double affection, when they
declared Gods judgments: ex vna part condolebant miseris hominibus, on the
one side they pitied those miserable men, to whom the judgments were
denounced, deinde intrepide pronuntiabant, yet they pronounced them without
fear, Calvin. And this seems to have been the cause of this pause which he
made, the greatness of the judgment which was determined, and for that it
greiued him for the king, of whom he had been so honored, because the king
encourages him to proceed, whatsoever the dream was.

3. Vtilis etiam fuit regiscunctatio, etc. and in this behalf also this stay
of Daniel was profitable to the king, that he might be more desirous to hear
the truth, Oecolampaid. Pelli. This use the king might make thereof: but this
was not the cause which moved Daniel.

Quest. 21. v. 16. In what sense Daniel wishes this dream to the kings
enemies.
Daniel should seem herein to pray against the will of God, which had so
decreed against Nebuchednezzar, and beside it might be thought against
charity, to wish such things unto those, whom he knew not, who might some of
them be better then Nebuchadnezzar.

1. Some think therefore that Daniel by this speech only shows, the great
calamity, which should befall him, such as we use to say a man wishes to his
enemy, Bulling. which was the cause, he was so loath to open the dream,
because it pretended such heavy things: but it is evident by Daniels troubled
thoughts, that he was indeed sorry for the king, and wished that evil far
away from him.

2. Dyonis. Carthusian. answers, that this evil which he wished unto the
kings enemies, might ad salutem animae proficere, be profitable unto them for
their souls health, and therefore this wish was not uncharitable: But it might
as well have been for the health of Nebuchadnezzars soul, he should not then
have wished it from him.

3. Some think that it was rather ciuilis salutatio, then precatio ex fide, a
civil kind of salutation, then a prayer of faith, which it was necessary
Daniel should use, to insinuate himself, Iun. in commentar.

4. But it was more then a civil salutation, for indeed Daniel desired averti
tam horri^ilem poenam a regis persona, such an horrible punishment to be turned
away from the king, Calvin. whereupon Polanus also notes, that we should even
pray for our enemies, as Daniel did for Nebuchadnezzar, who was an enemy to
the people of God, and held them in captivity.

5. But Daniel herein went not against the decree of God, for he thus prays,
praesupposito beneplacito diuino, presupposing if it were Gods good pleasure,
Dyon. Carthus. so also Pintus: he knew Dei minis and promissionibus haerere
suas conditiones, that certain condions were annexed to the threatenings and
promises of God, Iun. for otherwise Daniel in vain afterward had given
counsel unto Nebuchadnezzar here to prevent this calamity. see further,
quest. 29.

Quest. 22. That at yrannicall government is better, then an anarchie, or no
government.
V. 19. It is thou O king, that art great and mighty. 1. though Nebuchadnezzar
were a Tyrant, as both appears by his cruelty against the Jews in
destroying their city, both burning the Temple, and putting the people to the
sword, as also by his fierce rage showed against the Chaldeans, whom he
unjustly caused to be killed, cap. 2. because they could not tell him his
dream, which he had forgotten: yet he is compared to a goodly tree, which gave
meat and shadow unto the fowls and beasts: So that although Tyrants and
cruel governors seek to extinguish all equity and justice, Deus retinet
illos incomprehensibili modo, God holds them in after a secret manner, that
some profit comes by their government, Calvin. As the heathen Emperors of
Rome, though they were cruel, yet ordained good politic laws, as may appear
by the constitutions of Alexander, Diocletian, and the rest, as are extant in
the Code.

2. Whereas, when there is no government, but every one does what they list,
there is a confusion of all things, a corruption both of manners and religion,
as appears in the time of the Judges, when as there was no king in Israel,
they followed what religion they would, Judge. 17. 6. and they lived as they
would themselves, without either fear of God or man, as appears by the sin
of the men of Gibeah against the Levites wife, Judge. 19.

Quest. 23. v. 10. What is meant by hewing down the tree.
1. If but one or two branches had been cut off, yet the rest remaining would
have flourished still, and so the loss should not have been so great. As in a
commonwealth, when one noble man of account, or one of excellent learning or
virtue dies, and is taken away, though it be a loss or hinderance, yet the
country is not undone; others may rise up in his place: as when Sulpitius that
eloquent orator among the Romans was slain, yet Cicero succeeded, in whom
that want was supplied. And if a king loose one city in his kingdom, yet he
may comfort himself in the rest: But Nebuchadnezzar at once should loose all
his great and large dominion, and be stripped of his regal dignity: The Duke
of Florence gave for his ensign a great tree with many spreading boughs, one
of them being cut off, with this posie, vno avulso non deficit alter, one
being pulled away the other fails not: but here all the boughs and branches
are pulled away at once, Pintus.

2. If it had been told him, that he should only loose his regal dignity,
and live as a common person, it had not been so grievous: but now when he
hears that he should be thrown down from such an high estate, into such an
ignominious life, as to be matched with beasts, it must needs trouble him,
Calvin.

Quest. 24. 22. How Nebuchadnezzar was driven from men, and dwelt with the
beasts.
1. Theodoret shows how this came to pass: for both because he was rabie
correptus, taken with fury, and so might have done much hurt, if he had still
conuersed among men; as also for that he was hated of all for his former
tyranny, and cruelty, they expelled and drove him away from the company of
men.

2. And being thus driven out among beasts, and lying in the wet and cold, his
garments rotted, and his hair grew hard, like eagles quilles, and his nails
waxed long, like unto birds claws, he was neglected of all, even of his wife,
and children, and kindred: Gods justice so providing, that as he had showed
himself in his tyrannical and cruel government as a beast toward others, so
ferina vitae damnatus est, he was condemned to a beastly life: in whom may be
verified that saying in the Psalm. 49. 12. Man shall not continue in honor, but
is like unto the beasts that perish.

Quest. 25. How Nebuchadnezzar did eat grass like an ox.
It may seem strange, that a king being so delicate a person, should fall to
eat grass like an ox: which seeming unto some to be very unlikely and
improbable, they therefore would turn this histore into an allegory: but this
doubt may diverse ways be answered.

1. First, it is no unnatural thing for men to live of grass and herbs, lib.
6. cap. 30.
as Pliny writes of a certain people of the Ethiopians, which live of raw
Locustes: some only of herbs and roots, others do eat of any thing that
comes to hand, and therefore are called pamphagi, ea^nals, which eat of any
thing. As also Ecclesiastical histories make mention of diverse Heremites,
which lived only of roots and such other wild fruit of the earth.

2. And further the imagination of his mind, which was now become phrantike
and brutish, might bring him to eat such meats, which otherwise he in his
right mind would have abhorred, as Hierome says, multa sunt furentibus
facilia, qua sunt sanis intolerabilia, many things are easy unto mad men,
which are intolerable to them of right mind: and as Theodoret observes, we
see by experience that furious and mad men do put into their mouths, and
tear with their teeth, whatsoever comes to hand.

3. Beside ^he temperament and constitution of his body, was altered and
changed by the distemperature of his mind, and so it might be made fit and
applyable unto such brute beasts.

4. But most of all Gods power here was secret, in preserving the life of
Nebuchadnezzar by such meats, that he might be an example to all ages of Gods
justice, and that thereby his pride might thoroughly be tamed.

Quest. 26. How the kingdom of Babylon was governed in the time of
Nebuchadnezzars absence.
1. Some think that it might be governed by Euilmerodach his son, who
afterward succeeded, which is not unlike, Perer. But whereas Lyranus adds
that Nebuchadnezzar at his return put his son in prison, where Iechonias
was, for his misgouernement, while his father was thus humbled, and thereupon
Euilmerodach when he came to reign advanced Iechonias and took him out of
prison, 2. king. 24. 27. it has no probability.

2. Or the nobles might take upon them the government of the kingdom in the
mean time, seeing they knew by Daniel that the king was to be restored to his
kingdom: and Josephus adds further, nemine audente toto septennio inuadere
dominium, none durst invade the kingdom all those seven years: and because
Nebuchadnezzar had been a valiant king, and much enlarged his hingdome, this
might be a reason, that they expected his return with patience, Lyran. which
made them to be the more willing to receive him again, and to seek unto him,
because God had so ordained.

Quest. 27. ver. 22. What is understood by seven times.
1. Some think that by 7. times no certain but an indiffinite time is
understood, ex Bulling. but that is not so, for it is said, ver. 31. that in
the end of these days, etc. there were then certain days appointed.

2. R. Leui, and Aben Ezra, leave it uncertain and indifferent, whether we
understand here months or years, or the parts of the year: but it is
certain, that in a prophecy some one special thing is signified.

3. Theodoret enclineth to think, that hereby the half years must be counted
for the times, as the Persians generally divide the year into two parts,
Summer and Winter: and so these 7. times should make three years and an half.
But no where in the Scripture, is a time taken for half a year.

4. Bullinger by these 4. times understands the 4. times of the year, the
Spring, Summer, the Autumn, Winter: and so these 7. years should come out in
a year and three quarters: but we refuse this sense also for the former
reason: time is not so taken in Scripture.

5. Wherefore the received interpretation is best, by seven times to
understand 7. years, so Josephus, Iun. Osiand. Oecolampad. Calvin. Perer.
Vatab. Lyranus gives this reason: because cap. 12. ver. 7. a time, two times,
and an half, are so taken for three years and an half, which make 1290.
days, as it is expounded, v. 12. Iunius gives instance in a more direct
place, cap. 11. 13. in the end haghittim shanim, of the times of years:
Pererius further yields this reason, quia omnis nota temporis varietas, etc.
because every notable variety and change of time is contained in the compass
of a year; as Summer, Winter, heat, cold, etc.

6. Hence also is manifest the error of Dorotheus in Synops. and Epiphanius in
vit^ Danielis, whom the author of the scholasticall history follows, that 7.
years were determined, but at the prayer of Daniel they were changed into 7.
months: for the contrary is evident, v. 31. that Nebuchadnezzar did not come
to himself, till the full time was expired: In the end of these days I
Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes to heaven, etc. And so Daniel had prophesied
before, ver. 22. seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know, that the
most high bears rule over the kingdoms of men.

Quest. 28. Of Nebuchadnezzars transmutation, but first in general of the
diverse kinds of transmutations.
1. Their is one kind of transmutation, which is a fabulous and poetical
fiction, rather then any true alteration and change, such as is the fable of
the changing of Ulysses companions into diverse forms of beasts by the
witchcraft of Circes, and of Diomedes company into birds, and Lucianus tale
of Apuleius golden ass: like unto this is the fabulous report of the
Arcadians, which by swimming over a certain river, are changed into wolves;
whereof Pliny gives this censure, falsum esse considenter existimare debemus,
Pliny li. 8. c. 22.
we ^^st confidently think that it is false.

2. There is a kind of natural and physical transmutation, lib. 5. de.
histor. animal. cap. 19.
as Aristotle shows how certain worms become butter-flies: and by
experience we know, that maggets, which breed in flesh, are turned into flies.
But Pliny reports a more strange thing of a certain beast in the Iappanian
Islands, in bigness, shape, and hair like unto a dog, lib. 11. cap. 22.
which by often swimming in the Sea; by little and little is changed into a fish.
But for the transmutation of women into men, which Pliny of his own
experience reports to be true, and that such things, as most true, are
inserted into the Roman annals, or Chronicles, lib. 7. cap. ^.
it is to be doubted how far his report may be credited.

3. The third kind is of fantastical changes, such as are wrought by sorcetie
and art Magic: such were those apparitions of serpents, procured by the
subtlety of the Egyptian sorcerers: and such may be thought to be those
alterations and changes of men into the form of wolves and other beasts, which
Olaus Magnus writes to be usual in Prussia, Liuonia, Lituania. lib. 18. 3.
(...).


4. Unto these add, those true changes, which have been made by the power of
God, as Lots wife was turned into a pillar of salt, Moses rod into a serpent,
Christ turned water into wine, Perer.

5. And the last kind is the spiritual change which is in the mind and
understanding, either for the better, as when men are renewed by grace, and
from ignorance, infidelity, carnal lusts, are turned to become new men, as
Zacheus was, Luke 19. or are inspired with a prophetical gift, as Saul was,
when he prophesied: either for the worse, as when the spirit of God left Saul,
and an evil spirit was sent upon him, which possessed him with fury. And of
this kind was Nebuchadnezzars change, who of a reasonable man, became in his
mind an unreasonable beast: But this matter follows now to be handled more
at large.

Quest. 29. What manner of change Nebuchadnezzars was.
1. Lyranus and Carthusianus do impute this opinion unto Josephus, that he
should think, that Nebuchadnezzar was indeed changed into an ox. But
Josephus in that place, where he touches that story, lib. 10 antiquat. cap.
11. has no such thing: he only says, vitam acturus erat inter bestias, that
he was to lead his life among the beasts. Indeed Darotheus and Epiphanius are
of opinion, that he was not changed at all in his mind, Dorotheus (...)
Synops. Epiphan. de vita Danielis.
but only externally in his body* and that the forepart of him was like an
ox, the hinder part like a lion. But this cannot be so. 1. If they press the
words literally they may with better reason say, he was changed into an eagle:
because it is said, his hair was as eagles quilles, and his nails like birds
claws: 2. If there had been in him any such notorius change it would not have
been omitted, seeing the power of God should have been set forth thereby. 3.
And if the Chaldeans had seen him in the shape of a beast, they would have
taken him for a very brute beast, and not fit to be restored to his kingdom.
4. It is evident also that the same Nebuchadnezzar a man, and not a beast,
after the time expired, was restored to his kingdom: but if he had been so
changed, he should not have been the same, but an other.

2. Medina is of opinion, that Nebuchadnezzar was changed not indeed but in
show, lib. 2. de rect. in Deum side, cap. 7.
that he appeared to be a bruit beast in the sight of all that looked upon him:
such a like thing is that, which Hierome reports in the life of Hilarion, how
a woman was brought unto him, which seemed unto others to be a beast, but he
discerned her to be a woman.

But Gods works are not fantastical, or in show: that which he does is in
verity and truth: this difference there is between Gods works, and the
illusions of Satan, that he makes things to be the same which they appear,
as Moses rod became a true serpent, but Satan deceives the sense, the
sorcerers serpents were but counterfeit.

3. Neither yet can I altogether subscribe unto the opinion of Thomas Aquin.
lib. 1. de regim. princip. c. vlt.
who thinks that although Nebuchadnezzar were neither actually, nor in show
a beast in his bodily shape, yet sua opinione videbatur sibi bestia, he seemed
a beast unto himself: I think rather with Calvin, non sic obstupuit, quin
mala sua sentiret, he was not so besotted, but that he had some sense of his
calamity: for otherwise how should he have remembered it afterward, and so
given thanks to God for his restitution.

4. This then was the transmutation which Nebuchadnezzar had, manente forma
humana, his man's shape remaining, his humane soul was changed to be brutish by
his frenzy and madness: Bulling. not that the mind of a beast was given him
in substance, for he retained his reasonable soul: nor yet that there was no
more understanding in him left, then in a bruit beast, Osiand. for the
reasonable soul remaining, though it became brutish, yet it is not altogether
as the sense of a brute beast: but as Lyranus says, vsum rationis perdidit
per amentiam, he lost the use of reason by his madness: his mind became
brutish, and in this sense in respect of the use of his reason, and
understanding it is said, v. 13. let the heart of a beast be given him. (...).
6 de victor. verb. Dei. c. 14.
Rupertus also collecteth as much out of these words, v. 33. mine understanding
was restored unto me, satis ostendit non formam se amisisse, sed mentem, he
sufficiently shows, that he had not lost his shape, but his mind.

Yet he was somewhat altered and changed in the constitution, and sight of his
body, being grown misshapen and deformed, though not transformed into the
shape of a beast, as follows to be showed in the next question.

Quest. 30. How Nebuchadnezzars body was changed.
1. As his mind was become sottish and brutish, so the constitution of his
body was much changed and became applyable unto that brutish food, whereof he
lived. 2. he went naked having no care of his clothing, as brute beasts are
only covered with their skin: but here Lyranus notes an error in Josephus,
who resembles this nakedness of Nebuchadnezzar, to Adams nakedness before
the fall, whereof he gives this reason, that Adam vixit in simplicitate
bestiali, Adam lived then in a brutish kind of simplicity, as children before
they have use of reason are not ashamed of their nakedness, etc. But Lyranus
argues well against this assertion: that by this reason man's state should have
been bettered by his fall, which brought unto him the use of reason. This
matter then may be further thus scanned, that there is an Angelical kind of
nakedness (that I may so speak) such as Adam had before his fall, whereof he
was not ashamed, because sin was not yet entered into the world: there is a
brutish nakedness, which because beasts have no reason at all, neither are
subject to sin, is not unseemly in them: there is an humane nakedness
between both, whereof men are not ashamed, either because the use of reason is
not yet come unto them, as in children, or they are deprived of it altogether,
as natural fools, or for a time only, as madmen: Such was the nakedness of
Nebuchadnezzar which altered the state of his body.

3. Then follows the effect of his nakedness, and his lying in the air, and
in the cold fields, enduring both heat, and cold: being careless of himself,
his hair grew stiff, his skin hard, and his nails long and crooked, and
so he became deformed.

4. The gesture of his body was answerable, he grew crooked, and bowed
together, and crept upon all four like a brute beast.

5. His food and meat was herbs and grass, such as the brute beasts feed
upon. 6. his habitation was in the fields and woods among the brute beasts. 7.
he had no use of his speech living among beasts, but made a rude noise like
unto them. And thus he was changed even in respect of his body, that although
the fashion of his humane shape remained still in his head, hands, and feet,
yet he was become very deformed: as Rupertus collecteth, that seeing it is
said he should eat grass like an ox, that he crept upon his hands and his
feet, and pulled up grass with his mouth, as does an ox: and because his
dwelling was among the beasts, he was in outward gesture as a beast, non enim
besti^ facile sociarentur illi sine aliqua similitudine, for the beasts would
not have accompanied with him if there had been no similitude: and so he
concludes that this was the greatest change that is mentioned in Scripture,
excepting only that of Lots wife, who was changed into a pillar of salt.

8. Now whereas ver. 33. as the vulgar Latin reads, my figure returned unto
me, or my shape, Sep. my form. V. though it may be well understood, in respect
of his deformity (not the change of his form) which now was taken from him;
as we see by experience, that mad men if they continue any time, are so
changed, that they can hardly be known and discerned, Osian. yet this matter
is made more clear and out of doubt, if the word be rightly translated: for
the Chalde word zivi, rather signifies my glory, beauty, as Iun. Mont.
read, then my form, or figure: so the comeliness and grace of his humane
countenance and body, was restored unto him, and his deformity taken away.

Quest. 31. ver. 24. How Daniel gave counsel to the king to prevent this
judgment, seeing it was determined.
1. Pererius says, that Daniel speaks doubtfully, It may be God will forgive
thy sin, as the Latin reads, non fuisse eum certum, that he was not
certain, whether God would remit the punishment, which was thereatned: but
Daniel knew assuredly that the sentence and decree of God should stand, as is
showed before, verse. 14.

2. The most think that there was a secret condition annexed to this
threatening, and Hierome makes it like to the message of Isaiah to Hezekiah,
that he should die, and the prophecy of Jonas against Niniue: which both were
conditional upon their repentance, so also Bullinger. But it may be gathered,
v. 14. that it was certainly decreed in heaven, that this judgment should
befall Nebuchadnezzar, who, the Lord foresaw, would not otherwise be humbled.

3. Chrysostom gives this solution, propter hoc prolata est sententia, vt non
fiat, non vt Rex discat solum futura, sed vt caveat, therefore this sentence
was pronounced, that it should not come to pass, that the king should not
only know things to come, but prevent them, etc. ex Oecolamp. But this still
is most evident, that God had certainly decreed this thing, and it could not
be altered.

4. Calvine thus answers, this counsel of Daniel was profitable to the king,
though the judgment were determined potuit aliquam veniam consequi etiamsi
poenas dedisset, he might some way have been eased, though he were to endure
the punishment, etc. so also Polan. cum resipiscentibus Deus benignius agit,
God deals more gently with those which repent.

5. To this may be added, that Daniel here sustaineth a double person, both of
a Prophet in interpreting the dream, and showing things to come, and of a
faithful counselor, in aduising Nebuchadnezzar what course to take: that
although the sentence against him was decreed, yet if he did in time humble
himself, he knew it would not be unprofitable unto him. So our Blessed
Savior, though he knew that indeed the bitter cup of death could not pass
away from him, yet in his humane affection he desires it to pass, yet with a
subjection of his will to the will of God: and the like supposition had Daniel
here, thus aduising and counselling, if so it stood with Gods good pleasure:
not looking now into Gods secret counsel, but speaking in his love and zeal
to Nebuchadnezzar, as Moses in zeal to the people of Israel forgetting
himself, wished rather to be cut out of the book of life, which in the
judgment of faith he knew could not be.

Quest. 32. Whether Daniel did counsel the king to redeem his sins by
almesdeeds.
1. Pererius with other Romanists do ground their error of satisfactorie
works for sin upon this place: for their opinion is, that there are tria
genera operum, quae satisfactoria vocant pro peccatis, three kind of works,
which they call satisfactorie for sin: and so they read this text, redeem
thy sins. Contra. 1. The word is not well translated, to redeem, for Pharak,
properly signifies to break off, as R. Shelemo, and D. Kimhi think, and so
is the word used, Exodus 33. 2. break off your earings. 2. sins properly are
not redeemed, but men. 3. And it had been impossible for Nebuchadnezzar, who
had reigned tyrannically 40. years to make satisfaction by his works, for all
the cruel murders and other oppressions which he had committed.

2. Some give this sense retaining the usual reading, that good works are
said to redeem sins, as they are said to justify, because they which are
justified, ex iustitia illa operum suorum probantur, are proved and manifested
by the righteousness of their works, Bullin. so also Oecolamp. externa opera
sidei testimoniu^ dant, external works do give testimony of faith, which is
not seen of men, but by their works.

3. There is a third answer, that it is meant not of redemption or satisfaction
of and for our sins before God, but before men: redimimus apud homines
p^^cata, dum illis satisfacimus* etc. we redeem our sins with men, when we
make them satisfaction, Calvin. this answer also is sufficient: but I prefer
rather the first, which insisteth upon the right sense of the word: see more of
this question afterward among the controversies.

Quest. 33. Whether Daniel spoke doubtfully saying. v. 24. it may be thy
prosperity may be prolonged.
1. The ordinary gloss here notes that Daniel, though he had the knowledge
of things to come, de sententia Dei dubitabat, did doubt of the sentence of
God: and thereupon notes their presumption, which do certainly promise
remission of sins unto any: But to say that Daniel, who had such a clear
revelation of Gods will, doubted thereof, were to make question whether he had
the spirit of God or no.

2. Carthusian thinks that Daniel was certain that God upon his repentance
would forgive him his sin, but he was not sure whether he would remitte the
punishment: but the sin being once remitted, the punishment also is
pardoned, for it were not just with God to punish for that, which now is
acquitted: there may some chasticement remain, not as a punishment of sin,
but as an admonition and correction for amendment of life.

3. Pererius proceeds further proouing from hence, nemini certam esse
remissionem peccatorum, etc. that none can be certain of remission of sins.
But it is contrary unto faith to be doubtful or wavering, as our Savior
says unto Peter, Matthew. 14. 31. O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou
doubt: and S. Ieames says, let him ask in faith and waver not: but of this
question see more among the controuerses following.

4. These particles then, if so be that, it may be, and such like in
exhortations and perswasiue speeches, are not words of doubting: but are used
to these two ends. 1. to show the greatness and difficulty of the thing
hoped for in respect of our selves, that the greater endeavor should be used,
and all security laid aside, as Ioshu. 14. 12. Caleb says, if so be the Lord
will be with me, that I may drive them out, which he spoke not doubtfully, for
he had the warrant of Gods word to prevail, give me the mountain whereof the
Lord spoke in that day: but he does thus speaking, encourage himself to put
his confidence in God with fear and reverence. And Hierome to this purpose
writes upon these words, Joel, 2. 14. who knows if he will return and
repent, etc. ne desperetis veniam scelerum magnitudine, etc. sed ne forsi^an
magnitudo clementiae nos faceret negligentes, adiunxit, etc. despair not of
forgiveness for the greatness of your sins, etc. but least the greatness
of clemency should make them negligent, he adds, who knows, etc. these
phrases then of speech, do not argue doubtfulnesse, but only serve to take
away presumption and security, as the Apostle says, work out your salvation
with fear and trembling, Philip. 2. 13.

Quest. 34. Whether Nebuchadnezzar did follow Daniels counsel.
Ver. 16. At the end of twelve months. 1. Some think that Nebuchadnezzar did
as he was advised by Daniel, and gave plentiful alms, whereupon for his
humility, mansit adhuc annum in regno, he stayed yet a year in his kingdom,
but afterward being lifted up in pride, he was cast out of his kingdom,
gloss. ordinar. ex Hieronym.

2. But I approve rather the judgment of Oecolampadius, quia Prophetae
admonitionibus eum non poenituit, neque Deum sententiae suae poenituit, etc.
because he repented not by the admonitions of the Prophet, therefore neither
did God repent him of his sentence: for if he had humbled himself, it is not
like that so soon he would have so swelled in pride: and his mind being set
so upon his magnificent buildings, it seems he little attended upon
charitable deeds. So it is well gathered from hence that it is not in man to
convert his own ways, though the means be offered, except God by his spirit
work it, Genevens.

3. In that this judgment was deferred a tweluemoneth, it was a sign rather
of Gods long suffering, then of any change in Nebuchadnezzar, Bulling. to the
same purpose Theodoret, dedit ei Deus locum poenitentiae, at ille abutitur eo
in superbiam. God gave him time and space to repent, but he abuses it unto
pride: to the same purpose Calvin.

Quest. 35. Of the greatness of the city Babylon.
The greatness thereof is thus described by Herodotus, Herod. lib. 1.
he writes that the city was four square, and each square contained in
length an 120. furlongs, so that the four squares or sides made 480. furlongs,
the walls were 50. cubits thick, and 200. cubits high, and in the compass of
the walls there were an 100. brazen gates, with their hinges and posts: other
writers do somewhat vary from this description. lib. 6. c. 26. lib. 2. c. 4.
Pliny makes the walls 200. foot high, and 50. foot broad, and in compass
60. miles. Diodorus says that the wall was 360. furlongs in compass,
according to the number of the days in the year, so that every day a furlong
of the wall was built, and the whole finished in a year, there being used
thereto of workmen 13. hundred thousand; the walls were so thick as 6. carts
might meet in the breadth; the towers were 250. and the height thereof 365.
foot, there was the space of two furlongs between the wall and the houses,
for the more speedy building of the wall.

Strabo gives unto the compass of the walls 380. furlongs, lib. 16.
the thickenes was 30. foot, the height 50 cubits, and the towers above the
walls were 60. cubits high.

Q. Curtius says the walls were in compass 368. furlongs, in thickness 32.
feet, that carts might meet thereon, they were an 100. cubits high, and the
towers ten cubits higher then the walls.

Lyranus out of Hierome thus sets it down, that Babylon was four square
and every side contained in length 16. miles: for within the city the houses
were not close built, but every one had his vineyards and fields, that they
might sow in the time of famine or siege, and maintain themselves within the
city.

Aristotle making mention of Babylon, (...) 2.
says it had the compass rather of a country then a city, being of such
greatness that some part of it was taken three days before the other heard of
it: and therefore a city he would not have to be esteemed by the walls.

But though the reports of writers are somewhat diverse, it is out of doubt
that it was a great city, and the walls thereof both of great thickness and
height: as the Prophet Jeremy witnesses, cap. 51. the thick wall of Babylon
shall be broken, and the high gates burnt.

There was also in the mids of the city a great tower, which was the Temple
of Belus, with brazen gates, which Herodotus says remained until his time,
lib 1.
it had in compass every way being four square 2. furlongs, and in the mids
thereof a turret of a furlong high, and an other above that of the same height,
until they came to the eight. lib 3 c. ^.
Diodorus says it was so high, that the Chaldeans thereon made observation of
the stars toward the east and west. Curtius says, that this tower of Babylon
had 20. stadia or furlongs in compass, lib. 5.
the foundation whereof was 30. foot deep in the ground: By these evidences it
appears, that this Babylon was a city of huge bigness, and therefore the
king calls it here great Babell.

Niniue had been as great a city or greater, being 60. miles in compass,
the walls were an 100. foot high, and the towers 200. whereof there were an
150. Strabo. lib. 16.
but Niniue was now much empayred and decayed, and Babylon was made the chief
city of the kingdom.

Quest. 36. Whether Nebuchadnezzar were the builder of Babel.
Ver. 27. Which I have built for the house of my kingdom, etc. 1. There are
diverse opinions hereof, who should be the builder and founder of Babel. Moses
says that Babel was the beginning of Nimroths kingdom, lib. 9. de praepar.
Euang. cap. vit.
Genesis 10. 10. Alexander Polyhistor in Eusebius, out of Eupolemus, says that it
was built by the giants after the flood. Alphaeus makes Belus the founder
thereof, as Eusebius says: the most of the Grecians, do give the honor
thereof unto Semiramis the wife of Ninus, as Herodo. lib. 1. Diodo. lib. 3.
Strabo. lib. 16. Iustine with others. lib. 10. cap. 11.
Josephus out of Berosus makes Nebuchadnezzar the builder of Babel, and
therefore finds fault with the Greek writers, for ascribing it unto Semiramis.

2. But all these may easily be reconciled. 1. Nimroth is held to be the same,
who of foreign writters was called Belus: for this Belus was the first, that
brought in idolatry, lib. 3. aduers. Julian.
as Cyril says: and so was Nimroth: for hence it is, that most of the idols of
the Gentiles took their name from Bell, as the first founder of them, as
Belial, or Baal, the God of the Sidonians, Beelzebub the god of Ekron,
Beelphegor the god of the Moabites, Numb. 25. Baalsamen the idol of the
Carthaginians, as Augustine says: so then it may well stand togethet, q. 16.
in lib. Iudic.
that Nimroth and Belus, Hexap. in Genesis cap. 10. que. 14.
being both the same man, as is more at large showed elsewhere, were the
founders of Babylon.

2. And seeing Ninus was the captain and chief of the Giants, they might be
assistant unto him, in building of the tower of Babel, and he a tingleader unto
them.

3. It may also very well agree, that Nimroth or Belus laid the first
foundation of Babylon, which was enlarged by Semiramis.

4. And afterward when the Kings of Assyria left Babylon, and made Niniue the
chief city of their kingdom, by this means Babylon was decayed and lay
want, which last of all was reedified and beautified by Nebuchadnezzar, lib 10.
antiq. (...) lib 1. contra App^on.
who as Josephus out of Berosus writes in these five works added to the
buildiug of Babylon. 1. he repaired the old city and the temple of Belus. 2.
then he built a new city adjoining unto it. 3. he compassed each of them with
three walls for defense, with towers and gates. 4. then he built a most
sumptuous palace next unto the Palace of his father, and finished it in 25.
days. 5. he made certain artificial rocks and mountains, with orchards and
gardens upon them, to satisfy the desire of his wife, who being a Median,
desired to see such hilly prospects, after the manner of her country: Because
Nebuchadnezzar then had so enlarged and beautified the city, he makes
himself the builder of it.

Quest. 37. Of Nebucadnezzars pride in saying, which I have built for the house
of the kingdom.
Nebuchadnezzars pride diuersely appears. 1. because he thinks that by his
own power and strength he had raised those great buildings, as though by his
own wit and strength, he had attained unto that power and riches, to be able
to compass such great works, whereas it is said in the Psalm. 126. 1. except
the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it, Calvin. 2. he
considered not how to compass such a great work, innumerorum pauperum
facultates exhausit, he had wasted the substance of a number of poor, and
wearied their bodies, Oecolamp. 3. He robs his father and ancestors of
their due praise, who had builded much before him, he takes all to himself,
Polan. 4. then he shows his contempt against God, as though he should have
said, having now made Babylon invincible, as he thought, quis inde me posset
deijcere, who can cast me out of it, no not God himself, Lyran. Iun. 5. then
he adds further, he built it not for Gods honor, but his own, he neither
respected Gods glory, nor the good of the commonwealth, but his own fame and
magnificence, Osiand. Calvin. 6. whereas the Septuag. reads as he walked
(...), in the temple, Eudoxius is of opinion that the king would have been
counted for a God, Oecolampiad. 7. But the kings great security appears
herein, deambulat otiosus, he walks idly, as though in such a great
kingdom there had been no business for him, and he museth of nothing but his
own greatness, Pelican. 8. nemo interrogat, etc. ^pse primus su^ encomia
decantai, no man asks him any question, he first sounds out his own
praise, wherein he bewraieth his vanity and selfeloue, Oecolamp.

Quest. 38. v. 28. What manner of voice it was which came down from heaven.
1. The Lord deals with Nebuchadnezzar by degrees, first, he spoke unto him
by dream, then by the voice of his Prophet, and seeing he was not moved by
any of these, now the Lord thundreth from heaven.

2. This voice was not spoken in Nebuchadnezzars ear, but in the hearing of
all that stood by, Iun. vt Dei vindicta intelligatur a populo, that all the
people might see and understand, how the Lord took revenge of him for his
pride, Lyran.

3. And it comes from heaven, both to show the authority and power, the
voice came from heaven, quasi quoddam pondus deijciens eius superbiam, as a
mighty weight pressing down his pride, Lyran. as also the certainty, that
those things being pronounced from heaven should undoubtedly come to pass,
Iun.

4. And this voice comes of a sudden, even while that proud speech was yet in
his mouth, to show that God never punishes without cause, and that all his
judgments are just, Bulling. and further to testify that such as abuse Gods
long suffering and patience, as Nebuchadnezzar here did, shall suddenly be cut
off: and that when men are come to the height of pride, the Lord will no longer
forbear, Polan.

Quest. 39. The sum of the sentence denounced against Nebuchadnezzar.
1. The circumstances of the sentence are described. 1. the time, that the
voice came while Nebuchadnezzar was yet in speaking. 2. the manner, it was
uttered by a voice. 3. the place, from heaven. 4. the person to whom, to
Nebuchadnezzar by name* by the which he is conuented, as before his superior
Judge: his title is added, O king, to tax him for his ingratitude, that was
unthankful to God, who had exalted him to that state.

2. Then the matter of the sentence is declared, which consists partly in his
deprivation both of his kingdom, and of the society and company of men,
partly in the denouncing of certain calamities, namely, these two, his
cohabitation with beasts, and then his manner of food, he should eat grass
like an ox.

Quest. 40. ver. 30. Of the execution of the sentence upon Nebuchadnezzar: he
did eat grass as the oxen.
1. This was neither a change in show; such as Pliny reports out of
Euantes, how among the Arcadians they used to take one by lot out of a
certain family, lib. 8. cap. 22.
who going unto a river, leaving his clothes behind him, and swimming over was
changed into a wolf, and nine years keeps among them, and then swimming
over again receives his former shape: the like he alleges out of C^pas,
that one Demetrius Parrhesius offering a childs flesh in sacrifice to Jupiter
Lyceus tasting thereof was turned into a wolf, and so continued 10. years,
and afterward received his humane shape again. The like is that, lib. 18. de
ciuita. Dei. cap. 18.
which Augustine writes of certain women in Italy, which used to give unto
the trauailers some intoxicated cheese, whereby they seemed to be transformed
into beasts, and carried their burdens: These transformations were either
fabulous tales, or else illusions of Satan.

2. Neither was Nebuchadnezzar in truth changed into a beast, as Bodinus
thinks, as is before showed, quest. 27.

3. Nor yet was it only a madness and frenzy of mind as Ericus king of
Sueland being expelled his kingdom, for very grief fell mad.

4. But beside the brutish change of his mind, his body was much changed
and altered, in feeding and living among bruit beasts: as Ab. Ez^a writes of
one in Sardinia, that was carried into the woods by his parents among the
hindes; and so lived a great while among them, going upon all four his hands
and feet: who being at length taken by the king in hunting, was brought to
his parents: but he said nothing to them: they offered him wine and meat, but he
rufusing both, did eat of herbs, and in the night fled again to his old
companions the bruit beasts, Oecolampad. The like narration has Dresserus in
his book of new and ancient discipline, of a man taken in the country of
Hesse in hunting being among other wolves: who retayning yet some shape of a
man, was kept and made tame, and went upright, whereas he before did go and
run on all four: he also at the length spoke as a man distinctly, using to
houle as a wolf before: and being thus come to himself, he reported, how he
was lost in the woods when he was a child, and brought up among the wolves, and
was nourished by that which they got for their prey: this was done in the
year, 1544.

Philippus Camerarius in his historical meditations, c. 75. has the like
report of a child of twelve years of age, which was taken in the same
country, in the farm of Echtzeb, as he ran among wolves. Goulartius in his
book of the memorable histories of these times, has this relation, how a man
was taken in France in the forest of Campeigne, and was brought to the la^e
king Charles the 9. he went upon all four like a beast, was swifter then an
horse, did houle like a wolf, had an hard skin, and was covered almost all
over with hair; he had a terrible look, with his teeth he strangled dogs,
and was fierce toward men: such like change and alteration there might be both
of mind and body in Nebuchadnezzar.

Quest. 41. v. 31. After the end of what days Nebuchadnezzar was restored.
V. 31. At the end of these days. 1. The author of the scholasticall
history, as Hugo Cardi. here notes, thinks that at the prayer of Daniel,
the 7. years were turned into seven months, whereof 40. days Nebuchadnezzar
was mad, and 40. other days he came to himself and wept exceedingly for his
sin, so that his eyes were become as a piece of flesh: then 40. days more he
was in his mad fittes: and so after 7. months he was restored to his right
mind, but yet had not the kingdom, till 7. years were expired, but there
were 7. Judges appointed for him, and he in the mean time, neither did eat
flesh, nor drink wine all those seven years, but did eat pulse, and herbs,
as Daniel counseled him, and so did as it were penance.

2. But this opinion is contrary to the text. 1. because the seven times
which were to pass over him, were fulfilled, as appears, v. 31. at the end
of the days (that is the days before appointed, which were called 7. times)
then I Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes, etc. and not before, there was then no
part of this time cut off. 2. After that his understanding came to him, he fell
not again into his mad fittes, as is evident, ver. 33. 3. when his
understanding was come to him, he was withal restored to the honor of his
kingdom, and his counselors sought again unto him: he then took the
government presently upon him, after his return and restitution, it was not
governed by others. 4. This also is an evident argument, that Nebuchadnezzar
continued longer then seven months in his humiliation, because in so short a
time his hair could not grow as eagles quilles, nor his nails as birds
claws: neither is it like that in so short a time he would have been brought
to know himself, Calvin.

Quest. 42. Of the restitution of Nebuchadnezzar.
As there were two degrees of his humiliation, he was deprived without of his
kingdom, and of the company of men, and in himself of his understanding; so
there are two degrees of his restitution: first, to his humane understanding,
and then to the glory of his kingdom, and each of these are set forth with
their effects.

1. First, he is restored to his humane estate and condition, both in body,
that whereas before he went groueling, and crept on all four as a beast, now
he reareth up his body, and lifts up his eyes to heaven: then in his mind,
mine understanding was restored unto me, but that is here put last which was
done first; for he was first restored to his understanding, before he lift up
his eyes, Bulling. and as before he cast up his eyes in pride, so now he
lifts them up in humility, Calvin.

Secondly, the effect of this his restitution to his reason and understanding,
is the praising of God, with the reason thereof taken from the eternity of the
power and kingdom of God, both which are amplified, 1. comparatively, All the
inhabitants of the earth, are as noth^ng before him: 2. by the effects, he does
what he will, and none can gainsay.

2. Then follows the second part of his restitution, both to the society of
men, and to the honor of his kingdom, v. 33. And the effect thereof, his
praising and extolling of God, with the argument of his praise, taken from
three properties, and adjuncts of Gods works, the verity and truth, justice
and equity, and the power and omnipotence, in these words, Whose works are
all truth, and his ways judgment, and those that walk in pride he is able to
abase, v. 34.

43. Quest. That God only is without check, and not to be controlled in his
works.
v. 32. None can stay his hand, nor say unto him, What do thou? 1. They
which profanely object that God shows himself as a Tyrant doing what he
list, his will standing for law, may easily be answered, that this proposition,
they whose wills only stand for law are Tyrants, is true only among men, it
concerns not God: and the reason of this difference is, God is a law to
himself, quia voluntas eius est perfectissima iustitia, because his will is
most perfect justice: Calvin. he can will nothing, but that which is holy and
just. So is it not with man, whose will is corrupt and perverse, and therefore
it had need of a rule and law to guide it.

2. It is a question among the Ciuilians, whether the Prince have not an
absolute power in his kingdom, statuendi omnia pro suo arbitratu, etc. to
appoint all things according to his will, and so they would have the Prince to
be (...), without check and controlment: of this opinion are Bartolus, and his
followers: others do hold, that even the Emperors themselves are bound unto
their laws: for they do thus profess, digna vox est maiestate regnantis,
legibus alligatum s^ principem profiteri, adeo de authoritate iuris nostra
pendet authoritas, it is a voice worthy the majesty of him which rules, for
the Prince to profess himself bound unto the laws, in so much that our
authority depends of the authority of the law, etc. Polan.

3. But thus may these opinions be reconciled, that though Princes are both
bound by oath in some kingdoms to keep the laws and customs of the
country, and in policy also do subject themselves to their own laws for
the example of others, and beyond all these, they are tied by a straiter bond
of Gods word; yet they are without check of their subjects: their doings are
not of every one to be called in question, as the Preacher says, c. 8. 4.
Where the word of the King is, there is power, and who shall say unto him, what
do thou? where Princes hold immediately their kingdoms of God, there they are
only to give account unto God. But God is not to give account unto any: and
therefore of him only, simply, and absolutely it is true, that none can say,
What do thou? both because of his perfect justice, that none can find fault
with his works, and his absolute power, that he is not subject to the check
of any.

44. Quest. Whether Nebuchadnezzer were saved.
1. It may be objected that he was not, out of that place Isa. 14. 14. Thou
shall be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit: which being spoken of
Nebuchadnezzer shows his everlasting destruction in hell: and the rather,
because in him is set forth and described the fall of Lucifer, who with the
rest of the reprobate angels were cast down to hell.

Answ. 1. Though it be admitted and granted, that Nebuchadnezzer herein were a
type of Lucifer, yet it is not necessary, that all things which are expressed
in such typical predictions, should agree unto the type: for some things are
so spoken, that they may fitly agree both unto the type and figure, and to the
thing prefigured, some unto the sign only, some unto the thing prefigured
only: as in the 2. Psalm, where David is a type of Christ: the 2. verse, The
kings of the earth band themselves, etc. agrees unto both: and v. 6. I have
set my king upon Zion: but these words, v. 7. Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee, can only be applied unto Christ: So in this place, this
casting down to hell may be understood only of Lucifer here prefigured:
Perer. but there are better answers then this.

2. As this commination against the King of Babylon is conditionally
understood: that unless he repen^ed, he should be cast down to hell.

3. As it may be an allegorical speech showing his great abasement, as that
other is, I will ascend above the height of the clouds.

4. But yet it may be further and better answered, that it is not necessary to
understand this prophecy of Nebuchadnezzer, but rather it was performed in
Balthazar: for the Prophet prophesies also together of the destruction of
Babylon, which continued many years after the death of Nebuchadnezzer.

5. And lastly, the word translated hell, signifies also the grave, and so
better interpreted here, because there is mention made of the pit.

2. Wherefore the more probable and certain opinion is, that Nebuchadnezzer in
the end was saved: as may appear by these reasons.

1. Josephus says, that Nebuchadnezzer all his life long after this did
acknowledge God, and gave praise and glory unto him. 2. Dorotheus in Synops.
and Epiphanius infer as much upon his afflictions, that God therefore
chastened him, because he would not have him perish. 3. lib. de (...).
Augustine shows as much by the diverse end of Pharaoh and Nabuchadnezzer,
that he was hardened in his sin, and so given over to destruction, the other
was humbled under Gods hand, and so saved. 4. Theodoret likewise moving the
question, why the Lord punished Nabuchadnezzers for a time, but Balthazar with
sudden death, makes this answer; because the Lord did foresee, that the one
would be amended by his corrections, but the other was irrecorrigible. 5.
Lastly, Lyranus adds this reason, scripturae terminat historiam in eius
humiliatione, etc. and fidei confessione, the Scripture ends this story in
his humiliation, and confession of faith: which it uses not to do in them,
that afterward fall away, and are lost.

45. Quest. Why Nabuchadnezzer was saved, and not Pharaoh, both being in the
same cause.
1. Augustine putting forth this question, de gratia. c. 15.
shows wherein both of these were like: quantum ad naturam, ambo homines,
etc. in respect of their nature, they were both men: for their dignity, they
were both kings: their cause was the fame, they both held the people of God
captive: quantum ad poenam, and for their punishment, they both were gently
admonished with Gods scourges: and yet their ends were diverse: the question is,
cur medicamentum vnius medici manu confectum, alij ad interitum, alij valuerit
ad salutem, etc. why a medicine made by the hand of the same physician, should
be effectual to the destruction of the one, and for the health of the other.

2. His answer is this, because the one was humbled under the Lords correction,
the other hardened: but then it will be asked, why the one was humbled, the
other hardened: the answer must be this, illi vt mutaretur adfuisse diuinum,
huic vt iudicaretur, defuisse praesidium, that the one had Gods help to change
him, the other wanted it, and so was hardened. But if any think further that
this is unjust, that God should assist one, and not an other, the Apostle
answers, The Lord has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens, Romans 9. And so he concludes, omnia illa adiuvante Domino perfici,
vel deserente permitti, nolente vero Domino nihil prorsus admitti, etc. that
all these things are perfited and brought to pass, God so helping, or
permitted God so forsaking them, but nothing is committed God being not
willing.

46. Quest. Why Nabuchadnezzer being thus converted, the Jews kept in
captivity were not delivered, nor Iehoiachin released out of prison.
1. Though Nabuchadnezzer being thus brought to acknowledge God, did incline
also to savor his people, which in all likelihood was the more increased by
Daniels means, who was greatly honored of the king, yet the people remained
in captivity still, either because Nabuchadnezzer lived not long after this,
and so could not perfect his favor toward them; or rather this was the cause:
Daniel knew by the prophecy of Jeremy, that 70. years were determined for
the captivity of the people, and therefore expected the end and expiration of
that time, and therefore before would not attempt any thing.

2. But an other reason is to be yielded for Iehoiakims imprisonment: that
either Nabuchadnezzer intended before his death to set him at liberty, and
therefore his son did it, to fulfill his fathers mind, as soon as he came
to the kingdom: or else it pleased God by this long time of restraint to punish
the sins of Iehoiakim: who being but 18. year old followed his fathers
sleppes, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, and therefore he reigned but
three months, 2. king. 24. 9. but continued in prison 37. years, 2. king. 25.
27.

4. The places of doctrine.
1. Doctr. That the end of civil government is the peace and prosperity of
the subjects.
v. 2. which is the 31. of the former chapter according to the usual division:
Peace be multiplied unto you. Nabuchadnezzer a wise and politic King sends
this salutation to his subjects: showing thereby that a good Prince is not
only to wish, but to procure the peace of his subjects: therefore the Apostle
would have prayer made especially for kings, that under them we may live a
godly and peaceable life, 1. Tim. 2. 1. This Tullie well perceived thus
writing, vt gubernatori cursus secundus, Medico salus, Imperatori victoria,
etc. as the pilot of a ship propounds to himself the prosperous course of
the ship, the physician the health of his patient, the captain victory, so
the good governor seeks the welfare and happy life of his citizens. lib. 5.
de repub.

2. Doctr. That we are to pray even for Tyrants and cruel governors.
v. 16. The dream be to them that hate thee. In that Daniel prays for
Nabuchadnezzer, and wishes that this calamity might fall upon his enemies,
and that he might escape it; it shows, that the subjects are to pray even for
the prosperity of evil gouerners: for even under them they receive some
benefit: a badde government is better then no government. So the Prophet
Jeremy bids the Jews pray for the prosperity of the city, whether they
were carried captive, 1. Tim. 2. 1.
for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace, Ierem. 29. 7. And S. Paul
exhorts that supplications, and prayers should be made for kings: who then
were Tyrants, and persecuters of Gods Church.

3. Doct. Of the office and parts of a good Magistrate.
v. 19. Nabuchadnezzer is compared to a goodly fair spreading tree: by the
which similitude are set forth many excellent parts, that should be found in a
Prince. 1. As the tree spreads her boughs abroad, and who so will comes
under the shadow of them, so a Prince should give access to all his loving
subjects freely to come unto him, not to shut himself up from them. 2. The
beauty of the tree and comely grace, sets forth the majesty and authority
of the Prince, which ought to be reverenced of all. 3. It is full of fruit, so
the King should yield relief unto his subjects, be bountiful and beneficial,
not gathering or taking from the subjects, where the necessity of the
government requires not. 4. The shadow of the tree signifies defense from
wrong: that under the government of the Prince subjects may find comfort and
relief. 5. The birds dwell in the branches, and the beasts couch under the
shadow: so the king should to all his subjects high and low extend his favor,
according unto every ones quality and degree. ex Polan.

4. Doctr. God tempereth and moderateth his judgments with mercy.
v. 22. Seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know, etc. God might in
his justice have suffered Nabuchadnezzer all his life long, for his exceeding
great pride, to live among the bruit beasts: but he does only limit him a
certain time so long, till he was brought to acknowledge God: So that God
remembers mercy in the midst of his judgments, according to that saying,
Psalm. 30. 5. Weeping may abide at evening, but joy comes in the morning.
Bulling. 1. Cor. 19. 10.
And the Apostle says, God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted
above that you are able, but will even give the issue with the tentation, that
ye may be able to hear it: As here Nabuchadnezzer had a gracious issue of his
tentation.

5. Doctr. Of the necessity of good Counselors.
v. 24. Let my counsel be acceptable unto thee. Happy was this king, which
had so faithful a Counselor at hand to advise him: But miserable is the state
of such Princes, who are beset with bad counselors, as Rehoboam was, who
followed the headie and rash counsel of the young men: such a wicked
counselor was Haman to Assuerus, and Achitophel to Absalom. Therefore Hom^dius
a wise Senator of Rome, as Fulgosus writes, lib. 7. was wont to say, that he
had rather have an evil Prince with good counselors about him, then a good
Prince with evil. If he be an enemy to the Commonwealth, who clippeth the
kings coin, he is much more, which by evil counsel corrupts the mind of
the Prince. Pintus.

6. Doctr. What manner of alms are acceptable unto God.
v. 24. Break off thy sins by righteousness, etc. Simply to give alms, it is
not pleasing unto God; for the Pharisees gave alms, but it did nothing avail
them, because they did it of a vain ostentation: they which give alms, and
yet live in sin, as though they would buie out their licentious life by their
sin, do therein deceive themselves: the Apostle says, Without faith, it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. alms then not proceeding of faith, can
not be accepted. In (...). c. 75* 76.
Augustine therefore says well, Qui vult ordinate eleemosynas dare, debet a
seipso incipere, etc. he that will give alms orderly must begin with
himself: he must first look into his own conscience, and see his own
poverty and nakedness: mendicat a te anima tua, esurit iustitiam, thy own
soul beggeth of thee, it hungreth after justice. Perer.

7. Doctr. Of true repentance.
v. 24. Break off thy sins by righteousness, etc. 1. Here the parts of true
repentance are set down, which are these two, to depart from sin, and to
follow righteousness: as the Prophet Isai says, Cease to do evil, learn to
do well, Isa. 1. 16.

2. Hence also the effects of true repentance are gathered, which are the
fruits of righteousness: so that in vain does one afflict himself, if he do
not alter and change his life: such are reproved by the Prophet, Isa. 58. 5.
that did afflict their souls for a day, and bow down their head like a
bulrush, and yet continued in their sin.

3. The quality of true repentance is here also expressed, that it may not be
deferred or put off, but speedily prosequuted: which is signified by this
phrase of breaking off. As the Apostle to the Hebr. c. 3. 7. urges that place,
to day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

4. The benefit of true repentance follows, it procures peace, and
tranquillity, and preuenteth the judgments of God: as here Nabuchadnezzer is
promised, that by this means, his peace might be prolonged: So our blessed
Savior says, Luke 13. 3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
Polan.

8. Doctr. That God sees and knows all things.
v. 28. While the word was in the kings mouth, etc. God heard the very proud
words which Nabuchadnezzer spoke, and in that very instant and moment, sent his
Angel to denounce the judgment decreed against him. So then nothing is hid
from God, neither our thoughts, as the Prophet David says, Thou understand
my thoughts a far off, Psalm. 139. 2. nor our words, as it follows in the
same place, v. 4. There is not a word in my tongue, but thou know it wholly,
O Lord: much less can our works be hid, as Rev. 2. 2. I know thy works. So
that as the Apostle says, All things are naked, and open to his eyes, with
whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13.

9. Doctr. Gods judgments come of a sudden.
v. 28. As a voice came from heaven, even while the word was in the kings
mouth: so the judgments of God overtake the wicked when they look not for
them: so Noah's flood came upon the old world, and the destruction of Sodom
upon the wicked: So the day of the Lord, as the Apostle says, shall come as a
thief in the night, and as the travel upon a woman with child, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
2. 3. It behooves us therefore to be sober and watchful, as our blessed
Savior says, Those things which I say unto you, I say unto all men, watch,
Mark. 13. 37.

10. Doct. Gods judgments meet with sins in the same kind.
v. 29. They shall drive thee from men. Nabuchadnezzer is here punished in the
same things wherein he had sinned: he was not so much lifted up before in
pride, as he is now humbled, and cast down: As he had banished many out of
their countries, and taken them captive, so he is now exiled himself, and
driven from the company of men: his food was dainty and delicate before, now
he feeds with oxen: then he was apparelled in purple, and other rich attire,
now horrido pilo totus obtegitur, he is all covered with hair: then he was
anointed with balm and precious ointment, now he is wet with the dew of
heaven. Oecolampad.

11. Doct. True repentance is the gift of God.
v. 31. At the end of these days I Nabuchadnezzer lift up mine eyes to
heaven, etc. Until it pleased God to turn this proud kings heart, nothing
could make it stoop. He had received many warnings, and was foretold of this
his downfall, and was advised by Daniel by repentance to prevent this
calamity: and being in this great misery, he was not moved therewith, till
the time was expired, and the Lord moved his heart: So our blessed Savior
says, Ioh. 6. 44. No man comes unto me, except the father draw him, etc.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. That the virgin Marie was not without sin.
v. 12. Leave the stumpe, etc. Pererius allegorizing this vision of the tree,
thereby would have shadowed forth the beautiful state of man in Paradise
before his fall: and by the stumpe and root remaining, he understands the
virgin Marie, peccato Adami nullatenus infectam, not infected at all with the
sin of Adam. And Christ is the branch that sprouteth out of this root.

Contra. 1. This comparison first is unfit: for here a stumpe only remains
without any branches at all: he can not find then here both a stumpe, and a
branch. 2. This stumpe is bound about with a chain: and what other chains is
man's nature bound with, then with the chains of sin: his own application
makes against him. 3. It is a most blasphemous opinion, and contrary of the
Scriptures, that Marie was without original sin: for the Apostle says, All
men have sinned, Romans 5. 12. none are excepted but Christ, Heb. 4. 15. Marie
also confessed her self a sinner, in acknowledging that she also had need of
a Savior, Luke 1. 47. see more hereof, Synops. Centur. 2. err. 79.

2. Controv. Against freewill.
Lyranus by this stumpe remaining, understands free will: per hoc germen
significatur liberum arbitrium reuerti potens ad bonum, by this branch is
signified free will, which has power to return unto that, which is good.

Contra. 1. The vision it self overthrows this conceit: for this stumpe is
bound with a chain, it could not sprout of it self, till the chains were
taken away, and before God had given Nabuchadnezzer an understanding heart, he
could not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven: therefore this is but a weak
ground to build free will upon. 2. Beside the Scripture evidently speaks,
that there is no power or ability in man so much as to think a good thought,
2. Cor. 3. 5. And our Savior says, Without me ye can do nothing, Ioh. 15. 5.
see more hereof, Synops. Centur. 4. err. 46.

3. Controv. Against the invocation of Saints.
v. 14. The sentence is according to the petition of the holy ones. The
Romanists do thus understand this place, that the holy Angels made request for
the king, that mercy might be showed him: and hence would infer, that we are
to make our prayers unto them.

Contra. 1. That this place has no such meaning, is showed before, Quest. 18.
the Angels pray not against Gods will, that Nabuchadnezzer might escape this
calamity, for it was already decreed with God, that it should fall upon him:
but they desire rather, that what God had decreed in heaven might accordingly
be fulfilled in earth. 2. And although it be granted, quod been nobis
afficiantur, that they are well affected toward us, and wish well unto us, yet
it would not follow, that therefore we should pray unto them. Oecolampad. see
hereof, Cent^r. 2. err. 8.

4. Controv. That the Pope is not the distributer of kingdoms.
v. 22. Till thou know, that the most high bears rule over the kingdoms of
the earth, and gives it to whomsoever he will. This Sovereign power belongs
unto God to dispose of kings, and kingdoms, to pull down, and set up: then it
is presumptuous arrogancy in the Pope, to challenge unto himself any such
supereminent power over kings, unto whom he himself ought to be subject,
according to S. Paul's rule, Romans 13. 1. See before chap. 2. controv. 6.

5. Controv. Against satisfaction by works.
v. 24. Break off thy sins by righteousness. The Latin interpreter
reads, redeem thy sins by righteousness: whereupon Pererius with other
Romanists do collect, that works of righteousness, and mercy, do satisfy
for sin, and are available ad expianda peccata venialia, to expiate venial
sins. And to that purpose he urges that place, Prove. 16. 6. By mercy and
truth iniquity shall be forgiven.

Contra. 1. It is before sufficiently declared, Quest. 30. that the true
reading here is not, redeem, but, break off thy sins. 2. Though that other
reading be retained, the meaning only is, that he should redeem, and satisfy
men whom he had wronged. 3. And this had been impossible for him to do, to
make recompense to so many, whom he had cruelly handled the space of 40.
years. 4. And if he would not make satisfaction unto men, much less unto God.
5. Wherefore in these words, non exponitur modus redimendi peccata, sed modus
potius agendi, the way of redeeming his sin is not declared, but the way
rather of working, such as becomes those that are truly penitent: first then
his sins must be forgiven by faith, before he can bring forth the works of
repentance. Iun. 6. Further, as Nabuchadnezzer could not satisfy for his
sin, no more can any man: for our best works are imperfect: our righteousness
is as a stained clout, Isa. 6. 6. but that which must satisfy before God,
ought to be perfect, and absolute: it is therefore the most perfect
righteousness of Christ, and none other, that is able to satisfy Gods justice
for our sins.

7. And concerning that place urged out of the Proverbs, either it may be
understood not of mercy which we show, which is called an active mercy, but
of mercy showed unto us from God, which is a passive mercy, by the which our
iniquity is forgiven: as Iunius proves by the words following, by the fear
of the Lord they depart from evil: or else the meaning is, by the works of
mercy we are assured our sins are forgiven us, Genevens. as in the like
sense our Savior says, Many sins are forgiven her, because she loved much,
Luke 7. 47. her great love was not the cause, but the sign rather and effect
of the forgiveness of her sins. And so the Apostle says, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. We
know, that we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren:
he says not we are translated, but we know, we are. But of the question
against satisfaction by works, see more Synops. Papism. Centur. 4. err. 78.

6. Controv. Of the certentie of remission of sins.
v. 24. The Latin reads, It may be God will forgive thee thy sins:
whereupon Pererius infers, nemini liquido cognitam remissionem peccatorum,
that remission and forgiveness of sin is not certainly known unto any.

Contra. 1. It is showed before, Quest. 31. that the word here used, is not a
particle of doubting, but rather it serves to exhort, and stir up to have
further confidence in God, and to take away carnal security. 2. But that by
faith we are undoubtedly assured of the remission of sin, the Scripture
evidently shows: Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we are at peace with
God: but our conscience can not be settled, or at peace, unless it be assured of
Gods favor in the remission of sins: likewise, Romans 8. 16. The same spirit
bears witness to our spirit, that we are the children of God: but how can we
be assured, that they are the children of God, if their sins be not forgiven
them. See further hereof, Centur. 4. err. 56.

7. Controv. Which be the good works of Christians.
v. 24. Break off thy sins by righteousness, etc. Here good works are
defended to be the works of righteousness and mercy. Among the Romanists,
these are counted their good works, suscipere peregrinationes, erigere
statuam, etc. to vow and take in hand pilgrimages, to set up an image, to found
crosses, Calvin. But these are not the works which God is pleased with: those
are the works acceptable unto him, not which man's curiosity has invented, but
such as God himself has appointed for us to walk in, Ephesians. 1. 10. The
hypocrites say, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, etc. will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil, etc. But
the Lord makes answer, what works he requires, To do justly, to love
mercy, to humble thy self, etc. Mich. 6. 7.

8. Controv. That Gods providence, is not only a bare prescience or permission.
v. 32. According to his will he works in the army of heaven, etc. Polanus
hence refelleth that error of certain Lutherans, who affirm, providentiam Dei
nihil aliud esse, nisi praescientiam, that the providence of God is nothing else
but a certain prescience. formul. concord. fol. 249. for here it is evident,
that God is not a fore^eer, but a doer: that all things in heaven and earth
fall out according to his will: as Psalm. 135. 6. Whatsoever pleased the Lord,
that did he in heaven and earth, etc. And Luther himself was of an other
judgment, whose words are these, Deus omnia infallibili voluntate, and
praevidet, proponit and facit, etc. that God by his infallible ^ill does
foresee, propound, and do all things, etc. Polan.

Calvin further urges this place against those, which make a distinction
between the will of God, and permission: As though he suffered some things
which he would not have done, which should argue impotencie and weakness in God,
as though he should suffer some things against his will. A voluntary
permission there is in God, in leaving men unto themselves, and suffering
things to work according to their kind: but an inuoluntarie permission there
is not in God, to suffer any thing, which he would not have done. He suffers
sin to be done, though he will it not to be done, yet it is his will it
should be done, because he knows how to make it serve unto his glory: yet he
is no way the author of sin, nor yet accessarie unto it.

9. Controv. Against the presumption of the Pope, who would be without check
and controlement.
v. 32. None may say unto him, What do thou? This prerogative and privilege
this great king gives only unto God, to be controlled of none, nor to give
account of his doings to any. Therefore the presumption of the Pope is
intolerable, who challenges that to himself, which is only peculiar unto
God. As thus his clawbacks and flatterers write of the Papal pre-eminence and
privilege, non est de eius potestate inquirendum, quum primae causa nulla si
caus^, no man must inquire of his power, seeing he is the cause of causes, and
of the first cause there can be no cause, etc. secund. Bald. in capit. E^cles.
etc. And, nemo potest dicere Papae, etc. no man must say unto the Pope, why do
you so. distinct. 40. c. si Papa. Hereof F^ederick the 2. Emperor complained
in an epistle to Otto Duke of Bavaria, Rationem actuum nemini quasi sit Deus,
reddere vult, id quod soli Deo conuenit, vsurpat etc. he will render account to
none of his doings, he usurps that which only agrees unto God, that he can
not err, etc. Annal. Aventin. lib. 7. ex Polan.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Worldly and carnal men do only crave the help of the godly in
the time of need.
v. 5. Till at the last Daniel came before me. If the Soothsayers and Sorcerers
could have served Nabuchadnezzers turn, he would not have sought unto Daniel:
but now all other means failing him, he craves his help to expound the
dream: like as men in their health regard not the physicians, but in their
sickness run unto them: So Jeroboam when Abiah his some was sick, sent unto
Ahiah the Prophet, 2. king. 14.

2. Observe. Witches and Sorcerers not to be sought unto.
Nabuchadnezzer called all his wise men together, to unfold the secret of his
dream, but they could do him no good: by which we are taught, not to run
unto any such for help: 1. because they can not help, they are both ignorant,
and know nothing, and of no power, and can do little, as is evident in these
Chaldean wizzards, who did but deceive and abuse the king. 2. Such do use the
conference of wicked spirits, and therefore to go unto such, were to forsake
God: As Ahaziah in ^eeking unto Beelzebub the god of Ekron, did therein deny
that there was a God in Israel, 2. King. 1.

3. Observe. Prosperity is dangerous.
v. 9. The boughs thereof were fair, and the fruit much. Nabuchadnezzer in
his flourishing and prosperous state is compared to a good tree both fair and
fruitful: this his prosperity did lift up his heart, and made him proud, and
therefore his boughs were broken off, to make him know himself: So riches and
abundance are but a snare to them, which know not how to use them: therefore
the wise man prays that God would not give him riches, least I be full and
deny thee, Prove. 30. 9. They say that the palm tree will not grow in a sat
ground, but in a light and sandy: and if the soil be strong and fertile, they
must cast salt and ashes at the root to qualify the strength of the ground:
So if prosperity be not seasoned with the salt of grace, it is unfruitful and
unprofitable. Pintus.

4. Observe. Ministers must be faithful in delivering the truth, though it be
not pleasing.
As Daniel verse. 2. delivers the interpretation to the king of this fearful
and terrible dream, though he knew it should not be welcome unto him: so must
Ministers in their office be faithful, as the Apostle says, It is required of
the disposers, that every one be found faithful, 1. Cor. 4. 2. They must fear
rather to offend God, then to displease men. So the Lord says to his Prophet,
Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet: and show my people
their transgression, etc. Eli was judged for sparing and forbearing his wicked
sons; 1. Sam. 2. and the false prophets are threatened, for flattering the
people, and sowing pillowes under their elbowes, Esech. 13. and the watchmen,
which tell not the people of the sword coming, shall bear their sin: the
Lord will require their blood at his hand, Esec. 33. 6.

5. Observe. We must look unto Gods providence in our affliction.
So Daniel says, c. 2. 21. It is the decree of the most high, which is come
upon my Lord the king: When the Lord lays his hand upon his children, they
must look unto him that corrects them, and humble themselves before him, and
not murmr against him, seeing it comes not by chance, but as it pleases
the divine providence to dispose, as the Prophet David excellently says, I
held my peace because it was thy doing, Psalm. 39. 4.

6. Observe. Of the utility and benefit that comes of true and effectual
repentance.
V. 33. My glory and beauty was restored unto me, etc. Nebuchadnezzar after
his seven years humiliation, is restored unto as great honor as ever he was:
So Job after he had been afflicted, was raised up to a more glorious and
flourishing estate, then he had before: David after his long time of
persecution was established in the kingdom: so affliction, and if it work
true humiliation and repentance, brings greater joy and comfort in the end,
as the Apostle says, one light affliction which is but for a moment, causes
unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4. 17.

7. Observe. Of the greatness of the sin of pride, and how the Lord abhors
it.
V. 28. While the proud word was in the kings mouth, whereby he boasted of his
goodly buildings, which he had made not for Gods honor, but his own, even in
the same moment did the Lord cast him down from his princely throne. So Daniel
says, c. 5. 20. when his heart was hardened in pride, he was deposed from his
kingly throne: therefore let all those take heed by this example, whose hearts
are lifted up, ascribing their gifts and works to their own wit, industry,
and strength, or making their own glory and praise, the end and scope of all
their doings: for the Scripture says, the Lord resists the proud, 1. Pet. 5.
5.

8. Observe. God fights for us against the Devil.
V. 27. According to his will he works in the army of heaven. The Lord is
the commander of the Angels and princes: both good and bad are subject unto
him: all things in heaven and earth are swayed according to his will, which is
much to the comfort of Gods children, that nothing can hinder their salvation:
neither Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, height nor depth, can separate
them from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8. 39. And so our Blessed Savior
says, My father is greater then all, and none can take you out of his hand,
John. 10. 29.

CHAP. V.
1. The Method and Argument.
THe sum and argument of this chapter is an historical narration, 1. of a
fearful sight, an hand was seen writing upon a wall. 2. and the
interpretation thereof by Daniel.

In the vision these things are declared. 1. the occasion wherefore this vision
was sent, which was the profanation of the vessels of the Temple, which is set
forth in this manner. 1. the occasion, the king made a feast, v. 1. 2. the
vessels are brought and abused in excessive drinking at the kings commandment,
v. 2. 3. 3. and withal they blaspheme God, and praise their idols, v. 4.

2. The vision it self follows, where is noted 1. the time. 2. what
appeared, a man's hand. 3. the manner, it did write. 4. the place, over against
the candlestick.

3. The effects are two. 1. the king sees it, v. 5. 2. upon his fight he is
troubled, both inwardly in his thoughts, and outwardly in his body, his
countenance is changed, his Ioynes loosed, and his knees smote together, v. 6.

In the interpretation, there is the way and preparation made unto it, unto v.
17. then the declaration it self, from v. 17. to the end.

In the preparation there is, 1. the kings inquisition of his soothsayers, but
all in vain, v. 10. 2. his sending for Daniel at the Queens motion. In the
inquisition. 1. the wise men are called. 2. the matter is propounded with
promise of great reward, v. 7. 3. their vain attempt is showed, v. 8. 4. the
event thereof the kings perplexity, v. 9.

In Daniels sending for, 1. there is the Queens motion and speech, see the
parts thereof, quest. 22. 2. the execution by the king, with his speech unto
Daniel, which consists of 4. parts. 1. his inquiry concerning his person. 2.
a commendation of his gifts, v. 14. 3. a narration of the wisemens weakness and
insufficiency, v. 15. 4. a promise of great reward to Daniel, if he can
expound the vision, v. 16.

Then follows the declaration it self which consists, 1. of a sharp
reprehension or redargution, the order and method thereof see quest. 25. 2.
the interpretation it self, the parts thereof see, quest. 31.

2. The text with the diverse readings.
1. v. Belshatzar the king made a great feast ( bread. C.) to a thousand of his
princes, and drank wine before the thousand ( and every one drank wine
according to his age. L. ad.)

2. And Belshatzar while he tasted wine ( in the taste of wine. C. S. that is,
being now enflamed with wine, and merry with wine. L. while the wine was in:
for to taste wine. I. but it is said before v. 1. that he had drunk wine)
commanded to bring the vessels of gold and silver, which his father
Nebuchadnezzar had brought from the Temple in Jerusalem: that the king and his
princes, his wives and concubines might drink therein.

3. Then were brought the golden vessels, which they had taken out of the
Temple of the Lords house, which was at Jerusalem, and the king and his
princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them.

4. They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold and silver, of brass, of
iron, of wood, and stone.

5. At the same time came forth ( appeared. B. G. L.) the fingers of a man's
hand, which wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaster of the wall
of the kings palace: and the king saw the palm ( or part. I. the joints, or
knuckels. L. V. B. pas, signifies a part, some interpret it the palm) of the
hand that wrote.

6. Then the kings countenance ( glory or brightness. C. which Iunius
understands of that whole festiuitie which was suddenly turned) was changed (
changed it self. C.) and his thoughts troubled him, so that the girdle I.
(bands. C. V. joints. L. B. G.) of his loins was loosed, and his knees smote
one against another.

7. Then the king cried aloud ( strongly. C.) that they should bring in the
Astrologians, Chaldeans, and the Soothsayers, ( wisards. B.) And the king spoke
and said to the wisemen of Babel, Whosoever can read me this writing, and
show me the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed in purple, and shall
have a chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler ( rule the
third. C.) in the kingdom.

8. Then came all the kings wise men, but they could neither read the writing,
nor make known unto the king the interpretation.

9. Then was king Belshatzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was changed
in him, and his princes were astonished.

10. Now the Queen by reason of the talk of the king and his princes, came
into the banquet house, and the Queen spoke and said, O king live for ever: let
not thy thoughts trouble thee, neither let thy countenance be changed.

11. There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy gods,
and in the days of thy father, light ( lat. det.) and understanding, and
wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods ( L. S. det.) was found in him: whom
the king Nebuchad-nezzar thy father made chief of the Magicians, Astrologians,
Chaldeans, and soothsayers, the king ( I say) thy father ( thy grandfather. I.).

12. Because that a more abundant spirit ( excellent. I. G.) and knowledge, and
understanding the interpretation of dreams, and decla^ing of hard sentences,
and the solution of doubts, ( knots. C.) was found in Daniel, whom the king
named (imposed the name) Beltashazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will
declare the interpretation.

13. Then was Daniel brought before the king, and the king spoke, and said unto
Daniel, art thou that Daniel, which art of the children of the captivity of
Judah, whom my father the king brought out of Judea?

14. Now I have heard of thee, that the spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and
that light and understanding, and excellent ( abundant. C.) wisdom is found
in thee.

15. Now therefore wisemen and Astrologers have been brought before me, that
they should read this writing, and make known unto me the interpretation
thereof: but they were not able to declare the interpretation of the thing.

16. Then heard I of thee, that thou art able to show interpretations (
interpret interpretations. C.) and dissolve doubts ( knots. C.) now if thou
can read the writing, and show me the interpretation thereof, thou shall be
clothed in purple, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and shall be the
third ruler in the kingdom.

17. Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Keep thy rewards to thy
self ( thy rewards be to thee. C.) and give thy gifts to another: yet will I
read the writing to the king, and make known the interpretation unto him.

18. O thou king, ( hear thou O king. G.) Iunius refers it to the 22. v.
but it is better put interrogatiuely) the most high God gave unto
Nebuchadnezzar thy father, a kingdom, and majesty, and power, and glory.

19. And for the majesty, that he gave him, all people, nations and languages
trembled, and feared (were trembling and fearing before him: whom he would he
slew, and whom he would he saved alive. I. (he (...). L. S. B. G. V. but the
other is fitter, as set in opposition to the former clause: and then the word
must not be derived of macah to smite, but of caiah to make alive) whom he
would he set up, and whom he would he put down.

20. But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind ( spirit. C.) hardened in
pride, he was deposed ( caused to descend. C.) from his kingly throne, and they
took his glory from him.

21. And he was driven from the sons of men, and his heart became as a beasts
( was put unto the beasts. C.) and his dwelling was with the wild asses, they
fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was were with the dew of heaven,
till he knew that the most high God bare rule over the kingdom of men, and he
appoints over it, whomsouer he pleases.

22. And thou his son O Belshatzar, have not humbled thine heart, though thou
knew all this.

23. But have lift thy self up against the Lord of heaven, and they have
brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou, and thy princes, thy
wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them, and thou have praised the
gods of silver, and gold, and brass, iron, wood, and stone, which neither
see, neither hear, nor understand.

24. Then was the part ( palm. B. G. knuckles. B. joints. V. L. see before v.
5.) of an hand sent from his presence: and so this writing was written. C. (and
has written this writing. G. B.

25. And this is the writing that is written: mean, mean, tekel, vpharsin.

26. And this is the interpretation of the words ( of the things. B. G.) Mean,
God has numbered out thy kingdom, and has finished it.

27. Tekel, thou art weighed in the balance, and art found wanting ( too light.
G.)

28. Peers (divided. I. and so he interprets the other words before, but
first the words are set down, as they were written, and then the
interpretation) thy kingdom is divided, and given unto the Medes and Persians.

29. Then Belshatzar gave charge ( said. C.) and they clothed Daniel with
purple, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made proclamation
concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.

30. The same night was Belshatzar the king of the Chaldeans slain.

31. And Darius ( Dariaves. C.) the Mede took the kingdom, being threescore
and two year old.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. Why this chapter is transposed and not set down according to the
order of time.
1. It is evident by the last verse of this chapter, that this history fell
out in the last year of Balthazars reign, for at this time Babylon was taken:
but the prophesies and visions contained, cap. 7. 8. were showed unto Daniel
before, the one in the first year, c. 7. 8. the other in the third, cap. 8. 1.

2. The reason hereof is this, because Daniel would set down together all the
matters of fact and history unto the 7. chapter, and then follow the
prophetical visions together, which only were revealed to Daniel, from cap.
7. to the end; beside this chapter has a very fit coherence with the former:
for as there it is showed how Nebuchahnezzar was punished for his pride, so the
like is set forth here in the fall of Balthazar.

3. It is like that many other memorable acts fell out in the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar, his son Euilmerodach, and this Balthazar, but Daniel only
touches such things, quorum vtilis futura erat posteris memoria, the memory
and knowledge whereof might be profitable to posterity: as were these
miraculous works of God, which were showed upon these kings, Theodoret.

Quest. 2. Of the kings of Chaldea which succeeded after Nebuchadnezzar.
1. Josephus sets them down in this order, lib. 10. antiqui. c. 13.
after Nebuchadnezzar he names his son Abilomarodachus, then Niglisar his
son, and Labosardachus his son the father of Balthazar: the same order
follows Eusebius differing somewhat in names: he calls these four
Amilmathapacus, Egressa^ius, Labosardochus, Balthazar: lib. 9. de praepar. c 3.
so also Hierome and Lyran.

2. Metasthenes as Pintus alleges him, says that Euilmerodach had three
sons which succeeded one another, the first Niglazar, or Regassar, who
reigned 2. years, then Lab-assar-dach, who reigned 3. years, and the third
was Balthazar.

3. But all these are deceived: for it is evident out of the S^^^pture, Ierem.
27. v. 5, 6, 7. that after Nebuchadnezzar succeeded only his son, and his
sons son: there were not then 4. descents, but only three from
Nebuchadnezzar, who was the grandfather, not the greatgrandfather of Bal^hazar:
for after Nebuchadnezzar succeeded Euilmerodach, 2. king. 25. 27. and after him
his son Balthazar, thus Hugo. Vatab. Inn. Oecolamp. Calvin.

4. But hereupon rises this difference, that this Ncega-letzer, or Niglazar
did depose Euilmerodach his kinsman, who together with his son Balthazar
lived in exile among the Medes, and in the mean time Neegaletzer, or Niglazar
possessed the kingdom: and so indeed there were four in all, but one of them
was an usurper, Polan. see more hereof afterward, quest. 20.

Quest. 3. Of the diverse names of this Balthazar.
1. He is here called Belshatzar, which signifies a searcher of treasure, of
belash, scrutatus est, he searched, and atzar, treasure: he is called of
Metasthenes, Balt -- assar, and in the vulgar Latin, Balsasar, of the Septuag.
Baltasar.

2. He was also called Nabobonidus, or Naboan with Josephus, or Nebonidachus in
Eusebius, or as others Nebonidus: which signifies a prince expelled.

3. Herodotus calls him Labynetus, or Labunit^s, the son of Nitocris, whom
he makes more famous then Semiramis: but here Herodotus falls into great
error, making these two famous Queens but five ages or generations one before
another, whereas from Semiramis to Nitocris, there were run a 1500. years.
Peter.

4. Pererius thinks, that this Balthazar was called Merodach, because Jeremy
says, cap. 50. 2. Bell is confounded, Merodach is broken down: where Merodach
which signifies sceptrifer, a scepter bearer, is there understood rather of
their idol Bell, as appears by the phrase, is broken down: which title also
they gave unto their kings, Iun. annot. some think that Euilmerodach was so
called, as to say prince of Merodaci^, the name of a region of Babylon, which
Ptolomie calls Amordacia, Polan.

Quest. 4. In what year of Balthazars reign this history fell out.
1. Pererius thinks it was in the 17. year of his reign. Hugo Cardinal. in
the 18. year: Metasthenes gives unto Balthazars reign 5. years: Calvin
says he reigned 8. years, and this happened in the last year of his reign.

2. But it was rather in the third and last year of his reign, as Oecolamp.
Bulling. for if so many as 17. or 18. years be allowed unto Balthazars reign,
there will be more then 70. years of captivity, which now were expired at the
taking of Babylon, and Cyrus entrance: for 37. years were gone of the
captivity before Euilmerodach began to reign, 2. king. 25. 27. then
Euilmerodach reigned as some account 30. years, Bulling. others give him but
23. Oecolampad. Calvin. they that give the least reckon 18. years, Josephus.
there could not then be yet 18. years remaining. And that it was in the third
year rather, then in the 5. or 8. this may be a probable reason, because there
is mention in Daniel of noe more then the 3. year of Balthazar, c. 8. 1.

Quest. 5. Of the greatness of Balthazars feast.
Verse. 1. He made a great feast. We read of other feasts as great as this, as
that which Ptolome the last king of that name, the father of Cleopatra, made
unto Pompey: who envited a thousand of his captains to a feast, setting before
every one of them a cup of gold to drink in, and changing the dishes with
the messes. But Alexanders feast also exceeded this, who at the solemnizing of
his marriage bid 10. thousand gh^stes, giving unto every one of them a golden
cup. And Assuerus feast went beyond these, who had at one feast all the
princes and captains of his kingdom and provinces, which were an 127. Esther.
1. 1. But of all other that was the greatest feast, which Plin^e writes to
have bin made by Pythius, who entertained all Xerxes huge army, which
consisted of 700. thousand, and 88. thousand men: and promised them pay for
five months. 2. Yet this was a great feast, wherein were present a thousand of
Balthazars nobles, and if there were so many of his princes, the rest of the
company and followers far exceeded. Hugo thinks that there were many more,
for here a certain number is taken for an uncertain: but this was a
sufficient company for a Princes feast. And it fell so out by Gods providence,
that all these should be here assembled together, that they might all taste of
the same calamity: as Jeremy prophesies, c. 50. 35. A sword is upon the
Chaldeans (says the Lord) and upon the inhabitants of Babel, and upon her
princes and wise men, Polan.

Quest. 6. Of the manner and order of this feast.
1. The Latin interpreter reads, and every one drank according to his age:
which is two ways understood, either that they sat down according to their
age, or that they did drink in measure, every one according to his strength;
sic Lyranus. Perer. Hugo. Pintus. But beside, that to sit according to their
age, is not to drink according to their age, and it is not like that there was
any order or measure observed in drinking, in this riotus feast, there is no
such thing in the original: but thus are the words truly interpreted, he
drank wine before a thousand, so also the Septuag.

2. Which words some of the Rabbines do so understand, as though the king did
strive with these thousand of his princes, who should drink most, Osiand. Some
think thereby is noted his unshamefastness, that whereas he used at other
times to be drunk in secret, now he is drunken before a thousand witnesses:
But although hereby is noted his intemperancie, that before his nobles took
such fill of drink, encouraging them to do the like by his evil example, yet
here is an allusion to the fashion of that country, the princes used to take
their meat alone: but now to give the better welcome, he does not only drink
before them in the same place, yet at another table, as Vatablus, but he
enteraineth them as his ghests, eating and drinking together.

Quest. 7. Of the occasion of this feast.
1. Hierome from certain Hebrews reports, that Balthazar having heard, that
the Jews were to be held in captivity 70. years, which time now by his
account was expired, does make a feast, as insulting against the Lords people,
as though all were fables, and that no such thing was to be expected* But
Hierome counts this as a fable, for those 70. years were not yet expired.

2. Some think that the Chaldeans had chased away the Persians and Medes from
the city, and thereupon the feast was made* Some that Cyrus and Darius being
overcome, did ^^mage to the king, and were at this feast, while in the mean
time their army divided the river into diverse channels, and so made it
paessable, and by this means took the city: for if this had been so, after
Daniel had expounded the writing upon the wall, and had said, thy kingdom is
divided, and given unto the Medes and Persians; ver. 28. if Cyrus and Darius
had been present, they would have made them sure enough.

3. Some conjecture that the Persians might seem to give way for a time in
policy to make the Babylonians more secure, and that they thereupon for joy
made this feast: But they which write of these wars, report that Cyrus of a
long time had now besieged the city.

4. The occasion then of this feast was indeed an annual solemnity, which
they kept yearly about the 16. day of the month which the Greeks call (...),
Loon, which continued five days together, wherein the servants bear sway in
every family, and for that time their masters were subject unto them: and
they used to choose one out of their company apparelled like the king, whom
they called in the Chalde language Segane, which signifies a Prince, Iun.
Cyrus as Xenophon writes, took his opportunity by reason of this feast, to
assault the city more strongly. Now the Babylonians were secure, both being
confident in the strength and defense of the city, which was compassed both
with high walls, and with the great river Euphrates: as also they had provision
laid up in the city, as both Xenophon and Herodotus write, for 20. years and
more. And this made them so secure.

Quest. 8. Who commanded the vessels of the temple to be brought, and how.
V. 2. Balthazzar while he tasted the wine. 1. The word is beteghem, in the
taste, which word also signifies counsel, advise; and thereupon Ab. Ezra thus
interprets it, in consilio vini, he commanded as the wine advised him, vino
dictante, the wine thus decreed: but this interpretation, as Calvin notes is
too curious. 2. Iunius reads, ad gustandum vinum, he sent for the vessels to
taste wine in them: But it seems they had well drunk wine before, ver. 1. and
this was a fruit of their excess and drunkenness. 3. The word chamra, which
here signifies wine, some would derive of the Hebrew word chamar, that
signifies an ass, and understand hereby that some Agaso, some base fellow
that kept or drove asses, was set up in this feast to be their king, and that
at his bidding all things were done: they suppose him to have been such an
one, as is used to be called the Lord of misrule: but that Chamra is here taken
for wine, is evident, ver. 1. the king drunk wine. 4. wherefore the usual
reading is best: the king in the tasting of wine, etc. that is, when his heart
was merry and overcome with wine, as R. David and R. Leui read, he was
temulentus, now drunk with wine.

Quest. 9. Of Balthazars profaning of the holy vessels.
Balthazar offends diverse ways. 1. In his presumption, he aduentureth to
do that which neither Nebuchadnezzar, nor Euilmerodach, his grandfather, or
father before him attempted: for none of them are read, to have brought forth
these sacred vessels, Calvin. 2. then he profaneth the holy vessels in turning
them to profane uses, which were consecrated and dedicated only to the service
of God: Bulling. 3. he brings them forth not for any necessary or sober use,
but in this drunken and lascivious feast, he causes them to be set before
combibo^ibus and scortis, his drunken companions and harlots, Bulling, for here
were present his wives and concubines, Bulling. 4. But the greatest impiety of
all was, that they praised their abominable idols; not only giving them the
honor of their plenty and feasting: for it was the manner of the heathen in
the beginning of their feasts to sacrifice unto their gods, Perer. but they
ascribed this victory unto their idols, when these vessels were taken from the
Temple at Jerusalem, as though their filthy idols were stronger then the God
of Israel, Bulling.

Quest. 10. Whether Nebuchadnezzar did not likewise profane the vessels, in
laying them up in his idols temple.
1. It will be objected, that Nebuchadnezzar did as much profane them, by
placing them in the Temple of his idols, as the Philistims in bringing the Arc
into the house of Dagon: but there the Lord showed his judgment even upon
their god in striking off his head and hands, and punished also the Philistims
for that profanation, 1. Sam. 5.

2. The answer here is, that the contempt was not alike: for the Philistims
presented their idol with the Arc as a monument of their victory, and so
robbed God of his honor, but Nebuchadnezzar of some religious respect did lay
up these vessels in the Temple, as not fit to be profaned and turned to any
common use: and therefore so long as the vessels were there kept, the Lord
seemed not to be angry, Hugo ex gloss. This also may be added, that the Arc
was a more sacred thing, then the golden vessels* for that was not lawful to be
touched or seen of any; therefore the abuse offered thereunto was more heinous.

Quest. 11. Of the blind and obscure idolatry of the Chaldeans.
1. V. 4. They praised the gods of gold etc. 1. Concerning their blind
idolatry, 1. they used to set up their images before their faces, in some
humane shape, to the which they sacrificed in the beginning of their feasts, as
Athen. lib. 8. Dypnosophist. c. 13. 2. These were made of diverse mettalls,
according to the property of those things which they represented: as they made
the image of the Sun of gold, of Mars of iron, of the Moon of silver: as
Alexander the coppersmith is said to have made silver shrines for Diana, Act.
19. Lyran. 3. And further how absurd and foolish the Chaldean idolatry was, is
thus described, Baruch, c. 6. v. 3. You shall see in Babel gods of gold and
silver borne upon men's shoulders: v. 9. they make crowns of gold for their
heads. v. 13. one holds a scepter, as though he were a certain Judge of the
country, yet can not slay such as offend him. v. 14. an other has an axe or
dagger, or an axe in his right hand, yet is not able to defend himself in
battle. v. 16. their eyes are full of dust. v. 17. the Priests keep the
Temples shut with doors and bars upon them, as gates are shut up round about
upon offenders. v. 18. they light up candles before them, etc. such is the
vanity of their idols, and the blindness of those which worship them.

2. And what their obscenitie was in their idolatrous service, is showed in the
same place, v. 42. the women girded with coards, sit in the streets, and burn
straw: and if one of them be drawn away, and lie with any such as come by,
she casts her neighbor in the teeth, because she was not so worthily
reputed, nor her coard broken. Her^dot. lib. 1.
Herodotus shows at large the manner of this vile custom among the
Babylonians, how every woman once in her life is bound to go to the temple of
Venus, and there to sit, until one come and cast money into her lap, which
she taking must rise and go aside with him, and suffer him to have his
pleasure of her. They which are beautiful are soon dispatched of their
attendance, but they which are deformed are feign to sit two or three years,
till some stranger come unto them. Thus their idolatry was joined with
obscenitie: as at this time, while they praise their gods of silver and gold,
they have their concubines present. And therefore Balthazars fault was the
greater, quia vasa illa exposuit vxoribus and concubinis, because he did expose
those vessels to his wives and concubines. gloss. ordinar.

Quest. 12. How far it is lawful to apply sacred things to profane uses.
1. Polanus is of opinion, that it is not lawful at all to transfer things
consecrated unto God to any profane use: for if Balthazzar were reproved for
profaning the holy vessels, much greater is the fault of Christians to abuse
such things: and so he concludes, papistis erepta, etc. things taken from the
Papists, if they be consecrated unto God, eidem dicata maneant, they must so
remain still.

Contra. 1. There is great difference to be made between things rightly
consecrated unto God, and true religion, and things applied to superstitious
uses, as Melancthon well says, res consecratas sine verbo Dei, non esse
discernendas a prophanis, that things consecrate without any warrant of Gods
word, are not discerned from profane, etc. there is not then the like reason
between the vessels of the Temple, which were consecrated to Gods service by
his own commandment, which were no ways to be profaned, and such things as
are dedicated to Popish superstition, which have no such warrant. 2. It is
evident that Hezekiah, when he brake down the hrasen serpent, which was abused
to idolatry, did apply it to profane uses, calling it but a piece of brass,
2. King. 18. 4.

2. Lyranus opinion is, that the consecrated things, the property and form
not altered, should not be translated unto any other use: and therefore says
he, it was decreed, vt calix in propria forma, non vendatur nisi alteri
Ecclesiae, etc. that a chalice in the proper form, should not be sold, but
unto an other Church. Contra. But there may be such necessity of the Church
and Commonwealth, as to redeem captives, to maintain war, that the chal^ces
may be melted, and turned into money: And so was it made lawful by an
Imperial constitution of Justinian, that to redeem captives it should be
lawful to sell the vessels and ornaments of the Church, and this reason is
yielded, non absurdum est animas hominum quibuscunque vestimentis praeferri, it
is not inconvenient, that the souls of men should be preferred before
vestiments. Cod. lib. 5. ti^ 5. leg. 17.


3. It is not then simply unlawful to translate upon some urgent occasion
things consecrate to religion to some other uses: wherein these several
considerations must be observed.

We must distinguish between things devoted unto God and his service, and
things ordained to superstitious uses, which have no right consecration.

1. Concerning superstitious implements they may be converted to other uses. 1.
so that it be done sine furto, without theft, or any disorderly manner: not by
any private man, but by such as have authority. 2. It must be provided, that
sufficient maintenance be remaining unto the Church, such superstitious
dedications being cut off: quantum opus est Ecclesus, impertire debent, they
must impart unto the Church so much as is sufficient. 3. The things
superstitiously abused, and evil employed, as to maintain idle bellies, and
Abbeylubbers, should be converted unto good uses, the maintenance of preachers,
relief of the poor and such like. 4. The things taken from Ecclesiastical
use, must not be abused to riot and excess: which made Balthazars fault the
greater, in profaning these holy vessels in his drunken feast. And so it has
been the miserable use in some places, that great men, consumptis bonis in
conuiuijs, frequenter se conuertunt ad spoliandum ecclesias, etc. having
consumed their own goods in banketting and feasting, do often fall to the
spoiling of Churches. gloss. ordinar. 5. A difference is to be made in those
things which are consecrated: some are of necessary use, and are not to be
alienated: some were added of superfluity, and were not so pertinent, or
properly belonging to the Church: as the politic dominions, and civil
jurisdictions, which were given to Ecclesiastical persons, were not so fit to
be administered by them: Melancth. But the tithes of the Church, as the proper
maintenance thereof, and originally theirs, it had been happy, if they never
had been alienated.

2. Now as touching things consecrated unto true religious uses, there is less
liberty in alienating of such things: where these cauteles must be observed.
1. We must distinguish between those things, which are of necessary use in
Gods service, and those which are not so necessary: as the high Priest gave
David Goliaths sword, which was consecrated unto God, but of no use in his
service: the holy vessels, which were used in the Temple, he would not so
easily have given him. 2. Even those Church implements* which are used, must
give place to necessity, and to works of charity, as is showed before: for
God will have mercy, and not sacrifice: to adorn Churches with gold, and to
suffer the poor members of Christ to starve, is not pleasing unto him. David
in his extreme hunger did eat of the show bread, which it was not lawful for
any but the Priests to eat. 3. But like as David, if he could have provided
other bread, would not have eaten of that: so all means must first be used,
and the last refuge must be to the Church goods, in such extreme cases, and
urgent necessities.

13. Quest. Of the fingers, which appeared in the wall, how they were caused.
1. R. Saadiah thinks that this was the hand of the Angel Gabriel, who is
called the man Gabriel, c. 9. 21. and here it is said to be a man's band: but
the same word is not used in both places: for here the word is enosh, home, and
in the other, ish, vir: this then is but a weak reason.

2. The most think this was done, ministerio Angelico, by the ministry of
Angels, Oecolamp. Lyran operatione Angeli, by the operation of an Angel, Pint.
so also Osiand. but Daniel says, v. 24. that the hand was sent from God.

3. Wherefore I rather think with Calvin, that Deus scripsit virtute su^, God
did write it by his power: digiti Iehovae fuerunt, they were the fingers of
God, Polan. who procured or caused by his power a man's hand to appear: not
that it was indeed a man's hand, but had the similitude thereof, Calvin.

4. Rupertus more particularly says it was the hand of Christ, c. 9. in Daniel.
thus writing, qui per lapidem de monte sine manibus, in prima, etc. be which
is described by a stone cut out of the mountain without hands, in the first
vision, and is expressed by his own name in the second (where he is called the
son of God) and by the name of watchman, and the holy one, in the third, per
manum scribentis designatur, is designed by the hand of a writer in the fourth.

5. But that is too curious, which is observed by the ordinary gloss. God is
the writer, the hand is the son of God, by whom he made all things, digiti
spiritus sanctus, the fingers are the holy Ghost.

14. Quest. Whether it were the likeness of a^ hand only, and seen of
Balthazar alone*
1. Lyranus thinks it was only the similitude of an hand: it was not manus
scribentis secundum existentium, the hand of a writer having any true
existence, for then it would have been seen of others as well as of
Balthazar, whereas it is said only of Balthazar, that he saw it, Contra.
Pererius here refelleth the opinion of Lyranus. 1. The Scripture sets it
down simply, that the fingers of a man's hand appeared: there is no note of
similitude added. 2. Though it is said expressly, that Balthazar saw it, it
follows not, but that others might see it also. 3. Neither is his reason
good, though the rest had not seen it: for God may open the eyes of some to
see such visions, which others see not: as the young man with the Prophet, saw
not at the first the fiery charets and horse which the Prophet saw, till his
eyes were opened, 2. king. 6. Perer. 4. Hereunto may be added, that God uses
not to feed men's eyes with fantasies, but true appearances: fantastical
apparitions are the illusions of Satan. 5. And as it was a true writing
remaining upon the wall, so was it a substantial hand that wrote it.

2. Some think further, that Balthazar first and only saw this sight, and not
the rest of the gh^sts: as Balaams ass saw the Angel, before he saw it: so
Oecolampad. Calvin speaks doubtfully: the king saw it, proceres forte non
ita, the nobles perhaps not: But I rather think with Iunius, that it was seen
of all, vt omnes euidenter animaduerterent, etc. that all men might see
evidently, it was the hand of God. And so much may be gathered, v. 10. the
Queen came in by reason of the talk of the king and his Princes: this strange
sight was the matter of all their talk.

15. Quest. Of the manner of the apparition of this hand.
1. The time is noted, that it might evidently appear, propter quod erat
vindicta, wherefore this revenge came, Lyran. for as he was in the mids of
his cups, and blasphemed God, and praised his idols, then this hand was sent:
like as before while the word was in Nabuchadnezzers mouth, the sentence was
pronounced against him for his pride. gloss. ordinary.

2. The fingers of an hand appeared: the hand is the instrument of working,
Deus exerit manum iam percussurus, God puts forth his hand now ready to
smite: it signifies therefore the celeritie of Gods judgments. Bulling.

3. And in that the hand was seen to write, it shows the certentie of the
judgment: sententia iam scripta and lata est, the sentence was written and
decreed against him. Oecolamp.

4. And the hand was seen in loco aspectabili, in a conspicuous place, over
against the candlestick; not in a corner of the house, but over against the
mids, where they used to set up their lights, Polan. and upon the white
pargent of the wall, that it might be the better seen, Bulling.

16. Quest. Why this hand appeared over against the candlestick.
1. The most do make this the reason of it, vt melius appareat manus, etc.
that both the hand, and that which was written, might better appear. gloss.
ordinar. H^g. vt illustretur scriptura, that the writing might be more
conspicuous: so the place where it appeared was very bright, tum ob alborem
parietis, both because of the whitenes of the wall, and the light of the
candlestick, Bulling. and Calvin gives a reason of it, fuit nocturnum
conviuium, it was a night banquet.

2. Iunius in his Commentary thinks that this writing was made the more
conspicuous, non solum luce diei, sed etiam lampadum, not only by the light of
the day, but of the lamps also: But it is not like they would set up lamps and
lights in their feasts by day.

3. I rather approve Iunius judgment in his annotations, whom Polanus
follows, who thinks, that this was an hanging candlestick prepared to give
light against the night: for till then was the feast protracted: it was not de
nocte coeptum, begun in the night: for afterward Daniel is rewarded, being
clothed with purple, and a chain of gold put about his neck, with
proclamation made, that he should be the third in the kingdom; which is not
like to have been done in the night: as it may appear also by the sending for
of the Chaldeans and wise men: and further it is like it was done in the day,
that Gods judgments might be so much the more manifest and evident to all men.
This place, over against the candlestick, is mentioned, because it was a
conspicuous place, about the mids of the house, where their lights used to
hang. Polan.

17. Quest. Of Balthazars sudden fear, and the manner thereof.
v. 6. The kings countenance changed. 1. This sudden passion and great fear of
the king is set forth by the parts, it was both internal: his thoughts
troubled him, then it wrought upon his body, by diverse degrees, first, his
countenance was changed, waxing wanne and pale, the blood running all to the
heart and vital parts, as it uses to do in such sudden fear: Lyran, then
his body so trembled, that both his loins did shake and quake, in so much,
that he was constrained se discingere, to unbrace himself, as it were sweating
and swelling for fear, Iun. Polan. and then his knees smote together, and it
is like also that his teeth chattered in his head. Hug.

2. Though Balthazar understood not the meaning of this writing, yet he
trembled and feared, expecting some present judgment, because his own
conscience accused him. And though the wicked for the most part are hardened,
and are not much moved by the judgments of God; yet Gods hand was here upon
Balthazar, and struck terror into his soul; this being as the last summons,
to call him before the Lords tribunal seat. Polan.

3. This his terror might have been a preparation to his repentance, if he had
had grace to use it: sed in medio cursu defecit, he gave over in the mids of
his course: for these his passions did soon vanish away: he was not much
moved afterward, when Daniel had showed unto him, how present the danger was,
and at hand. Calvin.

18. Quest. v. 7. Why Daniel is not here called among the rest.
1. Lyranus moving the like doubt, why Nabuchadnezzer upon his second dream
called not for Daniel with the first, c. 4. gives this reason, that Daniel was
at that time absent about some necessary affairs, and the king expected his
coming: which was the cause, why he commanded not all the Soothsayers to be
killed, as he did the first time he dreamed: But neither was that the cause
then, but rather Nabuchadnezzer was still addicted unto his superstitious
Chaldeans, and would not have used Daniel at all, if he could have found any
help at their hands: neither can this reason be alleged here, for it seems
Daniel was much neglected.

2. Wherefore, as Osiander well collecteth, it seems that Daniel so much
esteemed in Nabuchadnezzers time, was not employed under licentious Balthazar:
he was a stranger in Court, and grown out of knowledge, and therefore the old
Queen, to whom he was known in Nabuchadnezzers days, makes first mention
of him.

19. Quest. v. 8. How it came to pass, that the wise men could not so much as
read the writing.
1. Lyranus thinks the Chaldees could not read the writing, because it was
written in Hebrew letters, which they were ignorant of: but there being such
great affinity between the Hebrew and Chalde tongue, it is not like there was
such difference in the characters, but that the learned among them might have
read them.

2. The Hebrew Cabbalists imagine, that the letters were inuerted, and the
words transposed, and set out of order, and so they could not read them: but it
seems by Daniels reading of the writing, and setting down of the words in
order, as they were written, that there was no such transposing.

3. Pererius thinks the meaning is, that they could not read the words with
any understanding, they knew not what words to join together, to make any
sense or construction of them: but it is evident by Daniels speech afterward,
that they could neither read the writing at all, nor give the interpretation:
for first he says, This is the writing: it should seem then, that they could
not so much as spell the words: and then he adds, This is the interpretation,
v. 26.

4. Wherefore it is most probable, that this writing was written in some
strange and unknown characters unto the Chaldeans: or rather which is most
like, that they were so blinded, and astonished by the power of God, that they
could not read it: they were caecitate and stupore perculsi, smitten with
blindness and stupiditie. Polan. so also Calvin.

20. Quest. What Queen it was, which came in.
v. 10. Now the Queen by reason of the talk of the King, etc. came in. 1.
This Queen was not Balthazars wife, as Porphyrie scoffingly objected, that
she knew more then her husband: for of his wives mention is made before, v. 3.
that his wives and concubines drunk in the vessels of the Temple which were
brought.

2. Origin, and so also Theodoret, take her to have been the mother of
Balthazar: so Bullinger alleges Herodotus to have been of the same opinion,
who calls the mother of Labynetus, which was this Balthazar, Nitocris, whom
he makes as famous as Semiramis: so also Polanus.

3. But Josephus opinion, which Hierome follows, and Lyranus, think that
this Queen was grandmother to Balthazar, and wife sometime to Nabuchadnezzer;
whereof these two reasons may be yielded: 1. one which Theodoret alleges,
verisimile est eam seni^ confectam, etc. it is like, that she being stricken
in years, did not give her self to drinking and dancing, and such other
sports, etc. this conjecture shows it to be more probable, that she was his
grandmother, then mother: for his mother could not be so old, he having reigned
but 3. years, being the eldest son, and heir to the kingdom. 2. the other
reason Lyranus urges, which Pintus also approoueth, because she speaks of
things done in Nabuchadnezzers days, which shows, mulierem fuisse iam
vetulam, that she was now a very old woman, Calvin.

21. Quest. In what sense Nabuchadnezzer is called Balthazars father.
1. Some think that Nabuchadnezzer was his great grandfather, and that
Balthazar was not the third, but the fourth from him: so Josephus whom Hierome
and Beda follow: see before, qu. 2. But this can not be so, because Ierem. 27.
v. 5, 6. the Lord promises the kingdom to Nabuchadnezzer, and to his son,
and to his sons son, and staieth there.

2. An other opinion was of Alexander Polyhistor, and Alpheus, with others,
whom Josephus mentions, lib. 1. cont. Appion. that four reigned after
Nabuchadnezzer: 1. Euilmerodach. 2. Niglasar his sisters husband, who killed
him. 3. Labosardach his son, who was deposed for his misgouernment, and
slain: and then Balthazar was chosen by common consent. But by this account
Balthazar should not be at all of Nabuchadnezzers stock and line, contrary to
the Scripture, which calls him his son.

3. The author of the Scholasticall history says, that there were two
Nabuchadnezzers, the father and the son: and that Euilmerodach was brother to
the second, and reigned after him, who had three sons which succeeded one an
other in the kingdom after him, Niglazar, Labosardach, and Balthazar: so he
makes Nabuchadnezzer the great, grandfather of this Balthazar, and Balthazar
to reign in the fifth place. But it is evident in story, that Euilmerodach
succeeded next to Nabuchadnezzer his father, not to his brother of that name:
for Nabuchadnezzer is held to have reigned 43. years at the least, as
Josephus: but he reigned rather 45. in the 8. year of his reign Iechonias was
carried captive, in the 37. year of whose captivity, which was the 45. year
of Nabuchadnezzer, Euilmerodach began to reign, 2. king. 25. 27.

Pererius misliketh this opinion, because he makes two Nabuchadnezzers,
whereas sacrd and profana historia vnum tantum agnoscit, both the sacred and
profane histories (says he) acknowledges but one Nabuchadnezzer king of
Chaldea, etc. wherein I wonder at his forgetfulness, being otherwise a most
diligent writer, seeing Josephus evidently makes two Nabuchadnezzers, the
father, to whom he ascribes 21. years, and his son, to whom he gives 43.
years lib. 10. antiq. c. 11.

4. The fourth opinion is of Theodoret in this chapter, and Severus Sulpitius
lib. 2. sacr. histor. that Nabuchadnezzer had two sons, Euilmerodach the
elder, and Balthazar the younger, who reigned successively one after an other:
and so they think, that Balthazar was in deed the son of Nabuchadnezzer:
But this can not be so: for seeing this Balthazar was the last of the Chaldean
kings, and Jeremy prophesied that the kingdom should be given to
Nabuchadnezzer, and to his son, and to his sons son, now this prophecy
should not be fulfilled, if the kingdom did only remain to him, and to his
sons.

5. Not far differing from this opinion, is that which is found in the book
of Baruch, c. 1. 11. Pray for Nabuchadnezzar, and for the life of Balthazar his
son: where the author of that book, seems to make Balthazar the eldest
son of Nabuchadnezzer, as next heir to the kingdom. Pererius would thus
help the matter, that either Nabuchadnezzer had an other son called
Balthazar, who should have been king if he had lived, or that Euilmerodach was
also so called: thus also Emmanuel Sa. But neither of these assertions can be
proved out of the Canonical Scriptures, which evidently testify, that
Euilmerodach was the son of Nabuchadnezzer, and not Balthazar, 2. king. 25.
27. and Ierem. 52. 31.

6. Pintus has an other conceit, that Euilmerodach might be called
Nabuchadnezzer, which was a general name to all the Chaldean kings, as the
Emperors were called Caesar's, of the first Emperor: and thus he says
Balthazar was Nabuchadnezzers, that is, Euilmerodachs son: but no where in
Scripture does it appear, that Nabuchadnezzer was a general name to the kings
of Chaldea, neither that Euilmerodach or Balthazar are so called.

3. Pererius opinion is, that Balthazar was the nephew, not properly the son
of Nabuchadnezzer, yet he reigned not in the third place, but in the fifth:
there came between two other named by foreign writers, Niglasar, and
Labosardach, the first was Euilmerodachs sisters husband, who slew
Euilmerodach, and so reigned, and Labosardach his son after him, who was
deposed and slain for his cruelty: and then Balthazar, who fled unto the
Medes, was restored unto the kingdom: so Joseph. lib. 1. cont. Appion. Now
Pererius reason is this, why some other reigned between, because otherwise the
term of 70. years captivity can not be made up: for the captivity began in
the 19. year of Nabuchadnezzer, when Jerusalem was taken, there remained 25.
years of his reign, who reigned in all 43. Euilmerodach 18. years, and
Balthazar 17. all these years make but 60. there wanted yet 10. years, which
must be made up by the reign of others coming between.

Contra. 1. Though Pererius opinion be admitted as probable, that some usurpers
came between Euilmerodach, and Balthazar, yet the reason which he urges, is
not sufficient: for the 70. years captivity do take beginning rather from
the 8. year of Nabuchadnezzer, when Iechonias went into captivity, 2. king.
24. 12. for from that time the Prophets do begin the account of the 70.
years, Ezekiel. 1. 1. and c. 24. 1. and in other places of that Prophecy. And
Nabuchadnezzer reigned 45. years: 8. years before the captivity began, 2.
king. 24. 12. and 37. years of the captivity: 2. king. 25. 27. so that the
ten years which are wanting, may thus be filled up.

8. Pererius thinks, that the strange names of Niglazar, and Labosardach,
mentioned by Josephus, were the same with Euilmerodach and Balthazar, called by
other names, in 2. cap. Daniel. But Josephus, and other writers whom he
follows, as Berosus, Alexander Polyhistor, with others, make these diverse
kings from the rest: for Josephus names Abilomarodach beside, who in Scripture
is called Euilmerodach.

9. The truth then is this, that Euilmerodach, as Pererius reports out of
some writers, was slain by Niglazar, or Neegal-etzer his sisters husband; or
as Iunius out of others, he was expulsed out of his kingdom, and he with
Balthazar his son lived in exile among the Medes: in the mean time Niglasar,
and his son Labosardach after him, a while usurped the kingdom, and after
that Balthazar was restored: So that Balthazar was in deed the right nephew of
Nabuchadnezzer, yet called his son according to the phrase of Scripture: see
before, quest. 2.

Quest. 22. Of the Queens oration to the King.
It consists of 4. parts: 1. the salutation: O King, live for ever, whereby
she does insinuate her self, 2. the proposition, which contains the drift
and scope of her speech, that he should not be troubled, v. 10.

3. The narration follows containing a reason, why he should not be troubled,
because there was a man found in his kingdom, who was able to reveal this
secret. In this narration three things are expressed, 1. a description of
Daniel by his gifts, 2. the experience of his gifts in the days of
Nabuchadnezer, which were three: light or illumination by Gods spirit,
understanding in the apprehension of those things which were revealed, and
wisdom in wisely and fitly applying the same. 3. then the approbation of his
gifts, and public testification by his advancement: he was set over all the
wise men.

4. The fourth part is the conclusion, that Daniel might be sent for to
interpret the kings vision: with a repetition of the argument taken from his
sufficiency and ability, which consisted either in his gifts, which are the
three before named, an excellent spirit called before (light,) understanding,
and knowledge called before (wisdom:) or else in the exercising and use of
these gifts, specially in the expounding of dreams, more generally in
declaring hard sentences, and most generally of all in declaring any manner of
doubts, or hid matters, v. 12.

Quest. 23. Of the excellent wisdom and other princely parts in this old
Queen.
1. In that she came in upon this occasion to the banquet, not having been
there before, therein she was an example of great temperance and sobrieti^, in
not being present at this riotous seast, Polan. 2. her wisdom appears in
the whole course of her speech: she saluteth the king with loving words to
insinuate her self, therein also giving an example of due reverence to be
yielded unto kings, Bulling. 3. she is sola admiratrix viriutum Danielis, found
to be the only admirer of Daniels gifts, Oecolamp, and sets him forth as
one excelling all other in the gifts of wisdom and understanding. 4. And
beside in making mention of Nebuchadnezzar, a prince of great wisdom and
judgment, who advanced Daniel for his excellent wisdom, ostendit eum nimis
crasse arrare, she shows that he greatly erred in neglecting such an
excellent man in his kingdom, and seeking satisfaction of others, where it was
not to be found, Calvin, herein then appears her faithfulness in giving such
good advice unto the king. 5. And the Queen whom Herodotus calls Nitocris,
is by the same author commended for a woman of great wisdom, whereof he gives
this experiment: she caused her tomb to be made in an high and conspicuous
place over one of the gates of the city, with an inscription to this effect,
that if any of the kings of Babylon wanted money, if he opened that sepulcher,
he should find enough: Afterward Darius of Persia opened the tomb, wherein he
found nothing but a writing to this effect, that if he had not an insatiable
mind, he would not have raked in the tombs and ashes of the dead. 6. This
woman for her great age and experience, like to have been the wife of
Nebuchadnezzar, was of great wisdom: she was not Balthazars wife, as is
before showed, quest. 20. And therefore Porphyrie his scoff, that the wife
here showed her self wiser, then her husband, is soon answered.

Quest. 24. Of Balthazars speech to Daniel.
v. 13. Art thou that Daniel, etc. 1. he vpbraideth him with his captivity,
which art of the children of the captivity, etc. Iunius and Polanus following
him think, that he moved this question to be certain of his person: but
there being no more of that name, or of those excellent parts, it is rather to
be imputed to his pride, as insulting over the poor captives, and vaunting of
the victory, which his predecessors had gotten: the Queen wisely concealed
this, hoc vnum commemorat gloriosus rex, but the king remembers this one thing
more then the rest, Oecolamp. so also Bulling. The gloss. says, that he asked
this question, because the Prophets were only of the nation of the Jews: But
if the king had held such an opinion of the Jews, he would not have relied
upon his Chaldean Soothsayers: therefore these questions rather spirant
superbiam regis, do breath out the pride of the king, Osiand.

2. The kings simplicity appears, that says no other thing then was put
before into his mouth: as unwise and simple Princes use to speak unto their
people conceptis verbis, and in aurem suggestis, in a set speech, and suggested
as it were to their ears, Bulling.

3. Detegitur eius socordia, his carelessness appears, that has nothing but
by hearsay, Calvin, that he did not take knowledge himself of so worthy and
excellent a man, as Daniel was.

4. Dubitanter loquitur, he speaks doubtfully, v. 16. if thou can, etc. he
had yet more confidence in his Chaldees, Oecolamp. 5. Non quaerit consilium,
etc. he does not require any counsel how he might escape this danger, but
only to know the meaning of the dream, Pelican.

Quest. 25. Of Daniels answer to the king, and the several parts thereof.
It consists 1. of the exordtum, or preface, and 2. of the narration.

1. In the preface there is 1. a refusal of the kings rewards, then a promise
and undertaking to interpret the dream.

2. In the narration there is first a redargution, and reprehension of the
king, showing the cause why the Lord sent this strange sight, v. 25. then the
interpretation of the vision.

In the reprehension 1. there is a commemoration of that which happened to
Nebuchadnezzar to v. 22. 2. an application thereof to the king.

In the commemoration, 1. the benefits are rehearsed, which God had bestowed
upon Nebuchadnezzar, a kingdom, majesty, authority, and honor, v. 18. 2.
his unthankfulness is showed, that abused his authority and power to
cruelty, injustice, and tyranny, v. 19. 3. his punishment is declared 1. in
his deprivation and deposing from his kingly estate. 2. in the misery that
befell him, living and dwelling among brute beasts, to v. 22.

In the application the reprehension is set forth first negatiuely, that he was
not moved with an example, which was so near him, even in his grandfather,
who is here called his father: Then affirmatively, he had lift up his heart,
which is described by four effects. 1. in that he had brought forth the
vessels of Gods house. 2. he had profaned them, in that he, his princes, wives,
and concubines, drunk in them. 3. he praised their idols, which are described,
1. by their matter, they were made but of silver, brass, and such like. 2. by
their impotencie, they could neither see, hear, nor understand. 4. he gave not
glory unto God, which is aggrauated by two benefits, the giving him of his
life and breath, and in protecting him, in whose hand is thy breath, and all
thy ways, etc.

3. Then follows the interpretation of the dream, v. 25. to 29.

Quest. 26. Of Daniels abrupt beginning, in his speech to the king, v. 17.
Keep thy rewards to thy self.
The reasons why Daniel uses no insinua^ion or salutation to the king, were
these; 1. In respect of his age and gravity, such a simple and plain
beginning became him: for he was 90. year old, if we suppose him to be 20.
when he first went into captivity. 2. it best beseemed him in respect of his
office, being a Prophet, and now consulted with concerning the will and
counsel of God, to show his contempt of the kings gifts, Iun. 3. hoc ips^
monstrauit abiectum, etc. in that he saluteth him not as a king, giving him his
titles, he therein shows that he was now rejected of God, no longer to be
king, Oecolampad. 4. voluit asperius loqui cum impi^ and desperat^, he would
speak the more roughly with a wicked and desperate man, of whom there was
small hope, and therefore he does rippe up his sin, and searches it to the
depth, Calvin.

Quest. 27. Why Daniel rejects the kings rewards.
1. That was not only the reason, in respect of his office because he was a
Prophet, least he might seem to have made merchandise of his prophetical
gift, as Polan. and to fulfill that saying in the gospel, ye have freely
received, freely give, Lyran. Pelican. for then he should not by this reason
have received any gifts of Nebuchadnezzar.

2. Neither was this the cause, tristia nuntiantem indecens erat dona aeciper^,
it was not fit for one telling hard news to receive gifts, gloss. ordinar. for
then neither should Daniel have received any reward of king Nebuchadnezzar,
after he had expounded the dream of theimage, which foreshewed the end and
dissolution of Nebuchadnezzars kingdom.

3. And to say, that Daniel affected no such honors, because he was now old,
is an insufficient reason: for neither had he at any time before any desire to
those places, but only for the good of the L^rds people.

4. But the special reasons, are these two, noluit ab homine impi^, etc. he
would not receive any gifts of a wicked man, Osiand, as Abraham refused to take
any thing of the king of Sodom, and the Prophet Elisha of Naaman, who was a
stranger: As also tempus subiectionis mox finiendum erat, the time of
subjection unto this king, and of his government, was at an end, Calvin. and
therefore he refused these honors at his hand, who was as no king, but
rejected of God.

Quest. 28. Why Daniel received the like rewards from Nebuchadnezzar, and
refuses them from Balthazar.
1. The reason of this difference is, because Daniel knew that Nebuchadnezzar
was established in the kingdom, which the Lord had given to him, and to his
son: and therefore he made no refusal of the honors which were offered unto
him, because thereby he might stand the Church of God in great stead: But the
case was now otherwise: for he knew that Balthazars kingdom was at an end,
and these honors under him he could not long hold: and the Monarchy of the
Chaldeans being at an end, he could not thereby advantage the people of God,
Polan.

2. Because also their was greater obstinacy and stubbornenesse in Balthazar,
then there was in Nebuchadnezzar, ideo oftendit se minus ei defer, quam avo,
and therefore he shows, that he does not so much respect and honor him, as
his grandfather, Calvin.

Quest. 29. Why then Daniel after his refusal accepted afterward of these
rewards, v. 29.
This showed no inconstancy at all in Daniel to suffer that to be done unto
him, which before he in words refused. 1. It is like, that they were very
urgent and instant upon him to accept of the kings offers. 2. Chrysostom
gives this reason, that if he had been stiff in refusing still, it would
have been thought, quod ipse de responso suo addubit asset, that he himself
had doubted of the truth of his answer: and therefore to take away that
suspicion, he upon that instance accepts of the rewards: so also Occolampad.
Bulling. 3. An other reason was, qui mundi diuitias contempserat, ne regem
ipsum contemnere videretur, least he which had despised the riches of the
world, should have seemed to have set the king himself at naught, he accepts
of the kings offers, Pintus. 4. If he had still obstinately refused, he might
have been brought in suspicionem proditionis, into suspicion of treason,
Calvin. as though he had conspired with the Medes and Persians against the
king, if he had refused Balthazars rewards and offers. 5. signum fuisset
timiditatis, it had been also a sign of fearfulness, that by this means he
might have lien hid still, and so escaped the danger, being called to no
public place: he therefore in accepting of these honors, ostendit se
imperterritum, shows himself without fear, Calvin.

Quest. 30. Whether in these words, he put to death whom he would, v. 19.
Nebuchadnezzars tyrannical government be expressed.
1. Neither is this a description of Nebuchadnezzars tyranny and cruel
government, as though he put to death the innocent, and spoiled men of their
goods, without just cause or equity: for that this is not meant of the abuse
of his power, the next v. following shows, But when his heart was puffed up:
this power then might be in Nebuchadnezzar, and his heart not yet lifted up.

2. Neither yet do I think with Bullinger, that it is like, that
Nebuchadnezzar, non unjust suum administrauit regnum, did not unjustly
administer his kingdom: for the contrary appears, c. 2. in that he
commanded the Chaldeans to be slain without cause, for that they could not
tell the king his dream, which he had forgotten: and c. 3. he commanded the
three servants of God to be cast into the fiery furnace, for refusing to
worship the idol which he had set up.

3. Nor yet can it be proved by this place, that princes have authority, to
take away their subjects lives and goods at their pleasure: for even kings
themselves must remember, serationem summo regi reddituros, that they also
shall give account unto the the great king, Calvin.

4. But the Prophet simply speaks de regia potestate, of the kingly power,
Calv. neither touching the abuse or right use thereof: But shows to what
eminent authority God had exalted him, that he might exalt and cast down whom
he list: to show that God had given him this great honor and power, for the
which he was feared of all. This amplitude and greatness of his authority is
set forth by two effects. 1. the one is in his subjects, they feared and stood
in awe of him, both for the inward conscience which they had of authority, and
in respect of his great and absolute power: the other is in the king himself,
he might do and did what he would, both the lives and goods of men were at his
beck, Polan. Daniel therefore rather speaks, what he did de facto, in fact,
then, de iure, of right.

Quest. 31. Of the writing and the interpretation thereof in general.
v. 24. Then was the palm of the hand sent, etc. Three things are here
declared. 1. the manner of the writing. 2. the matter. 3. the meaning. 1. The
manner is set forth in these four points, 1. the time is expressed, then and
there, when the king had profaned the holy vessels, and blasphemed God. 2. the
author and efficient cause was God. 3. the iustrument, a palm or part of an
hand. 4. the form, it was in writing.

2. The matter which was written consisted of four words, the first being
twice repeated.

3. The meaning and interpretation consists of three parts. 1. the certain
determination of God, who had now numbered and fulfilled the time of his
kingdom. 2. the inquisition and examination: God having weighed him found him
to be too light. 3. the execution of Gods decree: his kingdom was divided and
given to others.

Quest. 32. Of interpretation by writing in general.
1. By this example of Daniel, who scanneth the words themselves, and thereupon
groundeth his interpretation, the Rabbines would warrant their devise of their
Cabbalisticall interpretation, whereby they take upon them by hunting after
syllables and letters to find out mysteries in Scripture: thinking that they
may take unto themselves the like liberty, which Daniel here used.

2. Contra. 1. They must first be sure, that they have the like prophetical
spirit, which Daniel had, before they may adventure upon such mystical
interpretations. 2. the occasion is not alike: this writing was extraordinary,
and therefore it was obscure and mystical: but the writing of the Scripture
contains an ordinary and plain form of doctrine, and therefore it is not
in such curious manner to be handled. 3. neither did Daniel here examine every
letter and syllable, as the Cabalists do, but takes the words only as they
lie in order, and makes up a full sense of them.

Quest. 33. Why the first word Mean is doubled.
1. Some do give this reason of this repetition, the word mean, is derived of
manah which signifiech to number: and first they would have signified the
numbering of the years of his kingdom, then the days and term of his life:
But this is too curious: and the interpretation is of his kingdom: God has
numbered thy kingdom.

2. Bullinger takes it to be according to the Hebrewe phrase, as they use to
say, clamando clamauit, in crying he cried: moriendo morieris, in dying thou
shall die, which phrase is used for more vehemency of speech.

3. But there is beside an allusion here unto the manner of taking account, and
numbering: men for failing will number twice, to be sure that they number right:
so by this twice numbering, is signified that God had most exactly nnmbred the
term of his kingdom: so R. Saadia, whom Polanus follows: so also Calvin.

4. Iunius thinks that by numbering is meant, the singular care which God had
of that kingdom: singulari quadam ratione curatum est, that God after a
singular manner took care thereof, as they use to do, which have things in
number and account: but it rather shows, that the time and term of his
kingdom was determined: as the next words declare, and has finished it: sic
Lyran. Hugo. necesse est vt finem accipiat,etc. now his kingdom must needs be
at an end, because it is fulfilled, Calvin.

Quest. 34. Of the meaning of the word Tekel.
1. Tekel signifies he has weighed, this phrase is taken from merchants or
goldsmiths, that use most exactly to weigh their gold, and that which is light,
they do reject and refuse: So God had most exactly tried and examined the life
and works of Balthazar, and found them too light.

2. Some do thus apply this similitude, as though the sins of Balthazar
should be weighed in one balance, which was pressed down, and in the other
which was light, his piety and virtue, which appeared to be very small,
Perer. Hugo thus expounds: God has weighed the time of thy life, iamillud
declinare pronuntiat, and now he pronounces it to be declining, as a scoale
that inclines, and sinketh down: But rather Balthazar is found, being
weighed against Gods justice, to be in the light scoale, quasinullum pondus
haberet, as though he had no weight at all, as Daniel here expounds, Calvin.

3. Thus is this phrase used in Scripture, as Job says, c. 6. 2, 3. O that my
miseries were laid together in a balance, it would now be heavier then the sand
of the Sea. His meaning is, that if his miseries were valued in an equal
judgment, they would be found to be heavier then they seemed to be: Pintus
gives this sense, as though Job should think that his afflictions being
weighed against his sins, would be found too heavy for them: but Job was
far from accusing God of such injustice, that his miseries and sorrows laid
upon him, were greater then his sins.

4. But it will seem strange, this phrase of weighing in a balance, being
used to signify a just examination, and trial, that Apocal. 6. 5. he which
sat upon the black horse, (whom Pintus expounds to be the devil) should
have a pair of balances in his hand: for it is far from Satan to do things
in measure and weight: Pintus therefore gives this sense: he is said to have a
balance, non quod illa vtatur, sed quod videatur vti, not that indeed he
uses a just balance, but seems to use it: But the sense of the place rather
is this, by the black horse is signified dearth, famine, and scarcity of all
things: and by the balance, that by a scant and exact weight their corn and
food should be weighed unto them.

5. In this interpretation two things are insinuated, 1. the examination and
trial of Balthazar in the judgment of God: he was weighed. 2. then the event
and issue, he was found too light, Polan.

6. Deus non vtitur communi trutina, God uses not here a common balance or
scoale, he has a balance of his own: though Balthazar might be approved in
the judgment of others, yet Gods judgment was otherwise, he found him too
light, Calvin. like as the goldsmith uses more exact weights then other
Merchants and tradesmen, so the Lords exact judgment far exccedeth man's.

Quest. 35. Of the meaning of the word Pheres.
1. Whereas the word written upon the wall was pharsin, in the plural, they
have divided, and here it is put in the singular, pheres, he has divided,
therein is no great difference: for by both are expressed the causes
subordinate one unto another: in the singular it is understood of God, who was
the principal author, and chief worker: in the plural it is understood of
Gods iustruments in this work, the Medes and Persians, Polan.

2. And in the word pheres, there is an evident allusion unto the word paras,
which signifies the Persian.

3. It is also put in the preter tense, he has divided, to show the
certanitie thereof: before the Lord it was as already done.

4. Two things are here prophesied, that this kingdom should be divided, and
between whom, the Medes and Persians, for so Darius and Cyrus did as it were
divide the kingdom between them: Darius had Babylon, and Cyrus Assyria,
leaving Babylon to Darius, himself going in expedition against the Scythians.

5. This Isaiah prophesied of, above 200. years before, as Pererius, rather an
170. years as Polanus, that the Medes should be sent against the Chaldeans,
Isay. 13. 17. behold I will stir up the Medes against them.

Quest. 36. Of the tropologicall, that is, the moral application of this vision
1. By the hand writting upon the wall, is signified the justice of God, which
both praescribit supplicia, and suo tempore infert, prescribes aforehand
punishments due unto men's sins, and in due time brings them forth and
inflicteth them: it also may be applied unto the judgment of the conscience,
wherein are written, and as it were scoared up the sins, which one
commits: as Job says, c. 13. 26. thou writest bitter things against me, and
make me to possess the sins of my youth.

2. And by the three words may be signified, the three last things which shall
come upon sinners, the remembrance whereof uses to be most grievous unto them,
death, final judgment, and bell. By the numbering of the days and the
fulfilling of them, men are brought to think of their end, as Job says, c.
14. 5. are not his days determined, the number of his months is with thee? by
weighing in the balance is signified the most perfect judgment of God in the
last day: And by division the punishment of hell, where the wicked and
reprobate shall for ever be divided and separate from Gods presence, Perer.

Quest. 37. Why Balthazar commanded Daniel to be honored hearing so evil
news.
1. Josephus gives this reason, that although Daniel had told heavy things
unto the king, yet he kept his promise, and seemed not much to be moved, thus
thinking with himself, quod non bona audierat, sui fati culpani esse, non
prophet^, that it was his own fate and destiny, not the Prophets fault, that
he heard no better news, the Prophet did but discharge his duty: But it is
not like, that the king had any such thought, or so equal consideration.

2. Hierome gives two other reasons hereof: aut post long a tempora credidit
futura, he did think that these things might come to pass long after; or in
honoring the Prophet he might think to obtain pardon of his sin: But the
city being now besieged, if the king had not been altogether besotted, might
have put the king in mind of his present danger: and it seems by his
security, that he had no such good thought, as to think how his sin might
be forgiven him.

3. Some think the king kept his promise, ne coram hominibus mendacij
arg^eretur, leaft he might before men have been found in a lie, Lyran. And it
was the constant use and custom of the kings of Persia to keep their word:
intelligebat proprium esse regis veritatem seruare, he understood it was the
property of a king to keep the truth, Pintus. so also Occolampadius,
sanctissima esse, etc. the things which the kings promised were most sacred.

4. The king might have some care of his credit to keep his princely word, as
Herod had to perform his wicked oath: But this the king did rather being
carried with great admiration of the divine wisdom, which was in Daniel,
Osiand. And herein the king showed his carnal security, incolume regnum sibi
promisit, he still promised unto himself a safe estate and prosperous
kingdom: Bulling. Calvin thinks that although Balthazar were somewhat moved
with this commination, yet he caused Daniel to be honored, to set a good face
upon it, ne signum aliquod praeberet timiditatis, that he should not seem to
show any sign of fearfulness: But it rather showed his stupiditie and great
security, as before is noted.

Quest. 38. Of the honors bestowed here upon Daniel.
The honors and favors here conferred upon Daniel, are either the ensigns of
honor, or the government it self upon which the other ornaments attended.

1. The ornaments of honor are two, purple raiment, and a chain of gold.
Lyranus here notes that there were four kind of ensigns and ornaments of
estate: the purple to be or other precious garment, a chain, a ring of gold,
and a crown: all these things concurring together, did signify the regal
dignity: but being more or few, and not all, designabant participationem
honoris regij, they did but show the participation of the kingly honor, as
Joseph had three of them, when he was advanced of Pharaoh, a ring, costly
raiment, and a chain of gold, Genesis 41. 42. but he had not the crown or
diadem. So Mordecai was honored with princely raiment, and a diadem, but
mention is not made of the kings ring, and chain of gold, Esther. 6. 9.

2. The honor it self which is bestowed upon Daniel, is, to be the third man
in the kingdom, which Josephus expounds, that the third part of the kingdom
should be given unto him: but that is not like that the king would give away
any part of his kingdom: Hierome thinks he was made one of the three, which
was set over the kingdom, as cap. 6. 2. But if Daniel had been in that place
before, then Darius needed not to have advanced Daniel again to be one of the
three rulers. Therefore Theodoret takes it, he was the third man in honor and
authority next to the king, so also Lyran, the king was the first, the Queen
or heir of the kingdom might be the next, and Daniel the third.

Quest. 39. Whether Daniel did well in accepting of these honors.
1. Though Daniel were unwilling to receive these honors, yet seeing they were
forced upon him, he is content to accept of them, least if he had refused
still, in suspitione^ proditionis veniret, he might have been brought into
suspicion of some treason or practice against the king, Polan.

2. And beside, foreseeing that the kingdom should come unto the hands of the
Medes and Persians, he accepted of them, vt postea noti^r fieret Persi^, in
solatium filiorum Dei, that he might thereby be better known unto the
Persians, for the comfort of the children of God, gloss. ordinar, O^^^lamp.

3. And beside, these ornaments being a sign of freedom and of dignity, it
was fit that Daniel, to whom the king had objected before his ser^itude and
captivity, should not refuse them, whereby he was now made free and honorable
in the city.

4. If these vestures had been any special ornaments of the idolatrous
priests and Soothsayers, as some think, it is like that Daniel so holy a man,
would have utterly rejected them: Polan. see before quest. 29.

Quest. 40. Why Daniel exhorted not Balthazar to repentance, as he had done
Nebuchadn^zzar before.
1. One reason hereof may be yielded to be this, the same which Theod^r^t
^lleadgeth, why it pleased the Lord to chastise Nebuchadnezzar for a time to
humble him, and afterward raise him up again, but Balthazar is cut off
altogether: because Balthazar was more indurate and hardened in his sin,
seeing he had Nebuchadnezz^^ example before him, and yet would not be warned.
And so the Prophet obi^cting here unto Balthazar his fathers example, which he
made no use of, saw that there was small hope of his repentance.

2. And further Daniel did see by the spirit of prophecy, hanc sententiam non
fuisse com^natoriam, sed plane absolutam, that this sentence pronounced against
Balthazar, was not by way of commination, which uses to be conditional upon
men's repentance, as was the threatening of Jonas against Ninive, but it was
peremptory and absolute: and as Bal. hazat was confirmed and settled in his
sin, so this sentence was irreuocable. Perer.

41. Quest. v. 30. Whether Balthazar were slain at this time.
1. It is the opinion of some, that Balthazar was not slain at all when the
city was taken, but that Balthazar, called in foreign histories Nabonidus, when
the city was besieged by Cyrus, did yield himself, and so he not only
obtained his life, but had a place of habitation assigned him in Carmania,
where he died: thus seem to write Alexander Polyhistor, Megasthenes, Alpheus,
as they are cited by Joseph. l. 1. cont. Appion.

But it is untrue, that Balthazars life was spared, for the Scripture here
evidently says, that he was slain: this favor indeed Cyrus showed to his
grandfather Astyages, whom he deposed from his government being a tyrant, as
Herodotus and Justinius write: it is not like, that he would use such clemency
toward his mortal enemy: at the least, if there had been any such thing,
which would have tended much to the praise and honor of Cyrus, Xenophon, who
is very large and lavish in setting forth the praise of Cyrus, in all
likelihood would not have omitted it.

2. Wherefore the truth is, according to the Scripture here, that Balthazar was
at this time slain: and thereunto agrees Xenophon, that the king of Babylon
himself was put to the sword, when the city was taken. lib. 7. de Cyri
institut.

42. Quest. Whether Balthazar were slain the same night, and the city taken.
1. Some seem to be of opinion, that this murder was committed upon Balthazar
a long time before the taking of the city by the Medes and Persians, about 17.
year, before, whom they say was slain by the Babylonians, and one of the
conspirators called Darius the Median, was chosen king in his place: and that
this was done many years before Cyrus invaded Babylon. This conceit they would
ground upon the report of Berosus and Megasthenes. But they do greatly mistake
one thing for an other: for he which was so deposed by the Babylonians, was
Labosordach the son of Niglasar, or Neege-lasar, who had before expelled
Euilmerodach called Labinitus by Herodotus, together with his son Balthazar,
called also Labinitus the second, which name signifies, a Prince expulsed: and
because he fled unto the Medes, he was called Medus, a Median: this was not
Darius then of the Medes, which was set up by the Babylonians, but Balthazar
called Labinitus of the Medes, because he lived an exile there, Iun. in
commentar. see before, qu. 21. 9.

2. Josephus says, non multum abijt temporis, much time passed not after
Daniel had expounded this vision, when both the King and the city was taken by
Cyrus. If Josephus understand, not many hours after, he agrees with the
Scripture; but if he mean many days, or months, he is deceived.

3. Zon^ras affirms this to have been the opinion of diverse, that Balthazar
was slain the same night, but he seems not to be of that opinion: which
seems strange, that he being a Christian writer, should speak so doubtfully
of a thing so evident in the sacred story.

4. All these things are evident out of Scripture: 1. that Babylon, after 70.
years of the Jews captivity, should be surprised and taken, Ierem. 25. 12.
2. that the king himself should be slain at the taking of the city: as Isa.
14. 4. The oppressor shall cease. v. 22. I will cut off in Babel the name and
the remnant, the son, and the ^ephew: for Balthazar was nephew to
Nabuchadnezer. 3. It should be done on a sudden: Isa. 47. 11. Destruction shall
come upon thee suddenly, or thou beware. 4. and in the night: Isa. 21. 4. The
night of my pleasures has he turned into fear. 5. and in the time of their
feast, therefore he is called the king of Sheshach, of the feast of their
goddess Shacah, Ier. 25. 26.

Quest. 43. Whether Balthazar was taken in Babylon.
1. The Authors before rehearsed, which think that Balthazar was not slain,
but yielded himself to Cyrus, and so was sau^d alive, do add further, that
when the King heard that Cyrus was coming with a great army to besiege
Babylon, he fled to a city called Borsippa, and thither Cyrus pursued him, and
besieged him there, who seeing that he could not hold out, yielded himself
unto Cyrus clemency.

2. But Xenophons opinion, lib. 7. is more probable, that the king was taken at
Babylon, which is also most consonant to Scripture: for though it be not
directly expressed, that he was slain in Babylon, yet it follows by
necessary collection, that that was the place, where Balthazar was both
deprived of his life and kingdom. 1. There was the kings palace, c. 4. 27.
where the Chaldean kings usually did reside. 2. there was the temple of Bell,
where the vessels of Gods house were laid up, c. 1. 2. from whence they were
brought unto this riotous feast: but they could not have been fetch from
Babylon to an other place, seeing the city was now besieged by Cyrus. 3. and
for the same reason so many nobles could not have been gathered together. 4.
nor yet the wise men of Babel assembled. 5. neither is it like, that Balthazar
being in such fear, would in that obscure place have made such a feast,
whereas in Babylon he trusted to the defense of the city.

44. Quest. By what means Babylon was taken.
1. Some think that Cyrus and Darius did homage unto king Balthazar, and he
thereupon made this feast, whereat they were present: who when they heard the
prophecy of Daniel, and seeing the king and his nobles drunk with wine, took
their opportunity, and so set upon them, and killed them. ex Hugon. But it is
not like, that the king would have been so secure, if his enemies had been in
his hand, but that he would have made them sure.

2. Some are of opinion, that the Babylonians hearing Daniels prophecy, durst
not resist their enemies, but gave up the city unto them. ex Perer. but it is
not like, if the city had been yielded up, that Cyrus and Darius would have
made such havoc of them, putting the king and his nobles to the sword.

3. Josephus says, quod Cyro fortiter dimicante capta est Babylon,, that
Babylon was taken, Cyrus strongly assaulting it: but, though the city were
besieged, it seems by the great security and feasting in the city, that
there was no such assault made.

4. Thomas thinks, that seeing the Lord appointed by Cyrus to deliver his
people out of captivity, that he by his power caused the rivers Tigris and
Euphrates, subito siccari, of a sudden to be dried up: but seeing that neither
in Scripture, nor in any foreign writer any such thing is spoken of, it is
dangerous to imagine miracles without a good ground; and beside the river
Tigris was a great way distant from Babylon: God indeed did extraordinarily
assist Cyrus, as the Prophet says, I will go before thee, and make the
crooked straight: I will break the brazen doors, and burst the iron bars,
Isa. 45. 2. but of the drying up of the river the Prophet speaks not.

5. Wherefore this is most probable, as both Herodotus and Xenophon write, that
when Cyrus saw that the city was otherwise invincible, he used this
stratageme, he caused the river Euphrates to be divided into many channels, and
so made it passeable, and then his army passed over, and by the guiding of
Gadata and Gobryas two of the kings chief courtiers, they entered into the
city. Herod. l. 1. Xenoph. l. 7.

45. Quest. By whom Balthazar was slain.
1. The Rabbis, and among the rest Ab. Ezra do think, that one of Balthazars
Courtiers hearing Daniels prophecy of the ruin of Balthazar, and of the
kingdom, did presently slay the king, and carried his head to Cyrus, because he
would execute the judgment of God against him: but the Lord needed not to have
such treacherous executioners of his will. Calvin.

2. An other opinion is, that Balthazar was slain of Cyrus soldiers, while
they set upon him, and he in the mean time defended himself with a sword.
Lyran.

3. But it is most like, that he was slain by the hands of Gadata, and
Gobryas, which betrayed the city, and brought in Cyrus army, whom the king
before had offended: for Balthazar had caused Gadata before to be gelded, and
had slain Gobryas son in hunting, and they to be revenged conspired against
him. Calvin. Bulling. Oecolampad. Polan. ex Xenophon. l. 7.

46. Quest. By whom the city of Babylon was taken.
1. The Grecian historiographers do ascribe this victory and exploite in
taking of Babylon only unto Cyrus, as Herodotus, Xenophon: and the reason
thereof is, because they followed therein the Persian histories, which ascribed
the whole praise unto Cyrus: and beside, as Strabo writes, lib. 15. the
Grecians did extol the Persians beyond all other Barbarians, of whom they
obtained many noble victories, which made for their own commendation.

2. Theodoret on the otherside, thinks that Cyrus did not join with Darius
in this exploit: and he gives these two reasons thereof: 1. because their
reign is distinguished, c. 6. 28. Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius,
and in the reign of Cyrus of Persia: but if they had both joined together, it
had been but one and the same kingdom. 2. he that joined with Cyrus, was
Cyaxares, whom it is hard to prove to be this Darius of the Medes: this
Darius was before Assuerus, and Cyrus was after: and thus Theodoret would
infringe Josephus report.

Contra. 1. At this time, when Babylon was taken, the kingdom of the Medes and
Persians is only in Darius, who reigned not long, and then Cyrus succeeded:
therefore their reign was distinguished. And that Darius held the kingdom of
the Medes and Persians at this time, is evident, c. 6. 15. Perer. 2. In the
Greek histories, as Josephus writes, Darius is called by an other name: and
it is no rare thing, for one to have diverse names; and to be called by one in
the Scriptures, by an other in foreign histories: as Ezra 4. the king which
hindered the building of the Temple, is called Assuerus, and Artaxerxes, who is
the same, who is named Cambises by other historiographers, the son of Cyrus:
so the last king of the Medes by Herodotus is said to be Astyages the son of
Cyaxares, whom Diodorus calls Apanda, the other Astibara: so also this
Darius may be the same, who is called Cyaxares the son not of Astyages, but
of Assuerus, c. 9. 1.

3. Wherefore Josephus opinion is more probable, whom Hierome follows, that
Darius and Cyrus with the power of the Medes and Persians joined together in
the siege of Babel: which best agrees both to the prophecy of Daniel here,
that the kingdom was given to the Medes and Persians; and to the vision of the
image, c. 2. where the second Monarchy next unto Babylon, is represented and
set forth by the two arms of silver, which signified the two kingdoms of the
Medes and Persians joined in one.

4. Xenophon, whom Iunius follows in his commentary, thinks that although
Darius was the chief procurer and beginner of this war with the Babylonians,
yet he himself was not present in person, but stayed at home to defend his own
kingdom of Media: but by the words of the text here, that presently after
Balthazar was slain, Darius took the kingdom, it appears, that he was
present then to take the kingdom upon him.

47. Quest. Who was chief in the taking of Babylon, Darius, or Cyrus, and why
mention is made only of Darius.
1. Herodotus makes Cyrus only the author and beginner of this war, and the
chief contriuer of it; and Iunius seems to be of the same opinion in his
commentary: and further thinks, that Cyrus spent one year in settling the
kingdom of Babylon, and afterward resigned it to Darius called also Cyaxares:
so that the first year of Darius reign was the second of Cyrus: but it is
gathered rather by the text, that Darius took upon him the kingdom immediately
after the taking of the city, and then began to reign.

2. The more probable opinion then is, that Darius was the chief author and
beginner of this battle, and that thereunto he used the help of Cyrus then
President of Persia: so Xenoph. and Josephus faith, when Darius did extinguish
the Empire of Babylon, adiutus a Cyro, he was assisted by Cyrus. And this is
most agreeable to the Scripture, which makes the Medes the chief in this
siege: Isa. 13. I will stir up the Medes against thee: and, Ier. 51. 11. The
Lord has raised up the spirit of the king of the Medes. So that the chief
authority and power was in the Medes, but the dexterity in expediting of this
business, and in using that stratageme in dividing the river, is ascribed unto
Cyrus.

3. The victory then is specially ascribed unto Darius, though it were
achieved and obtained by Cyrus skill and valor, for these three reasons, as
Hierome briefly expresses them: ord^ aetatis, propinquitatis, and regni
servatus est, the order of age, of affinity, and of the kingdom was kept. 1.
Darius was now not only 40. lib. 1. de divinat.
year old, as Cicero says, but 62. years old, Cyrus being a young man. 2.
he was Cyrus great uncle, his grandfather Astyages brother, and beside, as some
think his father in law. 3. and now the chief dominion was in the Medes, from
whom it was translated after Darius death, by Cyrus to the Persians.

48. Quest. Of the cause of this Babylonian war.
1. Heaodotus thinks it was only Cyrus ambition, and immoderate desire of
enlarging his dominion, that made him enterprise this battle: but this was not
the chief cause: for Cyrus was but an assistant and associate unto Darius in
this exploit, as is before showed.

2. The author of the scholasticall history imagines this to be the cause,
that the mother of Baltbazar, for whose cause those hanging orchards were made
in Babylon, was this Darius daughter; and now Balthazar having no son, Darius
attempted to invade the kingdom, Balthazar yet living. But this is not like:
for Darius could pretend no title at all by this pretext unto the kingdom,
especially Balthazar, the right heir of the kingdom, being alive.

3. That cause is more probable, which is alleged by Xenoph. lib. 1. that the
king of Babylon combining himself with the kings of Asia, was purposed to have
warred against the Medes, who had then the chief dominion: and therefore Darius
to prevent him, first sets upon Babylon.

4. But what cause soever moved them, the special stirrer and instigator to
this battle, was the Lord himself: as Ierem. 14. The Lord has broken the
rod of the wicked, and the scepter of the rulers: and Ierem. 51. 11. The Lord
has raised up the spirit of the king of the Medes.

5. For the Lord was provoked by the sins of Babel, and therefore brought
this desolation and destruction upon them: which sins were these, 1. their
cruelty and oppression: Isa. 14. 6. which smote the people in anger with a
continual plague, etc. And they were not only cruel toward other nations,
but specially against the people of God, when they destroyed their city and
Temple: and therefore Jeremy says, c. 51. 11. It is the vengeance of the
Lord, and the vengeance of his Temple. 2. An other of their great sins, was
their superstition and idolatry, Ierem. 51. 44. I will visit Bell in Babel. v.
52. I will visit her graven images. 3. The Babylonians were given to
diuinations, to sorcer^e, and enchantiments, for the which they were punished.
Isa. 47. 9. They shall come upon thee, etc. for the multitude of thy
diuinations, and for the great abundance of thine enchantments. 4. And to fill
up the measure of their iniquity, Balthazar had in this his last, and as it
were his funeral feast, profaned the vessels of the Temple, and blasphemed
God. All these sins being put together made up the full measure, and cried
for vengeance, which the Lord would no longer defer.

49. Quest. Whether Babylon was at this time finally destroyed according the
predictions of the Prophets.
1. The Prophets spoke of an utter overthrow and subversion of Babylon: as Isa.
13. 19. Babel the glory of kingdoms, and the beauty and pride of the
Chaldeans, shall be as the destruction of God in Sodom and Gomorrha: it shall
not be inhabited for ever, etc. and c. 14. 23. I will make it a possession for
the hedgehogge, and pooles of water, and I will sweep it with the besome of
destruction, says the Lord. Ierem. 50. 23. Babel is become desolate among the
nations, etc. But at this time Babylon was not brought to such desolation: for
it continued after the reign of Darius and Cyrus to the times of Alexander,
being then a city of great riches and power.

2. Some to wind themselves out of this straight, do make an allegory of
these prophetical predictions: whom Hierome justly reprehendeth in his
commentary upon the 13. c. of Isa: for if still upon every doubt and
objection, men should fly unto allegories, there would be no certentie of any
thing.

3. Calvin to dissolve this knot, says, that Babylon was subdued twice, once
by Cyrus and Darius the Mede, then afterward by Darius Hystaspis, by the help
of Zopyrus, when 3000. of the nobles were hanged up, and many other put to the
sword. But although this second taking of Babylon were more cruel and grievous
then the other, yet neither at this time was it finally overthrown, as is
before showed.

4. Wherefore it must be considered, that these prophecies were not fulfilled
all at once, neither was Babylon at the first brought to utter desolation, but
by degrees. 1. it was surprised by Cyrus and Darius, and deprived of the Empire
and dominion. 2. afterward it was defaced by Darius Hystaspis, when they
rebelled, and the walls were broken down to the ground. Herod. lib. 3. Justin.
lib. 1. 3. after this, not far from Babylon by Seleucus Nicanor was built the
city Seleucia, and by the Parthians the city Ctesiphon, Plin. lib. 6. c. 26.
and so Babylon was almost exhaust by this means of the inhabitants. 4. In the
Emperor Adrians time, as Pausanias writes, lib. 8. Babylon nihil praeter
muros reliqui habet, had nothing left but the walls. 5. In Hieromes time, as he
writes from the report of an Elamite, the walls of Babylon only served to
keep in wild beasts for the kings game: and so he says vsque in praesentem
diem prophetia Babylonis impletur, even unto this day, the prophecy on Babel
is fulfilled: Isa. 13. 20. Neither shall the Arabian pitch his teuts there,
neither shall the shepherds make their folds there. And so accordingly it was
fulfilled, as Hierome says, praemultitudine bestiarum and daemonum nullus
pastorum audet intrare, by reason of the multitude of beasts and of devils,
(and unclean spirits that there haunted) no shepherd durst enter within the
walls of Babylon.

50. Quest. How long the Chaldean Empire and Monarchy continued.
There are three general opinions hereof. 1. Some extend it not so far as to
70. years: 2. some limit it unto 70. years: 3. some make it far to exceed
the tear^^ of 70. years.

1. Of the first opinion are diverse, one disagreeing from an other: Berosus
from the beginning of Nabuchadnezers reign to the end of Balthazars, counts
but 65. years, as Josephus alleges him, lib. 1. cont. Appion. Alexander
Polyhistor cited by Eusebius. lib. 9. de praep. Evang. reckons but 62. years.
Clemens Alex. lib. 1. stromat. and August. lib. 18. de civit. Dei, do make the
sum but 48. years. But the Scripture evidently conuinceth all these: which
shows that the Chaldeans should rule over nations 70. years, Ierem. 25. 11.
and so long the Jews should be in captivity under them: but their captivity
began under Nabuchadnezer: from the beginning then of his reign to the end of
the Chaldean Monarchy, there must be 70. years at the least.

2. Some make but just 70. years, as Sulpit. lib. 2. sacr. histor. so also H.
B. in the Concent of Scripture: Nabuchadnezers 45. Euilmerodachs 22. and
Balthazars 3. do fill up the number of 70. years. But the captivity began
not before the 8. year of Nabuchadnezers reign, when Iechonia was carried
away captive, 2. king. 24. 12. from whence the Prophet Ezekiel counts the
years of captivity, Ezck. 1. 2. c. 8. 1. and in diverse other places.

3. Of the third sort, lib. 10. anno. cap. 12.
which extend the term beyond 70. years: first Josephus counts an 118.
years: to Nabuchadnezer he gives 43. years, to Euilmerodach 18. to Niglasar
40. to Balthazar 17. yet Beda and Rupertus think that the place in Josephus is
corrupted: and Pererius also, because Josephus in an other place, lib. 11. from
the 18. year of Nabuchadnezer to the destruction of Babylon, reckons just
70. years.

Paulus Orosius affirming that Babylon was taken by Cyrus at the same time when
the kings were expelled out of Rome, which was in the 67. Olympiade, extends
the Chaldean Monarchy 60. years beyond the due time; for Cyrus is held to
have begun to reign in the 58. Olympiade.

Pererius holds that the Chaldean Monarchy endured 88. years, which he
shows thus: the captivity of the Jews began in the 18. year of
Nabuchadnezer, when Jerusalem was taken, which continued 70. years; unto this
sum must be added 18. years, which were run before of Nabuchadnezers
reign. But herein is Pererius error, he begins the captivity in the 18.
year, whereas it must take beginning only from the 8. year of his reign, as
is evident, 2. king. 24. 12. and shall afterward more fully be showed.

4. Therefore the true account is this: the 70. years captivity began when
Ieconia was carried into captivity: for so the Prophet Ezekiel uses to reckon:
as c. 1. 2. he makes mention of the 5. year. c. 8. 1. of the sixth year. c.
29. 1. of the 10. year. c. 31. 1. of the 11. year. c. 32. 1. of the 12.
year. c. 29. 17. of the 27. year: all which years are accounted from the
captivity of Iechonia, as is evident c. 1. 2. which was in the 8. year of the
reign of Nabuchadnezer, 2. king. 24. 12. for then must begin the account of
70. years: unto which must be added 8. years of Nabuchadnezers reign, which
were expired before: so the whole time of the Babylonian Monarchy, from the
beginning of Nabuchadnezers reign, was not precisely 70. years, as Polan. p.
398. but 78. years. Bulling.

51. Quest. Of the years of the reign of the several kings of Babylon.
Concerning the number of the kings themselves, how many reigned after
Nabuchadnezer, is showed before, Quest. 21. about the years of their reign,
there is great diversity of opinion.

1. Sulpitius gives unto Balthazar 14. years: Eusebius to Enilmerodach and
Balthazar together allows but 12. years, to Nabuchadnezzer but 36. Berosus
with other ancient writers, cited by Josephus, lib. 1. cont. Appion. do give
unto Nabuchadnezzer 43. years: 20. years to Euilmerodach: 4. years to
Niglasar: 17. years to Balthazar. Josephus counts 18. years for
Euilmerodach, 40. for Niglasar, 9. months for Labosardach, and 17. years for
Balthazar. lib. 10. antiq. c. 12. Pererius does give 43. years to
Nabuchadnezzer, to Euilmerodach and Niglasar between them 27. years, to
Balthazar 17. years. But all these do manifestly err in these two things:
first, they give but 43. years to Nabuchadnezzer, whereas he reigned 45.
years: 8. years before Ieconiah his captivity, 2. king. 24. 12. and 37.
years after, 2. king. 25. 27. And they suppose Balthazar to reign 17. years,
whereas Daniel makes mention only of the third year of his reign, c. 8. 1.

2. The more common opinion is, that Nabuchadnezzer reigned 45. years,
Euilmerodach 22. as H. B. in his Concent, or 23. as Oecolampad. and Balthazar
three. But these are decciued in beginning the captivity from the third year
of Iehoiakim, when Jerusalem was first taken, in the first year of
Nabuchadnezzers reign: whereas it must be accounted from Iechoniahs
captivity, as is showed in the former question.

3. Therefore I think Bullingers account is rather to be followed, to begin
the 70. years from Iechoniahs captivity, as Iunius also does, comment. in 9.
Daniel. and then allowing unto Nabuchadnezzer 45. years, Euilmerodach must
have 30. and Balthazar three, which make in all 78. years, the whole time of
the continuance of the Babylonian Monarchy: from which sum 8. being
deducted, for so many years reigned Nabuchadnezzer before he took Iechoniah
prisoner, there will remain just 70. years, the time of the captivity.

4. The places of doctrine.
1. Doctr. That Gods judgments work diversely.
v. 6. Then the kings countenance was changed. Generally the denuntiation or
demonstration of Gods judgments do awaken and rouse up the secure and sleepie
conscience. But it has a diverse operation in the Elect, and in the wicked and
reprobate: In the Elect, the hearing of Gods judgments does sometime bring
them to repentance for their sin, as it did David, or does stir them up to
be more zealous in performing their duty, as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5. 11.
Knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men: that is, seeing every one
shall receive the things done in his body, as he says in the former verse,
that every one should have a care faithfully to perform his duty.

In the reprobate, either they are not moved at all at Gods judgments, as
Pharaoh at the first was not humbled at all: or else there is wrought in them a
show of repentance for a time, as in Ahab: or they may be terrified with the
fear of Gods judgments, without any remorse at all, as is here seen in
Balthazar.

2. Doctr. Of the momentanie pleasures of the world.
v. 6. And his thoughts troubled him. Balthazar in the mids of his feast,
when his heart was disposed to be merry, is stricken into his dumps: according
to that saying of Amos, c. 8. 10. I will turn your feasts into mourning, and
all your songs into lamentation: for like as the weather changes, it is
sometime fair, sometime foul: and as at the sea, when it is calm suddenly
rises a storm and tempest: such are all terrene and earthly joys: Only our
peace and joy in Christ is perpetual: as our blessed Savior himself says,
Ioh. 16. 22. Your joy shall no man take from you: like as a stream, which
continually runs, such are spiritual joys flowing unto everlasting life:
but the joy of the world is like unto sudden rain, which hastily runs
down, and is speedily gone.

3. Doctr. Man of himself can not understand or perceive heavenly things.
v. 8. Then came all the kings wise men, but they could neither read the
writing, etc. As these Ch^ldeans presuming upon their own skill, could neither
read, much less interpret this divine writing; so man is of himself unapt and
unable to apprehend any spiritual thing: the vision of the Prophets unto
carnal men, is like unto the words of a book sealed up. Isa. 29. 10. the
reason whereof the Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives
not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnes unto him, etc.

4. Doctr. That God often uses weak instruments, as namely women, to effect
his purpose.
v. 10. Now the Queen, etc. came into the banquet house. The Lord uses
oftentimes women in his service, which are the weaker vessels and instruments:
both to show his liberty, that he is not tied unto any means, but may use
any indifferently, and to declare his power in setting up weak means: and to
bring down the pride of the wise, when they are confounded by the simple and
unwise: As here the Lord gave more wisdom and understanding to this
honorable and ancient Queen, then was in the king, and all his thousand
nobles now assembled together: So the Lord raised up Deborah to have more
courage and wisdom in her, then Baruch had. And thus in our age and memory,
as Polanus notes, Deus adhibuit Reginam Angliae ad confundendum Hispaniarum
potent^ssimum regem, God has used the Queen of England to confound the
mighty king of Spame.

5. Doct. Of the oblivion and forgetfulness in Princes of those which deserve
well of them.
v. 13. Art thou that Daniel: Daniel was worthy for his great wisdom, and
necessary employment in the Babylonian state, to have been remembered of the
king, as he had been honored of his predecessors: But such is the mutabilitie
of Princes favors: As in Egypt there rose up a Pharaoh that knew not Joseph,
neither remembered the great benefits, which he had done for that nation. So
Saul had soon forgotten David, that had played before him, and by whom he had
found great ease: for not long after he asked Abner whose son he was:
Therefore as it is in the Psalm, (...)
it is better to trust in the Lord, then to have any confidence in Princes.

6. Doct. Of the necessary and profitable knowledge of histories.
v. 18. The most high God gave unto Nebuchadnezzar thy father, etc. Here Daniel
propounds unto Balthazar his father Nebuchadnezzar, and sets before him
the history of his life, by the which he might have learned great wisdom: The
knowledge of former times is most profitable, therein we behold the equity of
Gods judgments, his justice, verity, wisdom, power: likewise we see in a
glass the uncertain and changeable state of the world: And for our own
direction we find, what to follow, and what to decline, in prooem. Bibliothec.
as Diodorus Siculus speaking of the profit that comes by histories, says,
pulchrum est ex aliorum erratis in melius instituere vitam, etc. it is a good
thing by other men's errors to reform the life: The counsel of the ancient,
because of their long experience, is commended and followed: But the knowledge
of histories goes far beyond, quanto plura exempla complectitur diuturnitas
temporis, quam hominis aetas, in as much as the continuance of time
comprehends more examples, then the age of man.

7. Doct. Of the use that is to be made of examples.
Examples are either old, such as fell out in former times, or they are new,
such as happen in our own age and memory; and both are either domestical or
foreign examples: But the domestical examples are more forceable and effectual
to move, as here the example of Nebuchadnezzar is set before Balthazar. Thus
it is much available to call to mind the examples of our fathers, and
ancestors before us, to follow their virtue, and decline and shun their
vices: And most of all we should observe, what has befallen our selves in the
former part of our life; as David did comfort himself when he went against
Goliath, in the experience of Gods mercy and power in delivering him from the
lion and the bear, 1. Sam. 17.

8. Doct. That flatterers are about Princes.
v. 23. Thou and thy Princes, etc. It may seem strange that among a thousand
princes and noble men that were here assembled together, there was not one
faithful counselor: But here we see fulfilled that saying in the Prou. 29.
12. of a prince that hearkeneth unto lies, all his servants are wicked: It
seems that Balthazar was given to hear tales and lies, by which means it is
like that Daniel was out of favor in Court, and therefore it falls out just
upon him, that he has none about him to speak the truth: flatterers then are
dangerous about princes, as Haman was unto king Assuerus: And like as oil does
soake into earthen vessels, being soft and smooth, so flatterers by their
pleasant and smooth words do insinuate themselves.

9. Doct. God has all things in number and account.
v. 26. God has numbered thy kingdom. The years and days of the world, the
term and continuance of kingdoms, the time of man's life are all determined
with God: As Job says, are not his days determined, the number of his months
are with thee, thou^ have appointed his bonds which he cannot pass, c. 14. 5.
So the times and seasons the Lord has put in his own power, Act. 1. 7.
neither the age of the world, not the term of kingdoms, not the space of
man's life, can be measured or calculated by the skill of man: but the Lord
only knows them, who has numbered and appointed them, Polan.

10. Doct. Of the fall and ruin of great and famous cities.
v. 18. Thy kingdom is divided. Pererius out of Pausanias here alleges how
many cities, which had been renowned and famous in the world, were either
utterly decayed; or much impaired; as the great city Niniue, and the city
Mycene, which ruled over all Greece, were in his time become desolate: so
likewise Thebes in Boeotia, and an other Thebes in Egypt, Delos in Greece, and
the city Tyrinth, together with Babylon, which had nothing then left but
walls, Pausan. lib. 8. which ought to teach men, not to put confidence in these
earthly things, as Nebuchadnezzar did in his sumptuous and costly buildings,
which after his time, came to utter ruin and desolation: so that it is now
scarce known where Babylon stood.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. That idolaters and worshippers of images, make them their gods.
v. 4. They praised the gods of gold and silver, etc. The Babylonians and other
Gentiles were not so gross to think, that the divine essence consisted of
silver or gold, or that the very images were their gods: for they did hold
that their gods were in heaven: as the men of Lystra said, Act. 14. 11. gods
like unto men are come down unto us, yet the spirit of God gives this
judgment of them, that they make such images their gods: because they have
devised such of themselves, God requires no such thing, to be represented by:
Therefore vain is the defense of the Papists, which allege that they do not
worship the image, but as it has relation to him, that is represented thereby,
Poaln. See further of this controversy, Synops. Centur. 2. p. 402.

2. Controv. Whether images in Churches may be retained, though they be not
worshipped.
Like as they only do not worship God, which do pray unto him, and fall
down before him, but they also which do fight for him: So they are not only
worshippers of images, which do bow unto them, but they also which do
maintain them, and strive still to have them retained: In this place they are
not said to worship the gods of silver and gold, but to praise them. So they
are praisers of images, which think they may be retained as ornaments in their
Churches: for the very making of such images for any religious use, is
accursed before God, and abominable, and therefore defiles Gods house, it can
be no ornament unto it. As Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Cursed is the man that shall make any
carved or molten image, which is an abomination to the Lord, etc. God did not
only forbid the Israelites to make them any such images, but he commanded them
to break down and deface the images of the Cananites, Deuteronomy. 7. 5. they might
with as good pretense have kept them for ornaments, as the Lutherans do popish
images in their Churches: But as Augustine says, Deus istarum omnium
superstitionum euersionem, iussit, permissit, exhibuit, God has commanded,
permitted, exhibited unto Christians the subversion and overthrow of all such
superstitions.

3. Contro. That no Protestants but Papists are the profa^ers of holy things.
v. 23. They have brought the vessels of his house before thee. Pererius takes
here occasion, p. 399. to enueigh against protestants, whom he falsely and
contumeliously calls heretics, quires sacras Iudi^rio and contemptui
habeant, etc. which do contemn and make a mock of holy things, which they
take away from sacred places and persons, and put them to impure and wicked
uses.

Contra. 1. We deny that Church vessels and implements taken from idolaters,
are sacred things: they were never consecrate unto God, but to superstitious
uses, and therefore it can be no sacrilege to convert such things to civil
uses. 2. If any have abused such things notwithstanding to riot and excess,
they are not to be excused. 3. But the Papists are the profaners of holy things
indeed: they profane the Scriptures, not suffering them to be read to the
peoples understanding, and the Sacraments, in polluting them with their own
inventions, they baptize bells, and make an idol of bread in the Eucharist. 4.
the Church* maintenance by tithes they first took away from the Churches, and
translated them to their Abbeys, where their fat bellied Monks wasted and
consumed them in riot, as all the world knows.

4. Controv. That there are no certain periods of kingdoms.
Pappus here notes, that concerning the periods of kingdoms, they are for the
most part quingentorum annorum, of five hundredth years, or half so much: as
the Assyrian Empire continued 520. years: from the going out of Israel are
counted 480. years: and thence to the captivity of Babylon 430. years: from
thence to the coming of Christ 490. years: the kingdom of Athens from
Cecrope to Codrus, continued 490. years: and so long the commonwealth of the
Lacedaemonians from Lycurgus to the end and subversion thereof: Some kingdoms
continued but half the time of this periode, as the kingdom of Israel in
Samaria 262. years: the Persian Monarchy 230. the kings among the Romans
reigned 245. years.

Contra. 1. First they can define no certain periode of kingdoms: some will
have 500. years the periode, some 700. some an 120. years: and here before
diverse examples are alleged of unlike continuance.

2. The examples are impertinent: the Assyrian Empire is held to have continued
above a 1000. years: the state of the Judges exceeded not 300. years: the
490. years till the coming of the Messiah, take not beginning from the
captivity, but from the reedifying of Jerusalem after the captivity, as is
evident, Dan. 9. and in that time there were great alterations in the
commonwealth of the Jews.

3. But many contrary examples may be produced: the Roman state after the
kings were expelled, under Consuls and Dictators eudured above 600. years: The
dominion of the Turks has borne sway a 1000. years, the kingdom of France
has continued a 1200. years: the state of Venice 800. And for short
continuance, the Monarchy of the Athenians exceeded not 50. years: nor the
Chalde Empire many above 70. This therefore is a vain observation, of any such
certain and definite periode of kingdoms.

4. Further in that this Chaldean Monarchy was dissolved because of their
iniquity, two other errors are met withal. 1. of them which think that the
alteration and change of kingdoms is ruled by the constellations, and aspects
of planets: the Chaldeans were very expert in such contemplations, who could
foresee no such thing, that their Monarchy was so near unto an end. 2. they
are also here confuted, which think there is a fatal destiny of kingdoms,
that by an inevitable necessity, which depends upon the connection and
concurrence of certain secundarie causes, commonwealths come unto their fatal
end: We see in this place that no such second causes here concurred, but it
was Gods decree, and the writing of his own hand, which dissolved the
Babylonian state for the iniquity thereof.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Of the dangerous sin of drunkenness.
v. 2. Whiles Balthazar tasted the wine, etc. The king being intoxicate here
with wine, casts off all care of God and man, he falls to profaneness and
blasphemy, such are the fruits of drunkenness. It made Noah discover his
nakedness. Lot to commit incest: it caused Benhadad with his 30. kings, to be
overcome of a few, 1. king 20. And Simon the Macchabe being filled with good
cheer was slain at a banquet: Alexander the great killed more of his friends
when he was drunk, then he did enemies in battle: Pythagoras therefore well
said, ebrietatem brenem esse in saniam, that drunkenness is a short kind of
madness. And Anacharsis his saying was, primum poculum vini esse sanitatis,
alterum voluptatis, tertium contumeliae, the first cup of wine was for
health, the next for pleasure, the third was raging and contumelious, etc. the
Apostle therefore exhorts, be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, Ephesians.
5. 18. yea he shows that drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 2.
Cor. 6. 10. what madness then is it for so short and a beastly pleasure, to
loose Gods inheritance, at the least to put it in hazard.

2. Observe. Against carnal security.
This Balthazar being so near unto his destruction, gave himself to
banqueting and feasting, to drink, and to be drunken: So the wicked and
ungodly many times are most secure, when their judgment is at hand: according
to that saying in the Proverbs, 16. 18. Pride goes before destruction, and an
high mind before the fall: thus it was said to the rich man, that laid up
store for many years, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, Luke 12.
Thus the old world was eating and drinking, when the flood came, and swept them
all away: And Jobs sons were feasting, when the house fell upon them, Job. 1.
It therefore stands us in hand always to be watchful, and always to shake
off carnal security.

3. Observe. Of the terror of a wicked conscience.
v. 6. Balthazar was so terrified at this sight, that his loins trembled, and
his knees smote together: the wicked, which always carry about with them a
guilty conscience, are no otherwise affected when any sudden judgment
ouertaketh them, then if they were presented before Gods tribunal seat to
receive their everlasting doom: As the wicked in that day, Apocal. 6. 16.
shall say to the mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the
presenc^ of him that sits on the the throne, etc. Thus the heathen judge
trembled, when Paul disputed before him of the judgment to come: Act. 24. 20.
Wherefore let us labor to have a quiet conscience, settled by faith in Christ:
Romans 5. 1.
As the Apostle says, being justified by faith, we are at peace with God:
then shall we not fear the terror of that day, but rather love the appearing,
of Christ, and desire his coming.

4. Observe. The graces of God in others must not be neglected.
v. 11. There is a man in thy kingdom: This honorable Queen only had
respect unto Daniel: his great graces and wisdom were neglected of the king,
and his nobles, even as Joseph was hated of his brethren, Philip 24.
and David also of his: But the Apostles rule is, look not every man on his
own things, but every man also on the things of other men: And set up (says
the Apostle) them, which are lest esteemed in the Church: 1. Cor. 64.
There are many even in the Church, which for their wisdom and other gifts,
are worthy to be advanced, which are not esteemed of, according to that
observation of the preacher, cap. 10. 7. I have seen servants on horses, and
princes (for their knowledge and gifts) walking as servants on the ground.

5. Observe. That it is a dangerous thing not to profit by the example of others.
v. 22. And thou his son (O Belthassar) have not humbled thy self: His sin
was so much the greater, because he had his fathers example before him, whom
God had humbled for his pride, and yet would not be warned: as Lamechs
profaneness is set forth, for that he threatened to kill a young man in his
rage, flattering himself in his impunitie, Genes. 4.
yet having before his eyes such a fearful example of Gods severity upon
Cain for the like sin.

6. Obseru. The tyranny of the wicked shall have an end.
v. 26. God has numbered thy kingdom: The people of God endured much sorrow
under the hard bondage and servitude of Babylon: but now their tyranny is at
an end: So when the Israelites were most cruelly oppressed in Egypt, the Lord
looked upon their affliction, and numbered Pharaohs kingdom. So the tyranny of
the Roman Emperors was numbered, which for 300. years had persecuted the
Church of God; and God raised up Constantine to be their deliverer: And in this
latter age of the world, when the Pope had a long time raged against Christ's
members, the Lord brought him to number and account, and has freed his Church
in many famous kingdoms from his Tyranny.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Of the dangerous sin of drunkenness.
v. 2. Whiles Balthazar tasted the wine, etc. The king being intoxicate here
with wine, casts off all care of God and man, he falls to profaneness and
blasphemy, such are the fruits of drunkenness. It made Noah discover his
nakedness. Lot to commit incest: it caused Benhadad with his 30. kings, to be
overcome of a few, 1. king 20. And Simon the Macchabe being filled with good
cheer was slain at a banquet: Alexander the great killed more of his friends
when he was drunk, then he did enemies in battle: Pythagoras therefore well
said, ebrietatem brenem esse in saniam, that drunkenness is a short kind of
madness. And Anacharsis his saying was, primum poculum vini esse sanitatis,
alterum voluptatis, tertium contumeliae, the first cup of wine was for
health, the next for pleasure, the third was raging and contumelious, etc. the
Apostle therefore exhorts, be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, Ephesians.
5. 18. yea he shows that drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 2.
Cor. 6. 10. what madness then is it for so short and a beastly pleasure, to
loose Gods inheritance, at the least to put it in hazard.

2. Observe. Against carnal security.
This Balthazar being so near unto his destruction, gave himself to
banqueting and feasting, to drink, and to be drunken: So the wicked and
ungodly many times are most secure, when their judgment is at hand: according
to that saying in the Proverbs, 16. 18. Pride goes before destruction, and an
high mind before the fall: thus it was said to the rich man, that laid up
store for many years, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, Luke 12.
Thus the old world was eating and drinking, when the flood came, and swept them
all away: And Jobs sons were feasting, when the house fell upon them, Job. 1.
It therefore stands us in hand always to be watchful, and always to shake
off carnal security.

3. Observe. Of the terror of a wicked conscience.
v. 6. Balthazar was so terrified at this sight, that his loins trembled, and
his knees smote together: the wicked, which always carry about with them a
guilty conscience, are no otherwise affected when any sudden judgment
ouertaketh them, then if they were presented before Gods tribunal seat to
receive their everlasting doom: As the wicked in that day, Apocal. 6. 16.
shall say to the mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the
presenc^ of him that sits on the the throne, etc. Thus the heathen judge
trembled, when Paul disputed before him of the judgment to come: Act. 24. 20.
Wherefore let us labor to have a quiet conscience, settled by faith in Christ:
Romans 5. 1.
As the Apostle says, being justified by faith, we are at peace with God:
then shall we not fear the terror of that day, but rather love the appearing,
of Christ, and desire his coming.

4. Observe. The graces of God in others must not be neglected.
v. 11. There is a man in thy kingdom: This honorable Queen only had
respect unto Daniel: his great graces and wisdom were neglected of the king,
and his nobles, even as Joseph was hated of his brethren, Philip 24.
and David also of his: But the Apostles rule is, look not every man on his
own things, but every man also on the things of other men: And set up (says
the Apostle) them, which are lest esteemed in the Church: 1. Cor. 64.
There are many even in the Church, which for their wisdom and other gifts,
are worthy to be advanced, which are not esteemed of, according to that
observation of the preacher, cap. 10. 7. I have seen servants on horses, and
princes (for their knowledge and gifts) walking as servants on the ground.

5. Observe. That it is a dangerous thing not to profit by the example of others.
v. 22. And thou his son (O Belthassar) have not humbled thy self: His sin
was so much the greater, because he had his fathers example before him, whom
God had humbled for his pride, and yet would not be warned: as Lamechs
profaneness is set forth, for that he threatened to kill a young man in his
rage, flattering himself in his impunitie, Genes. 4.
yet having before his eyes such a fearful example of Gods severity upon
Cain for the like sin.

6. Obseru. The tyranny of the wicked shall have an end.
v. 26. God has numbered thy kingdom: The people of God endured much sorrow
under the hard bondage and servitude of Babylon: but now their tyranny is at
an end: So when the Israelites were most cruelly oppressed in Egypt, the Lord
looked upon their affliction, and numbered Pharaohs kingdom. So the tyranny of
the Roman Emperors was numbered, which for 300. years had persecuted the
Church of God; and God raised up Constantine to be their deliverer: And in this
latter age of the world, when the Pope had a long time raged against Christ's
members, the Lord brought him to number and account, and has freed his Church
in many famous kingdoms from his Tyranny.

CHAP. VI.
1. The Method and Argument.
IN this chapter is set forth the miraculous deliverance of Daniel from the
lions, with the occasion thereof going before, and the effects that followed.

It has three parts. 1. a narration of Daniels dignity and honor. 2. the
envy thereupon raised against him, with the effects to v. 21. 3. the
deliverance of Daniel, whereunto he was brought thorough envy.

1. Daniels dignity is described. 1. by the efficient cause and author of his
advancement, the king, v. 1. 2. by the degrees of his honor. 1. he was one of
the three set over the 120. governors. 2. he was made the first and chief of
the three, v. 3. 3. the king purposed to set him over the whole kingdom.

2. Hereupon Daniel is envied, envy brings forth malicious practicing
against Daniel, which is of two sorts. 1. they practice but prevail not, v. 4.
2. they practice against Daniel and prevail: where first is set forth their
consultation, v. 5. 2. the putting the same in practice: where these three
things are showed. 1. the enacting of a law to entrappe Daniel, v. 11. 2. the
urging of the law to v. 16. 3. the execution of the law, in the condemnation
of Daniel, with the effects thereof.

1. In the making of the law, there is 1. their petition to the king, to make
a law, v. 5. and to ratify it. 2. the kings condescending, v. 9.

2. The law is urged: where 1. is set forth the matter of their accusation:
they found Daniel praying: the manner of whose prayer is described, v. 10. see
quest. 12. following. 2. the manner of their accusation, which contains a
general repetition of the law made, v. 12. and a particular accusation against
Daniel, with false suggestions, v. 13. 3. the kings endeavor to deliver
Daniel, v. 14.

3. The execution follows, 1. with the cause thereof, the urging of the
Princes, v. 15. 2. the manner: the kings commandment goes before, in the
instant the king uses comfortable words, v. 16. and afterward to make all
sure, he and the princes seal the stone of the lions cave or den, v. 17. 3.
then follow the effects. 1. the kings heaviness showed by three effect^, the
refusing of his meat, of his delight and of his sleep, v. 18. 2. the kings
early rising. 3. and friendly salutation of Daniel.

Then follows the third part: Daniels deliverance with the manner thereof,
see afterward, quest. 23. And the effects which followed which were four. 1.
the king rejoices, v. 23. 2. Daniel is delivered without any hurt at all, v.
23. 3. his accusers are cast into the lions den; the manner is expressed, who
were cast into the lions den, and how it befell them, their bones were broken
in pieces before they came at the ground, v. 24. 4. the kings decree concerning
the worship of Daniels God: the parts and order where of see, qu. 29.

2. The text with the diverse readings.
1. And it pleased ( before. C.) Darius to set ( and he set. C.) over the
kingdom an hundredth and twenty governors, which should be over the ( in the.
L. C.) whole kingdom.

2. And over these he set, three rulers, of whom Daniel was the chief ( one.
V. L. S. G. B. but ( one) signisieth here the first, as the next verse shows)
that the governors might give account unto them, and the king should have no
damage ( not be troubled. L. but the word (nazik) signifies rather to sustain
loss, then trouble.

3. Now Daniel was preferred ( excelled. V. was superior. L.) above the rulers
and governors, because the spirit ( of God. L. B. ad) was excellent in him:
and the king thought to set him over the whole realm.

4. Wherefore the rulers and governors fought ( were seeking. C.) to find
occasion against Daniel on the behalf ( on the side. C. in the business. V.
in the administration. I.) of the kingdom, but they could find none occasion,
not fault: for he was so faithful, that there was no blame nor fault found in
him.

5. Then said these men, we shall find no occasion against this ( to this. C.
L.) Daniel except we find it against him concerning ( in. C.) the law of his
God.

6. Then these rulers and governors went together ( craftily assailed. V. L.
thronged tumultuously. A. so the word (pagash) signifies, as Psalm. 2. 1.) to
the king and said thus unto him, king Darius live for ever.

7. All the rulers of the kingdom, the officers and governors, the
counselors and dukes, have consulted together to make a regal statute ( a
statute of the king. C. for the king. G. B.) and to confirm an edict, that
whosoever shall ask a petition of any god or man, for thirty days, save of
thee the king. ( I. of thee O king. V. L. B. G.) should be cast into the lions
den.

8. Now O king ratisie the edict, and sign ( seal. G. B. describe or write.
C.) the writing, that it be not changed, according to the law of Medes, and
Persians, which fails not ( passes not. C.)

9. Therefore king Darius signed the writing and the decree.

10. Now when Daniel understood, that the writing was signed ( that (...)
sealed the writing. B. G.) he went into his house, and his window being open
in his chamber ( the word signifies an upper chamber, Polan.) toward
Jerusalem, he three times in the day kneeled upon his knees, and prayed, and
praised ( confessed. C.) before his God, as he did aforetime.

11. Then these men thronged together, and found Daniel praying, and making
supplication before his God.

12. So they came and spoke unto the king concerning the kings decree: Have
thou not signed the decree, that every man that shall ask of any God, or man,
for thirty days, save of thee O King, should be cast into the den of lions?
The king answered, and said, The thing ( or the word) is true, according to the
law of the Medes and Persians, which fails not.

13. Then answered they, and said before the king: This Daniel, which is of the
children of the captivity of Judah, has no respect ( puts no respect. C.)
to thee O King, nor to the decree, which thou have signed, but makes his
petition three times a day.

14. When the king heard these words, he was much displeased (or grieved. I. L.
much evil was. C.) with himself ( about it. V.) and set his heart on Daniel
to deliver him, and he labored till the Sun went down to deliver him.

15. Then these ^^en assembled ( understanding. L.) unto the king, and said
unto the king: Understand O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is,
that no decree or statute, which the king confirms, may be changed.

16. Then the king gave charge ( said. C.) and they brought Daniel, and cast
him into the den of Lions: now the king spoke and said unto Daniel, Thy God,
whom thou seruest continually, he will deliver thee.

17. And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den, and the
king sealed it, with his own signet, and the signet of his Princes, that the
purpose should not be changed (not nothing should be done against. L.)
concerning Daniel.

18. Then the king went into his palace, and remained fasting ( passed the
night, or continued all night without his supper. C. V. not he slept. L. for
the contrary is expressed afterward, that his sleep wont from him) neither
were the instruments of music ( such things as might cheer him. I. not
meats. L. or the table. V.) brought before him, and his sleep went from him.

19. Then the king arose in the morning by break of day, B. (with the light.
C.) and went with all have to the den of lions.

20. And as he came nigh unto the den, he cried with a piteous, B.
(lamentable. B.) voice unto Daniel: and the king spoke and said to Daniel, O
Daniel the servant of the living God, is not thy God ( think thou not, that.
L. ad.) able to deliver thee from the lions?

21. Then Daniel said to ( spoke with. C.) the king, O King have for ever.

22. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut (that is, the Angel) the lions
mouths, that they have not hurt me: and therefore. I (better then for. L. B.
G. as though it were a reason of his deliverance) integrity is found in me
before him: and before thee O King have I done no mischief. I. L. V. (hurt.
C.) I have done thee no hurt. G. never offended thee. B.

23. Then was the king exceeding glad for him, and spoke that they should take
Daniel out of the den: so Daniel was brought out of the den, and no manner
of hurt was found upon him, because he believed. G. (or trusted. B.) in his God.

24. Then the king commanded, and the men were brought, which had found
accusations ( accused accusations. C.) which were against Daniel, and into the
den of the lions were they cast, their children, and their wives, and they
were not yet at the ground of the den, when the lions had mastrie over them,
and brake all their bones in pieces.

25. Then Darius the king wrote unto all people, nations, and languages, that
dwell in all the earth ( world. G. lands. B.) Peace be multiplied unto you.

26. I make a decree ( a decree is propounded before me. C.) that in all the
dominion of my kingdom, men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel, for he
is the living God, and remains for ever, and his kingdom is incorruptible (
shall not be corrupted. C.) and his dominion shall be everlasting.

27. He rescueth and delivers, and he works signs and wonders in heaven
and in earth: who has delivered Daniel from the power ( hand. C. den. L.) of
the lions.

28. So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of
Cyrus the Persian. I. C. (of Persia. B. G.)

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. What Darius this was, which took upon him the kingdom of Babylon.
1. The author of the scholasticall history reports this to have been the
opinion of some, that this Darius should be Balthazars grandfather by the
mothers side, the son of his daughter, who seeing that Balthazar had no
children, he thought by this attempt to cut off Balthazar, and so to possess
the kingdom of Babylon. But this is very unlike, seeing Darius was so well
affected unto Cyrus being but his nephew, that he should be so unnatural to
his grandchild.

2. Theodoret thinks, that this Darius was grandchild to Nabuchadnezzer by
his daughter, and so he was a Chaldean by his mother, and a Mede by his father:
and this he would thus prove, because the kingdom was promised to
Nabuchadnezzer, to his son, and his sons son, Ierem. 25. 6, 7. now
Balthazar was Nabuchadnezzers son, the kingdom then must according to that
prophecy descend yet a degree further to some of Nabuchadnezzers stock,
namely unto this Darius.

Contra. 1. Balthazar, as has been showed before, was not son, but sons
son to Nabuchadnezzer: for Euilmerodach was his son which next succeeded in
the kingdom, 2. king. 25. 27. 2. seeing the kingdom was promised to his son,
and sons son, this prophecy could not be fulfilled in Darius, who is
supposed to have been his daughters son, not his sons son. 3. the
kingdom descended not to Darius by inheritance, but was taken by conquest.
Perer.

3. A third opinion is, that this Darius was he which was called Darius
Hystaspis, who did war with the Chaldees, and took their city Babylon, and
spoiled it: of this opinion was Porphyrius, as Hierome says in 9. Daniel* and
Tertullian. lib. advers. Indae. Cyril. Hierosol; catech. 12. Joan. Ioannes
Lucidus de emendat. temp^r. Gerardus Mercator. in annalib. But these are
greatly deceived, 1. because between this Darius the Mede, and Darius
Hystaspis there was great difference: for the first was a Mede, the son of
Assuerus the king, c. 9. 1. and reigned before Cyrus: the other was a Persian,
not the son of a king, and he reigned the third after Cyrus. 2. And herein is
their error, Babylon was twice taken, once by Darius and Cyrus together, and
afterward by Darius Hystaspis by Zopyrus means.

4. Some other were of opinion, that this Darius was the same with Cyrus,
because the Greek historians ascribe this victory and taking of Babylon only
unto Cyrus, which Daniel gives unto Darius: Theodoret makes mention of this
opinion in the beginning of his sixth oration upon this book: But this opinion
has no probability. 1. Darius was a Mede, but Cyrus was of Persia. 2. Darius
was now 62. years old, and is thought to have reigned but a short time after,
not above a year or two: but Cyrus was neither so old, held not then to be
above 40. and he reigned diverse years after. 3. And c. 6. 28. Darius and Cyrus
are named, as two diverse persons.

5. It was the opinion of some, as Hierome writes upon the 5. chap. of Daniel,
that this Darius was the same, who in Herodotus is called Astyages: of which
opinion Eusebius seems to be, who makes Astyages the last king of the Medes.
And this seems to be favored by the Apocryphal story of Susanna, v. 65.
that when Astyages was put or laid unto his ancestors, Cyrus of Persia took
his kingdom.

But this opinion may thus be refelled: 1. because none of the foreign writers
do make any mention, that Astyages had any war with the Chaldeans, or that
he took Babylon. 2. And this Apocryphal story may be doubted of: for
according to Xenophon, Cyaxares reigned after Astyages: and as Herodotus
writes, Cyrus expelled Astyages out of his kingdom, and sent him to Carmania,
and so took upon him the kingdom while he lived: the story of Susanna
agrees with neither of these reports.

6. The most general received opinion is, that this Darius called Cyaxares,
was, as Xenophon writes, the son of Astyages, and uncle by the mothers side
to Cyrus, which Cyaxares was king of the Medes after Astyages: this opinion
follows Josephus, Hierome, Lyranus, Pintus, Oecolampad. Osiander, with
others. But this is objected against this opinion: that Astyages had no son,
but a daughter, Mandane, the mother of Cyrus, whom Astyages commanded to be
slain, because the Astrologers told him, that he should have dominion over all
Asia. And this is affirmed by diverse authors, that Astyages had no son, as
Valerius Maxim. lib. 1. cap. de somnijs. Herodot. lib. 1. Severus Sulpitius,
lib. 2. sacr. histor. And therefore Iunius understands Xenophon to speak not
of Astyages natural, but of his adopted son.

7. Josephus Scaliger in the 8. book of that exquisite work, which he has
written de emendat. tempor* is of this opinion, that be which is called
Balthazar, is the same who is named of other writers Labosardach, the son of
Ni^octis Nabuchadnezzers daughter, who was slain by the Babylonians, and then
this Darius the Mede, the same who is called Nabonidus, was by a common consent
chosen king in his place, who when he had reigned 17. years in Babylon, was
overcome by Cyrus, and the city taken. Iunius also in his annotation upon this
verse, says that this Darius the Mede, is the same who is called by the
historians, Labonidus, or Labynitus.

Contra. 1. If Labosardach and Balthazar were the same, being the son of
Nabuchadnezzers daughter, then was not the prophecy fulfilled, that the
kingdom should be given to Nabuchadnezzers son, and his sons son, for it
was to his daughters son. 2. when Balthazar was slain, Darius took the
kingdom by force, it is not like they would have chosen him being a stranger
unto it. 3. after Balthazar was slain, the kingdom was divided between the
Medes and Persians it did not then quietly descend unto the Medes. 4. The
Prophet Isai says, c. 13. 17. Behold I will stir up the Medes against thee:
the Medes then assaulted Babylon and took it by violence: a Mede came not unto
it by election. 5. This Darius was king of the Medes and Persians, as it
appears in the 6. chapter, how could that be, if he reigned in Babylon, and
was overcome by the power of the Medes and Persians? 6. Concerning Iunius
opinion, I prefer his judgment in his commentary upon v. 11. 12. c. 5. that
Balthazar is the same, whom Herodotus called Labunitus, or Nebonidus, which
signifies a Prince expulsed: because he with his father were both expelled by
Niglazar: Then Darius the Mede could not be that Nabonidus, or Labynitus, as he
has in his annotation.

8. This then is the most probable opinion, that this Darius called also
Cyaxares, was not the son, but the brother of Astyages, and great uncle to
Cyrus, the son of Cambyses and Mandane Astyages daughter: this then was their
genealogy: Assuerus or Cyaxares the Elder had two sons, Astyages, and
Cyaxares the younger, the same is this Darius, who is said to be son of
Assuerus, c. 9. 1. not of Astyages. Xenophon calls Cyaxares Astyages son,
because he adopted him to succeed in the kingdom to prevent Cyrus. Iun.
Polan. The author of the scholasticall history much disagreeth not, who says
that Cyaxares was not the son, but the kinsman of Astyages, whom he adopted
to be his heir. This Darius was also father in law to Cyrus, to whom together
with his daughter, he resigned the kingdom of Media. Iun.

2. Quest. Of the diverse names which Darius had.
1. Pererius observes that he was called by 4. names: by Daniel he is named
Darius: by the Septuag. as Hierome says, he was called Artaxerxes: by Xenophon
Cyaxares: and in the story of Susanna, he is the same there called Astyages:
the three first names may be acknowledged to be given unto him, but Astyages he
is not called either by Herodotus or Xenophon: it is rather an error in that
Apocryphal story.

2. The names Cyaxares and Assuerus are in effect all one: for Chu in the
Persian language signifies a Prince, and so does achash, whence is derived the
word achashverosh, or Assuerus, which the Greeks pronounce Axares, or Oxuares:
Cyaxares then signifies a prince of princes, or a chief prince.

3. He is called Darius the Mede, by way of distinction from Darius the
Persian, Ezr. c. 4. 5. who was the third that reigned after Cyrus.

3. Quest. How Darius took upon him the kingdom of Babylon.
1. Xenophon writes that Darius was the chief author of the war against
Babylon, and therein used the help of Cyrus, who being sent with the greatest
part of the army to the siege, Darius himself stayed in Media, to whom Cyrus
came afterward, when he had settled the Babylonian affairs, to whom Darius
offered the kingdom of Media together with his daughter, and Cyrus again gave
unto Darius the government of Babylon with the goodly palace, and other
edifices there: this report follows Iunius in his commentary. But it is not
like, that Darius was now absent, seeing it is said, that immediately after
Balthazar was slain, Darius took upon him the kingdom.

2. R. Levi thinks, that Darius was present, and that he afterward continued
in Babylon, and reigned not a full year there, and then Cyrus succeeded him.

3. But Josephus, whose opinion is more probable, thinks that Darius certain
months after the taking of Babylon, returned into Media, and carried Daniel
with him, where in E^batane Daniel builded a goodly tower for the sepulture of
the kings, which remained unto Josephus time, lib 10 (...) c^ p. 12.
and then seemed as if it had been newly built: And he left Cyrus behind him,
to set the Babylonian affairs in order: this Bullinger thinks more probable:
and Oecolampadius seems to incline to the same opinion: for Daniel when he
was cast into the lions den was then among the Medes and Persians, as may be
gathered, c. 6. 12. The thing is true according to the law of the Medes and
Persians.

4. Now it being agreed that both Darius and Cyrus were both at this siege and
taking of Babylon, some think that Cyrus had the dominion, sed pro sua
modestia cessit titulo regni, but in his modesty gave unto Darius the title of
the kingdom, being his uncle and father in law, Oecolampad. Lyranus thinks
that Cyrus compounded with Darius upon this condition, it a vt post eum
regnaret, so that he might reign after him: But, seeing Cyrus, when he had
expulsed Astyages king of the Medes, established Cyaxares his uncle in the
kingdom for his life time, Iun. ex Xenoph. who now held the same, and was taken
for the king of Med^s: Cyrus was contented that Darius as in the right of his
kingdom, who also was the chief author of this war, should have the honor
of this victory, and the dominion of Babylon: and thus thinks Hierome that
not only ordo aetatis and propinquitatis, sed regni seruatus est, that not the
order of age, or affinity, but of the kingdom was kept herein: because then
the kingdom of the Medes, was greater then the kingdom of the Persians. And
this best agrees unto the Prophets, who make the Medes the chief enemies and
assaulters of Babylon, Isa. 13. 17. and Ierem. 51. 11. Josephus also makes
Darius the chief man in the siege and sacking of Babel: he did take it,
adiutus a Cyro cognato, being assisted by Cyrus his kinsman.

5. And herein more credit may be given to Josephus in the histories which
concern his own nation, then unto Herodotus, or Xenophon, unto whom these
two exceptions may be taken.

1. Herodotus is thought to have many fabulous reports, and therefore is
commonly called pater mendaciorum, the father of lies: and Xenophon in the
praise of Cyrus is found somewhat to exceed.

2. These two historians in diverse points are one contrary to the other.
Herodotus makes Astyages the last king of the Medes: Xenophon names Cyaxares
king after him: the first says Astyages had no son, but a daughter, the
other says Cyaxares was his son: the first writes that Cyrus expelled
Astyages out of his kingdom, the other that he died, and left it to his son.
Herodotus says that Cyrus was borne of obscure parentage, that he was
miserably slain by Thomyris Queen of the Messagetes, that he reigned 29.
years. Xenophon says that Cyrus was nobly borne of a Prince of Persia, that
he died peaceably at home, and reigned but seven years.

6. The resolution then of this question is, that neither this Darius was
chosen king by the Babylonians, as Joseph Scaliger, whose opinion is rehearsed
before: nor yet was he altogether rex beneficiarius, a king by courtesy, as
Iun. but as king of the Medes, which kingdom indeed he held by Cyrus favor,
he overcame Babylon, and translated the kingdom from the Chaldeans to the
Medes and Persians.

4. Quest. When Darius took upon him the kingdom of the Chaldeans.
1. Iunius in his commentary upon the ^. chapter v. 29. seems to be of opinion,
that Cyrus first spent a whole year in the settling of the Babylonian affairs:
and after a year resigned the title of that kingdom to Darius: so the first
year of Darius reign, was the second of Cyrus: which may be the cause, why
mention is made only of the first and third year of Cyrus, and not of the
second. So his opinion is, that Darius and Cyrus first year concurred not
together, but that Darius first year was Cyrus second. But this seems to
contradict the text, c. 6. 28. where Darius reign is set before Cyrus: it is
unlike that Darius reign then began after Cyrus.

2. Some are of opinion, that Darius the Mede reigned diverse years in Babylon,
before Cyrus took the city, of which judgment is Josephus Scaliger, as we
have seen before, qu. 1. 8. But this can not be: for as soon as the
Babylonian Monarchy was dissolved, it was divided presently between the Medes
and Persians: the Medes did not possess it before.

3. R. Levi thinks that Darius reigned the first year immediately after the
taking of Babylon: but he reigned not the whole year: Cyrus succeeded the same
year: which opinion Oecolampadius favors, because if Cyrus reigned not the
first year, then the manumission and deliverance of the Jews should have
been deferred after the 70. years were expired.

4. But the more probable opinion is, that Darius and Cyrus reign concurred
together, and that the first year of the Persian Monarchy is indifferently
ascribed to Cyrus and Darius: for it is evident, that immediately after the
dissolution of the Babylonian state, Cyrus reigned, and it is called the first
year of his reign: as, c. 1. 21. Daniel was unto the first year of Cyrus:
that is, he continued in Babylon, till that state was altered, and the kingdom
was translated to Cyrus: Beside, the 70. years of captivity, and the
Babylonian Monarchy ended together: then immediately after the 70. years
expired, Cyrus in his first year makes an Edict for the return of the Jews,
Ezr. 1. 1. Now that this was the first year also of Darius, is as evident, c.
9. 1, 2. in the first year of Darius, Daniel understood that the 70. years
were accomplished: but if Darius first, had not been likewise Cyrus first, the
years were accomplished before. So they both reigned together, as Calvin
faith, they did regnare in commune, reign in common, because the Medes and
Persians are joined together, c. 6. 8. and the Edict for the return of the
Jews was made by them both, as Iun. notes, 2. Chron. 36. 23. and therefore
Ezr. 6. 14. it is called the commandment of Cyrus and Darius.

5. Quest. Of the officers which Darius appointed, and the reason thereof.
1. Darius appointed an 120. governors, according to the number of the
Provinces: which were numbered afterward to an 127. Esth. 1. 1. Some think that
the odd number of seven is here omitted, to make the number even, Genevens.
annot. Esth. 1. 1. But it is more like that either more Provinces were added
afterward to the Persian Monarchy, or else all the 127. were divided among
these 120. governors. All these might be divided into three parts, each of
them containing 40. governors. And over all these were three other chief
overseers set to take account of them: to every one there might be assigned 40.
Bullinger. Josephus is deceived, who trebleth this number, and says that
Darius appointed 360. governors, whom Freculphus in his Chronicle follows,
tom. 1. lib. 3. c. 18.

1. The reasons, why Darius made choice of these governors, were these. 1.
Because Darius was old, 62. years of age, and therefore he did appoint them to
be his assistants in the kingdom, Iun. 2. Because all things in the
Commonwealth must be done in order: intellexit absque ordine nullum regnum, he
knew that a kingdom could not continue without order. 3. Their office was to
see, that the king sustained no damage, to see that the laws were observed,
and the kings revenues were not wasted. The Latin interpreter reads, vt rex
non sustineret molestiam, that the king might not be troubled: but that were,
as though the king gave himself to his ease, and had care of nothing, which is
not like, that a king of so many Provinces could be without care of the
government.

6. Quest. Whether Darius did wisely in thinking to set Daniel, being a
stranger, over the whole realm. v. 3.
1. Though it ordinarily be more safe, for such governors to be appointed
which are of the same nation, because both the hearts of the people will be
more inclined unto such, and the care and love of such officers will be greater
toward their country: yet in two cases it may fall out to be better to appoint
a stranger: 1. when as there are any singular and extraordinary parts of
wisdom in such an one as there was in Daniel, more then is to be found in any
other. 2. where countries are subdued by conquest, it is not safe to commit the
government to men of the same nation, least they might rebel: This was the
Roman policy, to make their own citizens Proconsuls and Leiftenants over
their Provinces: And in the same policy it was sometime enacted here in
England, that no Irish man should be made a Bishop in Ireland, least such
being then popishly affected, might have been instruments to corrupt the
people in religion, and so move them unto rebellion.

2. Likewise it is more safe for the Prince to have his Senate and assembly of
Counselors, where many may be found trusty and faithful, but otherwise it is
not amiss, to prefer one prudent and faithful man, before many unwise, and
unfaithful, as Pharaoh committed the government of the whole realm unto
Joseph, and here Darius unto Daniel, Polan.

7. Quest. Whether Daniel did well in taking upon him to bear office in an
idolatrous kings court.
1. Two conditions being observed, it is not unlawful to bear such an
office. 1. Daniel did not here ambitiously seek this place of government, but
it was cast upon him. 2. he kept himself pure from their idolatry, as Joseph
did likewise in Egypt.

2. Neither was it unlawful for Daniel to have the chief charge of the kings
accounts, and to be as chief Treasurer under him, and to be a faithful
steward for the kings profit: as Joseph was a means that the kings revenues
were greatly augmented and increased. But such must have care, that they seek
not the kings profit, with the oppression of the subjects, and laying hard
impositions upon them: As Haman by oppressing the Jews, promised to bring ten
thousand talents of silver into the kings treasure, Esth. 3. 9.

8. Quest. How the Rulers failed in their purpose, finding no fault at all in
Daniel.
1. There are three words here used, they found no occasion, blame, nor fault:
the first word is ghillah, which the Septuag. translate (...), the second
shall, (...), the third shachitha, which the Septuag. interpret (...): the
first Polychr^nius understands of capital offenses, the second of faults not
capital, the third of corruption in receiving of gifts, or misgouernment,
Oecolamp. Lyranus thus distinguishes, they found no fault, in facto, in deed,
not any occasion or suspicion, in signo, in the least sign.

2. Whereas the words are, they sought occasion, ex latere regni, on the part
or side of the kingdom: Lyranus reads, ex latere regis, on the side of the
king, giving three interpretations thereof; that they practiced to remove him
from the kings side, from being so near unto him: or to accuse him, that
ambiret aequalitatem regis, as though he sought to be equal to the king, and
to go, as we say, side by side with him: or they sought to pick out matter
concerning the Queen, which lay at the kings side, as though Daniel had been
too familiar with her. But all these gloases are grounded upon a false text:
the words are on the side or behalf of the kingdom, malcutha, not of the
king: that is, they sought to find some fault concerning the administration of
the kingdom.

9. Quest. Of the edict and decree made to entangle Daniel, the occasion
thereof, and injustice therein.
1. Some think that these governors wrought upon the kings ambitious humor,
who thought that Cyrus would obscure him: as Xenophon writes, that Cyaxares,
which was this Darius, would say with tears, that Cyrus was more glorious then
he: therefore they knew that this decree would content the king, that none
should be prayed unto for 30. days but himself. But they beside pretended the
kings profit, that it was necessary by this decree to try the obedience of
his subjects, especially the Chaldeans, which were lately subdued, Calvin. that
by this means Darius might be established in his kingdom. Not much unlike
unto this was the practice of Gryslerus governor of Austria, who to try the
affections of the people to the nobility, caused a cappe to be hung upon a
pole, that they which passed by, should do obeisance thereunto, for reverence
to the nobility and magistrates. But whatsoever their pretense was to the
king, they intend the destruction and overthrow of Daniel.

2. Now how unjust this decree was, diversely appears. 1. herein they first
dishonor the God of Israel, whose power they had experience of, though they
knew him not, in denying that honor which was due unto God, to be inuocated,
Like to this law was that prohibition of Henry the 3. in France, that is
should not be lawful for householders to pray with their families. Polan. p.
452.
and called upon, and giving of it unto a nortall man. 2. They are injurious to
their own gods, whom they would not have worshipped for 30. days: for
envious and ambitious men contemn all religion both true and false, to
compass their own desire, Polan. 3. they abuse and deceive the king: Rex non
perspiciens eorum malitiam, etc. the king not perceiving their malice, gives
consent, Joseph. and so Daniel, whom the king most favored, is entrapped. 4.
They limit this decree unto the space of 30. days; whereupon Chrysostom well
notes, si hoc bonum, ^pertebat semper facere, if it were a good thing, it
ought always to be done; if evil, it was not fit to continue 30. days. 5.
Beside they urge a general consent of all the nobles: whereupon Chrysostom
again: if it were good, quid tantam multitudinem pratexitis, why do ye
pretend such a multitude: for it ought to be approved without such a
multitude: and if it were evil, ^e toto mundo praecipiente parere fas erat, it
was not lawful to obey, though all the world commanded it. 6. Beside, in
barring all men to make petition to any save the king, they do wrong unto
Cyrus, by whose favor and benefit Darius held the kingdom, Iun. in comment.
7. And lastly it was a most bloody decree, under pain of most cruel death,
to be cast into the lions den, inioyning so unreasonable a thing.

10. Quest. Of the immutable decrees of the Medes and Persians, v. 8.
1. It seems that the decrees of the Persian kings were inuiolably kept,
whether they were just or unjust: as the sudden and rash sentence which
Assuerus gave against his wife Vashti, could not be revoked: and the bloody
decree which Haman procured for the extirpation of the Jews, was not reuersed;
but a contrary decree was made, that the Jews should stand upon their own
defense, and kill those which went about to destroy them.

2. The Persians had great respect unto the truth. Agathias in his history of
the manners of the Persians, writes that they make two gods, as the Manichees,
one the author of goodness and truth, whom they call Ormisdatis, whose body
they say is like unto the light, and his soul to the truth; and their other
god, the author of evil, they call Arimanes. Pet. Crinitus l. 1. de honest.
discipline. writes, that the Persian kings son was committed to four
masters, whereof the second did always admonish him, that he should love and
keep the truth throughout his whole life.

11. Quest. Why Daniel did not stay the kings decree by his contrary advise.
v. 10. Now when Daniel understood: 1. It is like that Daniel was not present,
when the rulers thus moved the king, but they had excluded him, and not made
him privy unto their devise: for otherwise such was the piety of Daniel, and
his zeal toward God, that he would not by his silence have suffered his glory
to be empayred, Calvin. he understood then the decree after it was proclaimed
and published.

2. They then which upon the supposed conniuence and silence of Daniel, do
think it enough, if counselors and men of state being present, when wicked
decrees are enacted, do withhold their consent, are in error: for this were
by their timiditie and fearefulnes to betray the truth. Against such the wise
man speaks, Prou. 24. 11, 12. Deliver those that are drawn to death, and
will thou not preserve them, that are led to be slain? if thou say, Behold, we
knew not of it, he that pondereth the hearts, does not he understand?

12. Quest. Of Daniels custom of praying, with the circumstances thereof.
1. The occasion is expressed, that when he heard of this decree, he betook
himself unto prayer, which the children of God most of all use in the time of
distress.

2. The place is expressed, he went to his own house, not unto any of their
idolatrous temples; his own house was his Temple. And he prayed in an upper
room, not to be more secret, as Pintus collecteth, but rather that he might be
seen, that he continued constant in his religion. P^lan. Iun.

3. The place is described by the adiunct, the opening of the windows, that he
might freely and openly show himself a worshipper of God.

4. The site and position of the opening of the windows was toward Jerusalem,
whether he hoped to return.

5. The circumstance of the time is added: he prayed three times a day, in the
morning, before he went to his business: at noone, when he came home to eat
meat, and at night, when he had finished his business: these three times he
made choice of, as freest from worldly employments, that he might not be
interrupted in his prayer.

6. His gesture is expressed, he kneeled down upon his knees.

7. The argument and matter of his invocation: prayer, in the petition of
things necessary; and praise, in giving thanks unto God.

8. His constancy is showed, as he had done aforetime.

13. Quest. How Daniels custom in opening the windows when he prayed, agrees
with our Saviors precept, Matthew. 6. to shut the doors of the chamber in
prayer.
1. Our blessed Savior must not be understood in that place, to speak simply
and absolutely, as though it were not lawful but to pray privately in the
chamber, the doors being shut: for then it should not be lawful to pray
publicly, or in the hearing of others: but that precept is uttered, as we say,
secundum quid, in a certain respect, and by way of comparison, that it were
better secessum quaerer^, to seek a secret place to pray in, then to press
into the sight of men, to show our devotion.

2. The end must be considered, which our Savior there aymeth that, which is
to take heed of vain glory in our prayer: which end is here observed by
Daniel, who in opening his windows did not seek the praise of men, sed se
palam Dei cultorem commonstrabat, but only showed himself openly a worshipper
of God, Bulling.

Quest. 14. Why Daniel opened the window of his chamber toward Jerusalem.
Daniel turns not himself toward Jerusalem, as having any confidence in the
place, or as though God were present more in one place then in another; but for
these reasons. 1. because they had a promise, (...)
that when they were taken prisoners, and carried captive into a strange land,
if they prayed toward the Temple, they should be heard, Lyran. Iun. And whereas
they were commanded, Deuteronomy. 12. to go unto the place which the Lord should
choose; from hence it is gathered, si non possent ad locum illum venire, saltem
contra locum ipsum adorarent, if they could not come unto that place, yet they
should worship toward it.

2. Iustabat nunc annus septuagesimus, etc. now the 70. year was at hand, when
the deliverance of the people was expected, and therefore he prayed so much the
more earnestly, Pel. and toward Jerusalem, quam optabat reparari, which he
desired to be repaired: his desire appears in his gesture, Oecolamp.

3. By this means he showed his faith and hope, se acquiescere in haeriditate
promissa, that he rested in the promised inheritance, Calvin. that the people
should return thither again, as Iacoband Joseph believed, that they should be
redeemed out of Egypt.

4. By this Ceremony in looking toward the temple, where it was only lawful
for them to offer sacrifice, was signified the redemption by Christ, and that
it is not lawful, ad alium mediatorem respicere in precibus praeter Christum,
to look unto an other Mediator in our prayers, beside Christ, Bulling.

5. And hereby he showed se non obliuisci populi sui, etc. that he forgot not
his people, country, and religion, though he himself enjoyed great honor,
Polan. like as Moses forsook Pharaohs Court, and chose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God.

6. Conspectus ille fuit instar flabelli, etc. that prospect toward Jerusalem
was a means the more to inflame Daniels desire to the peoples deliverance for
the which he prayed: this he did to help his own infirmity, not that God by
opening the windows that way, heard the sooner, Calvin.

7. And herein Daniel had the example of other holy men, as David says, Psalm.
5. 8. I will bow my self (or worship) toward thy holy temple, Polan.

8. And this looking of Daniel toward Jerusalem out of the captivity of
Babylon, teaches us, that we being set here in the world, as in the
captivity of Babel, ex hac confusione ad calestem Jerusalem respiciamus,
should out of this confused estate look up to the heavenly Jerusalem, Pintus.

Quest. 15. Why Daniel prayed thrice in a day.
1. Daniel did not make choice of these hours, as though they were more
specially consecrated unto prayer, and by the circumstance of the time more
holiness and efficacy were added thereunto; as the Romanists have such a
superstitious conceit of their canonical hours: And they say the Jews
observed these three times, with more religious respect: as the third hour,
because then the holy spirit was given, the sixth hour, because then the brazen
serpent was lift up in the wilderness, and the ninth, because then the waters
came out of the rock in Cades. And so Christians should observe the same three
times: the third hour, when the Holy Ghost was given, the sixth, at what time
Christ was crucified, and the ninth, when the water gushed out of his side,
Pintus.

2. But this was the reason rather, why Daniel observed these times: he made
choice of such times, wherein he had best leisure, and was freest from worldly
business, which was the morning before he went abroad, at noone when he came
home to eat meat, as Joseph also used to do, Genesis 43. 16. and at night when
all his business was ended, Iun. Besides, these are the fittest times in
respect of the benefits therein received of God, in the morning to give thanks
for our deliverance the night past, at noone, when we take our meat, and at
night for our preservation that day, Calv. of these three times David makes
mention, Psalm. 55. 17. Evening, morning, and at noone will I pray: A Deo
initium, felicem successum, beatum exitum petimus, we do ask of God the
beginning, the happy success, and prosperous end of our business, Oecolampad.

16. Quest. Whether Daniel did well in thus praying, to offer himself to
public danger.
It will be objected that Daniel might have done better to have prayed in
secret. 1. because of the kings commandment. 2. he should have had herein some
special revelation. 3. he might have prayed unto God though he had not done it
so openly, seeing the external worship is not simply necessary, but it is
referred to the internal, whereby God will specially be served. 4. a wise man
would have given way to the present necessity and observed the time. 5. by
this means he might have brought all the Jews into danger, if God had not
extraordinarily delivered him.

Contra. 1. The kings commandment was to be obeyed, so long as it was not
contrary unto Gods commandment, as in this case it was: for the Lord says,
call upon me in the day of trouble: but here the king forbids that God
should be called upon. 2. Daniel herein was guided by the spirit of God: yet he
was not to expect any special revelation, having the general word of God, as
Deuteronomy. 6. 12. 13. beware least thou forget the Lord thy God, etc. thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, etc. and Deuteronomy. 8. 10. when thou have
eaten, and art filled, thou shall bless the Lord thy God. 3. though the
internal worship of God be most necessary, yet the other is necessary also,
as being a part of our outward confession of God: as in this case it was
necessary, Daniel should thus testify his worship of God, because it had
been his custom in former times, which if he had intermitted, f^isset obliqua
quaedam abiuratio, etc. it had been an indirect abiuring of his religion. 4.
in civil matters and things indifferent, it is good to give way unto the time,
but not in matters which concern the salvation of the soul. 5. he was rather
to go before his nation in constancy of religion, and to give them a good
example: whereas if he had dissembled, he might have brought them all into the
same dissimulation: Daniel then herein doing his duty, was not to give over in
respect of any danger, but to leave the success unto God.

But that Daniel did well in making this open confession of his faith, it
appears by the happy success, Gods extraordinary assistance, whereby the
Lord approved of Daniels godly resolution. Beside if Daniel had done
otherwise, he should have diuersely offended. 1. against God, in preferring the
kings commandment before his. 2. against the law of nature, which teaches us
that God is to be worshipped. 3. against the true religion and worship of God,
which by his example should have been much hindered. 4. against the people of
God, in offending them with his inconstancy. 5. and against his own
conscience, if he had for fear forbeared that, which in his judgment he
allowed, Iun. in comment.

Quest. 17. Of Daniels adversaries practice and accusation against him.
1. First they lie in wait for Daniel: And there is both a multitude of them
which conspire together, these men assembled, v. 11. and they find Daniel in
the very manner, praying unto his God.

2. In their accusation is to be considered the form of it, which is full of
subtlety, and cunning: they do not at the first directly accuse Daniel,
because they knew he was favored of the king: but first by making rehearsal
of the decree in general, they draw from the king a former consent, that
afterward he should not go back: wherein they call three things to the kings
remembrance, the sum of the decree, the ratification, and the penalty. v. 12.

3. The matter of the accusation is against Daniel, which is not simply done,
but with diverse false and envious suggestions: Envious concerning his person,
in obiecting his captivity, and the action, in concealing to whom he made his
petition: they simply propound it, he made his petition three times a day: the
king might conceive that he might make it to some other man: their suggestion
is false; as though Daniel did it in contempt of the king laws.

4. And their envy further appears in these two things. 1. they omit to make
mention of Daniels virtues: they bury them all in oblivion, and pick what
matter they can against him, Pintus. 2. they forget that Daniel was their
fellow in office, which many times is respected by men of like place and
calling, Osiand.

Quest. 18. How the king labored to deliver Daniel till the sun went down.
1. The king by deferring the sentence until night, might think that some
opportunity might in the mean time be offered unto Daniel to escape this
danger, Iun. And in the mean time, optimum testimonium Danieli dat, he gives
a good testimony unto Daniel, O^co, it is like he pleaded for him showing what
a necessary man he was to the commonwealth, and what good service he had done,
and that afterward there might be great miss of him: Beside, he might dispute
the cause with them, interpretando edictum, by interpreting his decree, and
seeking to excuse Daniel, Lyran. But he could not prevail: Thus far the king
is to be commended, in laboring for the innocent.

2. But in two things he fails, on the one side, metuit discrimen, etc. he is
afraid least the nobles should have conspired against him, if he had resisted
them: he durst not infringe their laws at the first. 2. stulto pudore mouetur,
he is moved with shame least he might be noted of inconstancy, for reuersing
his law, Calvin. Thus Herod was loath to put John Baptist to death, but he
more fear^d the note of inconstancy with those which sat at the table: and
Pilate would have delivered Christ, but he feared the displeasure of Caesar, as
the Jews object, that in so doing he should not be Caesar's friend. 3. Yet
though Darius here show himself to be but a weak Prince, yet his offense was
no so great as was the sin of the Rulers, for he lapsus est infirmitate, fell
of infirmity, Melancthon. illi accusant per inuidam, etc. they accuse the
servant of God through envy, Oecolamp. And as there was difference in their
sin, so the event was diverse: for the Lord had mercy on the king, and
brought him to repentance: but Daniels enemies were destroyed.

Quest. 19. Whether Darius might not have broken this decree.
1. There is no question, but that the king ought to have reuersed this unjust
law, whatsoever the custom was to the contrary, whereby the innocent were
condemned: like as it is better to break an unjust oath, then to observe it:
for then there is a double fault committed, first in making an unjust oath, and
then in keeping it: like as David did well to reuerse his oath of revenge which
he had made against Nabal; and Herod did wickedly in performing his rash and
unadvised oath in killing John Baptist, Pap.

2. Darius then binding himself to strictly to his law, therein cannot be
excused. 1. he knew in his conscience that it was a wicked decree, and against
the glory of God. 2. And that it was made fraudulently to intrappe Daniel. 3.
neither should he have been drawn to be partaker of other men's sins. 4. And
though his nobles resisted him, yet where he could not by argument and
persuasion prevail, he should have stricken thorough by his authority, Polan.

Quest. 20. Whether Darius prayer for Daniel were of faith.
v. 16. Thy God, whom thou always seruest, he deliver thee, etc. 1. Hierome,
with whom consents Lyranus, Hugo, gloss. ordinar. do here note, quod non
ambigue loquitur, sed audacter and confidenter, that Darius speaks not
doubtfully but boldly and confidently, etc. And this may seem to be an
argument that he prayed in faith, because his prayer was heard: but Daniels
deliverance was not an effect of Darius prayer: the Lord had respect unto his
own glory, and to Daniels innocence; and he wishes rather that God should
deliver him, then affirms any thing, as Iunius translateth.

2. There appears in Darius, that he had here aliquam Dei cognitionem, some
knowledge of God, which he had learned of Daniel, Osiand. which is manifest
both in that he speaks of Daniels God, that he and not any other god, was
able to deliver him: and then in respect of Daniels person, because he was
innocent he was persuaded God would deliver him, Iun.

3. Yet this was far from a faithful prayer. 1. for then he would never have
suffered an innocent man to be condemned. 2. he calls him Daniels God, as
though he were not his God, Polan. 3. If he had prayed in faith, he would not
only have wished well unto Daniel, but have endeavored by all his power to
do him good: for not good words, but good works are the fruits of faith, as
S. James shows, c. 2. 16. Bulling. yet we may gather, non omni pietate vacuu^
fuisse regem, that the king was not void of all piety, by his words following,
when he thus spoke to Daniel, v. 20. O Daniel, servant of the living God, is
not thy God whom thou always seruest, able to deliver thee from the lions?
Bulling. though Calvin here doubt not to affirm, ^e micam pietatis fuisse in
rege, that there was not a crumbe of piety in the ki^^*

Quest. 21. v. 17. Why the king sealed the stone with his own seal.
1. The Latin interpreter reads, he sealed the stone with his own signet,
and the signet of his princes, ne quid fieret contra Danielem, least any thing
should be done against Daniel, whereupon the ordin. gloss. notes following
Hierome, de leonibus securus de hominibus pertimescit, the king being out of
fear for the lions, is afraid of men, etc. he is afraid least any of his
enemies seeing the lions to do Daniel no harm, might have practiced against
him in the den: and therefore he sealed the stone, ne introiret aliquis sine
scitu suo, least any should enter without his priuitie, Lyran. to the same
purpose also Bullinger and Pelican. But the original is otherwise, which is
truly translated thus, that the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel.

2. Therefore the meaning is this, that when these men perceived, when Daniel
was cast into the den, that the lions stirred not at him, they doubting of
the kings constancy, least he should cause Daniel to be taken out alive, or
that some other of his friends might draw him out, Daniels accusers cause the
king to seal the stone: and they not trusting to the kings seal alone, put to
their own seals likewise, Iun. Polan.

Quest. 22. Whether Darius were truly converted, confessing Daniels God to be
the living God.
v. 20. Is not thy God whom thou seruest able to deliver thee? 1. Hierome, and
Lyranus following him, think that the king did not speak thus as doubting of
Gods power, sed ambiguam sententiam temperat, etc. but he so tempereth his
speech, that when Daniel should come forth without any hurt, the more credible
the thing was, tanto aduersus principes iustior sit indignatio, so much the
more just his indignation might be against the rulers, etc. And so their
opinion seems to be, that Darius as trusting in the power of God spoke
confidently, as a man assured that Daniel was delivered. And for further
strengthening of this opinion it will be said, that Darius here confesses the
living God, as believing in the only true God: But to confess one only God,
men are taught by the light of nature, and diverse of the Gentiles so
acknowledged, this then was no firm argument of his conversion.

2. Though Darius spoke not thus, as incredulous, sed inter spem metumque
haerebat, but did stick as it were between hope and fear, Osiand. yet the
manner of his speech shows that he somewhat doubted of Gods power, habuit
aliquid spei, sed coniectum cum dubitatione, he had some hope, but joined with
doubtfulnesse and infirmity, Bulling. beside he confesses the Lord to be
Daniels God, and that he served him, but he did not call him his God: neither
did Darius abolish the worship of idols out of his kingdom, all which are
evident arguments that he was not truly converted unto the knowledge of
Daniels God, Polan.

Quest. 23. Of Daniels deliverance from the lions, and the cause thereof.
Daniel shows both the causes efficient, the form and manner, and end of
this his deliverance. 1. the principal cause of this his deliverance was God:
God has sent: the isntrumental cause, was the Angel: for though God can
immediately deliver his, without the ministry of others: yet it pleases him
to use his angels, both for the setting forth of his own glory, and the
further consolation of his servants.

2. The form and manner is expressed, the Angel shut the lions mouths, that
they had no power to hurt Daniel. And not only their mouths were shut but
herby is signified also, that their talents and claws were stayed from hurting
him: and therefore it follows, that they have not hurt me: so that they
touched him neither with their teeth, claws, tail, or by any other means,
Iun.

3. The end also is expressed: that by this means the innocence of Daniel
might appear, and the goodness of his cause, that he had not offended against
the king, but had showed himself a true worshipper of God, Polan.

Quest. 24. Of Daniels salutation to the king, O king live for ever.
1. This was the manner of salutation in the East country, to wish long life
unto their king. Thus the Chaldeans, saluted Nebuchadnezzar, c. 2. 4. but in
hypocrisy, wishing in their hearts rather, that such a tyrant might perish. So
c. 3. 4. they which accused Daniels godly companions and brethren, do with
such words insinuate themselves to the king, as flatterers: But Daniel does
wish unto the king long life ex animo, from his heart, because it is the duty
of subjects to pray for magistrates: yea he wishes unto him eternal life,
gloss. he then uttered the same words, but with an other heart and mind then
the ^est did.

2. He might have expostulated with the king, because by his authority he was
cast into the lions den: but two reasons might move Daniel to forbear all
such reprehension. 1. because he more respected Gods glory then his own
particular cause; satis fuit eius liberatione illustratam fuisse Dei gloriam,
it was enough that Gods glory was set forth by his deliverance: and therefore
he is silent in the rest, Calvin. 2. According to S. Paul's rule, infirmum in
fide recipe, etc. receive him that is weak in faith, etc. So Daniel would not
deal sharply with the king, and discourage him, but by gentle means seek to
win him f^rther to the faith.

Quest. 25. Of Daniels manner of deliverance from the lyon^, that it was divine
and extraordinary.
1. There are diverse means whereby men have resisted the rage and violence of
lions 1. As first by force and strength, as Samson killed a lion, and David
slew a lion and a bear that invaded his flock: but so was not Daniel
delivered here: for the lions might have teared him before he came at the
ground, as they did his accusers: and though resistance may be made against one
lion, yet here were many. 2. Some have conquered lions by casting some garment
upon their head, lib. 8. c. 16.
and so as it were blindfolding them: as Pliny writes how a Getulian
shepherd at Rome under Claudius, did stay the rage and fierceness of a lion,
leui iniectu oper^o capite, his head being covered with some light thing cast
upon it: by which means Lysimachus, whom Alexander caused to be shut in with a
lion, might more easily strangle him. 3. Some have tamed lions by using them
gently while they were yet young, and but whelps, as Pliny in the same place
makes mention of Hanno the Carthaginian, who (as he says) primus hominum
ausus est leonem manu tractare, the first of any durst handle a lion with his
hand. 4. Beside lions use to show themselves kind unto those, which have
showed them any kindness, Gellius lib. 5 c. 14.
as Aulus Gellius reports out of Appian, of a certain servant called
Androdus, who was condemned to the wild beasts, and was spared of a lion, that
remembered some former kindness he had received: and this he was an eye
witness of at Rome. 5. Pliny also writes in the same place, that lions
unless they be very hungry, will spare those which are suppliant unto them,
and mulceri alloquio, and that they are made gentle with speech: as he makes
mention of a woman, which fell down in the woods before a lion, alleging se
indignam eius gloria praedam, etc. that she being a silly weak woman, was a
prey unworthy so noble a beast. But none of these means did Daniel here use.
6. neither yet as Daniels enemies objected, did they spare Daniel because they
were full before: as they say a lion will not prey upon a man unless he be
very hungry: Josephus adds further, that thereupon the king caused flesh to
be cast before the lions to feed them, and then cast Daniels accusers into the
den, who notwithstanding being full did tear them before they came at the
ground: But this narration of Josephus though it may seem probable, is not
necessary to be received, seeing the Scripture has it not.

2. But* the lions here were not bound by any such ordinary means: this was
Gods extraordinary work, wherein it pleased him to use the ministry of
Angels: who diversely as Pererius coniectureth might stop the lions mouths.
1. as by remoouing the lions into some other place. 2. or by blinding their
eyes. 3. or by slaking their hunger. 4. or by changing their inward fantasy,
which stirs them up to rage, when they apprehend that as enemy unto them,
which they devour. 5. or there might be a terror and fear stricken into them:
as they say lions naturally are afraid of the rumbling of wheels, the crow of
a cock, lib. 2. de mi^abi. scrip. c. 32.
and burning fire: 6. But Augustine better shows how this was, non natura in
leonibus mutata, the nature of these lions was not changed, sed lenitatem quam
catuli^ ostendunt in Danielem exercebant, but they practice toward Daniel, that
lenity which they use to show to their whelps, etc. So also Lyranus, natura
non est mutata* sed feritas prohibita, their nature was not changed, but their
rage was prohibited and stayed: as appears afterward* in that they returned
to their kind in falling upon the accusers of Daniel, and breaking all their
bones in pieces ere they came at the ground, v. 24. As God by his power stayed
the sword of Arioch, that sought Daniel to slay him, cap. 2. 13. and kept the
fire that it hurt not his three ^aithfull servants, c. 3. so here he stops
the mouths of these lions against Daniel, Polan.

Quest. 26. Why the Lord does not always send his children temporal
deliverance.
1. It is not sufficient for temporal deliverance to have a good cause: for
thorough ambition, vain glory, and vain confidence, men may be carried to
maintain a good cause: as Brutus that stood for the liberty of the
commonwealth, because he had no better success, said in discontent, virtutem
esse rem friuolam, that virtue was a frivolous thing: he considered not that
through his ambition, and trusting to his own wit, he ouerthrewe a good cause:
so in this place, it was not Daniels innocence only that delivered him, but
the cause was his faith, he trusted in God, Calvin.

2. God does not always deliver temporally: As he suffered Ignatius to be
torn of wild beasts, and Polycarpus to be consumed of the fire: yea at
sometime he sends the same man deliverance, and not at an other: as Peter was
delivered out of Herod's hands at Jerusalem, but he suffered under Nero at Rome:
yet are not the children of God forfaken, for when they are taken away by
death, they then are most of all delivered at once from all the calamities of
this world, and are received into everlasting glory, Bulling.

3. There is then a threefold kind of deliverance. 1. there is a temporal
deliverance from death and danger here: as Daniel was now delivered. 2. there
is a deliverance from sin, as in this place, Daniel liberatur a morte, Rex a
peccato, Daniel is delivered from death, the king is freed from his sin,
Melancthon. 3. there is a deliverance and preservation to eternal life: as the
godly conseruantur ad vitam eternam, are so preserved, so that in death it
self they perish not, Osiand.

Quest. 27. Of Darius joy, v. 23. Then was the king exceeding glade.
1. There were two special causes of Darius joy, l^t^tus est amici nomine, he
rejoiced on the behalf of his friend, who was now delivered by this great
miracle, Oecolamp. and he found his conscience somewhat quieted, which was
perplexed and troubled before, when he refused his meat, and would not hear
the instruments of Music.

2. Yet this was but a carnal joy; it was much differing from the true
spiritual joy, which the children of God have, when they are assured of the
favor of God, and of the remission of their sins; whereof the Prophet David
speaks, Psalm. 4. 6. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us,
thou have given me more joy of heart, then when their wheat and wine did abound.

3. Yet this joy of the king, and the sight of this miracle made the king more
courageous and bold; that whereas before he feared the nobles, and against his
own conscience condemned Daniel, now he delivers Daniel, and causes them to
be cast into the lions den in his stead: and whereas the stone was sealed
both with his own ring and the nobles, he now ^tayeth not for their consent,
b^t by his regal authority Daniel was fetched out of the den.

Quest. 28. Whether the king did justly in causing Daniels accusers with their
wives and children to be cast into the den, v. 24.
1. Some here do answer, non est lex aequior vlla, quam neces artifices art
perire sua, etc. there is no more just law, then for the deviser of mischeife
to perish in his own devise, as Haman was hanged upon the gallows which he
had made for Mordechai, gloss. iuterlin. Hugo. this reason satisfies why the
authors of this mischief were punished, but not why their wives also and
children should suffer with them.

2. Bullinger shows the equity hereof by the like judgments of God, as in
the destruction of the old world, and of Sodom, and in Saul's expedition
against Amalech: in all these neither men, women, or children were spared: So
it is usually seen, that in war, famine, pestilence, the calamity is
general: But there is great difference between the judgments of God
inflicted either immediately by himself, or by his commandment, which are
always most just, though we see not the reason thereof; and the judgments of
men. God may do that justly being Lord and Creator of all, who may give and
take life at his pleasure, which man does unjustly.

3. Calvin granting, that the wives and children may for the sins of their
husbands and fathers justly suffer civil punishment, as infamy, loss of
goods, corruption of blood, and such like, says, long durius est, etc. it is
a harder matter to slay the children with the parents: And he seems to
resolve upon the cruelty of the Persian government, scimus reges Orientales
exercuisse immane and barbarum imperium, etc. we know that those Eastern kings
did exercise a barbarous and cruel dominion: yet simply he would not have this
example condemned. But howsoever the Persian kings governed cruelly, this
example of justice is simply to be commended in the king, as shall appear by
this which follows.

4. There are then four things, which do justify the kings sentence against
Daniels accusers. 1. The greatness of the offense, which deserved a great and
extraordinary punishment* they sinned against God, by hatred of the true
religion, against the king, in abusing his facility, and deceiving him, and
they were false accusers against Daniel: they offended also against the whole
commonwealth, which by Daniels care was peaceably and quietly governed.
Bulling. Iun. annotat. 2. The law of re^alion required, that false accusers
should indu^^ the same punishment, which by their false testimony, they would
have brought upon others: according to Moses law, Deuteronomy. 19. 19. So the
Lacedaemonians did use to put to death false accusers, as the Athenians did
flatterers. As these then by their false suggestions caused Daniel to be cast
into the lions den, so are they justly served themselves: And as they would
have deprived the king of his friend, so they perish with their friends,
Oecolampad. 3. The custom of nations is to be considered, which was for the
treason committed against the king or commonwealth, either against their honor
or life, to punish both the offenders themselves, and their posterity: As this
enterprise was both against the kings honor, and against the peace and
tranquillity of the commonwealth. Seneca gives this reason of this custom and
law of nations, lib. d^ clem. cap. 8.
Nam parents, liberique eorum, qui interfecti sunt, and propinqui, and amici
in locum singulorum succedunt, for the parents and children of them which were
slain, their friends, and ki^^ed do succeed in their places, etc. that is,
they are all like to be conspiratours, as the other were. Arcadius and Honorius
after they had extinguished the conspiracy of Talnia, do thus resolve in
their rescript, in Codic. tit. ad leg. Iul. Paterno deberent perire supplicio,
in quibus paterni, hoc est haereditarij criminis exempla metuuntur, they ought
to suffer their fathers punishment, seeing the like example is feared in them
of that hereditarie crime. The general custom and law of nations, which was
to punish the children with the fathers in treasonable attempts, shows the
equity of this judgment. As yet to this day the offender is punished in his
posterity, though not by death, yet by other means; as by confiscation of his
goods and lands, by tainting of the blood, disinheriting of the children, the
annihilating of all their acts and fraudulent conueyances. 4. It was just for
example sake to show such severity, that others should fear to do the like.
5. And further, the children as they are by nature, aliqua portio parentum,
some part of their parents, Oecolampad. so they were participes criminis,
partakers of the crime: their wives and children either encouraged them to go
forward in their devise, or they consented and approved it. As the like must
be supposed in the destruction of Achan with his family, Josh. 7. and in the
execution of Haman, who was hanged with his ten sons, Esth. 9. Iun. in
commentar. Polan.

29. Quest. Of king Darius decree, concerning the worshipping of Daniels God,
the order and parts thereof.
It consists of three parts. 1. the salutation. 2. the propofition. 3. the
confirmation. 1. In the salutation or inscription, three things are expressed.
1. the person which sends greeting, Darius: the persons saluted, All nations
and languages: the matter of the salutation, the wishing and imprecation of
peace.

2. The thing propounded and commanded, is, to fear and tremble before the God
of Daniel: wherein three things are expressed, who are to perform this duty,
1. men in all his dominions. 2. what is required, to tremble, fear, and stand
in awe. 3. and to whom this duty must be yielded, not to the idols and gods
of the nations, but to Daniels God.

3. The confirmation follows by three arguments. 1. from the adjuncts of God,
his power, in that he is said to be the living God; his eternity, he remains
for ever. 2. from the adjuncts of his kingdom, it is everlasting, it shall
never perish. 3. from his works and effects in general, which are two, 1. he
rescueth and delivers. 2. he works signs and wonders: then in particular:
he delivered Daniel, etc.

30. Quest. Of Daniels prosperous estate under Darius and Cyrus.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, perseveravit Daniel, etc. and Daniel perseuered
or continued unto the reign of Darius and Cyrus: which Hugo expounds thus,
ad regnum Darij finitum, etc. unto the end of Darius reign, and the beginning
of Cyrus. But the original is not here well translated, the word is tzalach,
which signifies to prosper, not to continue; and the preposition is not ghad,
which signifies to, or until, but beth, which is ( in.)

2. The meaning then is, that he was honored first by Darius in Media, who
reigned not long after the taking of Babylon: and after him he was in great
reputation with Cyrus in Persia.

3. But where it is said, c. 1. 21. that Daniel was unto the first year of
Cyrus: that is to be restrained, not unto the time of Daniels life, for he
continued unto the 3. year of Cyrus, c. 10. 1. but of his employment in the
Chaldean Monarchy: that he was famous as long as that Commonwealth continued:
and in this place it is showed, that in the Persian state he was had likewise
in reputation: and it is not unlike but that he declared unto Cyrus the
prophecy of Esai, and was a special instrument to hasten the deliverance of
his people.

4. How long Daniel remained unto Cyrus, it is not certain: there is mention
made in this book but of the third year: Bullinger thinks he lived plures
annos, many years under Cyrus. But Daniel was now above an 100. year old, and
it should seem saw only the beginning of Cyrus reign, as Hugo thinks.

5. Here is a secret antithesis or opposition between the Chaldean and Persian
Monarchy: under this Daniel prospered still, and was greatly honored: but in
the Chaldean state, though he were honored of Nabuchadnezzer, yet he was
neglected of Balthazar, as appears, c. 5. Calvin.

6. Hugo here notes, that Darius and Cyrus had but one reign: he thinks
that Cyrus reigned under Darius, who took Daniel with him into Media, leaving
Cyrus with his son Cambyses at Babylon, as thinks Oecolampad. though
according to the opinion of some, Cyrus was not yet married.

31. Quest. Whether this miracle of Daniels deliverance from the lions, were
showed at Babylon in Chaldea, or in Media.
1. R. Levi thinks, that this fell out at Babylon, because Darius reigned but
a short time after the taking of Babylon, not full out a year: and to him
agrees Oecolampad. and so Cyrus succeeded Darius in the very first year, for
otherwise the 70. years of captivity being expired, the deliverance of the
people should have been deferred: But all this may be admitted, that either
Cyrus succeeded Darius the very first year, or that they both reigned
together, and yet this should be no reason, that this miracle was done rather
in Babylon, then in Media. Amand. Polanus also thinks that the accusers of
Daniel were Babylonians, p. 468. and so this is to have been done in Babylon.

2. Iunius is of opinion, that Cyrus reigned one year in Babylon, when the
Jews were sent out of captivity, and then Cyrus went to Darius into Media,
and sent him to Babylon, and resigned unto him the kingdom thereof: and so
Darius first year in his opinion was Cyrus second, Iun. comment. in 5. cap. in
fine. hence it will follow, that this miraculous accident fell out in Babylon.
But the text shows evidently that presently after Balthazar was slain,
Darius took upon him the kingdom: he was the next: and c. 6. 28. Darius
reign is named before Cyrus reign, it came not therefore after it: see
before, qu. 4.

3. I prefer therefore Josephus opinion, who says, that after the taking of
Babylon, Darius Danielem prophetam secum assumptum duxit in Mediam, took the
Prophet Daniel and carried him to Media, where he was cast into the lions
den: so also gloss. ordinar. Daniel in Mediam translatus, that Daniel was
translated into Media by Darius: so also Hug. Calvin agrees, satis apparet
ipsum relicta Babylone alio migrasse, that Daniel leaving Babylon went to an
other place: first to Media, where he continued not long, then to Persia. So
also Pellica^ thinks, that Darius did take Daniel with him into Media, and
left behind in Babylon Cambyses Cyrus son. Bullinger agrees, that Darius
left Cyrus at Babylon, and took with him Daniel to Ecbatane in Media: who
understood of the great wisdom that was in Daniel and how he had interpreted
the writing upon the wall. This opinion that Daniel at this time was in Media,
not in Chaldea, seems more probable for these reasons. 1. the form of
government, which was brought in by Darius to set an 120. governors over his
kingdom belonged to the Persian, not to the Babylonicall state, as may be
collected, Esth. 1. 1. where mention is made of the largenes of Assuerus
kingdom over an 127. Provinces. 2. in this chapter the law of the Medes and
Persians is urged, v. 8. Darius was then in Media, not at Babylon. 3. after the
dissolution of the Chaldean Monarchy, Babylon was no longer the seat of the
kingdom, but Shushan, Nehem. 1. 1. Esth. 1. 1.

4. The places of doctrine.
1. Doctr. That order is necessary in a kingdom.
v. 1. Darius set over the kingdom an 120. governors, etc. This prudent
Prince knew that no Commonwealth could stand without order: for like as in
families, where confusion is, and no order, all things go to ruin, so much
more in the great family of the Commonwealth without order all things soon
come to decay. Therefore Iethro gave wise counsel unto Moses, that there might
be captains over thousands, hundreds, fifties, one to be under an other: And
the Queen of Saba coming to Solomon wondered at nothing more, then to see the
order of his house, 1. king. 10. So here the king first sets a certain
number of governors over his whole kingdom: then he appoints three to take
account of them, whereof Daniel was one. Bulling.

2. Doctr. Of the end of Civil administration and government which must be
for the common good.
v. 2. That the king might have no damage. Darius was careful that the
treasure of the kingdom should be maintained: not therein respecting his own
private gain, but his principal care was to uphold and support the charges of
the kingdom: for the kings purse and treasure is for the maintenance of the
Commonwealth: the Crown can not want, but the whole Commonwealth will soon
feel it. Though Princes may by their revenues and receipts maintain their
princely dignity, and employ part thereof upon their pleasure, and bestow it,
as they see cause; yet they must have care, that there be sufficient to support
the burdens and charges of the Commonwealth: and to remember, that their
subsidies are, ipsum sudorem and sanguinem populi, the very sweat and blood of
the people, and therefore must be sparingly used, Polan. as Nehemiah had that
respect unto the people (in respect of their present poor estate) that he did
forbear to eat the bread of the governor, Nehem. 5. 14.

3. Doctr. How prayer should be made.
v. 10. He prayed and praised his God. Daniel only was not a petitioner unto
God for the obtaining of good things, and the turning away of evil: but he
also together gives thanks for the benefits received. Men then must learn not
only to be beggars of God, but to offer up the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving also: as S. Paul exhorts, that not only prayers be made, and
intercessions, but giving of thanks, 1. Tim. 2. 1. And the Apostle follows
his own rule, Romans 1. 9. First I thank my God, then he comes to his prayer,
v. 10. Always in my prayer, beseeching etc.

4. Doctr. Of kneeling in prayer.
v. 10. He kneeled upon his knees. Though a man may pray in his heart unto God
without any outward gesture, as Moses did, Exodus 14. 15. when the Lord said
unto him, Why criest thou unto me? when as Moses was not heard, nor his prayer
perceived by any gesture, but he cried unto God in his heart: yet when as
opportunity serves, as it does most fitly in private houses, and in public
places of prayer, then it becomes us to humble our selves upon our knees,
thereby to stir up our devotion, and to express our humility. Thus our
Savior fell upon his face, when he prayed in the garden, and Daniel here
prays upon his knees. If subjects humble themselves upon their knees to their
Prince, how much more should we use all humblenes and lowlines in gesture
before God?

5. Doctr. Of the ministry of Angels.
v. 22. My God has sent his Angel, etc. God could at his beck have stayed the
rage of the lions, as he commanded the Whale to cast up Jonas, but it pleases
him for his own glories sake, and the comfort of his children, to use the
ministry of his holy Angels and blessed spirits: as the Apostle says, Are
they not all ministering spirits sent forth to minister for their sakes that
shall be heirs of salvation? Heb. 1. 14. And in three things does it please
the Lord to use the ministry of Angels; in preserving and defending of his
children, as Jacob saw the Lords host, when he was afraid of his brother, Genesis
32. 1. or in the destruction of their enemies, as Senacheribs host was smitten
by an Angel, 2. king. 19. or in conueying blessings, as Manna is called Angels
food, which was ministered unto the people by the Angels.

6. Doctr. How far the Prince is to be obeyed.
v. 22. Unto thee, O king, have I done no hurt: Hereupon Melancthon well
notes, that although Daniel did go against the kings Edict and decree, yet he
had committed no evil against him: So if Princes command unjust and impious
things, they are not hurt, if their precepts be not obeyed: neither must they
think themselves despised, if God be preferred before them: As the Apostles
resolution was, when they were forbidden to speak in the name of Jesus,
Whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey you rather then God, judge
ye, Act. 4. 19. And hereby Melancthon justly excuses the Protestants of
Germany for refusing to obey the Emperors edicts, made against the profession
and professors of the Gospel.

7. Doctr. Of true miracles.
v. 23. No manner of hurt was found upon him. Hence Polanus well infers,
divina miracula non esse praestigias, that divine miracles are not counterfeit
tricks, such as are the iugling feats of Magicians: but the Lords works are
wonderful in deed: the three servants of God, which were cast into the fiery
oven, had not so much as the smell of fire upon them: And Daniel has no hurt
by the lions at all: God only makes true wonders. But the power of Satan and
his ministers, is by false signs, and lying wonders, as the Apostle calls
them, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.

8. Doctr. That the beasts and other creatures are ready to execute Gods will.
v. 22. And has shut the lions mouth. The unreasonable creatures, as here they
do spare Daniel, so at other times, they are ready to execute vengeance: as
the lion that slew the Prophet, that was disobedient to the word of God, 1.
king. 13. 25. and an other was slain by a lion, for not obeying the Prophet,
1. king. 20. 36. And the Lord sent lions upon the Samaritans, because they
feared nor the Lord, 2. king. 17. 25. So whether it be to show mercy, or to
execute judgment, the creatures are ready to perform the will of God, Polan.

9. Doctr. Of the force and efficacy of faith.
v. 23. Because he believed in him. Daniel here by his faith was delivered from
the lions, because with a firm and assured trust he reposed himself upon God.
So S. James says, c. 5. 15. The prayer of faith shall save the sick: and as
Clemens Alexand. (...), faith is effectual and available to salvation. But
though every faithful man have not this particular and peculiar kind of faith,
(which is called the faith of miracles) yet they are assured by their faith to
be everlastingly saved, though they are not thereby secure and assured always
of temporal deliverance.

10. Doctr. The magistrates office is not only to procure things temporal,
but spiritual also for their subjects.
v. 26. As Darius here makes a decree that all men in his kingdom should
fear Daniels God, so it belongs to the magistrate not only to procure
outward peace, and to watch over the people for their bodily and worldly
wealth; but to see also, that they profess true religion, and be brought to
the right knowledge of God, Papp. Thus did the good kings of Judah, David,
Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josias, they abolished idolatry, and superstition, and
planted true religion.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. Against canonical and stinted hours of prayer.
1. Bellarmine upon this example of Daniel does ground the institution of their
canonical hours, lib. ^. de bon. open. in particul. c. 1^^
the third, ninth, and sixth: and Pintus adds further, not only at these
three times, but seven times a day does the Catholic Church pray, septem horis
canonicis, in the seven canonical hours: as David says, Seven times a day
will I praise thee, Psalm. 119. which was shadowed forth by the seven times
blowing of the trumpets, Josh. 6. 4.

Contra. 1. They do in these positions contradict themselves: for if they
would prove by Daniels example, that there are three canonical hours, how
come they to have seven. 2. David prayed also at midnight, Psalm. 119. v. 62.
beside his seven times a day: then by this reason there shall be yet more then
7. canonical hours: and David in that place by seven times, understands
many, according to the phrase of Scripture, Leuit. 26. 18. and Prove. 24. 16. A
just man falls seven times. 3. not only these hours, but all other are
consecra^ed to prayer, according to the saying of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
Pray continually: As David prayed in the morning, evening and at noone, Psalm.
55. 17. and he used to remember God upon his bed, and in the watches of the
night, Psalm. 63. 5. and our blessed Savior continued all night in prayer, Luke
6. 12. 4. Yet it is convenient in respect of our infirmity, that men should
tie themselves to certain hours for their private prayers, without
superstition: that although it be free for us to pray at all times, quisque
tamen sentire debet suam infirmitatem, vt remedia sibi accersat, yet every man
must take knowledge of his infirmity, and use the helps and remedies to stir
up his dulnes by keeping his set hours of prayer, Calvin. yet so as his
affection and devotion be not tied unto these hours, but that at all other
times, as his necessity requires, and occasion serves, he be ready to call
upon God. 5. As for Daniels example, he kept not those hours, as being
addicted in devotion and religious observation more to one time, then an other,
but because that he was most vacant and free from other employments, as is
before showed, qu. 15.

6. But the Popish observation of canonical hours we refuse for diverse
reasons. 1. because they think the very keeping of the hour is a part of Gods
worship. 2. they enjoin them with such necessity to be kept, as though they
could not be omitted without mortal sin. 3. they think by this keeping of
their canonical hours to merit at Gods hand, Polan. see more hereof, Centur.
4. err. 90.

2. Controv. That it is no Apostolical tradition to pray toward the East.
1. Daniel here prays toward Jerusalem, which was situate southwest from
Babylon: and the Sanctuary was toward the West, and the door of it opened
toward the East: therefore the superstitious situation of Churches, as of
necessity East and West, has no ground out of the Scriptures, Oecolampad. the
Apostle exhorts men to lift up pure hands, every where, 1. Tim. 2. 8. Every
place is fit to make our prayer in: and God is every where present to hear
those which call upon him in faith: see more, Synops. Cent. 2. err. 52.

2. Beside, the heresy of the Ebionites is very gross, who held, that
Christians should pray toward Jerusalem, as Ireneus writes of them, lib. 1.
aduers. haeres. cap. 26. for now the Temple of Jerusalem, together with the
ceremonies thereof is abolished, the true Temple Christ Jesus being come.

3. Controv. That the public profession of our faith is necessary, and it is
not sufficient, to have it inwardly in the heart.
v. 10. Daniel opened his windows to the intent that he should be seen of all,
not of vain glory, but that his constancy in the worship of God might be
known to all, notwithstanding the kings edict to the contrary: Hereby is
confuted the error of the Georgians, Libertines, and Nicodemites in these
days: the same was the error of the Helchesaites in times past, that if any
denied his faith in time of persecution, and kept it in his heart, he sinned
not. And for the strengthening of this error, diverse reasons are brought.

1. They allege, that the Magistrate, who is in Gods place, is to be obeyed,
as the Apostle teaches, that whosoever resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God, Romans 13. 2.

Contra. 1. Magistrates as they are in Gods place, so they must command and
rule according to the will and word of God: they have not received an absolute
power to command what they list, but limited according to the rules of Gods
holy word. The Apostles themselves refused to obey the Magistrates which
enjoined them not to speak in the name of Jesus, Act. 4. 19.

2. Men must have care of their wife and children, whom wilfully for a man to
forsake in casting himself into apparent danger, it were impious.

Contra. Wife and children ought to be loved, and cared for, but the love of
Christ must be preferred: as our Savior says, that he which loves wife or
children, more then me, is not worthy of me, Matthew. 10.

3. But the shedding of Christian blood should be prevented: men should not
offer themselves to apparent danger which gives occasion of much bloodshed.

Contra. 1. The constant servants of God, are not the cause of bloodshed, but
the wicked persecuters, which kill them cruelly and unjustly: as our blessed
Savior says, Ioh. 16. 2. Whosoever kills you, will think he does God good
service: and these things will they do unto you, because they have not known
me. 2. The very death of the righteous is precious in Gods sight, Psalm. 116.
15. and God receives as much honor by the constant death of his Saints, as he
does by their godly life. 3. Otherwise the holy Martyrs should be blameable,
because by their constant profession, murder and bloodshed is occasioned:
whose memory is honorable before God, and man: as Eusebius makes mention of
a certain city in Phrygia, the citizens whereof together with the Magistrates
professing themselves to be Christians, were all put to the sword under the
persecution of Di^cletian and Maximinian, and their city burnt with fire.
Eusebius. lib. 8. c. 11.

4. They object, that it suffices to keep faith and religion in the heart: it
is no^ necessary in time of danger outwardly to profess it.

Contra. 1. S. Paul joins both these together, to believe with the heart, and
to confess with the mouth, Romans 10. 10. 2. Peter denied Christ only with the
mouth, yet he wept bitterly for this his fall* lib. 8. c. 3.
Eusebius writes how the persecutors would draw Christians to their idolatrous
sacrifices, and say they had sacrificed, and yet they did not: who
notwithstanding were reproved, because they in silence suffered such crimes to
be objected: but some would cry out, Homil. 25. in Matthew.
they had not sacrificed, but were Christians. 3. Chrysostom has an excellent
tractate of this, or who else was the author of that imperfect work upon
Matthew, that we must confess Christ with all our senses: and if a man fail
in any of them, it is no perfect confession of Christ: As, though thou do
not eat of things sacrificed to idols, if thou do but look upon them how
beautiful they are, oculis negasti Christum, thou have denied Christ with
thine eyes: If one say unto thee, do but hear how such an one blasphemeth
Christ: if thou hearken, iam auribus tuis negasti Christum, now thou have
denied Christ with thine ears: If it be further said, do but stay and smell
the incense offered to idols, if thou smell, odoratu tuo Christum offendisti,
thou have offended Christ with thy smell: If thou eat not, but seem to taste,
or touch the idolatrous sacrifices, gustu, tactu tuo Christum abnegasti, by thy
taste, by thy touching thou have denied Christ.

4. Pappus here shows five reasons, why the confession of the truth should be
preferred before all dangers or perils whatsoever. 1. There are great
promises, which are made to such as confess Christ here: he will confess them
before his father in heaven, Matthew. 10. 32. 2. Debitum animi grati, the debt of
a thankful mind requires this at our hands, that we should freely confess
the name of God, of whom we receive so many benefits in token of our
thankfulness. 3. The great dangers must be considered, which men by not
confessing of Christ, do cast themselves into: they do hazard their own
souls, Mark. 8. 35. He tha^ (by this means) shall save his life, shall loose
it: and Christ will deny him in heaven, that shall deny Christ in earth,
Matthew. 10. 33. 4. The utility of our brethren, and general good of the
Church, which is edified and builded up by such examples of constancy, ought
to encourage us. 5. And the singular examples of so many holy Martyrs and
confessors of the truth, should embolden us. The Jews when Petronius attempted
to bring in Cesars image into the Church, rather offered themselves to die,
then to suffer it, Joseph. lib. 18. c. 10, 11. Polycarpus when the Roman
governor would have compelled him to swear by Cesars fortune, openly
withstood him, Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 15. And a noble man of Nicomedia pulled down
and rent in pieces the Emperors edict set up against the Christians. Eusebius. l.
8. c. 5.

5. Here I can not omit that distinction of Calvine, of confession, that it is
of two sorts, ^um palam testamur, quod est in animo, when we do publicly
testify what is in our mind: and this is not alwas necessary: the other kind
is, ne aliquod peruersae simulationis signum demus, that we give not any
perverse sign of dissimulation: and this must be perpetually observed: as
Daniel here, though he does not publicly proclaim his faith, yet by his
gesture and behavior he does show it.

4. Controv. That it is not lawful worshipping God to look toward an image.
Because Daniel prayed looking toward Jerusalem, the Romanists may infer,
that it is as lawful to look toward an image, when they worship God: for, as
they allege, they do not worship the image, but God represented by the image.

1. To pray toward Jerusalem was a ceremonial duty for those times: they
looked that way toward the Temple, which was a type of Christ: as they looked
toward the type and figure, so we must turn our eyes toward the body, that
is, look up into heaven where Christ is. 2. They had a commandment to pray
toward the Temple, and had a promise to be heard: but to worship God before an
image is forbidden, and accursed, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. 3. We are not only forbidden
in Scripture to worship any strange god, which is prohibited in the first
commandment; but likewise it is unlawful to worship him in any other manner,
then he himself has prescribed, which thing is against the ^econd
commandment.

5. Controv. Against the Papists and Vbiqui^aries that hold a carnal presence
in the sacrament.
As they offend which look toward an image, when they worship God: so likewise
they that turn themselves with adoration toward the bread in the Eucharist,
supposing there to be the bodily presence of Christ. In both these the
Romanists are offenders. 1. Indeed if the humanity of Christ were corporally
present, as they imagine, adoration were to be yielded unto it: As the Apostle
says, when he brings in his first begotten son into the world, he says,
and let all the Angels of God worship him: wheresoever Christ is present in his
humanity, he is there to be worshipped. 2. Therefore the Vbiquitaries and
Lutherans, which hold an omnipresence of Christ's flesh, and so affirm the same
to be present in the Eucharist, and yet will not have it adored in the
Sacramental bread, cannot justify with any show of reason this their
assertion: for wheresoever Christ is, he is there to be adored and worshipped:
neither need they to expect any new commandement^ (as they allege) far
Thomas, as soon as he knew Christ to be him, whom he felt, he presently
worshipped, saying, my Lord, and my God. 3. But as these are ouerseene, in not
adoring Christ whom they hold to be present, to they both are in error to
maintain a carnal presence, the one with adoration, the other without, which
is a fancy of their own: for the Scripture only commends unto us Christ to
be spiritually by faith eaten and drunken in the Sacrament: as our Blessed
Savor himself, it is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing,
the words that I speak unto you are spirit and life, John. 6. 63.

6. Controv. Of the falfe suggestions of the Papists against Protestants.
Like as these accusers of Daniel could find out no matter of accusation
against him touching his life and office, but entrappe him in his religion, and
do bring him into danger for his sincerity and truth: and then they accuse
him as a contemner of the king, and his decrees, v. 13. The very same course
do the Papists take against the Protestants: whom they cannot touch with any
crime of life, they wind in for their conscience in religion: and they call
that heresy, which is the truth and piety: And then, when they obey not their
wicked and impious decrees, they accuse them as rebels to the Prince: Thus are
the servants of God handled in Italy and Spain: so that there, Omnia cum
liceant, non licet esse pium, when all things else are lawful, it is not
lawful to be godly, Polan.

7. Controv. Of the unjust proceeding of the Romanists in their cruel
inquisition, condemning the Protestants, their cause not being heard.
v. 16. As Daniel was presently brought and cast into the lions den, it was
sufficient to accuse him, he has no liberty given him to answer for himself:
Thus both under the Pagan Emperors of Rome were the Christians proceeded
against, being not suffered to come to their answer: as appears in the
Apology of Justinius and Athenagoras: And this course the Spanish Inquisitors
take in their cruel inquisitions against the Protestants to this day,
condemning them in corners, and never bringing them to public answer, Polan.

8. Controv. Of the practizing of Popes against Princes.
v. 21. O king live for ever. Daniel here prays for the life and prosperity
of the king, who had unjustly persecuted him, and commanded him to be cast
into the lions den: And S. Paul exhorts that supplications should be made
for Kings, who then were heathen and persecutors, 1. Tim. 2. 2. So the
Christians used to pray for the heathen Emperors, wishing unto them vitam
prolixam, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Setum fidelem, a
long life, a quiet Empire, a safe house, strong armies, a faithful Senate, a
good people, etc. Tertull. in Apologet. c. 30.

Contrary hereto has been and yet is the practice of the Popes of Rome: they
pray not for Princes, but rather seek to make a prey of them. They
excommunicate princes, such as favor not their superstition, and stir up
their subjects to rebellion against them. Gregor. 2. and 3. Leo. 3. did
excommunicate the Emperors: Gregor. 7. waged battle against Henry the 4. he
hired one to have brained him with a stone in the Church, but that the
mischeife was prevented, the beam being broken, and the stone falling down,
which drew ^he murderer to the ground after it: Clemens the 5. practiced to
have poisoned Henry of Lucelburg the Emperor, in a consecrated host:
Paschalis the 2. set Henry the 5. against Henry the 4. his father: Adrianus
stirred up the Lombards against Frederike Barbarossa the Emperor, and betrayed
him to the Sultane of Egypt: Such were the practices of late also of that
bloody Sea, against our late renowned Sovereign, as in the conspiracy of
Ballard with his confederates, and of Parrie incited by the counsel and gifts
of the Cardinal of Coinie, to mu^ther our worthy Queen Elizabeth, Polan. And
now since his majesty came unto the crown, first treacherous Watson, with his
adherents attempted against the kings Royal person: and since, that miscreant
crew, Catesbie, Percie, Digbe, with their mates enterprised that monstrous
attempt by gunpowder to have blown up the parliament house, and so at once to
have made havoc of King, Queen, Prince, nobles, and the chief of the
commons.

9. Controv. Whether one is just before God by an inherent justice.
v. 22. My justice was found out before him. It follows not hereupon, because
in this particular act Daniel was innocent before God, that therefore by any
righteousness in us, we are justified before God: the justice whereby we are
justified with God, is the righteousness of Christ imputed unto us by faith,
and is not inherent in us, as the Apostle says, that I may be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
through faith in Christ, Philip. 3. 10. Beside this justice which is unto
eternal life, which is not inherent but imputed, there is, iustitia
temporaria, a temporary justice or righteousness which is our innocence and
holiness, which is called our Sanctification, and this is inherent in us, the
first is called, iustitia personae, the righteousness of the person, which is
justified by faith in Christ, the other is, iustitia causae, the righteousness
of our cause. See more of this question of inherent justice, Synops. Centur.
err. 56.

10. Controv. Whether Daniels innocence were the meritorious cause of his
deliverance.
According to the reading of the vulgar Latin, because my righteousness is
found out before him, hence this collection is made by the Romanists, that
Daniels innocence was the cause of his deliverance.

Contra. 1. The word is not well translated, quia, or quoniam, because, but
rather, propterea: therefore, as Iun. and Polan. for so the words, col kebel
di, may be translated: and then the meaning is, that this deliverance of Daniel
was only a testimony of his innocence, and to show the goodness of his
cause.

2. But if it be translated, quia, because, it is not always taken as a
causall, but as an illatiue particle, a word only of inference and
consequence, as cap. 2. 43. whereas thou saw iron mixed with clay, there the
very same words are used, yet is it not there taken as a causall: for the
kings vision and dream, was no cause of the things to come, which were
revealed unto him: so Psalm. 25. 11. David says, be merciful unto mine
iniquity, for it is great: the greatness of his sin was not the cause of
forgiveness: this conjunction therefore always shows not the cause.

3. There is great difference between these two, for ones innocence to be
found before God, and for the same innocence to merit: for to merit is
required that a man should do some work, dignum compensatione, worthy of
compensation: but innocence is not man's work, it is Gods work in man: for if
the innocence and godnesse of the cause should deserve a temporal deliverance,
then God should have dealt unjustly with many martyrs, which have not been
temporally delivered, Polan.

4. The cause then of Daniels deliverance, was indeed the faith of Daniel, as
it follows, v. 13. there was no hurt found upon him, because he believed in
his God. And so the Apostle testifies, Heb. 11. that Daniel by faith stopped
the mouths of lions, and ex hac vera fide sequitur innocentia vitae, and out
of this faith proceeded his innocence as a fruit thereof, Osiand, for
otherwise without his faith, though this cause had been never so good, it
should not have been accepted.

5. Here also we must distinguish between eternal deliverance, and temporal:
God delivers us from everlasting death, not for any respect of any
righteousness in us, but freely of his own grace he respects us in Christ:
but in particular deliverances, Deus potest respicere vniuscuiusque iustitiam,
God may respect every ones righteousness, not as it is theirs, but as it is
wrought in the by his spirit, Call. So then as Melancthon says, here are three
things to be considered, says whereby we are acceptable unto God: and so it is
said here, that Daniel believed in his God: inchoata obedientia, our inchoate
obedience, which is accepted with God, because we are justified by faith: and
our righteousness, whereby we are just before men: both these are also here
expressed in Daniel, my justice was found out before God, and unto thee O king
have I done no hurt: To conclude then this point, a man's particular justice and
innocence is rather an antecedent of his deliverance then a cause. And in some
sort it may be said to be a cause also, yet not of it self, but as it
concurreth with faith, for the which the Lord respects us, and our obedience,
though imperfect in Christ, Iun. in comment.

11. Controv. That a general faith, called fides implicita, an implied faith,
is not sufficient.
v. 23. Because he believed in God: not as the Latin has, he believed God,
for in the text there is the preposition beth: And hereby is signified, not a
general apprehension only, that God was true of his promises, and that he was
the only true God, creator of heaven and earth: as the Romanists do affirm
faith to be nothing else, but generally to believe, what soever is contained in
the word of God to be true, Bellar. lib. 1. de iustifi. c. 4. But Daniel here
so believed in God, that he committed himself with firm trust and assurance
unto him, and in eius gratiam recubuit, he relied wholly upon his grace,
Calvin. And so the Apostle describes faith, Heb. 11. 6. He that comes unto
God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek
him: this faith only apprehends not God in general, that he is, but is
joined with a particular assurance, that he will reward his faithful servants,
and bring them unto life. And so Pintus one of their own writers, very well
resolves upon this place, vt mea fert opinio, credere hoc loco est actus
fidei, charitate formatae, plenae fiducia in Deum: as mine opinion is, to
believe in this place is an act of faith, formed (that is expressed) by
charity, full of trust and confidence in God.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observat. Of Gods providence that watches over his servants.
Generally in this chapter, in that God delivered Daniel his faithful servant,
from the rage of the lions, we see how Gods fatherly care watches and awaketh
toward his servants: so Noah was saved from the waters, Lot from the flames of
Sodom, Jeremy in the destruction of Jerusalem* Plutarch in vit^ Marcell.
We read that when the city of Syracus^ was taken by M. Marcellus, which
(...) that great Mathematician had defended a good while by his art and skill:
of whom Marcellus gave charge, that he should be spared, yet he was slain by a
soldier, as he was drawing of his lines, because he would not straitway
follow him to their General, saying he would dispatch that, he had in hand,
first: But God has greater care of his, and continually protecteth them,
Bulling.

2. Observat. Of the monstrous sin of envy.
v. 4. They sought occasion against Daniel. Envious men are always in
excubijs, they are set in their watch, observing and marking other men's doings,
to see if they can find any matter against them, Polan. 2. they are envious at
other men's virtue, as here they cannot endure Daniels piety and sincerity:
like as the hen scraping in the dunghill contemns a pearl, and prefers
a barley curnell: and as the Sun beams are offensive to those, that are
bleare eyed: so is virtue a grief to the envious, Pintus. 3. The envious
person, propriae vtilitati est addictus, is addict to his own profit,
neglecting the common good: as here these men seek to supplant Daniel, who was
so necessary for the commonwealth. 4. And beside envy brings (...) to (...)
most cruell^ against Daniels life, Calvin. ^ 5. The remedy against envy is
(...) our selves with innocen^ie and integrity, as Daniel did, that the (...)
find (...) S. Peter says, when they speak evil of us as of evil doers, they
may be ashamed, which blame our good conversation in Christ, 1. Pet. 3. 16.

3. Observe. We must not give over our profession, notwithstanding any danger
objected.
v. 10. Daniel though he knew of this bloody decree will not intermit calling
upon God: so etiamsi centum mortes nobis occurrant, though an hundred deaths be
set before us, we should not fall away from the true worship of God, Calvin. as
S. Paul's excellent resolution was, Act. 2. 13. Iam readi^ not only to be
bound, but to die at Ier^salem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

4. Observe. Of continuing in prayer.
v. 10. As Daniel prayed thrice a day, so thereby we are taught to persevere in
prayer, according to S. Paul's rule, Romans 12. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. for prayer is
not auayleable unless it be seruent, Iam. 5. 16. and fervent it cannot be, if
we give over and faint in our prayers, and continue not.

5. Observe. Of the terror of conscience.
v. 18. The king remained fasting. The Kings conscience was perplexed for this
injustice showed toward Daniel: he cares neither for meat, delight, nor
sleep: he had none in earth whom he needed to fear: but his conscience
accuses him before the great Judge, that shall call even kings to account: As
it is written of Theodoricus king of Italy, after he had caused B^etius and
Symmachus to be unjustly beheaded, how within a few days after a fishes head
being brought before him, he imagined he saw Symmachus head, and thereupon was
stricken with horror of conscience, and not long after died: let us then labor
for a good conscience, Pro. 15. 15.
which is as a continual feast. And here shall be an end of this first Book,
which is as the first course and service in this feast.

Praised be God.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THIS COMMENTARY UPON THE DIVINE PROPHECY OF DANIEL:
containing the second part thereof, consisting of the Prophesies and visions
set forth in the six last Chapters: Wherein that mystical and Prophetical
vision of the seauentie weeks in the 9. Chapter, is handled at large, with the
diverse Expositions thereof, and the approbation of the best.

Printed by CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1610

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT, VIRTUOUS, AND Right noble Prince; HENRY by the grace
of God, Prince of Wales, and heir apparent to the most famous Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, his gracious Lord.
RIght Noble Prince, it may seem strange to some, that I offer unto your
princely view, in these your Highness young and flourishing years, a
Commentary upon the most difficult and obscure book of the old Testament: But
I trust your Highness shall not think it unseasonable, to be acquainted with
the mysteries of holy Scripture in this your princely youth: 2. King. 24. 2.
As Josias that godly king of Judah, 2. Chron. 34. 3.
at the sixteenth year of his age did set his heart to seek the Lord, and
read unto his people out of the book of God: So did Honorius the young Emperor
season his first years with true religion and piety: As Ambrose joins them
both together: Honorius iam pulsat adolescentiae fores, In obit. Theod. s.
prouectior aetate quam Josias, Hebrewe^. R. Saadiah. R. Levi. R. Ezra. R.
Salamon. R. Moses.
Honorius now stands at the next door to be a young man, somewhat elder then
Josias: S. Luke wrote his Gospel to noble Theophilus, which name is
interpreted, one that loves God: whereupon Ambrose thus notes, si Deum
diligis, ad te scriptum est, and if thou love God, it is written to thee.
Greeks. Josephus. Origin. Theodoret. Oecumenius.


Touching the obscurity of this book, it is such, as that it is tempered as
well with variety of history to delight, as with profunditie of mysteries to
exercise the Reader: Latins. Ireneus. Tertullian. Eusebius. Hierome.
Augustin^. Bernard. Rupertus. Lyraenus. Dionys. Carthu^*
as Augustine well says of the Scripture in general, si nusquam aperta esset,
non te pasceret, si nusquam occulta, non te exerceret, if it were no where
plain and open, it would not feed thee, if no where obscure, it would not
exercise thee.

This part of the Treatise I have presumed to offer to your Highness, as the
former part I was bold to present to his Majesty. New writers. Protestants.
Melancthon. Oecolampad. Calvin. Pelican. Osiander. Pappus. Fulke. Napeir. H.
Brough. Polanus. Genevens.
This prophecy treats chiefly of the alteration and change of States and
Kingdoms: of the honor and prosperity of good Kings, and of the ruin and
bad success of hard and cruel Potentates: here we have the most clear
prophecy in the Old Testament of the Messiah the Prince of Princes. These are
subjects fit for Princes meditations, and matter meet for noble spirits to be
occupied in.

I have omitted no means (to my power) to help to furnish this matter: I have
therein abridged the best Commentaries, and Writers both old and new, as they
are set down in the margen: Romanists. Hug. Cardin. Caietan. Arias Ma^^.
Vatablu^. Pererius. Pintu^. Rhemists, with others.
and some of them, which were decennali cur a elaborati, with ten years
travel set forth, as Pererius confesses in his Epistle Dedicatorie. This
labor I have undertaken, not so much to redeem the time, which otherwise
might be misspent: for as Seneca says, maxima pars vitae elabitur male
agentibus, magna nihil agentibus, tota aliud agentibus, the greatest part of a
man's life passes away in doing evil, a great part in doing of nothing, and
almost the whole, in doing other things then we should: neither herein do I
expect any terrene reward or recompense: The heathen Orator could say, 4. (...).
Nullam mercedem virtus, quam hanc laudis gloriaeque desiderat, virtue desires
no other reward then praise and glory: not that vain praise of men in this
life, which they hunted for, having no knowledge of God: but the praise of God
in the next world: I chiefly then have propounded to my self the profit of the
Church of God: for as every one that lives in the commonwealth, ought to
seek the good thereof: so every member of the Church should labor some way or
other, for the edifying of the whole: If any mislike my diligence in writing,
as this age wants not carpers, I much pass not for their unfriendly censure,
so that I may do good to others: and here I may say again with the Orator,
(...).
Malui multis post diebus sententiam meam laudari, quam a multis hodie
reprehendi, I had rather that my endeavor many days hereafter should be
commended, then now of a few reprehended. I have heretofore exercised my pen
in handling of controversies against the common adversary, and as I was
provoked, have written also in mine own defense, both against foreign enemies,
(...)
and some domestical: But now, those occasions being if not altogether
removed, yet somewhat intermitted, I have propounded unto my self this course
in the explaning of Scripture: In which kind, as heretofore I have exhibited to
your Highness a brief and compendiarie Treatise upon some part of Scripture,
Harmony upon the 1. of Samuel.
so now I make amends with a larger Commentary, whereof your princely piety,
virtue, clemency (of the which of late I have had particular experience) do
promise and even assure me of your gracious acceptance: I then in sign of my
duty and thankfulness, together with these my labors, do offer my self, and
my best service to your Highness: whom I beseech God so to bless and increase
with all spiritual and princely gifts, that the age following may say of your
Highness, as Ambrose of Honorius after the decease of that good Emperor
Theodosius, Ambros. in obit. Theodos.
Tantus Imperator recessit a nobis, sed non totus excessit, reliquit enim nobis
liberos suos, in quibus debemus eum agnoscere.

Your Highness ready to be commanded in all duty and service; ANDREW WILLET.

CHAP. VII.
1. The Argument and Method.
THis Chapter contains, 1. a vision of four beasts rising out of the Sea: 2.
the interpretation thereof.

1. In the vision, 1. are set forth certain circumstances, of the time, when,
the person, to whom this vision was showed, and the manner how, v. 1, 2. 2.
the matter of the vision, which is, 1. of the four beasts, of their
flourishing and prosperous estate, to v. 9. then of the judgment of God
against them, v. 15.

The beasts are described, 1. in general, v. 3. by the efficient cause, the
winds blew; by the number, they are four; by the place, they came out of the
Sea; by their quality, they were one diverse from an other.

2. In particular. 1. the three beasts are briefly set forth, v. 4, 5, 6. which
are every one expressed, 1. by their similitude or resemblance, by their parts,
and by their events. 2. the fourth beast is described in general, by the
quality, it was fearful and strong, the parts, it had iron teeth, and ten
horns, and by the effects, it devoured, etc. then the little horn is
particularly set forth. 1. by the quality of it and the place, it was a little
one, and came up among the other horns. 2. by the effects, it plucked away
three other horns. 3. by the parts, the eyes and mouth.

2. The second part of the vision is of the judgment. 1. the manner and form,
see the parts thereof, quest. 30. following. 2. the effects, which are two, 1.
in the destruction of the fourth beast, v. 11. and of the other with it, v. 12.
2. in setting up the kingdom of Christ, where 1. his person is described, 1.
by his name, the Son of man. 2. by the place, in the clouds. 3. by his
authority, he approached to the Ancient of days. 2. his kingdom is described
by the universality of it, all nations shall serve him: and the eternity, it
shall be for ever.

2. The interpretation follows. 1. the manner first is showed how he came by
the interpretation of it, v. 15, 16. An Angel declared it. 2. then the
interpretation it self is set down. 1. of the beasts. 2. of the judgment.
The beasts are expounded in general, v. 17. then in particular, the fourth
beast: where is first a repetition of the vision, v. 19. to 23. then the
declaration, 1. of the fourth beast, v. 23. 2. of the ten horns, v. 24. 3.
of the little home, what it shall do, it shall rage against kings, against
God, against his people: and how long, v. 25.

Then the judgment is set forth by the two effects thereof, the destruction of
all other kingdoms, and the advancing of the kingdom of Christ, v. 26, 27.

The conclusion follows, which shows the effect of this vision in Daniel by
these three operations. 1. his perplexed cogitations. 2. the change of his
countenance. 3. his deep meditation, I kept it in mine heart.

2. The text with the diverse readings.
1* In the first ( one. C.) year of Belshatzar king of Babel, Daniel saw a
dream, and visions of his head ( were G. B.) upon his bed: then he wrote the
dream, and declared the sum ( the head. C.) of the matter.

2 Daniel spoke, and said, (L. det.) I saw in my vision by night, and behold,
the four winds of heaven strove ( did fight, C.) upon, (or in, I.) the great
Sea:

3 And four great beasts came up from the Sea, diverse one from an other (this
from that. C.)

4 The first was as a Lion ( lioness. L. cor.) and had eagles wings: I beheld,
till the wings thereof were plucked off, and it was lifted up from the earth, V.
A. B. G. (better, then taken away from the earth, L. S. for the Chaldean
Monarchy hereby expressed, was not utterly dissolved: or by the which (wings)
it was lifted from the earth, I. Pol. for the decaying state of this Monarchy
is signified: and the meaning is, that whereas it had before eagles wings, and
did soa^e aloft, it could now scarce heave or carry it self from the ground)
and set ( caused to stand. C.) upon his feet, as a man* and a man's heart was
given him.

5 And behold an other beast, the second was like unto a bear, and it stood
upon one side ( it stood on part, L. det. it erected one dominion. I. B. but
the other reading is the better, see q^. 14. following) and he had three ribs
( three orders. L. three morfels, V.) in his mouth between his teeth, and they
said thus unto him, Arise and devour much flesh.

6 After this I beheld, ( I was seeing. C.) and lo, there was an other like a
leopard, and it had four wings of a foul upon his back, ( upon him, L.) and
dominion was given him.

7 After this I saw in the visions of the night, ( by night. B. G.) and behold,
the fourth beast was fearful and terrible, and exceeding ( maruelously, B.
very, G. too strong. L.) strong: and it had great iron teeth, it devoured, and
brake in pieces, and stamped the residue under his feet: and it was diverse
from ( unlike to. L. B. G. but the preposition (min) signifies from) the
beasts that were before it: and it had ten^e horns.

8 I considered the horns, and behold the last horn being little I. (an
other little horn, caeter, but (achari) signifies the last, as well as an
other) did come up among them, and three of the first horns were plucked away
before it, and behold eyes as the eyes of a man, were in this horn, and a
mouth speaking presumptuous things ( great things. C.)

9 I beheld, till the thrones were set up, ( taken away. I. V. but the words
following, which describe Gods glorious sitting in his throne, do confirm
rather the first reading) and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was
white as snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool: his throne was like
the flame of fire, and the wheels thereof ( that is, of his throne: for so the
use was for Princes thrones to be set upon wheels) as burning fire.

10 A stream of fire issued, and came forth from before him: thousand
thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand (not ten
thousand thousand. B. G. or ten thousand times an hundred thousand. L. S. the
word is (rhibo) which signifies ten thousand, in the which sense (rebobah)
is taken, Levit. 26. 8.) stood before him: the judgment was set, and the
books opened.

11 Then I beheld from the time that the voice of presumptuous words begun,
I. V. (from the voice of presumptuous words. C. because of the voice of
presumptuous words, caeter. but the preposition (min) signifies (from) which
the horn spoke: I beheld, until (not, because. L.) the beast was slain, and
his body destroyed, and given to be brent in the fire. B. (unto the burning of
the fire. C.)

12 And of the rest of the beasts there dominion was taken away, ( they had
taken away, C.) but their lives were prolonged ( a length or space in life was
given them) for a time and season ( a time and time. L. A. but there are two
diverse words used in the original.)

13 I beheld in the visions of the night, and behold with the ( in the. V. B.
G. but the preposition signifies with) clouds of heaven one like the Son of
man coming: and he approached unto the Ancient of days, and they presented
him before him.

14 And dominion was given him, I. V. S. (he gave him dominion. L. B. G. but
the verb is of the passive signification) and honor, and a kingdom, that all
people, nations, and languages should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall not fail ( pass away. C. shall not be taken away. L. B.
G.) and his kingdom is that, which shall not be destroyed ( corrupted. C.)

15 My spirit was troubled ( pierced. C.) yea I Daniel in the mids of my
body, V. (I Daniel was troubled in spirit in the mids. B. G. L.) and the
visions of my head made me afraid:

16 I came then unto one of the standers by, and asked him the truth of all
this: so he told me, and showed me ( made me to understand. C.) the
interpretation of these things.

17 These great beasts, which are four, are four kings ( not kingdoms, L. S.
yet that is the meaning) which shall arise out of the earth.

18 And they shall take the kingdom of the most high Saints (not the most high
Saints shall take the kingdom. L. V. and it is better read, the most high
Saints, V. I. then Saints of the most high. L. B. G. for the word (high) is in
the original in the plural number) and they, ( that is the Saints, see qu.
48.) shall possess the kingdom for ever, yea for ever, and ever.

19 After this I desired (or wished, I.) to know the truth concerning the
fourth beast which was so diverse from ( unlike to, B. G.) all these, exceeding
fearful, whose teeth were of iron, and his nails of brass: he devoured, and
brake in pieces, and stamped the residue under his feet.

20 Also concerning the ten horns, which were in his head, and of the last,
Iun. (the other, caeter. see before, v. 8.) which came up, and three horns
fell before it: of this horn ( I say) which had eyes, and a mouth speaking
presumptuous things, whose look was more stout ( great, C.) then his fellows.

21 I beheld, and the same horn made battle with ( against, L. B. G.) the
Saints, and prevailed against them.

22 Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given unto the most
high Saints: ( Saints of the most high, L. S. see before, v. 18.) and the time
approached, that the Saints possessed the kingdom.

23 Thus also he said, The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom in the
earth, which shall be diverse from ( unlike to. B. G. greater then. L. S.) all
the kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and
break it in pieces.

24 And ten horns out of this kingdom ( that is, ten kings shall arise:
and the last ( I. Br. an other. L. S. V. see before, v. 8.) shall rise up after
them, and he shall be diverse from the former ( not greater. L. or shall over
come all the evil, that were before him. S.) and he shall subdue three kings,

25 And he shall speak words against the most high (better then on the side,
or behalf of the most high. A. or of divine things. V. the word (letzad) here
signifies against) and shall consume (not deceive. S.) the Saints of the most
high, and he shall think that he may change times and the law, ( laws, L. S.)
and they shall be delivered into his hand, V. L. (by his hand. I.) until a
time, and times and the dividing of time. ( a long time or a short. V. the
half of time. L. a part of time. I. pelag signifies a part or division.)

26 But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, in
consuming and destroying it I. (to consume and destroy it. B. G.) unto the end.

27 And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdoms (not
kingdom, L. B. G. for the word is in the plural, nor of the kings. S.) shall
be given to the people of the high Saints, A. V. B. (the people of the Saints
of the most high. L. the most holy people of the most high. G. but the word
(galonin) is in the plural, and answers to Saints) whose kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and all powers shall serve and obey it. B. (him. G. that
is, the people before spoken of.)

28 Hitherto the end of these words (of this matter hitherto. V. or, this is
the end of the matter. G.) even me Daniel many cogitations troubled V.
(troubled me. C. a pleonasm^s. better: then as for me Daniel, many cogitatious
troubled me. Pol. or I Daniel had many cogitations, which troubled. B. G. for
here many words are inserted not in the original) and my countenance changed
in me: but I kept the words ( the matter. G.) in mine heart.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. Of the order observed by Daniel, in the setting down of these
visions.
This vision contained in this chapter, being showed unto Daniel in the first
year of Balthazar, who was the last king of the Chaldeans, and before Darius,
under whom that miracle fell out, in Daniels deliverance from the lions, c. 6.
is a manifest argument that the former story is transposed; this vision in
time coming before it, yet in order being placed after it: the reasons hereof
are these. 1. Theodoret says, that in the former six chapters, historico more
prophetiam conscripsit, he writ the prophecy after an historical manner,
showing what things happened under Nebuchadnezzer, Balthazar, Darius; but in
the six chapters following, he sets down those predictions, quas^ per
diuinam reuelationem doctus est, which he was taught by divine revelation. 2.
Hierome does add further, that in the former chapters Daniel historically
sets down, quid mirabilium signorum acciderit, etc. what memorable signs
happened under these kings; but in the rest of this book he declares such
visions, quarum solus propheta conscius est, which the Prophet only was privy
unto himself. 3. Hugo gives this reason: the things before historically
rehearsed, tempore suo impleta sunt, were such as were fulfilled in Daniels
time; but these here following were visiones futurorum, visions of things to
come to pass afterward. 4. Further, in the former histories God had appointed
Daniel, interpretem and magistrum profanis regibus, an interpreter and teacher
unto the profane kings: nunc praefecit Ecclesiae doctorem, now he set him up as
an instructor of his Church, Calvin. 5. The former histories and miracles
showed the calling of Daniel, and the confirmation thereof by signs and
miracles: in these chapters Daniel exercises his vocation and function, in his
prophetical visions, Iun. 6. Lyranus beside the reason before touched, that
the former visions were partly historical, partly prophetical, and therefore
were set down together, but these visions are mere propheticae, merely
prophetical; assigns also this reason, that the former visions belong unto
the first coming of Christ, and therefore are set together: these following
concern his second coming: but this is not so, for c. 9. there is a manifest
prophecy of the first coming of the Messiah, and the very time is described:
and though mention be made by the way (as it were) of the resurrection, and the
final judgment, c. 12. yet the visions are principally intended to foretell
such things, as should befall the Church of the Jews before the first coming
of the Messiah.

2. Quest. Of the visions which follow in general.
1. Bullinger reduces all the visions following unto four, making the visions
in the 3. last chapters but one: for it is a continuance of the same prophecy:
wherein the condition of the Church is described under the state of the
Persians and Grecians, especially under Antiochus Epiphanes. c. 11. 2. Lyranus
makes five visions of them, thus distinguishing them: the first, c. 7.
significat (vltimae) tribulationis totalem processum, signifies the total
proceeding in the last tribulation of (that) Church: the second, c. 8. which
treats of the combat between the Persians and Grecians, designat ^iusdem
tribulationis principalem conflictum, does design the principal conflict of
that tribulation: the third, c. 9. which prophecieth of the coming of the
Messiah: and so, designat eiusdem tribulationis solatium, it shows the
comfort in the same tribulation: the fourth vision is of the man which
appeared, prophesying of the deliverance of the people, and designat eiusdem
tribulationis terminum, and shows the end of that tribulation, c. 10. the
fifth is of the victory of Christ under the sign and figure of the king of the
South, and the king of the North, and designat eiusdem tribulationis triumphum,
it sets forth the triumph over that tribulation. c. 11. But, as is showed
before, the same vision is contained and continued, c. 10, 11, 12. 3. This
vision in this chapter is general of the state of the four Monarchies, which
afterward are particularly described: like as Cosmographers in the description
of the world, do first set forth a general map of the whole world, and then
particular tables of several countries: the same order Daniel observes in
these visions: in the 7. chapter, he is informed concerning the general
condition and state of the four kingdoms: then in the 8. follows a
particular narration of the Persian and Grecian Monarchy: and in the 11. chap.
a more large description of particular accidents under the divided kingdoms of
the Grecians, one of the South, the other of the North. Bulling.

4. The sum then of these visions following is this. 1. The state of the
Church of the Jews is described, how they shall suffer much affliction under
the four Monarchies, but especially under the fourth. 2. But the affliction
shall be but for a time, it shall end at the coming of the Messiah: who shall
of many be refused, and put to death, whereupon shall follow the destruction of
Jerusalem, and dissolution of the Leuiticall state^ 3. And then Christ at his
second coming shall perfect all: the dead shall rise, some unto life, some
unto everlasting condemnation.

3. Quest. Of visions in general.
1. Two ways did the Lord reveal himself unto his servants, either by oracle
and lively voice, as he spoke to Moses face to face, Numb. 12. 6. or by vision;
wherein certain representations and similitudes of things were exhibited for
the more lively demonstration of that thing which was revealed: in which
visions sometime the truth it self of things to come was simply manifested
without any other shadow, as Ezekiel. 40. sometime under the similitude of beasts
and other things, demonstration was made, as here, c. 7, 8.

2. Visions were showed either unto men waking, or sleeping: and being waking
they either saw them with their eyes, as Abraham was bid to behold the stars,
for so should his ^eede be in multitude, Genesis 15. 5. or in the mind, as in a
trance: such was the vision of the (...) cornerd sheet which Peter saw, Act.
10.

^. And visions also were declared unto men by dream, when they were a sleep
in the (...) as unto Jacob was showed while he slept, that vision of the
ladder, Genesis 28.

(...). This vision which Daniel saw was of both kinds: it was both a dream,
and a vision: (...) showed unto Daniel partly in his sleep, and partly being
awake: God did give a b^essing unto Daniels religious care to know the vision,
visione redintegrans id ipsum, quod (...) per somnum exhibuerat, renewing the
same thing by vision, which he had exhibited before by dream, Inn.

Quest. 4. Of the time when this vision was re^^aled unto Daniel.
V. 1. In the first year^ of Belshazzar, etc. 1. ^ererius says that this first
year of Belshazzar, whom he supposes to have reigned 17. years, was 18.
years before the deliverance of Israel out of captivity, which was the 54.
year of their captivity, and from the building of Rome, the 176^ year, when
^^quinius Priscus was king of the Romans: But Pe^^^ius in this reckoning
commits diverse errors. 1. Belshazzar reigned not 17. years, but three
years only: as has been showed before, cap. 5. quest. 51. 2. the 54. year
of the captivity was indeed the 18. year before their deliverance, but the
first year of Belshazzar was in the 68. year of their captivity, 3. year
before they were delivered. 3. the 54. year of the captivity did concur
with the 190. year after the building of Rome, in the reign of Seruius
Tullius, not of Tarquinius Priscus, as Bullinger well collecteth in his tables.

2. Pelanus also is deceived, which thinks that this vision in the first
year of Belshazar, was 17. years before the end of the captivity, for so
long he thinks Belshazar to ^^ue reigned: which was in the 34^9. year from
the beginning of the world, and 552. before the coming of Christ: But three
years only must be allowed unto Belshazar: Berosus gives unto him but 5.
years, as M^t^she^es reports him in his book de iudicio temporum: and the
17. year before the captivity ended, was according to Bullinger^ account, in
the year of the world 3408. H. Br. in his account much varieth for the year
of the world, making the first year of Belshazar to fall into the year 3407.
In these accounts there is great uncertainty, every one following his own
conjecture.

3. Herein therefore I approve rather Bullingers judgment, that this first
year of Belshazar, was only three years before the 70. years ended: for
Daniel makes mention only of the third year of Belshazar, c. 8. 1. and now
the time of their deliverance approached, and was near at hand, Oecolamp.

Quest. 5. Why the vision of the four Monarchies is again revealed unto
Daniel, being showed before to Nebuchadnezzar, cap. 2.
1. The vision which Nebuchadnezzar saw was more obscure, aspiciunt quidem
aliquid impij, sed in caligine, vt nihil distinguant, the wicked indeed see
somewhat, but darkely, they cannot distinctly perceive any thing: This vision
which Daniel has of the same thing is more distinct and manifest, Calvin.

2. An other reason of this repetition, is for more certainty: as Pharaoh had
two dreams signifying the same thing, vt firmitatis indicium sit r^petiti^
illa, that the repeating thereof might be a token of the firmness and
certainty, Pap. and ^ine noua repetitione non tam attenti essent Iudaei, etc.
without a renewing of that vision, the Jews would not have been so attent
unto the prophesies, Calvin.

3. Beside, it was requisite, that Belshazar and his people, the times being
now much declined, should be admonished, as Nebuchadnezzar was: and therefore
this vision is only written in the Chalde, that they might be without excuse:
the rest of the visions following are not imparted unto them, because the
Chaldes went on in their impiety, and showed themselves obstinate, Iun. in
comment.

4. And in respect of the people of God, it was necessary, that the same
vision in substance should be revealed, now upon the point of their
deliverance, that they should not promise unto themselves a quiet state, no not
after they were come o^t of captivity, but should know, that still they must
be exercised under affliction, Calvin, Genevens.

Quest. 6. What manner of vision this was which Daniel here had, and how it was
revealed.
1. This prophetical vision was two ways showed unto Daniel, first by a
dream, which was sent of God; and then this vision was revealed unto him
again being awake: he saw it in his mind, Polanus. and therefore he calls
them the visions of his head: composita and sobria mente ab ipso visa, they
were seen and perceived of the Prophet with a sober and well advised mind,
Bulling, therefore he says, I saw a dream, he porceiued and understood:
Nebuchadnezzar had a dream, but he understood it not, Calvin.

2. This dream came in the night: which signifies as Pelican* quod
annuntiantur grauia, that many heavy things are declared; for the night is
taken in Scripture for tribulation: But this rather was the meetest time for
such visions, when the mind was freest from all other encumbrances: and when
the external senses are quiet, facilius recipitur cognitto supernaturalium,
the knowledge of supernatural things is more easily received, Lyran.

3. This vision Daniel commits to writing: some think, eum repent
exilijsse ex lecto, that he of a sudden leaped out of his bed, least he
should forget the dreame^ but that is a frivolous collection: hereby is
signified, that Daniel knowing that this things was revealed unto him, not for
himself, but for the general use of the Church, commits the same to
writing, Calvin. And where it is said. Daniel spoke and said, this is to be
understood of the writing, as is ^uident in the first verse; he wrote the
dream, and declared the sum of the matter, that is, in writing.

Quest. 7. What is meant by the four winds which strove together upon the Sea.
1. Hierome by these four winds understands the good Angels, who are
compared to the winds in three respects. 1. for their celeritie. 2. because
they are invisible. 3. and are known only of us by their effects, as the
winds are: and these good Angels do strive for the good of those several
countries, over the which they are set: as the Angel which was president of
Chaldea, labored that the Jews might remain still in captivity for the
instruction of the Chaldeans: the Angel of the Hebrews, endeavored that they
might be delivered: But, neither have the good Angels such special regiments
assigned unto them, neither are their endeauours contrary each unto other,
neither do any of them labor against the people of God, but they do all
minister for the elects sake.

2. Albertus Magnus (so also Hugo, Lyranus,) understands here the evil
Angels, which are said to fight and strive, because they stir up men to
strife and contention: but these are called the winds or spirits of heaven,
which title is not given unto evil Angels.

3. Pererius by these four principal winds which do blow from the 4.
corners of the earth, would have signified the 4. Monarchies, whereof one was
in the North, an other in the South, one West, another East: But the four
Monarchies and kingdoms are understood by the four beasts, which rise out of
the Sea.

4. Theodoret understands by these winds, the great commotions and
perturbations, quae in exortu cuiusque monarchiae extiterant, which were raised
in the beginning of every Monarchy: for Darius and Cyrus by tumult of war
overcame Balshazar: so did Alexander the great the last Darius of Persia: And
thus the Monarchies were translated not without great vexation and trouble: so
also Bullinge^, Osiander. but these stirs and commotions follow upon the
rising of these beasts, as procured by them: these winds go before, and bring
forth these beasts.

5. Pelican by the winds understands the afflictions and persecutions of
the Church: but these beasts were the causes of these afflictions: the winds
go before, and are the causes of their coming forth.

6. Calvin thinks that Daniel, similitudinem notam ominibus assumit, both
take a similitude well known unto all: for the winds do not blow so much
upon the solid earth, as upon the liquid Sea: by this similitude he shows
that the world shall be like a troublesome Sea.

7. Iunius thinks that mention is made of the winds, quia Deus solitus est
seruos su^s praemisso ventorum impetu praeparare, because God uses to prepare
his servants by sending the winds before, when they receive any visions as
Elias was so prepared, 1. King. 19.

8. But beside these allusions, specially by these words is expressed the
ministry of the Angels, who are compared to winds, Psalm. 104. 4. which makes
the spirits or winds his messengers, so Revel. 7. 1. the four Angels are said
to hold the four winds of the earth, that they should not blow: not that
particular countries are assigned to the custody of Angels; which conceit is
refuted before: but hereby is signified, that the Angels are like the winds
dispersed every where in the world, as ministers of Gods will, Iun. Polan.

9. Now whereas it is expounded afterward what the beasts signify, v. 17. but
not what the words betoken, the reason is, the harder and hidden things are
expounded, and some things are pretermitted, tanquam per se manifesta, as
manifest of themselves, Oecolamp.

Quest. 8. Of the description of these beasts in general.
1. The cause is set forth, which raises up these beasts, the winds, which
signify the ministering spirits, which are as swift as the winds to expedite
the business committed unto them.

2. The place or subject is expressed, where these winds blow and work, the
world, which is compared unto a Sea, in respect of the turbulent and changeable
state thereof.

3. Then follows a description of the effect, the bringing forth of these
beasts, which are described, 1. by their number, they are four. 2. they are
great. 3. by the manner, they ascend, by degrees these terrene Monarchies
attained to their power and strength. 4. by the matter, they all came out of
the Sea, they are all terrene and earthly. 5. by their fashion and form, they
are one unlike an other.

Quest. 9. Why the kings and kingdoms of the earth are likened unto beasts.
1. In that kings are resembled unto beasts, it is not spoken in disgrace of
the honorable calling of Magistrates, which is the ordinance of God: and in
these Monarchies there were some good Princes, as Cyrus, Artaxerxes, which
favored the people of God: 2. But because many of those great kings were
Tyrants, and oppressed the people of God, they are termed beasts: as Hierome
says, regnorum feritas bestiarum nomine demonstratur, the cruelty of those
kingdoms is showed by the name of beasts. 3. So that which is essential in
the calling of princes, namely, the institution and ordinance of God, is not
here signified, but that which is accidental in them, the abuse of their
government, which proceeds not from the institutor, or institution, but from
themselves, Calvin. Polan.

Quest. 10. Of the agreement between this vision of the 4. beasts, and that of
the image showed to Nebuchadnezzar, cap. 2.
1. As there the king saw a great image, so here the Prophet names a great
Sea. 2. here four beasts came up, and there the image is compounded of four
mettalls, gold, silver, brass, and iron, which represent the four great
Monarchies and kingdoms. 3. as there the iron and clay feet had their toes,
which in number are ten, so the last beast here has ten horns, v. 7. 4.
there the kingdoms are likened to an image, and here they come out of the Sea,
to show the mutable and changeable state of the world. 5. there a stone cut
out of the mountain without hands, breaks the image in pieces: here also one
like the son of man takes upon him the kingdom, rule, and dominion,
Oecolamp. ex Eusebius.

But yet herein is the difference between these two visions. 1. both in respect
of the manner: that which is but there obscurely propounded, is here more
evidently handled, Iun. commentar. 2. and of the person: There Nebuchadnezzar
had a dream, but understood nothing: here Daniel sees a dream, he has a
revelation in his dream, and the illumination of mind withal to understand
it, Calvin.

Quest. 11. Of the first beast representing the Chaldean Monarchy.
Concerning this Monarchy two things are declared. 1. The flourishing state.
2. and then the declining thereof.

For their prosperous state, they are compared unto the lion and the eagle. 1.
The vulgar Latin reads a lioness, whereupon Hierome notes two properties
in the Chaldean Monarchy, ingentem ferociam and libidinem, their fiercenes and
intemperate lust: for the lioness is more fierce then the lion, and very
insatiable and intemperate, not only coupling with the Lion, but with the
Hyena, and the Pardus, whereof comes that mixed kind of the Leopard: but the
word here used, arieh, signifies a lion, not a lioness: therefore that note
has no ground, which the ordinar. gloss. borrows out of Hierome, that for
cruelty this Monarchy is compared to a lioness, rather then to a lion.

2. There are diverse names given unto lions according to their age, ghur, is a
lions whelpe, chephir, a young lion, ghur shacal, a middle lion, laish, an old
lion, labi, a decrepite lion.

3. The Chaldeans are resembled to a lion, as Theodoret thinks, because it
was both the most ancient, and first of all, and it continued longest, almost
a 1300. years, as Diodorus, and Ctesias G^idius write: but rather this
comparison is made to show both the magnanimity and courage of them, as
likewise withal, their cruelty and rage: In the image, c. 2. the Chaldean
state is compared unto gold, and here to a lion, which is the most excellent
and heroical beast: thus also the Prophets resemble the Chaldeans to a lion,
Isa. 5. 29. Ierem. 4. v. 7.

4. By the Eagles wings is signified the great celeritie and swiftness of the
Chaldeans in their conquests and victories: so also do the other Prophets
liken the Chaldeans to a swift Eagle, Ierem. 48. v. 40. Esech. 17. v. 3. by the
two wings, are understood, the Babylonian and Assyrian state, which now were
both joined together, by the which this Monarchy was carried aloft above all
others: Melanct. Osiand.

Then follows a description of their declining estate, in these four
degrees. 1. the wings are pulled away: their dexterity and courage is taken
from them: the Chaldeans gave themselves to idleness and pleasure: likewise
the Persians pulled their wings, when they stripped them at once of all their
dignity and government. 2. then it was reared from the earth: whereas they
did fly aloft before, now it can scarce lift up the head from the ground: the
Latin reads it was taken from the earth: but the Chaldean state remained
still after their wings were pulled, it was not utterly dissolved. 3. then he
was set upon his feet as a man: they could no longer fly with Eagles wings,
but stood upon the ground as other ordinary and private men. 4. and a man's
heart was given him: they became timorous and fearful, in so much that when
the city was besiedged, the Babylonians durst not look out at their gates,
Iun. comment. the Babylonians were tributarie to the Persians, and were their
servants to till their ground, and saluted them as their masters when they met
them: they also maintained Cyrus garrison in Babylon: and so they which were
lords before, became as ordinary private men, Polan. ex Xenophon.

Aben Ezra, and Hyppolitus do expound this of Nebuchadnezzar: Lyranus also,
and the ordinar. gloss. do not mislike that interpretation, which Hugo. Car.
and Osiander also follow; how his wings were clipped, and his pride abated,
when he became as a bruit beast, deprived of his reason and understanding: and
when he was restored to his understanding, he was as set upon his feet, and
had a man's heart given him again, whereas he had a beasts heart before till 7.
years were past: But because this is a description of the whole state and
Monarchy, and Nebuchadnezzar was at this time dead, the former interpretation
is better.

Quest. 12. Where the Chaldean Monarchy here described must take beginning.
1. Some think that the Assyrian Monarchy began in Nimrod, and so continued
as Diodorus Siculus thinks a 1300. years, unto Sardanapalus: who was the
last king of the Assyrians, and against whom conspired Arbaces a Mede, and Phul
Belochus the governor of Babylon, at such time as Iotham reigned in Judea, and
Pekah in Israel: But exception may be made hereunto. 1. although Nimrod were
mighty in his time, Genesis 14. 1. 5.
and reigned in Babel, yet not long after in Abraham's time, Chedorlaomer king
of Elam or Persia, was greater then Amraphel king of Shinar, or Babylon, for
Sodom and Gomorrha were subjects to the king of Elam. 2. Herodotus counts
but 520. years for the whole time of the Assyrian Monarchy unto Sardanapalus.
Pap. But whether the Assyrian Monarchy continued so long, or not, we are not
here to fetch the beginning thereof so far for the application of this
vision: for it is evident, that Daniel has special reference to the state of
that Monarchy then present.

2. Eusebius thinks that these Monarchies are here understood, unto the which
the Jews were subject (...), de praepar. Euang. c. 15.
from the times of this Prophet. And this seems the most probable, that this
vision should begin from the reign of Nebuchadnezzar: for so in the vision
of the image, c. 2. Nebuchadnezzar is expounded by Daniel, to be the head of
gold, the first Monarchy.

3. Pappus begins the Assyrian and Chaldean Monarchy from the time of
Sardanapalus: after whom the kingdom was divided: Arbac^s had Media and
Persia, and Phul Beloch Chaldea and Assyria. 1. The first king then of the
Chaldeans and Assyrians after the division of the Empire, was this Phul, who is
supposed to have reigned 48. years: to him Menahem king of Israel paid a
1000. talents of silver which was imposed upon him, 2. king. 15. 19. 2. Next
unto him was Tiglath Peleser, who overcame Pekah king of Israel, and carried
captive all the land of Nepthali on this side Jordan, and all the country
beyond, into Asshur, 2. king. 15. 29. he helped Ahaz king of Judah against
Pekah king of Israel, and Rezin king of Aram, 2. king. 16. 7. he is said to
have reigned 23. years. 3. Then succeeded Sa^manazar, who overcame Hoshea king
of Israel, and took Samaria, and carried away the people captive, 2. king. 17.
3. 6. he reigned 11. years. 4. Senacherib followed, who besieged Jerusalem in
the time of Hezekiah, and lost of his army in one night by the stroke of an
Angel an 185000. men: to him are given but 7. years. 5. Senacherib being
slain by his sons, Asarchaddon his son succeeded, 2. king. 19. 37. who
reigned 10. years. 6. About this time it seems that the Chaldeans overcame
the Assyrians, and Berodach Baladan, that sent presents to Hezekiah to
congratulate for his recovery, 2. king. 20. 12. had the whole Empire, who is
held to have reigned 40. years. 7. Next to him was Ben Merodah who reigned 21.
years. 8. Nabuchadnezzer the Elder followed, who overcame Egypt, whom
Josephus affirms to have reigned but 21. years: but it is gathered that he
reigned 35. years. Bulling. Papp. 9. After him was Nabuchadnezzer the Great*
who reigned 45. years: he carried away Iechoniah prisoner in the 8. year of
his reign, and ^fterward took Jerusalem, and put out Zedekiahs eyes, and
bound him in chains. 11. After him reigned Euilmerodach his son, who took
Iechoniah out of prison in the 37. year of his captivity and imprisonment, 2.
king. 25. 27. 12. The last of this race was Belshazzar, in the third year of
whose reign was Babylon taken by Darius and Cyrus. Thus Bullinger and Pappus
set down the succession of the kings of Assyria and Babylon.

4. But the Chaldean Monarchy in this vision reaches not so high, as either
to the division of the Empire after Sardanapalus, or the alteration of the
kingdom under Berodach Baladan: Daniel only describes the state of the
Monarchy in his time, beginning at Nabuchadnezzer the great: as he expounded
the like vision of the image, c. 2. resembling Nabuchadnezzer to the head of
gold.

13. Quest. Of the second beast: and why the Persian Monarchy is compared to a
bear.
1. Lyranus thinks they are so resembled, because the bear is less cruel:
and so the Persians were more equal toward the people of God: but in this
sense, this vision should differ from the other, c. 2. where the arms and
breasts, which signify the Persian Monarchy, appeared to be of silver, as
inferior to the first, which was of gold.

2. In diverse other respects then the Persian state is resembled to a bear: as
in their obscure beginning: the Persians were at the first a nation of no fame
or renown: like as the bear, is at the first but a rude lump of flesh
without any fashion, which the damme by continual licking brings to fashion.
Perer. Pintus.

3. Beside, the bear is most patient of labor and hunger: all winter long
they live without food, being nourished only by sleep, as Pliny writes of
them, lib. 8. c. 36. So the Persians (...) a most frugall nation, for the most
part they lived only of bread: and they dwelt among the mountains, as wild
bears seeking their food. Perer. Hug. Card.

4. The bear is of a weak sight, and of a tender head, but of a vast and
unhandsome body, whereby is signified that the Persians did fight rather with
their vast and huge numbers, then with martial stratagemes and policy, Perer.
as Cyrus was overcome of the Massagetes, and his head was cut off by Thomyris,
having 200. thousand men in his army. Pisistratus being expelled Athens for
his tyranny, was sent against Grecia by Darius, with an army of an 100.
thousand footmen, and 10. thousand horsemen: and was overcome by Miltiades the
Athenian captain in the fields of Marathon, only having a 11. thousand men.
Xerxes with 10. hundred thousand men invaded Greece, and was overcome by Sea of
Themistocles, and by land of Leonidas and Pausanias with a small number, and he
himself constrained to flee away in a small boat. Leonidas at Thermopylae
with 3000. men kept the streights against all the Persian army: and with 300.
men set upon their host of 500. thousand, and slew of them 20. thousand; where
he himself also, and all his company was slain.

5. They were like unto bears ob barbariem, because of their barbarousnes,
Calvin. they were a savage and barbarous people brought up in the mountains:
like as the bear is to the sight a more uncomely and unpleasant bea^t, then a
lion.

6. But herein the fittest resemblance is, the bear is, typus barbaricae and
ferinae crudelitatis, a type of babarous and beastly cruelty, Iun. Theodoret
has special reference here unto the cruel torments, which the Persians used,
in fleaing of men, and pulling off their skins, and hewing them into pieces:
But generally rather is described the savage and cruel nature of that nation
(as it follows in the rest of the vision) by the ribs between the teeth,
and their devouring of much flesh.

Quest. 14. Why the bear is said to stand upon the one side.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, in part stetit, it stood up on a part: but the
true reading is, it stood upon one side, which the Hebrews expound, that this
Monachie was not so cruel against the Jews, as the other: for diverse of the
Persian kings were beneficial toward the people of God.

2. Hierome gives this sense, they first rose up on a part, that is, surprised
the Chaldean kingdom, that they might more easily subdue the rest.

3. Theodoret refers it to that part of the kingdom, which the Persians
held still under the Roman Monarchy, though the dominion of Egypt, and Asia
minor, and Syria, were taken from them: but in this vision the Persian
Monarchy is described how it was in the time of the pri^e and glory thereof,
before it was dissolved by Alexander.

4. Calvin, and the Geneuens. following him, do understand it of the mean
beginning of the Persians: respicit obscura initia regni illius, it respects
the obscure beginning of that kingdom.

5. Vatablus understands it of the taking of Babylon: that the Persians
leaned on one side, they only set themselves against the Babylonians, they
spared the Jews, so also Pintus.

6. But the best interpretation is, it stood upon one side, ex duobus
lateribus, id est, distinctis regnis, vnum effectum est, of the two sides, that
is, two distinct kingdoms, there was one side, that is, one kingdom made: for
the Medes and Persians joined together, Iun. in commentar. so also Bulling.
Iunius in his annotat. follows an other reading, retayning the same sense,
dominatum vnum erexit, he erected one dominion: that is, subdued all other
nations, and made but one dominion of them all: so also Polanus: the word
satar, with a prick on the left side over shin, signifies a side, also so D.
Kimchi reads: but with a prick on the right side, shatar, it signifies rule
and dominion: the first reading seems to be the fitter, because of the
preposition lamed, set before lishtar, on the side, which is omitted in the
other reading.

7. Oecolampadius thus interprets, he stood upon one side, that is, there was
a place found for the Persians to be numbered among the cruel beasts: but this
sense is not so proper.

15. Quest. Of the three ribs in his mouth, what they signify.
1. R. Saadia understands three kings which succeeded Cyrus: but Hierome
refuses this interpretation, because there were more then three kings of
Persia: Osiander also expounds by these three long teeth, three great kings
of Persia, Cyrus, Darius, Xerxes: but it appears not, seeing there were 10.
kings of Persia, or according to Hierome 14. kings, why these three should be
understood beside therest: Melancthon understands other three, Cyrus, Darius,
Artaxerxes.

2. Hugo interprets these three teeth, which the Latin translateth, three
orders, to be those three chief officers, which were set over all the
kingdom, as we read, cap. 6. 2. so also Apollinarius: but these chief
governors were the teeth rather of the beast, then the pray between the teeth.

3. Hierome understands the three kingdoms, Persia, Media, and Babylon:
Hyppolitus the Assyrians, Medes, and Babylonians.

4. Calvin, and so Bullinger think not good to define any certain number by
these three ribs: but by three ribs understand plures, many: for so they
subdued not one kingdom, but many: and the words following seem to approve
this sense, arise, and de^oure much flesh.

5. Oecolampadius places not the force of the words, in the number of three:
but in that they are said to be ribs, carnibus deuoratis arrodebat ossa, the
flesh being devoured, he gnaweth the bones, not one only, but three together,
to show him to be insatiable.

6. Iunius in his commentary, by the three ribs, interprets, ex omni
part, that they shall devour on every side: because three ways only a
beast uses to gnawe bones, before, and on each side.

7. But in his annotations he understands by the three bones, tres parts
orbis habitabilis, the three parts of the habitable world; into the which the
Monarchy of the Persians was extended: And so Theodoret expounds the three
parts of the world, the East, North, and South: likewise Polanus.

Now of all these, the third exposition of the three principal kingdoms,
Persia, Media, and Chaldea, seems to be most probable: because although Cyrus
subdued many countries beside, yet these were the three sweetest bones, which
he had first in his mouth: and after this he devoured and destroyed much flesh
beside.

Quest. 16. Who said unto him, arise, and devour, etc. v. 4.
1. Herome, and Lyranus following him, with others, as gloss. interlin. gloss.
ordinar. Hug. Card. do interpret this of Assuerus, who was encouraged by Haman
to devour and destroy the Jews: But this being attempted only by Haman, not
effected, cannot be the meaning of these words, which show, that as this beast
had already a pray in his teeth, so he should devour more.

2. Pererius thinks it may be referred to Cyrus, who was insatiable in his
ambitious desire, and his end was answerable thereunto: for he being overcome
of Queen Thomyris, and 200. thousand of his men slain, she caused his head to
be cast into a bowl of man's blood, uttering these reproachful words of him,
bibe sanguinem, quem ^itiuisti, and cuius insatiabilis semper fuisti, drink
thy fill of blood, which thou have thirsted for, and wast thereof insatiable,
ex Justin. But seeing this vision contains a general description of the
whole Monarchy of the Persians, it is not so fitly applied unto one.

3. Calvin thus expounds, they said, that is, the Angels.

4. Bullinger says, caelitus iussio descendit, that this commandment came
from God: they were iussi a Deo, bidden of God: The Persians were raised up of
God, who, though not the author of their cruelty, yet concurred as a just
judge, using them as his instruments in punishing the sins of the world, Pap.
mandatum ei diuinitus, etc. it was commanded him from God to enlarge his
Empire, Iun. annotat.

5. As both these last senses may be received, so yet further here may be
understood the instruments whereby the kings of Persia were stirred up, to
destroy and devour: as Darius, called also Cyaxares, and the Hyrcanians,
together with Gobryas a governor of Assyria, did stir up Cyrus against the
Babylonians, Xenophon lib. 4. Mardonius likewise persuaded Xerxes to take in
hand the war against Grecia, but Artabanus dissuaded him: in which war, as
Orosiu^ writes, were consumed in three battles and in three years, Oros. l.
3. c. 17.
10. hundred thousand men. So that this Monarchy, thorough their ambitious
desire to rule, was the cause of the effusion of much blood: as it is here said
unto them, arise, and devour much flesh.

6. So then all these concurred together, in setting up this Monarchy, God is
the author, the Angels as the chief ministers, and then other instigators and
setters on, as the instruments: like as the Chaldeans provoked Nebuchadnezzar
to cast the three Hebrews into the fiery furnace, cap. 3. and the Persian
governors caused Daniel to be cast into the Lions den, cap. 6.

17. Quest. Of the Persian Kings with whom the Persian Monarchy began and
ended.
1. Hierom, whom the ordin. gloss. follows, reckons up 14. kings of Persia.
1. Cyrus. 2. Cambyses. 3. the Magi. 4. Darius, under whom the Temple began to
be reedified. 5. Xerxes the son of Darius. 6. Artabanus. 7. Artaxerxes
Longimanus. 8. Xerxes, an other of that name. 9. Socdianus. 10. Darius Nothus.
11. Artaxerxes Memnon. 12. Darius Ochus. 13. Arses. 14. Darius the last, whom
Alexander overcame.

2. Some do number eleven in this order. 1. Cyrus. 2. Assuerus Artaxerxes,
which was Cambyses. 3. Darius Assyrius. 4. Artaxerxes pius. 5. Xerxes the
terror of Grecia. 6. Artaxerxes Longiman^^^. 7. Darius Nothus. 8. Artaxerxes
Memor. 9. Ochus. 10. Arses, or Arsanes. 11. Darius Codoma^^us, whom Alexander
subdued: H. B. in the short view of the Persian Monarchy, following Beroaldus.

3. Some account not so many kings of the Persians, as Pappus names all these
before rehearsed, omitting Arsanes who succeeded Ochus.

4. But the best numbering of them, is that which Iunius in the argument of the
books of Ezra and Nehemiah, and Bullinger in his Chronicle tables follows,
who number 10. Kings of the Persians beside Smerdes the Magician, and his
brother: and with them an eleven. 1. Cyrus. 2. his son Cambyses. 3. then the
Magi. 4. Darius the son of Hystaspis. 5. Xerxes his son, who invaded Grecia
with such an huge army. 6. Artaxerxes Longimanus, so called as it seems
because one hand was longer then an other. 7. Darius Nothus. 8. Artaxerxes
Memnon, who committed horrible incest, and left behind him Darius Ochus. 9.
This Ochus molested the Jews: Bagoas his captain polluted* the Temple, and
deprived them of the privileges granted them by Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes: he
was at last slain by the same Bagoas. 10. Then this Bagoas set up Arsanes the
son of Ochus, and slew him also at the length. 11. The last was Darius
Codomannus, whom Alexander vanquished. But Smerdes is rather to be omitted in
this number, because he was an usurper, and reigned but 7. months: and by the
same reason also Artabanus must be fetched in, and other usurper after Xerxes:
and if Smerdes be admitted, Xerxes should be the 5. not the 4. king, as Daniel
makes him, c. 11. 2.

18. Quest. Of the third beast, called a leopard, and of the description of the
third Monarchy.
There are four parts of the description. 1. a simili, from the similitude and
likeness of the Pard, or leopard: whereunto in diverse respects Alexander is
compared. 1. The Leopard is noted to be subtle and crafty, lying in wait for
them which go by the way, as Jeremy says, c. 5. 6. A leopard shall watch
over their cities, every one that goes out thence shall be torn in pieces: so
Alexander by subtlety and policy prevailed much. 2. The leopard is very
swift, as Habak. 1. 8. Their horses shall be swifter then leopards: So
Alexander in a short time conquered the most known countries of all the world.
3. He is likened also to a leopard for his strength. Polan. 4. The Panther,
Pard, or Leopard is full of spots, which either notes the variety of
countreies and nations which Alexander subdued, Hug. or rather his variable and
changeable nature, which was tempered both with excellent virtues, and notable
vices. Perer. 5. The Leopard they say is taken by this means: it much coue^eth
and desires wine, which being poured near unto their dens, the sent
thereof draws them forth: and the hunters set not far off, vessels of wine,
which the beast drinks, till he falls a sleep, and so is taken: And herein
was Alexander like unto the leopard, who died of surfeting, and drunkenness.

2. Then this beast is described by the adjuncts, it had four wings. 1. Some
hereby understand Alexanders four virtues. 1. his strength of body. 2.
courage of mind, which feared nothing. 3. dexterity and industry. 4. his
great liberality and clemency. Lyran. Perer. 2. Some by the four wings, and
four beasts, understand the same thing, namely, his four successors,
Melancth. Calv. but then should something in this description be superfluous.
3. Hereby rather is signified Alexanders great celeritie, which is shadowed
forth in the nature of the beast, but more lively expressed by wings: and he is
said to have four wings, not two, quia nihil fuit velocius Alexandri victoria,
because nothing was swifter then Alexanders victories, Hier. for in 12. years
he made conquest of all the famous kingdoms of the world: yea in six years,
as Hierome testifies, he subdued all Egypt, a great part of Europe, all Asia
even unto India: in the first year of his kingdom he took the city Thebes:
in the 2. he overcame Darius armies at Granicum: in the 3. year he again
overcame Darius at Issum: in the fourth year he took Tyrus, when he had
besieged it 7. months, and then in the 5. subdued Syria, and Judea: in the 6.
year he finally vanquished Darius at Arbela, and so possessed the Asian
Empire. Polan.

3. Then this beast is set forth by the number of the heads, the beast also had
four heads. 1. Iunius hereby would not have understood four kingdoms, but
the great dexterity of Alexander, in taking care for all the parts of his
kingdom, as if he had had four heads. Iun. in comment. 2. The most do take
them for Alexanders four successors in the kingdom: Cassander in Macedonia,
Antigonus in Asia minor, Seleucus in Syria, Ptolome in Egypt: so Oecolamp.
Perer. Papp. Calv. with others: but these 4. kingdoms make the fourth beast,
as afterward shall be showed. 3. Wherefore better are here understood the 4.
chief captains of Alexander, which did aid him to atchieue his victories, and
afterward governed the kingdom under Aridaeus Alexanders brother, who being
slain, they divided the kingdom among them: So Hugo says, quatuor dicit
duces Alexandri, he means the four captains of Alexander, which afterward
became his successors: so Iunius in his annotations understands quatuor
satrapiae, the four regements of the kingdom, which after Alexanders death
should have come unto his two sons Alexander and Hercules, but they agreed to
make Aridaeus Alexanders brother king, and appointed Antipater, to be protector
of the kindome: but at length, both Alexanders sons were slain by Cassander,
and Aridaeus also: And then Cassander succeeded Aridaeus in Macedonia, and
after him Antipater: And the other three in their several kingdoms, as is
before expressed.

4. The last part of the description is from the efficient cause and author of
this great dominion, which Alexander had, it was given him of God: and that he
obtained not such great victories by his own power or policy, but by the
extraordinary assistance of God, does evidently appear by these four
arguments. 1. because he in a shorter time subdued more countries then other
(...) captains have taken cities: as is before showed in the second part of
the description. 2. in that he with so small an host of 30. thousand,
encountered with such great armies of the Persians, first, with an 150.
thousand, then with 400. thousand, and last of all with 10. hundred thousand,
which Darius Codomannus had gathered together against him. 3. Alexanders
security is an evident argument also thereof, who the same day that Darius was
overcome, was so fast asleep in his Tent, that all his captains could not
awake him, making a noise round about, for they durst not go in. 4. Alexander
himself also confessed as much, who meeting Iaddua the high Priest in his
pontifical robes, and falling down before him, and reuerencing him, being
asked the reason of Parmenio, answered, that he worshipped not the man, but God
in the man, who in the same habit had appeared unto him, and encouraged him to
go on in his enterprise to overcome Asia, and promised to lead his armies:
thus Josephus writes, lib. 11. Antiquit. c. 8.

Quest. 19. Why the fourth beast has no name.
1. The Hebrews do here imagine that although this fourth beast be not
expressed by name, yet that it was a wild boar, whereby they would have
signified the Roman Empire which destroyed Jerusalem: and they allege that
saying in the Psalm, 80. 13. the wild boar out of the wood has destroyed
it: But seeing this last kingdom is described to be more fierce and cruel
then the rest, it was not like to be resembled by the wild boar, which is not
so terrible, as the other three beasts, the lion, the bear, the Leopard, unto
the which the other three kingdoms are compared.

2. Theodoret applying this vision to the Roman Empire, thinks that this is
the reason why certain beasts are before named, but none here: because in the
other three kingdoms, there was a certain form of government by kings; but
in the Roman state the form of government often changed: they were governed
1. by kings, 2. by Consuls. 3. by the Tribunes of the people. 4. by Dictators.
5. by Emperors. But it shall evidently appear afterward, that this vision is
not to be extended to the Romans.

3. Hierome gives this reason: the beast is not named, vt si quid ferocius
bestijs supradictis cogitauerimus, hoc imperio Romanorum attribuamus, etc. that
if any thing can be imagined more cruel, then the forenamed beasts, it should
be attributed to the Roman Empire: thus also Lyran. gloss. ordinar. with
others: Hieromes reason here in general is to be admitted, but he fails
likewise in his particular application to the Roman state.

4. Pererius has this conceit, that if this last Monarchy here described,
which he supposes to be of the Romans, should be represented by any certain
kind of beast, it is most like to be that, which Aristotle out of Ctesias
Gnidius, says is found in India, which he describes in this manner: the name
of the beast is Mantichora, Aristot. lib. 2. de histor. animal. c. 1.
it has three rows of teeth above and below: with lions feet, and of
bigness and hair like to a lion: with man's ears, a scorpions tail: it
makes a noise like a trumpet: as swift as an heart: so wild that it can never
be tamed: it coueteth man's flesh most of all.

But both it may be doubted whether any such beast is to be found in the world:
and if there were, seeing the spirit of God has not expressed any particlar
kind, it were great presumption for us to guess at it.

5. Wherefore those two reasons may be yielded, why no certain beast is here
named: both in respect of this description here made, propter infinite am,
varietatem, for the great variety of the parts (borrowing of some beast one,
and of some an other) it cannot be resembled to any certain kind, Iun. annot.
And in regard also of the signification: no beast can be named so cruel, quod
posset naturam ostendere istius bestiae, which can express the nature of this
beast, Calvin, which can sufficiently portraite out unto us the cruelty of
this fourth kingdom and government. Polan.

Quest. 20. Of the description of the fourth beast in general.
It is described 1. by three adjuncts, it was fearful, terrible, and strong.
2. by the effects, which are three, it devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped
the residue under the feet. 3. by the dissimilitude and unlikeness which it
had to the other beasts, it was unlike the beasts that were before it. 4. by
the parts, it had iron teeth, and horns: the horns are first set down in
general, it had ten horns, then there is a particular description of one
horn, which is expressed by four arguments. 1. by the adiunct of the
smalenesse, it is called a little horn. 2. by the manner of growing, it came
up among the other. 3. by the effects, three of the other horns were plucked
away before it. 4. by the parts, it had the eyes of a man, and a mouth, which
is described by the effects, speaking presumptuous things.

Quest. 21. Whether the Roman or Turkish Empire be signified by this fourth
beast.
1. The Rabbines by this fourth beast understand the Empire of the Turks, of
which opinion are R. Ab. Ezra, and R. Saadiah; because mention is made
afterward of one like the son of man, to whom power and dominion was given,
which shows that the Messiah should reign after this fourth kingdom should
be dissolved, whom because they hold not yet to be come, they would have this
vision understood of the Turkish Empire. And to make their opinion more
probable, they join the Greek and Roman Empire together, comprehending them
both under the third beast: And Ab. Ezra, doubts not to call Alexander king
of the Romans. So by this devise they would prove Christ Jesus not to be the
Messiah, because he was borne under the third Empire.

Contra. 1. Herein the Rabbines show their great ignorance in confounding the
Greek and Roman Empire: unless it be because Constantinople was called new
Rome, and they find that one of the Roman Emperors was called Alexander,
which are slender reasons to confound the two Empires. 2. neither was Alexander
known unto the Romans, who yet at time were of great power, and mightier then
diverse kings. 3. this vision cannot be applied unto the Empire of the Turks:
for it cannot be showed, how he has 10. horns, that is, so many kings, nor
what that little horn should be, before the which three other were plucked away.

2. Some do apply this vision to the Roman Empire alone, and that but unto
the first coming of Christ, as Calvin.

3. Some do understand the Roman Empire, that it shall continue to the end
of the world: as Hierome says, that toward the end of the world when the
Roman Empire shall be destroyed, there shall rise ten kings, which shall
divide the Empire among them: But neither of these opinions can stand: for
whereas these kingdoms are described by the similitude of beasts, whose
cruelty they should imitate toward the people of God; before the first coming
of Christ the Romans had not practiced such cruelty against the Jews, as
that therein they should have been unlike to all which went before them:
neither yet is the Roman Empire to continue unto the end of the world, which
was long since dissolved.

4. Pappus thinks that both the Turkish tyranie, and the proud jurisdiction
of the Popes of Rome, are described under this last beast, showing how all the
properties of the little horn agree unto them both, in their small beginnings,
their subtlety and hypocrisy, their blasphemy against Christ and his gospel:
Neither need it seem strange says he, that two diverse gouernements are
signified by one horn, because they both propound unto them the same end and
scope, the subversion of the Church, and use the same weapons in general,
cruelty, and blasphemy.

Contra. 1. This fourth kingdom shall be destroyed by the coming of the
Messiah in the flesh, as was prophesied before in the vision of the image, c.
2. 44. and here also, v. 13. one like the son of man came in the clouds,
which is to be understood not of his second commming to judgment, but of his
first coming to finish the work of our redemption, as shall be showed more at
large, when we come to that place: now neither Turk nor Pope were then head of
the world, when the Son of man came in the flesh, nor diverse hundred years
after. 2. this fourth beast should be more cruel, then any of the rest toward
the people of God then, for whose comfort this vision was revealed to Daniel:
but the Romans before the coming of Christ had been more equal toward the
Jews, then any of the other Monarchies. 3. this horn came forth of the fourth
beast: the beast signifies but one Monarch or kingdom, as the other three
before: therefore two kingdoms, and the same opposite the one to the other,
cannot be comprehended under one horn: other reasons why the Roman Monarchy
is not understood neither in this, nor that other vision tending to the same
end, c. 2. see at large, c. 2. quest. 49.

5. Seeing then that the Roman Empire is here excluded, all that labor may be
spared which Pererius takes to show wherein the Roman power consisted, by
what means they attained unto their large dominion, and whether justly or
unjustly, as impertinent to this place: yet it shall not be amiss, to take a
short view of that, which is set down by him touching these three questions.
1. Their greatness consisted, first in the largeness of their dominion,
Wherein the Roman power chiefly consisted.
which extended Westward to Spain, Southward to Ethiopia, and Eastward to
Armenia: in so much that Appian affirms, that the other three Monarchies had
not the half part, of the Roman Empire. Secondly, in their provision for
war: the Romans had always in a readiness 200. thousand footmen, 40.
thousand horsemen, 300. Elephants for war, 3000. chariots, amor in store for
300. thousand, 2000. ships, 1500. galleys, 80. great ships: this strength
they were of under Adrian the Emperor, as Appian writes. Thirdly, their
strength consisted in their riches and treasure: they had of treasure in a
readiness in diverse places, 75. thousand Egyptian talents: a talent of Egypt
weighed 80^. which is equivalent to 8000. Italian pieces of gold: the whole
sum will amount to 600 times ten hundred thousand, that is, 600 millions of
gold. 2. Touching the means whereby they enlarged their Empire, they were
these. 1. the love of liberty. 2. their ambitious desire to rule. 3. their
affecting of praise and renown. 4. their military discipline. 5. their
courtesy to their friends, and severity against their enemies. 3. Some part of
their kingdom they got unjustly, as Pompey took Asia from the rightful
kings: Cyprus they took from Ptolome, Sardinia from Carthage. Some countries
were given and bequeathed unto them, as Asia by Attalus will, Bythinia by
Nicodemus testament: the Cyrenians, and Pentapolis by Ptolome, Lybia by king
Appio^, Perer. But all this discourse here is superfluous, seeing in this place
we have nothing to do with the Romans, but as it is typically shadowed forth
in the kingdom of the Seleucians.

6. It remains then that this fourth beast must represent the kingdom of
Syria, wherein ten kings succeeded one another, the last of which was
Antiochus Epiphanes, who is the little horn here spoken of: That this
interpretation is most probable, shall appear in the handling of the several
parts of this vision: neither is it new, taken up by Iunius only, Polanus, and
others; but Hierome makes mention of one Polichronius, who so understood it
and Theodoret also shows the same to have been the opinion of some, though
he resolve upon the Romans: And yet we deny not but that typically also under
the kingdom of the Seleucians, is shadowed forth the Monarchy of the Romans,
as S. John in the description of the beast with seven heads and ten horns,
has relation unto this vision, thereby implying the Roman Monarchy, Apocal.
13. 1.

Quest. 22. That the kingdom of Syria which was held by Seleucus, and his
posterity, was the fourth beast.
Pappus, who expounds this fourth beast of the Turk and Pope together,
against this other exposition takes these exceptions.

Object. 1. Seleucus Nicanor is comprehended under the third beast, which is
described with four heads: the beast is Alexander, and the four heads are his
four sucessors that followed after him, of the which Seleucus was one: he
cannot be both a part of the third beast, and the fourth also.

Contra. He is comprehended in the the third beast, as then governing under
that kingdom: for Alexanders 4. captains, were at the first regents under
Alexander and his successor Aridius: but he made the fourth beast, when he
constituted and erected a kingdom to himself, and his successors: though the
fourth beast had his beginning and first erection under the third, yet now the
succession and continuance of that kingdom may make the fourth beast.

Object. 2. They which reckon ten kings of Syria, unto Antiochus Epiphanes,
do insert two of the Egyptian kings, Ptolomeus Euergites, and Ptolomeus
Philopator, otherwise they cannot make up the number: for there be but eight in
all beside.

Contra. Though these two were kings of Egypt, yet by conquest they held for a
time the kingdom of Syria: Ptolomeus Euergites expelled Seleueus Callinicus:
and Ptolomeus Philopator expelled: Antiochus the great, though they were
dispossessed again of the kingdom; yet because they did hold it for a time,
they may be numbered also among the rest of the kings.

3. Antiochus Epiphanes is one of the ten horns: he cannot then be the other
little horn, that plucketh away three horns before it, which makes the
eleventh.

Contra. The little horn is the last of the tenth, it makes not the eleventh,
the word is acharee, which the most translate, an other, but it more usually
signifies the latter, this little horn then, was not another beside the
ten, but the last of the ten.

Ob. 4. As in the third beast, the four heads do not signify 4. kindomes one
after another, but four set up all at once: so these ten horns must
signify ten kings or kingdoms all at once.

Contra. 1. Though these 4. heads, of the 3. beast do here signify 4.
kingdoms raised up together: yet always it is not so: for Apocal. 17. 9. by
the 7. heads, are signified 7. kings one succeeding another: as it is there
said, verse. 10. five are fallen, and one is, and one is not yet come.

2. In this chapter the Angel expounds these 10. horns of succession: the
last shall rise after them, v. 24. the latter of these ten shall be after the
other, they were not then altogether.

3. Again, it is there said, v. 24. that these ten horns, should arise out
of one kingdom: But in one kingdom at one time there could not be 10. kings.

Ob. 5. After the abolishing of the fourth beast, the kingdom is given unto
the Saints, v. 27. but the Roman Empire came between the determination of the
kingdom of the Seleucians, and the birth of the Messiah, in whom this
spiritual kingdom of the Saints, began.

Contra. It cannot be gathered out of the text, that immediately after the
destruction of this beast, the Messiah should come: but after Antiochus
Epiphan^s, who is intended by that little horn, though other of the Seleucians
succeeded, yet none of them afflicted the people of God as he had done: they
had peace and tranquillity from those foreign Tyrants of Syria: and yet there
remained some life in the other beasts, though their kingdoms were taken away
a long time before: as there was some relics of the Babylonian kingdom in
the Armenians, of the Persian in the Parthians, of the kingdoms of Syria and
Egypt, after their power and strength was taken from them by the Romans.

Ob. 6. The end of the world and final judgment follows after the
destruction of the fourth beast: but so did it not after the dissolution of the
kingdom of the Seleucians.

Contra. That description v. 9. is not of the final judgment at the last day,
but of that which God exercises in this world against the wicked: as Apocal.
4. 2. a throne likewise is set, and judgment prepared.

Ob. 7. After the kingdom of the fourth beast, the dominion is given unto the
Saints: but the kingdom of the Seleucians fell unto the Romans.

Contra. The temporal kingdom was invested in the Romans: but the spiritual
kingdom, was given to the Messiah, and in him communicated unto the Saints: of
this spiritual, not of any temporal kingdom speaks the Prophet, v. 14.
which is described, by the universality, all nations and languages should
serve him, and the eternity, his kingdom shall never be destroyed.

Ob. 8. Antiochus Epiphanes is described by a little horn, which came forth of
one of the four horns of the goat, cap. 8. 9. which is taken for Alexander,
and answers to the third beast here: he therefore is comprehended under the
third beast, he makes not the fourth.

Contra. 1. That is a diverse vision from this, they are not then to be
confounded together: he may belong to the second beast there, the goat, and yet
make the fourth beast here. 2. This collection makes strongly, to procue
Antiochus to be the little horn here, because he is resembled to a little
horn there, and other parts of that vision agree with this.

Object. 9. Against Antiochus whom they would have signified by this horn, the
ships of Chittim are sent, c. 11. 30. but this beast is not destroyed by any
humane power, but by the judgment: of God in the end of the world, Pappus.

Contra. 1. It follows not, because God is said here to judge him, that
therefore he used no humane instruments: God destroyed the kingdom of Syria,
by stirring up the Romans against them. 2. this place is not to be understood
of the final judgment* as is showed before.

Quest. 23. Of the iron teeth, and other parts of the general description of
the fourth beast.
1. They which understand the fourth beast to be the Roman Empire: some by the
iron teeth would have signified the famous and valiant captains, by whose
means the Romans subdued the nations: dentes regni sunt princip^^ fortissimi,
the teeth of the kingdom are the valiant captains, by whose means the king
de^oureth as with teeth, gloss. So also Bulling. Such teeth were C. Fabricius,
who subdued Pirrhus, M. Marcellus conquered the Germans: Paulus Aemilius
Greece, Scipio Africanus Africa: Crassus and Pompey the East, Julius Caesar the
West: Calvin by the iron teeth understands, audaciam and inexplebilem
cupiduatem, their boldness, and insatiable desire of dominion; intelligitur
Romani imperij crudelitas, the cruelty of the Roman Empire is signified.

But this does evidently convince, that the Romans are not here understood at
all: because this fourth beast should be more fierce and cruel then the rest
against the people of God, the Jews, as v. 21. they shall make battle with
the Saints: But till the coming of the Messiah, the Romans showed themselves
more equal toward the Jews, then any of the former kingdoms.

2. Therefore by the iron teeth of the fourth beast, are better understood the
cruelty of the kingdom of the Syrians, exercised against the people of God:
and more particularly by the teeth, are expounded, duc^s and ^opiae, their
armies and captains, whereby they did bite and devour, and as it were grind
the Jews. And for this cause, this beast is said to have nails or claws of
brass, v. 19. whereby they did rent and tear in sunder the people of God: for
they are the special object of their cruelty.

Quest. 24. Why it is said to stamp the residue under the feate.
1. They likewise which refer this to the Roman Empire do diuersely expound
it. 1. Bullinger takes it to be a phrase of speech taken from wanton beasts,
which being full, what they cannot eat themselves, do tread the rest under
their feet: whereby he thinks is signified the great insolenci^ and cruelty
of the Romans, in making havoc and spoil of all. 2. Oecolampadius
understands it of their envy, quibus frui non poterat, alijs inuidens, etc.
what they could not enjoy themselves they stamped under their feet, as envying
that others should have it. 3. Calvin* whom the Gonevens. follow, does expound
it of this politic devise of the Romans, that what they could not quietly
enjoy in other countries, they would give to other kings and rulers, whom they
might use at all times as their vassals: Thus they advanced Masinissa in
Africa, and gave him great gifts, that by his means, they might have Africa
more peaceable. 4. the most do thus understand it* that whom they did not
consume and destroy* tributo and seruituti subijcieba^t, they brought them
under tribute and servitude. 5. the meaning is, that those whom they utterly
destroyed not, they did as it were spurn with their feet, that is, by all
means afflict and oppress them, Iun.

Quest. 25. Wherein this fourth beast was unlike the rest, v. 7.
1. They likewise which think the Roman Empire here to be shadowed forth, do
make diverse applications of it. 1. Some do refer it, to the diu^rse form
of government among the Romans, who were first governed by kings, then by
Consuls, afterward by Tribunes, the Dec^^viri, Dictators: whereas the other
Monarchies were perpetually ruled by kings, Bulling. Ofiand. 2. An other sense
is: because in the former beasts, singula fortitudinum signa fuerunt, in hac
omnia, there were some particular signs of fortitude, but in this all
together, Hierome, Hugo. 3. or in impe^io Rom^^ orum omnia simul fuere regna,
etc. in the Roman Empire were joined together all those kingdoms, which were
separated before: 4. It was monstrum insolitum, a strange monster, Call. in
respect of their strange rising up, and of their great power.

2. R. Leui thinks, that this beast is distinct from the rest, to signify,
that it should continue a long time: true it is, that the Syrian kingdom
continued 248. years longer then the Persian Monarchy, or the Chaldean,
counting from the beginning of Nebuchadnezzars reign: but it is not the
quantity or continuance of time, but the quality and condition, that makes a
thing like or unlike.

3. Wherefore this unlikeness to all the rest is understood of the cruelty,
wherein it should exceed all the rest, toward the people of God: prae
tyrannidis grauitate, in the greatness and grieuousnesse of the tyranny, it
should be unlike them, Iun. annot. Polan. And therefore in the vision of the
image, c. 2. this last kingdom is resembled to the iron feet, which did
break and bruise all in pieces.

Quest. 26. Of the ten horns, what is signified thereby, v. 7.
The diverse opinions which are held concerning the interpretation of these
words, are of two sorts, some by ten understand not precisely a certain
number, but an uncertain and indefinite, they take ten for many, as Number. 14.
22. they have tempted me ten times, Job. 19. 2. ye have ten times
reproached me. Some understand according to the litterall sense, so many kings
precisely.

1. Of the first sort. 1. Some by ten kings understand all the kings which
should be in the Romne Empire, from the beginning to the end thereof, unto the
coming of Antichrist; numero isto denario vniuersitas Regum significata est,
etc. by this number of ten is signified the universal company of the kings
in the Roman Empire, August, lib. 20. de ciuit. Dei. c. 23. 2. Some by these
kings understand the several provinces and kingdoms which were governed by
Proconsuls and deputies, the Roman Empire yet standing, Calv. 2. Some the
kingdoms into the which the Roman Empire was divided and dissolved: as first
it was parted into the East and West Empire: in the East sprang up the
kingdoms of the Persians, Saracenes, and of other nations: in the West, of the
Goths, Lombards, Hunnes, Bulling. so also Pintus, Sa, Oecolamp. Perer.

But all these are deceived. 1. in taking this number of ten for a number
indefinite: for seeing this number is divided, as after mention is made of
three kings, which shall be pulled away, a certain and finite number must be
signified: and if ten did not betoken a certain number, the time should not
be known, when the little horn, the last of the ten, should be expected. 2.
The kings do not signify kingdoms, but so many kings out of one kingdom, as
it is expounded, v. 24. the ten horns out of this kingdom, are ten kings
that shall rise: they must rise out of one kingdom. 3. neither can these ten
kingdoms, which they understand, be raised after the dissolution of the
Empire; for the beast is not destroyed, that is the kingdom dissolved until
the little horn came up, v. 11.

2. Of the second sort also there are diverse opinions. 1. Some by ten horns
understand so many kings, which in the end of the world shall divide the Roman
Empire among them, and then shall the eleventh horn rise up, which they
suppose to be Antichrist: of this opinion is Hierome, whom Lyranus follows,
Hugo, gloss. ordinar. and interlin. But, as Oecolamp. notes, we find this to
be otherwise: for one part of the Roman Empire only which is in Europe, we
see to be divided into ten kingdoms: as Portugal, Spain, England, France,
Denmark, Suecia, Polonia, Bohemia, Hungaria, Naples: the other parts of the
Empire were divided into more kingdoms.

2. Some understand the 10. Provinces, which were subject to the Roman
Emperor, governed by Consuls: as Strabo lib. 17. reckons ten of them: But
the Proconsuls and Deputies were not kings: and though they were as kings, they
had their several provinces as their kingdoms, but these kings must come out
of one kingdom.

3. Some do here number ten several kingdoms, into the which the Roman
Empire was divided: as some do reckon these: Italy, Spain, France,
Germany, Illyricum, Grecia, Africa, Egypt, Asia, Syria, Melancthon. Some do
for Illyricum, put England, numbering the rest which are before rehearsed,
Osiand. Some do name the ten kingdoms in Europe before specified, ex Pap.
But it is evident, that more then ten kingdoms are risen out of the Roman
Empire, seeing so many are found only in Europe.

4. Some then leaving this conceit of the Roman Empire, do find these ten
horns, that is so many kings in diverse kingdoms, putting together Macedonia,
Egypt, Syria: this was the opinion of Porphyrie rehearsed and refuted by
Hierome: for these kings must rise out of the same kingdom, as these ten
horns came out of one and the same beast.

5. Wherefore these ten horns, were indeed ten kings of Syria, which the
Seleucia^s held, one succeeding another, and these they were. 1. Seleucus
N^canior. 2. An^iochus Soter, who was in love with Stratonica his fathers wife,
whom he enjoyed by the means of Erasistratus his Physician, and reigned, his
father yet being alive. 3. Antiochus called Theos, God, of the Milesians, for
delivering them from the tyranny of Timarchus; him his wife Laodice, the
daughter of Ptol^me Philadelphus, poisoned. 4. Seleucus Callmicus, whom Ptolome
Euergetes expelled his kingdom. 5. P^olome Euergetes. 6. Seleucus Ceraunus,
Ptolome Euergetes being expelled. 7. Antiochus the great the brother of
Ceraunus, who had war with the Romans, and drove them out of Asia. 8.
Ptolome Philopator, who invaded Syria, Antiochus the great being otherwise
occupied and busied, and held the kingdom a while. 9. Then Philopator being
expelled by Antiochus and his sons, Seleucus Philopator succeeded. 10. And
Seleucus being slai^e, then Antiochus Epiphanes the younger brother invaded
the kingdom: who was the little horn here spoken of, and did rage most
cruelly against the people of God, Iun. ann. there were after him other of the
Seleucians, that held the kingdom of Syria, but they had not that power over
Judea, which the other had; for Antiochus Eupator, and after him Demetrius the
son of Seleucus, attempted in vain to subdue Judea unto their kingdom.
Polan.

6. But here is some defference between Iunius and Polanus account of these
ten kings: Iunius makes Ptolome Euergetes the fifth, who expelled Seleucus
Call^nichus, and Seleuchus Ceraunus, the son of Callinicus the sixth: But
Polanus omitting Ptolome Euergetes, makes Ceraunus the son of Callinicus the
fifth, and the son of Ceraunus the s^xt, who being but a child, and not able
to govern the kingdom, after he had reigned two years, was poisoined: But I
rather follow Iunius for these reasons. 1. seeing Polanus confesses that
Euergetes expelled Callinicus, and held the kingdom, he is as well to be
counted among these ten kings, as afterward Ptolome Philopator, who invaded
the kingdom under Antiochus the great. 2. Seleucus Ceraunus reigned himself
but three years, and next unto him succeeded Antiochus the great: no mention
is made in some Chronicles of Ceraunus son coming between, Bullinger.

7. But against this interpretation of the ten kings of Syria, thus it will
be objected. 1. Lyranus says that these kings must not be understood per
successionem vnius post alterum, by the succession of one after another, but
they were all at one time, as the Angel expounds afterward.

Contra. 1. The contrary appears by the Angels exposition, that these kings
shall one succeed another, See further appendix. exerci^. 1. argu. 8. 1.
as v. 24. the Angel says, ten horns out of this kingdom, are ten kings
that shall rise: now in one kingdom there cannot be ten kings at once,
every king has his kingdom: 2. as the three kings which shall be subdued,
are understood successively, so are the ten: but these followed one an other
by succession: as Andreas whose opinion Hugo reports, thus expounds, alios
duos sibi succedentes similiter occidet, he shall likewise kill two other kings
succeeding one another.

2. Pererius obiecteth that in the Syrian kingdom, there were but eight kings
in all unto Antiochus Epiphanes.

Contra. There were but eight of that line: but two kings of Egypt, Ptolome
Euergetes, and Ptolome Philopator, which held the kingdom by conquest, are to
be numbered among them.

3. This fourth kingdom shall be more fierce and mightier, then any before it:
but the kingdom of Syria was not mightier then Alexanders, Perer.

Contra. It is not said simply to be mightier, or stronger, but in respect of
the Jews, whom they carried a more strong and terrible hand over, then did
Alexander who favored them.

4. It may be objected, that this fourth beast shall devour the whole earth,
and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces, v. 23. but the kingdom of
Syria did not subdue the whole earth.

Contra. By the whole earth is here understood the whole land of Judea, as is
expounded v. 25. he shall consume the Saints of the most high: and so thinks
R. Saadia, that the whole earth is taken here for Judea, which was brought into
such subjection unto the kings of Syria, that Memnon in his Chronicle lib. 13.
14. calls Antiochus warring with the Romans, the king of Judea.

Quest. 27. Who is signified by the little horn, ver. 8.
The diverse opinions here conceived about the interpre^ation of these words,
are of five sorts. 1. Some apply them to the Empire of the Turks. 2. Some
understand them of the Roman Empire. 3. Some of both joined together. 4. Some
of Antichrist. 5. Some of the Syrian kingdom, and hold Antiochus Epiphanes,
that cruel enemy of the Jews to be this little horn. All these opinions
shall now be examined in their order.

1. That this little horn should be the Turk, it is the opinion of Melancthon
and O^iander, and of Vatablus and Pintus, among the Romanists: unto whom they
make all the properties of this little horn to agree: for as this is called a
little horn, so Mahomet was of obscure beginning, who under the Emperors
Heraclius and Honorius, about the year 600. by craft, cousenage, and sorcerie
did draw many after him: he is said to have the eyes of a man, because he was
most cunning to deceive: he spoke proud things: for Mahomet feigned that he had
familiar conference with Angels, and that he was a great Prophet, and he said
his law was better, then Moses or Christ's.

Melancthon to the same purpose, shows, how these four things do fitly
agree unto the Turkish Empire, the time of their rising up, their doctrine,
power, and place of their dominion.

1. For the time, they sprang up, when the Roman Empire was decaying, and
under the Emp^rours before named. 2. for their doctrine, they abolish the
writings of the Prophets, and Apostles, they deny Christ to be the Savior of
the world, and many horrible blasphemies do they utter against the Son of God.
3. their power exceeds all other Monarchies: they have under their Empire the
most part of Africa, and a great part of Europe, and Asia. 4. For their place,
they came from the North, from the mount Caucasus, as Ezekiel prophesies that
Gog and Magog shall come from the North, Ezeck. 39. 2.

But Pererius shows by these two arguments, that the Turk is not here meant
to be this little horn. 1. because when Mahomet did rise, there were not ten
kings in the Roman Empire, it was not yet dissolved and divided into ten
kingdoms, but remained whole under the obedience of the Emperor. 2. This horn
shall afflict the people of God a time, two times, and an half, that is three
years and an half: but Mahomet and his followers, have persecuted the Church
of God many hundred years. 3. Burgensis adds further this reason: that the
Turk does not make the fourth beast, which is the fourth Monarchy here
described, nor that set forth in the Image, c. 2. because before the first
coming of Christ, which is there spoken of, there was no mention at all of the
Turks and Saracenes: and the four Monarchies were absolute in their times,
that no other kingdom was able to resist them: So is not the Turk, for he is
encountered with other enemies equivalent unto him: 4. But this further may
disprooue this opinion for the Turks: this fourth kingdom shall make war
with the Saints and the people of God, which then were understood to be the
Jews, the known, people of God: But the Turks are at this day great friends
unto the Jews, of whom they borrowe the greater part of their religion. This
little horn then upon the reasons aforesaid, is not the great Turk, to whom
by way of analogy many of the properties of this horn may agree, but
historically it is not meant of him.

2. Of the second sort that here understand the Roman Empire, is R. Leui, who
sometime makes the next after the tenth Caesar, which was Traiane, to be this
horn, sometime Constantine: But both of these were commendable Emperors:
Traiane is renowned even among the Gentiles, and Constantine was a virtuous and
religious Emperor, as all our histories do write of him.

3. Calvin would have this little horn to be Julius Caesar, Augustus, and the
other which succeeded him: But seeing that the ten horns are expounded to be
ten kings, the little horn being the last of the ten, cannot be the
first, nor the second, or the rest in order: Julius Caesar was the first
Emperor, next to him was Augustus, and so the rest that follow.

4. Oecolampadius does indifferently understand this little horn to be both
the Pope in the West, and the Turk in the East; which he expounds to be the
beast with two horns, Apocal. 13. 11. the one pushing in Europe by ^ypocrisie
and deceit, the other in Asia and Africa, by tyranny and violence, so also
Pap. But v. 24. the Angel expounds the ten horns to be ten kings of one
kingdom: the Pope and Turk make not one kingdom, therefore they cannot both
be this horn.

5. Some apply this prophecy unto Antichrist, whom they suppose shall come in
the end of the world after the Roman Empire is destroyed, and divided among
ten kings: Hier. Lyran. Hugo. who out of Andr^as reports, that this
Antichrist shall draw the Jews unto him, and reedifie the Temple at
Jerusalem: But this is an old dream, that such an Antichrist shall come
toward the end of the world: this fancy is received both of Turks, who in
their Alcaron speak of Antichrist that shall come, whom Christ shall destroy,
and the Papists expect the like Antichrist to come, three year and an half
before the second coming of Christ: Both of them are grossly deceived: for
the little horn here described, should make war with the Saints, that then
were the Jews, whose commonwealth long since was dissolved, and they through
the world dispersed.

6. Bullinger understands this little horn to be the Pope, showing, how from
small beginnings that Sea did grow up at the first, as a little horn, partly
by the grant of the Emperors, as Boniface the 3. obtained of the Emperor
Phocas to be called the Universal Bishop, partly by their pride and ambition:
But still this principle must be held, that Daniel describes here by this
horn, a great enemy and persecutor of the Jewish nation, the people of God
then: therefore this vision, although analogically it may be referred to the
Pope the very Antichrist, of whom Antiochus Epiphan^s might well be a type and
figure, yet literally and historically it is not so intended.

7. But the Hebrews of all other are the most malicious and absurd, who most
blasphemously make Jesus Christ our Blessed Lord and Savior, this little
horn: for so they say, his beginning was small and base, he came out of the
fourth beast, he joined with the Roman Empire as appeared in Constantine: he
spoke presumptuous things, in making himself equal unto God, and changed
times, in abrogating the ceremonies of Moses law, ex Paul. Burgensi. But all
this is maliciously and ignorantly devised of the Jews. 1. because this horn
is little at the first, it follows not, that whosoever is little and small at
the first, should be this horn. 2. neither is the Roman Empire this fourth
beast: and though the Imperial authority did set forth and maintain the
gospel of Christ, there is great difference between terrene dominion, and the
spiritual kingdom of Christ. 3. out Blessed Savior was equal to his father
as God, and as the true Messiah was to determine and abolish the legal
ceremonies: The Jews therefore thus obiecting, do but bewray their own
ignorance, concerning the true Messiah.

8. It remains then, that this little horn was historically Antiochus
Epiphanes, who was the tenth king of Syria from Seleucus Nicanor, and yet
typically also Antichrist, as bath been showed in the former questions: and to
him best agree all properties of the little horn, as shall be showed in the
questions next ensuing: Thus Polychronius interpreted this place, whose opinion
Hierome misliketh: lunius thus expounds, and Polanus following him.

Quest. 28. Who those three kings should be, signified by the three horns
plucked away.
Some do take this number of three indefinitely for no certain number, some
do strictly understand three as they are named: and each of these opinions has
diverse varieties and differences.

1. They which take it indefinitely. 1. Some by three kings understand many, R.
Leui of many kings subdued by the Roman Empire, R. Saadia of the Turkish
dominion, Oecolampadius of both: and the wearing of the Popes triple crown
signifies his dominion over three, that is, diverse kings: But where diverse
numbers are named, and there is a division of number: as here of ten and
three; there certain numbers are understood: otherwise if the number of ten
should be taken indefinitely, and so the number of three; more should not be
signified by ten, then by three, no certain number being contained in
either.

2. Calvin gives this exposition: This litttle horn took away three horns,
that is, a great part of the regal power and authority; which he thinks was
done, when Augustus Caesar took from the Senate the authority of naming
Proconsuls and Governors for the Provinces: But whereas the Angel by the three
horns understands three kings, this is no proper sense, to understand by
these three kings, the authority of naming the Proconsuls, which were many;
and this power was not extinguished: though it were taken from the Senate, it
remained still in the Emperor: but these three horns shall be quite plucked
away before this little horn.

3. They which take this number for three precisely. 1. Some, which do
understand it of the Turk, name three kingdoms, which he has surprised: but
therein they agree not: Melancthon sets down Egypt, Syria, and Cilicia:
Osiander, and Pappus, Asia, Grecia, and Egypt: Vatablus names the Empire of
Constantinople, and the kingdom of Egypt for two, the third is not yet subdued
to the Turk, which he names not: But the Turk has many more then three
kingdoms under him.

4. They which imagine a certain Antichrist to come in the end of the world,
understand these three kings, of Egypt, Africa, Aethiopia, whom when Antichrist
has subdued, the other seven shall yield themselves: so Hierome, whom Lyranus,
gloss. ordinar. Hugo, Pintus, follow.

But this conceit of this supposed Antichrist, is confuted before, quest. 27.
5. and it is said that this horn shall pull away only 3. horns, not that he
shall subdue all the ten.

5. Bullinger making the Pope that Roman Antichrist to be this little horn,
by the three kings would have signified, Leo the 3. the Emperor of Greece,
whom Gregory the 2. excommunicated for condemning of images, and took from
him the Exarchateship of Rauenna: and Childerichus king of France was deposed
by Pope Zachary: and Pope Leo the 3. obtained of Charles the Exarchateship and
government of Italy, the Longobards being overcome, and their king
Desiderius slain: But this cannot be the meaning for these reasons. 1. this
little horn signifies one king specially, then it is not properly referred to
many Popes, one succeeding another. 2. the Popes deposed and did excommunicate
many more kings and Emperors beside these. 3. and these 3. horns must be
plucked away before the other, to make a way for the little horn, not after
this horn is exalted.

6. Palychronius, who by this little horn rightly expounds Antiochus
Epiphanes, yet is deceived, in taking the Persians, Egyptians, and Jews, for
these three horns, ex Oeco. for the Egyptians had an horn by themselves, and
the Jews could not be an horn of this fourth beast, for they were pushed at
by the beast, they had no horns to push others withal.

7. Porphyrius likewise, taking this little horn to be Antiochus Epipha^es*
yet erreth herein: these three kings he takes to be Ptolome Euergetes, Ptolome
Philom^tor, and Artaxias king of Armenia, whom Antiochus subdued: for although
Antiochus reigned at the same time with Philometor, and overcame him, (wherein
Hierome is deceived, who thinks that Philometor was dead before Antiochus was
borne, for they reigned 11. years together, one in Syria, the other in Egypt,
Perer.) yet Ptolome Euergetes the Elder, was 40. years before Antiochus, and
Euergetes the younger, was twenty years after him: therefore neither of them
could be any of the kings s^bdued by Antiochus: And though he overcame Artaxias
king of Armenia, yet he took not from him his kingdom.

8. Iunius thinks that these were the three kings whom Antiochus subdued and
destroyed: Ptolome Philopator, whom he expelled out of Syria, joining with
Antiochus the great his father, and Seleucus his brother: then he deposed
Seleucus, and killed Demetrius his son, as he returned from Rome: But in this
last is Iunius deceived, for Demetrius the son reigned after Antiochus
Epiphanes, therefore he was not killed by him, not deposed: Neither could this
Demetrius being an hostage at Rome, procure while Epiphanes lived, to be king
of Syria, but after his death he was received by the Syrians, and first having
killed Lysias tutor of Antiochus Eupator, the son of Epiphanes, and then
Eupator himself, he got the kingdom: Thus Joseph. lib. 12. Antiquit. c. 15.
Livius. lib. 46. Appian: and Demetrius is none of the ten horns, quest. 26.
therefore he could be none of the 3. horns which were of the ten: some other
agree with Iunius, that these three forenamed were the three kings, but
Demetrius they think was not killed, but only deposed and kept from the
kingdom. H. Br.

9. Therefore these three rather were the kings, Ptolome Philopator, expelled
by Antiochus Epiphanes, Antiochus the great his father, See more appendix.
exercise 1. a^gum. 10.
whom he procured to be slain in a certain sedition, when his father went
about to spoil the Temple of Iuppiter Dodoneus, the third was his Elder
brother Seleucus Philopator, whose death he compassed likewise, Polan, and
Iunius leaves it as indifferent, whether Anti^chus the great, or Demetrius be
held to be the third king.

Quest. 29. Of other prop^rties of this little horn.
1. It is called little. 1. which some apply to the Turk in respect of his
small and obscure beginnings, Why the horn is called little.
for Mahomet was of obscure and base parentage: Pappus, Osiander. 2. Some
understand it of the Pope, who at the first gave himself titles of humility,
as ^ervus servorum, servant of servants. 3. Calvin understands it of Julius
Cesaer, who refused to be called king, but Tribune of the people. 4. Some
refer it to their Antichrist, which shall come in the end of the world, qui
ignobilis in obscuro loco nascitur, who should be very base, and borne in an
obscure place. Hugo. But these several opinions we before confuted, qu. 26.
qu. 27. 5. Therefore this is better understood of Antiochus Epiphanes, who is
resembled to a little horn, because he was younger brother to Seleucus
Philopator, and had no right to the kingdom, but it should have descended unto
Demetrius Seleucus son.

2. This little horn came up among the rest. 1. Some understand here, Why it
is (...) among the rest.
that inter ipsos and in terra eorum, etc. that this little horn or King shall
come up among the other kings, and in their land, Andreas ex Hugon. But how can
he come up among the ten kings, seeing three are plucked up before him to
make a way for him. 2. Some hold that these te^^e kings shall come in the end
of the world, and that this shall be the eleventh, whom they suppose to be
Antichrist. Hierom. Lyran. 3. But the meaning rather is, that it shall come up
among them, that is, be one of the ten, Iun. and he shall come up, as of
himself, intruding and usurping: for Antiochus Epiphanes had no right to the
kingdom, being the younger brother: yet, though he be one of the ten, he may
be said to be the eleventh, as differing from all the rest: see the like, Apoc.
17. 11. The beast, that was, and is not, is even the eight, and is one of the
seven.

3. This little horn had the eyes of a man. 1. They which apply it unto
Antichrist, do thereby insinuate, that he shall not be a devil, as some
think, but a man: though it be their opinion, that he shall be possessed of
the devil, who shall rule in him both in body and soul: the spirit of Satan
shall not be hypostatically joined unto him, as the Godhead in Christ, but
Satan shall dwell in him, as in those that are possessed, not tormenting him,
but in stirring of him up, and instructing him, and teaching him many hid
things: thus Hierome. Hugo adds further, that although Antichrist shall be
conceived of the seed of his parents, yet the devil shall enter into the
womb of his mother, cuius virtute nascetur puer, by whose power the child
shall be borne: and so by these eyes they understand the wonderful knowledge,
and magical science, which shall be infused into him by Satan. But all these
are men's fancies concerning Antichrist: in that he is said to have the eyes of
a man, an humane not diabolical science is insinuated. 2. Pintus expounds
the eyes of a man, of carnal wisdom, not spiritual. 3. Vatablus refers it
to the policy of the Turks. 4. Bullinger to the hypocrisy and subtlety of
the Pope. 5. Oecolampadius to both. 6. Calvin to the humanity of the
Emperors, that mad^ themselves in outward show, as one of the Senators, but
took all authority from them. 7. But it is a true description rather of
Antiochus Epiphanes: three properties are signified by these humane eyes:
first, that he should make an outward show of humanity, intending nothing else
but deceit and cruelty; then hereby his subtlety and cunning is expressed;
and thirdly his covetousness and ambitious greedy desire. Iun. Polan.

4. He has a mouth speaking presumptuous things. 1. that is, Antichrist shall
make himself God, and shall feign himself to be the Messiah, Hugo. he shall
speak great things, promise more then he can perform. Lyran. 2. Vatablus
understands it of the blasphemy of the Turk against God, and his Church: so
Melancth. O^iand. 3. Bullinger of the blasphemies of the Pope. 4. Oecolampadius
comprehends the blasphemies of them both: as the Turk denies Christ to be
the son of God, and says he was not crucified, but an other for him: he
prefers his law, before either Moses, or Christ's: So the Pope challenges to
be Christ's Vicar in earth, that he can not err, that he is the head and
husband of the church, that he has power to dispose of the kingdoms of the
earth, and give them to whom he will. 5. Calvin understands the terrible
threatenings of the Emperors of Rome against their enemies: who though they
pretended humanity, which is signified by their eyes, yet they were fierce and
cruel.

5. But it is better understood of the blasphemy of Antiochus, which he
uttered against God and his people, as is extant in the histories of him, (...).

30. Quest. Of the description of the glorious manner of Gods judgment,
expressed v. 9. to v. 15.
Here first is set forth the form and manner of the judgment it self, v. 9.
10. then the execution, v. 12. to v. 15. In the form of judgment four things
are described, 1. he which sat upon the throne. 2. the throne it self. 3. the
assistants. 4. the process in judgment.

1. He which sat upon the throne is described by three essential properties.
1. his eternity, he is called the Ancient of days, which also shows his
infinite wisdom, which is found in the ancient. 2. his authority, his
garments were white: which Hugo applies to Christ's transfiguration in mount
Tabor: but the white garment was a sign of authority, as Joseph, when he was
advanced by Pharaoh, had a white garment put upon him. 3. by his hair, which
was as pure wool, is signified his innocence and integrity in judgment.

2. First it is said, that thrones were set, in the plural: which some read,
thrones were cast down, understanding the thrones and kingdoms of the former
beasts, Iun. Polan. Vatab. but it is better interpreted, thrones were set up:
as the 24. Elders had their seats about the throne, Apoc. 4. 4. these thrones
were set as inferior seats for the Lords assistants the Angels, which title
of honor is vouchsafed unto them in Scripture, Calvin. then the throne of God
is set forth by three properties; it is fiery, which shows that all things
are manifest unto God: it has wheels, which signifies the celeritie of Gods
judgments: and a fiery stream issued forth, which shows the power of Gods
judgments, which none can resist, no more then the course of a stream can be
stayed.

3. The Angels, as Gods assistants in this judgment, are described, 1. by
their number, thousand thousands, and ten thousand thousands, a finite number
being taken for an infinite. 2. by their office, they are said to minister
unto God. 3. by their alacrity and readiness, they stand before him, as ready
at his beck to execute his will.

4. The process is set forth, the books were opened; the books of every man's
acts; as Princes in their judgments have books and evidence brought forth:
not that God needs any information, as terrene Judges, but to show the
equity of his judgment.

2. The execution follows, which is of two sorts, in justice, in condemning
the beasts, v. 11, 12. and in mercy, in setting up the kingdom of his son
Christ and his Church, v. 13, 14.

31. Quest. Whether the final judgment in the end of the world be here
described.
1. Some think that the form of the final judgment of the world is here set
forth, as they which either by the little horn understand Antichrist, who (as
they imagine) shall come in the end of the world, as Lyran. Hug. and likewise
they which by the fourth beast understand the Roman Empire, or the Turks, as
Bullin. Oecol. Osian. But seeing this vision, and that of the Image, c. 2. in
effect is all one: as there the stone cut out without hands, that dashed the
image in pieces, signifies Christ in his first, not in his second coming: for
that stone grew into a mountain and filled the earth, but after Christ comes
to judgment, his kingdom shall be at the full, it shall not afterward
increase: see this confirmed by other reasons, c. 2. qu. 55. So this judgment
here described must be referred unto Christ's first coming. And if the fourth
beast be the kingdom of the Seleucians, as is before proved at large, then
these thrones must be set, when that beast was destroyed.

2. Burgensis is of opinion, that the first vision concerns the first coming
of Christ, when he dashed the image in pieces, in that all idolatry of the
Gentiles was abolished at his coming: but this he refers to the final
judgment, when all the kingdoms and Monarchies of the earth shall be
destroyed, and Christ only shall reign. But Thoring takes exception here to
Burgensis, that all idolatry was not abolished at Christ's coming, seeing in
many nations it continued long after Christ's coming into the world, and yet in
Asia, Africa, and some places of Europe is practiced: This rather makes
against Burgensis, that seeing in this vision there is a description of the
four Monarchies, which were represented in that image, c. 2. that the same
manner of judgment by the coming of Christ, for the destruction of those
Monarchies, is in both places signified.

3. Calvin misliketh that this place should be understood of the second coming
of Christ, and yet he holds this fourth beast to be the Roman Empire: both
these can not stand together: for the Roman Empire was not judged nor
dissolved at the first coming of Christ.

4. Therefore by the judgment of God here showed in this manner to the
Prophet, is better understood the process of the divine justice against these
Monarchies, which were all dissolved before the first coming of Christ. In
like manner is the judgment of God described in the overthrow of Senacherib,
which came against Jerusalem, Psalm. 76^ 9, 10. Thou did cause thy judgment
to be heard from heaven, etc. when thou O Lord arose to judgment, to help all
the meek of the earth. Iun. Polan.

5. But yet we so understand here the judgment of God upon these kingdoms at
the first coming of Christ, as that it is also a type and figure of the final
judgment: this judgment begins at the first coming of Christ, Genevens.
and shall be perfected at his second coming, when all the enemies of Christ
and his Church universally shall be destroyed.

32. Quest. v. 9. Who is said to be the Ancient of days, and how.
1. Some understand here the person of the Father, because mention is made, v.
13. of the son of man, which approached unto the Ancient of days, Polan* so
also the ordinary gloss takes it: But Christ is there called the Son of
man, in respect of his humane nature: as he is God, he is the Ancient of
days, from all eternity, as God the Father is, as he is called the
everlasting father, Isa. 9. 6.

2. Some by the Ancient of days, understand Christ the Mediator, Christus
antiquus dierum introducitur, Christ is brought in as the ancient of days,
who is the lamb that was slain from the beginning of the world, Oecolampad.
But Christ as the Mediator God and man, is described afterward, v. 13. where he
is called the Son of man, and approaches to the ancient of days: the Son
of man then, and that Ancient of days, are not all one.

3. Wherefore by the Ancient of days, the everlasting God is signified, Iun.
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, who were from all eternity: for concerning
the person of the Father, our Savior says, My Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment to the Son, Job. 5. 22. So Hugo, Deus aeternus
iudicabit, the everlasting God shall judge: not God the Father only by his
son, as Osiand* but although the person of the Son only shall appear, non
deerit pater and spiritus sanctus, yet there shall not be wanting both the
father, and the holy Ghost, Vatab.

4. God is said to be the Ancient of days, both in respect of his eternity,
who was from the beginning before all time, and shall continue for ever, Job.
36. 26. The number of his years can not be searched out: And of his wisdom it
is said, Job. 12. 12. Among the ancient is wisdom, and in the length of days
is understanding.

33. Quest. How God was seen of Daniel, who is invisible.
1. God in his invisible nature, such as he is in his divine essence, was never
seen of any. The Apostle calls God the King everlasting, immortal,
invisible, 1. Tim. 1. 17. who dwells in light that none can attain unto,
whom never any man saw, neither can see, 1. Tim. 6. 16.

2. And yet, if God would not be seen at all, the Apostle would not have said
of Moses, that he saw him which is invisible, Heb. 11. 27. God then did show
some visible signs of his presence unto his servants, not being in deed any
such thing as he appeared, as fire, or any such thing: but he revealed
himself, and induit varias formas pro captu hominum, etc. and put on diverse
shapes according to men's capacity, as it was fit for them to see God, and they
were able to bear. Calv. Polan.

34. Quest. How judgment is said to be set, seeing God is Judge from
everlasting.
1. The Lord applies himself to our weakness and imbecillitie: for although
the Lord be Judge for ever, yet he does not always exercise judgment: So then
while the Lord suffers the wicked to prevail in the world, and deferreth
their punishment, he seems unto men not to sit in judgment: whereupon the
servants of God do utter these speeches, Psalm. 10. 1. Why stand thou so
far off, and hidest thee? Psalm. 13. 1. How long will thou forget me, O Lord?

2. But when the Lord shows himself, and sends forth his judgments, then
he seems to us to sit in his throne: as Psalm. 7. 6. the Prophet says, Arise
O Lord in thy wrath, and list up thy self against the rage of mine enemies: we
do not (so effectually) acknowledge God to be judge, nisi vbi reipsa se talem
ostenderit, as when he shows himself so in deed. Calv. Polan.

35. Quest. What the fire signifies, which issued from the throne.
1. All things about the throne are fiery, to signify that God is ignis
consumens, a consuming fire: he shall as a fire consume his enemies round
about, Hug. 2. It also signifies, Iucem inaccessibilem, the light not to be
attained unto, wherein God dwells, Pintus. 3. Deus voluit me^um incutere
prophetae, God by this terrible vision would strike a fear and reverence into
the Prophet, Calvin. 4. As fire is bright and gives light, so hereby is
showed, that all things are known unto God, and nothing can be hid from him:
and that the judgment of God shall be manifest to all the world. Perer. 5. His
throne is compared to fire, propter zelum veritatis, for the zeal of the
truth: he shall come to judgment with zeal of justice as hot as fire, Lyran.
6. And as the fire has two properties, it purifieth gold, and consumes
stubble: so God shall come as fire, vt malos puniat, bonos purget, to punish
the evil, and to purge the good^ gloss inter. 7. By the wheels is shadowed
forth, incredibilis pernicitas, his incredible swiftnes to judgment, Polan.
and they are fiery, quod eius accessus impediri ^equit, because his coming
can not be hindered, Oecolampad. 8. A fiery stream issued and came forth,
wherein three things are signified, poenarum perpetuit as per fluvium, the
perpetui^ie of the punishment of the wicked by the flood; acerbitas per ignem,
the sharpnes thereof by the fire; potestas per rapidum motum, the power, in
that it issues, Hugo. like as the course of a stream can not be stayed,
Polan. 9. And three properties of the judgments of God are here noted: they
are constantissima, perlustrantia, pervadentia omnia, they are constant, as the
flood always runs; they lighten all places, as the fire; and go through
every where, as a flood still issuing forth, and running along. Iun.

36. Quest. Of the number of Angels that ministered unto God: thousand
thousands, etc. v. 10.
Some have taken upon them to scanne the number of the Angels, where there are
diverse opinions. 1. Athanasius reports the opinion of some, (...).
that thought there were so many Angels as men, because of that place, Deuteronomy.
32. 8. which the Septuag. thus translate, he appointed the number of the
people, according to the number of the Angels: But this text proves no such
thing, which is thus truly translated, he appointed the borders of the people
according to the number of the children of Israel.

2. Gregory seems to be of opinion, Hom. 34. in Evangel.
that there are more men put good and bad together, then Angels good and bad:
for first he sets this down, that there shall be as many men elected as
Angels: but there are far more men damned, then are saved: contrariwise he
thinks that there are more elect Angels then reprobate angels, as some would
gather by that place, Apoc. 12. 4. how the dragon with his tail drew the third
part of the stars of heaven: If then the elect men be equivalent in number to
the elect Angels, and the reprobate men are more then the elect, but the
reprobate angels are fewer then the elect Angels; it will follow that the
number of men is greater, then of Angels. But this opinion is builded upon an
uncertain ground, that the number of the elect among men, is equivalent to the
number of the elect Angels.

3. A third opinion is, that the number of Angels, far exceeds the number
of men. Athanasius says, that some thought, the Angels in number were more
then men, as 99. to one; which they would gather out of that parable of the
lost sheep, when the shepherd left 99. to seek that one. Lyranus, whom
Pererius follows, makes this collection, that as the celestial bodies the
stars do in bigness far exceed the things below, for one star is
bigger then the earth: in the same proportion because Angels do not exceed
men in quantity, they do exceed them, incomparabiliter in numerositate,
without comparison in number.

4. But these things are more boldly then certainly affirmed: out of this place
no such thing can be gathered: for it is agreed of all hands, that here a
certain and finite number is put for an indefinite: as Hierome says, non quia
ministrorum Dei numerus definitus sit, etc. not that the number of Gods
ministers is here defined, etc. but because a greater number can not be
expressed by man's speech. Yet as touching this question, some things may
certainly be resolved upon, some things are doubtful: 1. that the number of
elect men is smaller then of the reprobate, is certain: for many enter in at the
broad gate, and few find out the narrow way, Matthew. 7. 13, 14. 2. But the
number of the elect Angels is greater then of those which fell: because the
Prophet says, when he showed the young man the Lords fiery horse and chariots
round about upon the mountains, They that are with us, are more then they
which be with them, 2. king. 6. 16. And in Scripture the good Angels are
expressed in greater numbers, then the evil: we read in the Gospel of 12.
legions of Angels, Matthew. 26. 53. but of one legion of devils, Mark. 5. 9. And
in this place, ten thousand thousands of Angels are named. These things are
certain. These following are probable. 3. That the number of the Elect men is
greater then of the evil and reprobate angels, as Augustine thinks, lib. 22.
de civ. ca.
that the angels which fell shall be supplied out of the numbers of the Elect:
As our blessed Sauiout said unto his Apostles, Have I not chosen you twelve,
and one of you is a devil, Ioh. 6. 70. there was one devil to 12. elect
Apostles. 4. Likewise the number of the elect Saints may seem to be greater
then of the elect Angels, by that vision Apoc. 4. the four beasts about the
throne represent the blessed Angels, the 24. Elders the Saints. 5. It may be
also coniectured, that the Elect Angels are more in number then the Saints
which are at once upon the earth; because two hosts of Angels attended at once
upon Jacob, Genesis 32. 1. when his brother Esau came against him, whereupon he
called the place Mahana^m, the Lords hosts. 6. But whether the Angels good and
bad, be equivalent in number to men good and bad, that live at once upon the
earth, it can not be gessed at. And let this suffice of this question: It is
not safe wading too far without a bottom. Concerning the diverse offices and
degrees of Angels, which Pererius takes occasion here to note, it shall be
discussed among the controversies following.

37. Quest. What books these were which were opened, v. 10.
1. Hierome, whom Lyranus, and gloss. ordinar. follow, understands here two
books, the one of life, which is held in Gods hand, the other of death, qui
tenebitur in manu accusatoris, which shall be held in the accusers hand, which
is the devil. But 1. as Augustine says, non sic datur liber mortis, etc.
there is not found to be a book of death, as there is of life; only they
which are elected are said to be written, and the reprobate not to be written
in the book of life. 2. And whereas Pererius answers, that though there be
no such book of death with God, yet the devil may, have such a book: neither
does the devil know who are saved, who condemned, and therefore he can have no
such book: neither is there any book mentioned in Scripture, but of the Lords
writing, as Moses says, Exodus 32. 32. Raze me out of the book of life which
thou have written. 3. Apoc. 20. 12. there are other books said to be opened
beside the book of life; then is not the book of life here comprehended.

2. Augustine by these books, lib. 2 de civit. Dei, c. 14.
understands the Saints which shall come with Christ to judgment, In whose
godly life and conversation the good will of God appeared: and in them the
wicked, as in books may see, what they should have done: But by the opening of
these books not only the wicked, but the rightehus are judged: Apoc. 20. 12.
The dead were judged of those things, which are written in the books.

3. Beda by these books which shall be opened in the day of the Lord,
understands the sacred Scriptures, according to the which men's doings shall
be examined, and sentence given according to the same: But the Scriptures are
called a book, Apoc. 10. 9. not books.

4. Calvin by the opening of the books, would have signified the manifestation
of the knowledge of God unto the world at the coming of Christ, which before
lay hid: But here books are not opened for instruction unto salvation, but for
trial and examination unto judgment.

5. Therefore these books are better interpreted to be every ones conscience,
wherein all their doings good and bad are written: whereof S. Paul speaks,
Their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one an
other, or excusing, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ, Romans 2. 15. And thus are those books interpreted, Apoc. 20. 12. The
dead, were judged of those things, which were written in the books, according
to their works. So Hierome, conscientiae, and opera singulorum in vtraque
part, bona vel mala revelabuntur, the consciences and works of every one shall
be revealed whether good or bad, etc. To the same purpose also Rupertus. As
here the acts and works of this fourth beast are examined before sentence
given.

6. But as Chrysostom well notes, these books are not opened, that God
should receive information thereby, to whom all men's hearts are opened: like
as in earthly tribunalls, books are brought forth, non so^um vt princeps in
instruatur, sed vt iudicium iustum appareat, not only to inform the Prince,
but that the judgment may appear just, etc. So God opens every man's
conscience, that they may themselves see and confess, that their judgment is
most just, whether to life or death. Oecolampad.

38. Quest. Of the destruction of the fourth beast, v. 11.
v. 11. I beheld till the beast was slain, etc. Hierome, whom Lyranus
follows, understands this of the destruction of Antichrist, in the end of
the world, whom Christ shall destroy with the spirit of his mouth: so also
Vatablus, Antichristus significatur and eius membra, Antichrist is signified,
and his members. But in this sense this prophecy should not yet be fulfilled,
whereas it is evident, that all this was fulfilled before the first coming of
Christ.

2. Calvin applying this to the Roman Empire, thinks that the beast was
destroyed when the Empire began to decay, which was immediately after Traiane
the Emperors time: for after that time, well nigh these 15. hundred years,
nullus Romano potitus est Imperio, none has enjoyed the Roman Empire: But,
though the state of that Empire was somewhat empayred, yet it was not then
wholly destroyed, but continued in great power and glory many hundred years
after Traians time: but here the beast is slain, and his body utterly
destroyed.

3. Bullinger expounds this of the ruin of the Papal kingdom.

4. Osiander of the decay of the Turkish dominion, together with the Roman
Empire: so also Oecolampad. expounds it of the destruction of the Pope and
Turk together, by that prophecy Apoc. 19. 20. of the taking of the beast, and
the false prophet. But these prophesies must be distinguished: Daniels
extends to the first coming of Christ, John's Revelation to the second.

5. Iunius in his Commentary, applies this prophecy unto Antiochus
Epiphanes: his judgment is set forth in three degrees. 1. the beast is slain:
the death of Epiphanes is foreshewed, who having received evil tidings first
at Persepolis, then at Elymais fell into a grievous and incurable disease, as
is set forth, 1. Macchab. 6. 2. Macchab. 9. 2. his body is destroyed: his
armies were overthrown, and all his posterity rooted out: for Antiochus
Eupator his son reigned not above 3. years, and in him the whole family of
Epiphanes was extinct, and the kingdom returned to the right heirs. 3. his
body is given to the burning fire: whereby is signified the grievous torments
of his disease, which he endured, 2. Macch. 9.

6. But seeing Antiochus Epiphanes is the little horn of the fourth beast, and
this judgment belongs to the whole beast; here rather is described the ruin
and destruction of the whole kingdom of the Seleucians: the meaning then is
this rather: 1. that the power of the Seleucians after Epiphanes began to
abate, and their kingdom to be much ^olested by enemies without, the Parthians
and Armenians, and by commotions within: and so the beast was slain: See
appendix in the end of the book, exercise 1. argu. 8. answ. 3. and argu. 11.
answ. 1.
then the body of the beast was destroyed: the kingdom being taken from the
house of the Seleucians, and given to Tygranes king of Armenia, as Iustine
writes, lib. 40. And this body was given to the fire, when Tigranes being
taken, the kingdom was dissolved, and made a Province by Pompey. Polan.

39. Quest. v. 12. When the other beasts had their dominion taken away, and how
their lives were prolonged.
1. Some do interpret these words by the time past, that before the
destruction of this last beast, the other three had been destroyed: so Calvin,
Vatablus: ante interitum quartae bestiae evanuera^t, they had vanished away
before the overthrow of the fourth beast, Osiand. And though mention be made
hereof after the destruction of the fourth beast, yet the other beasts were
before removed and taken out of the way, Calvin. But to what end is it said
that after the dominion of the other three beasts was taken away, their lives
were prolonged, if there had not been some remainder of the other Monarchies,
the Chaldean, Persian, and Grecian, after their dominion ceased.

2. Some on the contrary he think, that here is signified a prorogation and
continuance of other kingdoms, after the fourth beast is destroyed: for after
Antichrist is destroyed, non statim omnes reges sine onima regna cessabu^^, not
presently shall all the kings or kingdoms of the earth cease, but they shall
have a time given them to repent, Hugo. But it is evident by the interpretation
of the Angel, v. 26, 27. that after the dominion of the fourth beast is taken
away, then all these dominions shall cease, and all the kingdom and dominion
shall be given to the people of God: Christ only shall reign.

3. Bullinger thinks, that here is showed a difference between the ruin of
this fourth kingdom, and the other three: innuit nullum ex omnibus regnis tam
horribilem consequutum esse exitum, etc. he shows that none of all the other
kingdoms, had so horrible an end, as this last. True it is that there is a
difference, for there was some remainder of the other Monarchies, after they
were deprived of their dominion, but this fourth had nothing remaining, it was
utterly destroyed: yet this is not all: here is described the end of all those
kingdoms together: that although the Lord had forborne them a great while, yet
at length they are judged.

4. Oecolampadius and Pelican make this the meaning, that whereas in the
dissolution of the other kingdoms, one still succeeded another, post hunc
quartum non sequutura alia, after this fourth, which he expounds of
Antichrist, there shall follow no other: But this according to our former
exposition (the fourth beast being understood to be the kingdom of the
Seleucians) cannot stand: for the Roman Monarchy succeeded, which destroyed
all the rest.

5. Hierome, whom the ordinar. gloss. follows, so takes this prophecy, as
that together with Antichrist, Romanum imperium, and alia omnia regna
delabuntur, the Roman Empire, and all other kingdoms shall be destroyed in
the end of the world: But this prophecy is not to be referred unto the second
coming of Christ, it must be understood of his first coming, as is before
showed, quest. 31.

6. The interlinear, gloss. expounds these words, their lives were prolonged,
of the elect and Saints, which should live under the reign of Antichrist: But
here is no mention made of the Saints, but of the beasts, whose lives should be
prolonged till the time appointed.

7. Lyranus, whereas it is said, their lives were prolonged for a certain time
and season, understands by the first time, the persecution of the faithful
before the first coming of Christ, by the second the persecution following
unto the second coming of Christ: But it is evident; that all these four
beasts must be destroyed before the Messiah should come in the flesh, and take
possession at his ascension of his everlasting kingdom.

8. Wherefore this is the meaning, that together with the fourth beast should
be destroyed the remainder of the other kingdoms, and all should be dissolved
by the Romans: there was some relics of the ancient Monarchies, after their
dominion ceased, as of the Babylonians in the Armenians, of the Persians in the
kingdom of the Parthians, of the Grecians in the kingdom of Macedonia, and
Egypt: But all these were utterly extinguished by the Romans, Iun. Pol. Perses
the last king of Macedonia was subdued by P. Aemilius, and the kingdom made a
Province of the Roman Empire: and this was in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes,
then some 90. years after that the kingdom of Syria was by Pompey reduced to
the form of a province: and some 50. year after Augustus ouercomming Antonie
and Cleopatra, made a province of Egypt, ex tabul. chron. Bulling.

Quest. 40. Why it is said, v. 13. one like the son of man.
1. Lyranus thinks that this note of similitude is added, quia plus est quam
filius hominis, because Christ is more then the son of man, he is also the
son of God: But the Prophet describes here the figure of man, which he saw:
the Godhead could not be figured.

2. Pintus gives this sense: quasi non similitudinem significat, sed
certissimam confirmationem: this word as or like, signifies not here a
similitude, but a most certain confirmation, as the word is taken, Ioh. 1. 14.
we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten son of the
father. But it cannot be so taken here, because Christ was not yet incarnate
indeed.

3. Oecolampadius understands this to be spoken of Christ now tryumphing in
glory, he was as the son of man, that is true man, but not now mortal and
subject to humane infirmities, as other men are, and therefore he is said to be
like: he is not now altogether the same: But as yet the son of man had not
taken upon him our nature, with the infirmities thereof: therefore this cannot
conveniently be understood of the laying aside and putting off those
infirmities.

4. The ordinar. gloss. expounds this by that place, Philippi. 2. 7. He took
upon him the form of a servant, and was made like unto man: But in this place,
as Calvin well notes, non loquitur de essentia naturae humanae, sed de statu,
the Apostle speaks not of the essence of humane nature, but of the state and
condition: that Christ came in a lowely state and condition, as the Apostle
said before in the form of a servant: But the son of man is here seen in
the clouds, and in glory: his humble and abject state cannot be here signified.

5. Iunius in his commentary gives this sense, in similitudine carnis peccati
verus hominis silius, the true son of man in the similitude of sinful
flesh, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. 3. And therefore he is said to be as
the Son of man.

6. But the better sense is: that he is said to be as the Son of man, because
he saw only a figure of the son of man: for at this time, when Daniel saw
this, he was not yet the Son of man, but was to be borne, and become man in
his time: Bulling. quia nondum induerat Christus carnem nostram, because Christ
had not yet put on our flesh: yea after Christ was incarnate, when he was seen
figuratively in vision, he is said to be as the Son of man, as Revel. 14. 14.
I saw upon the cloud one sitting; as the son of man: because he was not
seen in his substance, but in figure only.

Quest. 41. How he is said to come in the clouds and approach to the Ancient
of days, and when.
R. Leui understanding this of the Messiah, by the ancient of days would have
signified him, that shall be at that time over the Roman Empire, and shall
entreat him for his people, as Moses did Pharaoh for the Israelites: But these
Rabbines show themselves herein maliciously blind, and grossly absurd: to
apply that to the terrene state, which is here meant of Christ's spiritual and
eternal kingdom: and the ancient of days which is God, to make a mortal
man: and the son of man coming in the clouds, to understand in base and
suppliant manner to come unto a mortal Prince.

2. R. Saadia understands this also of the Messiah, that he shall come as was
prophesied of him sitting upon an ass, that is, in great lowliness, and in
the clouds, armies of Angels shall attend upon him, and that great dominion
shall be given, as the ancient of days, that is, sicut domini filiorum
hominum, as they which are Lords among men, etc. But herein also is his error:
1. he confounds the first coming of Christ, which was in humility, and his
second coming, which should be in glory. 2. he dreameth of a temporal
kingdom. 3. he misinterpreteth the ancient of days, which he applies to
mortal men.

3. The most of the Christian writers do here understand the second coming of
Christ to judgment: as Lyran. Hugo. gloss. So also Oecolampad. Bulling.
Pererius grants that in the vision of the image, c. 2. the stone cut out
without hands does signify Christ in his first coming: but here he thinks
that Christ is described coming unto judgment, because so it is said, Matthew.
24. then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds, etc. And
because this apparition of the Son of man follows after the destruction of
Antichrist.

But 1. Christ also ascending to his father was taken up in the clouds. 2. the
little horn of the fourth beast, signifies not Antichrist, but typically and
by way of analogy: it historically is meant of Antiochus Epiphanes, as is
before showed. 3. seeing the same Monarchies and kingdoms are described in the
vision, c. 2. and this, c. 7. the same destruction and extinguishing of the
kingdoms in both places must be insinuated. 4. neither is this aptly referred
to Christ's second coming, but to that his coming, which followed upon the
dissolution of that fourth kingdom, which was of the Seleucians in Syria: as
is showed before, quest. 22. and quest. 26. 5. Iunius understands the
approaching of Christ to the Ancient of days, of Christ's ascension unto his
father: but the coming in or with the clouds, he applies to Christ's coming
into the world, to finish the work of our redemption, deitas illius figuratur
aduentu e nubibus, his deity is prefigured, by his coming out of the clouds,
Inn, annot. so also Calvin thinks the meaning is, that Christ though he were
the son of man, yet differed much from all mankind, etc. his beginning was
from heaven, ours is from the earth.

6. But all these are better joined together, to set forth the glorious
ascension of our Blessed Savior: which type we see fulfilled, Act. 1. where
Christ ascended up in a cloud: by this approaching to the Ancient of days, is
signified his equality with his father: he approached ad aequalitatem
Deipatris, to be equal to his father in the divine essence, Lyran. Bulling.
and to sit at the right hand of God his father, Vatab. they brought him before
him, that is, he offered and presented himself to his father: for so in the
Chalde tongue the third person plural is used impersonally, Iun. or else the
Angels rejoicing at the ascension of Christ, attended upon him, when he
ascended in triumph to his father, as Iustine Martyr expounds, dialog. cum
Tryphon. Polan.

7. And that this part of the vision is rather understood of Christ's first
coming into the world, and his returning to his father, then of his second
coming to judgment, these two reasons out of the text it self may persuade.
1. because this dominion is here given unto Christ: but Christ received his
kingdom at his resurrection from the dead, when he said to his Apostles, all
power is given unto me in heaven, and earth: tunc regnum suum auspicatus est,
then Christ began his kingdom, Calv. it was not deferred till his second
coming: Oecolampadius answers, nouo modo datur illi gloria, quam in membris
suis accipit, etc. then after a new manner glory shall be given him, because
he shall receive it in his members, etc. But it is evident, that this is meant
of Christ's receiving this kingdom in himself, though for his members: because
he is brought to the Ancient of days, as it were to sit down in the throne
with him, which cannot be understood of his members. 2. the kingdom under the
whole heaven is said to be given unto the holy people, v. 27. but the
celestial and heavenly kingdom cannot be said to be under heaven: therefore
it is not meant of the Church tryumphant in heaven, but of the Militant in
earth.

8. And yet we so understand this of the first coming of Christ, Rupert. lib.
1. (...) in Daniel. c. 12.
as that we say with Rupertus, in primo aduentu coeptum fat^mur, quod in
secundo consummandum est, we confess this kingdom to begin in the first
coming of Christ, which shall be finished in his second, etc. and that Christ's
kingdom then took beginning he shows by that text, Ioh. 12. 31. now is the
judgment of this world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out.

Quest. 42. That this kingdom could not be the kingdom of the Macchabees.
v. 14. And he gave him dominion and honor, etc. 1. Porphyrie by this kingdom
understands, the prosperous government of the Macchabees, who obtained
diverse victories against Antiochus, and procured the liberty of their
country. 2. But this cannot be. 1. Theodoret thus reasons: this kingdom
here given shall never be taken away: but this government of the Macchabees
continued not long: Judas governed three years, Ionathas 31. Simon 8. years:
but afterward the country of the Jews was oppressed again: And though we
take the whole time of the Macchabees which succeeded, it continued not above
an 126. years, till the time of Herod, who deprived them of the kingdom: to
this purpose Theodoret. 2. this kingdom shall be over all the world: but the
Macchabees only ruled in Judea, Perer. 3. whereas this Son of man comes in
the clouds, and approaches unto the Ancient of days, it cannot be showed how
this should agree unto mortal men.

Quest. 43. That this kingdom is the kingdom of Christ our Blessed Lord and
Savior.
1. The Jews seek by their cauils and shifts to obscure this clear
prophecy, and first object, that Christ's kingdom is not here understood:
Secondly, they argue, that Christ is that little home, which came out of the
fourth beast.

1. The first they would thus prove. 1. the fifth kingdom must destroy the
fourth beast, but Christ at his coming did not dissolve the Roman Empire, it
then most of al flourished under Augustus and Tiberius. 2. the fifth kingdom
must be distinct from the fourth: but the kingdom of Christ flourished under
the Roman Empire, being advanced by Constantine, and other Christian
Emperors. 3. this fifth kingdom shall be of all other the most mighty: but
there are other kingdoms mightier then the Christans, as the Turkish power. 4.
this fifth kingdom must continue for ever: but the kingdom of Christianity
decreaseth, and is more and more empayred.

2. That Christ is that little horn, out of the fourth beast, and so
consequently not this fifth kingdom, thus they object. 1. this horn was
little in respect of the obscure beginning, so was Christ's rising up obscure.
2. this horn speaks proud things: so Christ said he was without sin, that
he was the son of God. 3. this horn changes times and laws: so Christ
violated the Sabbath, and abolished the ceremonies of Moses. 4. and as this
horn was to continue a time, two times, and an half, that is, three years
and an half: so Christ preached just so many years.

Contra. 1. Their reasons upon the first point are easily answered. 1. It is
denied that the Roman Empire is the fourth beast, but rather the kingdom of
the Seleucians in Syria, which was destroyed before the coming of the Messiah.
2. And so Christ's kingdom was distinct from the fourth, and from all other
terrene kingdoms and dominions: they are earthly and temporal: Christ's is
spiritual and eternal: the Christian faith is maintained under the Roman
Empire: yet it is far differing from it: the Jews here imagine, that this
fifth kingdom should be a temporal and external kingdom in the world, such
as they dream of their Messiah, but therein they are deceived: for our blessed
Savior himsefe says, that he came not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
Matthew. 21. and he said to Pilate, that his kingdom was not of this world: yea
the thief who was converted upon the cross understood as much, saying to
Christ, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: therefore Christ had
no temporal kingdom in this world, but spiritual, in which respect it was
diverse and distinct from all other earthly kingdoms: See more hereof cap. 2.
que. 58. 3. And though this kingdom of the Messiah does not always show it
self mightier in this world, in external power, then other kingdoms: yet the
spiritual power thereof far exceeds all temporal dominion; seeing even
those terrene powers, which persecuted the gospel of Christ, were by the power
thereof subdued unto the faith, as Constantine the Empecour, and other
Christian Emperors and Kings, which maintained the Christian faith: according
to the prophecy of Isay, 49. 23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and
Queens thy nursing mothers. 4. though the terrene bounds and limits of those
kingdoms, which prof^sse the gospel of Christ, may sometime be enlarged,
sometime empayred: yet the spiritual kingdom of Christ is not conquered,
which triumphs in the mids of the greatest trialls and afflictions of his
servants: and it is most certain, though the Church of Christ may be
translated from one kingdom to another, yet it shall remain as long as the
earth endures, and after shall reign in heaven for ever.

2. Concerning the other objection, that Christ should be this little horn. 1.
The most of these arguments are answered before, quest. 27. 7. to the which
place I refer the Reader. 2. Christ violated not the Sabbath, but taught the
right use of the Sabbath against the superstitious observations of the Jews.
3. though this little horn was to rage against the Saints, 3. years and a
half, it follows not because Christ preached no longer, that he should be
this little horn: every mean Logician knows, what an inartificiall kind of
reasoning it is to conclude affirmatively in the second figure: as thus: this
little horn shall rage 3. years and an half, Christ preached 3. years and
half, Ergo, he is this little horn: Beside there is great difference between
raging and tyrannizing against the Saints, and preaching to the Saints: so that
beside the failing in the form of the argument, they assume not right. 4. But
that Christ no ways can be this little horn, it is evident: for these horns
must be kings, and kings of the fourth kingdom or Monarchy, and it must
pluck away three kings before it, but Christ was no king neither of the
Syrian, nor Roman kingdom: neither can it be showed how he removed 3. kings
before him. 2. and after this horn is taken away, it is said the Saints should
have the kingdom: but after Christ was put to death, the people of the Jews
were more afflicted, then they were before: and within few years their city
and Temple were destroyed by the Romans: Therefore this their assertion, is
most blaspemous and absurd, that Christ should be this little horn. 3. Those
Rabbines are more reasonable, which do understand this kingdom of the
Messiah, as R. Iesua, Ab. Ezra, R. Saadia: though herein they fail in dreaming
of a temporal kingdom, which should be raised by their Messiah.

Quest. 44. That this kingdom given to the Son of man, shall not be in
earth: against the Chiliastes.
1. Some of the ancient writers were of opinion, that after 6. thousand years
(for so long they held the world should continue, for every of the six days
of the creation counting a thousand years) Christ should come, and reign with
his Saints a thousand years in all prosperity in the earth: they should be
raised from the dead (which they call the first resurrection) and live in peace
and all happiness, marrying wi^es, and begetting children: And after these
thousand years Satan should be let loose, and then should be the greatest
persecution that ever was by Antichrist, after which time the dead should be
raised to life, which they say is the second resurrection, and then the Saints
should reign with Christ in heaven for ever.

2. Of this opinion was Papias, whom Ireneus affirms to have been one of
John's disciples: who for his antiquity moved others to embrace the same
opinion: as Justinius dialog: cum Tryphon. Iereneus, Tertullian, also as Hierome
thinks, lib. 11. in Ezekiel, Victorinus in Apocalypse. Lactantius also, and
Seruius Sulpitius: But the simplicity of Papias gave occasion to this error,
who understood literally those things which the Apostles spiri^ually meant, of
the glory and peace of Christ's kingdom: and to Eusebius gives this testimony
of Papias, that he was a man, ingenij perquam tenuis, of a verse slender wit,
as may appear by his writings.

3. The chief ground of this error is by the mistaking of that place, Apocal.
20. 2. that Satan should be bound for a thousand years: and that the Saints
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years: this is the first
resurrection: But this place makes nothing at all for this opinion, as shall
be showed afterward.

4. Cerinthus the heritike had the like conceit of Christ's reigning in earth a
thousand years, as Eusebius testifies, lib. 3. histor. Ecclesiast. c. 22.
(...)
But herein they differed: Cerinthus thought, that men under this kingdom of
Christ should live in carnal pleasure and voluptuousness. This opinion
Augustine always misliked, but he confesses that sometime he approved the
other, lib. 20. de ciuit. dei c. 7.

Cont^a. But now briefly it shall be showed how vain and false this opinion
is. 1. Our Blessed Savior himself says, that his kingdom is not of this
world. 2. Christ's kingdom is perpetual, it is an everlasting dominion, which
never shall be taken away, v. 14. but this kingdom which they imagine, shall
be but for a thousand years. 3. They which held this opinion, thought that the
last of the six thousand years was begun many years since: Augustine
thought that in his time the last of the six thousand was entered, following
the erroneous account of the Septuag. from the beginning of the world: and
Lactantius who lived in Constantines time, thought that there were but 200.
years remaining of the six thousand: In their opinion then, now the eight
thousand year should be a foot, and yet their supposed kingdom is not
begun.

4. But as concerning that place in the Revelation, The thousand years
expounded, Apoc. ^0. 2. during which time Satan should be bound.
it is greatly mistaken by them: there are diverse expositions thereof. 1.
Pererius by the first resurrection understands the deliverance of the souls
from the bodies, and their receiving up into heaven: and by the thousand years
he would have signified, taking a finite number for an indefinite, all that
time, which the souls of the Saints should reign in heaven with Christ til
his second coming: But this cannot be the meaning: for after these thousand
years expired, Satan shall be loose: now at Christ's coming Satan shall be
more bound then ever he was, and receive his everlasting doom.

2. Some do understand here the liberty which Christ's Church shall have in
earth, but by a thousand years they think no definite or certain time to be
expressed: but in prophetical predictions, numbers must be taken properly and
literally, especially, where a time is limited: as after these 1000. years
Satan must be let loose: if now a certain time be not defined, before his
loosing the Church should have no certain direction to expect it, and so they
should have small use of this prophecy.

3. Some do understand here precisely so many years, as are named: and some
begin the account from Christ's nativity, and end it in the time of Pope
Siluester the second: Genevens. Some begin in the 36. year after Christ, and
extend the 1000. years unto the time of Hildebrand called Gregory the 7. that
forcerer, whom Satan used as his instrument in oppressing the Church of Christ,
Iun. annot. in Apocalypse. But both these do make the 300. years of
persecution under the Roman Emperors, a part of this thousand years when
Satan should be bound, which cannot be, for then Satan raged against Christ
and his members.

4. Therefore these thousand years for that reason must begin, after the 10.
persecutions under the Roman Empire, in the time of Constantine the great:
from thence Satan was shut up for a 1000. years, unto the time of John
Wickleffe, and John Husse: then began again the general persecutions of
Christ's Church, Fox Martyrolog. p. 101. And by the first resurrection is
understood the renewing of the soul, and the rising from dead works by the
preaching of the Gospel: So S. Paul understands this first resurrection,
Romans 6. 4. Coloss 3. 1. and in diverse other places.

Quest. 45. Of the excellency of Christ's kingdom beyond other kingdoms.
1. It excels all other kingdoms in the continuance and diuturnitie: the
spiritual kingdom of our Blessed Savior has already continued 16. hundred
years, and shall endure unto the end of the world, and be perfited for ever
to remain in the next. Among earthly Monarchies, the kingdom of the Assyrians
was of the longest time: but it reached not to a 1400. years: but the kingdom
of Christ shall be everlasting. 2. none of these terrene kingdoms was
universal over all the world: but all nations and languages have been subdued
to the spiritual kingdom of Christ. 3. It excels in force and efficacy:
other kingdoms have but power over the goods and bodies of men: but this
kingdom of Christ works upon the soul and conscience. 4. Other kingdoms
do but intend the public peace, and maintenance of civil society: this
kingdom delivers men from the dominion of sin and Satan, and planteth in
them true verity and piety. 5. Other kingdoms have been enlarged by force
and arms: but Christ's kingdom has been propagated by humility and
patience: Our Blessed Savior has founded by his glorious passion, and his
faithful servants the Martyrs, have by their patient and constant sufferings
propagated the church. 6. This kingdom in the excellency of laws and
precepts far surpasses all other: If the Prophet David spoke such excellent
things of the law of Moses, Psalm. 19. 4. The law of the Lord is perfect
converting the soul, the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom
unto the simple: much more excellent is the Gospel of Christ: which is a
perfect rule of righteousness, which was first preached by the Lord himself.
7. They differ in the end: Terrene kingdoms do but procure the outward peace
and welfare of the people: but the gospel and kingdom of Christ do bring the
faithful unto everlasting life. 8. Lastly, these kingdoms are diverse in
respect of their governors: These terrene dominions are ruled many times by
unwise, often by unjust, but always by infirm, mortal, and weak men: But
this spiritual kingdom of the Church, has a Prince most prudent, most just,
most mighty: as the Prophet Esaias describes this Blessed Prince, (...) 9. 7.
by six titles: which may thus be sorted out to these properties before named:
two of them show his power; he is wonderful and mighty, two of them his
wisdom, he is a counselor, and the Prince of peace; by his heavenly
wisdom procuring the everlasting peace of his Church: and for his justice, he
is an everlasting father, not as an hard Lord over his people, but governing
them as a foster father: And all these three, his wisdom, justice, and power,
are comprehended in that one title, he is the mighty God.

Quest. 46. How the kingdom of Christ is said to be everlasting, seeing it
shall be delivered up unto God, 1. Cor. 15. 24.
1. Whereas the Apostle says, then shall be the end, when he has delivered
the kingdom to God, 1. Cor. 15. 24. and verse. 28. And when all things shall be
subdued unto him, then shall the son also himself be subject unto him, that
did subdue all things under him, etc. Some understand this of Christ in his
members: Sancti, in quibus viuit filius puriss^me agnoscunt Regem ac dominum,
the Saints, in whom the Son lives, shall heartily acknowledge their Lord and
king: and so Christ in his members shall be subject unto God: Oecolampad. But
it is evident in the text, that the Apostle speaks of Christ in his own
person: v. 24. He shall deliver the kingdom to God the father, when he has
put down all rule, etc. But Christ himself, and not his members, does subdue
and put down all rule, etc.

2. Some do thus interpret the Apostle, that Christ as man and head of his
Church, shall: be subject unto God, and deliver up the kingdom unto his
father, Geneuens. who is said then to be subject to his father as man, not that
he was not subject before, but because the Church which is his body, which
shall be also subject, is not yet perfect, Beza. This is most true, that the
Son as man, is subject unto God: as Augustine says, Christus vt Deus nos cum
patre subiectos habet, vt sacerdos nobiscum patri subiectus est* Christ as God
together with his father has us subject unto him, as he is the Priest, he is
together with us subject to his father, lib. 1. de Trinitat. cap. 8. yet this
does not fully satisfy how Christ shall deliver up his kingdom; for as he is
the Son of man, he is said here to have a^ everlasting kingdom, and he shall
be adored and worshipped for ever, as the king of his Church.

3. Therefore this is to be understood of the manner of his kingdom: that it
shall not be administered in the next world as now, per ministerium verbi and
sacramentorum, by the ministry of the word, and Sacraments, Osiand. And that
part of Christ's kingdom shall cease, which is exercised in the subduing and
vanquishing of his enemies: for then there shall be no enemies at all to be
subdued: this execution of Christ's kingdom shall cease: yet Christ shall
remain king of his Church for ever, to be adored of his Angels, and of all his
Elect.

47. Quest. v. 17. Of the rising of the four beasts.
1. Where it is in the text, these four beasts, are four kings, Calvin
following the vulgar Latin, reads kingdoms: but the word is malchin, kings:
malcutha signifies a kingdom, v. 18. But yet by Kings, we must understand
kingdoms, Iun. Vatab. for there were diverse kings in the second Monarchy of
the Persians, and in the fourth of the Seleucians. 2. It is said, they shall
arise, by a synecdoche, the greater part being taken for the whole: for the
Chalde Monarchy was already not only risen, but almost at an end: the other
three were yet to rise, Polan. 3. They shall arise out of the earth: before it
is said out of the Sea: sed metaphorice posuerat nomen maris, the name of the
Sea he put metaphorically: the earth in respect of the troubles thereof, is
compared unto a turbulent, and unquiet sea, Calvin.

48. Quest. Who shall possess the kingdom of the Saints.
v. 18. Some read, they shall take the kingdom of the Saints of the most high.
2. Some, the most high Saints shall take the kingdom, etc. and possess the
kingdom for ever, yea for ever and ever. 3. Some refer the first clause to
the beasts, that they shall take the kingdom, the second to the Saints, who
shall possess it for ever.

1. They which so understand these words, as though these four kingdoms which
should rise out of the earth, shall possess the kingdom of the Saints. 1.
Some. by the kingdom understand the earth, which is due unto the Saints, and
in Abraham was promised to the faithful, which these four Monarchies shall
possess for ever: that is, till the world be restored by Christ. Genevens.
Iun. 2. Or it is said for ever, in respect of the longing desire of the Saints
that are afflicted, who shall think the time very long before they be
delivered, Calvin. 3. Some do thus interpret it: for ever, yea for ever and
ever, that is, for diverse ages, shall these Monarchies keep the people of God
in subjection: for the Chaldeans held them and their country in bondage 70.
years, the Persians 207. years, the Seleucians 148. years, which make above
400. years: four complete generations, Polan. But all these expositions are
confuted by these two arguments. 1. because it seems an hard speech, that the
wicked should possess the kingdom of the Saints for ever and ever: whereas
the kingdom only of the Messiah shall be everlasting, v. 14. 2. the kingdom
of the Saints is not here taken for any earthly inheritance, but for a
celestial and spiritual dominion, as is evident, v. 22. 27. And therefore the
other kingdoms are said to rise out of the earth, to show a difference
between this kingdom, and theirs: as the ordin. gloss. well observes,
Whatsoever is earthly, shall return to the earth: Sancti non accipient regnum
terrenum, sed coeleste, the Saints shall not receive an earthly kingdom, but
an heavenly.

2. They which follow the second reading, that the Saints shall take the
kingdom. 1. Some refer it to the everlasting kingdom of heaven only, which
they shall receive at the coming of Christ: hoc erit in iudicio finali, this
shall be in the final judgment, Lyran. post regna mundi finita, post mortem
Antichristi, after all the kingdoms are at an end, after the death of
Antichrist, gloss. interlin. But this fifth kingdom the Saints shall receive
presently after the dissolution of the four former kingdoms, which were ended
before the first coming of Christ. 2. Oecolampad. likewise understands this
fifth to be the celestial kingdom, where the faithful shall reign with
Christ: But it is evident, v. 27. where it is said, the kingdoms under the
whole heaven shall be given unto the people of God, that this kingdom of the
Saints shall begin in earth: for the heavenly kingdom can not be said to be
the kingdom under heaven. 3. Some think that this kingdom of the Saints
shall take place, while the other Monarchies do yet stand; as under the fourth
Monarchy of the Romans the Church of Christ was propagated over all the
world, Pelican: So also Bullinger, Ecclesiam per omnes istus Monarchias in
mundo futuram, that the Church shall be in the world during all these
Monarchies: which exposition in part is true, that the Church of God, the
spiritual kingdom of Christ, can not be extinquished, or overcome, but shall
still continue in the world, the very gates of hell shall not prevail against
it: yet herein it fails, that they suppose these Monarchies shall still have
dominion, when this fifth kingdom takes place: whereas the contrary is
evident, v. 11, 12. that the fourth beast shall be slain, and the dominion
taken from the other three beasts, before this kingdom should be given unto
the Saints.

4. It remains then, that the fifth kingdom, being the spiritual dominion
of the Church, shall then begin when the other four kingdoms are
extinguished. And for the more certain and evident demonstration hereof, these
positions shall be here affirmed. 1. that the kingdom here spoken of, though
the four beasts shall first take it, yet in the end shall be possessed of the
Saints, not that those Monarchies shall possess the kingdom of the Saints: so
is it interpreted, v. 22. The time approached, that the Saints possessed the
kingdom. 2. this kingdom of the Saints is begun here in this world, it is not
deferred to the second coming of Christ, though then it shall be perfited: as
Hugo well interprets, ab hoc seculo in quo regnant per gratiam, vsque in
futurum seculum in quo regnabunt per gloriam, their kingdom shall begin in
this world, wherein they reign by grace, and continue unto the next world,
wherein they shall reign in glory, etc. 3. this kingdom of the Saints in
Christ shall begin after the dissolution of the four former Monarchies, as
is before showed.

49. Quest. Why they are called the most high Saints, v. 18.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, which H. Br. follows in his commentary,
Saints of the most high God: but beside that the word high, ghelonin is in the
plural, and so must be joined with Saints, the other word ( God) is not in the
text. 2. Some by the high Saints, understand the Angels: but that can not be,
for v. 27. they are interpreted to be the holy people of the most high: the
Saints in earth. 3. neither by the high Saints, can God himself be understood:
the Scripture uses not in the plural number so to speak of God. 4. some thus
read, the Saints of the high things: that is, to whom belongs the
inheritance of the high and heavenly things, Iun. Polan. Calvin. But it is
better joined as an epithete to Saints: they are called the high Saints: as v.
27. the people of the Saints most high: they are most high, in respect of all
other people in the world, in respect of the most high Prince the Lord Christ,
to whom they belong, and in regard of the most high inheritance of heaven,
which appertains unto them.

50. Quest. v. 20. How the horn called before little, is said to be in show
greater then the rest.
1. Before in the vision it is said to be a little horn in respect of the
obscure, base, and mean beginning: for so Antiochus Epiphanes being the
younger brother, had no right nor title to the kingdom, and in this sense he
was a little horn. 2. But the event considered, how afterward Antiochus
Epiphanes, proud Antiochus, who of some is rather called Epimanes, mad
Antiochus, exceeded all other of the Seleucians in greatness, he is in this
respect said to be greater in show then the rest. So both are true, but not in
the same time.

51. Quest. How this little horn is said to change laws and times.
1. Hierome, by changing times and laws, understands that Antichrist shall
abolish and take away all religion: so also Lyran. he shall abrogate the
worship of God, and sibi illum cultum vsurpabit, and shall usurp unto himself
that worship, making himself God. But Antichrist which was prophesied of, and
is now come into the world, shall not be an open and professed enemy unto all
religion, but rather through hypocrisy and vain show of religion, shall
deceive many: and therefore the Apostle says, he shall come with lying
wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.

2. Calvin understanding the Roman Emperors to be this little horn, gives
this sense, that omnia iura humana and divina peruertent, they shall pervert
all laws humane and divine: as Augustus caused altars to be erected unto him,
though otherwise a civil Prince: Tiberius neglected all religion: Caligula
threatened to banish Iuppiter their great god into Greece, and would often smite
his image with his fifth: Domitian wished that all the people of Rome had but
one neck, that he might smite it off at once: he would have made his horse
Consul. But though these things may by way of analogy be thus applied, yet
historically, as has been showed at large, this prophecy was fulfilled
before the coming of the Messiah into the world.

3. Bullinger, with others, show how this is practiced by the Pope of Rome, to
change laws and times: for he canonizeth Saints, and erecteth holy days unto
them: appoints fast^ and fasting days for religion: he changes laws, as
commanding adoration of Images, which is forbidden by the law of God:
restraining marriage, which God has made free for all: taking away the cup in
the Eucharist, which Christ in the institution of his last supper appointed to
be used.

4. Other do verify these things in the Turk, who endeavors what he can
to abolish all Christian religion: he thinks to do it: labors what he can
to extitpate the Gospel of Christ, but he can not. These two last expositions
also we refuse upon the former reason. These applications by way of analogy we
mislike not: but this prophecy had the historical accomplishment before the
birth of Christ.

5. Wherefore this is a true and lively description of Antiochus Epiphanes, how
he attempted to change times, to abolish the festiuals of the Jews, and to
profane their Sabbaths: the rites also and ceremonies of Moses law he
abrogated, defiling the Temple and the altars, and setting up most abominable
idols, as is showed at large, 1. Macch. 1. 46. etc. Antiochus sent his letters
to Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, that they should follow the strange laws
of the country: that they should forbid the burnt offerings, and the
sacrifices, and the offerings of the Sanctuary: and that they should defile
the sabbaths, and the feasts, and pollute the sanctuary, and the holy men: and
to set up altars and groves, and chapels of idols, and offer up swines flesh,
and unclean beasts, etc. The like reports Joseph. lib. 12. Antiquit. Iudaic.
c. 6. It is very evident now by comparing the history of the Macchabees with
the prophecy of Daniel, that all these things were most truly and properly
fulfilled in the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes, which are here described of
this little horn.

52. Quest. What is meant, by a time, times, and a part of time. v. 25.
1. Some by these terms understand, not any certain definite time, but take
it at large, for a certain season not determined. 2. Others understand
precisely a certain prefixed time.

1. Of the first sort, 1. some do understand, longam durationem, a long
continuance of time, yet certain and determined with God, Papp. So Bullinger
calls it, praefinitum tempus sol: Deo cognitum, a time defined, but only
known unto God: to the same purpose also Calv. Genevens. Melancth. 2.
Oecolampad. also here defines not any certain time, but gives this reason,
of three times and an half, which makes half a prophetical week, dimidiat
Deus hebdomadam, God halueth the week, because he will not be angry for ever:
as our blessed Savior says, that for the Elects sake those days shall be
shortened. But it is evident, that a certain time is here prefixed and limited:
and that by times, years are signified, as c: 4. in the vision of the great
tree, by seven times, are understood seven years.

2. They which understand here a certain time, 1. some would have hereby
signified so many years, as there be days in 3. years and an half: as R.
Levi says, that the desolation of the Temple shall continue a 1335. years,
which number of days Daniel has, c. 12. 12. But the gross blindness of these
Rabbis is evident to all the world: for since the last and final desolation
of the Jews Temple by the Romans, there are past above a 1500. years. 2.
Osiander applying this prophecy to the Turk, by three years and an half,
which contains in his estimate a 1178. days (but it comes to a 1278.
days) understands so many years from the first rising of Mahomet in the
year 613. so long he thinks the Turkish tyranny shall rage: but it is not
necessary, that all the half time should be fulfilled: it suffices that the
term exceed somewhat a thousand years. But this can not hang together, that
if the account be of so many years, an hundred or two should be cut off from
the reckoning, for this were to make the prophecies very uncertain.

3. Now some precisely here would have understood three years and an half,
which time they limit for the tyranny of Antichrist in the end of the world,
Hierom. Lyran. Hug. But this is an uncertain and improbable opinion, that
Antichrist shall reign just three years and an half before the coming of
Christ: for, 1. then it might be gessed at what time Christ should come to
judgment, if we may come so near as within 3. years and an half. 2. S. Paul
shows that the Roman Empire only let the coming of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. which being long since dissolved, the Empire being translated to
Germany, and the name thereof only left, Antichrist must be already revealed
to the world.

4. The historical sense then is, that the very time is here described how
long Antiochus should be suffered to change the times and laws in polluting
the Temple, and abolishing the sacrifices, which was just three years and
ten days: for this desolation began in the 145. year of the kingdom of
the Seleucians, the 15. day of the month Chisleu, 1. Macch. 1. 57. and in the
148. year, the 25. day of the same month Chisleu, the true worship of God was
restored, and sacrifices offered. And 80. days after that, which makes in all
1290 days, on the 25. day of the month Xanticus the last but one, in the same
year 148. Antiochus confirmed the Jews laws and manner of worship: 2. Macch.
11. 33. Iun. annotat. The history then being so correspondent unto the
prophecy, we need not search any further for the right meaning thereof.

53. Quest. What is meant by the half or dividing of time, v. 25.
The word properly signifies a dividing, and so consequently a part: phalag is
derived of phelag, to divide: whence Peleg had his name, because in his time
the earth was divided, Genesis 10. 25. whereupon some do read, a part of time,
Iun. Polan. Montan. or dividing of time, Genevens. the Latin following the
Septuag. reads, dimidium (...), half of time, which reading because it is
retained and used Apoc. 12. 14. is not to be refused.

1. Some now by this dividing of time, understand not any set term, as
Calvin, who thereby thinks to be signified, that those days should be
divided, that is, shortened for the Elect sake. Melancthon thus interprets,
that when the Turk is come to the height of his power, subita fiet inclinatio,
there shall be a sudden change and inclination. But if time do signify a
year according to the prophetical phrase, as c. 11. 13. the times of years
being expired, then the half or part of time, shall signify the half, or
part of a year.

2. Hierome by the half, understands just six months, and so 3. years and
half makes an 1260 days, Apoc. 12. 6. which is all one with 42. months,
Apoc. 11. 2. Pint. But 3. years and an half make just 1278. days: counting
15. days over in the 3. years, and 3. days over in six months: therefore
precisely there are not by this account 3. years and an half.

3. Iunius, whom Polanus follows, by this part of time notes to be
signified ten days only: but that cannot be the dividing or half of time,
which reading is before approved because of that place, Apoc. 12. 14.

4. Wherefore rather this place is expounded by that Dan. 12. 11. from the time
that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, shall be a 1290 days: So that it
is counted the half of time, being much about it, though it sometime come
short, as in the sum of a 1260 days, there want 18. days of 3. years and
an half, and sometime shoot over, as in 1290 days there are 12. days more
then three years and an half.

54. Quest. How this kingdom is said to be given to the holy people, v. 27.
which is said v. 14. to be given to the Son of man.
1. Because first and principally this kingdom is given unto Christ, as the
first borne of every creature, and in him communicated unto the Saints his
members: there is no contradiction between these two places: for so both the
spiritual kingdom, as likewise the Priesthood is in this life graciously
communicated by Christ our head unto his members: as the Apostle says, Apoc.
1. 6. He has made us Kings and Priests to God even his father: As also through
Christ his members are made partakers of his everlasting kingdom: as our
blessed Savior says, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers
will to give you a kingdom.

2. Here then that cavil of the Jews may easily be removed: who by this
would gather, because the holy people are here mentioned, to whom this
kingdom is given: that by the Son of man, verse. 14. the Messiah is not
understood, but the whole posterity of Abraham, and so likewise here: But
whereas the Prophet saw one as the son of man, that can not be applied to
Abraham's posterity, who could not be said to be as man: they were then men
being and existing: but Christ is said to be as the Son of man, because he
was not yet incarnate: this vision was praeludium incarnationis, etc. a
forewarning of his incarnation. So then v. 14. the author and foundation of
this spiritual kingdom which is given unto the Church is signified: for
unless Christ did sit at the right hand of God, and had all power given unto
him, the Church should have no kingdom at all. Calvin.

3. An other cavil also of Barbinel may be answered, who will have this
understood of an earthly and terrene kingdom, the kingdom under the whole
heaven is given unto them: for this ignorant Rabbin makes a difference
between being in the earth, and of the earth: the spiritual kingdom of
Christ is in the world, though it be not of the world, Ioh. 18. 36.

4. And whereas this kingdom is general over all the earth, it must be
extended further, then ad primum exordium, to the first beginning: for the
Gospel of Christ was not at the first preached over all the world, but was
received only of a few: it was in process of time propagated into all parts
of the world, Calvin.

4. Places of doctrine.
1. Doctr. Of the authority of Scripture.
v. 2. Daniel spoke and said. Daniels writing is here called his speaking,
whereby we are given to understand, that the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles ought to be received with no less reverence, then if we had heard
them speak with their own mouths: So S. Paul says to Timothy, that the
holy scriptures were able to make him wise unto salvation: and they were able
to make the man of God absolute and perfect to every good work, 2. Tim. 3. 15.
17. Polan.

2. Doctr. The Church in this world subject to affliction.
Because all these Monarchies and kingdoms are described by these four
beasts, which devour and destroy, being therefore resembled to cruel and
savage beasts, the lion, bear, leopard, hence it is evident, that the portion
of the Church of God in this world is, to be subject for the most part to the
violence and rage of oppressors: to the end, that they should not look for
their kingdom or inheritance in this world, but seek for their peace and true
comfort in Christ: Ioh. 16. 33. In the world ye shall have affliction, but be
of good comfort, I have overcome the world. Bulling.

3. Doctr. The Son of God equal unto his Father.
v. 13. He approached unto the Ancient of days. By this kind of speech is
signified, that Christ the Son of man according to his humanity, is equal
unto the Father, touching his Godhead, as sitting together in the throne with
him: as Apoc. 5. 6. The Lamb stood in the mids of the throne. And whereas
the kingdom is here said to be given unto the Son, that is to be referred to
the time of his dispensation, and coming in the flesh, which glory and
kingdom he received as man, but it was his own as God from the beginning: as
Ioh. 17. 5. our blessed Savior thus prays, Glorify me, thou Father, with
the glory which I had with thee, before the world was. Bulling.

4. Doctr. Of the vocation of the Gentiles.
v. 14. That all people, nations, and languages should serve him. This is an
evident testimony, that the Gentiles should be converted unto the faith and
knowledge of Christ, and so be subject and obedient unto him: as Tertullian by
this invincible argument shows that Christ is the true Mossiah, in quem enim
alium universe gentes crediderunt, quam in Christum? upon whom else have all
the nations believed, then in Christ? and he reckons up the Parthians, Medes,
Egyptians, Germans, Britains, Scythians, and many other nations in the
remotest parts of the world toward the North and South, and East countries,
which have received the faith: whereas all other kingdoms and dominions have
been confined. The kings of Babylon and Persia reigned from India to
Aethiopia, yet had limits and borders of their kingdom: neither did Alexander
conquer all Asia: the Roman Empire was defended in their borders with
garrisons: But the kingdom of Christ is not limited or confined to any place,
according to that prophecy in the Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me, and I shall give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy
possession: to this purpose Tertull. l. 7. cont. Iudaeos.

5. Doctr. Of whom the kingdom of Christ consists.
v. 18. The high saints, or the saints of the most high shall take the
kingdom. The Church of God then consists of the Saints and elect, which are
ordained to everlasting salvation. So our Savior calls them his flock for
whom his Father had prepared a kingdom, Luke 12. 32. And again he says, I
pray not for the world, but for those whom thou have given me. Ioh. 17. 9.
they then which are of the world, are not of the Church of Christ: Hypocrites
then, heretics, misbeleeuers, carnal livers, way well be in the Church, but
they are not of it: as S. John says, They went out from us, but they were not
of us: for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us, 1. Ioh.
2. 19.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. The Church is not discerned by the greatness and bigness thereof.
v. 3. Four great beasts came up. These four beasts signifying four
kingdoms, are said to be great: they were large and mighty in dominion, as
the Persian Monarchy had under it an 127. Provinces, yet all these kingdoms
were enemies to the people of God: So then the Church of Christ is not to be
measured by the bigness and greatness of it: our Savior calls his flock, a
little flock, Luke 12. 32. and few there be, that find the way unto life,
Matthew. 7. 14. Universality then and multitude is not a sure and infallible
note of the Church, as the Romanists would have it. Nicolaus the 1. thus wrote
unto Michael the Emperor, Numerus pusillus non obest, vbi abundat pietas, nec
multiplex prodest vbi abundat impietas, a small number does not hurt, where
piety abounds, nor a great does not profit, where impiety abounds. See
hereof more, Synops. Centur. 1. err. 20.

2. Controv. Whether the Saints shall judge the world.
v. 9. The thrones were set. Hence Pererius infers, that beside Christ,
there shall be other, quasi iudicis assessores, as assistants of the Judge: as
our Savior says, that his Apostles shall sit upon 12. seats, and judge the
12. tribes of Israel: But it is evident out of the Scripture, that Christ only
shall be Judge of the world: for the Father has committed all the judgment to
the Son, Ioh. 5. 22. But the Saints are said to judge the world, not as
Judges to give sentence, sed iudicant vt testes, they judge as witnesses:
Bulling. their life and doctrine shall be the condemnation of the world. In
this sense our Savior says, that his word shall judge those which receive it
not, at the latter day, Ioh. 12. 48. that is, it shall be a witness against
them. Hugo has here this distinction, Deus pater indicabit per authoritatem,
filius per sententiae prolationem, sancti per assensum and approbationem, God
the father shall judge by his authority, the Son by pronouncing the
sentence, the Saints by their assent and approhation, etc.

3. Controv. The vulgar Latin translation not authentical.
v. 10. Whereas it is in the original ribo riban, ten thousand times ten
thousand, the Latin translator reads, ten thousand times an hundred
thousand. Pererius would excuse it thus: that the interpreter did not so much
respect the words, as the mind of Daniel, which was to express an infinite
multitude of Angels, putting a finite number for an infinite. Contra. But an
interpreter is tied to the very words, which he translateth. It is one thing to
interpret, an other thing to expound or comment. Interpreters must not take
unto themselves that liberty in following the sense, to leave the text, and
depart from the words of the original.

4. Controv. Of the diverse orders of Angels.
v. 10. Whereas it is said, a thousand thousand ministered unto him, and ten
thousand thousand stood before him: Hence Pererius would prove that there are
two sorts of Angels, some that minister in being sent abroad into the world to
dispatch the affairs committed unto them; other stand by as assistants, not
being sent forth as the other, but they attend to know the will of God, and to
give direction unto the ministering spirits. And further, they assign the four
higher orders which are Soraphim, Cherubim, Thrones, Dominions, to the Angels
assistant, and the five inferior, Angels, Arkangels, Virtues, Powers,
Principalities, to the ministering Angels. But whether sort be more in number,
the assistant or ministering spirits, it is not agreed among them. Gregory
thinks that the number of ministering spirits is greatest, lib. 17. moral. c.
9. Dyenisius Areopagita, cited by Pererius, is of the contrary opinion, that
the higher the Angels are in degree, the more they exceed in number.

Contra. 1. Here is no distinction of the offices of diverse sorts of Angels,
but only a description of their office and ministry: they stood before the
Lord to minister: for so is this phrase of standing used, c. 1. 19. They stood
before the king: and the Apostle says, Are they not all ministering spirits:
which Pererius interprets that they do not all minister immediately, but some
immediately by others: but this interpretation is taken away by the words
following, sent forth to minister. Then all the Angels are sent forth to
minister, as it pleases God to employ them: they do not stand still before
the Lord as informers of the rest. 2. This difference then of Angels, some
ministering, some assistant, being taken away, the other question is
superflous, which should exceed the other in number. 3. And concerning those
nine orders of Angels, it is but a curious conceit: those several names do
show, that there are degrees, and diversity of gifts among the Angels, but so
many distinct orders can not thereupon be granted. See more hereof, Synops.
Centur. 2. err. 1.

5. Controv. The glorious persons of the Trinity are not to be represented by
any image.
v. 9. The Ancient of days did sit. From this place the Romanists infer
that it is no more inconvenient to picture and express by image the Trinity,
or any person thereof, as they did sometime appear, then it was for them so to
appear: But there is great difference between the appearing of the Trinity
in some visible shape, as God the father as an ancient man, the Son in the
shape of a young man, and the holy Ghost in the likeness of a dove, and the
picturing of them. 1. The one was Gods special dispensation, but the other is
forbidden to make any image to be worshipped. 2. this apparition did not
continue, but eftsoone vanished away, but pictures are permanent, and so are
dangerous. 3. the apparition was made only to the Prophet here, but pictures
are seen and beheld of all, which are in danger to stumble at them: the
argument then follows not, because it pleased God so to appear, therefore he
may be so described and pictured. 4. the apparition was a figure of Gods
special presence, but so is not an image: God is not declared thereby more to
be present, then where there is no image at all.

6. Controv. Against the Vbiquit aries which hold an omnipresence of Christ's
humanity.
v. 14. And he gave him dominion and honor. Hence the Lutherans would infer,
that the very essential power of the deity is communicated unto the humane
nature: and so consequently this property to be every where, and in all places
at once.

Contr. 1. They imagine, that this power was given only to the humane nature
of Christ: whereas it was given unto his whole person, in respect of the office
of his Mediatorship: this dominion was given to Christ (...), God and man. 2.
Whereas this great power they would have given by Christ's divine nature to his
humanity: it is evident out of the text, that it was given by the Ancient of
days unto the Son of man. 3. And because in the text it is called an
everlasting dominion, they hereby understand that dominion, which was without
beginning, and shall be without end: whereas this dominion given unto Christ
God and man, had a beginning with his incarnation, but shall have no end: and
this is evident, v. 27. where this kingdom which is communicated unto the
Saints the members of Christ, is also called everlasting: yet that kingdom
has a beginning. Polan. 4. Beside, that which is finite, can not be capable of
that which is infinite: the humane nature then of Christ can not receive the
infinite power and omnipotency of the deity. Pappus answers, that although
in it self it be not capable, yet by the power of God, to the which nothing is
impossible, it may be made capable of that infinite power and glory. Contr.
Gods power indeed is infinite, and he is able to do more then he does or
will: the question is not of Gods power, but of his will and purpose: which is,
that our blessed Savior, as he has assumed our very flesh, with the natural
properties thereof, so he should retain them still: as the Apostle calls him
the man Jesus. Christ, 1. Tim. 2. 5. 5. Those things which are peculiar and
proper unto a thing, can not be communicated really unto an other thing,
without the destruction thereof: it is proper to the divine nature to be
infinite, omnipotent, omnipresent, and to the humane, to be finite, and in one
place at once: if now the humane nature should become infinite, omnipotent,
omnipresent, it should loose the properties of the humane nature. Papp^^ again
answers, that there may be a real communication of properties without the
destruction of the thing: as iron made read hoate keeps the properties of
iron still, as the thickenesse, the heaviness, and such like. Contra. 1. The
properties of the fire are not communicated really to the iron, but certain
effects only: for if the iron had the very property of heat, it would
continue hoate still, the fire being taken from it: and if the fire should
impart the properties of lightness to the iron, it should be no more heavy,
but the very nature thereof would be changed. 2. Like as then the body as long
as it lives is animated by the soul, being quickened with agilitie, vital
spirits, and heat, yet the soul communicates not the essential properties
thereof unto it: so the humane nature of Christ is glorified, and in a manner
deified by the Godhead, yet each of the natures retain their essential
properties still.

7. Controv. That diuturnitie and long continuance without interruption, is no
infallible note of the Church.
v. 14. His dominion shall be an everlasting dominion. Bellarmine infers
from hence, (...)
that the Church is discerned and known by the durable state and continuance
thereof. Contra. This is spoken of the spiritual and invisible kingdom of
Christ, begun in this life, and perfected in the next. It follows not
because the Universal Catholic Church of Christ, which is not always visible
in the world, is perpetual; that a particular visible church should be always
discerned by this mark and note. 2. for even idolatrous kingdoms, as that of
the Assyrians, which is held to have continued above a thousand years, for
diuturnitie may compare with any visible Church.

8. Controv. That the dominion of the Pope is temporal rather, then spiritual.
Whereas the Hebrews to prove the Roman Empire, which they imagine to be the
fourth, and the kingdom of Christ to concur together, to avoid, that the
fifth kingdom should not be Christ's, which was to destroy the other four; do
give instance of the Bishop of Rome, who received his authority and
pre-eminence from Constantine, and other Christian Emperiours, and does now
crown and confirm the Emperor. Burgensis, and Pererius concur^ing with him,
do answer, to avoid this objection, that the Pope, non tam corporaliter, quam
spiritualiter tot^ orb regnet, does reign rather spiritually, then corporally
throughout the whole world: as appears in his power of binding and loosing.
Contr. This answer is insufficient and untrue. 1. for the Popes dominion
medleth more with temporal, then spiritual things: as in making war, in
taking upon him to depose and set up kings, and to dispose of their kingdoms.
2. and though he challenge to himself the chief stroke in the censures of the
Church, as in suspending, excommunicating, he uses them only for the
augmentation of his temporal dominion: he intends not thereby men's
salvation. 3. So in effect, though under an other color, the Pope exercises
the Imperial authority, as being risen up out of the ruins of the old
Empire: as it is said in the Revelation, c. 13. 12. he did all that the first
beast could do before him.

9. Controv. That Antichrist is already come.
Bellarmine to avoid this, lib. 3. ^ Romans Pontif. c. 16.
uses diverse euasions. 1. he says, that before Antichrist should come, there
should be ten kings, which should divide the Roman Empire among them.

Contr. This appears to be false out of the text. 1. these ten kings must
bear rule over the Saints before the coming of the Messiah, and the erection
of the fifth kingdom, v. 25. they shall consume the Saints. 2. their kingdom
must be destroyed before Christ come, v. 11. 3. after the destruction of them,
the kingdom of Christ must be set up thorough the world (which was by the
preaching of the Gospel:) but this is done already.

2. He says, that the little horn is Antichrist, which should come before the
end of the world.

Contr. This also is confuted by the same reasons. 1. this horn is one of the
ten kings, which should bear rule over the Saints, v. 25. which then were
understood to be the Jews the people of God. 2. this horn must be destroyed
before the kingdom of Christ be erected, v. 11. 3. this horn was Antiochus
Epiphanes, as is before showed, who prefigured and shadowed forth Antichrist.

3. He says, that this little horn shall arise from the nation of the Jews.
Contr. It arises among the other horns, which were interpreted to be kings of
the fourth beast and Monarchy, therefore not from the Jews.

4. He adds, that by fraud and deceit he shall obtain the kingdom of the
Jews. Cont. But the text shows, v. 21. that he shall make war against the
Saints: he shall then overcome them by force rather then fraud.

5. Further he says that this little horn, which he takes for Antichrist,
shall overcome three kings of Lybia, Egypt, Aethiopia. Contr. It is evident in
the text, v. 8. that the three kings which shall be subdued, shall be out of
one and the same kingdom, v. 22. 24. the ten horns out of this kingdom are
ten kings.

6. Likewise he says, that this horn shall subdue also the other seven, after
it has overcome the three. Contra. But no such thing is affirmed in the text:
2. neither can it be so, seeing these ten kings are to succeed one an other,
the tenth and the last could not rise up at the same time with the other ten.

7. An other of Bellarmines positions is, that this Antichrist should reign
but 3. years and an half, v. 25. Contra. 1. This was literally and
historically fulfilled in Antiochus Epiphanes, as is before showed. 2.
Antichrist which was to come into the world, must rise immediately after the
dissolution of the Roman Empire, which only let while it stood, the
manifesting and appearing of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Therefore the Roman
Empire being now long since dissolved, Antichrist has bin a good while
manifested in the world.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observat. The bed must be kept undefiled.
v. 1. There were visions in his head upon his bed. God used to reveal
himself unto his servants upon their bed, as being the fittest place for
heavenly meditation, when the soul was sequestered from all worldly affairs.
Therefore must we take heed, that the bed be not defiled with any unclean
pollutions, as are the beds of adulterous fornicators and wanton persons: we
should with David water our couch with tears, there meditate upon God, not
make it a place of wantonness and uncleanness.

2. Observe. The conscience must be carefully kept and watched over.
v. 10. And the books were opened. These are the books of every man's
conscience, which are Gods faithful witnesses and records in man: as the wise
man says, The light of the Lord is the spirit (or breath) of man, and
searches all the bowels, Prove. 20. 27. that is, man's conscience is as the
Lords lantern, whereby he searches our secrets: let us therefore take heed
what we write in these books of our conscience: for whether it be good or
evil, there it will appear either to accuse or excuse us.

3. Observe. The word of God, and the ministers thereof to be resorted unto for
our instruction.
v. 16. As Daniel to understand this dream went to one of the Angels, which
stood by: so now because we have no such access unto Angels, we must have
recourse to the ministers of Gods word, which are said to be Angels of the
Churches, Apoc. 1. 2. 3. So Christ sent Paul to Ananias for further direction,
Act. 9. and the Angel sent Cornelius to Peter, Act. 10.

4. Observe. Of the terror of the day of judgment.
v. 15. I Daniel was troubled in my spirit, etc. If Daniel was so perplexed
seeing the manner of Christ's judgment but in vision, how much more terrible
shall be the judgment it self: then all things which are now hid and secret,
shall be brought to light: like as packes and fardels of wares are not opened
till they come unto the fair or market, then the things hid before, are openly
showed: so all secrets shall be revealed in that day: the terror of that day
should persuade men to take heed, what wares they lay up in their heart and
conscience, for then all shall be disclosed.

CHAP. VIII.
1. The Argument and Method.
IN this Chapter is set forth, 1. a vision of the Persian and Grecian
Monarchy, to v. 15. 2. the interpretation thereof, thence to the end.

In the first we are to consider, 1. the circumstances of the vision, both the
time, when this vision was showed, the person to whom, and the place where, v.
1. 2. 2. the substance of the vision, to v. 15. which consists of three
parts, set forth under the resemblance of a ram, a goat, and a little horn
which grew out of one of the four horns of the goat.

1. The ram is described by his beginning, his progress, his end. In the
beginning these things are expressed, 1. the place, where this ram appeared,
by a river. 2. the parts, it had two horns, which are set forth, 1. simply, by
the adiunct of their height, 2. comparatively, with relation one to the other,
the one was highest, and last in time, v. 3. In the progress it is showed how
he prevailed, both by the place, he pushed into all quarters, and by the
effects, none could withstand him, v. 4. The end of this beast is showed in
the description of the goat following.

2. The goat is described, 1. generally, by the place, he came from the West,
the effects, he went over the earth: the quality, he went swiftly not touching
the ground. 2. particularly by the horn: which is set forth, 1. by the
beginning, it came up between the eyes. 2. the progress and success, in
running upon the ram, and ouercomming him, trampling upon him, v. 7, 8. 3.
the end, this horn was suddenly broken, and four came up in the stead
thereof, v. 8.

3. The little horn is described by the effects, which are three: 1. his
attempts against the nations in the world, v. 9. 2. against the Church, called
the host of heaven, v. 10. 3. against God himself: where 1. the effects are
rehearsed to be three, against the sacrifice, the Sanctuary, v. 11. the truth,
v. 12. 2. the time is declared, how long, which is expressed by way of
question, (where is showed, who asked, of whom, and what, v. 12.) and answer,
v. 14.

Then follows the second part, containing the exposition of this vision:
where are set forth, 1. the preparation, v. 15. to 18. 2. the exposition it
self, to v. 26. 3. the effects, which it wrought, v. 27.

1. In the preparation are to be considered, 1. the persons expounding: the
principal, one like a man, the less principal Gabriel, to whom the other
spoke, that he should expound the vision. 2. the person, to whom the vision is
showed: how he was affected with fear, v. 17. and how he was comforted both by
the voice, and by the gesture of the Angel that touched him.

2. The exposition is general, v. 19. then particular, 1. of the ram, v. 20.
2. of the goat, 21. with the four horns, 22. 3. of the little horn: 1. his
beginning, v. 23. his progress, prevailing, and prospering, set forth by the
effects: see the particulars, qu. 32. his end, he shall be broken down
without hand, v. 25.

3. Then follows the effect, Daniels fear, v. 27. after the Angel had summed
and ratified the vision, v. 26.

2. The text with the diverse readings.
1. In the third year of the reign of Belshatzer the king, there appeared a
vision unto me, even me Daniel, after that, which appeared unto me in the
beginning. B. (at the first. G.)

2 I saw in a vision, (or I looked to the vision, I.) and so it was, that as I
saw it, I was at Shushan in the palace ( in the town or castle. L. V. S. in
the chief city. A. the first rather) which is in the Province (not the city.
L.) of Elam, and me thought ( I saw. H.) in the vision, that I was by the river
(not gate. L. S. vbal signifies a river) of Vlai (not, of the court. S.)

3 Then I lift up mine eyes, and beheld one ram standing before the river (
before Vbal. S. but it is no proper name) which had two horns ( horns. L. S.
but it is in the dual number) and these two horns were high: but one was
higher then an other ( the second. H.) and the highest came up Last.

4 I saw the ram pushing against the West, ( the sea. H. S.) and against the
North, and against the South, so that no beasts might stand before him, (
withstand him. I.) nor any could deliver out of his hand (not, nor could
deliver out of his hand, G. B. L. as referring it to the former clause, that
the beast could not deliver out of his hand: for the word (delivering, matzil)
is in the singular) but he did as him lifted ( according to his will. H.) and
became great.

5 And as I considered, behold an he goat B. (a kid of the goats, H. that is,
a young lusty goat) came from the West over the whole earth, and touched not
the ground ( and no man touched him in the earth. I. but the first is better to
show the celeritie of this praunsing and conquering goat) and this goat had a
notable horn I. L. an horn that appeared. B. G. an horn of vision. H.
between his eyes.

6 And he came unto the ram, that had the two horns, whom I had seen
standing by the river, (not before the gate. L. or before Vbal. S.) and ran
unto him in his fierce rage ( rage with might. H.)

7 And I saw him come near unto the ram, and being moved ( moving
himself. H.) against him, he smote the ram, and brake his two horns: and
there was no power in the ram to stand against him, but he cast him down to
the ground, and trampled on him, and there was none that could deliver the
ram out of his power ( hand. H.)

8 Therefore the goat ( kid of the goats. H.) waxed exceeding great, and when
he was at the strongest, his great horn was broken, and there grew up for it
four notable ones, B. (that appeared. G.) toward the four winds of heaven.

9 And out of one of them came forth a little (not a strong. S.) horn, which
waxed very great toward the South, and toward the East, and toward the pleasant
land. ( against the strength. L. tebi, signifies delectable. pleasant, and
thereby is meant Judea.

10 And it extolled it self I. L. S. ( grew up. B. G. extended it self. V.)
against the host of heaven, and cast down to the earth some of the host, and
of the stars, and trampled on them.

11 And it extolled it self ( or magnified) even unto the prince ( against the
prince. G.) of the host: for from him ( from whom. B. G.) was taken away the
daily sacrifice, and the place of the Sanctuary was cast down.

12 And the host was delivered up to sin against the daily sacrifice I. V.
(better then power was given unto it over the daily sacrifice for the
iniquity. L. or a time shall be given him over the daily sacrifice for
iniquity. G. and so Mercer. in c. 7. Job. v. 1. but the word (tzaba) must be
here taken as in the former verse, to signify an army, the host of the Lords
people* see further hereof qu. 21. following) and it shall cast down the truth
to the ground, thus shall it do and prosper.

13 Then I heard one of the Saints speaking, for one of the Saints spoke unto
phelmoni, S. Br. B. (that is, to an excellent one. V. to one that has secret
things in account or number. I. to a certain one. G. L. the Hebrew word is
better joined, because of the ambiguous signification, see qu. 22.) saying, How
long shall endure the vision of the daily sacrifice, and the iniquity of
desolation, to give both the Sanctuary and host to be trampled upon? ( to be a
trampling* H.)

14 And he said unto me, Unto the evening and morning, two thousand, and three
hundredth: ( that is, so many days) then shall the Sanctuary be restored (
cleansed. B. G. L. S. be justified. H.)

15 Now so it was ( B. G. det.) when I Daniel had seen the vision, and sought
for the understanding, that behold there stood before me, as the similitude (
sight or show. H.) of a man.

16 And I heard a man's voice between Vlai (that is, between the banks of that
river) which called and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.

17 So he came, where I stood: and when he came I was afraid, and fell upon my
face: then he said unto me, Understand, O son of man: for in the limited time
(not in the end after the captivity. V. the sense rather then the words, nor
in the last times. G. time of the end. H. which is called (v. 19. moghed ketz)
the appointed time of the end) shall be the vision.

18 Now as he was speaking unto me, I was as in a slumber (better then sleep.
G.) falling on my face to the ground: but he touched me, and set me up in my
place.

19 And he said, Behold, I will show thee, what shall be in the last wrath (or
unto the last or extreamitie of wrath. I.) for in the appointed time of the
end H. (not the end of the time appointed. G. or the time appointed has his
end. L.) it shall be.

20 The ram which thou saw having two horns, are the kings of the Medes
and Persians.

21 And the hairie ( B. G. L. det.) goat is the king of Grecia, and the great
horn which is between his eyes, is the first king.

22 And that that is broken, and four stood up for it, are four kingdoms
(not four kings. L. S.) which shall stand up of his nation, but not in his
strength.

23 And in the latter part of their kingdom, S. (not after their kingdom. L.
for Antiochus reigned before the kingdom was dissolved, or, in the end of
that kingdom. V. B. G. which Ab. Ezra restrains to the end of their
kingdom over Judea, which Antiochus Epiphanes had the last dominion of. R.
Saadiah understands the kingdom of the four successors of Alexander, but
their kingdom was ended an 100. years before Antiochus reigned: this fell out
then toward the latter part of the kingdom of the Seleucians. Iun. reads, in
the proceeding of this kingdom) when the wicked are come to the full. B. V.
(not, when rebellious are consumed. G. consummated rather, the word is (tamam)
to make perfect, to consummate) a king of an impudent L. I. V. (strong. H.
fiery. B. G.) countenance, and understanding hard sentences (that is, crafty,
V. or wary. I.) shall stand up.

24 His power shall be mighty, but not by his own strength ( his strength, G.
B. that is, Alexanders: but the meaning is rather, that he shall grow strong,
but not by his own strength) and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall
prosper, and practice, and shall destroy the mighty, and the holy people. (
people of holy things. H.)

25 And through his policy ( understanding. H. not according to his will, L.)
he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand, and he shall extol ( or magnify.
I.) himself in his heart, and by peace (not plenty. V. L. craft. S. (shalvah)
peace, prosperity) shall destroy many: he also shall stand up against the
Prince of princes, but he shall be broken down (as eggs. S. ad.) without hand.

26 And the vision of the evening and morning, which is declared, is true:
therefore shut them up ( seal. L. S. B. G. but the word signifies to shut up)
the vision, for it is for many days. I. S. (not after many days. L. B. G.)

27 And I Daniel was smitten with sickness ( smitten and sick. H.) certain
days: but I rose up, and did the Kings business, and I was astonished at the
vision, but no man understood it: (not, there was none to interpret it. L. for
the Angel bad interpreted it to Daniel.)

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. The difference between this vision and the former.
1. In the former there was a description of four kingdoms: here the Chaldean
and Babylonian is omitted, quia mox abolendum erat, because it was now at hand
to be abolished, Calvin. which may be the cause why hitherto from the second
chapter Daniel had written in the Chalde tongue, because those things concerned
the Chaldean state, which were revealed to Daniel: now he uses the Hebrew
tongue, because these things which follow in this prophecy, specially
concerned the people of God, as of their great affliction under Antiochus, in
this chap. and c. 11. and of the coming of the Messiah, c. 9. first then this
differs from the former vision, c. 7. vt pars a toto, as a part from the
whole, Calvin. 2. In the former vision there is a large description of the
kingdom of Christ, which is omitted here. 3. Here is a more particular
explication of such things, as should befall the people of God under Antiochus,
as likewise c. 11. which is but briefly touched before. Prter.

2. Quest. Of the time of this vision.
In the third year of the reign of Belshazar, etc. 1. Pererius thinks, that
this was 14. years before the taking of Babylon by the Persians, for he gives
unto Belshazars reign 17. years: so also Joseph. lib. 10. antiqui^. c. 12. 2.
Iunius and Polanus following Berosus and Metashenes, which make Balthazar to
reign 5. years, think this vision was showed unto Daniel three years before
the destruction of Babylon. 3. But the third opinion of the Hebrews is more
probable, which Oecolampad. and Pellicane follow, that this vision was in the
third and last year of Beshazar: for the next time which is noted of Daniel,
was the first year of Darius, c. 9. 1.

3. Quest. What manner of vision this was.
v. 1. A vision appeared unto me, etc. Whereas there are two sorts of visions,
some are showed unto men in a trance, when they are waking, as that vision of
the four cornered sheet which Peter saw, Act. 10. some are revealed in
sleep, as Joseph was admonished by an Angel in a dream, Matthew. 1. 1. Some
think, that Daniel had this vision as the former, because he says, after that
which appeared unto me at the first: as making no difference between this
vision, and the former, which was showed unto Daniel by night upon his bed:
Perer. following Theodoret.

2. But it is more probable, that this vision was sent to Daniel, now being
awake: one reason is, because simply it is called a vision: there is no mention
made of sleepe^ which is always expressed, when the vision is revealed by
dream, Osiand. Oecolampadius adds this reason further, that because Daniel
made good use of the former vision, remembering it, and committing the same to
writing, ampliorem gratiam accipit, he receives greater grace, and that which
was before showed by night, now vigilans certissime agnoscit, he knows most
certainly being awake.

Quest. 4. How Daniel is said to be in Shushan. v. 2.
1. Dyonisius Carthusianus is of opinion, that this is an inexplicable
question, how Daniel at this time could be at Shushan, which was the chief
seat of the kings of Persia. 2. Some do make it indifferent, whether Daniel
were here corporally, or in vision only, Bull. But the objections which
afterward follow do show that either of these cannot be indifferently held.
3. Pererius and Pintus following the Latin text, resolve that Daniel was there
corporally, and that it is like the province Susiana at this time belonged unto
Chaldea: but the text says otherwise, that it was in the province of Elam,
which was in Persia: Josephus has the like opinion, that Daniel being at
Susa, with some of his companions went into the field, and there suddenly rose
a great earthquake, which scattered his companions from him, and he was left
alone, and then saw this vision of the ram and the goat: But no such thing
is expressed in the text, and therefore this report of Josephus has no ground.

4. It remains then, that Daniel was in the palace of Shushan, only in
vision: as afterward, c. 10. 4. he was beside the great river Hiddekell:
corporally Daniel was not there upon these reasons. 1. because Daniel could not
go whether he would being a captive, and therefore it is not like he could be
suffered to be in his enemies country. 2. he was by allegiance bound to the
king of Babel, and by Gods ordinance was to serve him, till the years of
captivity were expired, Ierem. 27. 7. 3. Daniel was in Babylon at the taking
thereof by Darius, it is not like that he could be permitted to come and go to
the professed enemies of the Chaldeans. 4. And that he names the third year
of Belshazar, it is evident he was then under the government and dominion of
the Chaldeans. 5. Beside the manner of speech shows as much: when I saw, I
was in the palace of Shu^han, that is, in my vision I thought I was there, as
Vatablus interprets: Daniel then was in Shusan not corporally, but
spiritually by vision: And this vision answers to the event, because there
these things should come to pass, the Persian kings should there be conquered:
for Alexander took that rich city and spoiled it.

Quest. 5. Of the city Shushan, by whom it was builded, and whence so named.
1. Strabo writes that the city Susa, as he calls it, was first builded by
Tithonus the father of Memnon: Diodorus lib. 3. c. 6. makes Memnon the first
builder of it, whereupon the city was called a long time Memnonia. Pliny lib.
6. c. 27. says it was built by Darius Hystaspis: But it is evident out of the
text here, that Darius, which followed after these times could not be the
builder of it. It may therefore thus be, that the city was first founded by
Memnon, and then afterward enlarged by Darius.

2. Strabo also says, lib. 15. that it was Cyrus chief city, both because it
was nearer unto other provinces, which he had subdued: and for the honor of
the Susians, that were most faithful to the Persians, and never fell from them.

3. It was so called of Susan, which signifies a lilie, of the pleasantness
of the situation: as Ath^neaus notes, Iun. Pol. of this Shushan, was the whole
province called Susiane, Bullin.

Quest. 6. Of the situation of the city Shushan.
1. It is here said to be situate in the region or province of Elam: Hierome
reads, following Symmachus, in the city of Elam: for the word medinah,
signifies both a province and a city, both the place to the which laws and
judgments are given, and the place from whence they come, that is from the
chief city: But it is here taken for a province: for how could one city be
said to be within another. 2. Hierome further affirms, that this Susan was
the chief city of the Province of Elam. But Strabo, Theodoret, Josephus, do
make it a part of Persia: Pliny does divide the region Susiane, from Elemais
by the river Euleus, and makes: two Provinces of them, lib. 6. cap. 27. But
all these may thus be reconciled: that both tho se regions on the one side and
on the other of the river Vlai, were all one, and belonged to the Province of
Elam: but afterward the Susians growing famous, they were distinguished into
two pro^^^ces, and both belonged to Persia, Perer. 3. This Elam was so called
of Elam one of the sons of Sem, Genesis 10. 22. of whom the inhabitants were
called Elamites of whom we read, Act. 2. 9. Parthians, Medes, Elamites. 4.
Some take Shushan and Ecbatane for the same city, histor. Sholast. but that
cannot be, for Ecbatane was the chief city of the Medes, Judith 1. 1. but
Sushan was the chief city of Persia: Hierome also is in the same error: for
he says that Daniel built that great tower at Susan, where the kings of the
Medes and Persians were buried: whereas Josephus says he built it at Ecbatane
in Media, who in the same place evidently distinguishes between Ecbatane and
Susan. making them two diverse cities, Josephus, lib. 10. cap. 12. So that
either Hieromes memory herein failed, or else he took both those cities for
one. 5. The Persian kings had beside an other city called Persepolis, where
they had a most sumptuous palace made of white marble, the pillars were of
gold, the roof or sealing set forth with glistering stars: which goodly
Palace, Alexander at the instigation of his concubine, caused to be set on
fire. 6. Of this Princely palace of Susan, where the kings of Persia made their
abode, mention is made, Neh. 1. 1. Esther. 1. 1.

Quest. 7. Of the River Vlai, where Daniel had this vision.
v. 2. I was by the river Vlai. 1. Hierome reads by the gate Vlai, as cities
have diverse gates, which are named by their several names, as the gate
Carmentalis in Rome: so also gloss. ordinar. but the word Vbal, does not so
signify. 2. Theodotian, whom Theodoret follows, makes it a proper name, by
Vbal Vlai. 3. But the better reading is, by the river Vlai: for so Vbal
signifies a river: and Pliny makes mention of the river Eulaeus that runs
by Susa, and compasses that most famous temple of Daina there: the water of
which river was had in such price, that the Persian kings only used to drink
of it, and whither so ever they went, they had of this water carried with them,
Plin. lib. 6. c. 27.

Quest. 8. Why Daniel names himself in the first person.
1. It is the manner of the Prophets, in their several visions to express
their names, as Isay. 2. 1. and 6. 1. so also Ierem. c. 1. 1. c. 2. 1. and in
diverse other places: as Daniel in this place says, a vision appeared unto me,
even unto me Daniel, and the reason is, because the truth of such prophesies
and visions depends upon the credit of those Prophets, to whom they were
only revealed: but it is otherwise in matters of history, where the author
need not insert his own name, seeing the credit of histories relyeth not upon
the authority of the writer, but upon the evidence and truth of the things
themselves. 2. Therefore that is a weak exception, which Dyonisius of
Alexandria takes to the book of the Revelation, that it was not written by
John the Evangelist, but by some other, because the Evangelist very sparingly
names himself in the gospel: and when he does so, he describes himself in
the third person, the disciple whom Jesus loved: for as is before showed, there
is great difference between the writing of prophesies and histories: the
Revelation being prophetical, it was fit the Evangelist should express his
name for the credit of those visions, as the other Prophets use to do in their
prophesies.

Quest. 9. Why the kings of Persia are compared to a ram, v. 3.
There are three parts of this description. 1. from the similitude or
comparison: they are likened to a ram. 2. by the parts, the two horns. 3. by
the effects, their preuayling toward the West, North, and South.

Concerning the first, there are diverse opinions, why the Persian Monarchy
should be resembled to a ram. 1. Theodoret alleges this reason, sicut
aries sua lana grauatur, as a ram is loaded with his fleece, and at the
length is killed for his flesh and fleice: so the Persian Monarchy abounding
in wealth, at length became a prey: But the Persians are likened to a ram in
their flourishing and prosperous state, when as yet they rather preyed upon,
then were a prey unto any. 2. Lyranus from the Hebrews thinks the kingdom
of the Medes to be expressed by a ram, a gentle beast, quia non multum erat
infestum Iudaeis, because it was not much troublesome to the Jews. But hereby
the kingdom not of the Medes only, but of the Persians is signified, who were
grievous to the people of God. 3. Rupertus to the same purpose says, the kings
of Persia were as rams, quia lanis suis, id est, opibus, eundem populum
fouit, etc, because with their riches as with wool, they cherished the same
people of the Jews: But the most of the Persian kings, though some were more
equal, did suffer the Jews to be pilled and polled. 4. Calvin yields this
reason, we know, quam ignobile fuerit Persarum exordium, how base and mean
the beginning of the Persians was. 5. But that other reason of Calvin better
satisfies, that here the kingdom of Persia is set forth comparatively, as
having relation to the kingdom of Grecia, likened to a goat, quia multo fuit
agilior, and origo obscurior, because his agilitie was greater, and his
beginning more obscure, Calvin. And the ram brings a great company with
him, but of sheep: such were the multitude of the Persians, as sheep before
Alexander, Osiand.

Quest. 10. Who are signified by the two horns, whereof one was higher then
the other.
1. Some here do understand certain particular persons, as Melancthon
interprets Cyrus to be this ram, having both Medes and Persians in his
army, as the two horns thereof: Some understand this ram to be Darius,
gloss. interlinear. Hierome, whom Lyran. Hugo, Calvin, Genevens. follow, makes
Darius king of the Medes, and Cyrus king of Persia, these two horns, whereof
the latter was the greater: for Cyrus grew to be greater then Darius. 2.
Theodoret expounds these two horns to be two families of the Persian kings,
the one of Cyrus, which was extinguished in Cambyses his son, the other of
Darius Hystaspis: But neither of these opinions can stand: for the goat
fighting with this ram, brake his two horns: Alexander overcame Darius, long
after the time of the first Darius and Cyrus; these then could not be the two
horns: neither was this last Darius of either of those kindreds, but was
elected to the kingdom for his valor, as writes Justinius lib. 10. though
Diodorus lib. 17. make him the son of Darius Arsanes, who succeeded Ochus his
brother. 3. Wherefore by these two horns are better understood the two
kingdoms of the Medes and Persians, this grew to be the greater in power,
though the other were the more ancient: thus the Angel expounds afterward,
v. 20. these two horns are the kings of the Medes and Persians: Thus interpret
Oecolampadius, Pelican, Osiand. Iun. Polan.

Quest. 11. Of the greatness and prosperous success of this ram.
v. 4. I saw the ram pushing against the West, and against the North, etc.
1. The kingdom of Persia being in the East, did extend it self unto the
other three parts of the world, toward the West, as Babylon, Cappadocia, Asia
minor, Grecia; toward the North, as Lydia, Armenia, Albania, and other
Northern countries; toward the South, as Arabia, Aethiopia: and this answers
to the former vision, c. 7. 5. where the bear, which signifies the Persian
Monarchy, had three ribs or morsells in the mouth. 2. no beasts were able to
withstand them: for though the Babylonians had combined themselves with the
Egyptians, Thracians, Grecians, and other nations, and were in league with
Craesus king of Lydia, as Herodotus testifies, lib. 1. yet all would not
help: as the Prophet Jeremy says, the strong men of Babel ceased to fight,
they became as women, Ierem. 51. 30. 3. whereas it is said, he did what he
listed, this must be understood of the Persian Monarchy in general, for some
of their kings in the end had but hard success, as Cyrus with his army was
slain by Queen Tomyris, and Xerxes was foiled of the Grecians, and
constrained with shame to flee away: yet notwithstanding these particular
losses, the Monarchy continued still, and increased in power, Calvin. Oecolamp.

Quest. 12. Of the meaning of these words, as I considered, v. 5.
The Latin translation reading, I understood, gives occasion here of
question, how Daniel is said to understand this, whereas afterward v. 16. the
Angel Gabriel makes him understand it: 1. Hierome thus interprets, that he
had a general understanding: he was instructed by the former vision, hereby to
understand the change and commutation of kingdoms: so also Lyran. gloss.
ordinar. Theodoret expounds it of Daniels desire to understand. 2. But all
this question and doubt is removed by the right translating of the words: I
considered, or marked, the word is mabin, eram perpendens, as I weighed and
considered, Montan.

Quest. 13. Why the kingdom of the Grecians is resembled to a goat.
1. Pererius thinks the Grecians are so resembled, ob sagacitatem and acumen
ingenij, for their subtlety and sharpness of wit: as the goat is noted to
have a sharp and piercing eye. 2. Some think that the Grecians are here taxed
for their wanton games and plays, to the which they were given: as the goat is
known by his skipping and leaping, Melanct. Bulling. 3. Polanus thinks
because Daniel saw a kid of the goats, as the words are, that is, a young
sucking kid, that the weakness of the Macedonian strength is thereby
signified, which was far inferior to the power of the Persians. 4. Iunius
and Pintus think Alexanders youth to be thereby insinuated, who was not above
20. year old, when he took in hand these wars. 5. Iunius further notes
hereby the education of Alexander in all liberal arts: because he is
resembled to a sucking kid: But the personal qualities and properties of
Alexander, are set forth in the horn, the goat signifies the kingdom it
self of Grecia. 6. Some do by this resemblance note the intemperancie of the
Grecians: whereof this was an evident argument, that a certain common strumpet
among the Greeks, having set up a building for a public and common use, one
added this title, ex intemperancia Graecorum, by the intemperancie of the
Greeks, Osiand. And as this was the fault of the whole nation, so the like
vice reigned in their kings: Philip was slain for his Veneri^, and Alexander
died of a surfeit, or as some think, was poisoned at a banquet, Melancthon.
Lyranus further adds this story; that there was a virgin sent to Alexander,
which had been nourished with poison, to the intent, that Alexander coming
unto her might be poisoned: but Aristotle perceiving it by her gesture, and the
casting of her eyes, gave Alexander warning thereof: he alleges for this
story the book of the secrets of ^ecrets, but it seems to be of no great
credit. 7. But the best conjecture why this similitude is used, is that of
Theodoret, quia ariete velocior est hircus, because the goat is nimbler then
the ram: so also Calvin, and this reason is warranted by the text, he touched
not the ground, which signifies the great celeritie which Alexander and the
Grecians used, as though he touched not the ground as he went: as the goat
skippeth and bounseth as he goes: for so Alexander made such have, as that he
seemed to run, or rather fly over the world, in the space of six years
ouerrunning the most famous kingdoms: He being asked how he obtained such
great victories, made answer, (...), he deferred no opportunity: And when he
was to encounter with Darius army at Granicum, Parmenio persuaded him to stay
till the next day; but he presently passing over the river, set upon the
Persians with happy success.

Quest. 14. Of Alexander the great, signified by the horn between the eyes,
his birth, education, exploits, death, and end.
1. Alexander was borne, not as Solinus in the 385. year after the building of
Rome, which falls into the 103. Olympiad: nor as Orosius in the 402. year of
the building of Rome, which was after the 107. Olympiad: But Eusebius better
casts the time, who places Alexanders death at 33. years of his age, in the
first year of the 114. Olympiad: so that his birth falls out in the 1. or 2.
year of the 106. Olympiad: so also Perer. Bullinger in his tables of
chronology: the same day that he was borne, the Temple of Diana at Ephesus was
set one fire, which the Magicians interpreted to signify, that one was then
borne which should set fire on all Asia.

2. Alexander at 15. years of age was committed by his father to Aristotle's
tuition and instruction, with whom he spent 5. years in the learning of arts
and other knowledge meet for a king, Justin. lib. 12.

3. At 20. years, not 24. as Orosius, Alexander began his reign, the first
year he subdued Thracia, Grecia, and other countries adjoining, the second
year he overcame Darius at Granicum, and so possessed Asia: the 3. year he
vanquished the Persians again in the streights of Cilicia: in the 4. year he
went into Phenicia, Egypt, Iudaea, and came to Jerusalem, where he met Iaddua
the high priest, and adored him, and was encouraged by a vision to go against
the Persians: in the 5. or rather the 6. year he finally vanquished Darius,
and all the power of the Persians: the 6. years following he subdued many
nations even unto the river Ganges, and the Indian Ocean.

4. Concerning the time and years of his reign, they were neither (as
Eusebius) six, or as Diodorus, seven: or as Arrianus eight, or as Liuius
thirteen, as Tertullian ten, or as Strabo, an eleauen: Justinius gives unto
him, 14. years, Clemens Alexandrinus 18. years, lib. 1. stromat. But he
reigned 12. years and odd months, as Theodoret, so also Bulling. Perer. and
so is it testified, 1. Macchab. 1. 6. that Alexander reigned 12. years.

5. He died at Babylon some write of a surfeit, some of poison, in the year of
his age 32. as Hierome, not 34. as Justinius, or 33. as Rupertus: he lived 32.
years, and reigned 12. years and odd months.

Quest. 15. Of the victory of Alexander against Darius, described by the goats
ouercomming of the ram.
1. Alexander encountered Darius forces in three great battles, first at
Granicum where with 32000. footmen, and 4050. horsemen, he overcame 600000.
Persians. After that Alexander discomfited Darius host at Issum in Cilicia,
consisting of 300000. footmen, and an 100000. horsemen, in which battle there
were slain 80000. footmen, and 10000. horsemen, and 40. thousand taken
prisoners, among the which were Darius wife, his sister, and daughters: The
third and last battle was at Alexanders return out of Egypt, where he built
the famous city Alexandria, when at Arbela, Darius met him with 400000.
footmen, and an 100000. horsemen, where the power of Persia was fully
overthrown: and Darius was slain by Bessus one of his own captains, whom
Alexander for that fact commanded to be rent asunder, being tied to the tops
of trees, Orosius lib. 3. c. 16. 17.

2. So Alexander broke the two horns of the ram, that is, overcame the power
of the Medes and Persians: first at Issum he subdued the Persian forces, then
in the last battle he conquered the Medes with other Northern nations, as the
Caspians, Iberians, Albanians, whom Darius had hired to assist him in this
battle, Iun. Analys.

3. Whereas it is said, there was none to deliver the ram out of the power of
the goat, thereby is showed, that there was no means, by force or other to
help Darius: for in these 3. battles Darius brought not less then 15. hundred
thousand against Alexander, and yet it auayled him nothing: Darius also
attempted Alexander with promise of great gifts, and of part of the kingdom,
and the marriage of his daughter: But Alexander would accept of no conditions,
unless Darius would have resigned unto him the whole kingdom: he answered
him, that the world could not bear two kings, Oecolamp.

4. He is said also to cast him down to the ground, and stamp upon him, that
is, Alexander made none account of the Persian glory, and riches, who at the
instance of his concubine, caused the most goodly palace in the world at
Persepolis to be set on fire, Calvin.

Quest. 16. v. 8. Of the breaking of this great horn, and of the death of
Alexander.
Three things are worthy of observation in Alexanders death. 1. the time. 2.
the causes. 3. the manner of his death.

1. When Alexander was at the greatest, and was returned from the conquest of
the Indians, as of king Porus, and Ambira, and purposed to pass over into
Greece, and into the West parts, he died in the way at Babylon, where
ambassadors from all nations in the world expected him, from Carthage, and
Africa, Spain, France, Sicilia, Sardinia.

2. The causes of this sudden judgment which befell him, may be thought to be
the great vices, which he fell into in the last three years of his reign,
having in the former 8. years, showed himself an example of a good prince:
The^e four great sins he was touched withal, cruelty, he killed diverse of
his friends in his drunkenness, which was another vice: then he was given unto
lust and wantonness: his pride also was such, that he would be worshipped as a
God, and made himself Iuppiter Ammons son: for which cause he commanded
Calisthenes to be killed, because he refused to worship him: for these his
great enormities the divine justice ouertooke him, and judged him.

3. The manner of his death some think was by poison: but the most agree that
he died of a surfeit: he feasted at a Physicians house a Thessalian, one of his
friends, and continued all the next day quaffing and drinking unto midnight,
and thorough this distemperature he fell into a burning fever, and after few
days died at Babylon, and had no time to return into his own country: thus
write of him, Justinius, Arrianus, Curtius, Plutarke.

Quest. 17. Of the four horns which came up in the stead of this great horn.
1. These four horns were four kingdoms into the which the Monarchy of
Alexander was divided: in the East Seleucus Nicanor obtained the kingdom of
Babylon, and Syria: in the West Cassander and Antipater the kingdom of
Macedonia: in the North Antigonus held Asia minor, in the South Ptolome
obtained Egypt. 2. the Rabbines do not agree among themselves what these four
horns should be: Some of them as R. Saadiah makes these the four horns, one
Romanus at Rome, the second Alexander in Alexandria, the third Arideus in
Achaia, the fourth Antiochus in Antiochia: Ab. Ezra thinks they be the four
kingdoms, of Rome, Egypt, the land of Israel, Persia: But both these opinions
are evidently convinced by the text: for the Angel afterward interprets these
four horns to be four kingdoms which should stand up of the nation of the
Grecians, v. 22. 3. Pererius also is deceived, who appoints but three
successors to Alexander, Ptolome in Egypt, Seleucus in Syria, and Antigonus in
Macedonia, whereas he succeeded in Asia, and Cassander after Antipater in
Macedonia.

Quest. 18. When these four kingdoms did arise, after the great horn was
broken.
1. The author of the history of the Macchabees affirms, that Alexander
being sick, parted his kingdom among his servants, while he was yet alive,
1. Macchab. 1. 7. But this is contrary to all other historiographers,
Justinius, Diodorus, Curtius, Arrianus, Orosius, Josephus: who all affirm that
this was the cause of the long war among Alexanders captains after his
death, because he had appointed none to succeed him. 2. Pererius to justify
the Apochryphall story of the Macchabees, thus helps the matter, that
Alexander being at the point of death, when he could not speak, did resign
his ring unto Perdiccas, to whom the rest of the captains at the persuasion of
Aristonus did yield the chief dominion, and so in that by his authority the
four kingdoms were divided to the rest, it was in effect done by Alexander,
who had resigned the kingdom unto Perdiccas, while he lived: But this agrees
not with the true history* for after Alexanders death, not Perdiccas, but
Arideus the brother of Alexander succeeded, and Perdiccas was but viceroy:
neither was there any peaceable division of the kingdom, but after much
contention and bloody wars, wherein 15. of Alexanders captains were slain,
Polan. 3. Some think that presently after Alexanders death, the captains made
this distribution among themselves, and divided the kingdom into four parts,
gloss. ordinar. but that is not so: for after Alexanders death, Philippus
Arideus succeeded, and Perdiccas was protector or viceroy, until Roxane
Alexanders wife had brought forth Alexander his son, and then Philistio was
protector of the kingdom: But Arideus was killed by Olympias Alexanders
mother; and Alexander his son with Roxane his mother, and Hercules an other
son of Alexanders with Barsan^ his mother were killed by Cassander: so
immediately after Alexanders death this division could not be made. 4.
Wherefore the truth is, that a long time after Alexanders death, there was
contention among Alexanders captains for the kingdom, Orosius says 14. years:
And then these four captains preuayling, divided the kingdom among them as
is showed in the former question: And as Eusebius writes the kingdom of Syria
begun the 11. year after the death of Alexander.

Quest. 19. Who was this little horn, v. 9.
1. This little horn was Antiochus Epiphanes, that is, noble or famous
Antiochus, or rather as Polybius calls him, Epimanes, the furious or mad
Antiochus: he came out of one of the four horns, namely, of Seleucus Nicanor,
being the eight of that race, which are thus reckoned, Seleucus Nicanor,
Antiochus Soter, Antiochus Theos, Seleucus Callinicus, Seleucus Ceraunus,
Antiochus Magnus, Seleucus Philopator, and then succeeded Antiochus Epiphanes
brother to the said Seleucus, and younger son to Antiochus the great. 2.
Hierome then is here deceived, who makes this Antiochus the son of Seleucus
Philopator, being indeed his brother. 3. He is called a little horn* not in
respect of other kingdoms, then whom he was mightier: but in these respect^, 1.
because he had no title to the kingdom at the first, being the younger
brother, and Seleucus his elder brother had also an issue male Demetrius,
Polan. 2. he was a long time an hostage at Rome, and lived as a private man,
Perer. 3. he was of a servile and flattering nature, and had no princely
quality, and condition in him.

Quest. 20. Of the outrages committed by Antiochus Epiphanes signified by this
little horn.
Three effects are described. 1. his attempts against other nations. 2. his
violence against the people of God. 3. his blasphemy and profaneness against
God himself.

1. He attempted much against the South, namely* against Egypt, upon this
occasion: Ptolomeus Epiphanes married Cleopatra daughter unto Antiochus the
great, sister unto this Antiochus Epiphanes, by whom he had Ptolome Philometor,
who being a child, Antiochus took upon him the tuition of him and his realm:
but under that color his meaning was to hold the kingdom of Egypt to
himself: Then the Egyptians craved help of the Romans, who sent C^ius
Popilius, who discharged Antiochus out of Egypt, making a circle with his rod
at his feet, requiring Antiochus present answer before he went any further.

2. He raged also against the people of God the Jews, whose country is called
the pleasant land, because of the knowledge and worship of God, as it is in
that sense called the joy of the whole earth, Psalm. 48. 2. In two expeditions
which he made against Egypt, in both of his returns from thence he invaded
Jerusalem, and put the Jews to the sword. At the first time he was received by
Jason the high Priest, and in his second return by wicked Menelaus: Thus he
raged against the host of heaven, the people of God, who are as the Lords host
militant here in earth: and he cast down some of the stars to the ground,
which some understand generally to be the people of the Jews, Hugo. some the
chief and famous men, Call. Polan. But rather by stars are understood the
excellent professors of the Church, whom he caused some to forsake their faith,
some to be tormented, as the mother with her 7. sons, 2. Macc. 2. 7. thus the
casting down of the stars is understood, Apoc. 12. 4. Bulling.

3. Then follows the third effect, his profaneness and irreligion against
God, who is called the prince of the host of his Church, hereof there are four
wicked and vile fruits. 1. the daily sacrifices should be taken away, with
other ceremonies of religion, the Sabbaths violated, Gods service and worship
intermitted. 2. The Sanctuary was defiled, and the abominable Idol of Jupiter
Olympus set up in the place of the worship of God. 3. many of the Jews
revolted from the faith, and so the army, that is the Church militant was
betrayed into the hands of Antiochus, v. 12. 4. he cast down the truth, that
is destroyed the law, defacing and burning the books of the law, 1. Macchab.
1. 59. Bulling.

Quest. 21. Of the meaning of these words, v. 12. the army was given up with
the daily sacrifice by iniquity.
There are diverse readings of this verse. 1. Some translate the word, tzeba,
time, thus reading, a time shall be given over the daily sacrifice for the
iniquity, Calv. Mercer. in Job. 7. v. 1. Genev. But seeing the same word tzeba
is taken for an host or army, v. 10. it is not convenient to alter the
signification here. 2. Some other read, robur ei datum est, etc. power was
given him against the daily sacrifice, etc. so the Latin and Perer. Pint. Pap.
Osiand. but this reading likewise is refused upon the former reason, because
the same word is otherwise taken before. 3. It remains then that this is the
true sense and reading: the host was given up with the daily sacrifice (Bull.
Vat.) or against the daily sacrifice, I. Pol. by iniquity or treachery. 4.
This defection, treachery, or iniquity, some understand generally of the Jews
and iniquity of the people, for the which they were punished, and deprived of
the daily sacrifice, Call. Genev. some refer it more specially to the sins
of the Priests and people (in corrupting and defiling of the service and
worship of God) committed against the daily sacrifice, for the which they were
worthily delivered up, Vatab. But here seems to be special relation to the
treachery of the Priests, by whom the city and temple was betrayed, as first
by Jason, afterward by Menelaus, who buying the high Priests place for money,
neglected the Temple and the service thereof, transgressed the laws, and
preferred the games and plays of the Gentiles, as is more at large declared,
2. Macch. 4.

22. Quest. Of the meaning of the word Palmoni, v. 13.
1. Some retain the Hebrew word Palmoni, as the Septuag. but it was not a
proper name of this great Angel, to whom the other Angel spoke, it was a title
rather or epithete given him, that admirable or excellent Angel, as Vatab. 2.
Some do take this word as derived of these two words, peloni almoni, which
signifies a certain one unknown: as Ruth 4. 1. peloni almoni, ho, such an
one, come hither: But this Angel being spoken unto as the superior, and the
other Angel which asked the question being set forth by the title of holy one;
it is not like that this great Angel the reuealer of secrets, should be
expressed by such a mean term. 3. Therefore this palmoni, is understood of
Christ, who is the reuealer of secrets: and it signifies one which has things
secret in number or account, Iun. some derive it of pala, wonderful, and
almoni, a certain one: so it should signify one admirable or wonderful,
Oecolampad. some of pala, and ghalam, which signifies to hide, he that hides
things secret, Polan. but the best deriuation is, of pala, wonderful or
secret, and manah to number: so Palmoni is he which has all ^ecrets in number
and account, Pap. and so interprets Iunius.

Quest. 23. What Angel that was, unto whom one of the Angels spoke.
1. This whom Daniel calls one of the Saints, was no doubt one of the Angels,
and most like to be the Angel Gabriel, because he is bidden afterward by name
to cause Daniel to understand the vision, Bulling. 2. But concerning the other,
who is called Palmoni, unto whom the Angel spoke, some question is who it
should be: Perer. and Pintus do suppose it was some superior Angel: and
thereupon Pererius would ground his speculatiue conceit of the Hierarchy of
Angels, that some are inferior and ministering spirits, some are superior and
give direction unto the other. 3. But this great Angel, called Palmoni, was (no
doubt) Christ himself the Prince of the Angels: for so he is called, Isay. 9.
7. peleh, wonderful, whence this name Palmoni is derived, Call. Bulling. 4. Now
this Angel that asked the question, did it not of any curiosity, as the
disciples enquired of Christ, Act. 1. and therefore are reproved, but the
Angel for the instruction of Daniel, for the common good of the Church,
desires to know this secret.

Quest. 24. Of the time prescribed, v. 14. of 2300. days, how it is to be
taken.
1. R. Leu^ by so many days would have understood so many years, beginning
from the time of Saul, which he calls the morning, because then the kingdom
of Israel flourished, and by the evening he understands the taking away of
the kingdom: from thence to the third reparation of the Sanctuary he would
have counted 2300. years, when he says the Temple should be built the third
time again, and after that never to be destroyed: But this Rabbine herein is a
false Prophet, for from Saul's reign there have run 2600. years, and yet
this their third Temple, which they dreamed of, is not raised. 2. R Saadia by
these 2300. days would understand so many months, for so he counts an 180.
years from the beginning of the kingdom of the Greeks unto Antiochus:
whereas it is evident, 1. Mac. 1. 21. that Antiochus came against Jerusalem in
the 143. year, Oecol. and beside, whereas it is said in the text, unto the
evening and morning, it is evident, that neither months or years are here to
be understood, but so many natural days: Call. Theodoret by the evening
understands the beginning of their calamity, by the morning the end
thereof: but the phrase of Scripture shows, that thereby the natural day is
comprehended, which consists of the day and night. As Genesis 1. throughout the
chapter, the evening and morning were the first day, and the second day, so the
rest. 3. It remains then, that by these 2300. days, so many days precisely
must be understood, which make 6. years 3. months and 20. days, counting
365. days to a year, Bulling. 4. Some do here read only a 1300. days,
Osian, So also read Montanus, and Pagnin: but the Hebrewe word alephaijm,
being put in the duall number, signifies two thousand, Vatab. Iun. Polan.
Oecolamp.

Quest. 25. When this term of 2300. began and ended.
1. Melancthon begins this term in the year of the kingdom of the
Greeks, an 145. and ends it in the year 151. when Nicanor and his army
were destroyed, and the whole land recovered: but seeing evident mention is
made, that Antiochus began to afflict Jerusalem in the 143. year, 1. Mac. 1.
21. this teame must not take beginning after that: and seeing also that all
this desolation is prophesied to happen under Antiochus Epiphanes, who was this
little horn, this term must not be extended after the death of Antiochus,
who died in the 149. year, 1. Mac. 6. 16.

2. Some do begin this term in the 143. year, when Antiochus went proudly
into the Sanctuary, and took away the golden altar, 1. Mac. 1. 23. And so
this term of 6. years, shall determine in the 148. year when Judas
Macchabeus recovered the city, and purged the Temple: then the 3. months and
odd days are counted over and about to finish the purging and sanctifying of
the Temple, Bull, Pererius extends them to the death of Antiochus, which was
in the 149. year. But this account cannot stand: for from the beginning of the
143. year, to the purging of the 1. Macch. 4. 52.
Sanctuary by Judas, which was in the ninth month Chisleu, the 25. day, in
the 148. year, is not 6. years, there wants 3. months and 5. days.

3. Calvin will have the six years to end in the month Chisleu, in which
month the temple was polluted: but 3. months after the month Chisle^, the
six years being expired, it was cleansed, in the month Adar: and he notes
for this 1. Macchab. 4. 36. But there is no such thing observed concerning any
particular time: the contrary is evident in the 52. v. following, that in the
month Chisleu (not Adar) the temple was cleansed, in the 148. year, 1.
Maccha. 1. 57.
as three years before it had been defiled in the same month, in the 15. of
Chisleu.

4. Iunius, whom Polanus follows, begins this time in the 142. year, the
sixth month, and 6. day: and so the full sum of 6. years, 3. months, and
20. days, will come out in the 148. year, in the ninth month, the 25. day.
He begins the reckoning of this desolation of Jerusalem, when Menclaus with
other wicked men, first obtained license of the king to follow the ordinances
of the heathen, 1. Mac. 1. 14. and 2. Mac. 4. 25. And this seems to be the
best account: for though it cannot be precisely gathered out of the story of
the Macchabees, when this term of a 2300. years began, it must have a
perfect end at the cleansing of the Sanctuary, which was in the 148. year,
on the 25. day of the ninth month Chisleu: Pererius answers, that it is not
necessary to understand that this cleansing of the Sanctuary should be in the
very end, sed prope finem, but toward the end: But the contrary is evident
out of the text, that after the 2300. days, then shall the Sanctuary be
cleansed: But they which begin the six years in the 143. year, cannot end
this term at such time as the Sanctuary was cleansed, but extend it further.

5. Some, as Pererius notes, to make this term end just at the cleansing of
the Sanctuary, do read, a 2200. days: but this is an evident controlling of
the text, which speaks of a 2300. days.

6. Pappus indifferently summeth these days, either from the first spoiling of
the city, in the 143. year, and so they shall end in Antiochus death; or
from the setting up of the abomination of desolation, in the 145. year, in
the month Chisleu, 1. Macchab. 1. 57. and then they shall end in the
overthrow and subversion of Nicanor and his host, which was two years after
Antiochus death: But this being a prophetical prediction, must have a certain
and definite accomplishment, it cannot indifferently be taken two ways: I
prefer therefore the fourth interpretation as the best.

7. Now whereas c. 7. 25. there are assigned a time, two times, and a part,
that is 3. years and 10. days for the desolation of the Sanctuary, R^ con^ll.
but here the sum of 2300. days makes six years, 3. months, 20. days:
This must be understood of all the time from the first defection or falling
away of the people by the procurement of wicked Menelaus, which was in the 42.
year, as is before showed; and then follows Antiochus first coming to
Jerusalem, when he laid wast the city and spoiled the people, in the 143.
year: but the 3. years must begin from the second coming of Antiochus in
the 145. year, when he set up the abomination of desolation: And therefore
here menion is not made only of the iniquity of desolation, and treading
down of the Sanctuary, but of the army also, that is, the Lords people and
the city, Polan.

8. Herein also appears Gods mercy, who now afflicts his people in
measure, he fulfilleth not (all out) seven years in the desolation of the
city and temple, whereas before he punished them with a captivity of seventy
years, Oecolampad.

Quest. 26. When the kingdom of the Greeks, so often mentioned in the book
of the Macchabees took beginning.
1. Lyranus is of opinion, that the reign of the Greeks should begin from the
death of Alexander, comment. in 1. lib. Macchab. c. 1. But this cannot be, for
after Alexanders death, for the space of 13. or 14. years, there was no
certain succession of the kingdom, Alexanders captains one warring against
another, till those four kingdoms of Macedonia, Asia, Egypt, Syria, were
settled.

2. Ioannes Annius is yet more bold, lib. super Philon. qui inseribitur
breviariu^ temporum.
and controlleth those numbers set down in the story of the Macchabees, that
whereas Antiochus is said to begin his reign in the 137. year of the
kingdom of the Greeks, he says it was the 153. year, from the death of
Alexander, from whence the kingdom of the Greeks must be counted in his
opinion: And he further affirms that those numbers in those books of: the
Macchabees, were not inserted by the author of that story, but by Josephus:
But though the book of the Macchabees is not received as Canonical for any
matter of faith or doctrine, yet it may be esteemed of for matter of story:
and therefore it is great bouldnes therein to contradict the same: And he in
this his censure gives unto Antiochus 16. years, whereas he is held to have
reigned but 12. year: he began to reign in the year 137. and died in the
149. year, 1. Mac. 6. 16.

3. Therefore these years of the kingdom of the Greeks must begin from the
reign of Seleucus in Syria, not from the death of Alexander, as may thus be
gathered. 1. whereas Antiochus polluted the Sanctuary in the 145. year, if
this time were taken from Alexanders death, it should be the 157. or 159.
year, for so long it was after Alexanders death. 2. Beside, Josephus lib. 12.
antiquit. cap. 7. says, that this 145. year did concur with the 153.
Olympiads: then cannot this account begin from the death of Alexander, which
was in the first year of the 114. Olympiad: from thence to the 153. Olympiad,
are 39. Olympiads, which make an 156. years, whereas it was but the 145. year
from the beginning of the reign of the Seleucians.

Quest. 27. Why the kingdom of the Greeks, is counted from the reign of the
Seleucians.
1. Though Alexander were the first king of the Greeks, and founder of that
Empire, v. 21. yet his reign is not counted, because the kingdom descended
not to his posterity, as the kingdom of the Seleucians did: for there were
many descents in the same family, until the kingdom was dissolved by the
Romans.

2. And whereas it may be objected, that there was a descent and succession in
the other kingdoms, but especially of the Ptolomees in Egypt, whose race
continued longer, then the Seleucians in Syria: yet these have the name of the
kingdom, because the were mightier then the rest, and they had chiefly to do
with the people of God, whom the history of the Macchabees specially
concerns.

3. Further whereas the kingdom of the Seleucians was not in any part of
Greece, but in Syria and Chaldea, yet it is called the kingdom of the
Grecians, because the Seleucians had their beginning from thence, and used the
language, customs, superstitions of the Greeks, Perer.

Quest. 28. Of the man Gabriel.
1. Some do take this to be an excellent name, common to all Angels: it
signifies the strength or power of God: but it is evident, Luke 1. 19. where
this Angel Gabriel was sent to the vigin Marie, that it was the proper name of
an Angel, Iun. commentar. 2. But Gregory well notes that Angels are not
called by names in respect of themselves, as though they could not be
discerned, but by their several names, in that celestial city where they
enjoy the vision of God, sed cum ad nos aliquid ministraturi veniunt, etc. but
when they come unto us to minister, they do take their names of their
ministry and office, etc. as here this Angel is called Gabriel, the strength
of God, because he was employed in the defense of the Church against the
enemies thereof. 3. But this further must be considered, that this Angel is not
so called, ab essentiali potentia dei, from the essential power of God, but of
that power which was given him to execute the Lords commandment. Iun. 4. And
this is the only name given unto Angels in Scripture: for the name Michael,
which signifies one as God, is ascribed unto Christ, who is equal unto God:
As for the other names, Raphael, Ieremiel, Sammael, they are but the devised
terms of men, inserted in the Apochryphall books, but not to be found in the
Canonical Scriptures, Polan. Iun.

Quest. 29. v. 16. Upon these words, make this man to understand the vision:
whether Angels can give us understanding.
1. The Angels of themselves have no power to infuse understanding into the
mind of man: but he only which has created the heart of man, can give unto
it understanding: And the Angels themselves cannot understand the secrets and
mysteries of God, unless it be given unto them, as here the Angel called an
holy one, enquired of Palmoni, which is Christ, the meaning of this vision, v.
13. 2. yet when it pleases God to use the ministry of Angels, they may help
to make a way for our better understanding, as he which opens the window,
may be said to give light unto the house, yet it is the sun properly that
gives light: So the Son of righteousness illuminateth our hearts, the
Angels may help to prepare the way, Polan. 3. But in this place the Angel does
not by any secret infusion open Daniels understanding, but by a manifest and
clear interpretation of the vision: and so the Lord uses the ministry of men
in the preaching of the gospel, to open the hearts of the hearers.

Quest. 30. v. 29. How Alexander is said to be the first king of Grecia.
1. Though there were other kings of Macedonia, which is a part of Greece,
before Alexander, as Philip, with others; yet Alexander here compared to an
horn for strength, is said to be the first king, namely of the Monarchy,
Osiand, the first king of the Grecians, that overcame the Medes and Persians,
Polan. 2. And here it must be observed, that the two first kingdoms are
likened unto beasts, the rest unto the horns of beasts, because they did issue
out of the other, as the horns came out of the beast. 3. And by the horns we
must understand, the kings together with their kingdoms, Osiand. 4. Lyranus
gives this reason, why Alexander is called the first, because before him the
kings were nullius momenti, of no account or fame: He was the first notable
king: But he is so called, not only in respect of his name or fame, but of his
power and conquest, as is before touched.

Quest. 31. Of the time when Antiochus Epiphanes should rise up: in the latter
end of their kingdom.
1. Some do thus expound the word, beacharith, procedente tempore, during the
time of these kingdoms, Iun. annot. Polan. but the same word, v. 19. they
interpret extremitatem, the extremity of wrath, or the last wrath: therefore
it is not fit in this place to give it an other interpretation.

2. Some read in the end of their kingdom, Genevens. that is toward the end
of the kingdom of the Macedonians, or Greeks, Vatab. So also reads the
Latin, post regnum illorum, after their kingdom: But this cannot be
understood of the end of the kingdom of the Grecians, or Seleucians: for when
Anciochus Epiphanes rose up, there were more which succeeded in that family
after him, then went before him: for in all there were 18. kings of Seleucus
posterity, in the which number Antiochus Epiphanes was the 8. king of that
family, so that ten succeeded him: Antioch us Eupator, Demetrius Soter,
Alexander Epiphanes, Demetrius Nicanor, Antiochus Sedetes, Antiochus Gryphus,
Antiochus Cyzicenus, Seleucus the son of Gryphus, Antiochus Pius, whom
Tigranes expelled, Antiochus Asiaticus, whom Pompey deprived. And further
whereas the kingdom of the Seleucians continued 270. years, as Appianus, and
Antiochus began to reign in the 137. year, and died in the 149. year, 1.
Macchab. 6. 16. there remained yet after Antiochus death an 120. years of the
reign of the Seleucians: Antiochus Epiphanes then could not come in the end
of that kingdom.

3. Lyranus making Antiochus a type of Antichrist, understands the final end
and dissolution of the Greek Empire, when the fourth Monarchy of the Romans
began: for the kingdom of Antichrist, quodam modo pertinet ad regnum
Romanum, belongs after a sort to the kingdom of the Romans: But seeing it
is confessed of all, that historically this vision and prophecy was first
fulfilled in Antiochus Epiphanes, though typically it be referred unto
Antichrist: then first this must historically be applied to the time of the
rising up of Antiochus.

4. Bullinger here understands the end of the Macedonian kingdom, for so
Antiochus Epiphanes, began to reign in the 4. year of Perses the last king,
who reigned a 11. years, in the last whereof he was overcome and taken by P.
Aemilius, and Macedonia was brought to be a Province: But this interpretation
agrees not with the text, which says, that in the end of their kingdom,
etc. a king of fierce countenance shall stand up: it is evident then that he
means that kingdom out of which this fierce king should come, which was the
kingdom of the Seleucians.

5. Calvin thus interprets, in the end of their kingdom, that is, vbi ad
summum peruenerint, when they are come to the height, and begin to decline: for
after Antiochus Epiphanes, the glory and power of that kingdom begun to
decay: But that is not said properly to be the end of a kingdom, when the
power thereof is somewhat altered only, the regal authority still remaining.

6. Therefore the best reading is, posteris temporibus, in the latter times of
this kingdom, so is the word acharith taken, Genesis 49. 1. c. 2. 28. see before
c. 2. quest. 31. cum regna illa aliquantum temporis constiterint, when those
kingdoms have continued some while: and the better part of the time of their
continuance was past: for Antiochus came in the 137. year, which was toward
both the latter, and the decaying times of that kingdom: for there remained an
120. years of that kingdom, not so much time, as was already fulfilled, Iun.
commentar.

Quest. 32. The description of Antiochus and of his doings.
He is described. 1. by the time of his rising up. 2 his qualities. 3.
condition and state. 4. his acts and exploits. 5. by his end.

1. The time is expressed, when the iniquities, or defection, or falling away
is perfited, which some understand generally when the iniquities of the people
were increased, Lyran. Hugo. then God would raise up one to punish them. Some
refer it to the professed enemies of the Church of God, when they should be
multiplied: But there is special reference had to the general defection and
falling away from religion, unto gentilisme, as is declared, 1. Macchab. 1. v.
12. v. 43. and c. 2. v. 15. And the ringleaders of this apostasy were Jason,
who bought the high Priests place of Antiochus for money, and Menelaus who by
the like briberie obtained it, Jason being expelled: which wicked men procured
the Greek plays to be set up in Jerusalem, and sent money to Tyrus for a
sacrifice to Hercules, and followed the abominable fashion of the heathen: as
it is more at large showed. 2. Macchab. 4.

2. He is set forth by his adjuncts. 1. he shall be of an hard countenance,
that is, of an impudent face, a shameless man. 2. he shall understand dark
sentences, which some expound thus, he shall cause by his doings this dark
vision to be understood, as being fulfilled in him, Hugo. But hereby rather is
signified his craft and cunning, he should be most subtle and politic to
contriue his purpose.

3. His state is set forth, his power shall be mighty, but not in his
strength: which some expound, 1. his strength shall not be like Alexanders,
Genevens. 2. or astutior erit quam potentior, he shall be more crafty then
powerful: grassabitur per frauds, he shall proceed by craft, not by
strength, Calvin. so also Iun. annot. 3. Hugo following the interlin. gloss.
gives this sense, not in his own strength, but of Gods, for he could not so
have prospered unless Gods will had been so, for the punishment of his
people. 4. not in his own strength, sed Satanae virtute, but by the power of
Satan, gloss. ordinar. ex Gregor. 5. But the meaning rather is this, he seduced
others, quorum viribus abuteretur, whose power he should abuse to help
himself: for both he was helped by the treachery of the high Priests, Jason,
and Menelaus, Bulling. and he had also the help of foreign kings, Eumenes, and
Attalus, as Appian in Syriacis. Polan.

4. His acts and exploits are of two sorts, either against men, or against God
himself: Against men. 1. he shall destroy wonderfully, which Hugo refers to
Antiochus obscure beginning, that he suddenly should rise to so great power:
Oecolampadins understands it of his wonderful cruelty, who in three days
slew 80. thousand in Jerusalem, 40. thousand were put in bands, and as many
sold: But it may more fitly be understood of his deceit and craft, whereby he
wonderfully prospered: for he procured the death of his father Antiochus, and
then of his elder brother Seleucus, and then defeated also Seleucus son of
the kingdom. 2. he shall destroy the mighty and holy people, Gregory
understands here, mente inuictos, those which were strong and invincible in
mind, whom he corporally overcame, as the mother with the seven children, and
other of the Saints, Lyran. Hugo understands the Jews which were strong and
mighty, auxilio dei, by the strength of God before: this shows rather, that
he should not only prosper against the people of God, but subdue other strong
nations also, as the Egyptians, with other people, Calv. Polan. 3. A third
effect is, that he should so by his policy and craft prevail, winning some by
flattery and bribes, others by fraud and deceit, that he should thereby wax
wonderful insolent and proud above measure: in so much, 2. Macchab. 9. 8.
as that he should think to command the floods, and to weigh the mountains in
a balance. 4. He shall in peace destroy many: 1. some read in copia rerum, in
the abundance of things: which Hugo understands of his gifts: Lyran: of his
power given him of God. 2. but the word shalvah signifies peace: Calvin
expounds, that he shall per quietem quasi per ludum, by peace, and at his
ease, and as in sport, without any difficulty prevail: some give this sense,
that he shall set upon men which were in peace, nihil opinantes, thinking
nothing: but the meaning is, he shall under color and pretense of peace destroy
many: for so he invaded Egypt under pretense to be gardiane to the young king,
his nephewe: so he gave peaceable words unto the Jews, who gave credit to him,
and he entered the city, and put them to the sword, 1. Macch. 1. 31, 32. 2.
Then follows his insolency against God himself, he should stand up against
the prince of princes: for so he set up in despite of God the abominable idol
of Jupiter Olympus in the temple.

The fifth and last part of the description is of his end: he shall be broken
down without hand, that is of man, he died by the stroke of Gods hand, of a
most incurable disease, 2. Macchab. c. 9. which is now to be handled more at
large in the next question.

33. Quest. Of some difference in the story of the Macchabees concerning the
death of Antiochus.
There are some differences, which seem to admit some reasonable satisfaction,
but some other there are, which can not be reconciled.

The differences of the first sort are these. 1. whereas the narration of the
death of Antiochus is set forth in three places, 1. Macch. c. 6. 2. Macch. c.
1. and c. 9. in the 1. Macch. c. 6. v. 1. it is said, that Antiochus would
have spoiled the rich temple in the city Elymais: and yet, 2. Macch. c. 9. it
is said to be the city Persepolis, the temple whereof he would have spoiled:
Pererius here answers, that it was in deed the city Susa in the Province of
Elymais, the temple whereof he would have robbed; which is called Persepolis a
city of Persia: though he confesses, that there was a city of that name, but
that was destroyed by Alexander; he himself, with his captains being
drunken, at the instigation of Thais his concubine, set fire unto it with his
own hands. Contr. But a better answer may be found out: that the words are not
to be read, he heard that Elymais in the country of Persia, was a city
greatly renowned for riches, as the Latin translatour reads, whom our
English translations follow: but the Greek text stands thus, he heard,
(...), that there was in Elymais in the region of Persia, a city. So Elymais,
is not the name of the city, but of the country which belonged to Persia,
where this city was. And Persepolis is known to have been the proper name of
a city, which though it had been destroyed by Alexander above an 150. years
before this, yet it might, and is like in all this time to have been repaired
again.

2. Whereas 1. Macch. 6. 5. it is said, that one brought him tidings into
Persia, how his armies were discomfited in Judea: and 2. Macch. 9. 3. it is
said the news was brought him to Ecbatane, which is in Media, not in Persia,
Tob. 3. 7. Pererius gives this satisfaction, that the messenger might first
come into Persia, but not finding the king there, he went to Ecbatane.

3. 1. Macch. 6. 4. the Latin translator reads, he came again to Babylon:
but 2. Macch. 9. 28. it is said, he died in a strange country among the
mountains: he could not die in a strange country being at Babylon, for that
was his own country. This doubt also may easily be removed by amending the
translation: the words in the original are, (...), he was to return to
Babylon, Iun. Vatab. in animo habuit, etc. it was in his mind to return to
Babylon, Perer. but the Latin translation is, reversus est in Babyloniam, he
returned to Babylon: which reading if they will stand unto, this contradiction
can not be reconciled.

4. 1. Macch. 6. 8. it is said, he fell sick for sorrow: but 2. Macch. 9. it
is declared how he was stricken with an incurable disease, that worms came out
of him, and no man could endure the stink of his body: Pererius also thus
reconcileth these places, that both were true, he might sicken of grief, and
his sickness was increased by that filthy disease: so also Hugo, he died morbo
scilicet and tristitia, both of the disease, and grief also.

These doubts may with some probability be satisfied: but this contradiction
can not be healed, that whereas 1. Macch. c. 6. and 2. Macch. c. 9. Antiochus
is reported to have died partly of grief, partly of a strange disease: Now 2.
Macc. 1. 16. it is reported, that he with his army was slain with stones in
the temple of Nanea, their heads cut off, and thrown out. To this objection
diverse answers are made, to preserve the credit of this book.

1. Some think that this Antiochus slain in the Temple of Nanea, was not
Antiochus Epiphanes, whose death is mentioned in those two other places: but
Antiochus magnus the father of this Antiochus: so Lyran. Carthusian. Melchior
Canus.

Contr. Bellarmine, and Pererius both do refuse this answer: for this
Antiochus thus killed, was an enemy to the Jews, and they rejoiced in his
fall: but the other Antiochus surnamed the great, was a friend unto the Jews,
and showed great kindness unto them, and they unto him, as Josephus writes,
lib. 12. antiqu^. cap. 3.
how when Antiochus had overcame Scopas Ptolome, Philometors captain, and
subdued Celosyria, and Samaria, the Jews yielded themselves, and received his
armies into their cities, and refreshed them: which benefit Antiochus
acknowledged in certain letters to his friends, purposing to require the same.

2. An other opinion is, that this Antiochus was the son of Demetrius the
son of Seleucus Philopator, whom Epiphanes deprived of his kingdom, Bellar.
lib. 1. de verb. Dei. c. 1^.
who was surnamed Antiochus pius, who put down Tryphon, that usurped the
kingdom. Bellarmine here forgetting himself says, that this Antiochus was
called Triphon, or Gryphus: in one sentence he commits two errors: for this
Tryphon usurped the kingdom, whom Antiochus expelled: and Antiochus Gryphus
was the 17. king of Syria, whereas Antiochus pius was the 15. Bulling. of this
opinion, that this was Antiechus pius here reported to be slain, are Rupert.
lib. 1. de victor. verb. c. 6. Michael Medina, Carolus Sigonius. But these two
arguments make against this opinion, 1. that Antiochus pius had no such end,
but died in battle against the Parthians, Justin. lib. 38. in fine. 2.
Antiochus though there was some variance between him and Hyrcanus, yet he
spoiled not the city, but when he besieged it, he gave them seven days truce
at their request, to celebrate the feast of Tabernacles, and beside sent them
vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and much incense: and at the length a
league was concluded between them. But this Antiochus, that should be put to
death in the Temple of Nanea, was a professed enemy unto the Jews, and
therefore they rejoice and give thanks for his death.

3. Pererius delivers an other opinion, to the which he subscribeth as
probable: that not Antiochus, but the captain of his host was killed with
stones: they cast stones as it were thunder upon the captain. But it is
evident, that Antiochus is understood by the captain, v. 13. 14. Albeit the
captain, and they which were with him, seemed invincible, yet they were slain
in the Temple of Nanea: for Antiochus, as though he would dwell with her, came
thither to receive money under the title of a dowry. It was Antiochus
himself, that pretended marriage with Nanea, or Diana, as the like is reported
of Tiberius, Nero, Heliogabalus, that would make marriages with the goddesses:
he therefore came himself in person, to receive as a dowry, the treasure of
the Temple.

4. But Bellarmine, and Pererius likewise do most approve this solution, who
thus interpret these words, v. 13. cecidit in templo Naneae, the captain with
his host fell in the temple of Nanea: that is, they were smitten, not slain.
Bellarmine gives instance of the like place, Genesis 14. 10. The king of Sodom
and Gomorrah fell there, in the slimie pits, that is, were discomfited, they
were not killed: for the king of Sodom met Abraham afterward. Pererius
obiecteth that place, Dan. c. 11. 30. how the Romans should come against
Antiochus, and he should be smitten, yet he was not killed.

Contra. 1. The word used 2. Macchab. 1. 13. is (...), not they fell, but they
were smitten or slain: concisi sunt, they were hewn and cut in pieces, as
Vatablus and Iunius translate. 2. in that place, Genesis 24. 10. it is only said,
they fell, but here more is expressed, they were cut in pieces, v. 16. 3. and
in the other place, the word is better translated by Vatablus, consternabitur,
he shall be grieved, or terrified, not smitten.

5. This then remains to be said, that this is an uncertain and untrue report
of Antiochus death, as that is likewise of the holy fire which was hid, and
when Nehemias sent to set it, they found thick water in stead of fire. And
therefore that other report of Antiochus death, being twice set down, 1.
Macchab. c. 6. and 2. Macchab. c. 9. is to be received as the more probable.
Iun.

34. Quest. Of the agreement of other persecutors of the Church with this
description of Antiochus.
1. As the apostasy of the Jews was a forerunner of the tyranny and
persecution of Antichrist: So when persecution is raised in the Church, many
do fall away: as when Constantius favored Arrius, and persecuted the
orthodoxall professors, Liberius the Bishop of Rome fell away also to
Arrianisme. And of late days when Charles the fifth made war against the
Protestant Princes in Germany, many gospellers either fell to Popery, or
received the Interim: And in England in Queen Mary's days, many forsook the
Gospel, and turned Papists.

2. As Antiochus was of a bold countenance, and full of craft, such were the
persecutors of the Gospel, as Julian the Apostata, Valens the Emperor, the
Duke of Albanie in the low countries.

3. As Antiochus increased by the treachery of others, that helped him: so it
is usual for the enemies of the Gospel to prevail, if they can by treachery:
as many treasons against Queen Elizabeth, and our noble Sovereign that now
is, have been set forward by some foreign Popish princes.

4. Antiochus by flattery, and under color of peace deceived many: so did the
Duke of Albania in the low countries: and king Philip when he intented the
invasion of England, ann. 1588. yet made show of peace by the Prince of Parma
unto Queen Elizabeth.

5. As Antiochus was taken away by Gods hand not by man's: So the Lord himself
encountreth the wicked, as he did Pharaoh and Herod. Polan.

Quest. 35. Why it is called the vision of the enening and morning, v. 26.
1. Some understand it thus, the vision, quae per successiones temporum
complenda est, which is to be fulfilled in succession of time: Hugo. 2. Lyranus
thus interprets: by the morning he would have understood the time of
Antiochus, by the evening the time of Antichrist, who was prefigured by
Antiochus. 3. the vulgar Latin reads, the vision of the morning and evening,
as though this were spoken of the time, when this vision appeared. 4. But it
has relation rather to the former part of the vision, v. 14. where mention is
made of 2300. days unto the evening and morning, that is so many natural
days: this vision which is expressed by part of the subject taken for the
whole, is said to be true, Call. Polan.

Quest. 36. Why Daniel is bidden to seal up the vision.
1. Some by fealing understand the committing to memory, Hugo. 2. Some the
committing of it to writing, Lyran. 3. Bullinger alludeth to the use of men,
which seal and confirm those things, which are true: and so Daniel is bid to
seal it, as a thing most certain. 4. Some think that hereby is signified,
that he should conceal this vision, least the Jews hearing what affliction
they should endure in their own country, might be slack to return thither.
5. Chrysostom gives this sense: that he should keep it faithfully, ne
temporis prolixitate dispereat, that it perish not in continuance and length of
time. 6. The Hebrews referring this vision to the last times of their
redemption by their Messiah, would have it therefore sealed, because the time
was long, before it should be fulfilled. 7. But the reasons why Daniel is
commanded to seal up the vision, were these. 1. that he should not communicate
it unto the Chaldees, whom it concerned not, or to any other carnal men, or
unbelievers, that would not give credit unto it: but that he should conceal it
from such: yet unto the faithful he might impart it: As the Prophet Isay says
to the same purpose, 8. 16. bind up the testimony, seal up the law among my
Disciples, and this is according to the rule of our Savior, not to cast things
holy unto dogs, Matthew. 7. 6. Polan. 2. By this sealing of the vision is
signified, that it was not presently to take effect, but after a long time,
about 300. years after: yet it should be most certainly fulfilled in the
appointed time, Iun. in commentar. so he is not bidden simply to conceal it,
but hereby rather he is admonished not to doubt of the accomplishment thereof:
and that be should not measure it, ex vulgi sententia, by the opinion of the
vulgar sort, Calvin.

37. Quest. What kings business Daniel did, v. 27.
v. 27. I did the kings business, etc. 1. Some do think that this was king
Darius business, that carried Daniel with him into Media, Lyr. and they think
this work was the building of the great tower, which Josephus makes mention
of, Hug. But this can not be so: for Josephus says, that Darius carried Daniel
with him into Media; but Daniel was at this time at Shushan, v. 2. and that
great tower was built not at Shushan but at Ecbatane, as Josephus writes, lib.
10. cap. 12. 2. Oecolampad. and Pellicane, in that it is said, when I rose up,
I did the kings business, do infer, non dicit se a Sufis redijsse, sed
surrexisse, he said not he did return from Susa, but only rose up, and
returned to his business, etc. so that their opinion seems to be, that Daniel
was in deed now at Susa: But it is showed before, that he was at Susa only in
vision, qu. 4. 3. It remains then, that this king was Belshazar, as is
evident, v. 1. by whom it seems he was employed, though not so much, nor in
so great affairs, as he was under the former kings, Osiand. but what manner of
emploiment it was, it is not expressed, neither can certainly be gathered, Iun.
Daniel then having noted before, that this was done under Belshazars reign, v.
1. returned unto his business, which is an evident argument that he was then in
Belshazars Court, or at hand, not at Susa, because he presently rose up, having
recovered himself, to do the kings business, Calvin.

38. Quest. Of the meaning of these words, v. 27. none understood, or
perceived it.
1. Some read, and there was none to interpret it: so Lyran. Hug. Pintus,
following the vulgar Latin, which they understand thus: that is, none
interpreted it as the Angel, Hugo. or none could interpret it in particular
concerning the kings names, but only in general, Lyran. But the word here
used mebin, signifies not interpreting, but perceiving and understanding:
neither could Daniel say, none could interpret it, seeing the Angel had given
the interpretation of it before. 2. Some read, none understood it. The Hebrews
think that Daniel himself understood it not: but that can not be, seeing the
Angel was bidden to cause him to understand it, v. 16. 3. Some think, that
none of those, to whom Daniel revealed the dream, could understand it,
Oecolampad. but Daniel did not impart it to so many, to try who understood it,
and who understood it not: for he was commanded before to seal it up, to hide
and conceal it, and lay it up in his heart. 4. The words are then better
translated, none perceived it, that he had been sick for grief, because of
the heavy vision: he dissembled his affection, and neither in word, nor so
much as in countenance bewraied, that he had seen a vision: according as he
had been before charged to conceal and keep the vision to himself, Iun.
Polan.

39. Quest. The history of Antiochus Epiphanes reign abridged, for the better
understanding of this vision.
1. After that Antiochus (the great) father unto Antiochus Epiphanes, had been
vanquished by Scipio, he was constrained to deliver over unto the Romans his
son Antiochus to be an hostage, where he continued 14. years: and then
hearing of his fathers death, watched his time, and fled secretly from Rome,
and took upon him the kingdom of Syria, making a way thereunto by procuring
the death of Seleucus his elder brother, and disinheriting Demetrius his son.

2. Then Antiochus, after he was settled in the kingdom, invaded Egypt, under
this color, to be tutor unto the young king Ptolome Philometor his sister
Cleopatra her son: he put many to the sword, and subdued many cities: And in
his return, being sauoured by diverse seditious persons in Jerusalem, as by
Jason, who had bought the priesthood of him for money, and wicked Menelaus, who
got the Priesthood for himself, promising more money, and put Jason by, 2.
Macchab. 4. by this means he entered into the city, robbed and spoiled the
Temple, and put many to the sword: this was in the 143. year of the kingdom
of the Greeks, in the 6. year of his reign.

3. Then about two year after he made a second expedition into Egypt, where he
was commanded to depart by Popilius the Ambassador of the Romans, who making
a circle in the sand with his rod before Antiochus, urged him to make his
present answer, before he went thence.

4. In his second return he entered Jerusalem again, and made havoc of the
city, defiled the Temple, and set up therein the abomination of desolation,
the idol of Iuppiter Olympus: this was in the 145. year in the 8. year of his
reign, 1. Macchab. 1. 57.

5. Then Mattathias being moved in zeal, stood up to resist the Tyrant, and
Judas his son, with his brethren after him: and at the length they prevailed,
and 3. years after they cleansed the Sanctuary, and restored the sacrifices:
and this was in the 148. year, 1. Macch. 4. 52. in the 11. year of Antiochus
reign.

6. After this this wicked Tyrant went into Persia, thinking to rob the rich
Temple at Persepolis, where having the repulse, and hearing at the same time
how his captains Timotheus and Nicanor were discomfited with their armies in
Judea, partly of grief, and chiefly being smitten of God with an incurable
and stinking disease, he died in the 149. year, and the 12. of his reign: see
the story, 2. Macchab. 9.

4. Places of doctrine.
1. Doctr. Of the office of a Prince.
v. 5. An horn appeared between his eyes. In that Alexander is resembled to
an horn between the eyes, many excellent properties required in a Prince are
thereby signified. 1. the king is as an horn unto the kingdom, the glory and
strength thereof, to defend them, and to push at their enemies: as the horn is
the defense of the beast, and that whereby others are offended. 2. as the horn
did rise up between the eyes, so the Prince must be circumspect and advised,
and do all things with counsel: as it in the Prove. c. 24. 6. with counsel
thou stalt enterprise war. 3. as the horn is most conspicuous of all other
parts, so the virtue and courage of the king should appear and be manifest to
all, Polan.

2. Doctr. That all things in the world are ruled and guided by the divine
providence.
v. 9. It waxed great toward the South, etc. In that Antiochus acts are set
down in order, both his outrage against men, and his blasphemy against God,
the treading down of the Sanctuary, and of the people of God: Hence Josephus
collecteth well, that these things were not done by chance: as a ship
fleeting upon the seas without a governor, or a chariot running without a
driuer: nam si haec sponte gererentur, non secundum illius prophesiam emnia
provenire conspiceremus, for if all these things fell out of themselves, we
should not see them so fitly to come to pass according unto his prophecy.
Joseph. lib. 10. Antiquit. c. 14.

3. Doctr. The Scriptures are the rule of truth.
v. 12. It shall cast down the truth, etc. That is, the books of the Law,
which were the rule of faith: hence then it follows, that the Scriptures
contain the holy doctrine of truth: which is not to be learned else where, then
from the Scriptures: So that they which are enemies to the Scriptures, do set
themselves against the truth; as wicked Iehoiakim, when he caused Ieremies
prophecy to be cut with a penknife, and cast into the fire; therein professing
himself an enemy to God and his truth: and therefore this judgment is
thereatned against him, that he should have none of his seed to succeed him,
and his body should be cast forth unburied, Ierem. 36. 30.

4. Doctr. That Angels have not all knowledge.
v. 13. In that one of the Angels enquireth of Palmoni, which is Christ, how
long this vision should endure: therein it appears, that Angels have not the
knowledge of all secrets: for here they are instructed by Christ, concerning
the meaning of this vision. Further, that the knowledge of Angels is limited,
and that they increase in knowledge, and have things revealed unto them which
they knew not before, is evident by that place of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 10. That
unto Principalities and Powers in heavenly places, might be known by the
Church the manifold wisdom of God: so also S. Peter says, 1. Pet. 1. 12.
Which things the Angels desire to behold: they still proceed in the beholding
of the mystery of our redemption.

5. Doctr. Christ is the Lord and head of the Angels.
v. 13. In that the Angel enquireth of Palmoni the meaning of this vision,
which is Christ, who afterward v. 16. appoints the angel Gabriel to open the
vision to Daniel: it is hence inferred that Christ is superior to the Angels,
that they receive their directions from him, and that they are his ministers
sent abroad for the service of his Church: So the Apostle faith, Hebr. 1. 6.
When he brings in his first begotten Son into the world, he says, And let
all the Angels of God worship him: and, v. 14. Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be heirs of
salvation?

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. Prosperity and external felicity is no perpetual note of the
Church.
v. 15. Antiochus is permitted for a time to tread down the Sanctuary, and
army, that is the Church militant, under feet: whereby it is evident, that
the Church is not always discerned by outward prosperity: which Bellarmine
makes one of the notes and marks of the Church. The people of God are more
subject to affliction and persecution in this world: they are oftener pressed
down with adversity, then lifted up by prosperity: as our blessed Savior
says, In the world ye shall have affliction, but in him we have peace, Ioh.
16. 33. See more hereof, Synops. 2. controv. qu. 3. note 15.

2. Controv. That the abomination of desolation spoken of, v. 13. is not the
abolishing of the sacrifice of the Mass.
The Romanists make this a mark of Antichrist, that the daily sacrifice of the
Maffe shall be abolished at his coming: and therefore they charge Protestants
to be forerunners of Antichrist, because they have banished out from among them
the Mass.

Contra. 1. The new Testament acknowledges no other external sacrifice, but
the sacrifice of atonement made by Christ, of himself upon the cross: the
virtue and efficacy whereof being everlasting, it is not to be iterated, or
repeated: as the Apostle says, Hebr. 9. 25. Not that he should offer himself
often: and v. 28. Christ was once offered, to take away sins. 2. The
sacrifices now offered up by Christians are spiritual: Hebr. 13. 12. Let us by
him offer the sacrifice of praise always unto God: And in this sense the
Apostle says, He has made us Kings and Priests to God his father, Revel. 1.
6. 3. The Papists are they which have abolished the true commemoration of
Christ's sacrifice: in stead of the Eucharist, having instituted a theatricall
and pompous show of the Mass. Papp.

3. Controv. The authority of the Scripture depends not upon the testimony
of the Church.
v. 27. The vision of the evening and morning is true, etc. The Angel here
gives testimony unto the truth of this vision, yet therefore depends it not
upon the Angels approbation, but upon the authority of Christ: this then is
but a weak argument of the Romanists; the Church gives testimony to and of
the Scriptures, therefore the authority of Scripture depends of the Church,
Polan. Indeed the consent and general approbation of the Church may induce
us, at the first, and may make a way, and as it were prepare us; but we believe
the Scriptures for the truths sake therein contained, being thereunto
persuaded by the spirit of God. See further of this question, Synops. Centur.
1. err. 5.

4. Controv. The description of Antiochus agrees to the Pope and Antichrist.
Although historically this vision of the little horn were fulfilled in
Antiochus, yet for as much as he was a type of Antichrist, all those properties
do fitly agree unto him also, shadowed forth in Antiochus: and so Gregor. in
40. c. Job, and Lyranus do in diverse points make Antiochus a type of
Antichrist, though they do not take the Roman Bishop to be he.

1. Before Antiochus raged against the people of God, there was a defection and
falling away of many from the faith, to Paganism: and this is touched, v. 23.
In the end of their kingdom, when their rebellions, defections, or falling
away shall be perfited: for so Jason, and Menelaus, with diverse other of the
Jews forsook their religion, and followed the Gentile customs, 1. Macchab.
14. 15. So before Antichrist come, there shall be a departure or apostasy, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. which shall be a falling away from the faith, as Ireneus
interprets, lib. 5. advers. haeres. c. 21. so also Primasius, Chrysostom,
Oecumen. Lyran. upon that place: which we see is come to pass, that the most
part of Christian nations had forsaken the purity of the Gospel.

2. Antiochus was of an impudent face: so Antichrist shall be ad omne malum
inuerecundus, unshamefast to every evil work, Lyran. which is fulfilled in
the Pope: who without all modesty and shamefastnes, challenges to be the
Vicar of Christ, the head of the Church, Universal Bishop, and what not.

3. His power was great, but not by his own strength. Antiochus was assisted
by the malicious practices of others, as of Menelaus: So the Pope has
increased by the help of others. Phocas that killed Mauritius the Emperor,
first granted unto Pope Boniface the 3. to be called head of the Church: And
of late times the French and Spanish kings have waged battle for the Pope.

4. v. 23. He shall understand dark sentences, whereby is understood his craft
and subtlety: so Antichrist, as Lyranus notes, callidissimus erit auxilio
Diaboli, shall be most crafty by the help of the devil: And so the Pope has
bewitched the world with his intoxicate cup of fornications, with deceitful
and subtle doctrines of invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, purgatory,
indulgences, and such like: and he has also deceived the world with lying
signs and wonders, as S. Paul prophecieth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.

5. Antiochus should destroy the mighty, and the holy people: So the Pope has
deposed kings, and deprived them of their kingdoms: he has also more
persecuted the people of God, then ever did any of the Pagan Emperors.

6. Antiochus is prophesied to wax great toward the North, toward the south,
etc. v. 9. he should raise up tumults and wars every where: So the Popes have
been the authors of bloody wars in every place almost. Gregory the 3. and
Leo 3. set Italy against the Emperor: zacharias suborned Pipinus against
Childerick king of France: Adrian 1. set the French and Lombards together by
the ears: Julius the 2. stirred up diverse Christian Princes against the
Venetians: Nicolaus the 3. caused the Sicilians to put the French to the sword:
Paulus the 3. raised the Italians and Spaniards against the Germans: yea,
there have been almost no wars between Christian Princes, wherein the Pope
has not put his foul finger.

7. Antiochus should thorough peace destroy many: and so did Gregory the 13.
under pretense of peace, in that bloody marriage at Paris, in the year 1572.
cause much blood to be shed.

8. Antiochus should stand against the Prince of Princes, God himself: so the
Pope aduanceth himself against God, in taking unto himself authority to
dispense with the word of God: in maintaining doctrines directly opposite to
the Scriptures, as idolatry, invocation of Saints, merits, and such like.

9. Antiochus should exalt himself in his heart, v. 25. so the Pope has been
so lifted up in pride, that he has set his foot in the necks of Emperors,
made them kiss his foot, and hold his stirrup, and lead his horse.

10. Antiochus should be destroyed without hand: so the Lord shall consume
Antichrist with the spirit of his mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Religion makes a city or country famous.
v. 9. Toward the pleasant land. There were many countries more flourishing
then Judea in temporal blessings, as Egypt, Babylon, Syria, yet Judea is
called the pleasant land, because of the true religion and worship of God: So
Italy now is for pleasantnes and fruitfulness far beyond other regions; but
those countries and cities which profess the Gospel, are the pleasant lands in
the sight of God: as the brethren of Berea are called noble in respect of their
knowledge, and zeal, Act. 17. 11.

2. Observe. The Church of God is militant and warfaring in earth.
v. 13. To tread, etc. the army under foot. The Church of God does but
soiourne here in earth, and the faithful are but as pilgrims and strangers
here, as S. Peter says, 1. Pet. 2. 11. They do not war after the flesh, 2.
Cor. 10. 3. Therefore we are taught, that as Gods soldiers, we should strive
for the kingdom of God, and hold out this our warfare and pilgrimage with
constancy and patience, till we obtain the victory.

3. Observe. Of the care and love of the Angels toward the Church of Christ.
v. 13. As here an Angel is desirous to know how long this desolation of the
Church should last: so those blessed spirits of God do grieve to see the
affliction of Christ's Church, and desire to have it at an end: As they rejoice
to see the Church increased, and men brought unto repentance, Luke 15. 7. Joy
shall be in heaven for one sinner that conuerteth.

4. Observe. It is profitable to hear the same things often.
v. 26. As the Angel repeateth only the vision of the evening and morning, but
expounds it not, because it was plain enough: so it is not amiss for us
often to have inculcated and beaten upon the same principles of religion: as S.
Paul says, Philip. 3. 1. It grieueth me not to write of the same things unto
you, and for you it is a sure thing. Men must not then have itching ears,
still desirous to hear new things: such were the Athenians, who coueted only
to tell and hear news, Act. 17. 21.

5. Observe. How we should be affected in hearing Gods word.
v. 27. And I Daniel was stricken and sick, etc. Daniel was much moved at the
hearing of this vision: so should the servants of God be thoroughly stricken
with admiration at the mysteries of religion: their inward bowels should be
moved at the hearing of Gods word. They then which are dull and heavy, and
have no sense not feeling when Gods word is denounced, do show that they have
but carnal and cold affections, and had need to be often rouzed up with that
saying, He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

CHAP. IX.
1. The Argument and Method.
THis Chapter has two parts, 1. Daniels prayer and supplication, to v. 20. 2.
then the effect of his prayer, thence unto the end.

1. There is set forth, 1. the occasion of his prayer: what it was, he
understood by reading the Prophet Jeremy, that the 70. years of captivity
was accomplished, v. 2. what it wrought, it moved him unto carnest prayer and
supplication, v. 3. which is set forth by the circumstance of the time, in the
first year of Darius, v. 1. 2. then follows the invocation it self, v. 5.
3. the prayer consisting partly of a confession, v. 15. the several parts and
arguments whereof, see quest. 7. following: partly of an earnest deprecation,
to v. 20. the particulars whereof, see also, qu. 7.

2. In the effect of his prayer, there is expressed, 1. who it was that came
unto him, the Angel Gabriel, v. 21. 2. when, the general time is described,
while Daniel was yet praying, v. 20. the particular, in the time of the evening
sacrifice. 3. what message the Angel brought: which is delivered first in
general, then in particular: in the general four things are showed. 1. the
commandment given unto him. 2. the cause thereof, Daniel was beloved. 3. the
end, to inform Daniel. 4. with a stirring of him up to attention, v. 22, 23.
In the particular declaration, two things are delivered, the office of the
Messiah, with such things as should happen unto him, he should be slain; and
the destruction of the city, which should follow as a just judgment for
putting the Messiah to death.

The time limited concerning the Messiah, 1. is set forth in an whole sum of
70. weeks: wherein three things are declared: 1. the time summed by
prophetical weeks of years. 2. for whom, upon thy people. 3. what things
should be done in this time: even these three: 1. the sealing up of former
visions, which should be accomplished in the Messiah. 2. the anointing of the
Messiah to his office. 3. the benefits procured by the Messiah, either in
taking away sin, both in finishing it, that it should reign no more in his
members, in sealing it in the remission and forgiveness thereof; and
reconciling, that is paying the ransom for it: and in bringing in everlasting
righteousness, v. 24. 2. this time is set forth in parts. 1. seven weeks are
set apart for the building of Jerusalem. 2. after 62. weeks the Messiah shall
be slain, v. 26. 3. in the 70. and last week he shall confirm the covenant,
and the sacrifices shall cease, v. 27.

The destruction of the city is showed, 1. by whom, by a Prince that should
come. 2. what he should do, destroy the city and Sanctuary. 3. the manner
thereof, it should be made desolate for ever, v. 26, 27.

2. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1. In the first ( one. H.) year of Darius ( Dariavesh. H.) the son of
Ahashuerosh ( Achasverosh. H.) of the seed of the Medes, wherein ( which V. L.
B. Gahefirst rather: it is better referred to the year, wherein he was (...)
king, then to the person that was made) he was made king ( ruled. L. S. but the
word is in the passive) over the Realm of the Chaldeans.

2 In the first year of his reign, I Daniel understood by books the number
of the years, whereof the word of the Lord came ( was. H.) unto Jeremiah the
Prophet, to accomplish the desolation of Jerusalem seventy years.

3 I turned my face ( gave my face. H.) unto the Lord ( Jehovah, H. and so
throughout for the most part where (Lord) is translated) God, to seek him by
prayer ( in seeking prayer. S.) and supplication, with fasting, sackeloath, and
(...).

4 And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession ( confessed. H.)
saying, Oh B. G. (or I pray thee. A. I. V.) Lord God, great and fearful,
which keeps mercy toward them which love him, I. A. B. (which love thee. L.
S. V. G.) (...) the pronoune affix is here of the third person) and toward them
which keep his commandments.

5 We have sinned, and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea, we
have rebelled, and have departed from thy precept^, and from thy judgments.

6 For we would not (...) unto ( obey. L. V. S.) thy servants the Prophets,
which spoke in thy name to our Princes, and our fathers, and to all the people
of the land.

7 To thee, O Lord* belongs righteousness, and to us confusion of face ( open
shame. B. G.) as it is this day ( as is come to pass. B. or appears this
day. G.) to every man of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: yea, unto
all Israel, near, or far off throughout all the countries, whither thou have
driven them, because of their trespasses, which they have trespassed against
thee.

8 O Lord, unto us appertains shame (or confusion) of face, to our Kings, to
our Princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned (not they have sinned.
L. the verb is put in the first person) against thee.

9 Unto the Lord our God ( pertains) compassion and forgiveness, because (
albeit. G. V. although. B. but the word is, chi, because) we have rebelled
against him ( and therefore they looked only for mercy from the Lord, having
no power in themselves.)

10 For we have not hearkened unto the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in
his laws ( law. L.) which he set before us ( gave before our face. H.) by the
hand (that is, the ministry, G.) of his servants the Prophets.

11 Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, in turning back, and not
harkening to thy voice: therefore the curse is powered upon us, and the oath
that is written in the law of Moses the servant of God, because we have sinned
against him.

12 And he has confirmed his words ( every one of his words. I.) which he
spoke against us, and our Judges, that judged us, by bringing upon us a great
plague, ( evil. H.) for under the whole heaven was not done the like, as is
now come to pass ( done. H.) in Jerusalem.

13 As it is written in the law of Moses, all this evil is come upon us: yet
made we not our prayers before ( entreated the face of. H.) the Lord our God,
that we might turn us from our iniquities, and understand thy ( in or toward
thy) truth.

14 Therefore the Lord has made ready the plague ( watched over the evil. H.)
and brought it upon us: for righteous is the Lord our God in all the works
which he does: for we would not hearken to his voice.

15 And now, O Lord our God, which have brought thy people out of the land of
Egypt with a mighty hand, and have gotten thee renown ( G. a name. H.) as
appears this day, ( which remains this day. V. B.) we have sinned, we have
done wickedly.

16 O Lord, according to all (not in all. L. S. the word is cecol, not becol)
thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger, and thy wrath be turned away
from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain: ( the mountain of thy holiness.
H.) for because of our sins, and the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and
thy people are a reproach to all that are round about us ( to all our circuits.
H.)

17 Now therefore, O Lord our God, hear ( hearken unto. H.) the prayer of thy
servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy
Sanctuary, that lies wast, for the Lords sake (not, for thy sake. L. S. for
the word adonai is expressed.)

18 O my God, incline thine ear and hear, and behold our desolations, and the
city ( G. or of the city. V. I.) whereupon thy name is called ( whereon thy
name is called upon it. H.) for not for our righteousness do we prostrate our
prayers (L. present our prayers. B. G. pray falling down. I. power out our
prayers. V. cause our prayers to fall. H.) before thee, but for thy great
tender mercies.

19 O Lord, hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord attend, and do it: deserre not, for
thine own sake ( for thy self. H.) O my God: for thy name is called upon thy
city, and upon thy people. (that is, they are called by thy name. V. I.

20 And while I was speaking and praying, and confessing my sin, and the
sin of my people Israel, and did prostrate ( cause to fall. H. as before v.
18.) my supplications before the Lord my God, for the holy Mountain (
mountain of the holiness. H.) of my God:

21 Yea, while I was speaking in my prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen
in the vision at the first ( in the morning. H.) came flying ( being bid or
made to fly. H. for the word is in hophal) earnestly ( with wearines. H. or
swiftly. V.) and touched me about the time of the evening oblation.

22 And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now come
forth to give thee understanding and knowledge. ( to make thee perceive
understanding. H.)

23 At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment ( the word. H.) came
forth, and I am come to show it (thee. L. B. G. ad.) for thou art much desired
(that is, accepted of God. I. greatly beloved. B. G. a man of desires. L. S.
chamudoth, desires. H. D. Kimhi reads (hamiddoth) a man of virtues: and he is
called a man of desires, not actiuely, because he much desired the deliverance
of the people, but passiuely, because he was a man according to Gods desire,
that is, beloved, and accepted of him: so Vatab. a man desirous of things to be
wished for, understanding it also actiuely, of Daniels desire) therefore
understand the matter, and consider the vision.

24 Seventy weeks are cut out (it is cut out. H. impersonally: are
determined. V. B. G. are abbreuiated, or shortened, L. but chatac signifies to
cut out) upon (or over) thy people, and upon thine holy city (city of thy
holiness. H.) to restrain (finish. V. L. S: B. G. but the word is cala, with
aleph, which signifies to restrain, but calah with he, signifies to finish)
and to seal up (A. I. B. G. S. rather then to finish sins. L. V. P. the word
is chatam, to seal) to reconcile iniquity (not, that iniquity be taken away,
L.) and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision (not,
that the vision be fulfilled. L.) and the Prophet (I. A. not prophecy, L. S.
V. B. G. for nabi signifies a Prophet, not prophecy) and to anoint the most
Holy (the holiness of holiness. H.)

25. Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the word to
bring again the people (to cause to return. H. not to answer. S. or restoare.
I. or to cause to return and build, that is to build again. L. V. for
although the same word be used in the same sense in the end of the verse, the
street shall return, and be built, that is shall again be built, yet it is
there in an other form, here it is in hiphil, which signifies to cause to
return) and to build Jerusalem, unto Messiah (Christ. L. S.) the Prince shall
be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks; and the street shall be built
again, and the ditch (that is, the compass of the wall. V. the wall. S. B.
G.) in a troublesome time, (in the straitnes of time. H. B. not in a short
time. V. or the time shall be euacuated. S.)

26. And after threescore and two weeks the Messiah (anointed. H. Christ. L.
not the unction or anointing. S.) shall be destroyed (slain. B. G.) and not
for himself (Br. B. better then, there shall be no judgment, that is, fault
worthy of judgment in him. S. or he shall have nothing, that is, he shall
seem to have no beauty. G. or nothing to do with Jerusalem. I. or there
shall be none to help him. V. see qu. 64. the vulgar Latin thus, he shall
have no people which should deny him) and the people of the Prince that shall
come, shall destroy the city and the Sanctuary (see the diverse readings, qu.
74.) and the end thereof shall be with a flood: and unto the end (not after
the end. L.) it shall be destroyed by desolations (or extreme desolation is
appointed. L. V.)

27 He shall confirm the covenant with many for one week: and in the mids (
or half) of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease (some
read thus, the half of the week shall cause to cease, etc. V. Br.) and upon
the wing ( that is, the Temple) shall be the abomination of desolation. L. S.
(better then, by the ouerspreading of abomination he shall make it desolate. B.
G. or by the legions or army of abominations making desolate. I. or the
destroier shall be upon the wing of abominations. V. see further for the best
reading, qu. 87. and 88. in the end) even until the consummation determined (
precise consummation. H.) it shall be powered (that is, desolation. I. continue.
L.) upon the desolate.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. What Assuerus this was, whose son Darius is said to be.
1. What Darius this was, is handled at large, qu. 1. c. 6. he was not that
Darius, in whose second year the Temple began to be built, whereof mention
is made, Hagg. 1. 1. as Porphyrie of purpose does confound them, to disturb
the prophetical history and computation of years in Daniel: neither was this
that Darius whom Alexander overcame, but Darius before mentioned, c. 6. who
together with Cyrus took the city of Babylon.

2. This Assuerus the father of Darius, was not that Assuerus the husband of
Esther, as Canus thinks, and Bullinger seems to incline to that opinion:
for that Assuerus is also called Artaxerxes in the book of Esther, which was
the name of the Persian kings after Cyrus: And that Assuerus had his palace and
princely seat at Sushan, which was not appointed to be the chief city or seat
of the kingdom until Cyrus, as Strabo thinks, l. 15. or till Darius
Hystaspis, as Plin. lib. 6. c. 21. Perer. But this argument rather overthrows
this opinion, that the captivity of Babylon was ended, and the people returned
before the reign of that Assuerus: whereas they were at this time in
captivity still. And further, that Assuerus reigned from India to Ethiopia:
but the Chaldean Monarchy yet standing, the Persian Monarchy could not be so
large.

3. Josephus, Hieronimus, Theodoret, and Lyranus, Carthusian. following them,
take this Assuerus to be Astyages whose daughter Mandane was Cyrus mother: but
Astyages is not found to have had any sons, but only that daughter, as is
showed before, c. 6. qu. 1. 6.

4. Pererius thinks that Assuerus, or Achashuerus, was not the proper name of
any one king, but it being derived of Achash, great, and Resh, an head, was a
common name, which was given by the Hebrews unto foreign Princes that were of
great power: And this title is found given unto three kings, the father of this
Darius, the husband of Esther, and to that king, which hindered the building of
the Temple, Ezr. 4. who is thought by the most to be Cambyses the son of
Cyrus.

Contr. Pererius is here deceived in many points. 1. he takes Assuerus to be
an Hebrew name, where it has a Persian deriuation, and is derived of Achash,
which signifies a Prince, Polan. in c. 6. v. 1. 2. it is evident, that it was
a peculiar name, for otherwise it should have been common to all the Persian
kings. 3. the same Assuerus mentioned Ezt. 4. 6. is thought to be the same so
much celebrated in the story of Esther: in both places Iunius takes him for
Xerxes.

5. Wherefore the more probable opinion is, that this Assuerus, called by the
Greek historians Cyaxares the first, was father unto Astyages and this Darius,
who was called also Cyaxares the second: for there is no great difference in
signification between Cyaxares and Achassuerus, the first being derived of
chu, and achash, both which words signify a Prince: and put together, a Prince
of Princes, that is, a great Prince: and Achassuerus likewise is derived of the
same word, Achash, a Prince, Joseph. Scallig. lib. 6. de emendat. Polan. in 6.
Dan. This Assuerus then was not Astyages, but the father of Astyages and this
Darius, who was uncle to Cyrus mother, and great uncle unto Cyrus. Iun. comment.

2. Quest. Of the years of Darius reign, and how this vision is said to be in
his first year.
1. Annius, whom Driedo, and Lucidus follow, think that Cyrus and Darius
reigned two years together, after the Babylonians were subdued. 2. Lyranus and
Vatablus in 9. ^. Dan. think that Darius reigned two years before Cyrus
reign began. 3. Cyrillus Hierosolymit. seems to give unto him eight years,
cateches. 12. 4. Severus Sulpitius thinks that Darius reigned 18. years, at
the same time that Astyages reigned in Media: but that can not be, for this
Darius was also the king of the Medes and Persians, as is evident, c. 6. 5.
Josephus Scalliger gives unto Darius 17. years, making him the last king of
the Chaldeans, after whom Cyrus succeeded, lib. 6. de emendat. tempor. 6.
Iunius opinion seems to be, commentar, in 5. c. v. 29. that the first year
of Darius, was the second of Cyrus. 7. Pererius affirms that Darius reigned
but one year, and that Cyrus succeeded him in the same year, being the 70.
year of the Jews captivity.

8. But the truer opinion is, that Cyrus and Darius reigned jointly together,
as thinks Calvin: and that the first of Darius was the first also of Cyrus:
for in the first of Cyrus the word of God spoken by Jeremy concerning the 70.
years captivity was finished, 2. Chro. 36. 22. And so likewise it appears
in this place, that in the first year of Darius, that time of 70. years was
expired: the first then of Cyrus and Darius concurred together: for the rest,
it is like that Darius reigned not long, but being 62. year old, when he
took the kingdom upon him, he might die the same year, which was also Cyrus
first: see more hereof, c. 6. qu. 3.

9. And whereas it is said, in one year of Darius, which Pererius gesseth to
be so called, because he reigned but one year: the reason rather is this, that
the word a^hath, which signifies one, is according to the phrase of the
Hebrew, taken for the first: as Genesis 1. the morning and evening were one day,
that is, the first: and Mark. 16. it is said, that our Lord rose in one of the
Sabbaths, that is, in the first day of the week. Polan. Pintus.

3. Quest. Whether in the first year of Darius the Chaldean Monarchy was
dissolved and the 70. years captivity ended, against the opinion of Josephus
Scalling. lib. 6.
Josephus Scalliger, a man of excellent learning, who for his singular labors
in that learned and exquisite work, which he has written of the emendation of
the times has highly deserved of all men, yet is in diverse points ouerseene,
and especially in this matter concerning the end of the Chaldean Monarchy,
and of the Jewish captivity: for lib. 6. of that work he has these positions.

1. He affirms, that the Chaldean state was not dissolved in the 70. year of
the captivity, but rather in the 60. year: for from the 8. year of Ieconias
captivity unto the end of the Chaldean government, are found says he, by
Josephus computation, who therein follows Berosus, about 60. years: 36.
years remained after the 8. year of Nabuchadnezzers reign when the
captivity began, who reigned in all 43. years: after Nabuchadnezzer
Euilmerodach 2. years, then Niglasar 4. years, Labosardach 9. months, and
Nabonidus, whom Cyrus overcame, 17. years.

2. He thinks that Cyrus did not take Babylon in the first year of his
reign, but many years after when he had vanquished Cresus the rich king of
Lydia, two years after that, as Herodotus writes, he overcame the Chaldeans:
But Cresus was overcome, as Eusebius does cast the time, in the 4. year of the
57. Olympiad, whereas Cyrus began to reign in the 1. year of the 53.
Olyampiad.

3. The first year of Cyrus he would have concur with the 46. year of the
captivity, not with the 70. year: for the beginning of Cyrus reign, as is
before showed, was in the 1. year of the 55. Olympiade: And Babylon was taken
in the 2. year of the 58. Olympiade, which was the 14. year of Cyrus, and the
60. year of the captivity.

4. A fourth assertion is, that the captivity ended in the last year of
Cyrus, about the 2. year of the 62. Olympiad, when as Cyrus had now subdued
many countries, which could not be in the beginning of his reign: for thus
Cyrus says in his Edict for the return of the Jews, All the kingdoms of the
earth has the Lord God of heaven given unto me: And whereas it is there called
the 1. year of Cyrus, that is not to be understood of his reign, but of the
captivity: for so the Jews began their account of years from that time.

Contra. 1. The first position is contrary to that prophecy of Jeremy, c.
35. 12. When the 70. years are accomplished, I will visit the king of Babel,
etc. then the 70. and last year of the captivity, and the dissolution of the
Babylonian state, must fall out together: as for that computation of Berosus of
the years of the Babylonian kings, it is uncertain: neither does Josephus
always follow it, who else where joins the last year of the captivity, with
the first year of Cyrus.

2. Herodotus is deceived much in his history in the order of time, and in the
computation of years, as is evident in this one instance; Nitocris the mother
of Balshazar, whom he calls Labynitus the last king of Babylon, he makes
but five generations or descents from Semiramis: which exceeds not an 165.
years, counting a generation at 33. years, or at the most 500. years, if we
give an 100. years to a generation: whereas the most writers are of opinion,
as Hierome, Eusebius, Orosius, Augustine, with others, that there were at the
least a 1000. years between them.

3. The two last assertions may evidently be convinced by the Scripture, which
expressly sets down, that the return of the Jews, and so the end of
their captivity, was in the first year of Cyrus: which must be understood of
his reign over Chaldea, for he had reigned before in Persia, and Darius in
Media: he might say all kingdoms were given him, because he had overcome the
large Empire of Babylon. The Jews indeed accounted their own years from
such notable deliverances, as from their going out of Egypt, from their return
out of Chaldea: but there is no reason so to account the years of the reign
of foreign kings, neither can any such president be showed in Scripture.

4. Quest. Of the 70. years of captivity in what sense they are called seven
generations, Baruch. 6. 2.
Whereas the Prophet Jeremy defines and sets down the term of the
Babylonian captivity, to be 70. years, c. 25. v. 11, 12. c. 29. v. 10. it
seems strange, that Baruch, c. 6. 2. should say, that they should remain in
Babylon seven generations: to this objection diverse answers are made by the
Romanists, who hold the epistle of Baruch to be Canonical.

1. The word generation, is taken diversely: sometimes for 7. years, as when
the Physi^ians prescribe that a child should not be let blood till he has
accomplished two generations, that is, 14. years. Eusebius takes a generation
for 20. years: Herodotus sometime for the space of 2^. years, sometime for
33. years: Diodorus for 30. years: in which sense H^mer says Nestor lived
three ages, that is 90. years: Dyonisius Halycarnass. by a generation
understands an 100. years: and so it is taken in Scripture, Genesis 15. 13. 16.
four generations are expounded to be four hundred years. Beside these diverse
acceptions of the word generation, Carthusianus takes it for the age of a man
apt for generation, which is at 14. years: whereof five do make 70. years:
the first and last are reckoned exclusive, exclusiuely: as the like instance he
gives in the Evangelists, where Matthew says Christ was transfigured after
six days, c. 17. Luke says after eight, exclusiuely: But this is a very
forced exposition: for to what end should seven generations be named, if they
were only five: neither can it be showed out of the Scriptures, that a
generation is taken for 14. yeare^.

2. The same Carthusian has an other exposition, that the number of seven is
taken for perfection, and so by 7. generations he means the perfect periode
of a man's life, which is seauentie years: as it is defined, Psalm. 90. But this
rather should have been named one generation, then seven: for one man's life
makes but one generation.

3. Pererius has diverse answers, by seven generations he understands many:
but the captivity lasted not many generations, seeing Daniel saw the
beginning and end thereof.

4. By a generation he understands the term of 15. years, because at that
age men are apt for generation: then 5. of these generations were complete, and
two of them the first and last were but begun only.

5. Or Jeremy speaks of the captivity which began with Iechonias, Baruch
of that which took beginning under Zedekiah: or Jeremy defines the time of
that captivity, which ended in the first year of Cyrus, Baruch of that which
held unto the seventh year of Artaxerxes, when diverse of the Jews returned
with Zorobabel: But if they will have Baruch a Prophet, he must not cross
Ieremies prophecy, to begin the time determined of 70. years captivity
sooner, or to end it later.

6. The only solution is, that this epistle of Baruch is Apochryphall, and
this is an evident argument thereof, because he calls this term of 70.
years, 7. generations, which has no warrant out of Scripture, and therein
disagr^eth from the Prophet Jeremy.

Quest. 5. When the 70. years of captivity mentioned, v. 2. took their
beginning.
1. The opinion of some was, which Eusebius remembers in his chronicle,
concealing the authors of that opinion, that the 70. years of captivity
began in the 13. year of Josias: But this cannot be so: 1. Jeremiah began
then indeed to foretell them of the evils which should happen unto them, but
23. years after he prophesied of the 70. years captivity, Ierem. 25. 8. 2.
And so long as Io^ias lived, the Lord promised him, 2. king. 2^. that his eyes
should not see the evils, which the Lord had threatened to bring upon that
place.

2. Whereas there were three several captiuities: the first in the first year
of Nebuchadnezzar, in the third year of the reign of Iehoiachim, when Daniel
went into captivity, Dan. 1. 1. the second in the 7. and 8. year of
Nabuchadnezzer, when Ieconias with others was carried away captive, 2. king.
24. 12. the third in the 11. year of Zedekiah, and in the 18. year of
Nebuchadnezzar, when the city and temple were destroyed. 2. king. 24. Ierem.
51. 29. Some do begin these 70. years from the first captivity, of which
opinion are Seuerus Sulpitius, lib. 2. sarc. histor. Lyran Vatablus, in 9.
Daniel: whereunto consents also H. B. in his concent: But here cannot begin
that famous captivity, because the land could not be captiued, seeing the king
Iehoiachim himself went not into captivity.

3. The most general opinion is, that the beginning of the captivity of 70.
years, must be referred unto the third captivity under Zedekiah: of this
opinion are many ancient grave authors, Josephus lib. 11. antiquit. Clemens
lib. 1. stromat. Julius Africanus lib. 5. Annal. E^sebius in chron. Lactantius
lib. 4. institut. c. 5. Hierome in 4. c. Ezekiel, with diverse others: Pererius
adioyneth this reason, because these 70. years are said here to be the years
of the desolation of Jerusalem, but the city was not brought to desolation
until the captivity of Zedekiah: But this reason concludes not, for although
then there was greater desolation brought upon the city, yet before when as
the king and all the principal men, and artificers were carried away, the
city began to be desolate: And altogether it was not desolate, no not in the
last captivity: for 5. year after in the 23. year of Nebuchadnezzar, there
were 745. persons carried away captive by Nebuzaradan, Ierem. 52. 30.

4. Wherefore the more certain opinion is, that the 70. years began with
Iechonias captivity, which may be confirmed by these reasons. 1. Jeremy, cap.
29. v. 10. writes unto those which were in captivity with Iechoniah, that
after 70. years, the Lord would visit them. 2. direct mention is made of the
captivity of Iechoniah, Esther. 2. 6. when Mor^ee as went into captivity. 3.
Iechonia and the rest yielded themselves unto the king of ^haldes, and obeyed
the counsel of Jeremy, which Zedekiah refused, and therefore the first are
compared to a basket of good figs, the other to a basket of rotten figs,
they which remained with Zedekiah went into Egypt: the first captivity then
rather is to be counted, because the counsel of God therein was followed. 4.
Ezekiel in diverse places counts the years from the captivity of Iechonias,
as the fifth, c. 1. 3. the sixth year, c. 8. 1. the seventh, c. 20. 1. the tenth
year, c. 37. 1. the eleventh year, c. 31. 1. All which years are reckoned
from the time, when Iechonias went into captivity. 5. beside, the captivity
of Iechonias was most famous, both in respect of the persons that went into
captivity, and their number: for the king himself, his mother, Princes, and
servants were carried away: And the captives were to the number of ten
thousand, 2. king. 24. 14. But in the captivity under Zedekiah, Jeremy
speaks but of 832. persons taken captive, cap. 52. 29. therefore from the
captivity of Iechonias, as the most famous, is the account of the years to
begin.

Quest. 6. When the 70 years of captivity ended.
1. Some make two reckonings of these 70. years, one of the captivity of the
Jews, which began with Iechonias captivity, and ended in the first year of
Cyrus, the other 70. were begun 19. year after with the captivity of
Zedekiah, and are extended 19. year after, to the second year of Darius
Hystaspis: 3. years of Cyrus reign, 14. of Cambyses, and 2. of Darius make
19. years, Pelican, Oecolampad. following Theodoret.

Contra. 1. But the Scripture in no place makes mention of twice 70. years,
there is but one and the same prophecy of Jeremy, concerning the 70. years
captivity, which can be but once fulfilled: for otherwise we should make these
prophetical predictions uncertain. 2. beside, the years of the Persian kings
are not certain: some unto the 2. year of Darius Hystaspis, make not so many
years: Iunius gives unto Cyrus and Cambyses together but 9. years, to the
Magi one year, and then succeeded Darius: these make but 12. years with the
second of Darius: Some make account of more years, as Bullinger gives unto
Cyrus 16. years, to Cambyses 8. years: some allot unto Cyrus 30. years, unto
Cambyses 9. years: Lively in his Persian Monarchy. Pererius counts 40.
years, from the 1. of Cyrus to the second of Darius: there being then such
uncertainty of these years, it is hard to interpret a prophecy upon so weak
and uncertain ground.

2. An other opinion is, that these 70. years must end simply in the second
year of Darius Hystaspis. 1. because these 70. years are called the years of
the desolation of the Temple: now the Temple remained desolate until the 2.
year of Darius Hystaspis. 2. Zachary beginning his prophecy in the 2. year
of Darius, thus says, c. 1. 12. thou have been displeased with us, now these
threescore and ten years. 3. Mardocheus who lived in the time of king
Assuerus, who is thought to be Artaxerxes Mnemon, who succeeded an 150. years
after the 1. year of Cyrus, should then be above an 130. year old, if the
70. years ended in the first of Cyrus: of this opinion are, Clemens Alexand.
lib. 1. stromat. Eusebius. in Chroni. Isidor. lib. 5. Etymolog.

Contra. 1. These arguments conclude not. 1. though the temple was not
reedified till the reign of Darius: yet because the people had liberty to
return, and to repair both the Temple and city in the first of Cyrus, the
captivity and desolation ended then: But if they will extend the time of
desolation so long till both the Temple and city were fully repaired, then
that time must hold out yet longer: for the city was not fully repaired until
the 20. year of Artaxerxes, whom Pererius takes for Artaxerxes Longimanus,
Iunius for Artaxerxes Mnemon, when Nehemias by the kings grauntreturned to
repair the city, and build the walls.

2. The Prophet Zachary affirms not the 70. years then first to be expired:
but his meaning is, that they had endured the 70. years captivity which were
prophesied of, and yet they saw not the full restitution of their city and
country.

3. To the third argument Pererius answers, that whereas the words in the
text stand thus, there was in the city of Shushan a certain Jew, whose name
was Mordecai, the son of Iair, the son of Shemei, the son of Kish a man
of Iemini, which had been carried away from Jerusalem, with the captivity
that was carried away with Iechoniah: these words, which had been carried
away, he would have referred not to Mordecai, but to Kish, that he was carried
away captive: so also Iunius: But Pererius answer is taken away by that text of
the Apochryphall Esther, which is canonical Scripture with them, where c. 11.
v. 3. it is said, that Mordechai, erat de numero eorum captiuorum, etc. was of
the number of those captines, whom Nebuchadnezzar translated with Iechoniah:
Iunius may be refelled by his own chronicle: for unto the reign of Assuerus,
whom he takes to be Xerxes, he numbreth but 46. years, from Cyrus first:
Cyrus and Cambyses reigned 9. years, the Magi one year, Darius Hystaspis 36.
years: unto this add 70. years, of the captivity: all make not full an 120.
years: it is not like that in this term, there were so many descents and
generations; namely these sour, of Kish, Shemei, Iair, Mordecai: therefore the
best answer here is, that so many years must not be given unto the Persian
kings: Mordecai being one of those which were carried into captivity, Ezra.
2. 1, 2. might be then an ancient man, but nothing near of such years as is
supposed.

4. But this opinion may be refelled by the former argument, that from the last
captivity unto the 2. of Darius when the Temple was reedified must needs be
above 70. years, seeing the most do hold at the least 40. years between the
1. of Cyrus, and the second of Darius: and between the last captivity of
Zedekiah in the 18. year of Nebuchadnezzar, and the 1. of Cyrus were more then
30. years: for that captivity was in the 18. year of Nebuchadnezzar, Ierem.
52. 29. who reigned in all 45. years, there remained then 27. years of his
reign, Balthazar had 3. years, then came between them Euilmerodach, who as
Josephus writes, reigned 18. years, lib. 10. antiquit. c. 12.

3. It remains then, that the 70. years of captivity must have their
determination in the first year of Cyrus: as is evident, 2. Chron. 36. 22.
then was the word and prophecy of Jeremy finished: And this is agreeable to
the prophecy of I say: he says of Cyrus, etc. he shall perform all my
desire: saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy
foundations shall be surcly laid, I say. 44. 28.

Quest. 7. Of Daniels prayer, v. 4. to v. 20.
Daniels prayer consists 1. of the invocation it self, where God is
described by his epithetes and titles, great and fearful: and his effects,
the keeping of his covenant toward them that love him. 2. then follows the
prayer it self, which has two parts as Daniel himself deuideth it, a
confession to v. 15. and deprecation from thence to v, 20. In the confession 1.
Daniel makes an ample and large confession of his and the peoples sins and
unrighteousness, to v. 7. 2. of the justice and righteousness of God in
punishing their sins yet in mercy, to v. 15. In the confession of their
sins are set forth, 1. the manner, which is amplified by four degrees, they
have sinned, committed iniquity, done wickedly, yea rebeiled: they have sinned
not of ignorance and infirmity, but wittingly and obstinately. 2. the matter,
in leaving Gods commandments, and not giving care to his Prophets, v. 6. The
confession is either general, to v. 10. or particular to v. 15.

In the general. 1. be confesses Gods justice in bringing upon them shame,
which is amplified by a threefold enumeration of the people: by their country,
the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem, yea all Israel: by their place and
situation, near and far off thorough all countries: by their degrees and
callings, even upon their kings and Princes, v. 8. 2. he confesses Gods
mercy, v. 9.

In the particular confession, is set forth Gods justice in punishing their
sin: where 1. their sin is amplified. 2. the punishment. In the
amplification of their sin, namely their disobedience, three circumstances
are expressed, whose voice they disobeyed, the Lords, by whose ministry, by
the Prophets, and who were disobedient, even all Israel.

Concerning the punishment three things are declared. 1. the prediction of it,
in the commination set forth in Moses law, v. 11. 2. the fulfilling and
accomplishment of it, v. 12. 3. the quality and condition of it, the greatest
plague under the whole heaven was fallen upon them: And this last part of the
greatness of the judgment is amplified, 1. by the certainty of the
prediction. 2. by their sin of security, in not being humbled by prayer
unto God, 3. by the equity and justice of God, v. 14.

Then follows the second part of Daniels prayer, his deprecation and earnest
petition: wherein he prays: for two things. 1. that the Lord would turn his
wrath from them. 2. that he would return and show his gracious favor toward
Jerusalem. The first petition is enforced by these arguments. 1. from the
example of their deliverance out of Egypt. 2. by the effects thereof, the
renown and praise which the Lord had obtained thereby. 3. from the confession
of their sin. 4. from Gods righteousness, which must be understood in
keeping and performing his promise. 5. from the sequel and event, they were
become a reproach unto their enemies. 6. from the interest and property, which
God had in Jerusalem, he calls it his city, v. 16. The other petition that
the Lord would show his favor, is amplified by these reasons. 1. because it
is his Sanctuary. 2. from the misery and desolation thereof, it lies wast,
and therefore was to be pitied. 3. from the cause, for the Lord, the Messiahs
sake. 4. from the quality and condition of the people and city, they were the
Church of God, his name was called upon among them. 5. from the opposition
between their worthiness, which they disclaymed, and the Lords mercies, which
they only relied upon. 6. from the end, he asks that Gods name thereby might
be set forth: for thine own sake, O God.

Quest. 8. How Daniel prays for the deliverance of the people, seeing it was
certainly promised after 70. years.
Daniel does not pray so earnestly knowing the time prefixed of the 70. years
to be expired, as doubting of the fulfilling and accomplishment of the
prophecy: for he being not only a faithful man, but a Prophet himself,
made no doubt, but that God; being most constant in not changing, and most
powerful in performing what he has decreed, would accordingly remember his
people.

These reasons then may be rendered, why Daniel prays notwithstanding he was
assured of the certainty of this prophecy. 1. Theodoret says, timens Daniel,
ne peccata Iudaeorum diuinis promissis obstarent, preces apud Deum
multiplicavit, Daniel fearing least the sins of the Jews might hinder the
divine promises, does multiply his prayers before God, etc. The promises, as
likewise the comminations of God are of two sorts: some are absolute, which
shall most surely come to pass, such was the promise of the coming of the
Messiah: some are conditional: as was the promise that the seed of Abraham
should inherit Canaan for ever, which was upon condition of their obedience:
Such was the commination threatened against Nineveh conditional, unless they
did repent: and Daniel, as Theodoret thinks, might take this promise of
deliverance after 70. years to be conditional, and might fear, least the
sins of the people should hinder it.

2. Hierome gives this satisfaction: Daniel prays not as incredulous, sed vt
quod Deus per suam promiserat clementiam, per ipsius preces impleret, but that
what God had promised by his clemency, might be fulfilled through his prayers,
etc. his meaning is this: that as God had appointed the deliverance of his
people, so also he had ordained the means, that it should be obtained by
earnest prayers and supplications of his servants: for both of these do fall
under the divine ordination, res, and suus modus, the thing it self, and the
manner and means thereof, Lyran. So although God have certainly preordained
the salvation of the elect, yet they must walk in the way which God has
appointed, and use the means to further their salvation.

3. Lyranus adds further: Daniel also prays to this end, vt ostenderet se
gratum Deo de promissione prius facta, to show his thankfulness to God, for so
gracious a promise of their deliverance already made.

Quest. 9. Of the properties required in the prayers of the faithful, observed
here in Daniels prayer, v. 20.
1. In that Daniel does prostrate himself before the Lord, humbly confessing
his sin, it teaches us, that our prayers must proceed from humility and
contrition of heart: therefore was the prayer of the Publican accepted, but the
proud Pharisees rejected, because the one prayed in humility, the other was
puffed up in pride. 2. in that he did speak in his prayer, therein is showed,
that although God do know our hearts and thoughts, and in that regard needs
not to be informed by any voice, yet he will have us by speech in our prayer to
open our minds, quo magis pietas nostra inardescat, that our piety and
devotion thereby may be kindled the more, Oecolamp. 3. Daniel perseuered in
prayer: he continued his prayer from morning to evening, unto the time of the
evening sacrifice, Oecolamp. 4. he prays in charity, not for himself only,
but for all the people of God: So if we will have our prayers to be heard, we
must offer them up in love: as our Savior says, Mark. 11. 25. when ye shall
stand, and pray, forgive, if ye have any thing against any man: 5. Daniel
prays in faith, presenting his prayers before God only, before whom, and not
before any creatures, we must prostrate our selves, Bulling.

Quest. 10. Of the apparition of the Angel Gabriel, v. 21.
1. He is called the man Gabriel, being described by his name, and the form
wherein he appeared: some think he is called a man, a virtute, of his
strength, gloss interlin. but it is rather to be referred unto the shape,
wherein he appeared, Polan. 2. This Angel only in the canonical Scriptures is
found expressed by ^ame: As for the name Michael, it is given unto Christ, who
is the Lord Jehovah, and is not the name of a created Angel, as some learned
Hebrews also affirm: H. Br. in Daniel. And this may be the reason hereof, why
Gabriel only is named of the Angels, because he was the messenger and minister
of the incarnation of that great Angel of the covenant, who should be named and
have his conversation among men. 3. This Angel Gabriel was he, that was sent
unto Zachary, and to the Virgin Marie to show the fulfilling and
accomplishment of this prophecy, H. Br. 4. And in that he says, whom I had
seen in the vision before, that is the vision set forth in the 8. cap. which
was expounded unto Daniel by the Angel Gabriel, c. 8. 16. it makes much for
the confirmation of Daniel, that having experience already of the
faithfulness of this holy messenger, he should now be out of doubt, Polan. 5.
He is said to come flying, to signify the diligence and readiness of these
holy spirits in executing the will of God: and though the Angels are spirits,
and neither have bodies or wings of their own, yet it is like, that as the
Angel here appeared in an humane shape, so also he might seem to come flying
with wings, Oecolamp. Hugo.

Quest. 11. How Daniel discerned this to be a good Angel.
1. Some by these five things would have the apparition of good Angels
discerned from bad, In tractat. de distinct. verar. vision. a falsis.
by their humility, patience, verity, prudence, charity, Joan. Gerson. As
humility appeared in that Angel, which appeared unto John, Reuela^. 22. that
would not suffer him to worship him: the good Angels are patient and long
suffering toward us, not ready to provoke God, as Satan was, that tempted Job:
they are not lying spirits, as Satan was in the mouth of Baals Prophets, 1.
king. 22. but always speak and deliver the truth: their heavenly wisdom and
prudence appears in revealing of secrets, and hid mysteries, as Gabriel, c.
8. did expound the vision to Daniel: they also are zealously affected with love
and charity toward the people of God, as our blessed Savior says, there is
joy in heaven over a sinner that conuerteth, Luke 15. 2. But beside this
ordinary direction, whereby the children of God are taught to distinguish true
visions^ from false, Daniel being a Prophet understood it, per illuminationem
spiritus, by the illumination of the spirit, Pintus. 3. As also Daniel by his
former experience in the other visions, c. 8. was able to discern of the
appearing of the same Angel here.

Quest. 12. Whether the Angels have (...).
By occasion of these words, that this Angel is called the man Gabriel, this
question is briefly to be discussed, whether the Angels have any bodies, or
rather are altogether immateriall and without bodies.

1. Of the former opinion seems Augustine to be, that, damones sunt a^rea
animalia, spirits are a^rie creatures, and because their bodies consist of the
air, which is an element more apt to work and do, then to suffer, they are
not dissolved by death, lib. 2. de Genesis ad liter. c. 17. And in an other place
he yields this reason of his assertion, that all Angels good and had are
supposed to have a kind of bodies, nihil incorporum credendum est praeter
solu^^ Deum, nothing is to be held incorporeall beside God only: with
Augustine consent Origen^ lib. 1. periarch, Philo (...). de opifici, (...),
dierum. Lanctanti^s, Hilarious, with others. And in the 2. Nycene Council.
action. 4. there was produced a treatise of John Bishop of Thessalonica, to the
same purpose, that Angels have either (...) or fiery bodies, where that place
in the Psalm is alleged, he makes his Angels spirits, and his messengers
flames of fire, Psalm. 104. and therefore he concludes, that they are (...)
pictura, to be imitated and portraited by picture.

Contra. 1. The Angels being celestial treatures, cannot be supposed to have
aerie bodies: the heavens are of a (...) pure essence and nature then is the
air, the Angels being celestial, and of a more subtle nature the^ the
heavens, do far exceed the subtlety of the air. 2. God the creator is an
infinite spirit far remote from all bodily matter, in comparison of whom the
Angels and created spirits may be said to be of a mixed and concret nature: yet
they are in themselves of a spiritual and immateriall constitution: otherwise
by the same argument, it would follow, that because God is a spirit, therefore
the Angels are not spirits. 3. that place in the Psalm describes not the
making and constitution of the Angels, as though they should consist either of
aerie or fiery bodies, but it shows their office only and ministry, that
God uses his Angels as the winds and fire, to execute his will: to the which
purpose the Apostle alleges it, Heb. 1. 7. 4. And in that Angels are and may
be portraited by picture, it proves not that they have any bodily
constitution, but that they appeared in some visible shape, which is expressed
by picture.

2. The sounder opinion then is, that Angeli sunt corporis expertes, Angels are
without bodies: which is the judgment of Gregor. Nyssen. in tractat. de
oration. of Chrysostom homil. 22. in Genes. of Cyrill in c. 12. Joan. of
Theodoret, in c. 12. Daniel. and of Thom. Aquin. And this assertion may further
be confirmed by these reasons. 1. because Angels are called spirits in the
Scripture: therefore they are of a spiritual nature. 2. the soul of man is of
a spiritual substance, not of any corporal constitution, much more the
Angels. 3. If Angels had bodies, it would follow, that they are
circumscriptible, and occupy a place, as other bodies do: but they cannot be
hemmed in by walls, doors, or such like limits and bounds. 4. one body does
not penetrate or pierce another, but gives way, as the air to the water: but
the spirits pass through substances, as through doors, walls, and the like;
therefore they have no bodies.

3. Pintus resolves not of either of these opinions, because the Church has
not defined and determined what is to be held of this matter: and concludes
thus: quid hac in re verum sit, Deus ipse viderit, etc. what comes near unto
the truth herein, God himself knows, etc. But it is more consonant and
agreeable to Scripture, that Angels are altogether of a spiritual nature, as
has been showed, and therefore we may safely rest in this as a true position,
and well grounded conclusion.

Quest. 13. Why the Angel came about the time of the evening sacrifice, v. 21.
1. Some note herereby that Daniel perseuered and continued an whole day in
prayer from morning to evening, gloss. and if it be objected that the
commandment was given unto the Angel in the beginning of Daniels prayer, and
therefore it is not like that the Angel was so long in coming, to deliver the
message unto Daniel, it may be answered, that as soon as Daniel began to
pray, God in heaven made known his decree for the revealing of this secret to
Daniel, Hugo. yet at that instant the Angel came not forth, but as God further
directed him.

2. And beside, God by diverse miraculous works did consecrate the time of the
morning and evening sacrifice: as about the time of the evening sacrifice at
Elias prayer, fire came down from heaven, which consumed the sacrifice, with
the water powered upon it, and the very stones of the altar, 1. king. 18. 36.
etc. so according to the word of Elisha, in the morning when the meat offering
was offered, water came by the way of Edom, 2. king. 3. Thus it pleased God to
commend the times of public prayer, that men might have a greater desire unto
those public exercises, Polan.

3. Oecolampadius shows out of Ammonius, that the Angel Gabriel came in the
evening, which is the end of the day, to show, that (...), Christ should come
in the latter days of the world.

4. But some observe yet more exactly, that the Angel came about the time of
the evening sacrifice, which was the ninth hour of the day, about three of the
clock in the afternoon, to show the very hour of the passion of Christ, who
about the ninth hour yielded up his spirit, Matthew. 27. 46. 50. H. Br.

Quest. 14. Why Daniel is called a man of desires, ver. 23.
1. Some do expound it actiuely, because Daniel so earnestly desired to
understand visions and secret mysteries for his own and others better
instruction: so Hugo. 2. Some give this sense, quia in te sunt multa
desiderabilia, because there are many excellent things to be desired in thee.
3. or thou art a man of desires, that is, worthy to be beloved, Pintus. 4. But
it is better understood passiuely, he was beloved and accepted with God: and so
Symmachus translateth (...), a man desired or beloved of God, Oecolampad. and
so it answeareth to the word (...), freely beloved, with which word the Angel
saluteth Mary Luke 1. 28. that as here God had chosen Daniel to reveal this
mystery unto, concerning the Messiah, so Marie is elected of God to be the
mother of Christ for the accomplishment of this vision: So then Daniel is
called a man of desires, that is, Deo acceptus, accepted of God, Calvin.
Iunius. D^o amabilis, beloved of God, Lyranus. Deo ch^rus, dear unto God, Sa.
for things which are esteemed, and had in price, are called things of desires,
as Esaus best raiment, which Rebeckah put about her son Iakob, are called
garments of desires, Genes. 27. 15. and pleasant bread Daniel calls bread of
desires, c. 10. 3. Polan.

Quest. 15. v. 24. Seventy weeks are determined, etc* How Daniels prayer is
heard, praying for the peoples deliverance.
Seeing Daniel made his request for the deliverance of the people, the 70.
years of captivity being expired, and the Angel does open unto him an other
vision of 70. weeks of years, the question is, how this is answerable unto
Daniels prayer.

1. One answer is, that because Daniel had some revelation of the Messiah,
which should be incarnate, both by the vision of the stone cut out without
hands, c. 2. and of the Son of man coming in the clouds, c. 7. he had an
earnest desire to be further instructed concerning the coming of the Messiah,
and therefore herein the Lord satisfies Daniels desire.

2. Lyranu^ adds further, quia Dominus plus dat, quam ab eo petatur, because
the Lord gives and grants more then is asked of him: he does not only
assure Daniel of the temporal deliverance of the people, now after 70. years
captivity; but does reveal also unto him, the spiritual and everlasting
deliverance of the people of God after 70. weeks of years.

3. Father it is answered, that it is usual in Scripture, when any thing is
spoken of, which is a type and figure of an other, that in the handling thereof
many things are delivered, which agree unto the thing that is prefigured, not
unto the type: as in the Psalms, David and Solomon (...) as types of Christ:
where many things (as Psalm. 2. Psalm. 7^.) are declared, which (...) in no ways
agree unto them, but must be referred unto Christ. And so in this prophecy,
the temporal deliverance of the people being a type of their spiritual
deliverance by Christ, Rupert. in Dan. c. 16.
under the one is signified the other, Perer. so also Rupertus, sic illam
captiuitatem solvioptat, vt pro maiori sollicitus ^it, he so desires that
captivity to be dissolved, as that yet he is careful for a greater
deliverance.

4. But it may furthe^ be answered, that beside that the Angel satisfies
Daniels desire concerning the deliverance of the people, he also foretells of
the spiritual deliverance by Christ: that the people should not rest in that
temporal benefit, but be in continual expectation of the coming of the
Messiah, by whom they should be redeemed from the bondage of sin, Polan. As
also because the people notwithstanding this captivity of 70. years, continued
in their sin, the Angel shows that God would yet give them a longer time
ofrepentance, even of seventy weeks of years: after which time, if they
repented not, their city should be destroyed, according to the determinate
sentence of God, Iun. in commentar.

Quest. 16. v. 24. How the seventy weeks must be understood.
1. These seventy weeks cannot be taken for so many weeks of days, as
weeks are properly taken, as Leni^. 23. the feast of Pentecost followed seven
weeks after the feast of the Passeo^er: for 70. weeks of days make but one
year, 4. months, and 14. days: so that then this prophecy should have been
fulfilled in less time, then a year and half, Lyran. Bulling.

2. Orige^ takes these weeks not for weeks of days, or of single years,
but of ten years, that every one of these prophetical weeks, should
comprehend 70. years, and so the whole (...) of 70. of these weeks, amounts
to 4900. years: Eusebius in part follows this interpretation of the weeks,
lib. 8. de d^monst. Euangel. for the last week of the 70. he extends to 70.
years, counting unto the last week seven times ten years: But if this
reckoning should stand, this prophecy of Daniel is not yet fulfilled, for from
Daniels time until now, there are not above ^^00. years run, so that their
should remain 2700. yerres of the 70. weeks: whereas we see that many years
since Jerusalem was destroyed, and their sacrifices and ceremonies abolished.

3. Lyranus* reports the opinion of some, which understand these to be Iubile
weeks, and some, weeks of hundred years: they which take them for so many
Jubilees or 50. years, make in every week 350. years, and the whole sum
will rise to 24500. years: but if every day should be counted for an 100.
years, the week shall contain 700. years, and 70. weeks, 49000. years.
Against this exposition Lyranus alleges these two reasons. 1. no where in
Scripture is the name of a week taken in any such sense, either for 50.
years, or an 100. years: but either it signifies weeks of days, or weeks
of years. 2. the world shall not continue so many thousand years, neither
should this prophecy be yet fulfilled concerning the destruction of the city
and Sanctuary: all which things we see came to pass above a 1500. year since.

4. It remains then, that we are here precisely to understand 70. weeks of
years: every week containing 7. years: for so is a week of years taken,
Leuit. 25. 8. thou shall number seven Sabbaths of years unto thee, even seven
times seven years: so that 70. weeks of years make 490. years, Iun. Perer.
Polan. Pelican. cum caeter.

Quest. 17 Why 70. weeks are said to be cut out or determined.
Whereas the Latin translator reads, abbreuiatae sunt, 70. weeks are
abbreuiated or shortened, this has given occasion of some question. 1.
Augustine epistol. 80. ad Hesychium, makes mention how some thus interpreted
those words of our Savior, Matthew. 24. 22. that for the elects ^ake those days
should be shortened, that the days of persecution should be shorter then the
natural day of 24. hours: and thus as well might some suppose the weeks to
be said to be shortened* like as we read that in Iosuah and Hezekias time, the
day was lengthened, and made longer then the natural day: But this cannot be
the meaning, for it cannot be showed, that during the space of those 70.
weeke^, which make 490. years, or for almost two thousand year since, any day
fell out shorter then the ordinary course of the natural day.

2. Augustine in the former place reports an other opinion of some, who
thought that the time appointed for the coming of the Messiah, which God had
purposed to have prolonged, was at the instant prayers of the Prophets, and
other of the elect shortened, and sooner accomplished: like as Augustine
thinks, that the time of 120. years set for the repentance of the old world,
was cut short by 20. years.

But this interpretation cannot stand. 1. God by this means, if he had
shortened the time, which he had appointed, should be mutable and changeable.
2. they must show out of Scripture, that there was a longer time appointed for
the coming of the Messiah, which the Lord abridged. 3. the time limited for
the repentance of the old world, was not shortened: but whereas first mention
is made of Noah's age of 500. years, Genesis 5. 32. and then the time of 120.
years is prescribed, c. 6. 3. and yet Noah was but 600. year old, when he
entered into the arc, Genesis 7. 6. it must be acknowledged that the limitation of
that time is somewhat transposed, and that in order of time it was revealed to
Noah before he was 500. year old, but it is deferred to the 6. chapter, least
the history of the generation of the fathers should have been interrupted.
See more hereof, Hexapl. in Genes. chap. 6. quest. 6.

3. A third opinion there is, which is ascribed to Julius Africanus, Theodoret,
Albertus, Beda, Rupertus, Carthusianus, Hug. Card. that here must be understood
the years of the moon, which contain but 354. days, eleven days less then
the year of the Sun, which consists of 365. days: so that 70. weeks of
such years of the Moon, that is, 490. years, are but equivalent to 475.
years of the Sun, Rupert. every week of the years of the Sun exceeding
a week of the years of the Moon by 77. days.

But Lyranus well refuteth this opinion by these two reasons. 1. because the
Hebrews used not to count by the years of the Moon, but by the full and just
years of the Sun: otherwise where the Scripture sets down the sums of
years, as 430. of the soiourning of Israel in Egypt and Canaan, Exodus 12. 480.
from the departure of Israel out of Egypt to the building of the Temple, 1.
King. 6. 1. there should be no certainty in these computations; but if the
account should be made by the course of the Moon, there should be fewer years
in these sums, then they are reckoned for. 2. Again, whereas the Israelites
kept their Passover, on the 14. day of the first Moon, if they should have
observed the year of the moon, they should every year keep the Passover,
an 11. days sooner then other, and so in process of time, they should have
observed that feast every month thorough the year.

4. A fourth exposition is, that abbreuia^e hebdomadas, to abbreuiate or
shorten the weeks, is all one, as paucas constiture, to appoint but few
weeks: this time was but short in respect of other prophesies made concerning
the Messiah, as that to Adam, Genesis 3. and to Abraham, Genesis 22. that in his
seed all nations should be blessed: these prophesies were to be fulfilled many
years after, but now there remained but a few weeks for the accomplishment
of this: In this sense the days are said to be shortened for the elects sake,
Matthew. 24. 22. that is, they should continue but a short time those days of
affliction, Pererius. But we refuse this exposition also, because it is
grounded upon a corrupt translation of the word chatach, which signifies not
to abbreuiate, but to cut out, and so consequently, to determine.

5. Barbinel a cauilling Rabbine, by the word chatach, which signifies to cut,
would have signified the cutting afflictions, which the people of God should
endure all this time: but all this term was not a time of affliction to the
people of God: they had many prosperous days, and had some breathing time,
after their return out of captivity.

6. The word chatach then, is well interpreted here, determined, or prefixed,
certainly appointed and decreed with God, praefinitae, defined, Vatab.
decisae, cut out, Pagnin. Mon. Iun. Polan. and this further is well observed by
some, that here a verb of the singular number is joined to a word of the
plural, 70. weeks is determined, to show, that every one of these weeks
from the first to the last shall be particularly and precisely complete, Lively.

Quest. 18. Why this term of 490. years is expressed by weeks.
1. The seventh number was of great observation among the Jews: the seventh
day, the seventh year, the seventh seventh year, which was the Iubile in the
49. year, were all times of holy rest: therefore to signify the great year
of rest, and Iubile at the coming of the Messiah, when there should be a
general remission of the sins of the world, this time is reckoned by weeks,
and by seven times ten weeks of years, which make 10. Iubilies: for ten
times 49. years, make just 490. years, Polan. 2. An other reason is this,
volebat confer septuaginta hebdo^^adas annorum cum septuaginta annis, the
Angel would compare the seventy weeks of years, with the 70. years of
captivity, showing that for 70. years of captivity, they should enjoy seven
times 70. years of deliverance: the Prophet then, confert Dei gratiam cum
iudicio, does compare the grace and mercy of God, with his judgment, Calvin.
3. But in that the Angel speaks simply of 70. weeks, not adding of days or
years, therein is observed the prophetical manner of speech, which is for the
most part obscure and dark, as treating of mystical and hid matters: whereas
in historical narrations an other kind of plain and open speech and phrase is
used.

Quest. 19. Why the Angel says, upon thy people, and upon thine holy city.
1. Hierome, whom the gloss. follows, and Hugo Card. thus interpret; he
calls them the people of Daniel, not his people, because they were evil, as
though God had rejected them: but this cannot be: for it being called an holy
city, must needs be Gods city. 2. Tertullian. lib. cont. Iudaeos, and
Theodoret upon this place, do think that they are called Daniels, and not the
Lords people, because of that great sin, which they should commit, in putting
the Messiah to death: but in this sense neither would Daniel acknowledge them to
be his people. 3. Therefore they are rather called Daniels people, sanguine and
affectu, they were his people both in the kindred of flesh and in affection,
Pintus. they were his contrymen, and beside he was careful for them, Calv.
Osiand. 4. Now, whereas it is said, upon thy people, some understand, for the
destruction, and final overthrow of the people and city, Iun. annot. so also
Hugo. super, notat oppressionem, this word upon notes their oppression, who
finally were destroyed by the Romans: some give this sense, within this time
all these things shall come to pass, which belong unto the eternal salvation of
the people, Osi. But both rather are signified; both the mercy, which should
be offered unto this people, in taking away their sins by the coming of the
Messiah, and the judgment, which should befall them for their contempt and
rejecting of the Messiah: for both these are afterward touched, the benefits,
which the Messiah should bring unto them, verse. 24. and the calamiti, ewhich
should be sent upon them, verse. 26. And both these Iunius in his commentary
joins together.

Quest. 20. The meaning of these words, v. 24. to finish or rather restrain
wickedness.
1. R. Salamon, who ends these 70. weeks at the second destruction of the
city and Temple by Titus, thus interprets, that then the Jews should endure
a longer captivity, then before: and thereby should learn, to leave off their
sins, and by their long punishment merit forgiveness of their sin.

Contra. 1. Lyranus thus refelleth the Rabbine: that the Jews are so far off
from leaving their sins by this long captivity, that they are rather worse:
for their periuries, usury, profane oaths, are notoriously known. And seeing
God punished their idolatry, but with captivity of 70. years, and now they
have endured captivity more then twice 7. hundred years, it must needs be a
greater sin for the which they sustain so long a time of punishment, which
can be none other, then their killing the Lord of life the Blessed Messiah. 2.
Paulus Burgen. adds further, that this finishing of iniquity must be within
the 70. weeks, but that ceasing from sin which the Rabbine imagines, must
follow after these 70. weeks expired. 3. add hereunto, that no man by the
works of the law is justified, or can do any thing acceptable unto God: how
then can the Jews without the Messiah obtain remission of sins? And again,
men by their punishment, though it be never so long and great, cannot satisfy
for their sins; for then they which are tormented in hell, might at length
satisfy for their iniquity. Polan.

2. Some following the Latin text, to consummate or finish sin, do thus
interpret it, to make perfect sin: as the Jews were come to the height of
sin when they crucified Christ: in this sense our Savior says, Matthew. 23.
Fulfillye the measure of your fathers: thus expound Chrysostom, orat. 2. cont.
Iudaeos. Theodoret upon this place, and Eusebius, lib. 8. de praeparat. Euang.
but the next words following, to seal up (...), and reconcile iniquity, do
show, that this phrase signifies rather the consumption, then consummation of
sin.

3. Some reading to finish sin, understand it of the consumption of sin,
and taking of it away by the death of Christ: as a candle is said to be ended,
when it is consumed, Hugo. so is the word finishing taken, Isa. 40. 2. Speak
comfortably to Jerusalem, etc. that her warfare is finished, and her iniquity
is pardoned. Perer. so also Calv. Genevens. Vatabl. Pintus: this sense is not
to be misliked, saving that the word is not well interpreted, which signifies
not to finish, but rather to restrain or shut up.

4. The word cala, with aleph, (which is here used) signifies to shut up, but
cal^h with he, is to finish and consummate: the meaning then is, to restrain
sin: which Iunius, and Polanus following him, do interpret of the preserving
of the elect from that general defection and falling away of the Jews, which
began in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes.

5. But seeing the words following, to seal up sins, etc. are general, not
of any special iniquity, or of some special nation, but of the sins of
all; these words are better understood also generally, that by the coming of
Christ, and preaching of the Gospel, there should be a general restraint of
sin: as many which made no conscience before of adultery, idolatry,
covetousness, and such like, should be reclaimed by the Gospel* Bullinger. as
the Apostle says, having made mention of idolaters, fornicatours, adulterers,
and such like, who shall not inherit the kingdom of God, adds, but such were
some of you, but ye are washed, ye are sanctified, etc. 1. Cor. 6. 10.

22. Quest. Of the sealing of sins.
1. The Latin translatour reads, to finish sin: whereupon Pererius takes
occasion to show how diverse ways sin was finished by the death of Christ, in
that he paid the ransom for our sin, abolished idolatry, conquered Satan:
So M. Lively prefers this reading, and expounds it by that place, Ioh. 1.
29. Behold the lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world.

2. But seeing the word is chatam, which signifies to seal up, and so the
Septuagint read, (...), in sealing, therefore this reading is to be preferred,
to seal up sins: that is, to bind up as it were, and to seal and cloase
them, as never any more to be opened, read, or declared against us: for as
writings are unfolded and opened to be rehearsed, and read, so they are sealed
up to be concealed and buried in oblivion: which S. Paul calls, the putting
out of the handwriting, etc. which was against us, Coloss. ^. 14. Polan.

Quest. 22. What it is to reconcile iniquity.
1. The vulgar Latin reads, to take away sin: so also Lyranus, Hugo,
Pintus, with others: and hereupon Pererius shows how three ways a thing may
be taken away, by washing and wiping, by scraping, as a blot in writing, and by
dissipating or dissoluing, as when a cloud or mist is dispersed: and so in all
these phrases sin is said to be taken away: as David says, Psalm. 51. wash
away my sin, and S. Paul, that Christ has rased out the handwriting of our
sin, Colos. 2. And Isay 44. 22. the Lord says, I have put away thy
transgression as a cloud: This sense is true, but it is not well grounded: for
the word caphar, signifies to expiate, reconcile, not to take away.

2. Some by this expiation and reconciliation understand the taking away of the
guilt of sin, whereby we are made guilty of eternal damnation, Polan. but
that seems to be signified before in the sealing of sins, that they should
not be had in remembrance to ou^ condemnation.

3. Hereby then rather is signified that Christ has made reconciliation for
sin, that is, he satisfied in his death upon the cross, pro culpa and poena,
etc. for the fault and punishment, Bulling.

4. Thus by these three words here used, peshagh, chataoth, ghaven, which are
translated, wickedness, sins, iniquity, all manner of sins whatsoever are
implied, (sin only against the holy Ghost excepted) Bulling. which may thus
be distinguished, wickedness against God, sin in our selves, and iniquity
against our neighbor, Hugo. And here this benefit of taking away sin is set
forth in three degrees: in restraining the act, in sealing them up in respect
of the guilt unto condemnation, and in making expiation for the fault and
offense it self.

Quest. 23. v. 24. How the Messiah brought everlasting righteousness.
1. Some by this everlasting justice understand Christ himself, Vatab. who is
said to be our justice five ways. 1. exemplariter, because his justice and
righteousness is set before us to imitate and follow. 2. satisfactorie,
because he has satisfied the wrath of God by his righteousness for our
sins. 3. meritorie, he has by his righteousness merited for us eternal life.
4. efficienter, he is the efficient cause of our justice and righteousness. 5.
finaliter, because this is the end of our holiness and righteousness, to be
made like and conformable to the image of the son, as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 8. 29. Perer. But here is understood, not that righteousness which Christ
has in himself, but that which is communicated unto us: for here are two
benefits rehearsed, which should come by the Messiah, the first is the taking
away of sin, which is before expressed: the other the bringing and giving of
righteousness.

2. Some by justice understand the preaching of righteousness by the gospel,
as Lyranus, as it is taken, Isay. 45. 23. the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, Pintus. But the preaching of the gospel shall not be
everlasting: for in the next world, there shall be no need of preaching: the
Saints shall enjoy the presence and sight of the lamb, who shall be their
light.

3. Some by justice interpret the active justice, which God exercised upon the
cross in not sparing his son, but giving him for the redemption of the
world, Hug. Card. But the very phrase, to bring in everlasting righteousness,
shows, that such a justice is here meant, not which was showed upon Christ,
but was communnicated to his members.

4. Wherefore by justice here is understood nothing else but our justification,
whereby the justice of Christ is imputed unto us freely, and made ours by
faith, Bulling. and in this sense, is the word justice or righteousness taken,
James. 2. 23. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for justice, or
righteousness, Pintus.

5. But we must take heed here of that Popish conceit of inherent justice: as
Pererius here understands that justice, quae in homine inest a Deo effecta,
which is in ^^an wrought by God, etc. for this justice which is wrought in man
by faith, is nothing else but our sanctification, which is imperfect, and
therefore it is not that everlasting justice, which is the justice of Christ
imputed unto us by faith.

Quest. 24. Why it is called everlasting righteousness.
1. The justice or righteousness of faith in Christ is called everlasting, in
respect of the justice of the law: non euanescet sicut iustitia legis, it
shall not vanish away as the justice of the law, Osiand. which was a temporary
justice consisting in the observation of legal rites and ceremonies, which
were not to continue, Perer. such was the righteousness of Zachary and
Elizabeth, which are called just, because they walked in all the commandments,
and (...), constitutions and ordinances of the law, Luke 1. 6. so also the
gloss. it is called eternal justice, quae legis iustitiam vincat, which should
exceed the justice of the law.

2. This justice of faith is everlasting, because it is omnium temporum, for
all times: all that ever lived in the world, were justified by the justice of
faith in Christ, Bulling.

3. And is eternal, quia inchoatur in via, in patria perficitur, it is begun
here as in the way, and shall be perfited in our country, Pintus.

4. But it is rather so called in respect of the everlasting force and virtue
of this justice, which shall never be extinguished, but shall make us accepted
of God for ever, Polan. as the Prophet Isay says, c. 45. 17. Israel shall be
saned in the Lord with an everlasting salvation, ye shall not be ashawed, nor
confounded world without end.

Here follow certain questions of the justice of Christ, in what manner,
wherein, and in what measure it is applied.
Quest. 25. Whether as Christ's satisfaction for the punishment of sin is
imputed to us by faith, so likewise his innocence.
It must of necessity follow, if that Christ has obtained and purchased for
us a perfect and absolute redemption, that he has discharged our whole debt,
not only in satisfying for the punishment of the law, but in imputing also
unto us his innocence and obedience, as may appear by these reasons.

1. Christ is of greater power to communicate unto us his innocence, then Adam
was to derive unto us the guilt of his sin and disobedience: then as by Adam,
sin was propagated, and death came in by sin, Romans 5. 12. so it is
necessary, that we should receive from Christ not only exemption from death
by his death, but be clothed also with his righteousness.

2. We cannot stand in judgment before God, unless we be endued with perfect
justice: now perfect justice is that whereby the commandments of God are
exactly fulfilled, which was performed not only by that one act of Christ's
death, but by the perfect innocence and holiness of his whole life: therefore
the whole obedience of Christ must be imputed and communicated unto us.

3. Christ discharged our whole debt: Now we are debtors not only in respect
of the punishment of the law, which by our disobedience we have deserved: but
the law exacteth also of us perfect obedience, and integrity from sin: in
both these respects then we have need of Christ.

4. The Apostle says directly, Romans 10. 4. that Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness unto every one that believes, that is, by faith the
righteousness of Christ in fulfilling the law is imputed unto us in as full and
ample manner, as if we had fulfilled the law our selves.

5. If Christ has not fulfilled the law for us, it would follow, that the
law remains still to be fulfilled by us, which is impossible.

The contrary objections answered.
Object. 1. The righteousness of faith, and the righteousness and fulfilling
of the law, are two diverse things: the righteousness, which we receive by
Christ, is by faith, therefore not the fulf^^^ng of the law.

Answ. The righteousness of the law by works, and of the gospel by faith, are
not two diverse righteousness, for they differ neither in matter, as both
requiring that obedience which is to be performed unto God, not in form, for
the law of God is the rule of righteousness in both: they differ in the
efficient and worker: the legal righteousness must be performed by man himself,
the Euangelical by Christ in our name: and in the end; for the end of the
legal righteousness is the glory of man, if he could keep it by his own
strength: the end of the Euangelical justice is the glory of God, in the
setting forth of his mercy. So then one and the same righteousness, is both of
the law in respect of Christ, who fulfilled the law, and it is not of the law
in respect of us, because we fulfill not the law, but of faith, because we
believe in him, who has fulfilled the law for us.

2. Object. If the obedience of the life of Christ be imputed unto us, it
seems then there was no cause, why Christ should die for us, seeing we are
made just by his obedience.

Ans. 1. As by Adam both sin entered, and death by sin, so it was requisite
that in both we should in the one be healed, in the other helped by our blessed
Medi^^our: so Justin Martyr, Justin in exposit. fide^ p 29^. edit. (...).
per conuersationem exactam evacuans lapsum, and per mortem indebitam, debitam
extinguens, by his most exact conversation he avoided man's fall, and by his
undue death abolished our due death, etc. 2. seeing the perfect fulfilling of
the law consists in the perfect love of God, and of man, it was necessary
that Christ should die: for therein he showed his perfect love unto God his
father in being obedient unto him: Ioh. 14. 31. It is, that the world may
know, that I love the Father: as likewise his perfect love of man, as our
Savior says, Ioh. 15. 13. Greater love then this has no man, when any man
bestows his life for his friends.

3. Object. The law binds either unto obedience of the law, or to the
punishment, not unto both: if then Christ's obedience be imputed unto us, the
imputation of his satisfaction by his death would seem to be superfluous.

Ans. 1. That proposition is not simply true, that the law binds either unto
obedience of the law, or to the punishment: for the law does not properly bind
unto punishment: but that is added as a commination, the rather to move unto
obedience of the commandment: as when the Lord said to Adam, that in the day
he did eat of the forbidden fruit, he should die the death: that commination
was no part of the bond or obligation of the commandment, but a conditionail
commination, if the other were not performed. 2. We must distinguish between
the state of man's integrity, and his fall: while man stood in his integrity,
he was only bound unto the obedience of the commandment* but since his fall,
man both is subject to the obedience of the law, which is not given him in
vain, and to the punishment, because he can not fulfill the law. 3. Again, of
the reprobate and wicked God exacteth only the punishment due unto their
disobedience: but of his elect he requires both the obedience of the law, and
the penalty, both which are performed in Christ: he has fulfilled for them
the one, and suffered the other. ex Polan.

4. Object. If Christ has fulfilled the law for us, and we are by his
obedience made righteous, then it would follow, that no other obedience or
holiness of life should be required of us.

Ans. It follows not. Indeed that perfect and absolute obedience of Christ,
whereby he perfectly fulfilled the law, is not exacted of us: for Christ's
obedience is ours by faith: yet an imperfect obedience is required, as a
testimony of our faith, and sign of our thankfulness unto God: Like as it
follows not, because Christ died for us the death of the body, that
therefore it is not necessary that we should die: the death of the body still
remains even in the children of God, for it is appointed for men to die once,
Hebr. 9. 27. but death is neither now as a punishment, or as a satisfaction for
sin, but as a condition of their mortal nature, and a passage unto a better
life: After the same manner, obedience is now required of the members of
Christ, but neither such an obedience, as Christ's was, that is perfect,
absolute, nor to the same end, to be meritorious or satisfactorie for sin.

5. Object. How are we made just by the obedience of Christ, seeing that we in
Christ's death are together punished with him?

Ans. 1. We (...) not actually made just by Christ's obedience, but by the
imputation thereof we are justified, and held as just in the sight of God. 2.
It is not all one to say we are punished in Christ, and Christ was punished for
us and in our stead: this is warranted by the Scriptu^e, as the Prophet says,
Isa. 53. 6. God has laid upon him the sin of us all. But the other can not
be affirmed* (...) seeing in Christ's death we have remission of our sins, we
can not be said for the same sins to be punished in and with Christ, whereof
we have remission in his death.

6. Object. Seeing Christ died to that end, that we should be justified by his
death, as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5. 21. He made him sin for us that knew
no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him: how then is
our righteousness obtained by the obedience of his life?

Ans. 1. The obedience of Christ in his life and death can not be severed: for
in perfect obedience is required constancy and perseverance unto the end:
therefore the obedience of Christ in his death and suffering, is a part of his
integrity, innocence, and righteousness. 2. Neither does that place prove,
that our righteousness was purchased only by Christ's death: but to make that a
perfect and acceptable sacrifice, the integrity of his life is required: for
in that he knew no sin in himself, (but our sins were imputed unto him, as
his righteousness is unto us) therein he was the unspotted lamb, and so was
made for us the sacrifice of atonement. We see then that even to make the
sacrifice of his death acceptable, the obedience and integrity of his life was
requisite.

7. Object. How is Christ's obedience made ours, seeing he as a creature was
subject to the law, and so was obedient thereunto for himself.

Ans. 1. It follows not, that because Christ as man, was a creature, that
therefore he was for himself subject to the law: this is true of those which
are creatures for themselves: but Christ was not made a creature for himself,
he was not incarnate, and made man for himself, but for us: therefore not for
himself, but for us, was he subject to the law. 2. And further, that Christ
was not for himself bound and subject to the law, it may appear by these
arguments: 1. to them only the law was given, whom the ends of the law
concern, which are these: before the fall of man the Law was given to these
two ends; to teach man the will of God, and to contain and keep him in
obedience to the will of God. After man's fall the law likewise has two ends:
to teach man to know himself, and to acknowledge his sins, and to stir him
up to seek the remedy against the same: But none of all these ends do
appertain unto Christ: he needed not to be taught the will of God, nor yet to
have any help to contain him in his obedience: he had no sins to
acknowledge, nor needed any such remedy: therefore the law was not given unto
him. 2. The law was not given to him to keep, who is the end of the law: but
Christ is the end of the law, as the Apostle shows, Romans 10. 4. and the law
is a schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3. 19. 3. Christ is above the
law, and Lord of the law, even as man, therefore not under the law, or subject
unto it: the first is evident, where Christ says, the Son of man is Lord of
the Sabbath; which is a part of the law: and as he is Lord of part of the law,
so of the whole.

8. Object. The Apostle says, Heb. 10. 19. By the blood of Jesus we may be
bold to enter into the holy place: and S. John says, 1. epist. 1. 7. The blood
of Jesus does purge us from all sin: what need then the imputation of the
innocence and obedience of Christ?

Ans. 1. Though the blood of Christ only be named, yet by a synecdoche, part
being taken for the whole, other parts of his oblation are signified: as his
obedience and innocence, whereby his blood was made a sacrifice of atonement,
acceptable unto God: for God was not simply delighted with the shedding of
Christ's blood, but with his obedience: as Bernard well says, non mors, sed
voluntas placuit spont^ morientis, not the death, but the will of Christ, dying
of his own accord, was pleasing unto God. 2. If all were in deed ascribed to
Christ's blood, then the oblation of his flesh and body, the anguish and agony
of his soul, had been superfluous: by the blood then the other parts are
signified: but the blood is named, as the most conspicuous part of his
oblation, and because it answered to the type, the blood of the legal
sacrifices. 3. And though the blood of Christ do purge us from all sin, yet
not from that b^nd and obligation, whereby we are tied to keep the law: which
we are freed from by the imputation of the obedience of Christ. 4. So then the
express mention of the blood of Christ, does not exclude his innocence and
obedience, but only the blood of the legal sacrifices, and man's merit, and all
other humane means, which avail not to salvation.

9. Object. But seeing Adams disobedience, by the which sin entered, was but
one offense in eating the forbidden fruit: one act likewise of Christ's
obedience, which was in the sacrifice of his death, may seem to be sufficient
for our justification.

Ans. Though God gave but one precept unto Ada^ for these reasons: 1. because
one commandment sufficed to exercise, and make trial of man's obedience. 2.
And the transgression of one commandment was enough to make man guilty of
eternal death. 3. And thereby man's impotencie and weakness appeared, who in the
state of integrity was not able to keep that one commandment: yet in that
one precept were contained and included all the precepts afterward given in
the moral law: as Tertullian says, lib. (...)
primordialis illa lex, quasi matrix omnium praeceptorum Dei, that first law
was the mother and womb as it were of all Gods precepts: And, as Augustine
well notes, August. (...) ^^^chirid. c. 45.
in illo vno peccato intelligi possunt plura peccata, in that one sin, many
sins may be understood, etc. quia superbia est illic, etc. for there was
pride, in that man loved rather to be in his own power, then Gods: there was
sacrilege, because man believed not God; and homicide, because he cast
himself headlong into death: there was spiritual fornication, because the
integrity of man's mind was corrupted by the enticement of the serpent: and
there was theft, because he usurped the forbidden fruit: and covetousness, in
that he desired more, then sufficed. Wherefore seeing that in Adams
transgression, we are made guilty of many sins, we have need also of
Christ's whole righteousness.

10. Object. If all Christ's innocence is imputed unto us for our righteousness,
then all Christ's acts must be imputed unto us likewise for our justification.

Ans. 1. It follows not, that because all Christ's acts which concerned the
justice and fulfilling of the law, are imputed unto us for righteousness, that
therefore all his acts are imputed: for his descension, conception,
incarnation, his miracles, are not imputed unto us, because they were no part
of the fulfilling of the law. So then it is true, that all the righteousness,
which is imputed unto us, Christ wrought for us; and that whatsoever Christ
did, he wrought for us: he was conceived, borne, circumcised, fasted for us:
yet all Christ's acts are not applied unto us for our justification, but only
those, wherein properly consisted Christ's obedience, and the fulfilling of the
law: And thus much shall suffice of this question, abridged out of Polanus.

26. Quest. Whether the justice brought in by Christ, exceed the justice of
Adam.
The righteousness of Christ imputed unto us by faith, is far more excellent
many ways then the justice which Adam had in the state of his innocence. 1.
That was the justice of a mere man, but this is the justice of that person,
which is both God and man. 2. for the effects: the justice of Christ is
meritorious of eternal life, it overcame death, subdued the devil: none of
all which Adams righteousness could do. 3. Christ's justice is eternal and
immutable, but Adams justice was but temporary for a time. 4. And we are in
Christ restored to a more excellent state, then we lost in Adam, which was but
terrene and mutable; but by Christ we receive an heavenly, everlasting, and
immutable kingdom.

27. Quest. Whether it stands with Gods justice, to justify us by an others
righteousness, and how that may be.
1. It is not agreeable with Gods justice, to justify a sinner, by that
righteousness, which is not intended unto him, nor wrought for him: but seeing
Christ wrought not righteousness for himself, but intended it wholly unto us,
and our benefit; it very well stands with Gods justice, that we should be
justified thereby. 2. And this justice of Christ, which is external and
without us, is more available to save and justify us, then if it were in our
selves: for then it were subject to change and alter, as all other gifts in us
are mutable and changeable: but now this saving righteousness is in a subject,
namely Christ, immutable and unchangeable. 3. And this righteousness is verily
made ours by faith: it is not an imiginarie or supposed justification, but
verily and in deed; for as we verily are by nature guilty of Adams
transgression, so is the obedience of Christ verily made ours by imputation
through faith: And as our sins were imputed to Christ, and he verily suffered
death the punishment of sin: so we by the imputation of his righteousness are
verily made partakers of everlasting salvation.

28. Quest. How the vision and prophecy was to be sealed up.
The Latin interpreter reads, vt impleatur, etc. that the prophecy and
vision may be fulfilled: which is to the same purpose. Three ways has our
blessed Savior fulfilled and sealed up all vision and prophecy. 1. Christ
has accomplished whatsoever was declared and foretold by the Prophets, as he
says, Matthew. 5. I came not to dissolve the law, but to fulfill it: and he
says to his Disciples, Luke 18. 31. Behold we go to Jerusalem, and all things
shall be fulfilled to the Son of man, which are written by the Prophets. 2.
He has fulfilled and sealed them up, because he has performed that, which the
law could not do, which was void, weak, and impotent without Christ: so the
Apostle says, Romans 8. 3. That which was impossible to the law, because it was
weak, etc. God sending his own Son, etc. Christ came to perform that which
the law intended, but was not able to effect. 3. Christ has made an end of
vision and prophecy, they are determined in him: Matthew. 11. 13. The Law and
the Prophets prophesied unto John: upon which words Chrysostom, orat. 2.
contr. Iudaeos, sistere oportuit post Christum prophetias, etc. prophesies were
to cease after Christ: So also Tertull, lib. advers. Iudaeos: post aduentum
Christi and passionem eius, ia^ non visio, neque propheta est, after the
coming and suffering of Christ, now there is neither vision nor Prophet. 4. R.
Solomon thinks that this should be performed after the destruction of the
second Temple, when after a long captivity of the people, the Messiah at the
last should come, and then all prophesies and promises of the Messiah should
cease. But Lyranus refelleth this conceit by these two arguments. 1. because
the Prophet Hagge, speaking of the coming of the Messiah, says, Hagg. 2. 7. 8.
Yet a little while, and I will shake the ^^^auens and the earth, etc. and the
desire of all nations shall come: but if the Messiah were not yet come, there
being 2000. years past since Hagges time, from whom unto the coming of
Christ there were above 400. years, and a 1600. are run since, how could
this be called a little while? 2. the same Prophet there says, the desire of
all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory: it is evident
then, that the Messiah should come, the second Temple yet standing, and not so
many years after the destruction thereof, as the Rabbin supposes. 3.
Experience shows, that long since all prophecies and visions among the Jews
are ceased: therefore they are hereby evidently convinced, that the Messiah is
come.

5. Barbinel, an other cauilling Jew, obiecteth, non debuisse auferri
prophetiae donum, that the gift of prophecy might not be taken away: wherein
he shows his ignorance, in not distinguishing between the time of vision and
prophecy, and of the Messiah, who should end all vision and prophesying. We
also grant, that God would not have taken from his Church the gift of
prophesying, but that he has provided a better way for the instruction of his
people, in speaking unto us in these last days by his Son, Hebr. 1. 2.
Calvin.

29. Quest. Of the anointing of the holy one: who is signified thereby?
1. R. Solomon understands this of the Temple and Sanctuary with the Arc,
and the vessels thereof, which he thinks should be reedified and builded
again by the Messiah: But Lyranus evidently conuinceth this Rabbinicall
conceit, by that place of Jeremy, 3. 16. When ye be increased and multiplied
in those days in the land (says the Lord) they shall say no more the Arc of
the covenant of the Lord, for it shall come no more to mind, neither shall
they remember it: it is evident then by this place, that the Messiah shall not
restore again the Arc and the Temple. And in this place the Angel prophesying
of the anointing of the Messiah, afterward speaks evidently of the
destruction and desolation of the city and Sanctuary, v. 26. so far off
shall the Jewish Temple then be from being reedified at the coming of the
Messiah, that it shall rather then be destroyed.

2. Wherefore, this most holy, or holy of holies is understood to be Christ,
who was prefigured and shadowed forth, by the most holy place in the Temple,
where the Arc was, which had the Tables of stone within it, and the golden
Cherubims stretching their wings over it.

3. Iunius in his commentary gives an other sense, by the most holy one
understanding the Sanctuary, the annoynting, and ordinary use whereof should
continue the time here limited and prefixed, to draw the people the better to
repentance: and in the same sense he understands the sealing of the vision
and prophecy, that all this time the Lord would not leave his Church destitute
of Prophets: But the former words of bringing in everlasting righteousness, do
show, that this is better understood of the office of the Messiah, as Iunius
himself interprets in his annotations upon this place: how Christ shall
perform those two great benefits, of taking away sin, and bringing in
everlasting righteousness by these two means; his Euangelical teaching and
prophesying, which shall make an end of the visions of the law, and by his
everlasting priesthood, whereunto he should be anointed.

30. Quest. Why Christ is called the holy of holies.
1. This title and appellation is given unto Christ, both as God and man: As
God in four respects: 1. because he is holy of himself, and has it not from
any other. 2. this holiness is essential in him, not accidental, as it is in
man. 3. because he is infinitely and beyond measure holy. 4. and he is the
original, cause, and fountain of all holiness: As he is man, he is most holy:
1. because of the union of his humane nature with his divine. 2. because of the
fulness of all grace and holiness, which he received as man. 3. because he is not
holy only in himself, but sanctifies and makes holy his Church. 4. because
he was not of unholy made holy, as man is, but he was always without sin,
and so always holy, Perer. to this purpose also Osiand. he is called most
holy, because in respect of his divine nature, he is Deus sanctissimus, the
most holy God: and in his humanity he was without sin. 2. This title to be
called most holy, or holy of holies, is peculiar unto the Messiah, as to be
called the king of kings, and Lord of Lords. And Eusebius observes well, that
he never read in the Scripture, any of the Priests or Kings to be called holy
of holies, lib. 8. de demonstrat. Euangelic. 3. Herein the most holy place in
the Tabernacle was a type of Christ, wherein the Arc was kept: As the
Tabernacle went before the Israelites, and when it refled, they stayed: so we
in all things should follow the direction of this Tabernacle. As the glory of
God rested upon Moses Tabernacle, so in Christ this blessed Tabernacle,
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2. 9. As the Priests of the
law had a Tabernacle to minister in, so, as the Apostle says, Christ is the
minister of the true Tabernacle, which God pight and not man, Hebr. 8. 2. And
in this sense Christ also, Ioh. 2. calls his body, the Temple, Polan.

31. Quest. How Christ was anointed.
Three things briefly are to be touched concerning the anointing of Christ;
wherewith he was anointed, in what manner, and whereunto. 1. We do not read,
that Christ was anointed with any external or material oil or ointment: but
his anointing was by the spirit of God, as Isa. 61. 1. The spirit of the Lord
is upon me, therefore he has anointed me, etc. 2. For the manner, he was
anointed with all graces of the spirit, abundanter, abundantly, above his
fellows, Psalm. 45. 7. and beyond measure, Ioh. 3. 34. God gives him not the
spirit by measure: and redundanter, his fullness redoundeth and ouerfloweth to
his members, Ioh. 1. 16. Of his fullness have we all received grace for grace:
like as the ointment, which was powered upon Aarons head, ran down upon his
beard, and so to the skirts of his clothing, Psalm. 133. 2. so the graces of
the spirit in our head Christ, are imparted to his members. 3. He was anointed
to be our Prophet, King, and Priest: of the first speaks the Prophet, Isa.
61. 1. Therefore has the Lord anointed me: he has sent me to preach good
tidings to the poor, etc. which prophecy our blessed Savior applies to
himself, Luke 4. 18. of his anointing to be King, speaks the Prophet, Psalm.
45. 8. Because thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity, therefore
has God thy God anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows: of
his priestly office and anointing likewise the Prophet David makes mention,
Psalm. 110. 4. Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech: and
of this his priestly anointing, this place is specially to be understood.

32. Quest. When Christ was thus anointed.
1. Lyranus generally understands the time of Christ's incarnation and
humanity, in humanitate vnctus est, etc. he was anointed in his humanity
above his fellows. 2. Pererius refers it to the first instant of his
conception, alleging those words of the Angel to Marie, That holy thing which
shall be borne of thee, shall be called the son of God. 3. Hugo Card.
indifferently would have it understood either of the time of Christ's
incarnation, or of his baptism, when his Father from heaven gave testimony
unto him, or of his resurrection, when his spiritual anointing was yet more
evidently declared. 4. But the solemn anointing of Christ was in his baptism,
when the spirit of God descended upon him in the likeness of a dove: non citra
visibile^^ pompam facta est haec Christi vn^tio, this anointing of Christ was
not done without some visible pomp, both in his baptism, and afterward in the
mountain, when his father testified of him from heaven, Bulling. for although
Christ always had the spirit of God, yet in his baptism, and afterward in the
preaching of the Gospel, the graces of the spirit did more manifest themselves
in him, Osiand. And this further may be gathered by the words going before: for
then, when Christ brought eternal righteousness, the fruit and effect of his
anointing appeared, which was by his most holy life and obedience; and by his
most holy passion, and oblation of himself, which followed immediately after.
5. Their error then appears, which would have this prophecy of the Angel
fulfilled in the end of the world: for Christ shall not then be again
anointed: his anointing was in his first coming, it shall not be in the
second.

Here follows the explanation of the most difficult and obscure prophecy of
Daniels 70. weeks.
33. Quest. Of the obscurenes and difficulty of this prophecy.
How dark, hid, and obscure this prophecy is, may appear by these three
arguments. 1. the opinion and sentence of the ancient learned interpreters
thereof. 2. the diversity of interpretations which are given. 3. the
difficulties and doubts in the prophecy it self.

1. Hierome upon those words of Daniel, v. 25. Know thou and understand, thus
writes, Si Gabriel suscitat animum Danielis, etc. If Gabriel do ro^ze up the
mind of Daniel (that was a Prophet) to understand the prophecy, what should
we do, that have not any such prophetical light, Tract. 29 in Matthew.
etc. Likewise Origin says, sermonem Danielis de septuaginta hebdomadis, etc.
Daniels speech of the seventy weeks none can make plain, as it would
require, but the spirit of God, which taught Daniel this mystery, etc.
Hereupon Hierome rehearsing diverse opinions of others about the exposition of
these weeks, forbeareth to set down his own: And Augustine, falling into
mention of this prophecy, of purpose seems to pass it over in diverse
places, as epist. 80. ad Hesych. lib. 18. de ci^it. Dei. c. 34. as not
satisfying himself in the right understanding thereof.

2. The great variety of interpretations, which are very many, as they follow
to be declared in the next question, is an evident demonstration of the
obscurity thereof.

3. And beside the uncertainty of foreign stories, which fell out in the change
of three Monarchies, the Persian, Grecian, and Roman: (for it being an hard
thing to find the true reckoning and computation of years in one kingdom, it
must needs be more difficult, to find a true account in laying together the
years of diverse Monarchies:) Beside this uncertainty, there are four other
principal difficulties in the prophecy it self. 1. when these 70. weeks
should begin. 2. when they determine and have an end. 3. whether the space
coming between the beginning and end, consisting of 490. years, does
precisely contain so many, neither more, nor fewer. 4. how all these things,
prophesied here of the Messiah, were fulfilled and accomplished in this limited
time. Now notwithstanding these difficulties, I will proceed by Gods grace, to
make some way for the better understanding of this great mystery: wherein I
will gather together the most probable opinions of learned interpreters,
approouing in my judgment the best.

34. Quest. Of the diverse interpretations of Daniels weeks, with an answer to
the cavil of the Jews concerning the dissension of our interpreters.
The diverse opinions here of writers about the beginning of the seventy
weeks, may be sorted into three ranks. 1. Some make them to begin before
Cyrus: 2. some pitch their beginning at Cyrus: 3. and some begin the
reckoning after Cyrus, under the reign of other Persian kings.

1. They which begin the computation of these years before the times of
Cyrus: 1. some count these 70. weeks, by weeks not of seven years, but of
ten times seven, for every year taking ten, and begin their reckoning
from the beginning of the world: so that 70. weeks shall make 4900. years
from the creation of the world unto Christ: thus Origin. hom. 29. in Matthew. 2.
Some will have these weeks take beginning from the 4. year of Zedekiah, 7.
years before the great captivity, which was in the 11. year of Zedekiahs
reign, for then the word, they say, came forth by Jeremy, namely the
prophecy and promise of their deliverance after 70. years, which was in the
4. year of Zedekiah: which they thus gather: Ierem. 29. 10. this prophecy of
70. years captivity is declared: which was in the 4. year of Zedekiah, c.
28. 1. of this opinion are Lyranus, Paulus Burgens. upon this place, Vatablus
in his annotations, and Petrus Galatinus, lib. 4. de arc anis fidei, c. 15. 3.
R. Salamon begins to reckon these weeks from the destruction of the Temple,
as Lyranus reports and confuteth his opinion.

2. Of the second sort are these. 1. Some will have them begin in the first
year of Darius, at the time when this word came unto Daniel, so Tertullian
lib. aduers. Iudaeos. and Pintus. 2. some from the time that Cyrus set forth
his edict for the peoples return, as Clemens Alexandrin. 1. lib. stromat. of
this opinion are Calvin, Melancthon, lunius in the first edition in his
annotations upon this place: H. Br. upon Daniel: And it shall appear of all
the rest to be the more probable.

3. Concerning those which set the beginning of these weeks after the reign
of Cyrus: whereas there were three other edicts beside that of Cyrus, which
gave liberty to build the Temple and city, which are mentioned, Ezra. 6. 1.
Ezra. 7. and Nehem. 2. hereupon, some think that these 70. weeks must be
reckoned from the 2. year of Darius Hystaspis, the 3. king of Persia, so
Eusebius lib. 8. de demonstr. Evang. Cyrillus cateches. 12. Driedo lib. 3. de
sacr. Scriptur. c. 5. par. 4. Iansenius c. 122. concord. Euang. 2. Some take
the 20. year of this Darius, Pelican. 3. Some count from Xerxes the 4. king
of Persia, whom Josephus thinks to have sent Ezra in the 7. year of his
reign: ex Bulling. 4. Some take the seventh year of Artaxerxes Longimanus the
fifth king: which opinion Pererius ascribes to Theodoret, so also Bullinger
holds, and Pap. 5. Some appoint the 20. year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, when
Nehemiah was sent with a new commission, Nehem. 2. so Chrysostom, Beda,
Africanus, Hugo, Pererius, Osiander: whereas this was Artaxerxes Mncmon, the
seventh king, not Longimanus, the fifth king of Persia, that sent Nehemiah. 6.
Some do begin the account, the second year of Darius Nothus, so called
because he was a bastard, the sixth king of Persia, so Iunius in his commentary
upon Daniel. Ios. Scallig. l. 6. de emend. temp. Polan. Edw. Lively in his
Persian Monarchy. 7. Lastly, Apollinaris long after these, counts the
beginning of the 70. weeks, from the time of Christ's birth and nativity: So
in all there are in effect ten several opinions, about the beginning these
weeks.

As touching the end and determination of these years, there are likewise
diverse opinions. 1. Some think that 69. of these weeks expired at such time
as Pompey took Jerusalem, and entered into the Temple, slaying such as
sacrificed, presuming even to the most holy place, and end the last week in
Traian the Emperor, until which time the preaching of the Apostles continued,
John surviuing even unto the reign of the Emperor Traian, Eusebius. 2. Some
beginning these weeks in the 6. year of Darius Hystaspis, do end them at
such time as Herod usurped the kingdom, Oecolamp. consenting with Eusebius. 3.
Some do determine these years in the nativity and birth of Christ, of this
opinion Hierome reports Origin to have been, lib. 10. stromat. so also
Ioannes Driedo, Iansenius, Melancthon. 4. Many draw these years, in the
passion of Christ, as Burgensis, Vatablus, Petrus Galatinus, begin these
years, in the fourth year of Zedekiah, and end them in the passion of
Christ: so Beda, Africanus, beginning at the 20. of Artaxerxes, end at the
passion of Christ. 5. Some end them in the 4. year after the passion of
Christ, as Lyranus, who reckons them from the 20. year of king Artaxerxes,
unto the 4. year, supposing the Messiah to have suffered in the mids of the
last prophetical week: so also Ioannes Lucidus, Pintus. 6. Some refer the
end of these weeks to the destruction on of Jerusalem by Titus, as
Tertullian, Chrsyostome, Clemens Alexandrin. and of the new writers, Iunius,
Scalliger, Polanus, Lively. 7. Some determine them after the passion of Christ,
extending them to the final destruction of the city under Adrian the
Emperor, as some of the Hebrews. 8. Some will have these weeks reach unto
the end of the world to the coming of Antichrist: as Apollinaris, who
begins them at the nativity of Christ, and continues them to the end of
the world.

Thus are interpreters diuersely carried in the interpretation of these
prophetical weeks: which afterward shall in their order be examined. Hereupon
the Jews, as namely cauilling Barbinel, to annihilate this prophecy, object
the difference and dissension of the Christians, about the meaning thereof: But
it may be answered, 1. that the diversity of opinions among interpreters,
does not evacuate or extenuate the authority of Scripture, Calvin. 2. Though
in the particular account of time, there be some disagreement, yet herein most
Christian interpreters agree, that all these years expired, either in the
birth or passion of Christ, or in the destruction of Jerusalem. So that which
account soever be received, two maine points are proved against the Jews: one
that the Messiah is come, the other that he came not as a glorious or
victorious temporal Prince, as the Jews imagine, but he was slain by them,
and put to death, Pappus. 3. This objection may be retorted upon themselves:
for even there is great dissension among their own Rabbines: Ab. Ezra holds
there were but sour kings of Persia, R. Moses says there were five, R.
Saad^ah three only: So they also differ about their years: Ab. Ezra holds
the Persian Monarchy to have continued 61. years: Abraham Dauison, but 51.
the most of the Hebrews give but 50. years to the Persian Monarchy, Ed.
Lively, p. 34. And in many other points are the Rabbines divided in opinion: so
that herein they may forbear to object unto the Christians their dissension.
4. And thus may the objection of the Gentiles be answered, which take exception
to the Christians, because of their dissension and difference in this and other
points: as Josephus gives instance of the dissensions of the heathen
historians among themselves, In quot locis Hellanicus de genealogijs and
temporibus ab Acusilao discrepat, etc. in how many places does Hellanicus
differ from Acusilaus concerning genealogies and times: and in how many does
Acusilaus correct Hesiodus: Ephorus in many things finds Hellanicus to be
deceived: and Timeus, Ephorus: and Timeus, those that followed him: and all
Herodotus: thus Joseph. contra Appion.

Quest. 35. What Chronology and computation of time is to be followed in the
account of the 70. weeks which make 490. years.
1. First, the computation which the Hebrews follow is very imperfect and
uncertain, and worthy of small credit concerning the Persian Monarchy: for
they make but four kings of Persia, Cyrus, Cambyses, Assuerus, Darius, and
generally hold, that the Persian Monarchy continued not above 50. years:
whereas beside these there is evident mention made of Artaxerxes or Artashasht,
and of the 32. year of his reign, Nehem. 5. 14. But to remove this doubt,
Ab. Ezra will have Assuerus and Artaxerxes to be all one: yet R. Moses makes
them two sundry kings, and so thinks that there were five in all: so well
the Rabbines agree together.

2. There is an other chronicle, which Annius Viterbiens. has set forth under
the names of the ancient writers, Berosus, Manethon, Metasthones, Philo: who
numbreth but 8. kings of the Persians, and gives unto that whole Empire 191.
years: But as in other things that Chronology is found to be false and
imperfect, as Pererius has showed at large in his 11. book upon Daniel: as
namely, in this that he makes Philo, in a certain, book called the
Breuiarie, to affirm that the posterity of Solomon ended in Achazia, and that
Ioas, which succeeded was not the son of Achazia, but descended of Nathan:
whereas it is directly set down, 1. Chron. 3. 11. that Ioas was the son of
Achazia: beside this, and other such slippes, this apparent error is committed
in the Persian Monarchy, that reckoning but 8. kings, he omitteth three which
were most famous among them, namely, Cambyses, Darius Hystaspis, and Xerxes,
whom to deny to have been kings of Persia were all one, as to say, that
Augustus and Tiberius were not Emperors of Rome.

3. There is an other way to make this account, by setting down the years of
the several kings of Persia, and so of the Grecians: but there is also small
certainty of this: for that the several years of diverse kings in three
Monarchies, cannot certainly be gathered, because of the change and alteration
of the state and kingdom, and many times there was an interregnum, or
intermission of the government: and some kings reigned only certain months:
so that the time of one king ran within the account of an others reign.

4. Beside the Hebrews have an other kind of reckoning, by the years of their
high Priests, which succeeded one another unto the time of Herod, under whom
Christ was borne: which account seems Montanus to follow in his apparatus,
in the treatise called Daniel: the whole sum there gathered from the first of
Cyrus to the birth of Christ is 433. years or thereabout: But this account
must needs be more uncertain, then the former by the years of the kings,
especially in those tumultuous and troublesome times after the Macchabees, when
the high priesthood was bought and sold.

5. We come now unto the Roman co^putation, which was accounted these two
ways, by the years from the first building of Rome, and afterward by their
Consulls: But seeing Rome was of no great reputation, while the Persian and
Grecian Monarchy stood, neither of these accounts can give any certain
direction concerning the affairs of those kingdoms: And thus much Plutarke
confesses in the life of Camillus, having declared the received opinion, that
Rome was taken by the French about the 360. year of the city* if it seem
credible (says he) that an exact account of these times, had been so long
preserved seeing that even the confusion of that time, has brought some doubt
and controversy to the latter: And he gives this reason of his doubt, because
the common opinion was, that the taking of the city was in the 365. year of
Rome, and the first of the 98. Olympiad but whereas the fame of that war was
spread abroad in Greece, and came to the hearing of Aristotle, and Heraclides
Ponticus, who lived in the time of Philip king of Macedon, who reigned about
the 105. Olympiad, this war falls out 27. years after the usual
reckoning: In his Persian Monarchy, page 125.
M. Lively to salve the credit of the Latin computation, says, that there
were two battles made by the French, and it was the latter of them, the report
whereof came to Aristotle's hearing: But it is like, that Plutarke would not
have omitted this matter, to have made sound the Roman Chronology: and it was
not a battle with the French, but the taking of the city by them, the fame
whereof was bruited abroad: Beside an other instance may be given of the
uncertainty of the Roman Chronology: Plutarke refers the beginning of the
Peloponne siake war in Greece, to the 300, year of the building of Rome, 3.
book. c. 1. whereas Aulus Gellius. l. 71. c. 21. brings it to the 329.
year: M. Lively here answeareth, that vigesimum nonum, twenty nine, by the
slip of the writers pen, is put for decimum nonum, ninteene, p. 105.
whereas, beside that there is small affinity, between these two words,
vigesimum, and decimum, that one lightly by the writer could not be taken for
an other, yet this being admitted, there remains still the odds of 19. or
20. years, which is a great difference in the story of times. As great
uncertainty there is in reckoning by the years of the Consuls: as Senerus
Sulpitius lib. 2. sacr. histor, says, that Christ was borne, when Sabinus and
Ruffinus were Consuls: Cassiodorus, when Cneus Lentulus, and Marcus Messala
were colleagues in the Consulshippe: Epiphanius hears. 51. when Augustus was
the 13. time Consul, and Marcus Plautius Sylvanus. So Augustine thinks that
Christ died that year, when C. Rubellius, and C. Fusius were Consuls, lib. 18.
de ciuitat. Dei. c. 54. but Onuphryus assigns the year, when Servius
Sulpitius Galba, and Lucius Cornelius Sulla were in office: so also M. Lively,
but both are deceived: for the first were Consuls in the 15. year of Tiberius,
the other in the 19. years, whereas Christ suffered in the 18. year of
Tiberius: And further, there is great uncertainty thoroughout the Roman
Chronology of the Consuls, that in the space of 700. years, there is hardly
one year to be found, wherein the historians agree who should be Consuls:
Liuius, Cassiodorus, Sulpitius, Dio, Diodorus Siculus, the Capitoline tables,
that were dug up out of the ground under Paulus the 3. ann. 46. composed as
it is thought by Verrius Flaccus, do all differ one from another, concerning
the names of the yearly Consuls; as is extant in the Roman Chronology,
collected out of diverse authors by Ioachimus Grellius joined unto Livies
history.

6. There remains then the Greek reckonings by their Olympiads, which were
certain games of running, wrestling, leaping, celebrated every 4. year about
July in Greece, in a certain place called Olympia so called, because there
Hercules first instituted these solemn games to the honor of Iuppiter
Olympius: which being discontinued a long time, were after renewed by Iuphitus
king of that country, about 705. years before the birth of Christ, and so
continued a 1000. years after: This account by the Olympiads is resolved upon
to be the best by Pererius, M. Linely, Bullinger, and others: whereof now
follows more in the next question.

Quest. 36. Whether the account of the Olympiake years be a certain direction
for the understanding of Daniels weeks.
1. Here are three opinions to be discussed. 1. Some, as the Hebrews, do
utterly reject the Greeks Olympiads, making no account of them. 2. Some do
make them the only help, and key to unlock the shut up and hid meaning of
Daniels weeks, Lively p. 36. So Bullinger, certissimae sunt omnium
supputationes, quae fiunt per Olympiades, the supputations made by the
Olympiades are of all other most certain, etc. and Pererius calls it,
chronologiam omnium certissimam, the chronology of all other most certain. 3.
But the mean opinion between these is the best, that there is small
certainty in the Olympiades concerning the Persian Monarchy, though for the
Greek affairs that computation may safely be received: and this is the
judgment of M. Calvin, hoc non potest certo trahi ad imperium Persarum, this
computation by the Olympike years (howsoever it may serve for the Grecians)
yet it cannot be applied to the Persian Empire, to know thereby at what time the
kings of Persia began and ended their reign, etc. So the Olympike reckoning
in part is to be received, in part it is so small certainty.

1. Conceruing the first of these opinions, that no respect is at all to be had
to the Olympiake years, which is the fancy of the Hebrews, it is utterly to
be misliked: for after the end of the prophetical writings, the Scriptures
being altogether silent, what direction will they have especially for foreign
histories? Oecolampadius here resolves well, that after the city Jerusalem
was repaired, iam desicientibus Prophetis cum Malachia and Ezra, (...) Prophets
then ending with Malachie and Ezra, there is no credit to be given unto the
Hebrews in the supputation of their years. 2. Neither is the second opinion
generally to be received, that the computation of this time is altogether to be
directed, and in a manner ouerruled by the Olympiake reckoning: Here first the
arguments shall be examined, which are brought for the certain authority of
the Olympiads, and then some contrary reasons shall be produced, to show the
inualiditie of them.

1. As touching the names and number of the Persian kings, that the certainty
thereof may be gathered from the Greeks, it is thus argued: because many
excellent writers, and learned men, Philosophers, and Historiographers lived
under the kings of Persia, and knew their affairs; as the seven wisemen of
Greece, Thales, Solon, Chilon, Pittacus, Bias, Cleobulus, Periander, lived in
the time of Cyrus: Pythagoras, Zenophanes, Anaximander, Heraclitus, with
others, flourished under Cambyses, and Darius: Socrates, Thucidides, Euripides,
under Artaxerxes: Beside the courts of the Persian kings were frequented by
many noble Grecians, as by Hippias, Demaratus, Miltiades: and therefore the
names and number of the Persian kings, was well known to them of Greece: thus
M. Lively from page 43. to page 46. But this is no sufficient argument for the
matter in question. 1. It follows not, though these learned Philosophers and
historians lived in the time of the Persian kings, and some of them frequented
their Courts, that therefore they had a certain knowledge of them all. These
kings of Persia, with whom the Grecians had to do, were known unto them: but
neither all of them, nor yet to all those forenamed Philosophers and writers
were they exactly known. 2. An evident instance hereof may be given in
Xenophon, who writes that Cyrus died in his bed, and made a wise exhortation
to his children, whereas it is generally received, that he was slain by
Tomyris, as Iustine writes. 3. And though the name and number of the Persian
kings had been known to the Grecians, yet the years of their reign they
much regarded not, because they being a vainglorious nation, followed their
own Olympike reckoning.

2. Now for the truth and certainty of the Olympiads one demonstration is
taken from the time when Cyrus began his reign, which was in the 55.
Olympiad, from whence to the 114. Olympiad, when Alexander died, are counted
236. years, whereof 6. years must be allowed to the Empire of Alexander after
he overcame Darius, so M. Lively, page 48. and Pererius lib. 11. quest. 2. But
this demonstration may be thus excepted against. 1. Clemens Alexand. places
the destruction of the temple which was in the 19. year of Nebuchadnezzar, in
the last year of the 47. Olympiad, lib. 1. stromat. the 55. Olympiad follows
just 30. years after: if then Cyrus began to reign, how shall the 70.
years of the Babylonian captivity be made up, which began in the 8. year
of Nebuchadnezzar, with the captivity of Iechoniah: or if we begin the
captivity in the 4. year, when Nebuchadnezzar took Jerusalem, in the reign
of Iehoiachim, 2. king. 24. 2. there will not arise by this account 50. years
in all for the captuitie. 2. Pererius begins the first Olympiad in the 8.
year of the reign of Ahaz: (and yet some begin the Olympiads in the 2.
year of Iotham who reigned 16. years, that is, 23. years before that,
Bullinger.) then cannot Cyrus reign be referred to the 55. Olympiad, for the
distance between the 1. and 55. Olympiad, makes 216. years: but there only
were expired, 205. years: as it may be thus gathered: from the 8. year of
Ahaz unto the 11. year of Iehoiachim, when Iechonias captivity began, are an
135. years, and from thence to Cyrus 70. years, which make 205. years, then
must the beginning of Cyrus reign be pulled back an 11. years from the 55.
Olympiad to the 2. of the 52. Olympiad.

3. An other demonstration is taken from comparing the Olympike years with the
building of Rome: Persian Monarchy, p. 75.
M. Lively out of Dyonisius Halycarnasseus his 5. book alleges that the 31.
year of Darius Hystaspis, concurred with the 72. Olympiad, and 262. year of
Rome. This account is just if we begin the Olympiads in the second year of
Iotham, for Rome is held to have been builded in the first of the 7. Olympiad,
which was in the tenth year of Achaz: but Pererius brings the 7. Olympiad to
the sixteenth year of Hezekiah, 23. years after, so that by his reckoning the
31. of Darius shall fall out 23. years later, about the 4. year of the 77.
Olympiad. And further, how well the Greek Olympiads and the years of the
bonding of Rome agree together, appears by the dissension of writers in what
Olympiad Rome should first be founded: Timeus Siculus thinks that Rome was
built at the same time, that Carthage was in Africa by the Tyrians, which was
38. year before the first Olympiad. Titus Liuius, Clemens Alexandrinus, and
Solinus set the building of Rome in the 4. year of the 6. Olympiad: Pomponius
Atticus, Cicero, Pliny, with others, in the 3. year of the same Olympiad:
Dyonisius Halycarnass. Eratosthenes, Theophilus, Antiochenus, in the 1. year
of the 7. Olympiad. Polybius, Diod. Siculus, in the 2. year of the 7.
Olympiad. Q. Fabius an ancient writer of the Roman affairs, (...)
in the 1. year of the 8. Olympiad. L. Cincius in the 4. year of the 12.
Olympiad: The odds between the first account and the last is above 80.
years: for 12. Olympiads make 48. years, and some think that Rome was
founded 38. years before the first Olympiad: some not before the 4. year of
the 12. Olympiad.

4. But yet a more evident proof is taken from the course of the Sun, which
was eclipsed in the 7. year of Cambyses, which was in the second year of the
64. Olympiad: there was an other eclipse, which happened an eleven days before
Alexanders last battle with Darius, in the sixth year of his reign: between
these two eclipses there are found by exact calculation, an 192. years, which
with Cyrus 30. and Cambyses 7. years make 229. which was the full time of the
Persian Monarchy: And hereupon he concludes thus, thus the glorious servant
of the world the Sun, etc. even this Chronologer I say, of all other without
exception most true and sure, witnesses for Herodotus, Thucydides, etc.

Contra. 1. Indeed, if all these supposalls were true, that these two eclipses
happened in those years, to the which they are assigned, and that such
distance were found between them, and Cyrus with Cambyses reigned so long, the
conclusion for that continuance of the Persian Monarchy were very strong: but
all these are uncertain, first that Cambyses and Cyrus reigned so long, 37.
years between them: Iunius gives unto them together but 9. years: Bullinger
14. years: secondly, whether such an eclipse fell out in the reign of
Cambyses, and not rather before, may be likewise doubted: thirdly, whether that
distance were not rather taken between two other eclipses then these, it
likewise may be a question: he speaks of an other eclypse which was an 141.
years after that, supposed to be in Cambyses time, which Diodorus Siculus
places in the 2. of the 99. Olympiad. 2. But although the Sun be most sure
in his course, there is a Sun which is more true and steadfast, even the
Sunne-light of the truth which shines in the Scriptures, and in this prophecy
of Daniel, which calculateth but 490. years from the word going forth, which
was the commandment of Cyrus, unto the Messiah, which time cannot be justly
gathered, if 200. years or above be given to the Persians: Now on the
contrary side this may be objected against the certainty of the Olympiads.

1. Seeing it is confessed, that the Olympike games, were first erected by
Hercules, and then discontinued a long time until Iphitus, who renewed them,
is it not as likely, that they might be interrupted afterward, as before? and
the rather because of the great wars which the Grecians had with the
Persians, and the Peloponnesiake civil war, which continued 27. years among
themselves: in which troublesome times it may be supposed, they had no great
leisure or desire to solemnize their Olympike games, all Grecia being in an
vproare.

2. Plutark in the life of Numa, makes some doubt of the Olympike reckonings
in regard of the beginning thereof being committed to writing very late by
Hippias of Elis: to this it is answered, that although Hippias should begin
the Olympiads somewhat too late: as put the case that he make that the 40.
Olympiad, which was but the thirtieth, yet the distances of time between the
Olympiads shall not miss one lotte: so Temporanus, and M. Lively, page 89. But
howsoever the distances and spaces of time may be kept, yet there must needs
be a manifest error in the computation, if those things be referred to a later
time, which were formerly done: As the question being of the beginning of the
Persian Monarchy, if it be set at the 55. Olympiad, when it began much
sooner, a great error will fall out in history, and one error admitted in
chronicle will breed many.

3. It is uncertain when the Olympiades began: Bullinger holds they
began in the 2. year of Iotham, and M. Lively seems to be of the same
opinion, who makes the 31. year of Darius Hystaspis, and the 72. Olympiad to
concur together, which cannot be, unless he begin the Olympiads in the 2.
of Iotham, as is evidently scene in Bullingers first and third Chronicle table,
Eusebius begins the Olympiads in the 49. year of Azaria, Glareanus in the
50. Lucidus in the 46. year, Paulus Phrygio in the 12. of Iotham, Bibliander
in the 13. Functius in the 2. of Iotham: so also Africanus, which seems the
most probable: But Pererius sets the beginning of the Olympiades 23. years
after, in the 8. year of Achaz, as is showed before.

4. If foreign writers be compared together, great difference will be found in
the account of years by the Olympiads, as this one instance here may suffice
concerning the time wherein Pythagoras lived: Dyonisius says he taught in
Italy about the 50. Olympiad: Diogenes Laertius writes that he flourished in
the 60. Olympiad: here is a distance of 40. years: Solinus brings him to the
time of the first Consuls, which was about the 68. Olympiad: but Pliny puts
him back an 100. years, from the time assigned by Solinus: the like
difference in other matters may appear by diligent search in foreign
historians, in the reckoning of the Olympike years: The like difference is
found among the Christians in the Olympike reckoning: Cyrillus chateches. 12.
places Christ's birth in the 186. Olympiad: Joseph. Scallig. and M. Lively, in
the 3. year of the 194. Olympiad: Pererius, and the most beside, in the 4.
year of the 194. Olympiad.

5. But the chief objection of all is, that the Olympian account agrees not
with the Scripture: for if Nehemiah saw both the beginning of the Persian
Monarchy, as is evident, Ezra. 2. 2. he was one of those which returned from
the captivity according to the edict of Cyrus: and lived to see the end of
that Monarchy, as he makes mention of Darius the last king of Persia, under
whom Iaddua was high Priest, who met Alexander, who is also named in the same
place, Nehem. 12. 22. then could not the Persian Monarchy continue 230.
years, as is gathered by the Olympike computation: for then Nehemiah, who may
be supposed to have been 20. year old when he returned from Chaldea, should
be, 250 year old, which age was not incident into those times: But this shall
be showed more at large afterward: This shall suffice concerning the Olympike
supputation of years.

3. Now the third opinion remains, propounded in the begnning of this
question: that the Olympike computation may be admitted concerning the affairs
of the Greeks, and the continuance of their Monarchy, as of the Kings of
Syria, and Egypt: but they can give no certain direction concerning the kings
of Persia, the years of their reign, and continuance of their Empire. To know
then the certainty hereof, first, we must have recourse unto the sacred
history: foreign historians are so to be followed, as that no contradiction be
admitted to the Scriptures: then where the Scripture leaves us, foreign
witnesses are to be received: Now seeing it is collected that the reign of the
Grecians from Alexander unto Cleopatra Q. of Egypt, continued about 300.
years, and from thence to the death of Christ the Romans ruled 60. years, H.
Br. ^roleg. in Daniel, there can remain but an 130. years for the Monarchy
of the Persians, to make up the sum of Daniels 70. weeks, that is, 490.
years. So then thus far we are directed by the holy story, as is showed
before by the age and life of Nehemias, who saw the beginning and end of the
Persian Monarchy, that it could not continue 200. years or above, the rest
must be supplied out of the Greek and Latin historians.

Here then two erroneous opinions are to be touched, the one of Varro, who
until the beginning of the Olympiads, holds no certainty of time to be
gathered: for he distinguishes the age of the world into these 3. times,
before the flood, which he says is altogether unknown, after the ^^ood unto
the Olympike years, which time he calls (...), fabulous, and full of tales:
the third from the beginning of the Olympiads, which time he calls (...),
historical, as certain and true: whereas the contrary is evident: that the
history of time from the beginning of the world, until somewhat after the
Olympiads, is most certain out of the prophetical writings: but there is no
certainty of the times following, because the prophetical writings were
ceased.

The other opinion is of Paulus Burgans. In 9. Daniel. addit. 3.
who thus advises, de quibus non habetur historia sacrae Scripturae,
recurratur ad historia^ authentica^ specialit^r Hebraeorum, whereof there is no
history of the sacred Scripture, we must have recourse to the authentical
histories, specially of the Hebrews: But Burgens. being a conuerned Jew
himself, does ascribe too much to the historical accounts of his nation:
whereas, after their Prophets ceased, there ^re no more uncertain, false, and
fabulous Chronicles, then those of the Hebrews are: As appears by that one
instance of the number of the Persian kings, whom they generally h^ld to have
been but four.

This then remains as the best resolution concerning this matter, what
Chronology is to be followed in the computation of Daniels weeks: that it is
safest to take direction of the Scriptures, so far as they proceed in the
history of the Persians, and then to use the help of the Olympiads, and other
foreign histories, for the rest of the years. And yet further to show what
small certentie is to be found in the historical accounts of the Gentiles
concerning the Persiah Monarchy, it shall not be amiss, before we come to
examine the true reckoning of Daniels weeks, briefly to show the great
diversity of writers, both of the number, and years of the Persian kings.

37. Quest. Of the names and number of the Persian kings.
1. Hierome, whom the Latin historians and interpreters follow, numbreth 14.
kings of the Persians, as they are set down in order before, qu. 17. upon the
7. chap. so also Pererius follows the same account, and Oecolampad. in which
number are comprehended Smerdes that succeeded Cambyses, and Artabanus, who
killed Xerxes, both being usurpers: and Xerxes the second, who reigned 2.
months, and Sogdianus 7. months between Artaxerxes Longimanus, and Darius
Nothus. These partly because they were usurpers, partly for their short reign,
are not to be counted among the Persian kings, for the history of time.

2. As the Latins exceed in number, so the Hebrews come as far short, Some
of them do make only three kings of Persia, Cyrus, Assuerus, Darius: and
whereas mention is made beside, Ez^. 4. 7. of Artaxerxes, and then of an other
Artashasht, or Artaxerxes, Ez^. 7. 1. they say that the first Artaxerxes was
the same with Assuerus, and the second with Darius: So R. Saad^a, and R.
Davison. Some of them number four kings, Cyrus, Assuerus, Artaxerxes, Darius:
Ab. Ezra. Some count five, as R. Moses. But all these are evidently convinced
of untruth by the history of Ezra, and Nehemia, as may thus appear. First, it
is clear that Xerxes was the fourth king of Persia, mentioned Dan. 11. 2. who
should be richer then the rest. Then after this Xerxes the fourth king,
succeeded Artaxerxes surnamed Longimanus, because he had one hand longer then
an other: then followed Darius surnamed Nothus, because he was the base son
of Longimanus: after him reigned an other Artaxerxes, who was surnamed Mnemon,
of his singular memory: there is mention made yet further of an other Darius,
who was the last king of the Persians, Nehem. 12. 22. Thus it is evident that
there were more kings of Persia then the Hebrews imagine, as may be gathered
out of the Scripture.

3. Some name but 8. kings of Persia in all: As 1. Cyrus. 2. Artaxerxes
Assuerus. 3. Darius with the long hand. 4. Darius Nothus. 5. Artaxerxes Mnemon.
6. Artaxerxes Ochus. 7. Arses. 8. Darius* so Annius Vite^biens. But in this
account are omitted two famous kings of the Persians: Darius Hystaspis, and
Xerxes his son.

4. Some make but nine, which they thus number, Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius
Hystaspis, Xerxes, Artaxerxes Longima^^us, Darius Nothus, Artaxerxes Mnemon,
Ochus, Darius Codomannus: Joseph. Scalliger: But here is omitted Arses, the
last king but one, who succeeded Ochus.

5. Some do set down ten kings of the Persians: namely, all these before
rehearsed: so Bulling. but the leaves out S^erdes the usurper, who succeeded
Cambyses, and reigned not one year, but only certain months.

6. Beroaldus, whom H. Br. follows, reckons 11. kings of Persia, agreeing
in the number, but he misseth in the order: for thus he places them: Cyrus,
Assuerus Artaxerxes, Darius Assyrius, Artaxerxes pins, then Xerxes, the fifth,
then the other six in order: But in this account he makes Xerxes the rich
king of Persia the fifth king, who in Daniel is the fourth, c. 11. 2. and he
supposes him to have been the son of Artaxerxes pins, who was indeed the
son of Darius.

7. Iuni^s sets down the Persian kings in this order. 1. Cyrus. 2. Cambyses
his son. 3. Smerdes, who usurped the kingdom a year. 4. Darius Hystaspis. 5.
Xerxes. 6. Artaxerxes Longhand. 7. Darius the bastard. 8. Artaxerxes Mnemon. 9.
Darius Ochus. 10. Arses. 11. Darii^s Codomannus, whom Alexander overcame. Iun.
But if Smerdes be counted for one, then Xerxes should be the fifth, not the
fourth king, as Dan. 11. 2. Thus much for the uncertainty of the names and
number of the Persian Kings.

38. Quest. Of the uncertainty of the years of the Persian Monarchy, and of
the Persian kings.
1. Concerning the continuance of the Persian Monarchy* the Hebrews generally
give unto it not above 50. years: Tertullian an 107. years: Isidor. lib. 5.
etymolog. an 180. Annius, Lucidus, Driedo, an 190. Dyonisius Halycar. lib. de
Romans Antiquit. 200. years, and somewhat above: Clemens Alex. lib. 1. stromat.
215. Severus Sulpit. lib. 2. sacr. histor. 250. Lyranus 230. so also M. Lively:
Pererius 232. Iunius in his last edition, 201. but in the first he reckons
for the whole time of the Persian Monarchy but an 129. years: Beroaldus whom
H. Br. follows, an 130. which seems to be the best computation for the
reason before alleged, namely, Nehemiahs age.

2. Now there is as great diversity in the several reigns of the kings,
Cyrus some think to have reigned 30. years, as Cicero lib. 1. de diuinatio.
Clemens lib. 1. stromat. Iustine, Eusebius: Sulpitius gives unto him 31.
Herodotus 29. Annius, Driedo, and Lucidus, 22. years, after Darius the Mede:
Xenophon yields him but 7. years: Bullinger 16. the Hebrews generally but
three, namely in the Persian Monarchy; he might reign before diverse years in
the kingdom of Persia: M. Lydyat aloweth to Cyrus 30. year over Persia, and
7. over the whole Monarchy: Cambyses reigned 8. years as some think,
Herodotus, Eusebius, Bullinger: as some but 6. years, Josephus lib. 11.
antiquit: as some 9. years, Sulpitius: as others 19. years, Clemens
Alexandrin, Iunius gives unto Cyrus and Cambyses together but 9. years in his
annotations, both in his first and last edition: M. Lydyat 17. years: Smerdes
who usurped the kingdom, fayning himself to be the brother of Cambyses,
reigned but 7. months, as Herodotus, so also Lydyat 10 months as Theodoret: a
whole year as Josephus, Iunius. Darius the son of Hystaspis reigned 19.
years, as Tertullian: 30. years as Orosius: 31. M. Lydyat: 46. years as
Clemens Alexandrin. 36. years as Herodotus lib. 2. Sulpitius lib. 2. Eusebius:
12. years according to Ab. Ezra. Iunius in his first edition gives him
twenty years, 36. in his last: Xerxes is supposed to have reigned 20. years,
as Oecolampad. Lydyat. 21. as Diodorus, Sulpitius. Orosius: 26. as Clemens
Alexandrin. lib. 1. stromat. 22. years, Iun. edition. 3. Artaxerxes Longimanus
reigned 37. Melancthon ex Metasthene. Iun. edition. 1. 40. Pererius agreeing
with the most historians, 44. as Bullinger: 46. as M. Lydyat. 40. years, Iun.
edition. 3^ Darius Nothus reigned 8. years, as Clemens Alexand. and H. Br.
proleg. in Da^iel. 60. years, as Phylostratus, lib. 1. de vit. Apollon. 19.
years according to Eusebius, Beda, Bullinger, M. Lydyat, with others. 18.
years, Iun. edit. 1. 19. years Iun. edit. 3. Artaxerxes Mnemon reigned 40.
Perer. Oecolampad. 43. as M. Lively, M. Lydyat, out of Diodorus Siculus. 62.
years as Plutarke. 36. as Bullinger. 35. as Melancthon out of Metasth. 10.
years, Iun. edit. 1. 3. years, edit. 3. Ochus reigned 3. years, as H. Br. in
proleg. in Dan. 23. years according to Tertullian, and Diodorus Siculus, and
Iun. edit. 3. 22. edit. 1. and M. Lydyat. 24. years as Sulpit. 26. years, as
Eusebius, Beda, Melancthon, Bulling. Arses, or Arsanes the son of Ochus,
reigned 1. year, according to Tertullian. 3. years, as Sulpit. Diodor. so
also Iun. edit, 1. and 3. and M. Lydyat. 4. years, as Eusebius. Beda. Darius the
last, reigned 3. years, as Clemens. 4. years, as Sulpit. 5. years, as Iun.
edit. 3. 6. years, as Eusebius. Beda. 21. years, as Tertullian.

Now then if we lay the years of these Persian kings together, first the
smallest numbers of their reign, and then the greatest, it will appear what
great odds there is in the account. According to some According to others
Cyrus reigned years 3 Cyrus reigned years 30 Cambyses 6 Cambyses 8 Darius
Hystaspis 30 Darius Hystaspis 46 Xerxes 20 Xerxes 26 Artaxerxes Longhand 37
Artaxerxes Longhand 46 Darius Nothus 8 Darius Nothus 60 Artaxerxes Mnemon 36
Artaxerxes Mnemon 62 Ochus 3 Ochus 26 Arses 1 Arses 4 Darius Codoman 3 Darius
Codoman 21 the sum is 147. years. the sum is 329. years. So then the
difference between these two accounts is of an 182. years. By this it is
evident, that there is small certentie to be had from foreign stories concerning
the Persian Monarchy, either for the names, number, or years of their kings:
whereupon Burgensis thus concludes, Historiae illorum temporum, praecip^e
regum Persarum, and Medorum, sunt plenae diversitatibus and contradictionibus,
etc. The histories of those times, specially of the Medes and Persians, are
full of diversities and contradictions, in so much that they only do not
vary in the continuance of some kings; but some histories also name some
kings, that other histories make no mention of. To this purpose Paul. Burgens.
addit. 3. in 9. Daniel. Now will we proceed to examine the several opinions,
before set down, qu. 34.

39. Quest. That Daniels weeks do signify a certain definite number of years.
This may be proved by sundry reasons, against their opinion, who do think,
that in this number of Daniels weeks, there is not signified a precise term
of years, but generally all that time, which should follow unto the coming of
the Messiah. But that a certain and definite number of years is signified and
intended by these 70. weeks, it may thus be showed.

1. That number of years whose beginning and end is expressed, must needs be
a definite and certain number, being so bounded and limited: but the beginning
and end of this term is described: they take beginning at the going forth of
the word, and they end at the Messiah.

2. The manner of phrase declares as much, 70. weeks are cut out, or
determined: the Lord had as it were cut out, severed, and appointed this time
for the coming of the Messiah, to perform these things here prophesied.

3. That number is definite and certain, which is divided into parts: but so is
this whole number of 70. weeks: it is divided into three parts, into 7.
weeks, 62. weeks, and one week.

4. This number of 70. weeks answers unto the term of 70. years, being
that number multiplied 7. times: therefore as the one is certain, so is the
other.

5. Further that time, which we are bid to observe and mark, and to attend
such things as fall out therein, must be a certain and definite time; for how
else should it be observed and marked: but such was this time here designed by
Daniel, and the events which followed it, as our Savior says, Mar. 24. 15.
When ye shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, standing in the holy place, let him which reads, consider it: But
how could the event of this prophecy be observed and considered, if some
certain direction were not given by the time to find it out?

40. Quest. That Origens account can not stand, beginning the 70. weeks at
Adam, and ending them in the destruction of Jerusalem.
1. Origin to make this account good, takes every week for 70. years, to
every day of the prophe^icall week allowing ten years: but no where in the
Scripture is a week so taken, but either for a week of days, or for a week
of years. 2. This whole sum according to his account, taking every week for
70. years, will amount to 4900. years: but the whole time from the first to
the second Adam, is not much above 4000. years, not yet so much in some
account: so that this time, according to Origens supputation, will exceed the
time of the Messiah almost 900. years. 3. It is evident that these 70. weeks
must begin at such time, as the word went forth to build again Jerusalem and
the Temple; they must not then take beginning so long before. 4. Neither are
they to be extended unto the destriction of Jerusalem, as shall be showed, when
we come to examine the several opinions, for the end of these 70. weeks.

41. Quest. That the 70. weeks must not begin before the peoples return out
of captivity.
1. Hippolytus, as Hierome sets down his opinion in his Commentary upon
this place, begins the 70. weeks fifty years before the dissoluing of the
captivity, and ends them in Christ's nativity: but this opinion can not
stand: for 1. the Angel shows, that these weeks must then begin, when the
people returned out of captivity. 2. from thence unto the Messiah are 490.
years: but if we should begin fifty years before, the number will arise to
540. years. By the same reason may be confuted the opinion of Lyranus,
Burgens. Galatinus, who begin the 70. weeks at the 4. of Zedekiah, because
then they say the promise was made from the Lord by Jeremy for the return of
the people: as is showed before, quest. 34. for 1. by this reckoning there will
be 70. years within four, all the time of the captivity, added to Daniels
prophetical weeks. 2. if they will fetch the beginning from that word and
promise, why may they not as well begin an eleven years before, when Jeremy
in the 4. year of Iehoiakim showed them of the captivity of 70. years,
Ierem. 25. 1. 11? or yet they may begin further off from that promise made
concerning Cyrus, Isa. 45. that he should cause Jerusalem to be builded again:
from which time to the end of Daniels weeks are above 700. years.

Likewise R. Salamons opinion is confuted by the same reasons: who begins
the 70. weeks from the first destruction of the Temple in the 19. year of
Nebuchadnezzer, and ends them at the destruction of the city: for 1. so
there will be found above 50. years more then the 70. weeks from the
destruction of the Temple unto the going forth of the commandment, to build
again Jerusalem. 2. seeing the Angel pitcheth the beginning at the going forth
of the word to bring again the people, and to build again Jerusalem, it is
absurd to set the beginning, when the people were carried into captivity, and
the city and Temple destroyed.

42. Quest. That the 70. weeks do not begin in the reigns of the other
kings of Persia after Cyrus.
1. From the second, or 20. year of Darius Hystaspis the 70. weeks cannot
begin. 1. for we do not read of any decree made by that Darius for the
reedifying of the Temple and city: it is Darius Longimanus in whose 2. year
the work of the house of God went forward, who is mentioned Ezr. 4. 24. As it
may be thus gathered: there are named in that chapter, v. 6, 7. two kings of
the Persians after Cyrus, Assuerus and Artashasht: then after them followed
Darius: But Darius the son of Hystaspis, was the third king of Persia. 2. In
Darius decree, mentioned Ezr. 6. there is no speech of building the city, but
of the Temple only: here the Angel speaks of the going forth of the word to
build Jerusalem. Perer.

2. Neither can the computation begin from Xerxes the 4. king of Persia, by
whom Josephus thinks first Ezra to have been sent, and afterward Nehemiah,
who is called Artaxerxes, Ezra. 7. and Nehem. 2. for Xerxes is held by the most
to have reigned but 20. years, only Clemens affoardeth him 26. years: but
mention is made of the 32. year of this Artaxerxes, Nehem. 5. 14.

3. Neither can their computation stand, which begin at the 7. year of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, when Ezra was sent with the kings letters to Jerusalem:
for, Sulpitius well observes, Ezram nihil super reficienda vrbe fecisse
comperio, etc. I do not find, that Ezra did any thing in repayring of the
city, his greatest care seems to have bin to reform the corrupt manners of
the people, etc. And whereas the king does furnish him with silver and gold,
that was rather employed for the sacrifices, and service of the Temple, then
for the building thereof. Bullinger sets down diverse reasons to confirm
his opinion, as 1. he proves that Ezra was sent to Jerusalem by Artaxerxes.
2. that Nehemiah living unto Alexanders time, as appears by the names of
Iaddua and Samballat, who lived in Alexanders reign, was sent by this
Artaxerxes, not by Darius Hystaspis, for then he should exceed an 194. years.
3. the commission given unto Ezra, c. 7. 23. thou Ezra, etc. set judges and
arbiters which may judge the people, etc. agrees with the Angels speech here:
the going out of the word, etc. 4. the time agrees, from the 7. of Artaxeres
to the death of Christ, are found just 490. years.

Contra. 1. The first is granted, being evident out of the Scripture, but
that is nothing to the purpose. 2. It is also confessed that this was
Artaxerxes Longimanus, not Darius Hystaspis: that reason then is impertinent.
3. Ezra his commission shows, that he was to reform the manners of the
people, and to set them in order, not to build the city or Temple, and
therefore it was not the going forth of the word, here spoken of, which was to
build Jerusalem. 4. It can not be showed, that this agrees with the just
computation of the 490. years: for therein lies the question.

4. Pererius with others, as namely M. Lydyat. lib. de emendat. temp. ann.
mund. 3553. would have the 70. weeks begin from the 20. year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, by whom Nehemiah was sent to repair the city, Nehem. 2. 8. which
agrees to the going forth of the word (here spoken of) to build Jerusalem: And
for the which enterprise Nehemiah is commended, Ecclus. 49.

Contra. 1. Nehemiah did not first build the city, and lay the foundations of
the walls, which was done long before in the reign of an other Artaxerxes,
Ezr. 4. 12. which is held to be Cambyses: he only viewed and repaired the
breaches of the city, Nehem. 2. 15. there is mention made both of gates and
walls before his coming. 2. The Temple was builded and finished before the 20.
year of Longimaniu, namely in the sixth year of his raig^^: but it is not like
that the building of the Temple, being the most special thing which the
people of God longed after, should be excluded out of the compass of the 70.
weeks.

5. Their opinion also may be refelled, who count the beginning of these 70.
weeks from the 2. year of Darius Nothus, when by the commandment of the king
the building of the house went forward, and was finished in the sixth year,
Ezr. 6. 15. from thence to the destruction of Jerusalem, are found just 490.
years: the particulars whereof Polanus thus gathers: from the 2. of Darius
Nothus to the death of Alexander, are years 99. from thence to the destruction
of Jerusalem, 391. which make 490. years.

Contra. 1. In the place given in instance, Ezr. 6. 14. it is said, they
builded and finished the house, by the appointment of God, and by the
commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artashasht king of Persia: seeing then,
that all these gave commandment for the building of the Temple, from which of
them rather must the account begin, then from the first? for they only
finished the work of the Temple now: it could not be begun and made an end
of in four years. 2. Neither is his computation of years certain and agreed
upon: for some begin to account from the 3. year of Darius Nothus, M.
Lively, p. 216. Iunius reckons but 98. years from the 2. of Nothus to the
death of Alexander: further in this reckoning, counting 70. years from the
birth of Christ, to the destruction of the city, 33. and an half to his
passion, and 36. with an half afterward, he leaves in the sum of 391. from
Alexanders death 321. years for the kingdom of the Greeks and Macchabees,
unto the 30. year of Herod: but others allow not so much: Melancthon not much
above 300. years, counting them thus: from Alexanders death to the beginning
of the Macchabees 146. years, from thence to Herod 127. years, then in the
30. year of Herod was Christ borne: Oecolampadius thus makes up the
reckoning, an 160. years from Alexanders death to the Macchabees, thence to
Herod an 127. and 30. years of Herod to Christ: the whole sum is 317. Others
reckon 300. years from the beginning of Alexanders reign unto the reign of
the Roman Empire after Cleopatra her 22. years, and from thence to the death
of Christ 60. years: so Africanus, as Lyranus cites him, and H. Br. in his
proleg. in Dan. Therefore the computation of Polanus is not so certain to be
builded upon.

6. Concerning the last opinion of Apollinaris, who begins to count the 70.
weeks at the birth of Christ, it need no long refutation: for then there went
forth no word for the building of the city: and there must be 7. weeks and
62. weeks before the Messiah; so that he begins Daniels weeks, where they
almost end.

43. Quest. That Daniels 70. weeks must take beginning from the proclamation
made by Cyrus for the return of the people.
There remain then only to be examined the opinions of the third sort of
those, which begin the account of the 70. weeks from Darius and Cyrus, who
reigned together. Tertullian begins them from Darius, and ends them in the
overthrow of Jerusalem. Origin takes the same beginning, but goes no further
then the nativity of Christ's so also Melancthon in his first account. The
Hebrews, making the same beginning, do extend the time to the last subversion
of Jerusalem by Adrian the Emperor. Clemens Alexandr. begins from Cyrus,
and ends in the subversion of Jerusalem, lib. 1. stromat. Origin does end
them too soon, and the rest extend them too far: but touching the end of
these weeks more shall be said in the next question: but that all these do
take the beginning right of these weeks, from the edict of Cyrus, who reigned
together with Darius the Mede, it may thus evidently be proved.

1. First, when the seventy years of captivity were expired, the 70. weeks
of liberty immediately began, as M. Calvin shows upon the 24. verse, Certum
est quinquaginta annos and quinquaginta hebdomadas simul coniungi, the 70.
years and 70. weeks are joined together. And this proposition is confirmed,
Ier. 29. 10. Thus says the Lord, After seventy years be accomplished at
Babel, I will visit you, and perform my good promise toward you, and cause you
to return to this place: But the 70. years were expired in the first year of
Cyrus, 2. Chron. 36. 22. therefore then the 70. weeks began.

2. The 70. weeks began from the going forth of the word to cause the people
to return, v. 25. but in the first year of Cyrus the Edict came forth for the
return of the people, Ezr. 1. 1. then was the general deliverance of the
people from captivity. Ergo.

3. Paulus Burgensis urges this reason, that if the beginning of these weeks
were suspended an hundred years to the reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus, or
after, then it would follow, that Daniel was ignorant when these weeks should
begin, and so consequently did not know the time of the coming of the
Messiah: but it is not like, that so great a Prophet, having revealed unto him
the time of the coming of the Messiah, should be ignorant of it.

Pererius to this makes a double answer. 1. that though Daniel have a vision
in general of the Messiahs coming, yet he might be ignorant of the very time:
as it was revealed to Daniel, that one should rise up to afflict the people of
God most grievously 2300. days, chap. 8. yet he knew not the particular time.
2. It is like that it was revealed to Daniel, when these 70. weeks should
begin, though it is not expressed in Scripture.

Contra. 1. There is not the like reason to know the particular time of Christ's
coming, and of Antichrist: there was more necessity for the comfort of Gods
people of the one, then of the other: neither was the time foretold of
Antiochus coming, as here of Christ's, but only how long his tyranny should
continue, when he was come. 2. Such unwritten directions not expressed in
Scripture, it is dangerous to imagine: it is true that Daniel knew the
beginning of these weeks, and had thereto direction, and that here expressed
in Scripture: other direction he had none, and not having other direction then
here, he should have continued ignorant of his own prophecy, if he had not
seen the accomplishment of it himself.

4. An other argument may be taken from the continuance of the Persian
Monarchy: the most agree, That above an 130. veares can not be allowed to the
Persian Mona^chie.
that the kingdom of the Macedonians continued 300. years from the beginning
of Alexanders reign, and that thence to the passion of Christ the Romans
governed 60. years, so African. Lyr. Iunius counts but 362. years in all:
there remains then to make up the sum of 490. an 130. years for the
Persian Monarchy, and not above: the reason is this, because Nehemiah saw both
the beginning and the end of the Persian Monarchy: that he saw the end,
Josephus Scalliger thus proves. 1. because Nehemiah in his story makes
mention of the last Darius, whom Alexander overcame, c. 12. 22. And that it
was the last Darius is evident, because Iaddua the high Priest is there
mentioned, who met Alexander. 2. Nehemiah was hindered in repairing the walls of
the city by one Samballat, c. 4. this Samballat afterward aided Alexander, at
the siege of Gaza with a band of soldiers, and died before Alexander had taken
Gaza: so that Nehemiah and Samballat were both of the same time. 3. Nehemiah
makes mention, c. 13. 28. of one of the sons of Ioiada the high Priest, who
was the son in law of Samballat the Horonite, whom Nehemiah chased away:
this, as Josephus shows, lib. 11. was Manasses the brother of Iaddua the high
Priest, who married Nicaso the daughter of Samballat. 4. Nehemiah also makes
mention of the last Darius called Codomannus, Nehem. 12. Now that Nehemiah also
saw the beginning, is evident, Ezr. 2. 2. where Nehemiah is named among those,
which returned out of captivity, according to the edict of Cyrus.

Two answers are here made. 1. that it might be an other Nehemiah beside him,
who was sent to repair Jerusalem in the 20. year of king Artaxerxes. 2. the
history may be transposed: for Nehemiah went not up then, but 64. years
after, Genevens. annotat. Ezra, 2. 2. 3. And it is further answered, that the
Samballat mentioned by Nehemiah, c. 12. might be an other of that name: or
Josephus might mistake the time wherein Samballat lived: and whereas Nehemiah
speaks of Iaddua, he only shows that at that time, when he writ that
book, Iaddua was borne heir to the Priesthood: to this purpose M. Lydyat in
his book de emendat. tempor. ann. 3485. set forth this year, 609.

Contra. 1. To imagine two Nehemiahs (as they likewise say that Mordecai there
named was an other beside Mordecai in the days of Esther) unless some
Scripture might be showed for it, is all one, as if they should make two of
Moses, David's, Salomons, or Zorobabels name. 2. whereas the words stand thus,
these are they, etc. which came with Zerubbabel, Ieshuaeh, Nehemiah, Ezr. 2. 2.
what a disorder were this in the story, these being named together, to put
off Nehemiahs coming so many years after. And beside, this doubt is removed,
Nehem. 7. 5. where Nehemiah says, I found a book of the genealogy of them
which came up at the first, and found it written there, etc. they which came up
with Zerubbabel, Ieshuah, Nehemiah: all these were captains and chief men,
with whom the people returned at the first: Nehemiah then was one of the
captains, that went up first out of the captivity. 3. To the other answers it
may be also thus replied: that Samballat mentioned by Nehemiah, is the same
that assisted Alexander: for he is said to have had one of Ioiada his sons
(which was Manasses the brother of Iaddua) to his son in law, Nehem. 13. 28.
And Josephus is not deceived in casting Samballat into this time, for Nehemiah
does the same: neither was Iaddua at this time only borne, for he is counted
among the high Priests: and if Manasses his younger brother at this time were
married, then Iaddua could not be so young, as only to be then borne.

Thus then Nehemiah being found to have lived from the beginning of the
Persian Monarchy to the end, may be supposed to have been about an 150.
years of age, or somewhat more: he may be thought to have been 20. or 25. at
the return out of captivity, and lived after an 130. the whole time of the
Persian Monarchy, which Nehemiahs age will not suffer to be extended much
further.

And it need not seem strange, that Nehemiah might be an 150. year old: for
many years after this, in the time of Claudius Caesar, one T. Fullonius of
Bononia, was found to be an 150. year old: and many other are recorded by
Pliny in his 7. book, c. 48, 49, 50. which in diverse countries lived between
an 100. and 150. years.

5. This also is an other manifest proof, that the Persian Monarchy could not
exceed much an 130. years, because in the 6. year of Darius, when the house
of God was finished, there were some then alive which had seen the former
house: as the Prophet Hagge says, Who is he among you, that saw this house in
her first glory, and how do you see it now? is it not in your eyes, in
comparison of it, as nothing? If now there were an 106. years run since
Cyrus first, as Iunius in his annotations upon that place in the last edition
observes, they must have been above an 180. years old, lib. 6. de e^^end.
which then living had seen the first Temple. Josephus Scalliger takes these
words spoken by way of wishing in this sense; O that any were alive which had
seen the former Temple, he would take this as nothing to that: But the Prophet
speaks unto them in the second person, is it not in your eyes? that is, yours
which did know the other Temple: and so Lyranus well expounds. Therefore from
Cyrus unto this second of Darius, might be some 40. years and odd: and so
some at the age of an 130. or thereabout, might have known the first Temple
standing: and after this there might remain some 80. years of the Persian
Monarchy.

6. And this further may be an other evident argument, that the Persian
Monarchy continued not above an 130. years or thereabout: because Nehem. 12.
26. there are nine several men expressed by name, which lived in the days of
Ioiakim son of Ieshuah, who was high Priest in the^ return from Babylon, and
continued unto the end of Nehemiah: now Ioiakim succeeded his father Ieshuah in
the Priesthood, in the 45. year after their return, as Bullinger notes in
his tables: 2. tabul. 2. These were the chief of the Levites all this while:
they could not be under 25. years old in Ioiakims time, for before the
Levites ministered not: now if the Persian Monarchy continued 200. years, or
above, they must be supposed to be very near 200. years old.

Thus it has been sufficiently proved I trust, that it is most agreeable to
Scripture, to begin Daniel (...) from the edict of Cyrus: wherein we have the
consent of Tertullian, Origin, Clem. Alexand. among the ancient writers; and
of Melancth. Calv. Beroald. Pint. H. T^^. of the new ^^the difference only
between them is, in that some begin from Darius, some from Cyrus Pi^^us from
the time of the revealing of this vision, which he understands to be the
going forth of the word: But the odds is not great, only in a year or two in
the most, in their opinion, which make the reign of Darius the Mede, and Cyrus
diverse. But if it (...) that they reigned jointly together, as is proved
before, 2. qu. upon this chapter (...) there is no (...).

But against this computation of the 70. weeks from the first of Cyrus, it
will be objected thus. 1. that edict, because it was void and took no place
(for the work was hindered all the days of Cyrus Ezr: 4. 3. notwithstanding
his former edict) is not to be accounted for the beginning of these weeks. 2.
Cyrus edict was only to build the Lord an house, Ezr. 1. 2. but this word, the
going out whereof the Angel speaks of, was to build Jerusalem: thus obiecteth
Pererius against the opinion of Clemens Alexandr, so also M. Lydyat reasons
in ann. 3553. 3. Lyranus alleges this reason against it out of Africanus,
that if the account begin from Cyrus, there will be found an 100. years more
then the 70. weeks to the passion of Christ: which he counts thus: The
Persian Monarchy continued 230. years, the kingdom of the Macodonians or
Grecians 300. th^nce to the death of Christ, the Romans ruled 60. years: all
make 590. years.

Contra. 1. Though Cyrus decree did not at the first take place altogether, yet
because they by virtue of that decree laid the foundation of the Temple in the
2. year, Ezr. 2. 10. though the work were interrupted, from thence the
reckoning must begin: and the rather, for that this decree of Cyrus was the
ground of Darius edict renewed afterward, Ezr. 6. yea the Angel foresheweth
here as much, in dividing 7. weeks from the rest, that the building of the
city and Temple should be interrupted 49. years, and should be finished in a
troublesome time, v. 25.

2. Though Cyrus edict specially intended the building of the Lords house, yet
they had liberty given them there withal to reedifie the walls and city, as
is evident, Ezr. 4. 12. for otherwise the prophecy of Isai concerning Cyrus,
had not been fulfilled, c. 54. 28. He says to Cyrus, thou art my shepherd,
and he shall perform all my desire, saying also to Jerusalem, thou shall be
built, and to the Temple, thy foundations shall be surely laid.

3. That the Persian Monarchy continued not 230. years, is proved before: so
that this objection is soon answered. And if Lyranus thinks that from Cyrus
to Christ's passion 590. years expired, how then can he make his own account
afterward good, counting from the 4. of Zedekiah, 52. years before Cyrus, as
he casts it, to the passion of Christ, but 490. years in all?

Thus the beginning of Daniels 70. weeks being known, it remains that we
come to examine the diverse opinions for the end, and determining of them: as
they are before propounded, qu. 34. But first, because we will at once make an
end of the questions and doubts of the Persian Monarchy, three other matters
shall here be briefly touched. 1. under which of the Persian kings Mordecai
lived. 2. what king it was by whom the Edict was renewed to build the Temple.
3. which Artaxerxes it was, by whom in the 20. of his year Nehemiah was sent.

44. Quest. Under which of the Persian kings Mordecai lived and of his age.
1. Some take the great king Assuerus, who married Esther, to be Cambyses the
son of Cyrus: as Paul. Burgens. calls this Assuerus, and filium Cyri, and
maritum Esther, both the son of Cyrus, and the husband of Ester, addit. 3. in
9. c. Dan. But this cannot be: for Cambyses is held by most Chronologer^, to
have reigned but 7. years, the Hebrews give unto him but 6. years: but this
Assuerus married not Esther till the 7. year of his reign toward the end
thereof in the 10. month, Estb. 2. 17. and c. 3. 12. mention is made of his
12. year.

2. Some take this Assuerus the husband of Esther, to be Darius Hystaspic the
3. king of Persia: so Iun. in his annotat. Esth. 1. 1. in the first edition;
and Esther called Adassa, he thinks to be A^ossa Darius wife, mentioned by
Herodot. lib. 3. Of the same opinion seems Lyranus to be, that the next king
unto Cam^yses, was this Assuerus: But Darius Hystaspicis succeeded C^^byses: so
also Genevens.

3. Joseph. lib. 11. thinks that this Assuerus was Artaxerxes Longimanus,
surnamed the long-hand, the 5. king of Persia: But Eusebius in his Chronicle
^^felleth him by this argument, that, seeing Ezra lived in the days of this
Artaxerxes, it is like he would have made some honorable mention of Esther and
Mordecai. Herein though Eusebius do truly contradict Josephus, yet his reason
is not so forcible: for seeing there is a special history written of Esther
and Mordecai their acts, which book is like to have been made by Ezra, or
some other of the Prophets then living, it was not needful in the other
books of Ezra and Nehemiah, to make mention of them; seeing in those books
they meddle not with the Persian affairs, but with such things as happened
about the building of the city and Temple at Jerusalem. But this reason rather
may be urged, that Artaxerxes (...), who is that Darius called also Artashasht,
who gave license to build the Temple, which was finished in his 6. year, and
in his 7. sent Ezra, and in his 20. Nehemiah, with new commissions to repair
the city: it is not like, that he would be so moved and incensed against the
Jews, to root them out, as Assuerus was.

4. A fourth opinion there is, that this Assuerus was Artaxerxes Mnemon, which
succeeded Darius Nothus, the 7. king of Persia: which is the opinion of
Exsebius, Isidore, Beda, Sulpitius, to whom subscribeth Pererius: But these
two objections may be made against this opinion. 1. that if Esther had been
the Queen in Nehemiahs time, it is like he would have used her mediation to
the king, or Mordecaies, and not have pressed himself upon the king. 2.
whereas Mordecai is said to have been one of those which was carried away in
the captivity of Iechoniah, Esth. 2. 6. from which captivity unto the reign
of Artaxerxes Muemon are accounted by the most Chronologers 250. years, as
Pererius confesses, then could it not be that Artaxerxes under whom Esther
and Mordecai lived. Hereunto Pererius answers, that whereas the words stand
thus, Mordecai, which was the son of Iair, the son of Shemei the son of
Kish, a man of Iemini, which had been carried away, etc. with the captivity
of Iechoniah. etc. he would have the relative (which) referred to the nearest
antecedent, Iemini, whom he supposes to have been then carried into
captivity: But herein Pererius is greatly ouerseene, for Iemini is here taken
for the tribe Benjamin: as Kish the father of Saul is said to be of Iemini, 1.
Sam. 9. 1. and Shemei is called the son of Iemini, 2. Sam. 16. 11. Then this
Iemini could not possibly go into captivity with Iechoniah. Therefore other
answer better, that it is referred to Kish, that he went into captivity: so
Burgens. and Iunius in his last edition: Joseph. Scal. l. 6. de emendat. tempor.

But hereunto Thoring makes a double answer. 1. They must show us an other
Kish out of Scripture, beside the father of Saul, which if they can not do,
eadem facilitate contemnitur, qua probatur, it may as easily be rejected, as it
is proved: yet this may be admitted, that this was an other Kish beside that
ancient Kish the father of Saul, as this Shemei was diverse from him that
railed upon David. 2. He has then a better answer; that if they will count so
many generations, namely these four, of Mordecai, Iair, Shemei, Kish, from the
captivity of Iechonia^, they will make Mordecai, either scarce yet borne, or a
very young man, who was now ancient, and nourished Esther as his daughter, he
was as a father unto her: for in true account there were not above an 150.
years run since the captivity of Iechoniah to the reign of this
Artaxerxes: and if four generations of men were then worn out, Mordecai must
be held a very young man, or not so grave a personage, as the story makes him.

5. An other opinion is, that Mordecai lived under Xerxes the fourth king of
Persia, who is also called Assuerus, which is the opinion of Josephus
Scalliger, lib. 6. de emendat, tempor. likewise Thom. Lydiat. lib. de emendat.
tempor. in ann. 3514. and of Iunius edition 3. the reasons thereof are these.
1. The name Achashverosh, which Scalliger pronounces Oxyares, comes near
the name Xerxes, which is after the Greek pronuntiation, the other is the
Hebrew name. 2. the name of Queen Esther has great affinity with Amestris,
as Herodotus, or Amystris, as Ctesias, the wife of Xerxes. 3. Assuerus is set
forth by the largenes of his kingdom, and the greatness of his riches, Esth. 1.
and Xerxes was the rich king of Persia, the fourth from Cyrus inclusiuely, that
is, including Cyrus, Dan. 11. 2. 4. Assuerus was the next king before the first
Artaxerxes whom Darius Nothus succeeded, Ezr. c. 4. v. 7. and 24. But Xerxes
was the next predecessor to Artashasht, or Artaxerxes, who was called
Longimanus, who was Xerxes son.

But against this last assertion, that this Assuerus was Xerxes, it will be
thus objected. 1. that Xerxes is held of the most, not to have reigned above
20. or 22. years at the most, and he was married to Esther but in the 7.
year, and in the 8. might Darius his son be borne, who was not above 13.
years old when his father died: yet in the second year of his reign he had
children, Ezr. 6. 10. where the Jews are bid to pray for the kings life and
his sons.

Burgensis here answers, that it is spoken by way of supposition, si filios
habuisset, if he had had sons: But Thoring in his reply to Burgensis
additions, does here find fault with him: for it was never heard of, that
prayer should be made, pro non existentibus in rerum natura, for them which had
yet no being or existence in nature.

But they which hold Xerxes to be this Assuerus, will answer, that Darius
mentioned, Ezr. 6. 10. was Darious Nothus, not this Artaxerxes Longimanus: now
this is after proved to be otherwise, because to the building of the Temple
from the going forth of the word, are but 7. weeks, that is, 49. years: but
there were in their own reckoning an 100. years from Cyrus to Darius Nothus:
see hereof further, qu. 58. following.

6. Bullinger thinks this Assuerus to be Cyaxares the father of Darius the
Mede, who with Cyrus surprised Babylon, Dan. 9. 1. But this cannot be: 1. in
Esthers time the Monarchy of the Persians and Medes was joined together, Esth.
1. 3. 2. Assuerus chief sear was at Susis. ibid. but Ecbatane was the chief
city of Media. 3. while the Monarchy of Babel stood, the Jews were held in
captivity under the Babylonians, not under the Medes.

7. Wherefore it is most probable that this Assuerus was Darius Hystaspis,
which is the second opinion before rehearsed, for it is showed before that he
was neither Cambyses, nor Longimanus, Mnemon, or Xerxes: who is he then more
like to be then this Darius? the arguments brought for Xerxes may be answered
by applying them to Darius. 1. the name Assuerus might be a common name to them
both: and it seems that by Assuerus is meant Darius the next to Cambyses, who
is that Artashasht named Ezr. 4. 6. 2. Darius was also of great riches and
power. 3. his Queens name Atossa comes nearer Hadassa the other name of
Esther, then Amestris to Esther. 4. that Artashasht mentioned Ezr. 4. 7. was
not Longimanus Xerxes son, but Cambyses rather.

It being thus showed that Mordecai lived in Darius time, (...)
the third king of Persia, neither could his age be so great, as Lyranus at the
first seemed to think, that is, 259. or as Annius Viterbiens. 198. nor yet so
small, as Lyranus in his second computation counts, giving unto Mordecai but
93. years. But his age might be an 110. or thereabout: whereof 70. years were
spent in the captivity, and about 30. year from Cyrus first: H. Br. in
prolegom. and he might be 10. year old when he went into captivity.

45. Quest. Which of the Persian kings it was that renewed the decree for the
reedifying of the Temple.
1. The most received opinion is, that it was Darius the son of Hystaspis the
third king of Persia, who renewed the edict for the building of the Temple, in
whose sixth year it was finished, Ezr. 6. 15. of this opinion is Josephus, with
whom Pererius consents: so also M. Calvin, and M. Lydyat de emendat. tempor.
ann. 3485. their special reason is taken from that place, Ioh. 2. where the
Jews affirm that the Temple was 46. years building: which time Pererius
reckons thus, Cyrus reigned 30. years, Cambyses. 8. and in the sixth year of
Darius the Sanctuary was finished, but 3. years after in the ninth, the
outward Court, and all was made an end of, as Josephus writes, lib. 11. antiq.
so from the 2. of Cyrus, when they began to lay the foundation, unto the sixth
of Darius, are 46. years.

Contra. 1. But seeing Ezra says, that the house was finished in the sixth
year, Josephus conceit is not to be admitted, who in this matter is contrary
to himself, lib. 1. cont. Appion. where he says, that the Temple was
reedified in the second year of his reign: Then must Pererius hold him to the
sixth year: as Theodoret also and Iansenius do there end the 46. years,
which the Jews speak of: whom Pererius for that misliketh: but unto this 6.
year by his own computation are but 43. years.

2. M. Calvin will have these 46. years, and the 7. weeks, which here are
severed from the rest, v. 25. to agree together, and to make the number even
49. years, he allows three years for the first laying of the foundation:
and herein he is so confident, that he thus writes, quisquis hic tergiversari
velit, no^ne prodet suam impudentiam, he that will here wind away, the matter
being so evident, shall but bewray his impudency. But if from Cyrus 2. to the
6. of Darius Hystaspis are in the largest reckoning but 43. or 44. years,
where will those three other years be found out over and above, to make up the
49. year? Touching the agreement between Daniels 7. weeks and these 46.
years, more shall be said, qu. 59. following. But M. Lydyat though he agree
with them, that the Temple was reedified in the 2. of Darius Hystaspis, yet he
dissenteth in the casting of the time: for he counts but 12. years from
Cyrus to the 2. of Darius, all which time, the work of the Temple was
intermitted: but this has no agreement at all with Daniels 70. weeks severed
from the rest, because of the intermission of the work of the Temple.

2. Iunius in his first edition, annot. in Ezr. 4. 24. was of opinion, that
this Darius that sent Ezra, was Artaxerxes Longimanus son of Darius Hystaspis
by ^^sther: so also Melancthon. And this is most like: for if the building of
the Temple be driven further off then unto this kings days, Daniels 7. weeks
set apart for the building of the Temple, will no ways agree: see more, qu.
59. following.

3. Iunius in his last edition thinks otherwise, that it was Darius Nothus in
whose sixth year the house of God was finished, which Josephus Scalliger would
prove by this argument; because this Darius has an Artaxerxes next before
him, Ezr. 4. 7. and an other next after him, Ezr. 7. 1. and so has no other,
Darius among the kings of Persia: But the first Artashasht was Gambyses, who
was not the next before Longimanus, and the other Artashassht is the same with
Darius, called also Artaxerxas Longimanus, as is further showed, qu. 59.
following.

46. Quest. What Artaxerxes it was, in whose senenth year Ezra was sent, and
in his 20. Nehemiah.
1. Iosrphus thinks, lib. 11. Antiquit* that this was Xerxes, by whom Ezra
first, and afterward Nehemiah was sent: but this can not be: for Xerxes is not
held to have reigned above 20. or 32. years: now mention is made of the 32.
year of this Artaxerxes, Ezr. 5. 14. Beside Josephus manifestly erreth in two
other points: 1. he says that Nehemiah was sent in the 25. year of this
Artaxerxes, whereas it is evident, that it was the 20. year, Nehem. 2. 1. 2.
he says the walls were finished in two years and 3. months, whereas they
were repaired in the space of 52. days, Ezr. 6. 15.

2. Pererius, therein consenting with some ancient writers, holds this to be
Artaxerxes Longimanus, the son of Xerxes; wherein he thinks right, saving
that this can not agree with his former opinion, that it was Darius Hystaspis,
in whose sixth year the Temple was built: which Darius in truth was Artaxerxes
Longimanus, as is further declared, qu. 58. following. M. Lydyat also thinks
well, that this was Artaxerxes Longimanus, by whom Ezra and Nehemiah were
sent, in ann. 3553. but from hence he does not well begin Daniels 70. weeks,
as is showed before* qu. 42.

3. Some think that this was Artaxerxes Muemon, which gave liberty unto Ezra
and Nehemiah to return to Jerusalem, and repair the city; because no other
Artaxerxes but he of the kings of Persia immediately succee d^da Darius: Joseph.
Scall^g. Iun. The Art^shasht mentioned, Ezr. 7. 1. who sent Ezra, and afterward
Nehemiah, succeeded not Darius, but was that Darius in whose 6. year the
Temple was built^ See qu. 58. following.

47. Quest. That Daniels 70. weeks were determined neither before Christ's
passion^ nor at the destruction of the city.
1. Eusebius. lib. 8. de demonstr. Euangel. in his first account begins the 70.
weeks in the first of Cyrus, and ends 69. of them about Hyrcanus time, when
Pompey the great took Jerusalem, and defiled the Temple.

2. In an other account he begins the 69. weeks in the 6. of Darius, when
the Temple was reedified, and makes them to end at Herod: the last week he
begins at Christ's haptisme, 60. years after, and ends it 3. years and an
half after his passion. Both these accounts of Eusebius O^cal^mpadius
indifferently follows.

But neither of these r^ckonings can stand. 1. because Daniel says, that after
7. weeks, and 62. weeks the Messiah shall be slain, that is, in the 70.
week next after: but in the first account the Messiah was slain above 90.
years, in the second above 60. after the expiring of the 69. weeks. 2. the
70. and last week must immediately follow the other, because they are made one
whole number of 70. weeks, verse. 24. though afterward they be divided.

3. Some end these 70. weeks at the nativity of Christ: as Origin, beginning
them in Darius, reign: others begin at the instautation of the Temple under
Darius, and end the 69. weeks at the birth of Christ, counting until then
483. years: Tertullian. But both these opinion^ are contrary to the text,
which end these 69. weeks at the passion and death of Christ, not at his
birth, after 62. weeks the Messiah shall be slain: beside, as the first
account comes short above 30. years of the 490. so the other ouerreacheth
above 60. years, as shall be showed in the particular account.

4. Some end these weeks at the baptism of Christ, Melancth. but the text
will not hear it* for before these weeks are expired; or together with the
expiration of them shall the Messiah be slain.

5. As these end Daniels weeks somewhat too soon: so some extend them
somewhat too far, as to the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus and Vespasian:
wherein not withstanding they do much differ. Tertullian, begins the account
at Darius the Mede, and ends at the subversion of Jerusalem: so also Clem.
Alex. beginning at Cyrus: Chrysostom there ending begins at the 20. year
of Darius Longimanus: Some begin form the 2. year of Darius Nothus, and end
at the destruction of the city by the Romans, Iun. Bulling. Polan. M. Lively.
But the first beginning right, ouershoote the 70. weeks almost 40. years,
from the passion of Christ to the taking of the city by the Romans: The other
neither begin right, Whether Daniel, weeks must end the, destruction of
Ie^^^^lem
seeing it is proved before, that the beginning of the weeks must be from the
first going forth of the word under Cyrus, qu. 43. neither do they end well:
for immediately after the 69. weeks, the Messiah must be slain in the last
week, then can it not be extended 40. years after Christ's death to the
destruction of the city: these words, after 69. weeks the Messiah shall be
slain, are otherwise expounded by Iunius and Polanus, which shall be further
examimed, when we come unto the handling of that verse.

Now the reasons that these weeks must be extended to the final destruction
of Jerusalem, are these.

1. The Angel says, Seventy weeks are determined over the people, and over
the holy city: that is, within which time there shall be a destruction of
both. Iun. an^otat.

2. Our blessed Savior does apply this prophecy of Daniel unto the desolation
and destruction of Jerusalem, Matthew. 24. 15. Polan.

3. Daniel first makes mention of the destruction of the city and Sanctuary,
and then speaks of the confirming of the covenant in one week, and of the
ceasing of the sacrifices in the mids of the week: which if it be understood
of Christ's death, it were a preposterous order, that after the destruction of
the city, which happened 40. years after, he should return to speak of the
Messiahs death. M. Lively Persian Monarch. p. 225.

4. To what purpose should mention be made here of the destruction of
Jerusalem, if it be not within the compass of these weeks.

Ans. 1. The Angel expounds himself afterward, how these words are to be
understood, upon thy people, that is, to finish their sins, and to seal up
their iniquities, by the anointing of the Messiah: this was the special
intendment and scope of these weeks, yet so, as if they rejected this gracious
offer, then destruction should come upon them: see more of the meaning of these
words, qu. 19. before.

2. Our blessed Savior speaks not there of Daniels prophetical weeks, but
only of the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet: it
follows not, because it is here spoken of, that therefore necessarily it
should be comprehended within the compass of the 70. weeks.

3. There is no disorder at all in the prophecy: for Daniel having propounded
briefly and jointly together, the slaying of the Messiah, and destruction of
the city, afterward comes to handle them severally in the next verse, and
more fully: so did the Prophet before, v. 25. for having spoken of the 7.
weeks and 62. weeks jointly, he afterward returns to the 7. weeks, after
the which the street and wall should be built, and then to the 62. weeks.

4. Lyranus well expresses the reason, why the destruction of Jerusalem i^
mentioned, though it be not within the compass of the 70. weeks, quia factum
fuit in poenam mortis Christi, ponitur immediate, etc because it happened and
came as a punishment for the death of Christ, it is put immediately after.

48. Quest. That the 70. weeks end not after the destruction of Jerusalem.
1. Eusebius ending the 69. weeks in the first year of Herod, begins the
70. and last week at the baptism of Christ, and extends it 70. years to
the time of the Emperor Traian, for so long the Apostolical preaching
continued, John the Evangelist suruiuing till then: But here Eusebius
commits two great errors: first, in dividing the 70. week so far by the
space of 60. years from the 69. weeks: secondly, in giving 70. years to the
last week, whereas he accounted every of the formet weeks but at 7. years a
piece.

2. Some Hebrews (as Hierome in his commentary upon this place rehearses
their opinion) beginning the 70. weeks from Darius the Mede, do end 62. of
them in the destruction of the city by Titus, the other 8. weeks they extend
unto the destruction of the Jews, and of their city under the Emperor
Adrian. Here they manifestly commit two errors: 1. they count the 7. weeks
last, after the 62. weeks, which must be counted first: 2. the years from
Darius to the Emperor Adrian, make above 600.

3. Some set the end of these weeks further off, toward the end of the world
at the coming of Antichrist, who after three years and an half should be
destroyed, and then the everlasting kingdom of Christ should be set up: So
Hyppolitus, and Apollinaris: who notwithstanding make two beginnings of the
weeks; Hyppolitus 50. years before Cyrus, and Apollinaris at the nativity of
Christ. But these do manifestly fail in their account: for 1. the weeks must
neither begin so son, nor so late, as has been before showed. 2.
Hyppolitus continuing 69. weeks to the birth of Christ, refers the 70.
week to the end of the world, whereas it must follow the other weeks
immediately. 3. from Christ's birth there are already past above a 1600.
years: therefore Apollinaris account of the 70. weeks has no show of reason
at all.

Quest. 49. That the 70. weeks must end at the passion of Christ.
Here there are two opinions. 1. Some will have the 70. weeks end 3. years
and an half after the passion of Christ, which time is allowed for the
preaching of the gospel; and so they begin the last week at the baptism of
Christ. 2. Others think that the 70. weeks must precisely end at the passion
and death of the Messiah.

1. Of the first opinion are Theodoret, and Zonaras 1. tem. Annal. which
begin at the 20. yearo of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and end the 62. weeks at
the death of Hyrcanus, from whence to Christ's baptism, they count 7. weeks
more: and then in the mids of the last week, the Messiah was slain: so
there remained afterward 3. years and an half for the preaching of the
Gospel: Eusebius begins the 69. weeks in the 6. year of Darius Hystaspis,
and ends 69. of them in the first of Herod, about the death of Hyrcanus, the
70. week he begins at the baptism of Christ, and ends 3. years and an
half after: Ioannes Lucidus lib. 7. de emendat. tempor. begins at the 20.
year of Artaxerxes, and ends four years after Christ's passion, so also
before him Lyranus: Pererius concurreth with them, who makes the 69. weeks to
end at the baptism of Christ, beginning at the 20. of Artaxerxes Longimanus,
and the seventh week then to begin, which was finished 3. years and an
half after Christ's passion: so also M. Lydyat in his book de emendat. tempor.
page 75. and 173. But Osiander goes beyond all these, and will have the 70.
week begin after Christ's passion. Pererius reason is this, because 69.
weeks must be counted unto Messiah, which end in Christ's baptism, when he
was declared to be the son of God from heaven, whereas he lived before a
private life, therefore from thence the last week must begin. And the better
to uphold his opinion of his so beginning and ending these 70. weeks, he vse^h
these three helps. 1. he counts these 70. weeks after the years of the
Moon, which consist of 12. months and no more, whereof 490. make but 475:
years of the Sun, wherein 13. months go to the year. 2. these 70. weeks
are so called, though there want half a week to the passion of Christ, to
make up a round number, the odd years are omitted, as the like is to be seen
in other places of Scripture, as Genesis 15. the Lord tells Ahraham his seed
should soiorne 400. years, which were indeed 405. from Isaaks birth till
their coming out of Egypt. Iunius also in his first edition upon this place,
thinks the odd years to be omitted, to make the 70. weeks answerable in
proportion to the 70. years of captivity. 3. his third evasion is, that
whereas from the 20. of Artaxerxes are found to be 477. sun years, which
exceed the 490. moon years more by then two; he says there are two kinds of
numbering, inclusiuely, when as the numbers, where the account begins and
ends are included, and exclusiuely, when as they are excluded: as Matthew
saying that after six days Christ was transfigured, c. 17. and Luke after
eight days, c. 9. the first numbreth exclusiuely, not reckoning the days
where the account begins and ends, the other includes both.

Contra. First, the Angel expounds himself how the 69. week must be
understood: until the Messiah should be slain in the last week: they
determine then not at his Baptism, but at the week wherein he should be
slain.

Secondly, concerning his cautels. 1. the Scripture uses not to count
according to the moon years, but according to the course of the Sun:
otherwise by this reason the 70. years of the captivity must likewise be cut
short: see before, quest. 17. 2. in great numbers sometime odd yeaes are
omitted, but so it is not here, because these seventy weeks are said to be
cut our, that is, precisely they shall fall out to be so many weeks of years.

3. That distinction has no place here: for seeing the account is made by
weeks, if any part thereof should be reckoned inclusiuely, or exclusiuely, it
must be done by weeks of years, not by single years, as M. Lively well
observes, page 187.

2. It remains then that these years must take their end precisely at the
time of the death and passion of Christ: as Julius, Africanus, Beda, Ruperius,
Bullinger, H. Br. do determine them: and then whereas it is said, in the
mids or half week the sacrifice shall cease, the sense is, that Christ by
the sacrifice of himself in the latter half of the week, shall abolish all
other sacrifices in right: and whereas it is said, he shall confirm the
covenant in one week, the meaning is, not that all the last week this
covenant should be in confirming: but the covenant shall be confirmed first by
the preaching, and then by the death of Christ, in the last week, which was
done in the last middle or half part thereof, Bulling. Now for this precise
determining of these weeks in the very passion of the Messiah, the reasons
are these.

1. The last week ends at the confirmation of the covenant or Testament, as
the Prophet says, he shall confirm the covenant with many in one week: the
week then must end with that confirmation, for not the beginning, but the end
is counted for the week. But the Testament was ratified by the death of
Christ, Hebr. 9. 17. the Testament is confirmed when men be dead, therefore
this last week ends in Christ's death, Bulling. 2. The death of Christ was to
fall out in a year of Iubile, that the body may answer unto the figure,
therefore it is called the acceptable year of the Lord, Isay. 6102. the great
year of remission of sins, and of the redemption of prisoners and captives:
And so the year wherein Christ died, was a Iubile year; being the 28. Iubile
by just computation from the 8. year of Iosuah, when the first Iubile was
kept, for so many Iubilies fall but in 1400. years. It is most probable then,
that Daniels 70. weeks should end with the last Iubile, H. Br. in 9. Daniel.
3. M. Lively though he end not the 70. weeks in the passion of the Messiah,
yet he holds so many weeks preeisely, gathering so much by the Hobrewe
phrase, Sexentie weeks is cut out, where a verb of the singular number being
put to a word of the plural, shows, that every one of the weeks
particularly from the first to the last, shall be precisely and absolutely
complete, Persian Mon. page 159. 4. If any of these weeks should be extended
beyond Christ's death, it is more like they should reach to the destruction and
desolation of the di^ie, which is by name expressed: for there is no other
cause to extend them further: the preaching of the Gospel continued longer
then three year and a half after Christ: therefore in that regard, the half
week is not to be extended beyond Christ's death. 5. Burgens. alleges this
reason, Burgens. addit. 3. in 9. cap. Daniel.
to show that the last end of these weeks must concur with the passion of
Christ, nam deletie iniquitatis, consummatio praevaricationis, etc. the taking
away of iniquity, and the finishing of transgression, which are propounded by
the Angel, in his first speech, are the proper effects of Christ's passion, etc.
upon this reason Burgens. is so confident, that he concludes, the end then of
these weeks, est nobis notus de fide, is known unto us, as of faith (that is)
certainly. Thus then the argument may be framed: the finishing of iniquity
and taking away of sin, were accomplished in the passion of Christ: but
seventy weeks are determined for the finishing of iniquity: therefore 70.
weeks are determined at the passion of Christ. 6. Mel^ncthon adds further,
that the 70. weeks must not extend beyond Christ's passion, because the Jews
rejecting of him, were no longer his people, neither took he protection of
them.

Thus having the beginning of these 70. weeks at Cyrus, and the end at the
passion of Christ, it remains then to be showed, how by a just computation
these 70. weeks may be brought from Cyrus unto Christ.

Quest. 50. Of the just and exact computation of years, from Cyrus first unto
the passion of Christ.
1. Tertullian beginning in the first of Darius counts but 490. years to the
destruction of Jerusalem: the 62. weeks and an half he would have ended at
Christ's nativity, which make 437. years, and from thence to the destruction
of Jerusalem he reckons 7. weeks and an half more, that is 53. years. But
Tertullian commits diverse errors in this account. 1. he makes but 5. kings
of Persia. 2. he gives but an 106. years to the whole Monarchy of the
Persians. 31 he fails in the particular account of the years of the kings of
Persia: he allows unto Darius the Mede 19. years, whereas he reigned but
one, and to the last Darius 22. years, who reigned but six in all: and to
Alexander be gives 12. years after, who lived but six years after Darius
ouerthowe. 4. he counts but 53. years from Christ's nativity to the
destruction of Jerusalem, which in true account were 70. years at the least:
for Christ was borne in the 4. year of the 194. Olympiad, and the city was
taken by Titus, in the 4. year of the 212. Olympiad.

2. Lyranus beginning his account the 5. year of Zedekiah, when as Jeremiah
promised deliverance after 70. years, reckons from that year to the
destruction of Jerusalem, 6. years, from thence the Hebrews to the first of
Cyrus count 52. years: then to Cyrus and Cambyses he gives 9. years, to
Assuerus and Darius, in whole 6. year the Temple was built, 45. years
between them: all these years make being put together, 112. years, then the
second Temple is held by the Hebrews to have stood unto the second destruction
by Titus, 420. years: all make 532. from whence 42. years being diducted,
which come between the blessed passion of our Lord, and the destruction of
Jerusalem, there will remain just 490. years. Paulus Burgens. agreeing with
Raimundus beginning and ending as Lyranus does, yet proceeds an other way
from the 4. of Zedekiah, which was in the 12. year of Nebuchadnezzar, who
reigned in all 45. years, there remained of his reign 34. years, and of
Evilmerodachs 32. and 3. years of Balthazars reign: all these make 60.
years: then Darius reigned two, Cyrus 30. Assuerus 14. Darius his son had
reigned 6. when the Temple was finished: these years make 52. and the second
Temple stood 420. years: as is the general opinion of the Hebrews: these
years joined together make 532. from whence must be diducted 42. years, from
the passion of Christ to the destruction of the city.

But beside the disagreement in these two accounts, between the number of
years before Cyrus, and the number of the years of the kings of Persia, which
breeds a great uncertainty, these manifest errors are committed. 1. whereas
the captivity ending in Cyrus first, had continued 70. years, this term
cannot stand with either of the former accounts: for if the beginning of the
captivity be set in the 8. year of Nebuchadnezzars raigue, when Iechoniah
went into captivity, where it ought to begin, there will want by Lyranus
account, who reckons but 58. years from the 5. of Zedekiah, which was 4.
years after Iechoniahs captivity, 8. years; by Burgensis, who counts from
thence 60. years, there will want six of 70. years. 2. They both between
Cambyses and Darius set one Assuerus, whereas the first Darius the son of
Hystaspis, immediately succeeded Cambyses. 3. whereas they make Darius the
first, son of Assuerus, the truth is, that Darius the first was that Assuerus
himself, as is before showed, quest. 44. 4. whereas they make Darius, under
whom the Temple was finished but the fourth king of Persia, as Cyrus, Cambyses,
Assuerus, and then Darius, it is evident that the 4. king of Persia, was the
rich king of Persia, which was Xerxes, Dan. 11. 3.

3. Pintus, who begins the 70. weeks right, at Cyrus first, and ends them
well in the passion of our Savior, does make the 70. weeks, and the term of
years to agree by two several accounts. One way he casts up his reckoning
thus: the Perfians reigned 191. years, the Greeks to the beginning of Julius
Caesar's Empire 220. years, from thence to the passion of Christ, are 76.
years and 3. years and an half after Christ's death do the 70. weeks end:
all these years make just 490. and an half, which is omitted: But these
exceptions may be taken to this reckoning: 1. that the Persian Monarchy could
not possibly continue an 191. years, as is proved before, quest. 43. 2. the
Greek Empire continued 300. years as Lyranus, and H. Br. and most consent: so
also Iunius in his annotations, and Polanus: as it shall further appear in the
54. quest. following.

4. Pintus has beside this an other reckoning: from the going forth of the
word, unto the finishing of the Temple, which began two years after the
return of the people (and it was 46. years in building) are 48. years, and
the Temple stood 480. years, from the second building thereof to the second
destruction, the whole sum is 528. from which sum must be diducted 38.
years and an half from the end of the 70. week, which was three years and
an half after the passion of Christ, unto the destruction of the city, and
there will remain 490. years.

But thus this account also may be accepted against. 1. he shows not how from
Cyrus first, unto the finishing of the Temple, there were but 48. years, the
7. weeks mentioned, v. 25. make 49. years, which were expired at the
finishing of the Temple in the sixth of Darius, seequeth 58. following. 2. The
second Temple might stand so long, though the Hebrews generally held that it
continued but 420. years: but the 70. weeks ending in Christ's passion, as is
showed before, there must be diducted 40. as some think 42. years, which came
between the passion of Christ, and the destruction of the city: so that this
account of Pintus comes short in the first part one year, and in the second
two: for he reckons but 48. years to the finishing of the Temple, whereas
49. even 7. prophetical weeks were expired then, and he allows but 38.
years in the last number, which should be 40. or 42. years.

5. But the account of R. Solomon is much more short, who reckons but 490.
years from the destruction of the first temple by Nebuchadnezzar, to the
destruction of the second by Titus, whereof to Cyrus first he counts 52.
years. Not much differing is the account of other Hebrews, who from Cyrus
first unto the destruction of Jerusalem make reckoning but of 430. years,
allowing to the Persian Monarchy but 50. years, to the reign of the Greeks,
an 175. to the Macchabees 103. to the Herodians an 103. as Montanus sets it
down in his apparat, in Daniel.

But here are manifest errors in this account. 1. they begin the 70. weeks
52. year* before the Angel delivered this prophecy. 2. they give unto the
Persian Monarchy but 50. years, whereas so many years save one were expired
at the finishing of the Temple; and after that Nehemiah makes mention of 32.
years of the reign of Artaxerxes, c. 5. 14. 3. from the end of the Persian
Monarchy to the destruction of Jerusalem, are years 400. which are thus
gathered 300. years of the kingdom of the Greeks, 60. years of the Roman
Empire to the death of Christ, and about 40. thence to the overthrow of the
city.

6. This then is resolved upon as the best account: the Persian Monarchy
continued from the first of Cyrus 130. years, the Macedonians reigned 300. the
Romans unto the death of Christ 60. But for the more evident proof and
demonstration hereof, it shall not be amiss to set down the particular
account of the years of the Persian and Grecian Monarchy, to fulfill this
number of years.

Quest. 51. Of the years of the Persian kings in particular, to make up the
said sum of an 130. years, and first of the years to the finishing of the
Temple.
For the more evident manifestation hereof, we will divide the Persian
Monarchy into two parts: the time before the reedifying of the Temple, and the
time that followed thence to the end of the Persian Monarchy: for the first.
It is evident in that the Angel divides 7. weeks from the 62. weeks, that 7.
weeks making 49. years are set apart for that time, while the work of
building the Temple and city was interrupted, unto the 6. of Darius, when the
Temple was finished: But in the casting of these years there is some
difference.

1. Lyranus gives unto Cyrus and Cambyses 9. years, to Assuerus 40. and then
follows Darius in whose sixth the Temple was finished. Here the time somewhat
agrees: but then one king is here committed, for Artaxerxes Longimanus, who
was also Darius, was the fifth king of Persia.

2. Burgensis thus accounts out of Raimundus, Darius the Mede reigned 2.
years, Cyrus 30. Cambyses his son called also Assuerus 14. years, and then
Darius 6. years, which make 52. years, in whose 2. the Temple began to be
built, and so we have 48. years to the beginning of the reedifying of the
Temple: But here one king is likewise omitted as before: for Darius in whose 6.
year the Temple was finished, called also Artaxerxes Longimanus, was not the
fourth, but the fifth king of Persia: again, if Assuerus the husband of Esther,
reigned but 14. years, who in the 7. year married Esther, c. 2. 16. how could
Darius supposed to be her son by Assuerus in the 2. of his reign have wife
and children, as Ezra. 6. 10. the Jews are willed to pray for the kings life
and his sons.

3. Bullinger counts but 30. years from Cyrus first, unto the 6. of Darius:
but herein is his error, he takes this Darius for Darius the son of
Hystaspis, the third king of Persia, whereas this Darius was the fifth.

4. Iunius likewise affirms, that the Temple began to be built 30. years
before the 2. of Darius, annotat. in 2. Hag. edition. 1. But there could not be
so few years to Darius Longimanus: and Iunius to make his account good,
omitteth Xerxes, who is famously known to have been king of Persia.

5. The same Iunius in his annotations upon the same place, in his last
edition, counts 106. years from Cyrus to the 3. of Darius Nothus: but that
cannot be: for seeing some were alive then, which had seen the first Temple,
Hagg. 2. 4. they must then be at the least an 180. year old: 106. from Cyrus,
and 70. year before from the beginning of the captivity in the 8. year of
Nebuchadnezzars reign, in whose 19. year the Temple was destroyed: the sum
will be 176 years: and they could not be of fewer years then 10. or 12. to
remember any thing of the first Temple: But this was too great an age for those
times.

6. Some giving but an 130. years in all to the Persian Monarchy, do count
30. years from Cyrus first unto Xerxes war against the Grecians, which was
six years after Darius death, and from thence Artaxerxes Longimanus began to
reign 42. years, partly alone, and partly together with his father before:
and afterward followed Darius Nothus, whom some call Darius Ochus, H. Br.
proleg. in Dantel: but by this reckoning, there will not be 49. years to the
6. of Darius who was Artaxerxes Longimanus.

7. Beroaldus finding so great uncertainty in the years of the Persian kings,
thinks that though the particular years cannot be set down, yet the whole
time of the Persian Monarchy could not exceed an 130. years.

8. But though I consent therein to Beroaldus, for the exact scanning of the
particular years, yet some coniecturall guess may be made of the years of
some of the Persian kings put together: as it is agreed upon by the most, that
Cyrus and Cambyses reigned together 9. years, then Darius Hystaspis and Xerxes
might have the first 14. the other 20. which with Darius six, and Cyrus and
Cambyses nine make 49. years: but how these years should be exactly divided
among these 3. kings, it cannot be certainly set down, because the son
reigned with the father: and as Xerxes reign ran within his fathers, so
Artaxerxes his son reigned also in his fathers time: this shall be further
showed in the question following.

Quest. 52. Xerxes reign was intermingled with his fathers in the beginning,
and with his sons in the end.
1. Some do give unto Xerxes no several reign at all, but give unto his
father Darius only 20. years: because they hold that in his fathers life time
he warred with Greece for 7. years together, and then flying away cowardly,
was afterward slain by Artabanus, Darius yet being alive, so Iun. following
Beroaldus, annotat. in Ezra. 4. v. 5. edition. 1. But it is clear that those
wars against Grecia, were after Darius death 6. years, as H. Br. in his
proleg. in Daniel. and M. Lively proves that Darius was dead before, by the
poet Aeschyl^^ living in those times: who in his tragedy called Persa, raifeth
Darius long before dead out of his grave to tell news.

2. Some give unto Darius 36. years, and to Xerxes 22. Iunius in his sum of
years set before Ezra in the Last edition: But seeing that Darius lived in all
but 43. years, as H. Br. shows out of Ctesias; and he was at man's estate,
when he was elected king, being before one of the seven governors, he could
not any thing near reign so long.

3. Some will admit no intercliange or mingling together of the father and
sons reign; and stand upon it, that it cannot be showed in all the Persian
Monarchy, that the father and the son reigned together, M. Li^^ly, Persian
Monarchy, page 195.

Answ. The contrary may be proved both out of sacred and profane histories.
1. In the reign of the kings of Judah it is found to be an usual thing, for
the sons to begin their reign while their fathers yet lived: as Ieh^r^m
was viceroy in Iehosaphats time 4. years: for Iehosaphat reigned 25. years,
1. king. 22. 42. now in the 18. year of Iehosaphat, began Iehor^^ king of
Isr^^l to reign 12. years, 2. king. 3. 1. And in the 5. year of this Iaram,
which was the 2^. year of Iehosahat, began Iehoram of Judah to reign 8.
years, 2. king. 8. 16. when as there remained ye^ 4. years of his fathers
reign. So Ahaz was viceroy under Iotham his father, 2. or 3. years: for
Iotham began to reign in the 2. of Pekah king of Is^ae^ and reigned 16.
years, 2. king. 15. 32. And in the 17. of Pekah began Ahaz to reign, 2.
king. 16. 1. the like instance may be given of other kings of Judah and Israel:
And the like custom might be among the kings of Persia, as Iunius thinks
that Artaxerxes Mnemon reigned in his father Darius time, annot. in Ezr. 6. 14.

2. For forre^ stories, Temporariu^ and Mercator do allege out of Plutarke
in the life of Themistocles, that he being b^^ished Greece, fled unto
Artaxerxes son of Xerxes, his father yet livings, as Th^cidides testifies,
and Charon Lampsacenus: Ae^^lius Probus i^ in the same mind, and Philostratus
lib. 1. de vit. Apollon. c. 19. And that Xerxes was then living as is further
showed, because they set the beginning of Artaxerxes reign in the first year
of the 79. Olympiad: But Themistocles died in the 1. year of the 77. Olympiad,
as Diodorus Sicu^us, lib. 11. and Eusebius. in Chron.

But 1. M. Lively answers, that Xerxes having three sons, Darius,
Hystaspis, and Artaxerxes, would have nominated in all likelihood, the eldest of
these heir apparent before the other: and Iustine says, that when Xerxes
died, Artaxerxes, was admodum puer, a very child. 2. diverse grave authors, as
Cleitarehus Heraclides, Diodorus Siculus, do write that Themistocle fled
unto Xerxes, not unto Artaxerxes, to this purpose M. Linely, page 195. M.
Lydyat is also of the same mind, that Artaxerxes, reigned alone at this time,
de emendat. page 73. 3. Pererius further answers, that if Artaxerxes had
been joined with his father in his kingdom, Artabanus who first killed
Xerxes, and afterward set upon Darius his eldest son, would rather have shot
at Artaxerxes, who was appointed to the kingdom, whom it is not like his
father would have preferred before his eldest son.

Contra. 1. If Artaxerxes were the youngest, either the other two might be
first dead, or not of so good parts as the youngest was, who might therefore be
nominated to the kingdom; as Xerxes was made heir apparent to his father
Darius, his elder brother Artabazanes being omitted, as M. Lydyat
acknowledges, page 67.

2. Though these authors so write, yet Ae^^lius Probus prefers the
restimonie of Thucidides, as living nearest to those times, and so best to be
credited, that Themistocles fled to Artaxerxes.

3. Artabanus might have opportunity to kill Xerxes fleeing from the Grecians,
as Bessus killed Darius Codomannus fleeing away from Alexander: and Darius
being one of the kings sons, he might kill likewise the occasion so serving,
whereas Artaxerxes being possessed of the kingdom, was better defended
against him, and afterward was revenged upon him for his fathers death.

4. But none of these answers do take away the former objection, that
Artaxerxes reigned 8. years at the least before his fathers death, a^i^
gathered by the Olympiade reckoning.

4. It remains then, that Xerxes is the latter part of his reign, joined his
son Artaxerxes with him, as he reigned together with his father Darius: and
therefore he is named next after Cyrus, Ezra. 4. 7. As there Cyrus reign is
named only for his and Cambyses: so Assuerus reign (who is thought to be
Darius Hystaspis) stands there for the joint reign of Darius and Xerxes. By
reason then of this intermingling of years, the foresaid years cannot be
particularly assigned to the former kings.

Quest. 53. Of the particular year^^ of the second part of the Persian
Mona^^hi^ (...) the finishing of the Temple to the end thereof.
1. Iunius in his first edition summeth these years to 90. or thereabout,
giving unto Longimanus 37. in whose 6. the Temple was finished, to Darius
Nothus 18. to M^emon 10. to Ochus 22. to Arsen 3. and Darius the (...) reigned
6. years: wherein he misseth not greatly the general sum of the Persian
years, but he counts only 36. to the finishing of the Temple in Longimanus
6. year, and 90. afterward: whereas so few as 30. years, cannot be given to
the four former kings. Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius the son of Hystaspis; and
Xerxes, which raig^ed before Longimanus.

2. Oecolampadous counts an 160. years after the reedifying of the Temple to
the end of the Persian Monar^hie, which he collect^^ th^s: Darius in his
account reigned 4. years after the temple and city repaired, Xerxes (...)
Artehanus 7. months; A^taxerxes Longhand 40. years, Xerxes the (...) months,
Segdia^us 8. months, Darius Nothus 19. years, (...) 40. years. (...) 26.
Arseo. 4. Darius the last 6. But here beside that he counts three among the
Persian kings. (...), Xgrxes the 2. Segdi^^s whose years of reign are not
reckoned but the best historians, as is showed before, quest. 37. he erreth in
referring the reedifying of the Temple to Darius Hystaspis reign, the third
king of Persia; whereas there are reckoned in Ezra, after Cyrus, Ass^^^us,
Artaxerxes, and then Darius, under whom the Temple was builded, Ezra. 4. 7. and
24.

3. Tertullia^ first sets down Darius to have (...) 19. years, then
A^taxerxes 41. after him Ochus 24. then Argus one, and the last Darius 21. So
he seems in all to account but an 106. years for the persian Monarchy:
whereof 49. being expired at the reedifying of the Temple, there will remain
but 57. to the end of that Monarchy. But herein is Teriullian deceived, in
making but five kings of Persia in all.

4. Iunius in his third edition, in his annotations upon this place, summeth
the years from the 2. of Nothus to the end of the Persian Monarchy, to 93.
for Nothus he, counts 19. years in all, and from his second 18. for Mnemon
43. Ochus 23. Arses 3. Darius the last 6. so also Polanus: which years being
added to the 106. which he thinks were expired from Cyrus first, at the 2. of
Nothus, make 200. save one. But the age of Nehemiah, who saw the beginning and
end of that Monarchy, will not permit, that so many years be allowed unto it.

5. Pintus giving unto the Persian Monarchy 191. years, and counting 48. unto
the sinishing of the Temple, must leave an 143. years or thereabout, for the
time of that Monarchy, after the finishing of the Temple: But upon the former
reason of Nehemiahs age, this can not be admitted.

6. Pererius from the 1. of Cyrus to the 2. of Nothus, counts an 140. years,
and from thence to the end of that Monarchy some 94. years: M. Lively also
agrees with him in the same account, Pers. Monarch. p. 53. they differ but in
2. years: Pererius allotteth to the Persian Monorchie 232. years, lib. 13. in
Dan. M. Lively 230. But it is sufficiently showed before, that the Persian
Monarchy could not continue so long, qu. 43.

7. But Montanus counting by the high Priests goes beyond them in all in his
reckoning for the latter part of the Persian Monarchy: in apparat. lib. Daniel.
for he gives unto Eliashib 41. years, in whose 14. year he says Nenemiah
returned to the king of Persia after the city was repaired, which was in 32.
year of Mnemons reign, Nehem. 5. 14. there remain then of Eliashibs years
27. then Ioiada succeeded 25. years, Iohanan 24. years, Iaddua, to the time
of Alexander 27. thus there shall be an 103. years from the 32. year of
Mnemon, to the end of the Persian Monarchy; unto the which add the 32.
years of Mnemon, and 7. years of Darius, there will arise an 142. years from
the finishing of the Temple to the end of the Persian Monarchy, which
Nehemiahs age will by no means endure.

8. This then is the best resolution, that although in such great variety and
difference, the particular years can not well be assigned unto the several
kings of Persia, which succeeded after the finishing of the Temple, yet the
whole sum is must not extend beyond 80. or 81. or thereabout: so that thus
the whole sum is made up: 49. years are counted from Cyrus 1. to the 6. of
Darius, when the Temple was finished: and thence to the end of the Persian
Monarchy, if 81. years more be added, we shall have the whole sum of an
130. years: this account follows Beroaldus, Iunius in his annotations, edit.
1. H. Broughton in his proleg. in Dan. who last named does thus parcel out the
years: from Cyrus to Xerxes 6. when he warred against Grecia, he gives 30.
years, to Artaxerxes with his father and alone, 42. to Ochus, called also
Darius Nothus, alone 8. with his father 16. to Mnemon 42. to Ochus 3. to Darius
the last 5. or 6. the whole sum is an 130.

54. Quest. Of the just computation of the years of the Grecian Monarchy.
Having the certentie of the years of the Persian Monarchy in general, the
next part of the 490. years, decyphered in the 70. weeks, consists in the
due examination of the years of the kingdom of the Grecians: where there are
five several accounts. 1. by the reign of the kings of Syria, 2. by the
years of the high Priests, 3. by the years of the captains and Princes of
the Jews, 4. by the years of the kings of Egypt, 5. by the Olympiades.

1. By the Syrian kings, the account is uncertain: there are numbered of them in
all from Seleucus Nicanor, the first king and founder of the family of the
Seleucians, to Seleucus the son of Gryphus 19. kings: their particular names,
with the years of their reign, it is not needful here to set down: we
shall have further occasion to deal with them in particular in the 11.
chapter. But the reason why the account taken by them is not certain; is this:
because the kingdom of Syria, began 15. years after Alexanders death, and
after the kingdom of Egypt, and it ended above 50. years before the kingdom
of the Herodians began in Judea, about which time the reign of Cleopaora, the
last Queen and Regent of Egypt, expired.

2. Likewise there is small certentie in the account taken by the years of the
high Priests. Montanus sets them down in this order unto the time of Herod.

High Priests years. Onias after Iaddua 27 Simon Iustus 13 Eleazar 20 Manasses
27 Simon Iustus 28 Onias Simons son 39 Jason 3 Menelaus 12 Ionathas 18 Simon
8 Ioannes Hircanus 31 Aristobulus 1 Iannes Alexander 27 Alexandra the widow of
Alexander high Priest. 9 Hircanus her son 3. months. Aristobulus Hircanus
brother 3 Hircanus restored 22 Antigonus 5

The whole sum arises to 293. years or thereabout: in which account we want
7. years of the full number, which is allowed to the Greek Monarchy, which
is 300. years: and beside there is some variance in the particular account:
for unto Eleazar the third in the foresaid number, Philo gives but 20. years,
Eusebius 23. to Onias Bullinger appoints but 25. years, Montanus 27. And the
like difference may be found in the rest: as Oecolampad. gives but 26. to
Ioannes Hircanus, Montanus and Bullinger allow him 31. to Aristobulus and
Hircanus he gives 34. years, the other two count but 26. between them, So
then this reckoning by the years of the high Priests is uncertain, and the
rather, because the times were corrupt, and confused: they were made high
Priests for money, and sometime one was up, and an other down.

3. The third kind of reckoning is by the years of the Princes and captains,
joined with the years of the kings of Syria. Oecolampad. thus sets down
the years of the kings of Syria unto the time of the Macchabees, and then the
years of the Macchabees in this order.

The kings of Syria. The Macchabees. Alexander reigned years 5 Judas
Macchabeus governed years. 3 Seleucus Nican^r 44 Antiochus Sother 19 Ionathas
19 Antiochus Theos 15 Simon 8 Seleucus Callinicus 20 Ioannes Hircanus 26
Seleucus Ceraunius 3 Aristobulus 1 Antiochus Megas 36 Ianneus Alexander 27
Seleucus Philopater 12 Alexandra 9 Antiochus Epiphanes 11 Aristobulus and
Hircanus 34 the sum is an 165 the sum is an 127

Both these sums put together make 292. there wants 6. to make up 300.
years. And beside, there is great variance and difference about the sum of
these years: Montanus sets down an other account of the Hebrews, who
allow unto the kingdom of the Grecians 175. years, before the time of the
Macchabees, to whose government they assign but an 103. years, which make in
all but 278. here want 22. years of 300. Melancthon much differs not from
the last account: he gives unto Alexander 7. years, to the Seleucians unto
Judas Macchabeus 146. to the Macchabees from Judas unto Herod 127. the whole
sum is 280. there yet are wanting 20. years. The former of these numbers
agrees with the account of years in the book of the Macchabees, where it is
said, that Antiochus died in the 149. year, 1. Macchab. 6. 16. and three year
before that Judas Macchabeus began to oppose himself against the tyranny of
Autiochus Epimanes. Hitherto then we can have no certentie for the just number
of these years.

4. The fourth way is to proceed by the account of the years of the Ptolomes
of Egypt: for Ptolomeus Lagi began his government immediately after Alexanders
death: and Cleopatra the daughter of Ptolome Auletes reigned in Egypt to the
beginning of Herod's reign in Iewrie, and somewhat after: their years are set
down thus, according to the computation of Clemens Alexandrinus, which M. Br.
follows: Alexander 6 Ptolomeus Lagi 40 Pto. Philadelph. 37 Pto, E^ergetes. 25
Pto. Philopater. 17 Pto. Epiphanes 24 Ptolom, Philometer 35 Physcon 29 Lathurus
36 Aul^tes 29 Cleopatra 22 the whole sum is 300. And in this account likewise
there is great uncertainty. Tertullian. 1. lib. contr. Iudaeos, sets down
the kings with their years of reign thus: Alexander 12 Sother in Alexandria
reigned 35 Philadelphus 38 Euergetes 25 Philopator 17 Epiphanes 24 An other
Euergetes 37 An other Sother 38 Ptolome 37 Cleopatra 22 the sum is 285. This
sum comes short of 300, by 15. and beside here are 12. years given unto
Alexanders reign after Darius, whereas he reigned but 6. or at the most 7.
after the final overthrow of the Persians: he reigned in all 12. years, but
after Darius was vanquished, 6. only or 7. which Tertullian counts 12.
years. And further, whereas Clemens Alexandrinus reckons for the Grecian
Monarchy three hundredth years, some do exceed that number, as Epiphanius
adds 12. years more: some come short, as Suidas, in Adam counts less by
30. years.

5. The last way then to know the just number of years for the kingdom of the
Greeks, is by the Olympiads, which is a sure reckoning, as is before declared,
qu. 35. for the Greek affairs. Alexander died in the 1. year of the 114.
Olympiad, as Arrianus, and most Chronologers do hold: and our blessed Savior
suffered in the 1. of the 203. Olympiad, Joseph. Scallig. the years between
these two Olympike years amount to 356. and with Alexanders 6. years, 362.
Iun. annotat. from whence 62. must be aba^ed from the end of Cleopatraes
reign, unto the passion of our blessed Savior: so there will remain just
300. years within two for the Greek Monarchy. Polanus much differs not
counting by the years of the building of Rome: Alexander died in the 430.
year of the age of Rome, and Jerusalem was destroyed in the 822. year: then
diducting 38. years from thence backward to the passion of Christ, (which
Bullinger makes 40. placing the destruction of Jerusalem 2. years later. in
the 824. year of Rome) and 60. or 61. to the end of Cleopatraes government:
and there will by this account also remain 300. years for the kingdom of the
Grecians.

So then we have toward the number of 490. years, first from Cyrus 1. to the
end of the Persian Monarchy, an 130. years, and then 300. years for the
government of the Grecians: there remain 60. years from the end of Cleopatra
her reign, in the 4. year of Herod, in whose 30. Christ was borne, unto the
passion of Christ in the 34. of his age, but 33. complete, which make up the
60. years* And so rises the just sum of 490. years, contained in Daniels
70. weeks. Thus by Gods gracious assistance have I waded through this
bottomless depth of Daniels 70. weeks, which I hold to be simply the most
difficult and inextricable question in the old Testament. Now it is time, that
I proceed to discuss the words of the text: but first I will lay together in
one view the sundry interpretations of these 70. weeks, which have been
dispersedly handled before.

55. Quest. The several interpretations of Daniels 70. weeks, dispersedly
handled before, summed together.
The sundry opinions and diverse interpretations of the numbering of Daniels
weeks, may be sorted out in this manner into these 6. orders or ranks. 1. Some
begin the account too soon, and end too soon. 2. Some begin too late,
and end too late. 3. Some begin too soon, and end too late. 4. Some
begin too late, and end too soon. 5. Some begin well* and end not right,
and they either end too soon, or too late. 6. Some end well their account,
but begin not right, and that either too soon or too late: the first four
do err both in the beginning and end, the other two fail but in the one,
either in the beginning or end.

1. Of the first sort is Orige^, who begins from Adam, and ends 69. weeks
of the account at the nativity of Christ, the 70. weeks he extends thence
to the destruction of the city* see this opinion confuted before, qu. 40.

2. Of the second sort are diverse. 1. all they which begin the acount after
the reign of Cyrus, as Chrysostom, who begins at the 20. year of Darius
Longimanus, and ends at the subversion of Jerusalem: so Eusebius begins at
Darius Hystaspis, and ends at Traian the Emperor: and Iunius, Josephus
Scalliger, M. Lively, begin at the 2. year of Darius Nothus, and end with
the ruin of the city: see their opinions more at large, quest. 47. Likewise
Apollinaris begins at Christ's nativity, and ends at the coming of
Antichrist toward the end of the world: see qu. 34. and 48.

3. Some begin too soon, and end too late, as Hyppolitus, beginning 50.
years before Cyrus, and ending toward the dissolution and end of the world:
and R. Solomon, who begins at the destruction of the first Temple, and
ends at the destruction of the second: see qu. 40. and 48.

4. Some begin too late and end too soon, as Melancthon, that begins his
second reckoning from Longimanus, and ends at the baptism of Christ: see
before, qu. 47.

5. Some begin well, and end too soon, as Origin, who in one account
begins a^ Darius the Mede, and ends at the nativity, qu. 47. before: so
also Melancthon in one accoun^. Eusebius also in one account begins at
Cyrus, and ends in Hyrcanus time. Some beginning right, end too late: as
Tertullian beginning at Darius, and Clemens Alexandrinus at Cyrus, end at the
subversion of Jerusalem: qu. 47. before. And some Hebrews begin at Darius
the Mede, but extend the years to the reign of Adrian the Emperor: see
quest. 48.

6. Some end right, namely at the passion of Christ, but begin too soon, as
Lyranus and Burgensis, who begin in the 4. or 5. year of Zedekiah, see qu.
41. some ending there also, begin too late; as they which begin at the 20.
year of Longimanus, and end at the passion of Christ: of which opinion are
Theodoret, Zonaras, Ioannes Lu^idus, Pererius, Bullinger, with others: see
before, qu. 49.

Then the best account of these weeks, is to pitch the beginning and end both
right: and that is to begin them at Cyrus, at the first going forth of the
word for the return of the people, as is proved before at large, quest. 43.
and to determine and conclude them at the most holy passion of our blessed
Savior, as is likewise before proved at large, qu. 49. of this chapter. Now I
will return to examine the words, as they lie in the text.

56. Quest. Why the 7. weeks are severed from the 62. v. 25. Unto the Messiah
shall be 7. weeks, and 62. weeks.
1. Some think that no other reason is to be given hereof, but that the Angel
of purpose thus speaks, that the prophecy should be uttered in dark and
obsture terms: as Hierom to this purpose says upon the 45. of Ezekiel,
Scriptura difficultatem habet in numeris, vt intentum faciat animum auditoris,
the Scripture uses some difficulty in numbers, to make the mind of the
hearer more intent: But it is evident, by the dividing of the last week from
the rest, wherein some special matters are delivered, concerning the death of
the Messiah, and the confirming of the covenant, and ceasing of the sacrifices,
that there is some special intendment in the setting apart also of the 7.
weeks from the rest.

2. Some do think, that it is only an Hebrew phrase, who use to set the
less number before the greater: as we would say, speaking of Abraham, he lived
an 175. years, but the Scripture says, he lived 5. and 70. and an 100.
years: so Hierome. But to this Calvin answers, non continuat seriem annorum,
etc. he continues not here the course of years, as in setting down the age
of man, etc. for the reason in setting down of numbers in that manner is,
because they are of diverse kinds: when the years are numbered by hundreds,
tennes, and unions: but here the number is all of the same kind, 70. in all.
And if the Hebrew phrase should be here observed, he should have said, nine;
and sixty, or 7. 2. and 60. two should not be put after 60. And why is the 70.
week put last of all? it should after that manner of speaking be put first: as
to say thus, 1. and 7. and 62. There is then more here to be con^idered then
the phrase only.

3. Some make no matter at all of this division, but put the 7. weeks and 62.
weeks together: that after 69. weeks the Messiah shall be slain, Melancth.
Vatab. Osiand. but then this division made of purpose by the Angel should seem
to be idle.

4. Pererius therefore gives this reason of this division, because in these
seven weeks, which make 49. years, there were two notable accidents; the
repairing of the city by Nehemiah, and in the end of this term fell out
that notable history of Mordecat and Esther under Artaxerxes Mnemon. But
Pererius is here deceived: for as it shall afterward appear, the repairing of
the city by Nehemiah, was without the compass of these 7. weeks: and the
other story fell out in the space of this term, but not under Mnemon: that
Assuerus is most like to be Darius Hystaspis, as is before showed, qu. 44.

5. Some give a mystical reason of it, as Burgens. addit. 4. Antiqua lex
dicitur septenana, nova octonaria, the old law is signified by seven, the new
law by eight: to show hereby that the Messiah should bring in a new law, and
abolish the old. But the Messiah was not to come in those 7. weeks, but after
62. weeks more.

6. So then in that the 7. weeks are divided from the rest, it does not so
much show what notable accidents should fall out therein, as it does prescribe
the very number of years, after the which from the going out of the word, the
Temple and city should again be repaired and reedified; which accordingly
came so to pass, as shall be showed afterward.

57. Quest. Whether these 7. weeks must be counted before the 62. weeks, or
after.
It being then agreed upon, that there was some special cause in seuering
these 7. weeks from the rest, yet there is some question, when these 7. weeks
should begin, before or after the 62. weeks.

1. Tertullian puts them after: for the 62. weeks he extends from Darius
to the birth of Christ, and then 7. weeks and an half, that is, 53. years,
he counts from thence to the destruction of Jerusalem. But from Christ's
birth, who suffered in the 34. year of his age, to the destruction of the
city, some 40. years after, was above seven weeks, they make 10. weeks, 70.
years at the least.

2. Some Hebrews, whose opinion Hierome rehearses in his commentary upon
this place, do end the 62. years at the taking of the city by Titus, and
from thence to the final destruction by Adrian the Emperor, they count 8.
weeks more, which makes 56. years. But beside that there are found from
Darius to Adrian the Emperor, above 600. years, whereas 72. weeks make but
490. years: the 7. weeks must be counted to the Messiah, as is evident, v.
25. not after.

3. Theodoret brings the 69. weeks to Hyrcanus death, and from thence to the
baptism of Christ, he counts 7. weeks, that is 49. years: But he is much
deceived in his account: for from Hyrcanus death to the baptism of our
Savior, are about 60. years: for after Hyrcanus in the 32. year of Herod, or
thereabout, was Christ borne, who was baptized in the 30. year of his age.

4. Now that these 7. weeks are to be counted before the 62. weeks, not to be
cast after them, 1. the order of the words declare: there shall be seven weeks
to the Messiah, and 62. weeks. 2. and beside it is said, that not after 69.
weeks, but after 62. weeks Messiah shall be slain: so that unless the 62.
weeks be put to the 7. weeks, the years will not bring us to the Messiah. 3.
the accidents that fell out after that time, the building of the city, and the
wall, which were done after the term of these 7. weeks, which things
accordingly came to pass, will bring back these 7. weeks into the first
place. 4. And beside the Angel directly begins the 7. weeks from the going
forth of the word, v. 25.

58. Quest. When this term of 7. weeks, that is, 49. years began, and
when it ended.
1. R. Solomon, whom Lyranus seems herein to incline unto, begins these
seven weeks from the destruction of the first Temple by Nabuchadnezzer, and
ends them at Cyrus, which time by his account makes 52. years. But in this
number of 52. years, there are 3. years above 7. prophetical weeks, that is,
49. years, which the Rabbin is constrained (to make his account even) to put
off to the beginning of the 62. weeks: but then is not the Angels division
just and true, that cutteth off only 7. weeks from the rest: and beside,
these 7. weeks must begin from the going forth of the word for the people to
return, they take not then beginning so long before.

2. M. Calvin begins these years in the first of Cyrus, and ends them in
the sixth year of Darius the son of Hystaspis, the 3. king of Persia: but
this can not be: for they that give the most years unto Cyrus and Cambyses,
allow but unto the one 30. to the other 7. excepting only Luther, who
following Eusebius. l. de demonstr. Euang. gives to each of them 20. years: then
add the 6. years of Darius, they will make but 43. how then can the seven
weeks here be fulfilled? Beside, that Darius, in whose sixth the Temple was
reedified, called Darius of Persia, was not Darius Hystaspis, the 3. king of
Persia, but before this Darius three other kings are named, Cyrus, Assuerus,
Artashasht, Ezr. 4. 6, 7.

3. Oecolampadius proceeds an other way: for thus he casts up the
reckoning: he allows unto Cyrus 9. years, and to Cambyses 8. or to Cyrus 14.
and to Cambyses 3. and then he puts hereunto 20. of Darius, when Nehemiah
was sent to Jerusalem, in whose 32. year the building of the city was
finished. But in this account diverse errors are committed. 1. in giving 17.
years to Cyrus and Cambyses, therein he differs from other Chronologers: the
Hebrews give unto them both 9. years jointly: the most 37. years: Bullinger
to Cyrus 16. to Cambyses 8. If it shall be free for men, to allot unto the
reign of kings more or fewer years at their pleasure, wheresoever they
begin their account, they may make it agree. 2. Darius in whose time the
Temple was built, was not Darius the son of Hystaspis, who immediately
succeeded Cambyses: for before this Darius are named three other kings, as is
showed before out of Ezr. 4. 6, 7. but Darius Hystaspis was the third king of
Persia.

4. Bullinger will have these 7. weeks begin in the 7. year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, when Ezra was sent with a new commission to Jerusalem, Ezr. 7. from
thence counting 49. years we shall come to the 11. year of Darius Nothus;
counting as he does to Longimanus reign 44. years: and in this time was the
city repaired by Nehemiah, but with much trouble. But this account also
fails: 1. The Temple was, after many years intermission, built and finished
before Ezra was sent, in the 6. year of Darius, Ezr. 6. 15. which intermission
is signified, in the dividing of these 7. weeks from the rest, as shall
afterward appear, qu. 59. 2. He begins the 7. weeks, where they should
end, namely at the finishing of the Temple, as shall be showed afterward.

5. They likewise which begin these 7. weeks at the 20. year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, as Pererius, with diverse others, can show no reason, why these 7.
weeks should be cut off from the rest, saving that because in this time
Nehemiah was sent: and in the end of this term, in the reign of Artaxerxes
Mnemon, he thinks the history of Esther and Mordecai fell out. But Pererius
is much deceived. 1. he begins the 7. weeks after the time, wherein they
should end, namely, at the finishing of the Temple, as follows to be showed.
2. And it is before proved, that Mordecai lived not under Artaxerxes Mnemon,
but under Darius Hystaspis, who is called Assuerus, as is showed before, qu.
44. 3. But though they seem to allege some reason for the beginning of these
7. weeks in the 20. of Artaxerxes, there can be no probable cause showed, of
the ending of these weeks, which by Pererius account will bring us to the 10.
year of Artaxerxes Mnemons reign, whom he supposes to be Esters Assuerus:
for in that story, there is no special note made of the 10. year, but of the
3. year, wherein he made a feast to his nobles, Esth. 1. 3. of the 7. year,
when he married Esther, c. 2. 16. and of the 12. year, when Haman procured the
decree against the Jews, c. 3. 7.

6. Some begin these 7. weeks at the 20. year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and
end them at the 2. of Artaxerxes Memor, M. Lydyat, page 78.

But beside the difference in this computation between him and Pererius, who
brings the 7. weeks from the 20. of Longimanus, to the 10. of Memor, or
Mnemon, no reason can be assigned of the breaking off and dividing those 7.
weeks from the other: he says, that other cities of Judea began then to be
builded, but with much trouble: but Daniel makes mention only of building
Jerusalem in this place.

7. Josephus Scalliger lib. 6. de emendat. tempor. M. Iunius, M. Lively in his
Persian Monarchy, and Polanus begin these 7. weeks in the 2. year of
Darius Nothus, and end them in the 32. of Artaxerxes Mnemon, when Nehemiah
returned, after he had finished the building of the city unto the king of
Persia, Nehem. 5. 14. there remained 17. years after Darius second, whom they
held to have reigned 19. years: which make the sum of 49. years: in which
space of time, both the Temple and city were builded.

But against this opinion it may thus be objected. 1. the 7. weeks, and the
70. weeks have the same beginning from the going forth of the word, which is
before proved at large to have been in the first of Cyrus, quest. 43. 2. they
begin these weeks where they should end: for these 7. weeks were the time
of the intermission and breaking off of their work, in building the city and
Temple: the Angel shows how long that work should be interrupted, after the
which they should begin to build.

8. M. Iunius then in his former edition begins these weeks in the first of
Cyrus, and ends them in the 20. year of Longimanus, when Nehemiah had his
commission given him* so also H. Br. in his commentary: But from Cyrus 1. to
the sending of Nehemiah in the 20. Artaxerxes Longimanus, must needs be above
49. years in account: for the four former kings of Persia, Cyrus, Cambyses,
Darius the son of Hystaspis, and Xerxes, had more then 30. years among them.

9. Wherefore the best reckoning of these 7. weeks is this: to begin them
with M. Calvin, Oecolampad. M. Br. in Cyrus first, and to end them in the 6.
of Darius Longimanus, when the Temple was finished: and in the 7. year was
Ezra sent, and in the 20. by the same king, Nehemiah: my reasons are these. 1.
from the first going forth of the word, which was in Cyrus time; must these 7.
weeks take beginning, which make 49. years: the time is too short to end them
in the reign of Darius Hystaspis, which was within 49. years, and too long to
extend them to Darius Nothus, who was the sixth king of Persia, which was about
70. years from Cyrus first: therefore one must be taken between them, and
that was Darius Artaxerxes called Longimanus, who was next before Nothus:
Longimanus is held by the most to have reigned 40. years, which years added
to the reign of 4. kings before Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius, Xerxes, will make too
many for the account of 49. years, to the 2. of Nothus. 2. The Temple was 46.
year in building as the Jews say, John. 2. which years must be accounted
from the 3. of Cyrus, when the building began to be hindered, for the which
cause Daniel was in heaviness 3. weeks of days, Dan. 10. 3. so we shall have
the sum of 46. years from Cyrus 3. and of 49. from Cyrus 1. to the finishing
of the Temple.

But it will be objected, that it was Darius Nothus, in whose 6. the Temple was
built, because he had an Artaxerxes going before him, Ezra. 4. 7. and an other
after him, Ezr. 6. 14. and 7. 1. and so he was in the mids between two
Artaxerxes, Longimanus and Mnemon, and that must needs be Nothus, Joseph.
Scalliger lib. 6. de emendat. temp.

Answ. That Artashasht mentioned, Ezra. 4. 7. who sent a rescript to hinder the
building of the city and Temple, was not Artaxerxes Longimanus, but Cambyses,
who was a chief hinderer of the building of the Lords house. 1. Longimanus is
held of all to have been a friend unto the Jews. 2. In the accusation sent to
Artashasht they say, that the Jews did build and lay the foundation of the
walls, Ezr. 4. 12. they speak, as of a thing then in doing, which could not
be so many years (more then 40) after in Longimanus time: for the work was
intermitted unto the time of Darius. Ezra. 4. 5. this complaint then was made
to Artashasht, prince under Cyrus, namely, Cambyses his son, who had the
administration of the kingdom, his father being occupied in foreign wars
abroad: so Iun. edition. 3. Vatab. H. Br. Though Assuerus be mentioned before
v. 6. which was Darius Hystaspis, how in the beginning of his reign an
accusation was made against them; that proves not the Artashasht following to
be Longimanus: but the story returns to show the original of that
accusation, which formerly had been made.

3. That place, Ezr. 6. 14. Whether Darius and Artashasht mentioned Ezr. 6. 14.
were all one king.
proves not an other Artashasht to have succeeded Darius: there are diners
opinions. 1. Some think, that Artaxerxes Mnemon caused such things to be
finished, which belonged to the ornament of the Temple, which was made an end
of in his fathers time: ex Vatabl. but here the finishing of the Temple is
ascribed to Darius and Artashasht together, not to one after an other. 2.
Iunius thinks, that Artashasht reigned together with his father: but it is
not like that in the second year of Darius, when the work began, that
Darius son was so old, as to take the administration of the kingdom upon
him. 3. Some by Darius understand Darius the Mede, who jointly with Cyrus gave
that commandment at the first; and by Artashasht they understand Longimanus,
Iun. annot. edit. 1. 4. Some thus read, Darius, that is, Artashasht, Vatab. and
M. Br. names him Darius Artashasht, which seems to have been a common
appellation to most of the Persian kings, Iun. Genevens. annotat. in Ezra 7. 1.
I prefer this latter, for in the first commandment which was given unto the
Jews to return, only mention is made of Cyrus, 2. Chron. 36. 32. Ezra. 1. 1.
Darius then called king of Persia, which was Longimanus, Ezra. 4. 24. the same
is Artashasht called here king of Persia, and Ezra. 6. 22. king of Ashur, and
Nehem. 13. 6. king of Babel: a part of the kingdom being by the figure
Synecdoche taken for the whole: for all was under the government of the kings
of Persia.

4. Some think that the first Artashasht or Artaxerxes mentioned Ezra. 4. 7.
was Smerdes, which usurped the kingdom after Cambyses, for 7. months: and the
other Artaxerxes spoken of Ezra. 6. 14. and 7. 1. was Artaxerxes Longimanus,
and Darius there mentioned was Darius Hystaspis called the king of Ashur, Ezra.
6. 22. because he snbdued Babylon and Assyria, so M. Lydyat de emendat. tempor.
page 64, 65. 73.

But 1. it is not like that Smerdes being king not above 7. months, and not
thoroughly settled, could be such an hinderer of the building of Jerusalem: or
that in so short a time, there could be such intercourse by letters to and fro
from the king of Persia to Jerusalem being far distant, even 4. months
journey, Ezra. 7. 9. the other Artaxerxes, was indeed Longimanus, as is before
showed, and the same was the Darius also there mentioned, Ezra. 6. 14. for how
could the temple be said to be finished by the commandment of Artashasht, who
yet reigned not, but is mentioned by anticipation, as be thinks: and as
Darius is here called king of Ashur, fo is Artashasht called king of Babel,
Nehem. 13. 6. they were both the same as is before showed, a part of the
kingdom is taken for the whole.

59. Quest. Whether that place, Ioh. 2. 20. that the Temple was 46. years in
building, have any agreement with these 7. weeks.
1. Oecolampadius utterly rejects that saying of the Jews, nobis illud
dictum Iudaorum, quod per inuidiam loquebantur, non est tantae authoritatis,
etc. to us that saying of the Jews is not of so great authority, that we
should set it against so evident places of the Scripture. Likewise Bullinger
thinks that the Jews might ouerlash in this speech, as they did when they
said to Christ, Thou art not yet fifty year old, Ioh. 8. 57. and yet he never
saw forty. But, although where the Jews speak upon their blind traditions
contrary to Scripture, they are not to be regarded; yet when we see the
received opinion to concur with Scripture, and the event to be answerable
thereunto, it is not to be rejected: as here the 46. years by them mentioned,
being counted from Cyrus third, when the work ceased, do agree with this
prophecy of 7. weeks, that is 49. years from Cyrus first.

2. Josephus Scalliger likewise rejects this testimony of the Jews, lib. 6.
de emendat. tempor. upon this reason, because these 7. weeks are appointed for
the building of the city and street, and not of the Temple: But by the one
the other must be understood: the building of Jerusalem includes also the
building of the Temple: for otherwise no mention is made at all here of the
building of the Temple, which notwithstanding was principally intended, both in
the prophecy of Isay concerning Cyrus, c. 44. 28. and in the fulfilling
thereof, Ezra. 1. 1.

3. Pintus applies that term of 46. years to the building of the Temple,
but he does not make it agree with these 7. months: for he reckons but 48.
years in all to the finishing of the Temple, which began two years after
the going forth of the word: so that from the beginning of the building were
46. years, but from the going forth of the word 48. Contra. But neither were
two years expired from the going forth of the word unto the beginning of the
Temple, but only one year complete and somewhat more: for they began to set
forward the work in the 2. year the second month, Ezra. 3. 8. And thus the
prophecy of 7. weeks from the going forth of the word should not be fulfilled.

4. Some think, that the Jews put diverse time^ together, of the second
building of the Temple in their teturne from captivity, and of the third by
Herod, so that they add 20. years, which Herod spent in enlarging the
edifices about the Temple, Oecolamp. But the Jews speak only of the time
spent in the building of the second Temple: for Salomons Temple was finished in
7. years, 1. king 6. and Herod's work about the Temple in 10. years, as
Josephus witnesses, lib. 15. antiquit.

5. Pererius thinks the Jews computation to be true, which he begins in
the 2. year of Cyrus, when they laid the foundation of the Temple, and ends
in the 9. of Darius Hystaspis, when all the work, the outward Court and all
were finished: and thus he casts the sum; from Cyrus 2. there remain 29.
years of Cyrus reign, Cambyses, and the Magi reigned 8. and Darius 9. But the
7. weeks he begins from the 20. year of Longimanus.

Contra. 1. Beside that, Cyrus and Cambyses reigned not so long over the
Persian Monarchy: Cyrus is held to have reigned in all 30. but over the whole
Monarchy, after the overthrow of Babel, but three. 2. an other error is,
that Pererius takes the ninth year of Darius, following therein Josephus,
whereas Ezra. 6. 14. the Temple was finished in the 6. year of Darius. 3.
neither was this Darius Hystaspis, but Darius Longimanus, under whom the Temple
was finished, as before is showed, quest. 45. 4. the seven weeks must begin
from the 1. of Cyrus, not from the 20. of Longimanus, as is also before
proved; quest. 43. and quest. 58.

6. M. Calvin, whom the Genevens. follow in their annotation here, do give
unto the building of the Temple 46. year, and to the laying of the foundation
3. years, which make 49. in all: but this account cannot stand neither, for
the 7. weeks must begin from the going forth of the word, which was in the
1. of Cyrus: the foundation of the Temple was laid in the 2. year, then cannot
the 7. weeks and these 49. years, wherein the Temple was built, end
together, not beginning together.

7. Some think that the Jews speak not of the Temple built by Zorobabel, but
of Herod's Temple which he began to enlarge in the 18. year of his reign,
which was 46. years before, and was not yet finished, M. Lydyat de emendat.
tempor. p. 174.

8. But the more received and probable opinion is, that the Jews speak of the
Temple built after their return out of captivity, and finished, not then in
building; and thus the 7. weeks, and the 46. years are made to agree
together: the 7. weeks, which make 49. years, begin at Cyrus 1. and the 46.
years must be counted from the third of Cyrus, when the work of the house was
hindered: and so the 7. weeks and the 46. years shall end together at the
finishing of the Temple in Darius 6. year, H. Br. in his Concent.

Quest. 60. Unto Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, ver. 25. Who is here
understood by the Messiah.
1. R. Selam^ who begins the 7. weeks at the destruction of the first
Temple, will have this Messiah, or anointed, to be Cyrus, as he is called,
Isay. 45. 1. Thus says the Lord to Cyrus his anointed: and from the desolation
of the Temple unto Cyrus he counts 52. years.

Paulus Burgensis thus confuteth this assertion, because none are simply in
Scripture calls anointed, but those which were anointed either with
material oil, as the kings and Priests, or with spiritual, as the Prophets;
but Cyrus was neither of these ways anointed. And whereas this place is urged
of Cyrus, he says it is not to be understood of Cyrus, but of the Messiah:
this answer of Burgens. is very weak: for in that the Prophet says, Cyrus,
his anointed, what is more evident, then that he speaks of Cyrus, being
expressed by name? Pererius answer also is insufficient, that Cyrus was long
before the beginning of these weeks; whereas it has been already showed,
that the weeks began in Cyrus time.

1. Thus therefore is this opinion rather refelled. 1. because he himself
counts 52. weeks unto Cyrus, which make above 7. weeks of years, Burgens.
2. Afterward by Messiah that should be slain, he understands Agrippa king of
the Jews; and so he changes the person, taking the Messiah for two diverse
persons: whereas it is evident, that the Prophet speaks of one and the same
Messiah, Lyran. 3. he is called Messiah the governor, or principal, for so
the word nagid signifies: but none is called the principal Messiah but only
Christ, of whom the Prophet speaks, Isay. 55. 4. I have given him for a
witness to the people, for a Prince, etc. the word is nagid, Burgens.

2. Some by the Messiah understand Nehemiah, as Ab. Ezra, some Zorobabel, some
Iehoshua the high Priest, as R. Levi, Ben Gerso^. But these were in the
beginning of the 7. weeks, at the return of the captivity, Ezr^ 2. 2. it
cannot be therefore said, that there should be 7. weeks unto them: And again,
the office of this Messiah was to finish sin, and reconcile iniquity, which
none of these could do.

3. Some by Messiah, taking the singular for the plural, do understand the
anointed governors, whom Eusebius takes to be the Macchabees, who were both
Priests and kings: but unto the beginning of the reign of the Maccabees, were
above 7. weeks from the beginning of the 70. weeks, wheresoever they begin
them: for the regiment of the Macchabees began above an hundred years after
the end of the Persian Monarchy.

4. M. Lively therefore in his Persian Monarchy, p. 205. takes the word
Messiah somewhat more largely, for the chief rulers and kings of the Jews
commonwealth, unto the beginning of whose settled estate are counted 7. weeks:
for from the 2. of Darius Nothus when the Temple began to be reedified, of
whose reign there remained 17. years, to the 32. of Arrashasht, are just 49.
years, in whose 32. year the city being builded, and set form of
government established, Nehemiah returned unto the king, Nehem. 13. 6. of this
his opinion he yields two special reasons. 1. from the Hebrewe point athnah,
after 7. weeks, which being a perfect distinction, does suspend it from the
sentence following: so that he would have these 7. weeks to the Messiah, taken
by themselves, and not to be joined with the 62. weeks following. 2. these two
things began together, the city builded, and the anointed governor
thereof: as Samballat in a letter to Nehemiah joins them both together,
Nehem. 6. 6. thou and the Jews think to rebel, for the which cause thou
buildest ihe wall, and thou will be the king thereof, to this purpose M.
Lively, p. 209.

Answ. 1. Oecolampadius to that objection of the points, makes this answer: we
had rather follow in this place the Greeks and Latins, quam Iudaeos pro sua
libidine punctum constituentes, then the Jews setting the points according to
their pleasure: but this is a dangerous answer: for if we make question of the
Hebrewe pricks and points, we shall have no certainty of the Scripture:
therefore I rather answer with Polanus, that although the perfect distinction
athnah, be there set, yet the rest must be joined in sense, as the Angel at the
first makes but one whole number of 70. weeks.

2. It follows not, because when the city was builded, the settled
government began, that therefore the governors were this Messiah: And if
Nehemiah were the first gouerno^r, as it cannot be denied, after the building
of the city: to the beginning of his government, there were not 7. weeks of
years; seeing he was sent in the 20. of Artaxerxes, and there continued to the
32. year, when according to his account the 49. years expired.

5. Wherefore the best and most received interpretation is, that by Messiah
here, we are to understand our Blessed Savior Christ Jesus; as it may thus
appear. 1. one and the same Messiah is spoken of through this prophecy: but
the Messiah which should be slain, and confirm the covenant for one week,
was Christ: therefore this Messiah here spoken of was Christ. 2. the weeks
before spoken of, to finish sin, and reconcile iniquity, could only be
performed by Christ.

6. Some do understand by Messiah, Christ, and make this the sense, that 7.
weeks, that is, 49. years he should be their governor, and afterward cast
them off: But it is evident, that the Lord did not only during those 7. weeks
take upon him the protection of that people, but many years after also.

7. Some object, that in that Messiah is called here a captain or governor,
if it were meant of Christ, it would extenuate his dignity: M. Calvin
answers, that therein the dignity and excellency of Christ is set forth,
who was a captain over all other kings and Princes: and this title is given
also to kings, and to the chief earthly states; as David is called the
captain of the people, 2. Sam. 3. 2. and Hezekiah, 2. king. 20. 5. Pererius
adds further, that this title, nagid, captain, Prince, is particularly given
unto Christ, as Isay. 55. 4. I have given him for a prince or captain: for he
was our captain, 1. to lead us by his holy example of life. 2. in teaching the
way unto salvation. 3. in gathering together his church, and conducting them to
eternal life, Perer. lib. 10. quest. 17.

Quest. 61. v. 25. The streets shall be built again in a troublesome time:
how this was fullfilled.
1. Some do refer this troublesome time to the 62. week, immediately before
spoken of: which contains 434. years to be counted, unto the Messiah from
the end of the 7. weeks: and then the meaning is this, that during all the
continuance of that time, the commonwealth of the Jews should have much
^^^uble: so Iun. Polan, and M. Lively out of Saadiah gives this sense, page
172. that Jerusalem being builded, shall continue 434. years before the
desolation: but in that mention is made of building the streets again, that
is, the city, the words seem to have special reference to these troublesome
times in the first 7. weeks, wherein the work of the Temple and city were
intermitted.

2. Some by the streightnes of time, understand the short time, wherein the
city was builded: for after it began to be reedified in the 2. year of
Darius, it was finished in four year, Hug. Cardinal. but it is showed before,
that it was from the first to the last 46. year in building, and therefore the
7. weeks are fingled from the rest, to note the straightness and troubles of
those times.

3. Some having special reference unto the 7. weeks, do understand, only
the troublesome building of the city, because they hold the Temple to have
been built before the 7. weeks began, so Bullinger, Josephus Scalliger,
Osian. as mention is made, Nehem. 4. how they built with one hand, and held
their swords in the other: But seeing the building of the Temple was the
principal work, and was intermitted 46. years, it is not like that it should
be omitted in this prophecy.

4. Wherefore by building here in a trouble some time, is understood the
building of the Temple and the city: as Iunius in his commentary,
understands the building of Jerusalem: that both of them should be in a
troublesome time: So that as afterward the Angel shows what should happen
after the 7. and 62. weeks: so here specially is intended what memorable thing
should befall within the compass of these 7. weeks in the building of the
Temple: and after in the building of the city, H. Br. Concent. as also thereby
is signified, that their whole state should remain troublesome still, as the
book of the Macchabees shows, Lyran. that they should not look for any
perfect outward estate, but be stirred up to look for their spiritual
redemption by the Messiah.

Quest. 62. Of the 62. weeks, how they are to be understood.
1. Pererius observes upon this place, that in some copies of the Complutense
edition, for 62. weeks, there are put 64. weeks: which he notes to be a
manifest error, seeing that in the original, and the best translated copies,
there is mention made only of 62. weeks, which make 434. years.

2. Josephus Scalliger does not begin these 62. weeks, where the first 7.
end, but does give a diverse beginning unto them: the 7. weeks he would have
begin in the 2. of Darius Nothus, and end in the 32. of Artaxerxes Mnemon:
the 62. weeks he thinks to begin in the 5. year of Mnemon, and to end at
the passion of Christ.

But 1. in that the Angel puts all these weeks together in one whole sum
of 70. it is evident, that the 62. weeks must follow immediately after the 7.
weeks, and the 70. and last week after the 62. 2. seeing that Ezra was sent
in the 7. year of Artaxerxes, Ezra. 7. 1. Scalliger thinks that the decree
was made for his return in the 5. year, but he spent one year in his
preparation: But M. Lively answers that one year will not serve his turn:
for from the last year of the 202. Olympiad, counting 434. backward, we come to
the second year of the 94. Olympiad, which falls into the 3. year of
Artaxerxes reign by Scalligers own confession: but by Bullingers tables, the
2. year of the 94. Olympiad, brings us to the 15. year of Darius N^thus, 5.
years before Artaxerxes began to reign: so that Scalliger misseth of his
reckoning 3. or 4. years after his own account: thus M. Lively p. 231.

3. Some begin these 7. weeks and 62. weeks, in the 65. Olympiad, which was
in the beginning of Darius Hystaspis reign, and bring them to the 186.
Olympiad, which make 483. years, at such time as Hyrcanus was killed, in whom
the line of the anointed Priests ceased, and then Herod a stranger usurped the
kingdom, Eusebius. in Chronicis. but in this account we want above 60. years to
the death of the Messiah, who after these 62. weeks was to be slain.

4. Theod^ret begins the 62. weeks at the building of the city in the 20.
of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and ends with Eusebius at Hyrcanus death, and
thence to Christ's baptisrne he counts the other 7. weeks. But this account
cannot stand: for as Pererius casts the time; from the 20. of Longimanus
which was in the 4. year of the 83. Olympiad, to Hyrcanus death, which was as
Josephus reckons, lib. 15. antiquit. in the 187. Olympiad, are not 62.
weeks, or 434. years, but only 59. weeks, which make 414. years: And from
Hyrcanus death in the 187. Olympiad, to the baptism of Christ in the beginning
of the 202. Olympiad, are not only 7. weeks, that is 49. years: but almost
9. weeks, even 60. years.

5. Bullinger begins these 62. weeks in the 11. year of Darius Nothus, and
ends them in the passion of Christ: whereas the 62. weeks must begin after
the 7. weeks, which as is showed before, begin at Cyrus first, and end in
the 6. of Darius Longimanus.

6. Pererius beginning the 7. weeks at the 20. of Longimanus, and ending them
by his own account about the 10. year of Artaxerxes Mnemon, there begins
the 62. weeks, and ends them at the baptism of Christ: but the 7. weeks
were ended in the 6. year of Longimanus, as is proved before quest. 58. then
can they not begin at the 20. year of Longimanus.

7. But Osiander is further wide, who beginning the 7. weeks at the 20. of
Longimanus, and putting unto them 62. weeks more, which make 483. years,
brings them to the very time of Christ's passion, and there begins the 70.
and last week: he varieth 3. years and an half from all the rest, who
beginning as he does, yet determine the 69. weeks at Christ's baptism. How
further these 62. weeks are yet diuersely interpreted by some other both for
their beginning and end, see before, quest. 57.

8. Then it remains, that these 62. weeks must begin where the 7. weeks
end, in the 6. of Darius, and they end at the last seventy week, which
began three years and an half before the baptism of Christ; and the other
half is set apart for the holy preaching and Blessed passion of Christ.
Bulling. H. Br. who both agree for the end of these 62. weeks: but they
differ in the beginning: M. Bullinger reckons the 62. weeks from the 11. of
Darius Nothus, and the 7. weeks from the 20. of Longimanus.

9. Melancthon begins the 7. and 62. weeks, which make 69. in all, in the
2. of Longimanus, when the Temple began to be reedified, and ends them at
Christ's baptism: But as is showed before, quest. 58. the 7. weeks must end
in the sixth of Darius Longimanus: wherefore the meaning is this, that after 62.
weeks joined with the former 7. the Messiah shall be slain, not immediately
after those 69. weeks, but in the 70. and last week following after the 69.
Bullinger. Vatabl. Lyran.

Quest. 63. Shall Messiah be slain, v. 26. who this Messiah was, that should
be slain.
1. R. Selomo takes this Messiah to be king Agrippa, that should be slain by
the Romans a little before the destruction of Jerusalem: But this is a
fabulous conceit. 1. for Agrippa was not slain, but as Cornelius Tacitus
writes, lib. 5. Agrippa was confederate with the Romans: and Josephus also
testifies, that he took part with the Romans, after be could not persuade
the Jews to give over their intended war: and that the said Agrippa suruiued
after the destruction of the city. 2. Beside here is a great error in
Chronology; for from the beginning of the 70. weeks, which he makes 52.
years before Cyrus, to the destruction of Jerusalem, are in the most
compendious reckoning almost 600. years.

2. Theodoret and Eusebius by the Messiah understand Hyrcanus, who was the last
anointed governor of the Priests, and after him the Herodians usurped the
kingly authority unto the destruction of the city: But the Messiah here
spoken off, must reconcile iniquity, and finish sin, but so could not any of
the anointed Priests.

3. M. Lively by Messiah, taking the singular for the plural, would have meant
the anointed governors: for all lawful rule and authority ceased a little
before the taking of the city by the Romans: there was hauock made of the
rulers and Elders, and a general disorder and Anarchie brought in first under
Albinus, then Florus: Persian Monarchy, page 212. and p. 241. And this reason
he urges why the Messiah is not here Christ: because it were an improper
speech, to take the last week for the Messiah: as they are forced thus to
interpret these words: after 62. weeks shall the Messiah be slain, that is,
in the 70. and last week.

Contra. 1. Whereas the Prophet here speaks of one Messiah, by this
interpretation we shall have many, and a succession rather of governors, then
any one certain governor, in which sense, I think, it cannot be showed, that
the word (Messiah) is taken throughout the whole Scripture. 2. and by this
exposition of (Messiah) we are deprived of one of the most pregnant prophesies
of Christ's holy passion. 3. neither does it follow, that the 70. week in that
sense should be taken for the Messiah, no more then he himself takes it,
where he says, that after 69. weeks counted from the commandment, the
Messiah (whom he interprets the anointed governor) should be cut off, the
city and Temple destroyed, leaving the last week of the seventy, for the
accomplishment thereof, page 224. for does not he likewise understand the 70.
week after the 69. wherein the Messiah should be cut off? 4. even to admit his
own sense, the lawful anointed governors ceased in Jerusalem long before the
destruction of Jerusalem, about the birth of Christ, in the 30. year of Herod,
when that tyrant slew all the Sanedrim, L. Pl^ss. in his book of the truenes
of Christian religion, c. 29. 30.
as the L. of Plessie shows out of Philo: whereupon he infers that to be
the time, wherein the sovereignty and Jurisdiction of Iudsh did cease. And so
was Jacobs prophecy fulfilled, Genesis 49. 10. that the sc^pt^r should not depart
from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come: M.
Lively hereunto answeareth, that this prophecy was rather fulfilled in the
destruction of Jerusalem, which he calls the beginning of Christ's second
coming to judgment, the end and accomplishment whereof shall be in the last
day of judgment: and therefore all the time afterward is called the last
days: and this is the reason why our Savior, Matthew. 14. treats in the same
place of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the end of the world. So M.
Lively, p. 251.

But 1. this is a strange exposition, to understand Christ's coming in the
flesh, when he was gone out of the world, and to make his going his coming. 2.
Jacob prophesies of the first coming of Christ in the flesh, as Iunius notes
out of the word Shilob* which he interprets, her son, the word properly
signifying the matrice or womb: because Christ was borne of a woman without
the help of man, Iun. annot. in Genesis 49. 3. The reason why our Savior
treats of both those questions together is, because the Apostles had
propounded two questions, both of the time of the destruction of the city and
Temple, and of the end of the world: for thus they say, Tell us, when these
things shall be, and what sign shall be of thy coming, and of the end of the
world, Matthew. 24. 3. therefore our Savior satisfies them in both their
demands. 4. These very words last rehearsed show, that the second coming of
Christ, and the end of the world should be joined together.

4. Iunius, who understands this place of the true Messiah, yet refers the
end of these 70. weeks to the destruction of the city, is forced to use a
kind of zeugmatical construction, as he calls it, by supplying the word after
in this sense, after 62. weeks, after, the Messiah is slain: so also Polanus:
which words they thus interpret, not that after the 62. weeks the Messiah
should be cut off: but after such time as the Messiah should be slain, which
was within the 69. weeks, and after the said 62. weeks, then should follow
the destruction of the city. But who sees not, how in this exposition the
text is strained: for the nominative is turned into the accusative, after the
Messiah slain, or the ablative, the Messiah being slain: and the word after
is inserted, which is not in the text. And the very first reading of the words,
after 62. weeks the Messiah shall be slain, do evidently give this sense,
that after that time, and not before, he should be slain.

5. Iunius has an other interpretation in his annotations, showing the
accomplishment hereof in the members of Christ, how that after the Messiah
himself was slain, his members were persecuted: for in the end of the 69.
week, about the 7. year of Nero, James was put to death, and a grievous
persecution was raised against the Church: But the members and servants of the
Messiah, can not be the Messiah: and this cutting off must be after the 69.
weeks, not in any part of them: neither as is showed before, does the 69.
week extend to the 7. of Nero, being expired before the baptism of Christ.

6. Oecolampad. yields this as a reason, why this cutting off can not in his
judgment be referred to the death of Christ; because the word signifies, so
to cut off, as the thing cut off be in a manner extinguished and perishes: but
so was not Christ cut off, who hanging upon the cross, was written in the
superscription king of the Jews: But M. Calvin. answers this objection well,
qu^ad communem sensum, quia putabant homines prorsus esse abolitum, this was
true according to the common sense, because men thought that Christ was wholly
abolished: So that he was in the opinion of men, as quite cut off, as the
Prophet Isay faith, c. 53. 8. he was cut out of the land of the living. 2. And
the word here used ca^ath, signifies to cut off either by death or banishment,
as Amos. 1. 5. I will cut off the inhabit a^ts of Bikeath-auen, etc. the sense
then is no more but this, that the Messiah shall be an off, that is, slain.

7. Wherefore the plain and proper meaning of these words is, that after these
weeks the Messiah out Blessed Savior should be put to death for our sins:
And this is an evident proof of this sense: because it is said, v. 27. He
shall confirm the conenant, which even in M. Liuelies judgment is understood
of the Messiah, p. 218. Then the Messiah, to whom this word (he) has reference
unto, must be expressed, and spoken of before.

Quest. 64. Of the meaning of these words, and he shall have nothing, or rather
not for himself.
1. There are diverse expositions of these words. 1. Oecolampad, refers them
to the people of Jerusalem, nothing to him, that is, the people shall have
neither king nor Priest, nothing shall be left unto them: but the Messiah
being spoken of immediately before, these words, veen^o, and not to him, must
have reference to the Messiah.

2. Iunius in his first edition thus interprets, nihil ad illum, nothing to
him, that is, death shall have no power upon him, neither for all this, shall
his judgments be stayed, which he purposed to bring upon the city.

3. In his last edition, in his annotations, and in his commentary, he thus
expounds: that all shall depart from him, he shall not have in Jerusalem any
disciple: for a little before the besieging of the city, they of the Church
were admonished by revelation to go out of Jerusalem unto a town in Petrea
called Pella. Eusebius. l. 3. hist. Eccl. c. 5.

4. Not much differing here-from, is the interpretation of Lyranus, Hugo,
Pintus, with others, following the Latin translation: non erit ei populus qui
eum negaturus est, they shall not be his people, which denied him: for the
Jews said they had no king but Caesar, Ioh: 19. 15. and as for this man (say
they) we know not whence he is, Ioh. 9. 29.

5. M. Calvin thus interprets, nihil ei erit, he shall have nothing: so also
Genevens. that is, he shall have a contemptible death, and be counted as
nothing: as the Prophet Isai says, c. 53. 3. He has neither form not beauty.

6. Vatablus thus expounds, there shall be none to help him or deliver him.

7. But the fittest and best sense is this: the Messiah shall be slain, but
not for himself, Bulling. B. translation, H. Br. upon Daniel. And this sense
best agrees to the prophecy of Christ, Isa. 53. 4. We did judge him as
plagued, and smitten of God, but he was wounded for our transgressions, etc.
And to the Apostles doctrine, 2. Cor. 5. 25. He has made him sin for us,
that knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. But
seeing here mention is made of the death of Christ, before we go any further,
it shall not be amiss briefly to handle the questions of the time both of the
birth, baptism, and passion of our blessed Savior.

65. Quest. Of the year of the nativity of our blessed Savior.
There are three accounts to find out the birth of Christ: 1. by the Roman
Chronology, 2. by the Greek Olympiads, 3. by the Hebrews computation.

1. The Roman account of years, is either by the years of the building of
Rome, by the Consuls, or by the years of the Emperors: for the years of the
city, Pererius casts the time of Christ's birth into the 752. year, which he
proves out of Dions Chronology, who places the 15. year of Tiberius, when
Christ at 30. years was baptized, in the 782. year. But therein he is
somewhat deceived: for setting the 1. year of Christ in the 752. of the city,
in the 782. begins the 31. year of Christ, as M. Bullinger casts it: and
the 15. year of Tiberius was in the 781. year. M. Lively in his table sets
down the birth of Christ in the 751. year: but the received opinion is, that
it was in the 752. year. which was the 42. of Augustus reign.

Concerning the computation by the years of the Consuls, it is uncertain.
Sulpitius thinks, that Sabinus and Ruffinus were then Consuls, lib. 2. sacr.
histor. Cassiodorus names C. Lentulus, and M. M^ssalinus: but these are placed
by others in the 749. year, not the 752. of the city. Onuphrius in chronie.
and Epiphanius in hares. 51. and Eusebius in chronic. do hold, that Augustus
was the 13. time Consul, and Syllanus; when Christ was borne: which Carolus
Sigonius in his commentaries agrees unto, as the most probable: yet M. Lively
sets them in the year of the city 750. the year before he supposes
Christ to have been borne. This account then by Consuls we leave as uncertain.

The surer way then by the Roman computation, is to count by the years of the
reign of the Emperors. Augustus Caesar is held to have lived 75. years, and
10. months, and 20. days, being borne as Dio does cast his nativity, in the
year of the city 691. and ending his life in the year 767. But others do
place his birth in the year of the city 689. as Eutropius lib. 6. and Orosius
lib. 6. when Cicero and Antonie were Consuls together, which was in the year
689. Bulling. M. Lively. by this latter account Augustus should be two year
elder: and so lived in all 77. years, and odd months. But Pliny is wide,
who places the Consulship of Cicero and Antonie, in the 700. year, which
should be above ten years after, lib. 9. c. 39.

Now for the time of his government: he reigned alone after he had overcome
Antonie at Actium, 44. years: 12. he had the joint government with Antonie: so
that from the beginning of his first Consulship and regiment, he governed 56.
years, some say 58. years, Tacit. dialog. de clar. oratorib. some 57. as
Josephus counts, l. 18. c. 3. but the most Chronologers agree that he reigned
in all 56. years, 6. months: so Epiphan. in Anchorat. and Beda, lib. de 6.
at^tib. Fererius thinks he reigned not full out 56. the difference is not
great.

The year then of Christ's birth compared with Augustus reign, being in the
752. year of the city, falls out to be in the 42. year of Augustus sole
government, the 62. of his age, and the 30. year after the conquest of
Antonie. Beda thinks it was the 27. year: so also Joseph. Scalig. Clemens
the 28. lib. 1. stromat. Onuphrius the 29. but it was the 30. year just from
the victory of Antonie: which was the 42. year from the beginning of Augustus
first Consulship, as it may be thus gathered: Christ in the 15. year of
Tiberius Caesar, was 30. year old, Luke 3. 1. 23. then put unto that number 15.
more of Augustus 56. and we shall come just to the 42. year of Augustus. Thus
much of the Latin computation.

2. By the computation of the Greek Olympiads, Christ's birth fell out in the
3. year of the 194. Olympiad, as Eusebius in chronic. and Beda, lib; de 6.
aetat. and Iosep. Scalig. so also M. Lively: but other cast it to be in the 4.
year of the 194. Olympiad, Bulling. Perer. and their reason is this, because
they hold Christ to have died in the 33. year of his age, in the 4. year of
the 202. Olympiad: by which account his birth will fall out in the 4. of the
194. Olympiad. Here Cyril. Hycrosol. is found to be in a great error, who
affirms, catech. 12. that Christ was borne in the 4. year of the 186.
Olympiad, which was above 30. years before, so that by this reckoning Christ
in the 15. year of Tiberius, when he was baptized, should be above 60. years
old.

66. Quest. Of the computation of years from the creation to the the nativity
of our blessed Savior.
3. We will come now to the Jews computation, which is either by the casting
of the year of the world, or by the years of their kings and governors:
other ways they have to reckon by, but these are most pertinent to this
business in hand.

1. Pererius counts from the beginning of the world, to the birth of Christ
4022. years, which sum he thus collecteth by parcels.

From the creation to the flood, were years a 1656. as may be gathered, Genesis
5. by the age of the fathers: then he reckons from the flood, to the birth of
Abraham, counting 30. years for Cainan, 322. from the birth of Abraham unto
the Promise 75. Genesis 12. from the Promise to the giving of the Law, 430. Gal.
3. from thence to the building of Salomons Temple 480. 1. king. 6. 1. then to
the beginning of the Olympiads in the 8. year of Ahaz, 283. and from the 1.
Olympiad to the 4. year of the 194. Olympiad, wherein Christ was borne 776.
years: all these sums laid together from the beginning of the world, to the
birth of Christ, he summeth to 4022. years in all.

But Pererius diversely fails in this his reckoning. 1. for in the second
sum from the flood to Abraham's birth, he commits two great errors: for 1.
he counts 30. years for Caynan, which is not in the original, but only in
the Septuagint. 2. and beside, he reckons but 292. years, supposing Abraham
to have been borne in the 70. year of his fathers age, whereas he was borne
in the 130. year: for he was but 75. year old when his father was 205. so
that from the flood to Abraham's birth, were 352. years: he then with forged
Cainans 30. making but 322. years, wants yet 30. more of the just reckoning.
3. further, he sets the beginning of the Olympiads in the 8. year of Ahaz,
whereas it is more probable they began 23. years before, in the 2. year of
Iotham: here then he comes 23. years too late. 4. and in his last sum of
776. he ouerreacheth above an 100. years, for from Ahaz 8. year to the 11. of
Iehoiakim, when the captivity began, are but an 134. years, as may be
gathered by the several years of the reigns of the kings of Judah: from
thence to Cyrus 70. from Cyrus first to the passion of Christ 490. from which
sum must be diducted 33. years from the passion of Christ to his birth; the
whole sum is but 661.

2. Let us then further see, how these years from the beginning of the world,
unto the birth of Christ, are otherwise summed. The chronology and computation
of years, added in the end of the Genevean translation, counts from Adam to
Christ's incarnation 4017. years, which they gather thus:

From the creation to the flood, 1656. from the flood to Abraham's departing
from Chalde 423. from Abraham's departing thence to the departing of Israel out
of Egypt, 430. from thence to the building of the Temple, 480. from thence to
the captivity of Babylon in the 11. year of Zedekiah, 441. then to the
building again of Jerusalem, 143. from thence to Christ's death, 478. The whole
sum is 4051. from whence 33. years and an half being diducted, there will
remain 4017. years and an half.

But this account may be thus excepted against. 1. they count from the 4. year
of Solomon, when the Temple began to be built, to the 11. year of Zedekiah
441. years, whereas from the 1. of Solomon, to the last of Zedekiah, by Iunius
computation there are but 412. years, or thereabout: by some others, not above
430. Oecolampad. H. Br. Concent. 2. they count form the first destruction of
Jerusalem, to the passion of Christ, 621. years: whereas there are at the most
but thence to Cyrus first, 59. which with the 11. years from Ieconias
captivity, make up the 70. years, and 490. which put together, make 549. So
that they do exceed in these two last sums, almost 90. years: but they
differ more in the whole sum from the creation to the nativity, as shall be
showed in the true computation.

3. But they are far wide, In the Table before the great English B^^le.
which do reckon from Adam unto the birth of our Savior 5199. years, which
sum they do gather by these particulars: From the creation to the giving of
the Law, they account 3689. years, from thence to the nativity of Christ
1510. which make the said sum of 5199. wherein this is a great oversight
committed: for from the creation of the world, to the giving of the Law, there
are not above 2500. and odd years: which are counted thus: from the creation
to the death of Joseph, are 2368. years, from thence to Moses birth 60.
years, who was 80. years old at their departure out of Egypt when the Law was
given: all make but 2508. years: which sum wants of the foresaid number of
3689. a 1181. years.

4. There is an other account made by the years contained in the several
historical books of Scripture, as Iunius has summed them, thus: Genesis
contains the history of 2368. years. Exodus. 142 The other books of the
Pentateuch to the death of Moses. 40 Ioshuah. 17 Judges. 299 The 1. of Samuel.
80 The 2. of Samuel. 40 The 1. of Kings. 118 The 2. of Kings to the destruction
of Jerusalem in the 11 of Zedekiah. 294 Thence to Cyrus 1. 59 To the building
of the Temple. 106 Thence to the destruction of Jerusalem. 490 The whole sum
of these years put together, amounts to 4053. from which sum if 73. years
be diducted from the birth of Christ, to the destruction of the city, (33. to
his passion, and 40. thence to the end of the city) there will remain from
the creation of the world, to the nativity of our Savior, 3980. years. In
which sum, two things may be excepted against: 1. in the years ending in the
11. of Zedekiah, which are cast to 3398. there want just 22. years: for the
11. of Zedekiah was in the year of the world 3420. and the cause of the
failing is this: Iunius gives but unto Amaziah. 17. years, and then
immediately to Vzziah or Azariah 52. for he thinks, that whereas the story
says, that Amaziah reigned 29. years, the last 12. he spent in a private
life, and so those years are counted to his sons reign: thus Iun. annot. 2.
king. 14. 2. and 21. But it is more agreeable to the text, that Amaziah reigned
29. years, and then his son succeeded not immediately, as Oecolampad. sets
him; but there was an interregnum, or intermission of the reign, for eleven
years, the kingdom being governed by the States: as it may thus be gathered:
Amaziah lived 15. years after the death of Ioash king of Israel, in whose 15.
year began Jeroboam the son of Ioash to reign over Israel, 2. king. 14.
17. 23. so then of Amaziahs 29. year, there remained yet 15. then in the 15.
year of Jeroboam Amaziahs reign ends: afterward in the 27. year of
Jeroboam, began Vzziah to reign: then must needs the kingdom lie void
eleven years from the 15. of Jeroboam to the 27. H. Br. Concent. Genevens. And
it can not stand, that Vzziah reigned together with his father: for he was but
16. year old when he began to reign, which was in the 27. of Jeroboam, 2.
king. 15. 1, 2. whereas his father died in the 15. year of Jeroboam, when
Vzziah was by this account but 4. year old. And it is noted in direct words,
that as soon as Azariah was made king in his fathers stead, he built Elath,
after his father had slept with his fathers, 2. king. 14. 21, 22. So it is
evident, that Iunius making Vzziah to begin to reign immediately after the
17. year of Amaziah, comes short of the just sum 22. or 23. years: for he
leaves out 12. years of Amaziahs reign, and omitteth the time of the
vacancie, which was eleven years more.

2. In that Iunius counts an 106. years from Cyrus 1. to the 2. of Darius,
when the Temple began to be reedified, and so extends the Persian Monarchy
199. years, therein he exceeds (by 69. years) the years of the Persian
Monarchy, which were an 130. as is before showed, qu. 43. So that I rather
approou^ Iunius judgment in his first edition, not allowing above an 130.
years to the Persian Monarchy.

5. Oecolampad. thus casts the years from the creation of the world, unto
the Messiah: from the creation to the flood 1656 from thence to the departing
of the Israelites out of Egypt. ^13 from the departure unto the destruction of
the first Temple in the 11. year of Zedekiah. 910 from the destruction to the
building again of the Temple and city. 94 from the Temple and city reedified
in the 32. of Darius unto Alexander. 160 from Alexander to the Macch. 165 from
the Macchabees to Herod. 127 from the beginning of the reign of the Herod's, to
the end thereof at the final destruction of Jerusalem. 103 But in this
account there are diverse errors committed: for in the sum of years unto the
first destruction of the Temple, which are summed to 3379. or thereabout, which
in true account rise to 3420. years: he comes short 41. years: which error
falls out by this occasion. 1. he misseth of 60. years in the sum from the
flood to Abraham, placing him to be borne in the 70. year of Terah, whereas he
was borne in the 130. year of his father, as is showed further else where.
H^xap. in G^^ c. 11. qu. 19.
2. from the death of Jacob to the departure of Israel out of Egypt, he
counts 230. years, which exceed not an 194. years: for when Jacob died at
147. Joseph was 56. being 39. at Jacobs 130. year: so Joseph living an 110.
years, suruiued his father 54. from Joseph's death to Moses birth are counted
60. years: and in Moses 80. year departed Israel: these three sums, 54. 60.
80. make 194. here then Oecolampadius counting 230. years, exceeds the just
number by 36. yet he fails in the whole sum 41. years, or thereabout: for
the just sum of years from the creation to the departure of Israel out of
Egypt, comes to 2510. years, Iun. H. Br. but his two sums of a 1656. and
813. laid together, make but 2469. 3. In the years of the Kings, next unto
Amaziahs 29. years, he places Vzziahs 52. years, whereas there came
between, an interregnum, or vacancie of the kingdom, for the space of an 11.
years, as is showed before: but this number of a 11. years he takes up in
adding so many in the several reigns of the kings, as in giving 8. years to
Ioram, who reigned alone but four, one to Ahaziah, whose time is not counted:
7. to Athaliah, who reigned but 6. and so he recompenseth by an other supply
in the addition of these and other years to several kings, the want of the
said number of a 11. years: so that here he agrees in the whole sum of the
years of the kings, which was from the beginning of Salomons reign, unto the
11. year of Zedekiah, 430.

In the next sum from the 11. of Zedekiah, unto the destruction of Jerusalem,
which makes 649. these errors ar^ found. 1. He counts but 70. years from
the first destruction of the Temple, unto the reedifying thereof in the 2. of
Darius: whereas in the least reckoning, there remained 50. years of the
captivity from the destruction of the Temple, to the first of Cyrus: and from
thence 7. weeks, that is, 49. years more to the building and finishing of the
Temple, as is showed before, qu. 58. 2. He gives unto the Persian Monarchy
160. years after the 32. of Darius Hystaspis, whom he thinks to have
reigned 36. years, and to Cyrus and Cambyses he gives between them 17.
years: so he extends the whole Persian Monarchy to 214. years: which must
be cut short to an 130. as is likewise declared before, qu. 43. 3. He numbreth
but 292. years for the kingdom of the Grecians and Macchabees, which made
300* qu. 54. so that here he wants 8. years. 4. This whole last sum of
649. years, 73. being abated from the last destruction of the city, to the
birth of Christ, makes 576. which joined to the fo^mer number of 3379. makes
3955. whereas the just sum to Christ birth from the creation, is 3927. or
rather 3935. or thereabout: so that here is an overplus of 20. years in the
whole sum, or there about.

6. Bullingers, account is this: he sets ^he 11. of Zedekiah, in the year
of the world 3365. the end of the Persian Monarchy in the year 3640. the
end of the kingdom of the Macedonians, which was in the 22. of Cleopatra, in
the year 3940. and the birth of our blessed Savior in the year 3970.

1. But in the first sum of 3365. he comes short by 55. years, the just
number being in Zedekiahs 11. year, ^420. which odds is like to arise,
because Bullinger following the common account, sets Abraham's birth in the
70. year of Terah, which was in the 130. year, and there fails of 60.
years ^ the 5. odd years he might make up in adding to the years of the
reign of the kings.

2. In the next sum of 3640. he exceeds, giving unto the Persian Monarchy
215. years, (which he begins at Cyrus in the year of the world 3425.)
whereas the whole exceeds not 130. years.

3. In the next sum he accounts right, numbering 300. years from Alexanders
first, unto the last of Cleopatra.

4. But in the last sum, placing Christ's, birth in the year 1970. he
exceeds about 35. years: it was by just account 3927. or rather 3935.
years, as now shall be made to appear.

7. Thus then may the year of the world be found out, wherein our blessed
Savior was borne: first we take the number before set down by Iun. artic. 4.
unto the destruction of Jerusalem in the 11. of Zedekiah, which is just by true
account found to be 3398. years, saving that there wants 22. to be added,
which Iunius cutteth off from the reign of Amaziah, to whom he gives but 17.
years, whereas he reigned 29. and from the time of vacancie of the kingdom
which was 11. years, as is there showed: add these 22. years to the former
sum, and we shall have just 3420. years, from the creation to the desolation
of Jerusalem in the 11. of Zedekiah: from hence to the death of our blessed
Savior there are two accounts: Some counting the beginning of the captivity
in the 1. year of Nabuchadnezzer, and the 4. of Iehoiakim, when Daniel was
carried away captive, (and Jerusalem was destroyed in the 19. year of
Nabuchadnezzer) do make reckoning but of 50. years more to Cyrus 1. and
thence to Christ's death 490. years: so that the year of the world by this
account was 3960. at the holy passion of Christ: and 33. years being abated
for the age of Christ, his nativity shall be in the year of the world 3927.
or thereabout, H. Br. in his Concent. But because the better opinion is and
more probable, to begin the 70. years in the captivity of Iechoniah in the
8. year of Nabuchadnezzer, See more for the beginning of the 70. years
captivity, qu. 5. upon this chap.
from whence Jeremy begins it, c. 29. 10. as Josephus Scaliger shows,
lib. 6. de emendat. tempor. we must add 8. years more to the foresaid number,
because we begin the captivity later, and so these 8. years being added,
we have the 3935. year of the world for the birth of our blessed Savior.

But it will be objected, that whereas the year wherein our blessed Savior
suffered, is held to have been a year of Iubile, the 28. Iubile being cast
up to fall in the year of the world 3960. his birth being placed in the year
3927. we shall by adding of 8. years more miss of a year of Iubile in the
year of Christ's passion. We answer, that they which cast the 28. Iubile to be
in the year 3960. begin the first Iubile in the 8. year of Ioshuahs
government, H. Br. which may better take beginning 8. years after in the 16.
of Ioshuah, when he gathered all Israel to Sechem, and made a covenant with
them: for then the people had rest from their enemies, Josh. 24. 1.

8. M. Lydyat places the birth of Christ in the year of the world 4007. and
so exceeds the former reckoning by 72. years: the reason of which difference
is, because he gives 204 years to the Persian Monarchy, beginning the same
in the year 3471. and ending in the year 3675. whereas it is proved before,
that the Persian Monarchy could not exceed an 130. years, or thereabout, qu.
43.

67. In what year of the reign of Herod our blessed Savior was borne.
An other account of years, which the Jews make, is by the years of the
reign of their kings: now then because Herod a stronger had obtained from the
Romans the kingdom of the Jews, it most be examined in what year of Herod's
reign our blessed Savior was borne. And here three things must be enquired,
when Herod began his reign, how many years he reigned, and in which of them
the nativity of our Savior was.

1. Josephus thinks, that Herod was cre^^^ed king by the Romans in the 184.
Olympiade, Cn. Domitius Calvinus, and C. Asin^^^ Pollio being Consuls: and
that 3. years after he took Jerusalem, and slew Antigonus, and so ^^^oyed the
kingdom peaceably: from his first creation are counted 37. years, but from
the death of Antigonus only 34. Thus Joseph. lib. antiqu. 14. and 17.

But this opinion of Josephus can not stand. 1. for if Herod began to reign
in the 184. Olympiad, he must die in the 193. Olympiad, which was 37. years
after: and then should Christ be borne 7. or 8. years after the reign of
Herod, namely in the 4. year of the 194. Olympiad, which is contrary to the
history of the Gospel, Matthew. 2. for Herod died after Christ was borne, and
fled into Egypt. 2. Josephus again is contrary to himself, for lib. 16.
antiquit. cap. 9. he places the 28. year of Herod in the 192. Olympiad: but
if Herod began his reign in the 184. Olympiad, his 28. year will fall out
not in the 192. but in the beginning of the 191. Olympiad. 3. Dio lib. 48. and
Onuphrius in chron. do place the Consulship of Cn. Calvinus, and Asiaius
Pollio. in the 2. year of the 185. Olympiad, which was the 714. year of the
building of Rome.

2. Onuphrius in chronic. assigns the beginning of Herod's reign to the 3.
year of Augustus Caesar: Beda lib. de 6. aetatibus, to the 11 year: But
Eusebius more truly in the 10. year of Augustus Caesar: so also Bullinger.

3. It is agreed with most historians, that Herod reigned 37. years complete;
only Beda appoints unto him 36. years.

4. But there is great difference about the year of Herod, wherein Christ
should be borne: Beda names the 31. year, lib. de 6. aetatib. Eusebius the
32. Bullinger, Epiphanius here is. 51. and Sulpitius lib. 2. the 33. so also M.
Lydyat, page 135. Onuphrius the 36. Su^lyga and Keplerus about the 35. Perorius
in this uncertainty leaves the matter in doubt, not resolving in what year
of Herod Christ was borne.

5. Josephus Scaliger is confident, that Christ was borne in the 37. year of
Herod, which he would prove thus. 1. the beginning of Herod's reign was in the
next year after the Consulship of Calvinus and Pollio (which was in the 714.
year of the city, as Dio and Onuphrius cast it) this was in the 15. year of
Augustus, which was the 715. year of Rome: from hence to the 42. year of
Augustus, are 37. years: then by this reckoning the 37. of Herod, and the 31.
of Augustus, and the 3. year of the 194. Olympiad shall concur together.

2. Christ was then newely borne, when the wisemen came to worship, for as yet
the time of purification was not come according to the law: for to what end
else should Marie stay in Bethlehem? the star appeared before the conception
of Christ, 1. year before Christ's birth, and they so cast their journey, as
that they came presently after the birth of Christ: Now Christ immediately
after his mother was purified, was carried into Egypt, and after a while Herod
died, and then he returned out of Egypt: to this purpose, Joseph. Scalig. lib.
6. de emendat. tempor.

Contra. 1. There were two beginnings of Herod's reign, one from the time of
his creating king, which might be in the 4. or 5. of Augustus reign, in the
714. or 15. year of Rome: but an other beginning was after the death of
Antigonus, when he took possession of his kingdom, which was as Eusebius
sets it, in the 10. year of Augustus, as Beda in the 11. year: from this
latter beginning must the 37. years of Herod's reign be counted, and not from
the first.

2. Concerning the time of the appearing of the star, and of the coming of
the wisemen: 1. I neither think that Christ was two year old at such time as
the infants were killed, as Aretius thinks in his commentaries upon Matthew,
and M. Calvin, that Herod deferred the execution of his malice almost two
years: for by the text it appears, that as soon as Herod saw himself
mocked of the wisemen, he forthwith in his rage caused the infants to be
killed, Matthew. 1. 16. 2. neither is it like that the star appeared 1. year;
or 2. before Christ's nativity: for how then should the wisemen have known
when to set forward, and to come just against the natiutie of Christ, if the
star had appeared so long before, and not at, and after the birth of Christ.
3. Therefore it is more probable, that the wisemen upon the ^ight of the
star, which appeared not before Christ was borne, came toward the end of the
days of Mary's purification, and returned back again, Christ being then
newly borne; for otherwise Marie would not have stayed in Bethlem: she might
continue there 40. days; in the end whereof the wisemen might come from the
East, At what time the star began to appear to the wisemen that came from
the East, Matthew. 2.
not from Chaldea, which was North, from Jerusalem, nor from Persia, which was
too far off, being four months journey, Ezra. 7. 9. But as Pelican
thinks, they might come from some nearer country, as Sabea, which was
counted in the East countries toward the South: so that toward the end of the
40. days of purification, they might well accomplish their journey: and in the
mean time as they returned, while Herod expected their return, Marie went to
Jerusalem to be purified. 4. neither does it follow, that they fleeing into
Egypt, should make abode there but certain months: some think they might
stay there 5. years, Emman. Sa. some 7. ex Pellicano. there is no certainty
of the time of their abode there, they stayed till Herod was dead. 5. And
whereas Herod in his rage caused the infants to be killed, from two year old
and under, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the
wisemen, it follows not, that this was the second year of the appearing of
the star, as Josephus Scaliger infers: But Herod to be sure, that the
child should not escape, puts all to the sword from a day old to two year
old, so Pelican. so that these words, according to the time, may as well be
referred to those which were under two year old, though they were but a day,
or a month, or two old, as to those which were fully two year old.

5. Wherefore although there be no certainty of this, in what year of Herod's
reign Christ was borne, neither is it necessary for the understanding of
Daniels weeks; yet it is most probable, that our Blessed Savior was borne
about the 30. of Herod complet, and the 31. begun, which falls into the 41.
year of the reign of Augustus Caesar complete, and the 42. begun, as it may
be thus gathered: the Herodians are held to have continued in the government
of Judea, to the destruction of Jerusalem 103. years, which may be counted
thus by the particular account of the years of the Herodians: Herod the son
of Antipater, reigned 37. Herod Archelaus 9. Herod the Tetrach 24. Herod
Agrippa 7. Agrippa the son of Agrippa, 26. Oecol. these years ending at the
destruction of Jerusalem in the 2. of Vespasian, make an 103. Then counting
backward from the destruction of Jerusalem 73. years, we shall come just to
the 42. of Augustus, and to the 31. year of Herod, as may evidently appear to
those, that will compare the years of the Emperors, and lay them together. I
therefore think Beda his opinion of the rest most probable, who places the
beginning of Herod's reign in the 11. year of Augustus, and the birth of
Christ in 31. of Herod, which by this reckoning falls into the 41. of
Augustus complete, or the 42. year begun.

And as there is small certainty in what year of Herod Christ was borne, so
neither is it agreed upon by all, into what year of Augustus reign Christ's
birth should fall. Cassiodorus assigns the 40. year, Iren. lib. 3. adners.
haeres. c. 25. Tertul. lib. aduers. Iudaeos.
Ireneus and Tertullian the 41. but the most resolve upon the 42. year of
Augustus: as Eusebius in chron. Epiphanius haeres. 51. Beda. But these may be
understood to speak of the 42. initiate only and begun, the other of the
41. complete: for if Christ being held to have been baptized, and begun to
preach, in the 15. of Tiberius, Luke 3. 1. there must be 15. years remaining
of Augustus, who reigned in all 56. to make up 30. years, in which year of
his age Christ was baptized.

Quest. 68. In what year of his age Christ was baptized.
1. Some are of opinion, that Christ was 30. years complete before he was
baptized: of which opinion was Beda, that Christ was baptized the 6. of
January, 13. days after he was full 30. year old, lib. de ration. temp. c.
41. So also Chrysostom hom. 10. in Matthew. Euthymius in 3. c. Matthew. Bernard
sermon. 1. de Epiphania. do think that Christ came to be baptized after he was
full thirty year old: the same is the opinion of Josephus Scaliger, lib. 6.
de emendat. tempor. But this opinion is thus refelled. 1. because the word
(...), quasi, as it were 30. year old, Luke 3. 23. shows that he was not
full 30. year old. Scaliger answers, that sometime this is not a word of
doubting, but of affirming, as Ioh. 1. 14. we saw the glory thereof, as the
glory of the only begotten, etc. But he should have given us an instance,
where this word is used in numbering otherwise, then uncertainly and by way of
geffe. 2. the words are, Jesus was about 30. year old (...) beginning: the
meaning of which words must be, that he began to be about 30. year old:
Euthymius to make his opinion good, reads (...), that is, entering or
proceeding, referring it to his preaching: but the words is (...), beginning,
Josephus Scaliger thinks, that the word is not referred to the 30. years but
put absolutely, after the phrase of the Hebrews, as he gives instance of that
place, Genesis 9. 20. Noah began to be an husbandman: But this instance is
against him: for Noah began then first after the ^^ood to be an husbandman:
and this word beginning, cannot stand absolutely in any good sense, unless
there should be relation to something in respect whereof this beginning is.

2. An other opinion is, that Christ when he was baptized was only entered into
his 30. year, about some 13. days: so Pererius urging the strict words of
Luke, that Christ began then to be about 30. year old: and makes Ireneus with
others to favor this opinion; the first thus writes, lib. 2. aduers. haeres*
c. 39. Ad baptismum venit, etc. he came to baptism not having yet fulfilled
30. years, but beginning to be about 30. year old, as S. Luke signifies.
Pererius judgment here is agreeable to the words of the text, saving that he
holds Christ to have been borne in December, whereas there must be 3. years
and an half between Chists baptism and his passion, as is showed afterward.

3. A third opinion is of Epiphanius, haeres. 50. that Christ was 30. years
old within two months: whom he holds to have been borne upon the sixth day
of January, and to have been baptized in his 30. year, two months before
the end thereof about the sixth of November: But the word, beginning, which S.
Luke uses, shows that he was toward the beginning rather then the end of
his 30. year.

4. Wherefore it is more probable, that Christ was baptized in the beginning,
not in the end of his 30. year, in the sixth month Tisri, whereof this reason
may be yielded out of Daniel, because Christ's death ended half of a week,
wherein the covenant was confirmed, which began at his preaching, immediately
after his baptism, H. Br. Concent. And if the 70. weeks must end just at the
death of Christ, as is proved before quest. 49. and Christ beginning to preach
immediately after his baptism, preached 3. years and an half, it must
follow, that he was baptized in the beginning of his 30. year: And in this
sense Christ is said in proper speaking to be thirty year old, when he was
but entering into his thirty year, see more hereof quest. 71. and 72.
following.

5. M. Lydyat thinks that Christ dimidia ex part exegerat annum aetatis
tricesimum, had passed the half of his 30. year, when he was baptized, and
the word (...), beginning, he refers to his preaching, not to his age. But I
incline rather to the former opinion. 1. for there is no mention made at all of
Christ's preaching, in respect whereof he should be said to begin: the words
do thus stand in the text, and Jesus himself was as it were of thirty years
beginning, etc. 2. neither did Christ immediately after his baptism begin to
preach: he was first tempted. 40. days in the wilderness, next after his
baptism, as S. Luke shows in the next chapter. 3. and if Christ were
baptized in the midst of his 30. year, and after that lived 3. years and an
half, being put to death in the spring, it will follow, that he was also
borne about that time of the year, which is also M. Lydyats opinion, which is
very improbable, as shall be showed afterward quest. 71. following.

6. But M. Lydyat has yet a more strange opinion: he thinks that John
Baptist began to preach 4. years before Christ was baptized, in the 15. year
of Tiberius reign; and that Christ was baptized in the beginning of the 19.
year of Tiberius, and suffered in the 22. year: his chief reasons are these.

1. There are 30. years, at what age Christ was baptized, from the 41. of
Augustus, wherein Christ was borne, to the 19. of Tiberius.

2. The Temple was in building 46. years, Ioh. 2. which began to be built in
the 18. year of Herod, whence unto the 15. year (he would say 19. year) of
Tiberius are 47. years.

3. John was not imprisoned and put to death before the 20. and 21. of
Tiberius, for presently after John's beheading, followed the battle between
Herod and Aretas king of Arabia, for repudiating his daughter, and marying
Herodias his brothers wife, which was in the beginning of Vitellius
government: which was in the 21. year of Tiberius, as Cornel. Tacitus
testifies, lib. 6. Annal.

4. The year wherein Christ began to preach was a sabbaticall year, as
appears Luke 4. but there was no sabbaticall year, after the 15. year of
Tiberius, till the 20. To this purpose M. Lydyat lib. de emendat. tempor. from
p. 169. to p. 176.

Contra. Though I will not of purpose oppose my self to so excellent a
Chronologer, who has taken great pains in this kind of study, which I
profess not; yet because that his opinion is singular, I hope I may without
offense examine his reasons, to give him occasion further to consider of them,
least the common adversary might take advantage thereby.

1. The 30. years of Christ's age were expired in the 15. year of Tiberius,
from the 41. of Augustus wherein Christ is held to have been borne: and M.
Lydyat makes mention of one Petavius a learned Chronologer of Paris, who
proves that Christ must be borne 30. years before the 15. year Tiberius, p.
153.

2. That place in Ioh. c. 2. must be understood of the building of Zorobabels
Temple, not of Herod's, as has been showed before, quest. 58.

3. John's troubles began before the 20. year of Tiberius, for when Herod
took his brother Philips wife Herodias, his brother was then living, at what
time John reproved him: but Philip died in the 20. year of Tiberius, Joseph.
lib. 18. c. 6. and the war upon that occasion might follow some year after.

4. That year wherein Christ preached was not a sabbaticall year: Christ
prepares them by his preaching against the acceptable year, which was that
wherein he suffered, which was both a sabbaticall and Iubile year: for the
Iubile being a type of Christ, in whom we should enjoy the true Iubile, in the
remission of sins, the figure and shadow and the body must agree together.

5. But that Christ was baptized in the 15. year of Tiberius, S. Luke puts
it out of doubt, c. 3. 1. M. Lydyat answers that the Evangelist assigns
that year for the beginning of John's preaching, not for Christ's baptism: for
John must have a longer time given him then so to prepare the way for Christ's
to preach and baptize, p. 171. But as John Baptists birth was but 6. months
before Christ's, so the like time might suffice for his forerunning in
preaching: the Evangelists set down the baptism of our Blessed Savior, as
following immediately upon the preaching of John: yea S. John says, that the
next day after his solemn baptizing, he saw Jesus coming unto him, John. 1.
29.

Quest. 69. How many years Christ lived on earth, and in what year of his
life Christ was put to death.
1. Some were of opinion, that Christ lived 46. years at the least, that the
body may answer to the shadow, the substance to the figure, because the
material Temple, which was a figure of the true Temple Christ Jesus, is said
to have been 46. year in building: Ireneus thinks that Christ lived 50.
years, because of that place, Ioh. 8. where the Jews say unto Christ, thou
art not yet 50. year old, etc. And he further adds this reason, that it was
not fit that Christ should begin to preach in his youth, but should take that
grave function upon him, when he grew in years, Irenaeus lib. 2. aduers.
haeres. cap. 39.

But 1. the Jews words (speaking but by guess) are not much to be weighed,
though some in that place do read forty for fifty, Chrysostom. 2. there may
be as great gravity in young years, as in age: for not years, but the graces
and gifts of Gods spirit do bring authority. 3. And if Christ had lived so
many years, it is not like that the Evangelists would have passed over in
silence the great works which Christ did in that time, whereas they only set
down those things, which Christ spoke and did unto the 4. Passover after his
baptism, which was in the 30. year of his age. 2. If Christ had lived above
40. toward 50. years, he could not have suffered under Tiberius, in whose 18.
year he is generally held to have died, being baptized in his 15. year, Luke
3. 1. for Tiberius reigned but 23. years in all.

2. An other opinion is that Christ died the same year, namely the 30.
complete wherein he was baptized, and so preached but one year, so Tertullian
lib. aduers. Iudaeos, and Clemens Alexandrin. lib. 1. stromat. who groundeth
his opinion upon that place taken out of the Prophet, Luke 4. 19. that he
should preach the acceptable year of the Lord: But 1. it follows not,
because mention is made of the acceptable year in the singular, that Christ
peached but one year in all: year is here taken either generally for the
acceptable time, or it has special reference to that true Iubile, the year
of remission wherein Christ suffered for our sins. 2. in the Evangelists there
is mention made of four several Passeouers after Christ's baptism, as shall
be even now showed: therefore Christ lived and preached above a year after his
baptism.

3. Some other think that Christ lived but 31. years, and preached but two
years after his baptism: of this opinion was Apollinaris Bishop of Laodicea,
as Hierome reports in 9. Daniel. and Cyrillus Alexandrin. seems to affirm
the same, in 29. c. Isaiae, Seuerus Sulpitius also lib. 2. sacr. histor.
seems to be of the same judgment, who writes that Christ lived 4. years of
Herod's reign, and 9. years of Archelaus, and then died in the 18. year of
Herod the Tetrach, all which make but 31. years. This opinion is refelled by
the former reason: because the Evangelists make mention in the Gospel of 4.
Passeouers after Christ's baptism, which could not be in the space of two
years.

4. Josephus Scaliger is of opinion that Christ suffered in the 35. year of his
age, holding that Christ was baptized in the beginning of his 31. year, and
after his baptism mention is made of five Pasches, the first Ioh. 2. 13. the
second John 5. 1. the third, Matthew. 12. 1. and Luke 6. 1. when the Apostles
plucked the ears of corn, which was as S. Luke says, the second Sabbath,
namely after the Pasche, for then the ears of corn began to be ripe: the
fourth is mentioned, John. 6. 4. when he fed the five thousand: the 5. was
the last Pasche, wherein our Blessed Savior suffered: S. Paul also speaks of
the perfect age of Christ at his resurrection, Ephesians. 4. 13. which is at 35.
years.

Contra. 1. That Christ was not 30. years complete, when he was baptized, is
showed in the former question, and the words of the text are against it, that
Christ was then beginning to be 30. year old. 2. that Christ suffered after the
18. year of Tiberius, which will follow if Christ died in his 35. year, is
against the common received opinion, which assigns the 18. year for Christ's
passion: which is gathered by the account of the Olympiads, for Christ is held
to have been borne in the 4. year of the 194. Olympiad, and to have suffered
in the 4. year of the 202. Olympiad; the distance of years is just 33. and no
more. 3. That Pasche which John speaks of, cap. 5. 1. is like to be the same
mentioned, Math. 12. 1. and Luke 6. 1. as Pererius well observes, when after
the Pasche the Apostles pulled the ears of corn; which may be the reason, why
John passes over in silence all that was done between the second and third
Pasche, which immediately he speaks of c. 6. 4. because the the other
Evangelists do set forth at large what happened between the second and third
Pasche, Matthew. c. 12. toc. 13. Mark, from the second to the 6. Luke, from the
6. to the 9. If five Passeouers could have been assigned out of the same
Evangelist, then he said somewhat: But out of diverse Evangelists, who do not
follow the same order of time, the number cannot so certainly be gathered. 4.
that is but a weak reason taken from the fullness and perfection of Christ's
age: Augustine by the same reason thinks that we shall rise again about the
age of thirty, because Christ died in that age, lib. 22. de ciuitat. Dei, c.
15. And indeed at that age men are in their strength, being fit for any
employment either of the body or mind: as Joseph at that age stood before
Pharaoh, and David at that age began to reign.

5. Some think that Christ died in the 34. year of his age, not complete, but
only begun some 3. months and certain days, so Beda lib. de ration.
tempor. c. 45. Albertus Magnus in commentar. epistol. Dyonis. Onuphrius in
Chronicis. Beda his reason is, because he thinks Christ to have been
baptized, when he began to be 31. year old, and from, thence preached 3.
years and an half: But this opinion is contrary to the text, which says he
began to be 30. not 31. year old: and by this means Christ's death is cast
into the 19. year of Tiberius (which also Onuphrius thinks) contrary to the
received opinion; that Christ was borne in the 42. year of Augustus, and died
in the 18. year of Tiberius.

6. An other opinion yet is, that Christ was baptized in the beginning of his
30. year, but began not to preach until the beginning of his 31. year,
when he wrought that miracle by changing water into wine, which is thought to
have been done the same day twelue-moneth after he was baptized: and yet the
time of his preaching was 3. years and an half: so Pererius lib. 11. in
Daniel. quest. 7. opinion. 4. But 1. it is not like, that Christ being
baptized, and then publicly called by his fathers voice from heaven to be a
teacher of men, and therefore they are charged from heaven to hear him, would
so long defer the execution of his holy function. 2. Pererius in this
assertion is contrary to himself: for if Christ died as he proves at large
in the 33. year of his age, and preached three years and an half, then could
not his preaching be deferred unto the beginning of his 31. year, for 3.
years and an half counted from thence will fall into his 34. year: But
concerning the time, when Christ began to teach, more shall be said, when we
come to speak of confirming the covenant, v. 27.

7. M. Lydyat thinks that Christ died in the 33. year of his age almost
complete, page 176. But then it would follow, that he was borne about the same
season of the year, wherein he suffered, about the vernall equinoctial, or
spring time, which opinion is refused as improbable, quest. 71. following.

8. Wherefore the best resolution is this, that Christ died in the 33. year of
his age not complete, but about the midst thereof, not after 3. months, as
Pererius, but 6. months after his 32. year complete. The first part of this
assertion that Christ suffered in his 33. year is thus proved. 1. because by
the Roman Chronology, he is held to have been borne in the 42. of Augustus
inch^a^e or begun, and to have died in the 18. of Tiberius: the distance of
years is just 33. for Augustus reigned 56. and then Tiberius succeeded. 2. the
same is proved by the Olympiads, as is before showed, Christ was borne in the
4. year of the 194. Olympiad, and died in the 4. year of the 202. Olympiad.
3. Pererius further proves that Christ died in the 33. year of his age, by
this astronomicall calculation: It is agreed upon that Christ suffered upon the
15. day of the month, having eaten the Passover upon the 14. day at even
according to the law, the next evening before. Again Christ died upon the
Jewish Sabbath eve, which is our Friday, for otherwise he had not risen again
upon the Lords day, which was the third day after: But in none of the years of
^hrists age from the 30. to the 37. did the 15. day of the month fall out upon
the sixth day of their week, our friday, but only in the 33. for in the 31.
year the 15. day of the moon was upon the 27. of March upon tuesday: in the
32. on the 15. of April upon tuesday likewise: in the 34. on the 23. of March
on wedensday: in the 35. on the 11. day of April on monday: But in the 33.
year only within this compass (for of the other years before the 30. or
after the 35. there is no question) the 15. day of the moon concurred with the
3. of April upon friday, as may be gathered counting the year of the Lord by
the Dominicall letter: therefore Christ only suffered in the 33. year of his
age.

4. After Christ was baptized, and began to preach, there were only four
Pasches, which he kept, in the last whereof he died: as may be gathered out of
the Gospel of S. John: the first Pasche is mentioned, cap. 2. 13. the second c.
5. 1. the third John. 6. 4. and the last when he suffered: to the which belong
the 11. 13. and 18. chapters of S. John's Gospel: these 4. Pasches were kept in
three years, and odd months, which were between the baptism of Christ and
the first Pasche: But about the number of these Pasches there is some doubt, as
now shall be further showed in the next question following.

The other part of the assertion, that there must be 6. months between the
season or time of the baptism of Christ and of his blessed passion, is thus
proved: because Daniel ending the 70. weeks in the death of Christ precisely,
speaks of half a week set apart for the confirming of the covenant, which
began at Christ's baptism, and causing all other sacrifices to cease: we must
then have half a seven of years exactly from the baptism of Christ unto the
time of his passion.

Quest. 70. Of the number of Pasches, which Christ solemnized in the days of
his flesh, whereby the time and years of his preaching is certainly gathered.
1. Whereas in the end of the former question four Pasches are assigned, the
second whereof should be mentioned John. 5. 1. yet it is not expressly said to
be the Pasche, but generally a feast of the Jews: there are diverse opinions
conceived hereof. 1. some think it was the feast of the Pentecost, which
immediately follows after the Pasche, which John spoke of before, c. 2. v.
13. of this opinion are Cyril, Chrysostom, Euthymius, Theophylaect, Thomas,
Lyranus, i^ the explanation of that place: But this cannot be: 1. after that
Pasche John 2. our Savior stayed a while in the city: then he left the city
and Iudaea, and returned into Iudaea again, and stayed there a good while,
John 3. 23. after that he departed out of Iudaea, and went by Samaria to go
into Galile, at what time there were yet 4. months to harvest, John. 4. 35.
All these things could not be done in the space of fifty days between the
Pasche and Pentecost: and beside the time of harvest is in the month Iiar, the
next unto Nisa^, which answers unto our March: wherefore this could not be
the feast of Pentecost, which is not two months from the Pasche. 3. when a
feast of the Jews is named simply without any addition, it is usually taken
for the feast of the Passover, which was their chief and principal feast, as
is evident, Matthew. c. 26. Luke 22. John. 13. 2. An other opinion is, that this
was one of the winter feasts, which were three, one of the dedication of the
Temple, instituted by Judas Macchabeus, lib. 1. Macchab. c. 4. which was kept
the 25. day of the 9. month Cisleu: the second was the feast of the reedifying
of the second Temple under Zerobabel, which was upon the 3. day of the last
month Adar, whereof see Ezra. 6. 15. the third was the feast of lottes
ordained by Mordecai and Esther, upon the 14. and 15. of the same month Adar,
as is declared Esther. 9. some one of these three feasts, some think this to
have been: so Caietan in 5. c. Joan. Melchior Canus lib. 11. de loc. Theolog.
But this is not like: for these were none of the principal feasts which were
instituted by Moses at the Lords appointment: But this was a principal feast
of the Jews, because it is simply called a feast without any other addition,
as is showed before. 3. Wherefore upon the former reasons, this was likely to
be the feast of the Passover, after the which in the next month immediately
follows harvest: and in the former chapter it is said, there were 4. months
then to harvest, c. 4. 35. And although in the next chapter following, c. 6. 4.
mention is made of the Pasch, that lets not, but that this may be the Pasch
also: for it is usual with the Evangelists to join things together which were
done far asunder, omitting many things coming between: as Matthew
immediately after the baptism and 40. days fast of our blessed Savior,
treats of the calling of the Apostles, which was done a good while after: So
John here omitteth those things which were done by our Savior between the 2.
and 3. Pasch, especially because they are handled at large by the other
Evangelists, Matthew. c. 12. to 14. Mark. 2. to the 6. Luke 6. to the 9.

2. As some would thus abridge the number of the feasts, and bring them to
three: so some others would enlarge the number of them: as they which think
that there passed a year between the baptism of Christ, and the first
miracle which he did in Cana of Galile: so that they think one of the
Passeouers, which followed next after the baptism of Christ, to be passed over
in silence: to this opinion inclines Pererius, and holds it to be an
ancient received tradition. But this is confuted before, qu. 69. artic. 6.

3. Ios. Scal. also thinks that there were five Passeouers between the
baptism of Christ, and his passion, making that mentioned, Matthew. 12. 1. and
Luke 6. 1. to be the 3. Passover* beside those other 4. mentioned by the
Evangelist S. John: as is noted before, quest. 69. opinion the 4. But what
small ground there is of this assertion, there it is likewise showed.

Wherefore this remains as the best resolution, that because Christ only
kept 4. Passeouers, neither more nor less after his baptism, (as M. Lydyat
well collecteth page 177.) that he lived only 3. years and so much as was
from his baptism to his first Passover, and so was put to death in the 33.
year of his age: Now for the further manifestation hereof, before we proceed,
it shall not be amiss breifely to touch the very time of the year when
Christ was borne, and the very day of his passion.

71. Quest. At what time of the year Christ was borne.
1. Epiphaenius opinion was, that Christ was borne upon the 6. day of January,
haeres. 51.
upon which day he thinks he wrought his first miracle in Cana of Galile, and
before that 60. days he was baptized: whereof he makes this demonstration:
after his baptism he fasted 40. days, then he went to Nazareth, and there
stayed 15. days: then one day which was the 56. he stayed with John, who
being absent, gave that singular testimony of Christ: and the 57. John being
present called Christ the lamb of God, that took away the sins of the
world: the 58. day Andrew followed Christ, and the 59. Christ called unto him
Philip: and the 60. day was there a marriage in Cana of Galile, as upon which
day Christ was borne. But here diverse things are vncertenly alleged, as of
Jesus staying in Nazareth 15. days: and some of those things, which Epiphanius
thinks to have been uttered by John of our Savior after his baptism, Ioh.
1. were spoken before, as v. 26. there is one among you, etc. whose shoes
latchet I am not worthy to unloose: these words were uttered by Iohn-before
the baptism of our blessed Savior, Matthew. 3. 11. And seeing the Evangelist
calls it the 3. day, wherein that miracle was done in Cana, c. 2. 1. how can
he make it the 60. day, and the next day, after Christ had that conference with
Philip; whereas it seems to be called the 3. day from thence.

2. M. Lydyat agrees with their opinion, whom Clemens Alexander. mentions,
who held Christina^ale verna tempestate anni, Christ's birth day to have been
in the spring: and he alleges Keplerus who leaves it uncertain, whether
Christ were borne the 6. of January, or the 19. of April or May. M. Lydyats
conjecture is, because the sheepheards are said to have watched their sheep by
night, which more agrees with the spring time, when the lambs were young, and
the ravenous beasts have then their young also, and so are more greedy and
desirous of their pray, p. 157. Contra. 1. But seeing there must be half a
year between the season wherein Christ was baptized, and wherein he suffered,
because he preached 3. years and an half after his baptism, which was in the
beginning of his 30. year, as S. Luke says, c. 3. 23. then will his passion
fall out in the middle, not in the end of his last year, and the time of his
birth must be half a year before, qu. 68. 2. The shepherds might watch their
flocks as well at other times of the year, when they kept their sheep
abroad, as in the spring, because that country was full of wolves: the reason
is given of their watching, because of their flock, Luke 2. 8. not of their
young only.

3. The common and received opinion is, that our blessed Savior was borne
about the 25. of December, and baptized 13. days after that season, in the
beginning of his 30. year, about the 6. of January. But beside these
conjectures, 1. that is not like that in the deep of winter, the edict should
come forth from Augustus to have men called together to me chief city of
their tribe to be taxed: as Joseph and Marie came to Bethlehem to be taxed,
Luke 2. 6. 2. or that in the cold time of winter the people went into the
waters of Jordan to be baptized of John. 3. beside these conjectures, this is
an evident argument, that Christ's birth was not so near the Passover, because
by Daniels prophecy here, there must be half a Prophetical week from the
time of confirming the covenant, by the preaching of the Gospel, which was
immediately upon the baptism of Christ, who was then entering into his 30.
year, Luke 3. 23. from the baptism then of Christ, about which season he was
borne, we must count. 3. years 6. months to the time of his passion.

4. Upon this reason Ber^aldus thinks, that Christ was borne about the 14. or
15. of September, because 6. months after he suffered upon the 15. of the
first month. Beside he takes an other argument from the custom of the
Grecians and Egyptians, who in memory of Christ's birth began their year in
September, and the Imperial indictions began then also: and this third
reason he urges; there were 24. courses of the Priests, 1. Chron. 24. who
served every month by couples: Abiahs course, of the which Zachary was, was
the 8. single course, 1. Chron. 24. 10. and the 4. double: these courses
began in March: then Abiahs course fell out to be in June, the 4. month:
immediately after was John Baptist conceived, and 6. months after our blessed
Savior, as may be gathered, Luke 1. 26. 36. John being then conceived in
June, must be borne 9. months after in March: And our blessed Savior must be
conceived in December, and his birth will fall out in the ninth month after,
namely September: this reason also is pressed by Joseph. Scalig.

M. Lively in his Persian Monarchy from p. 144. to p. 151. does make this
answer to Beroaldus reasons. 1. he answers to the first reason taken from
that place in Luke 1. that Christ's age can not be gathered out of that place,
because it is said, he was about, or as it were 30. years old, which word
imports a doubtful and imperfect number. 2. that place of Daniel is by some
referred not to Christ's preaching, but to the destruction of Jerusalem. 3.
neither is it certain that Christ preached just 3. years and an half: Joseph.
Scaliger makes the time of his preaching four years: some make it less, as
is showed before, qu. 69.

2. The Grecians and Egyptians began their year in September, in remembrance
of Alexanders victory against Darius: and the Imperial indictions began then,
because Constantine at that time began his reign.

3. In the third reason many things are uncertain. 1. whether the Priests
courses began in March. 2. whether they served by weeks or months. 3. in the
Jews ancient chronicle, called Seder olam, in the last chap. it is affirmed,
that Iehoiaribs course, which was the first, after the destruction of the first
and second Temple, fell out in the 5. month Ab, which is in some part
answerable to our July. M. Lydyat also here answers, that the courses of the
Priests were changed after the captivity, p. 157. Ans. Though I am loath to
contradict so general and received an opinion concerning Christ's birth,
neither will I take upon me to set down any thing positiuely and affirmatively
therein: yet I will show the insufficiency of this answer, and propound
certain doubts out of the Scripture, which I will leave to the Readers
consideration.

The 2. argument alleged by Beroaldus, taken from the Grecians beginning of
their year, and the Imperial indictions, receives full satisfaction, and
therefore I will not reply. To the 3. argument also a reasonable answer is
made, saving that it is not to be doubted, but that the month Nisau, answering
in part to our March was the beginning of their year for all Ecclesiastical
business, as was appointed by Moses, Exodus 12. 1. and it is most like, that the
24. courses went over every year, and so two served monthly: and
notwithstanding that testimony out of the Jewish chronicle, the authority of
the Scripture is more to be waighed, which testifies, that the orders of the
Levites were renewed after their return from the captivity in Nehemiahs time,
according to the ordinance of David the man of Nehem. 12. 24.
God.

But the first reason taken from the age of Christ, when he was baptized, is
not in mine opinion sufficiently answered: 1. whereas S. Luke says, that Jesus
began to b^ about thirty years of age, that particle (...), Josephus Scaliger
takes to be here, not (...), a word of doubting, but (...), a word of
asseueration, and affirming: and what doubt can be here made, but that Jesus
began then to be 30. year old, according to the very words? 2. that this
prophecy of Daniel of the 70. weeks determines in Christ's death, is showed
before, quest. 49. neither can it have any other meaning, without much
wresting, as either with Iunius to read, after 62. weeks, after the Messiah is
slain: whereas the words are, after 62. weeks, the Messiah shall be slain:
or with M. Lively, to say that Messiah in this prophecy is not to be taken for
Christ: both which may seem in any man's judgment* to be hard constructions of
the text. 3. If this place then be understood of the Messiah, there must of
necessity be half a week allowed for his preaching: and it is the general
received opinion of old and new, that Christ preached 3. years and a half:
and it is more inconvenient to deny that, then that Christ was borne in
December.

Now then, though for mine own part, in a matter indifferent and probable, I
am loath to go against antiquity; yet this first reason I must confess,
grounded upon the authority of Daniel for the space of 3. years and an half
from Christ's beginning to preach unto his death, and of S. Luke for Christ's
entering into 30. years when he was baptized, has so prevailed with me, that I
think it very probable, that Christ's birth was nearer September, then
December: And howsoever it is, there must needs be some error in the account
of time, in keeping Christ's nativity day the 25. of December, seeing in the
revolution of 16. hundred years, there may well be lost so many days of the
just reckoning: from hence now may be gathered the true distance between the
baptism and the passion of Christ, which shall be distinctly handled in the
next question.

72. Quest. Of the space and distance of time that was between Christ's
baptism and his passion.
1. Epiphanius, whose opinion was seen in the beginning of the former
question, makes the baptism of Christ 60. days before that season of the
year wherein he was borne: the day of Christ's birth he thinks to have been
borne the 6. of January: and 60. days before that falls out in the
beginning of November. But herein is Epiphanius error, he places Christ's
baptism toward the end of the year, whereas it was in the beginning of
Christ's 30. year: and again, he sets Christ's baptism in this account but
4. months distant from his passion.

2. Some bring the baptism of Christ nearer unto the Passover by 73. days
then Epiphanius: as they hold Christ to have been upon the 25. of December,
and then his baptism to have been solemnized about 13. days after the season
of his birth, about the sixth of January, in the beginning of Christ's 30.
year: so Pererius, as before is showed, qu. 68. And to this purpose he
alleges Maximus, hom. 1. de Epiphan. ferunt Christum hodie, vel stella duce
a gentibus adoratum, etc. they say that Christ this day (namely the Epiphanie)
was either adored of the Gentiles by the leading of a star, or being invited
to the marriage, to have turned water into wine, or to have received John's
baptism, and to have consecrate the flood of Jordan, etc. So August. sermon. 27.
de tempor. makes mention of these 3. opinions, that some held the wise men to
have come upon that day to worship Christ, some that he turned water into wine,
some that he was upon that day baptized, etc.

But 1. these Fathers speak hereof vncertenly, not determining any thing, as
Maximus in the former place concludes, quid potissimum praesenti hac factum
sit die, noverit ipse qui fecit, but what was chiefly done upon this day, he
knows that did it: so then this tradition had no certain ground. 2. Pererius
himself thinks with others, that the half week which Daniel speaks of,
wherein the Messiah should cause the sacrifices to cease, began at Christ's
baptism: then must there be just 6. months from the time of Christ's baptism
unto the Passover, for how else shall the half year be made up?

3. Josephus Scaliger, lib. 6. de emendat. tempor. brings Christ's baptism
yet nearer unto the Passover: for he thinks that the miracle of converting
the water into wine, was done 3. days after Christ's baptism: the 1. day
after, Andrew and Peter followed Christ, the 2. day Philip was called, and
Nathaniel, Ioh. 1. then the 3. day after was the marriage in Cana of Galile,
Ioh. 2. 1. and then it is said, v. 13. that the Jews Passover was at hand.
But this opinion can not hold. 1. Christ after he was baptized, presently was
tempted in the wilderness, as S. Mark says, (...), immediately the spirit
drives him into the wilderness, Mark. 1. 12. And S. Luke thus writes, c. 4.
1. Jesus being full of the holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led by the
spirit into the wilderness: the first thing then, that fell out after Christ's
baptism, was his temptation, which continued 40. days* how then could that
miracle be 3. days after Christ's baptism. 2. Therefore it is to be understood,
that it was the 3. day either after he came into Galile, or rather the 3. day
after he had that conference with Philip and Nathaniel.

4. Wherefore the best resolution is, that Christ was baptized about the
beginning of September, when he began to be 30. year old, and the reason
hereof is grounded upon Daniels half week: for whether we begin the 70. and
last week from the baptism of Christ, or the latter half week (for there
are of both opinions, as is showed before, but the latter is more probable) we
must, to make up this half week have 6. months from the season, wherein
Christ was baptized, to the time of the Passover.

73. Quest. Upon what day of the week Christ suffered, and whether upon a
festival day.
To know upon what day of the week Christ suffered, we must find out when he
did eat his Passover. 1. Epiphanius thinks that he did eat it upon the
third day of the week at even, when the fourth day begun with the Jews, who
reckon their civil day from the evening. But this can not be: for then if
Christ are his Passover either upon the 3. or 4. day, he must have suffered
the 5. which was the day following, and then he must have risen again just
upon the Jews Sabbath, not on the morrow after the Sabbath, as the history of
the Gospel shows. 2. Ios. Scaliger thinks that Christ did eat the
Passover in the eve of the 6. day, and the day following, which was part of
the 6. day, he suffered. But this cannot be: for the Passover was to be killed
upon the 14. day of the Moon between the two euenings: which was, as Scaliger
well observes out of Josephus, from the time of the evening sacrifice, which
was about the ninth hour, to the going down of the Sun, which was the space
of 3. hours: but the 15. day began not till after Sunne-set: therefore that
space between the two euenings, was the end of the 14. day, which was at this
time, the fifth day of the week, not the beginning of the 15. day, which was
the sixth of the week.

Now further Josephus Scaliger holds, that Christ and the Jews did eat
their Passover both at the same instant upon the 14. day at even according to
the law: and that the next day he suffered, which was the first day of
unleavened bread. And for the better maintenance of this assertion, he presses
these arguments: 1. Otherwise the Jews should have advantage against us, who
object, that Christ suffered not upon any festival day, wherein they kept the
Passover, and so the type and the substance agreed not together. 2. the
Grecians to uphold their opinion, that the Eucharist must be ministered with
leauened bread, because Christ gave unto his disciples leauened bread, do also
affirm, that Christ did eat the Passover one day sooner, then the Jews did
eat it. 3. he urges that place of S. Mark. 14. 12. the first day of
unleavened bread, when they sacrificed the Passover, his disciples said unto
him: hence he infers, that at the same time, the Passover was generally
eaten, when Christ also did eat it.

1. Ans. In this question Bellarmine with other Romanists, concur with Ios.
Scalig. but Bellarmine is answered else where, Synops. contr. 13. qu. 4.
and therefore I will only examine Scaligers arguments.

1. If the Jews upon a blind tradition deferred the Pasch to avoid the
concurrence of two Sabbaths, which should have bin this year, wherein Christ
suffered, if the first solemn day of the Pasch had bin kept according to the
law upon the 15. day, for their ordinary Sabbath followed the next: and yet
Christ kept it, as the law prescribed; and so suffered that day wherein the
Pasch should have bin solemnized: the typical lamb and the true lamb (this
notwithstanding) agreed together, because Christ was sacrificed at that time,
when the first day of the Passover should have bin kept by the law, though the
Jews by a corrupt custom and usage kept it not. 2. The Grecians may ground an
error upon a true position: it follows not, because Christ prevented the
common eating of the Passover, that therefore he eat the Passover with
leauened bread, for that had bin against the law, Exodus 12. 8. for although
leauened bread were not yet put out of the Jews houses, yet Christ sending his
disciples before, might provide unleavened bread for his paschal supper: and as
the Grecians hereupon ground their opinion, that the Eucharist is only to be
ministered with leauened bread: so the Romanists on the otherside do as
stiffely maintain their superstition, that unleavened bread only must be
used, holding that Christ at the same time did eat the Passover with the rest
of the Jews. 3. S. Mark respects the right time appointed by the law for
the Passover, not the corrupt usage which the Jews had taken up: so then that
day was the first of unleavened bread at even by right of the institution,
though it were not so in practice among the Jews: and therefore S. Luke chap.
22. ^.
says, then came the day of unleavened bread, wherein the Passover ought to
be sacrificed. But now the contrary is evident out of the Gospel, that the
Jews received not the Passover generally until the eve after Christ was
crucified. 1. It is said, Ioh. 18. 28.
they themselves came not into the common hall, least they should be defiled,
but that they might eat the Passover: They did not then eat the Passover
till the evening after Christ's passion. Josephus Scaliger answers, that the
sacrifices which were offered in the feast of the Passover, were called the
Passover, as well as the Paschal lamb: alleging that place, Deuteronomy. 16. 2.
Thou shall offer the Passover to the Lord thy God, of sheep, and bullocks,
etc. But here the phrase is to sacrifice the Passover, which was as well
referred to the offering of the other sacrifices, as the paschal lamb. Contr.
Yet to eat the Passover is not otherwise used in the Gospel, then of the
eating of the Paschal lamb.

2. If the Jews had eaten the Paschal lamb the same night with Christ, then
the next day should have been a solemn festival day, wherein they should
have done no servile work, as is appointed Exodus 12. 16. But they did much
servile work upon this day, as in carrying the cross, pitching of it into the
ground, raising of it up, nayling Christ unto it: And indeed they themselves
also resolved not to put Christ to death upon the feast day, Mark. 14. 2.
Joseph. Scaliger here answers, that the day wherein Christ suffered was the
first day of unleavened bread, but not of the paschal solemnity: But this
distinction is contrary to the place before alleged out of Exodus, where the
15. day, which was the first of unleavened bread, as likewise the seventh and
last, are named to be days of solemn assemblies wherein no servile work
should be done, saving about that which they did eat.

3. The day wherein Christ suffered is called the preparation of the Passover,
Ioh. 19. 14. it was not then the day of the Passover it self. Joseph.
Scaliger answers, that the preparation was not the whole day, but only after
the ninth hour: as he alleges out of a certain Edict of Augustus. But 1.
it appears, that the preparation was the whole day, at the least from the
sixth hour: as in the same place the Evangelist says, it was the preparation
of the Passover, and about the sixth hour. 2. If then it were the preparation
of the Passover, then was not that day the first of the Passover.

4. Paulus Burgens. somewhat to help out this tradition of the Jews his
countrymen, who deferred the Pasch, if it fell out upon the 6. day of the
week, to avoid the concurrence of two festival days, says there was a
double account of the 14. day of the Moon, vna vera and legitima secundum
veram computationem Christi, etc. one was the true and lawful day according to
the true computation of Christ, who knew all the mysteries of the law: the
other was legitima secundum communem and assuetam computationem aliorum,
lawful also according to the common and accustomed computation of others, etc.
M. Lydyat also shows that the difference between the observation of the
Pasch between our blessed Savior, and the Jews, did arise hereupon; because
Christ reckoned the days according to the computation of the natural years,
but the Jews followed the Syro-Grecian account, found out by Callippus,
beginning the months, not as the Hebrews, at the new Moon, but as the
Grecians began their months: so that the Jews began their month Nisan, as
the Grecians did their month Xanthicus, which that year began one day after
the new Moon. Lyd. de emend. temp. p. 179. Both these might very well concur
together, that the Jews did keep another day of the Passover, then Christ
and his disciples, both upon a blind tradition, to avoid the concurrence of
two Sabbaths, and because they followed a strange computation. But it is
evident hereby, that they did not eat the Passover the same day with Christ,
and that they did break the law of Moses in receiving a foreign computation of
their months, which was not lawful, howsoever Burgensis, in favor of his
countrymen, excuse it by the usual custom.

74. Quest. Who are meant by the people of the Prince to come, v. 26.
There are diverse expositions of these words: 1. Some do put the people in
the accusative case, he shall destroy the city and Sanctuary, the people of
the Prince to come. 2. Some do make it the nominative, the people of the
Prince to come shall destroy the city, and of either of these interpretations
there are diverse kinds.

Of the first. 1. Some read thus, he shall destroy the city with the captain
to come, Sept. but the word ( with) is not in the original. 2. Iunius thus
interprets, he, that is, the Messiah, the Prince, shall destroy the people of
the Prince, his own people, which shall come, that is, which shall be then. So
also M. Br. he shall destroy the people of the Prince, in the next generation.
But 1. it should seem not to be so proper a speech, he, that is (the Messiah
the Prince) should destroy the people of the Prince, that is, his own people:
2. and in the original there is no conjunction to couple them together: the
words standing thus; and the city and the Sanctuary shall destroy the people,
etc. but in this sense a conjunction must be supplied, and the people, etc. 3.
and though the word nagid, prince, were before joined with Messiah, yet here
being put alone, it is not necessary so to understand it of the Messiah. 4.
neither were the Jews then the people of the Messiah, whom they had rejected
and crucified.

2. Of the second sort are these interpretations. 1. Polanus gives this sense:
the people of the Prince to come, that is, the Gentiles, who should become the
people of Christ being converted to the Gospel, shall destroy the city: But
the Romans were not at that time, when they sacked Jerusalem, converted to the
faith of Christ, and so not his people.

2. M. Lively by this word to come, understands the strangers and comers
which are opposite to inhabitants, as the word is used, Genesis 42. 5. the sons
of Jacob came to buy food among those that came: so his meaning is, that the
city and Sanctuary should be surprised by strangers and comers: but the word
haba, to come, seems rather to be referred unto the time following, then to
the condition of the people: though it be true, that Jerusalem was spoiled by
forreners and strangers.

3. Some read, the principal people of the Prince or captain to come, Vatab.
and he thinks the destruction of the city to be imputed unto the people
rather then their captain, because Titus would have defended the Sanctuary,
from the spoil of the soldiers: but the word is nagid, which signifies a
Prince, not principal, and the other observation seems to be somewhat too
near and curious.

4. Oecolampadius by this captain understands Pompey the great, who took
Jerusalem, and slew 12000. Jews, and afterward Crassus robbed the Temple, and
then Herod and Sosius made havoc of the city: But this captain with his
people, were to come after the Messiah was slain, which was spoken of
immediately before.

5. Wherefore by the Prince and people to come, are signified Vespasian and
Titus his son, with the Roman army, which should besiege the city, and
destroy both it and the Temple, as Bulling. Calv. Osiander do well understand
it: so also Lyranus: and this is agreeable to that prediction of our Blessed
Savior, Luke 19. 43. The days shall come upon thee, when thine enemies shall
cast a trench about thee, etc. and shall make thee even with the ground, etc.
here the destruction of the city is ascribed to the enemies, not to the
Messiah their Prince.

6. Hugo thinks it may be applied also to that destruction of the city which
was after this by the Emperor Elius Adrianus: But our Savior appoints the
time, when all this should be fulfilled, Matthew. 24. 34. This generation shall
not pass, till all these things be done: but the destruction by Adrianus was
well nigh an 100. years after Christ spoke those words, 60. years after the
first ruin of the city by Titus: it was therefore without the compass of
that generation.

Quest. 75. How long after the Messiah was slain, this destruction happened by
Titus.
1. Barbinel, that ignorant and railing Rabbine, as M. Calvin reports his
opinion, says there passed 200. years between the death of Christ, and the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans: But herein he shows his blind folly:
for unto the second destruction by Adrian, there were not from Christ's death
above an 104. years, which happened in the 18. year of the reign of the
Emperor Adrian; the first destruction was according to the saying of our
Savior, within the memory of that generation, then living.

2. Lyranus and Paulus Burgens. think that the city was taken by the Romans
about 42. years after the death of Christ: but it cannot be so much, as shall
afterward be showed by the computation of the years of the Emperors. Pintus
also concurreth with Lyranus, counting 38. years and an half from the end of
the half of the 70. week, that is, 3. years and an half, which he reckons
after Christ's passion to the destruction of Jerusalem.

3. But Iunius comes more years too short, then these do ouershoote: he
makes it but 36. years from the passion of Christ, to the destruction of the
city: annotat. in 9. Dan.

4. Josephus Scaliger holding that Christ suffered in the 35. year of his age,
whereas he commonly is held to have suffered in the 33. year, brings Christ's
passion nearer by two years to the destruction of the city, then the
ordinary account is: and so he must make the time 38. years or thereabout,
from the death of Christ to the ruin of the city.

5. M. Lydyat brings Christ's passion within 34. years of the final
overthrow and destruction of the city by the Romans: for he sets Christ's
passion in the year of the world 4040. or in the 22. year of Tiberius, and
the destruction of the city in the 4074. year: the reason of which alteration
is, for that he makes the passion of Christ to have been 4. years later,
then usual; namely, in the 22. year of Tiberius: whereas our blessed Savior
is commonly held to have suffered in the 18. year of Tiberius: see this
opinion examined before, qu. 69.

6. But the just time was 40. years, as may be showed by a threefold
computation. 1. by the distance of the Olympiads. 2. by the years of the
Emperors. 3. by the years of the kings of Judea the Herodians.

1. Christ is held to have suffered in the 4. year of the 202. Olympiad: and
the destruction of the city fell into the 4. year of the 212. Olympiad: which
distance makes just 40. years. Perer. Bulling.

2. The years of the Emperors are thus counted: Tiberius reigned in all 23.
Christ then suffering in his 18. year, there remained 5. years more: then
Caligula reigned 4. Claudius 14. Nero 14. Galba, Otho, Vitellius, 1. Vespasian
2. these sums make 40. years: Bulling. But the precise and exact reckoning is
this, as Eusebius in his Chronicle sets them down: All these years, with
the months and days, being summed together, 18. years being diducted of
Tiberius reign, will make 40. years and sum odd days.

years months days Tiberius reigned 22 11 14 Caligula 3 10 18 Claudius 13 8
20 Nero 14 Galba 7 2 Otho 3 2 Vitellius 8 5 Vespasian 2

3. The third reckoning is by the years of the Herodians, whose whole time
from the beginning of the reign of Herod the great, to the end of their
government at the destruction of Jerusalem, was 103. years: which is summed
thus: Herod the great reigned 37. years, Archelaus 9. Herod the Tetrarch 24.
Herod Agrippa 7. Agrippa the son of Agrippa 26. Oecolampad. Now of this
account 63. years must be cut off for the reign of Herod, in whose 30.
complete, and 31. begun, Christ was borne, as is showed before qu. 67. and
for the years of our blessed Saviors life, who died in his 33. year, and the
remainder is 40.

7. Julius Africanus exceeds the rest, in counting 43. years from the death
of Christ, which he places in the 15. year of Tiberius, to the ruin of the
city: but herein was his error, he held that Christ died in his 30. or 31.
year.

76. Quest. Why mention is made of the destruction of Jerusalem here, seeing it
is without the compass of the 70. weeks.
1. One reason hereof is, because Daniel was desirous to understand what should
befall his city in time to come, the Angel does satisfy his full desire, and
as he had told him of the reedifying of the Temple and city, so he also
foretells of the final end and dissolution of both.

2. An other cause is, that after the Angel had showed him that the Messiah
should be slain, then further, that it might appear, what an heinous sin
this was, the destruction of the city is sore showed to follow, as a just
punishment for so great a wickedness: Perer. so also Lyranus: quia hoc factum
fuit in poenam mortis Christi, because this was done for a punishment because
of the death of Christ, it is immediately mentioned, though it fell not out
within the 70. weeks. Here then are two reasons showed of the destruction of
the city, the slaying of the Messiah, and the utter rejecting of him, Polan.

3. A third reason, why mention is here made of this desolation is, to make the
Jews inexcusable: that seeing they have found all this to be true by their
woeful experience here foreshewed by the Angel, that their city is destroyed
unto this day because of their treachery against the Messiah, their obstinate
blindness therein might appear, that yet continue enemies unto the blessed
Messiah and his holy Gospel. Perer.

77. Quest. Of the meaning of those words, v. 26. the end thereof shall be
with a flood, and unto the end of the battle it shall be destroyed, etc.
1. By this similitude of inundation, three things are signified, that it shall
be, casus repentinus, ineluctabilis, vniuersalis, a sudden casualtie,
inevitable, and general, Iun. in comment. like as a flood sweepeth all away
before it, and spares nothing; so none should be spared in this destruction.
2. Thereby also is signified the perfect desol^tion, that should be brought
upon the city: like as the ouerflowing of waters pulls up trees by the
roots, and overthrows the very foundations of houses; so in this desolation,
the city should be made even with the ground, and one stone should not be left
upon an other, as our Savior foretold them, Luke 19. 44. Bullinger. 3.
Further, like as in inundations and ouerflowings, the waters still increase,
and swell more and more, so hereby is signified, that calamitates magis and
magis increscebant, their calamities should more and more increase: for still
their state waxed worse and worse: they were afflicted by Pompey, but more by
Crassus; and he was tolerable in respect of the governors which followed,
Pontius Pilate, Albinus, Florus, who still were more cruel one then another,
Oecolampad. 4. And in that it is said, unto the end, or at the end of the
war: thereby is understood, that though the Jews might sometime resist and
put the Romans to much trouble and business, yet in the end they should
prevail, and make a final desolation, Melancthon. 5. Thus the Scripture uses
by this similitude of inundations and ouerflowing of waters, to set forth the
horrible wast and desolation that follows upon cruel war, as Isay. 8. 7.
8. the host of the king of Assure is described; he shall come up upon all their
rivers, and go over all their banks, and shall break into Judah, and
ouerflowe and pass thorough, and shall come up unto the neck, etc. And in the
same manner, are the armies of the Babylonians described, Ierem. 47. 2. Polan.

Quest. 78. That the end of the state of the Jews, not of the Romans, is
here signified.
R. Solomon gives this corrupt interpretation of this place, that in the end
of the last battle of Gog and Magog spoken of Ezekiel. 38. Messiah shall subdue
the Romans, and all other adversaries to the Jews, and then the city and
Temple shall be restored: But this is a corrupt gloss: 1. the next verse
evidently shows, that this desolation is understood of the Jews, as is
evident by the ceasing of the sacrifices there mentioned. 2. It is but a
dream, that their Messiah shall be a glorious temporal Prince, seeing the
Angel here shows, that Messiah shall be slain by them. 3. by Gog and Magog
are understood the Scythians and Sarmatians, and other people which joined with
Antiochus against the Jews, which battle was before the destruction of
Jerusalem above 240. years. And that Magog signifies the Scythians, this
evidence there is, because the Scythians built a city in Syria, which they
called Magog, as witnesses Pliny lib. 5. c. 23. Polan.

2. But whereas the Latin translator reads, post finem belli, after the end
of the war shall be the destruction: which reading if it were right, then the
Rabbines sense is overthrown, who says their desolation shall but continue
unto that war: Lyranus to make good the Latin translation, says there are
two Hebrew words, which are very like, (...) and (...) which he says differ
but in certain points: the first signifies, yet, and so in effect may be
taken for after, as Jonas 3. 5. yet forty days, and Nini^^h shall be
destroyed, that is, after 40. days, which word is like to have been used
here: sed postea mutata est punctatio per Iudaeos, but afterward the pointing
was changed by the Jews, etc. But Lyranus fails diuersely in this his
defense of the vulgar Latin. 1. there is great difference between these two
words, not in points only, but in letters: the word used in that place of
Jonas consists of three letters, it has va^ in the mids, and cholem, but
the other word which signifies until, has but two letters, with camets, and
without cholem. 2. to imagine, that the Jews have altered points, and changed
words in Scripture, is very dangerous: for so should we have no certainty in
Scripture: and beside, it is not like the Jews would use any such fraud,
seeing that they have in account the number of all the letters in the old
Test^ment. 3. therefore retaining the best reading according to the original,
the cauills of the Jews may be otherwise answered, as is set down before.

Quest. 79. Of the most grievous calamities that fell upon the Jews in the
final destruction of their city.
The great misery of the Jews in this ^ast calamity, and ever since, may be
showed three ways. 1. by comparing it with other former calamities which it
far exceeded. 2. by the deprivation of the benefits, which before they
enjoyed. 3. by the particular description of the evils, which actually they
suffered.

1. This their last calamity and captivity differs from all other in these
five respects. 1. Other calamities and captiuities, which they endured, were
before declared how long they should continue: as Abraham is told, that his
posterity should soiourne and be evil entreated in Cana^^ and Egypt 400.
years, the captivity of Babylon was prescribed for 70. years, as the Prophet
Jeremy showed them before: the heat of persecution under Antiochus, how long
it should lie upon the Jews, is likewise revealed to Daniel by the Angel, c.
8. But this last captivity and dispersion of the Jews, they have no notice at
all, how long it shall endure. 2. their other captiuities were nothing so long,
their servitude in Egypt exceeded not an 150. years, though the time of their
abode there were longer, the captivity of Babylon but 70. but this their
captiued estate has already exceeded 1500. years. 3. In the other
captiuities, they had prophets to comfort them, as Moses in Egypt, in the
Babylonian captivity Daniel and Ezekiel: but such Prophets they have none now
amongst them. 4. Then had they diverse signs and miracles: as the 3. children
were delivered from the fiery furnace, Daniel from the Lions, but now are
miracles ceased among them. 5. At other times they had excellent men, raised
from among them, which were famous and honorable for their wisdom, and
virtue, even with the Princes of the heathen: as Joseph with the king of Egypt:
Daniel with the kings of the Chaldeans, Ezra, Nehemiah, Mordecai with the kings
of Persia: But none such now are found among the Jews.

2. Beside, the Jews are now deprived of seven several benefits and
privileges, 7. benefits which the Jews have been deprived of since the
captivity of Babylon.
which they enjoyed in their former times: 1. they have not the Arc. 2. nor
the Lords oracles from thence. 3. they want the Vrim and Thummim, wherewith the
Priests used to ask counsel of God. 4. the fire which came down from heaven,
and was continually preserved upon the altar, was long since extinguished among
them. 5. the holy oil, wherewith the graces of the spirit were conferred upon
their kings and Priests, has lost the virtue. 6. the gift of prophecy is
ceased among them. 7. neither does the sixth year bring forth fruit for three
years, as at the first it used to do. And if it be here answered, that the
Jews wanted all these things after their return from Babel, while the second
Temple yet stood; yet now their case is much worse: because then they had both
a Temple with Priests, and sacrifices, and a city and commonwealth, but now
they have neither.

3. Concerning the misery which fell upon the Jews, when the city was
besieged and taken, it appears both by their miserable state wherein they
were oppressed with famine, the pestilence, and the sword among themselves, the
great havoc and slaughter made of them by the enemy, and by their
reproachful and slavish condition afterward. 1. during the siege, they were so
oppressed with famine, that women were constrained to devour their own
children, they did eat the very leather of their shoes and targets: they died
in such heaps within the city of the plague, famine, and by civil discord,
that the streets and channels lay full of dead bodies, and were trampled upon
as mire in the streets: in so much that being weary of burying them, they
threw their bodies from the wall into the trenches: which when Titus beheld
full of dead bodies, he stretched his hands to heaven, as testifying his
innocence, that it was not his doing. 2. the number of the Jews were great,
which were slain by the enemies: in Caesarea there were slain 20. thousand,
in Scythopolis 13. thousand, in Prolemais 5000. in Alexandria 50. thousand, in
Damascus 10. thousand: this was somewhat before the beginning of that war.
Then afterward the war being begun, there were slain in Galile 18.
thousand, in Aphek 150000. in Samaria 11. thousand and 600. in Iotapata 4000.
in Taricha 6600. in Giscalis 2000. ex Oecolamp. the whole sum of those which
died in the siege by the famine, pestilence, and sword, came to 11. hundred
thousand, as Josephus writes, lib. 7. de bello Iudaic. c. 16. 17. 3. Neither
was here an end of their misery: They which remained, the better sort of them
were reserved for tryumpht they which were above 17. year old were sent into
Egypt, to be employed in certain works, and some were cast unto the wild
beasts: they which were under 17. years were sold to be slaves: the whole
number of the captives is noted by Josephus to have been 97. thousand.

Quest. 80. That all this misery came upon the Jews for putting to death the
Messiah.
1. The Jews will by no means acknowledge that they have and yet do suffer
these things for the (...) of the Messiah: but first they answer that these
afflictions are laid upon them to pr^oue their patience, and that they thereby
should be tried as gold in the fire. But to this we answer, 1. that they by
these afflictions are nothing amended, but wax worse, their impiety,
profaneness, blasphemy is notoriously known to all the world. 2. though God
lay temporal chastisements upon men, to try their patience: yet to that end
none are deprived of spiritual blessings, as they are of the gift of
prophecy, of miracles, of the public worship of God according to his law. 3.
beside the Lord has promised them ample and great blessings, so long as they
walk in obedience of his law, as is extant, Leuit. 26. and Deuter. 28. so that
they should make God a liar, if these things were not befallen them for their
sins.

2. The Jews have an other answer, that they are not punished for the death of
Christ, but for their other sins. But the greatest sins for the which the
Jews were punished in time past, were their Idolatry, and killing of their
Prophets: which sins they are not now gultie of: epistol. 129. ad Dardanum.
for they have no Prophets to kill, and Idolaters they are not, as Hierome
says unto them, Certe non colis idola, seruiens Persis and Romany, etc. Deos
ignoras al^^nos, truly thou do not worship idols, though thou art in
captivity under the Persians and Romans, yet thou art ignorant of strange
Gods, etc. If then God had compassion upon them, when they went into captivity
for those sins, certainly this long captivity is now fallen upon them for
some greater sin then any of the other: And what can that be else, then the
putting to death of the Blessed Messiah? And so Hierome concludes, memento
voci^ parentum tuorum, etc. remmember the voice of thy parents, his blood be
upon us, and our children, etc. All this therefore is happened upon them for
killing the heir of the vineyard, whereas they did but offer violence to the
servants before.

3. Now as it is evident, that the Jews are punished for the death and murder
of the Messiah; so as their offense was heinous, the punishment is also great,
which is inflicted upon them: which is twofold, either corporal or spiritual,
the corporal is threefold, in the loss of their dignity, they being
deprived of their government and policy, in the perpetual desolation of
their city, and their ignominious exile and dispersion thorough the world:
their spiritual punishment is twofold, the blinding of their mind, and
understanding, and the hardening of their heart, as the Prophet Isay says, c.
6. 10. make the heart of this people fat, and their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes, least they see with their eyes, etc. and understand with their
heart, etc.

Quest. 81. He shall confirm the covenant with many for one week: how this
one week is to be understood.
1. Cyrillus Hierosol. cateches. 12. beginning the 69. weeks at Darius, and
ending them at the birth of Christ, omitteth the 70. week altogether. But that
must needs be acknowledged to have been a great oversight in Cyril, seeing
that the most special things to be performed by the Messiah, was done in the
70. and last week.

2. Hyppolitus ending the 69. weeks in the nativity of Christ, deferreth the
70. and last to the end of the world, unto the preaching of Henoch and Elias:
But beside that it was the error of those times, that Henoch and Elias should
come in their own persons, and preach toward the end of the world: seeing our
Savior expounds that prophecy (of the coming of Elias) of John Baptist*
Matthew. 11. who came in the spirit of Elias: this last week must not be severed
so far from the 69. weeks: but as the 62. followed immediately the first 7.
so after the 7. weeks and the 62. weeks, which make 69. must follow the 70.
and last week.

3. Eusebius, as Hierome reports his opinion in his commentary upon this
place, ending the 69. weeks at the baptism of Christ, takes the 70. and last
week for 70. years, and so extends it unto the time of Traian the Emperor,
for so long the preaching of the Apostles continued, John the Evangelist
suruiuing all the Apostles until then. But seeing Eusebius takes the 69.
prophetical weeks but for 7. years a piece, he has no reason to make the
last week ten times so much as any of the other; neither is a week of
years in any place so taken in Scripture.

4. Oecolampadius takes this 70. and last week yet more largely, for he
begins it at Pompeys time when the state of the Jewish commonwealth began
to decline, and continues it unto the death of Christ, which he reckons to
be some 98. years, and ends the week in the reign of the Emperor Hadrian,
which is above 98. years more, in which time all these things happened here
spoken of, and then was the final desolation of the city: so he takes the
70. and last week, not for any certain number of years, but for the
plenitude and fullness of time: But seeing the rest of the weeks do signify
a certain and definite time, and they are only taken for weeks of years: so
must the 70. and last week be understood also: and considering that this last
week is divided into two half weeks, the latter expressed, the other
understood, therein must be contained a definite and certain number: for the
parts being finite and certain, so must the whole be likewise.

5. Osiander takes this last week to begin after Christ's resurrection, in
which space of seven years many by the preaching of the Gospel were received
and admitted to the new covenant: But seeing the Angel says, that 70. weeks
are determined, and cut out, to finish wickedness, and to seal up sins,
which things are performed in the death of Christ, there also must the weeks
end.

6. Many begin this last week at the baptism of Christ, and end it 3.
years and an half after, as Melancthon, Iunius edition. 1. Pintus, with
others: But seeing it is said, he shall confirm the covenant for one week,
(he, that is the Messiah) the covenant must be confirmed before the Messiah be
slain: for otherwise how should it appear that this covenant was confirmed by
the Messiah, if it be not done in his time, that is, in the days of his flesh:
he then must confirm it either before, or at his death: priusquam tollitur e
medio, before he be taken out of the way, Vatab. for otherwise it should not be
conspicuous, and apparent to be the Messiahs work.

7. Some do refer this last week unto the last seven years which went
immediately before the destruction of the city, Iun. Polan. M. Lively. But it
is sufficiently showed before, that these 70. weeks must expire in the death
of the Messiah, and are not to be extended so far, see quest. 49.

8. The best interpretation then is this, that this last week must begin 7.
years before the death of Christ: the first half year went before his
baptism, as a preparation thereunto: then in the latter half week these
things were performed, as the next words show, H. Br. Concent. the whole week
is named, because these things were done in the last week: but not in all the
week, only in the latter half thereof, beginning at Christ's baptism. So
Hugo expounds it, quia non in principio hebdomadis hae mirabilia coeperunt,
ideo determinat, quando haec inchoata sunt, etc. because these things were not
done in the beginning of the week, therefore he determines when they should
begin, namely, in the latter half week, which began in the 15. year of
Tiberius, when Christ was baptized.

Quest. 82. What is understood by the covenant.
1. R. Selom^ by the covenant understands the truce for 7. years which the
Romans made with the Jews at the time of the besieging of the city: But
Lyranus does refell this conceit by these two reasons: 1. because Josephus
makes no mention of any such league or truce, neither in his books of the
antiquities of the Jews, nor of the Iew^^ wars. 2. And if there had been
any such truce, it should have been made with all the Jews, not with some
only, as it is here said, he shall confirm this covenant with many.

2. Some referring this last week unto the destruction of Jerusalem, by this
covenant do understand that special favor, which the Lord showed, and the
fatherly care, which he had of his Church in Jerusalem, who were admonished by
a revelation to depart the city before the siege began, so Iun. Polan. But
here rather we are to understand the everlasting covenant of grace, which
Christ has confirmed with his blood, then any such temporal favor.

3. M. Calvin seems specially to understand this covenant, of the vocation
and calling of the Gentiles, which was fulfilled after his resurrection: but
this covenant as has been said already, was confirmed by Christ at and
before his death, not after. Then indeed was this covenant by the preaching of
the Apostles published and divulged: but there is difference between the
ratification of a covenant, and the publication thereof; as there is between
the confirmation of a will, and the execution.

4. Therefore by the covenant here is understood, the covenant of grace made in
Christ for remission of sins unto all that believe, Osiander. the new
Evangelical law preached by Christ and confirmed in his death, Vatablus,
Pintus* such as the Prophet Jeremy speaks of, c. 31. 33. this shall be the
covenant which I will make with the house of Israel, After those days, says
the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, etc. I will forgive their
sins, and remember their iniquities no more, etc.

Quest. 83. How this covenant was ratified and confirmed.
Some do expound these words, multis, with many, of the diverse ways and
means whereby this covenant was ratified, Perer. but the word larabbini, to
many, is beter understood of the persons, with whom or for whom this covenant
shall be ratified, as the pr^position lamed shows: yet true it is, that this
covenant was ratified and confirmed many ways. 1. First, it was ratified by
many glorious testimonies of our Blessed Savior. 1. of the Angels, Of the
^anifold and (...) testimo^ies of Christ.
Luke 2. 2. of the wisemen that came from the East and worshipped, Matthew. 2. 3.
of the holy men and women, then living at the time of Christ's birth, as of
Zachary, Elizabeth, Sim^on, Anna, Luke 1. 2. 4. of John Baptist, who gave
witness to Christ. 5. of God the father from heaven, Math. 3. 6. of Moses and
Elias, which appeared in the mount where Christ was transfigured, Matthew. 17. 7.
of the Pharisees themselves, as Nicodemus said, we know thou art a teacher
come from God, John. 3. 8. yea of the devils themselves, who being cast out of
men, cried out and confessed that he was Christ the Son of God. 2. The second
kind of confirmation was by the prophecies of the old Testament concerning the
Messiah, which were all fulfilled in Christ, as the history of (...) Gospel
shows. 3. The third ratification was by Christ's wonderful and most glorious
miracles. 4. by his holy life and conversation. 5. by the predictions of our
Lord himself, which are noted to be seven. 1. of the ruin and destruction of
the city, Luke 19. 43. 2. of the miracles which should be wrought by his
disciples, Mark. 14. 17. 3. of the great persecutions which his disciples
should suffer for his name, John. 16. 2. 4. of the preaching of the Gospel
thorough the world, Act. 1. 8. 5. of the propagating of his Church over the
world: Ioh. 10. 16. 6. of the continuance of the same Church, as having a most
sure foundation being builded upon the rock, Matthew. 16. 18. 7. of his own
death, his resurrection, Mat. 16. 21. and the sending of the Holy Ghost, Act.
1. Perer.

6. But Lyranus also mentions six ways, whereby Christ confirmed this
covenant, praedicando, miracula faciendo, etc. by preaching, doing of miracles,
in dying, rising again, ascending, and sending the Holy Ghost.

7. But by two ways chiefly was this covenant ratified and confirmed, by the
declaration, and publishing thereof by his preaching, and by the sealing
thereof by his most precious blood: like as a Testament, is first declared and
written, and then confirmed by the death of the Testator; So in the death of
our Blessed Savior, was the covenant before set forth by his preaching, fully
established, as Oecolampad. Scimus, etc. in morte ipsa proprie foedus
confirmari, etc. we know, according to the author of the epistle to the
Hebrews, that the covenant was properly confirmed in his death, etc. And this
further may be made plain thus. 1. by the type and figure: as Moses took the
book of the law, and read in it, and then sprinkled the blood upon the
people, saying, this is the blood of the covenant, Exodus 24. 8. so the book of
this covenant declared by Christ's preaching was made sure in his blood. 2. This
also appears by the institution of the Lords supper, where Christ says of
the cup representing his blood, this is the new Testament in my blood, etc.
Luke 22. 20. that is, a sign, seal, and representation thereof. 3. the
Apostle shows this also by the nature and condition of a Testament, which is
confirmed when men are dead, Heb. 9. 17. and so in this place the Septuagint
translate the Hebrewe word berith, by the Greek word (...), testament, for the
word signifies both a covenant and a testament, as Budeus shows in his
commentaries: for the ratifying then and confirming of this will and Testament
of our Savior, his death and passion was necessary, with the shedding of his
most precious blood for the remission of our sins.

Quest. 84. When this testament began to be ratified and confirmed by the
preaching of Christ.
1. Pererius delivers it as an ancient tradition, and a received opinion,
that Christ began not to preach and work miracles till a year after he was
baptized: for the first miracle which he wrought in Cana of Galile, they hold
to have been done the same day tweluemoneth, wherein he had been baptized.

2. But this opinion may be easily refuted. 1. the words of S. Peter, Act. 1.
21. are directly against it: of these men, which have companied with us all the
time, that the Lord Jesus was conversant among us, beginning from the baptism
of John, unto the day that he was taken up from us, must one of them be made a
witness with us of his resurrection. Here it is evident, that Christ began
to preach after he had received John's baptism. Pererius by the baptism of
John, here thinks all that time to be understood wherein John baptized, till
he was imprisoned: but that can not be: for John began to baptize before
Christ came unto his baptism: and before Christ was baptized, he preached not,
neither showed himself publicly: therefore the beginning can not be
understood, to be from John's baptism in that sense. 2. Seeing Christ was
publicly in his baptism called from heaven to the office of teaching, in that
it is said, Hear him, it is not like that our blessed Savior would intermit
that holy function* a year together. 3. Before that miracle in Cana of Galile,
he entertained Disciples, as is evident, Ioh. 1. as Andrew and Peter, Philip
and Nathaniel: therefore even then he began to be a public teacher. 4. If
Christ's preaching began a year after his baptism, in the beginning of his
31. year, then could he not preach and confirm the Covenant, half a week,
that is, 3. years and a half, seeing he is generally held to have died in his
33. year: wherefore even presently after his baptism, as soon as his 40.
d^^^s fast was over, Christ began to preach, and show his power in working of
miracles.

85. Quest. v. 27. In the half of the week he shall cause the sacrifice to
cease: when this half week began.
1. R. Shelamo thus interprets the half week, that a little before the
destruction of Jerusalem, after the Jews had violated the truce taken between
them and the Romans for 7. years, then in the mids of the week, that is,
in the fourth year of those seven, the Romans came and besieged the city.
But it is showed before, qu. 82. that this is but a Rabbinicall conceit, that
any such truce was made between the Romans and the Jews.

2. Some do likewise refetre this half week to the destruction of Jerusalem,
that in the mids thereof, that is, the 5. year before the overthrow of the
city, the Romans came and laid siege unto it: Iun. Polan. M. Lively. But this
sense can not be admitted, because it has been proved already, qu. 49. that
these 70. weeks, and every part thereof, determined in the death of Christ.

3. Josephus Scaligor has a conceit by himself, that this 70. and last week
must be divided: the one part thereof he allows for the time of Christ's
preaching, namely 4. years and an half, the other for the destruction of the
city, two years and an half more. But here two exceptions may justly be
taken: 1. he divides this week, the one part above 30. years from the other,
whereas every part of these weeks must one succeed an other. 2. he divides
two years and an half from the rest: but that makes not half a week.

4. Some begin this half week at the death of Christ, and continue it
afterward, when the sacrifices and rites of the law began to be abolished by
the Apostles, as we read Act. 15. Perer. Pint. Melancth. M. Lydyat in ann.
4043. Osiand. saving that Osiander makes it the first half of the last week,
the other the latter: But it has been proved already, that these years
must end in Christ's death.

5. This half week then is better taken for the latter half part of the
week, which begins at the baptism of Christ, and ends at his passion: so
Bullinger says, per praedicationem Euangelij, and mortem Domini nostri Jesus
Christi, constat legem esse abrogatam, by the preaching of the Gospel, and by
the death of Jesus Christ, it is evident the law was abrogated: so also Hugo
begins this half week in the 15. of Tiberius, at Christ's baptism: for
then in the baptism of Christ, hostiarum legalium purificatio paulatim coepit
vilescere, the purifying of the legal sacrifices began by little and little
to wax vile. Thus also expounds the author of the Scholasticall history, as
Pererius shows in the very end of his 10. book upon Daniel: and unless we
end the 70. and last week at the passion of Christ, it will not end in a
year of Iubile: for Christ is held to have died in a year of Iubile, that the
shadow may agree unto the body: see before, qu. 66. toward the end.

86. Quest. How and when the sacrifices were caused to cease, and were
abolished.
1. R. Shelamoh thinks that this is understood of the ceasing of the
sacrifices in fact, when the city and Temple were destroyed by the Romans: so
also Polanus and M. Lively follow the same sense. But such ceasing of the
sacrifices ( de facto) actually and in fact, happened before under the tyranny
of Antiochus Epimanes, Dan. 8. v. 11. 12. here such a ceasing of them is
signified, which was not before, namely, that by the Messiah all the rites and
ceremonies of the law should be abolished.

2. Iunius joins both these together: that the sacrifices were caused to
cease, both in respect of the godly, whom Christ had sanctified by the one
offering of himself, Hebr. 10. 14. so that they need not to be purged by the
sacrifices of the law: and in respect of the wicked they ceased, because the
Romans took from the Jews both their Temple, altar, and sacrifices. But
concerning the first, that was done many years before the destruction of
Jerusalem, when Christ suffered: and therefore there is no reason to restrain
that benefit to these last times: and for the other, that actual ceasing of
the sacrifices happened before, as is said, under Antiochi^^.

3. Others expound this ceasing of the sacrifices, of the time of the Apostles
after the death of our Savior: as when the Apostles by their decree abrogated
the ceremonies of the Law, certain only excepted, in respect of the
necessity of the time, Act. 15. Melancthon, Osiand. But these do not
distinguish between the ceasing of the sacrifices in right, and in fact: they
in fact ceased not in the death of Christ, but in right they were then
abolished.

4. Wherefore I prefer Calvin's exposition, that after Christ had offered
himself upon the cross, illic cessarunt omnes ritus legales, there all the
legal rites ceased: and after that, as Oecolampad. well says, lanienae erant,
non sacrificia, the sacrifices were rather butchers slaughters and shambles,
then true sacrifices: And he yields this as a reason thereof, because in the
passion of Christ, the veil of the Temple was rent, to show that the
sacrifices and rites of the law were abolished. Pintus adds this reason,
because the body being come, the shadows must cease: like as a painter
draws his picture first with shadowed lines, but when he portraiteth the
picture, he puts out the first lines: so our blessed Savior bringing all
fullness and perfection with him, has dashed out the shadows of the law,
according to that saying in the Gospel, Ioh. 1. 17. The law was given by Moses,
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

87. Quest. What is meant by the ouerspreading of abomination, v. 27. of the
best reading thereof.
The word canaph, signifies a wing. 1. some therefore take it for the pinnacle
or wing of the Temple, the part for the whole, Oecolampad. 2. some understand
thereby the Temple, because it was as a wing and defense, wherein the Jews put
their confidence, Bulling. 3. Some take canaph, the wing, for the Cherubs which
were winged, that even upon them in the most inward parts of the Temple, this
desplation should come. 4. Some by the wing, interpret the extremity of
desolation, applying it to the desperate state of the Jews. 5. Vatablus thus
expounds, adam vel extensionem, id est, longam seriem abominationum, the wing
or extension, that is, the long continuance of these abominations: so also the
Genev. the ouerspreading of abominations. 6. Some by the wing, understand the
army of the Romans: as the word is taken, Isa. 8. 8. The stretching out of
his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land. Iun. Polan. 7. The Latin
interpreter reads, in the Temple shall be the abomination of desolation: by
the wing, he understands the Sea more hereof in the end of the 88. quest*
following.
Temple: and this seems to be confirmed by that place, Matthew. 24. 15. When ye
shall see the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place, etc. And so
the meaning is this, that even in the inward Temple, where the winged Cherubims
were, should be the abomination of desolation, Osiand. the word is meshomem,
which is a participle signifying making desolate: But here it is taken
substantiuely for desolation, as M. Lively observes the like in other places.
Thus then the place is to be read, And upon the wing shall be the abominations
of desolations, Oecolampad. that is, upon the very altar and holy place, where
the winged Cherubims were.

88. Quest. What this abomination of desolation was.
1. Ireneus by the abomination of desolation, lib. 5. advers. haeres.
understands Antichrist, of whom he imagines, that he should sit in the
Temple at Jerusalem, and be worshipped as the Messiah: who is called the
abomination, because of his abominable and execrable impiety; and desolation,
because he shall make desolate the Churches and worship of Christians. But
seeing that this desolation is prophesied to come upon Jerusalem, after the
death of the Messiah, and our blessed Savior also refers it to the
destruction of Jerusalem, it can not be deferred so long, as to the coming of
Antichrist: neither shall the Temple of the Jews be repaired again, for any
such to sit or advance himself in.

2. Some refer it to the times of Antiochus Epiphanes, who caused an
abominable Idol to be set up in the Temple, and the same to be called the
Temple of Iuppiter Olympius, as Josephus writes, lib* 12. c. 17. the history
whereof is also set forth, 1. Macchab. 1. 57. But seeing our Savior has
reference to this place, speaking of the destruction of Jerusalem, Matthew. 24.
it seems this prophecy was not then fulfilled: whereas the profanation by
Antiochus was past above 200. year before.

3. Some understand it of the very Jewish sacrifices, which after the oblation
of Christ upon the cross, were detestable and abominable, Dyonis. Carthusian.
Hug. Cardin. and the author of the scholasticall history* But our Savior
sets forth this abomination of desolation, as a present sign of the
destruction of the city: whereas the legal sacrifices continued still after
the death of Christ, which was 40. years before.

4. Tostadius, Hesselius, and ^ansenius upon that place, Matthew. 24. by this
abomination of desolation, do understand the abominable outrages, which were
committed by the seditious Jews, who filled the Temple with dead bodies, and
defiled it with blood. This seditious company called themselves zelotas,
zealous men, as Josephus writes: but they spared to commit no abomination, in
so much that Josephus writes of them, that their wickedness was such, that if
the Romans had not come against them, he thinks, that either the earth would
have devoured the city, or it should have been overflowed with water, or
burnt with fire from heaven, as Sodom was. Josephus also in the same place
testifies, that there was a common speech, that the city should then be
destroyed, and the Temple set on fire, when there should rise up sedition among
the people, and the Jews with their own hands first had defiled the Temple.
Joseph. lib. 5. de bell. Iudaic. c. 2. But seeing that these seditious, though
they committed many abominations in the Temple, yet the final destruction was
not brought upon it by them, but by the Romans, it is not so fitly applied to
them.

5. Galatinus gives this sense; because (so he interprets ghal canaph, which
we translate, upon the wing) of the abomination, that is, their impiety for
putting Christ to death, there shall come desolation upon them: But our blessed
Savior points at this abomination, as some visible thing standing up in the
Temple, which should be a sign of their desolation.

6. Bucer, by the wing of abominations, understands the help of the devils,
by whom the abominable Romans should be assisted in bringing this desolation
upon Jerusalem, ex Oecolampad. but the power of the devil is invisible: this
abomination of desolation Christ points at as some visible thing standing in
the Temple.

7. M. Calvin understands it* de profanatione, etc. of the continual
profanation of the Temple, after the Gospel began to be preached: so Vatablus
expounds, continuam seriem abominationum, vel multiplices abominationes, the
continuance of abominations, or their manifold abominations. But these
continual profanations of the Temple were practiced a long time, 40. years
together: but this abomination of desolation is observed by our Savior, as a
near sign of their destruction.

8. Some by the wing of abominations making desolate, understand the legions
and wings of the Roman army, which should compass the city and defile the
Temple: and this they gather by comparing the Evangelists together: whereas
Matthew says, When ye see the abomination of desolation, etc. standing in the
holy place, etc. c. 24. 15. S. Luke thus reports the words of our Savior,
When ye see Jerusalem besieged with soldiers, then understand, that the
desolation thereof is near, c. 21. 20. And they are called the wing or army
of abominations, because they were infidels, and strangers from God: Thus
Iunius, Polanus, Pererius, Caietan, and before them Augustine, epist. 80. ad
Esychium. Pintus adds further, that this wing or extension of abominations,
may be interpreted, extensio vexilli exercitus Romani, the spreading of the
banners of the Roman army even in the Temple. This exposition is very
probable, and to good purpose, but yet not so fit and proper, as may appear by
these reason^. 1. S. Luke speaks of the compassing of Jerusalem with
soldiers, but Jerusalem was not that holy place, which the other Evangelists
speak of: and Murke adds, c. 13. 14. When you shall see the abomination of
desolation, standing where it ought not: but the soldiers compassing or
besieging the city, stood, where they ought, and use to stand. And beside,
whereas the other Evangelists add, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, Luke has
not those words: so that it seems, he speaks not of that abomination of
desolation, expressed by the other; but of an other sign and forerunner of
their desolation, the compassing of the city with soldiers: which Christ had
told them of before, chap. 19. 43. where he uses the like word, (...), they
shall compass thee about: and here he says, when thou shall see Jerusalem,
(...), compassed with soldiers. 2. If they understand the soldiers entering
and inuading the Temple, that was done diverse times before: for Pompey took
the ^^tie, and entered into the Temple with his soldiers: so did Crassus after
him, and robbed the Temple, and carried away the golden vessels: afterward
Archelaus polluted and defiled the Temple, and slew nine thousand Jews in a
commotion, Oecolampad. Pelican. ex Joseph. but these were not signs of
imminent destruction. 3. Beside, they are admonished, when they see this
abomination standing in the holy place, to fly into the mountains: but when
the soldiers had taken the city, and invaded the Temple, and set it on fire,
and made havoc of all, it was then too late to fly, all their misery being
already past. 4. Polanus before understands by the people of the Prince to
come, the Gentiles, which should be called to the faith of Christ: how then
does he hold them now to be abominable. And seeing the Lord calls Cyrus his
anointed, Isa. 45. 1. because he executed his will upon the Chaldeans, yea the
Lord called Nabuchadnezzer king of Babel his servant, Ierem. 27. 6. being the
minister of his judgments upon his unthankful people; it seems to be unfit,
to call the armies of the Romans, abominable, seeing they herein were the
ministers of Gods sentence decreed against Jerusalem.

9. Wherefore I rather condescend to their opinion, which think that this
abomination of desolation, was some abominable thing, which was set up in the
Temple, which was a sign of the desolation thereof following: as whether it
were the ensigns of the Empire, the Roman Eagle, which Pilate brought in and
set up in the Temple, at the commandment of Tiberius, Osiand. or rather to
gratify the Emperor, Bulling. or the image which Caius Caligula caused to be
set up in the Temple with this inscription, Iovi illustri Caio, to Iuppiter the
famous Caius, Osiand, Chrysostom, and Theophylact, and E^thymius upon the 24.
of Matthew, do take it for the image of Titus the Emperor, which was set up
in the Temple, when the city was taken: so also Ab. Ezra. But this being
present could be no sign of the desolation, to give them warning after. R.
Levi understands it of the images which Manasses caused to be set up in the
Temple, for the which it came to desolation: but this was done before Christ's
time, in the days of Antiochus. Hierome thinks it was the image of Adrian
set up in the ruins of the Temple; so also Severus Sulpitius: but the Temple
was destroyed long before by Titus, and was not reedified again. Therefore I
rather take some of the other sensible profanations of the Temple to be
understood, which were set up after the death of Christ: as Theodoret takes
that profanation by Pilate, signum futurae desolationis in vrbe and Templo
erunt imagines qu^dam legibus interdictae, a sign of desolation to come, in
the city and Temple, shall be certain images, forbidden by the law, brought
into it, etc. which Pilate did, who brought in the night into the Temple the
images of the Emperors.

But against this interpretation it will be objected, 1. that Josephus (...),
lib. 18. de antiquit. and lib. 2. de bell. Iudaic. that Pilate brought them
into the city, (...) speaks not of the Temple: 2. it seems that this was
done after the death of Christ, Perer. 3. and as Josephus further writes, that
Pilate at the instance of the chief of the Jews, (who went unto Cesarea, and
offered their necks, rather then to suffer their country laws to be
transgressed) caused those images to be removed again.

Answ. 1. Though Josephus make no mention of the Temple, yet Eusebius out of
Philo, so alleges: and it may be gathered also out of Josephus report: for
if the Roman ensigns had been brought only into the city, the Jews would
not have so much stood upon it: for it had been no more, then to have Cesars
image in their coin. 2. This was done rather after the passion of Christ, as
Oecolampad. infers out of Josephus. 3. And though they were removed, yet it
is like they stood there some certain time. 4. Neither only is this
abomination of desolation to be restrained to the images, which Pilate brought
in: but it comprehends also other like profanations, as that of Caligula,
before mentioned: for the word is put in the plural ( shakutzim) abominations.

Now that this is the most fit and convenient sense of this place, our reasons
are these: 1. because this reading of the Septuagint and vulgar Latin, in the
Temple shall be the abomination of desolation, is confirmed and warranted by
our blessed Savior, Matthew. 24. When ye shall see the abomination of desolation
standing in the holy place. 2. The abomination of desolation, which was in
Antiochus time, foreshewed Dan. 8. 13. and 11. 31. they shall pollute the
Sanctuary, etc. and set up the abominable desolation, is taken in that sense:
which was the abominable idol of Iuppiter Olympius which was set up upon the
altar, as appears, 1. Macc. 1. 57. and Josephus also writes, that he caused
the Sanctuary to be called the Temple of Iuppiter Olympius, lib. 12. antiquit.
c. 7. The like meaning of the same words is also insinuated here. 3. The Hebrew
word shakutz, abomination, is peculiar to idols: as 1. king. 11. 5. Milcom is
called shakutz, the abomination of the Ammonites: the abomination then, and
abominable thing is most properly understood, to be some abominable idol set
up. 4. The word also canaph, wing, is applied to the Sanctuary* as Psalm. 61.
4. I will dwell in thy Tabernacle for ever, and my trust shall be under the
covering of thy wings: where David alludeth to the Cherubims, which strercheth
out their wings, and ouershadowed the Arc. So Matthew. 4. 5. the place of the
Temple whether Christ was carried in his second temptation, is called (...),
the wing, that is the pinnacle, or battlement of the Temple. Pintus takes the
wing, for the spreading of the banners in the Temple: R. Saadinh by the wing of
abomination, interprets the hand of those which taee abominable things, as
swines flesh: but this is forced, and he seems especially to have reference
to Antiochus times. It is most fitly therefore referred to the Temple: the wing
or pinnacle, and part, being taken for the whole, Oecolamp. or because in the
inward parts were the Cherubims with their stretched-out wings, Osiand. or
rather because the Temple was in respect of the defense thereof, and Gods
presence, called the wings of God, Bulling. and it stood in the highest part of
the city, as ouershadowing the rest, as it were with wings: see more of the
diverse acceptions of this word in the question next before.

89. Quest. v. 27. Whether the desolation of Jerusalem here spoken of, should
be final.
The words are thus translated, until the consummation even determined, shall
it be powered upon the desolate, Iun. the meaning of which words is, that like a
continual dropping and ouerflowing, so shall one calamity follow an other,
until they be utterly made desolate.

1. R. Solomon understands this consummation of the last battle of Gog and
Magog in the end of the world: until that time should this desolation be: but
then the Messiah should overcome all the adversaries of the Jews, and the
city and Temple should be reedified again. But the battle of Gog and and
Magog was past long before Christ's time, neither should the Messiah come into
the world as a victorious Prince, he was to be put to death, as here the Angel
foresheweth: see this opinion before confuted, qu. 78.

2. Lyranus infers upon these words, vsque ad consummationem and finem, unto
the consummation and end, etc. that, prope finem mundi, etc. toward the end
of the world the falsenesse of Antichrist being detected by the preaching of
Henoch and Elias, the Jews shall be converted unto Christ, and until that
time this desolation shall be, etc. But that conceit of Henoch and Elias
preaching in the end of the world, has no ground: neither shall the coming
of Antichrist be deferred so long unto the end of the world: the Jews
conversion is expected, but their city and Temple shall never be restored
again, for that would hinder their conversion unto Christ.

3. Wherefore out of this place rather it may be concluded, that this
overthrow of the city, which is here spoken of, should be the beginning of
their final and perpetual desolation, which may thus further appear.

1. This is testified in other places of the Scripture, that a final
destruction was determined over this people, as Ier. 19. 11. I will break this
people and this city, as one breaks a potters vessel, that cannot be made
whole again: so also the Prophet Isay says after he had prophesied of diverse
calamities which should fall upon them, yet for all this his wrath is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. Hereunto agrees S. Paul,
speaking of the Jews, who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets,
and have persecuted us, and God they pleased not, and are contrary to all men,
etc. for the wrath of God is come upon them to the utmost, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
16. And yet the Prophet Isay more evidently prophesied of the final ruin of
the city, c. 25. 1. 2. O Lord thou art my God, I will exalt thee: for thou
have made of a city an heap, of a strong city a ruin, etc. it shall never
be built again.

2. This further may appear by comparing this desolation of Jerusalem, with
the former times of their captivity. In Babylon they were captive but 70.
years: afterward the city and Temple were repaired: under Antiochus the
Temple and city lay wast 2300. days, Dan. 8. 14. that is, 6. years, 3.
months and an half: But this desolation and captivity has now continued
above 1500. years. Now whereas the Prophet Hagge says, c. 2. 7. Thus says
the Lord of hosts, Yet a little while, and I will shake the heavens and the
earth, etc. I will ^^one all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come:
seeing that in the Prophet Hagges time, which is almost 2000. years since, the
Messiah was then to come within a little while, what hope can the Jews now
have after so many years to expect an other Messiah?

3. Beside, this is an evident argument of the final and perpetual desolation
of the Jews city and Temple, because they have attempted since this
destruction by Titus, to have restored their Temple and Commonwealth, but they
were hindered from going forward: under Adrian the Emperor some 64. years
after this calamity, the Jews under their captain Benchochab, or Barchochab,
thought to recover their liberty: they held 50. castles, and 980. towns, and
fortified Beth-oron: Adrian came and besieged the city 3. years and 6.
months: at the length, he took it, killed the captain, and put to the sword
(as Dia writes) 50. thousand Jews. And beside, as Eusebius says, lib. 4.
histor. Eccl. c. 6. the Jews were banished out of Judea, and forbidden ever to
return to Jerusalem, which he repaired, and called it by his own name Aelia,
that the Jews should never inhabit it again.

Chrysostom also lib. 2. cont. Iud. makes mention, how under the Empire of
Constantine the great, the Jews began to rebel, and thereupon the Emperor
caused their ears to be cut off, and themselves to be dispersed among all
nations, that their treachery might be made known to all the world.

After this in Iulians time the Jews had license from the Emperor, who
thought by this means to disgrace the Christian religion, to build their
Temple again: who busily set themselves about that work: at that time Cyrillus
Bishop of Jerusalem, animated the Christians, showing out of this place of
Daniel, and Matthew. 24. that their Temple should never be builded again: And it
came so to pass: for there were three miraculous accidents, whereby the work
was hindered. 1. after they had raised the building upon the old foundation, all
was tumbled and cast down in the night. 2. there came forth a fire, which
consumed all their engines and instruments. 3. there appeared bright read
marks like the cross upon their garments, which they could by no means rub
or wash out: and so the Jews were feign to give over. The truth of this story
Chrysostom avouches, which was done but 20. years before his time, oration.
2. cont. Iudaeos. And further to convince the Jews, he shows, that they were
not thus crossed and hindered under a Christian Emperor, but under an enemy to
Christian religion, when Christians generally were persecuted: that this might
appear only to be Gods work: this history is reported by Ruffin. lib. 1. c.
37, 38. by Socrates lib. 3. c. 20. Theodoret. lib. 3. c. 20. And to this day
the Jews never were able to prevail in their purpose and desire, to recover
their country, city, or Temple: So that the verity and certentie of Daniels
prophecy is evident to all the world, that desolation shall be powered upon
them even unto the end.

Thus have I now by Gods special assistance, finished this wearisome task,
and most difficult question of Daniels weeks. In the skanning and calculating
whereof, I confess, I was as many weeks in painful study and meditation, as
Daniel was in heaviness, when he had that vision in the next chapter, c. 10. 2.
I have not omitted any thing to my knowledge, that affoarded matter of doubt or
question. And in such great diversity of opinion, which breeds distraction,
though it be hard to find out the best, yet I am persuaded, I have resolved of
the most probable and reasonable interpretation: yet so, as I will not
prejudice the judgment of any, but leave the Reader to his choice, not
doubting, but that all reasons weighed, circumstances duly considered,
inconveniences avoided, he will incline to mine opinion. Now I will proceed to
other matters of note observed out of this Chapter.

4. Places of doctrine.
1. Doctr. Of ordinary and extraordinary prayer.
v. 3. I sought by prayer and supplication with fasting, sackecloath, and
ashes, etc. This was an extraordinary prayer, which Daniel here makes, beside
that ordinary prayer which be made thrice every day, c. 6. 10. in the morning,
evening, and at noone. So there are two kind of prayers; ordinary, which we
ought twice every day at the least, or oftener, to power forth unto God: of the
which the Apostle speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray continually: there is also
extraordinary prayer, when either some judgment is feared, which we would
auert and turn aside by prayer, or when we want any special grace or
assistance from God: and this the Apostle means, 1. Cor. 7. 5. Defraud not
one an other, except it be with corsent for a time, that ye may give your
selves to fasting and prayer. Calvin.

2. Doctr. When fasting is to be joined with prayer.
Fasting is not to accompany ordinary but extraordinary prayer: where must
be considered, 1. the occasion of such fasting, which is either in the time of
some great judgment and calamity, either to be prevented or else to be
removed: or when any special assistance or grace is sued for. 2. the end
must be considered, which is not to please God by our fasting, as though it
were a part of his service directly, or that we hoped to merit thereby, but
only it is used as a means to tame the body and keep it under, to make the
inward man more seruent. Thus the Israelites fasted and prayed, when they had
been twice overcome of Benjamin, entreating the Lords assistance, Judge. 21. 1.
and Esther c. 4. when she was to make suite for her people: and the Church of
Antioch, when they sent forth Paul and Barnabas to preach, Act. 13. Polan.

3. Doctr. Confession of sins necessary in prayer.
v. 4. I prayed and made my confession. Confession of sins is either public,
either by the whole congregation, or of one and more before the Congregation;
or private, either of ones sins by himself, or in the name of many: and each
of these confessions is either ordinary, or extraordinary: This confession of
Daniel was of the latter sort, wherein he confesses not his own sins only,
but the sins of his people. And if Daniel so holy a man, yet confessed his
sins in his prayer, how much more ought we sinful men always in our
prayers to make our confessions, as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 32. 5. Then
I acknowledged my sin unto thee, etc. and thou forgauest the punishment of my
sin.

4. Doctr. Of the diverse degrees of sin.
v. 5. We have sinned, and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea we
have rebelled. There are four degrees of sin, which may be compared to a
diverse going out of the way. 1. as one may a little err out of the way. 2.
but after declineth more. 3. and being out of the way walks on still. 4.
until he be so obstinate in his course, that he cannot be brought again into
the way: so some there are, which at the first, 1. sin of error, and these
are they which are said to sin. 2. then they err yet more, such commit
iniquity. 3. and walk and continue in their error, which are said to do
wickedly, as David when he fell into those two great sins of murder and
adultery. 4. And at the last they grow intractable, and not to be won, and
these rebel against God: such an one was Saul, that would by no means be
reclaymed. We learn hereby, that howsoever we may fail in the first and
second kind, yet we should take heed of the great downfall in the 3. and 4.

5. Doctr. How the true ministers of God must be discerned.
v. 6. We would not obey thy servants the Prophets. 1. They are called Gods
servants: they must be sure and inwardly warranted, that they are sent and
called by the Lord. 2. they must be Prophets, that is, endued with prophetical
and spiritual gifts, for God sends no dumb or lame messenger with his
errant and message. 3. they must speak in the name of the Lord, they must
preach nothing but Gods word, and warrant their doctrine thereby. 4. they must
be faithful, not respecting persons in the delivery of their message, but
indifferently speak to all, as here it follows, which spoke in thy name to
our kings, to our princes, to our fathers.

6. Doctr. That Angels are of a finite and circumscriptible nature.
v. 24. The Angel Gabriel came flying, etc. Hence it appears that the Angels
pass from place to place, and are circumscriptible and defined by their proper
place: when they are in heaven, they are not at the same time in earth, as
Damascene says, lib. 2. de fide orthod. c. 3. Their error then is manifest,
who think the Angels to be in heaven and in earth at once: they are evidently
convinced by this place, which speaks of the coming of the Angel to Daniel,
which shows that he was not present before, Bulling. so Daniel says, c. 6.
22. that the Lord had sent his Angel, and stopped the mouths of the Lions: the
Angel then was not there before, until the Lord sent him to that end.

7. Doctr. That Christ is perfect God and perfect man.
v. 24. To reconcile iniquity, and bring in everlasting righteousness, etc.
Hence it is proved, that Christ was both perfect God, for otherwise he could
not take away sin: which is the work only of God: and he was man, in as
much as he lived and was conversant among men: the Prophet David therefore
understanding this mystery of the being or dwelling of God in the flesh,
says, Psalm 46. 7. the Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our
refuge: Therefore he is called by the Prophet Immanuel, Isay. 7. 14. and 8. 8.
Pintus.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. That prayer and fasting is not meritorious.
v. 3. I turned my face unto the Lord, etc. with supplications, with fasting,
and sackecloth: Fasting is not of it self a thing acceptable unto God, but as
it is used as a means to make ^ur prayers more fervent: the Romanists then are
in an error, which make fasting a thing meritorious, Calvin. the contrary is
evident in the Pharisie, who boasted of his alms deeds, and of his fasting
twice in a week, yet his prayer was not accepted of God, Luke 18. If prayer
then and true contrition, with hearty repentance, and unfeigned humility, do
accompany fasting, it is regarded, and had in remembrance with God, otherwise
it is an unprofitable exercise: as S. Paul says, Bodily exercise profits
little, but godliness is profitable unto all things, 1. Tim. 4. 8.

2. Controv. God only is to be invocated, not Saints or Angels.
v. 3. Daniel only turns his face unto the Lord: now if Saints were to be
prayed unto, Daniel had here occasion to turn himself unto Jeremy, whose
prophecy he makes mention of before: who had been fitter to assist Daniel
praying for deliverance after the 70. years captivity, then he, who was the
minister of that prophecy and promise. By this then it is well gathered, that
the invocation of Saints was not in use in the old Testament, Bullinger. and
therefore the Prophet David says, Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but
thee? And the Scripture commands us to worship God only and serve him, Deuteronomy.
6. 13. Matthew. 4. v. 10. If God only is to be worshipped, he alone must be
prayed unto, for prayer is a part of his worship.

The Romanistes, for the invocation of Angels and Saints, do allege these
places of Scripture: 1. Genesis 48. 16. Iakob says, the Angel which has
delivered me, bless the children: But this was no created Angel, it was Christ
the son of God: for in the former verse he is called God, the God, before
whom my fathers Abraham and Izaak did walk, the God which has fed me all my
life long unto this day, bless, etc. then it follows in the next verse, the
Angel which has delivered me, etc. what other Angel was it which delivered
Jacob, but he that fed him, which he says was God?

2. That place also is urged, Job. 19. 21. have pity upon me, have pity upon
me, O ye my friends: Bellar. lib. 1. de sanctor beatitud. c. 19.
which Bellarmine understands of the Angels: But it is evident, that Job
speaks unto his friends which came to visit him, who seemed to have small
compassion on him, but with tauntes and rebukes, condemning him as an
hypocrite, did add more affliction unto him: for it follows in the next
verse, Why do ye persecute me as God? they were not the Angels of God that
persecuted him, but Satan was the chief instrument of his afflictions, and
his friends helped it forward.

3. That place also Apocal. 1. 4. is abused to the same purpose: Grace unto
you, and peace from him which was, which is, and which is to come, and from the
seven spirits which are before the throne: by these seven spirits they
understand the Angels: But that cannot be. 1. these spirits are joined as in
equal authority with God the Father, and the Son, grace is here ascribed
indifferently to proceed from them all. 2. these spirits are set between the
father and the son, as being of the same power. 3. the Lamb is said to have
7. horns, and seven eyes, which are the 7. spirits, c. 5. 6. these spirits
then were of the same essence and substance with the Son. 4. and by the
virtue of these seven spirits the Lamb opens the book with 7. seals, c. 5.
5. But Christ receives no virtue from the Angels. 5. Wherefore these 7.
spirits are understood to be the holy Ghost, which is called septiformis,
seuenfold, quia licet vnus natura, gratiarum distributione multiplex, who
though he be one in nature, yet is manifold in the distribution of the graces,
gloss. ordinar. And because Christ did work so effectually by the
communication of his graces in the seven Churches, as if there were seven
several spirits, Justin. in paraenes. ad Grac.
therefore is the spirit so described. Thus also Justinius of ancient time
expounded, (...), etc. the holy Prophets say that one and the same spirit is
divided into seven spirits.

4. Then follows the example of John, who says he fell down at the feet of
the angel to worship him, Apoc. 19. 10. and 22. 8. where Bellarmine says, that
so great an Apostle, and Prophet would not have offered to have worshipped the
Angel, if it had been unlawful: he was deceived in his person, taking him to
be Christ, he erred not in offering to adore him: for then, if it had been an
error, he would not have done it twice: once before, c. 19. and now again, c.
22.

Contra. 1. it is evident by the text, that John is reproved of the Angel, for
offering to worship him, therefore therein was John's error. 2. And John was not
ignorant that it was an Angel, and not Jesus himself: for he says, c. 22. v.
6. the Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his Angel to show unto his servants
the things which shortly must come to pass: and again, v. 16. I Jesus have
sent mine Angel, to testify unto you these things. 3. Polanus thinks that
John did not commit this error twice in seeking to worship the Angel: but that
it is a repetition of that before mentioned, c. 19. But it may appear by
comparing the places, that John failed herein twice: for as Peter not twice,
but thrice together offended in denying his master: so might John thorough
forgetfulness, being astonished with the preseuce of so glorious an Angel,
once again show his infirmity herein.

3. Controv. That Christ is the only Mediator.
v. 17. Hear the prayer of thy servant, etc. for the Lords sake, that is, for
thy Christ's sake. But this place is corrupted by the Jews, and by the
Romanists. 1. the Rabbines some of them, as R. Moses, R. Saadiah, do here
understand Abraham: But the faithful of the old Testament used not to call
Abraham (being dead) their Lord: and the Prophet I say says, c. 63. 16. that
Abraham is ignorant of us: how could he then be a mediator for them, whose
affairs he knew not? Some other of them do say, that the noune is put here
for the pronoune, as it is usual in the Scriptures: so that for the Lords sake
is as much, as for thine own sake: But this phrase is used to take away
ambiguitie: as Genesis 1. 27. God created man after his image, after the Image of
God created he him: for if he had said, after his image, it had been
doubtful, whether it had been Gods or man's image: but there is no such
occasion of doubt here.

2. The Romanists here also following the Latin translation, read, propter
teipsum, for thy self, or for thine own sake: But they corrupt the text
evidently, the word is, Adonai, Lord.

3. Thus Christ was acknowledged to be the Mediator in the old testament, as
Psalm. 80. 15. the Church prays, that God would visit his vine, which he had
planted, and that for his sons sake, whom he had made strong for himself:
for so it is in the original: and so in that place read Montanus, Iunius; and
the Latin interpreter, howsoever he fails here, there reads right. Thus
David desires to be heard, for thy words sake, meaning Christ, 2. Sam. 7. 21.
And it is said he called the name of Solomon Iedidiah, beloved of God, propter
Iehouam, for Iehouahs sake.

4. Thus also in the new Testament, there is the same confession of Christ to
be the Lord and Mediator: as S. Peter Act. 2. 36. whom God has made both Lord
and Christ. And Heb. 1. 2. he is called, the heir of all things: and Elizabeth
confesses him to be her Lord, Luke 1. 43. So Christ is the Lord both by his
natural right, as the Lord and Creator of all: and iure acquisito, by the
right of purchase, which is threefold: by the right of inheritance: because God
the father has given us as an inheritance to his son, as Psalm. 2. v. 8. Ask
of me and I will give thee the nations for thy possession, etc. by the right of
redemption we are Christ's, because he has redeemed and purchased us with his
blood, as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 6. 19. 20. You are not your own, ye are
bought for a price. And Christ is our Lord, by the right of his spiritual
marriage: for the husband is Lord and head of his wife, and so Christ is of his
Church.

5. But it will be objected, that in the old Testament this phrase is often
used, for David my servants sake: as 1. king. 11. v. 12. 13. and 2. king. 19.
34. Hereunto it may be answered: that the meaning is not, that for the
worthiness of David, or by his mediation and intercession God would have
respect unto them, but because of the Promises which the Lord made unto David,
as Psalm. 89. 50. where are the ancient mercies, which thou swarest unto David
in thy truth? and Psalm. 132. v. 11. The Lord has swore in truth unto David,
and he will not shrink from it, Polan.

4. Controv. Against prayer and invocation of the dead.
v. 18. Whereupon thy name is called: that is, which is called by thy name, for
so this phrase is used, as Isay 4. 1. seven women shall take hold of one man,
saying, we will eat our own bread, etc. only let thy name be called upon us.
And so is that place to be understood, Genesis 48. 16. where Jacob says of
Ephraim and Manasses, let my name be invocated or called upon over them: which
words the Romanists do wrest, as though Jacob would have them to pray unto
him: whereas he means nothing else, but that they should be counted among his
sons, and called by the name of Israel, as the other of Jacobs sons: So in
this place, though the name of God were indeed invocated and called upon in
Jerusalem, yet the meaning here only is, that they were called by the name of
God, they were counted his city and people, Polan.

5. Controv. Of the name of the Catholic Church, that it is but usurped by the
Romanists.
As it was not enough for Jerusalem to be called by the name of God, but their
profession and couersation also must be agreeable thereunto, for otherwise,
while they said, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and yet did
steal, murder, commit adultery, etc. the Prophet says they did trust in
lying words, Ierem. 7. 8. And therefore because of their idolatry and other
sins, the Lord suffered his own Temple to be defiled and destroyed by the
Chaldeans: So neither now is it a sure note to know the Church of God by, to be
called Chatholike, if the Catholic faith be not held and maintained. The
Romanists the^ are but usurpers of this name Catholic, seeing they are
departed from the Catholic faith: He is not a Catholic that depends upon
the Pope of Rome, but he which professes the holy Catholic doctrine of
Christ: which they that corrupt and deny, are no more Catholics, then a dried
sceleton, (the bones of a dead man hanging together) is to be counted a man:
And as there is great difference between a painted woman, such as Iezabel was,
and a fair woman by her natural complexion; even so a Catholic in name
differs from a Catholic in deed.

6. Controv. That no man is perfect in this life.
v. 20. While I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin: The
interlinearie gloss. here has this note: this he says, either because in many
things we offend all, or ex humilitate, of humility, he joins himself with
the people: But it was better inferred, and concluded out of this place in the
Mileuitane Council, c. 7. that even Daniel confessed his own sin: for Daniel
says, confessing my sin, and the sin of my people: Daniel then confesses
not in the name of the people only, but he confesses his own sins, beside
the sins of the people: And further, whereas every one is taught to say in
the Lords prayer, forgive us our sins, that Council further decrees him to
be anathema, and accursed, who should say, that a righteous man saying this
petition, pro alijs potius, quam pro se petere intelligatur, etc. must be
understood rather to pray for others, then for himself, Bulling.

7. Controv. That the prayers of the faithful are not meritorious.
v. 23. For thou art a man greatly beloved, etc. Daniel was not accepted of God
because of his prayers, but his prayers were heard because he was a man beloved
before and accepted of God in Christ: So that it is not the merit or
worthiness of our prayer, that makes us to be respected with God: but the
respect which God has to us in Christ causes our prayers to have entrance
unto God. As it is said Genesis 4. 4. God had respect unto Habel, and unto his
offering: first his person by faith was accepted, and then his prayer because of
his person admitted: So S. James says, the prayer of a righteous man avayleth
much, c. 5. 16. that is, of a man righteous and justified by faith; as a little
before he says, the prayer of faith shall save the sick.

8. Controv. That we are not justified by any inherent righteousness, but
imputed only by faith.
v. 24. To reconcile iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness:
This then is our justification: when our sins, which we have don, are not
imputed, as it is in the Psalm, and so cited by the Apostle, Romans 5. 8.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not his sin: and beside the
righteousness of the Law, which we could not do, but Christ has wrought for
us, is imputed also unto us: as the Apostle teaches, 2. Cor. 5. 21. he has
made him sin for us, that knew no sin, that we should be made the
righteousness of God in him, Contrary to this truth of doctrine are these
assertions following.

1. The Jesuits in Censur. Coloniens. fol. 186. do define the justice of God,
which is revealed in the new Testament, to be virtutem in Deo, quam iuxta
vniuscuiusque dignitatem singulis distribuit, virtue in God, which he
distributeth to every one according to their worthiness, etc. not much unlike
hereunto is the opinion of Andreas Osiander, that we are justified, per
essentialem Dei iustitiam in nobis habitantem, by the essential justice of God
dwelling in us, and stirring us up unto good works. But this is an absurd
opinion. 1. because it confounds Gods justice and righteousness, with the
effects and operation thereof. 2. if our righteousness be the essential
justice of God. then Christ's obedience is excluded: for that is not the
essential justice of God. 3. this opinion tends to blasphemy, making the
essential justice of God, to be a quality in man. 4. it comes near the
heresy of the Manichees, who held that the essential justice of God was
transfused into men.

2. An other opinion is, that our righteousness, whereby we are justified, is
an inherent virtue, infused into us by the merit of Christ: Synod. Trident.
sess. 6. c. 16. And the same is the general opinion of the Romanists: that we
are not justified formally by the righteousness of Christ, in being accounted
or reputed just, but by an inherent justice, whereby we are made just in deed:
Synop^. Centur. 4. err. 56.
so the Rhemistes, to whom Bellarmme consents: which is directly against the
doctrine of the Apostle, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness: Abraham's justice was imputative by faith. There is indeed in
every faithful man a justice inherent, and dwelling in him, which is nothing
else but our regeneration and sanctification, which is the fruits of our
justification: by this inherent and inhabiting holiness we are not justified
before God, but thereby our justifying faith is approved and ratified: which
S. Paul calls, says working by love, Galat. 5. 6.

9. Controv. Whether sin after forgiveness may be said any way to remain in
the faithful.
Pererius upon these words, to finish wickedness, and take away iniquity, as
the Latin translator reads; infers, that sins in the faithful are not
only not imputed, but are utterly taken away: and therefore he by the
scandalous name of Heretics notes the Protestants, that they should hold,
remanere peccata, sed non imputari propter Christum, that sins do remain in
those which are justified. but they are not imputed unto condemnation for
Christ's sake: And to this purpose he alleges Thomas Aquin. Thom. in 4. c.
epist. ad Roman*
who observes 4. things in sin. 1. the offense toward God, which is said to
be remitted, as one man forgiueth the trespass of an other. 2. there is an act
of sin, which being once done, cannot be undone: but this is said to be
covered, because God sees it not to punish it. 3. there is reatus poenae, the
guiltiness of punishment, which the Lord remitteth in forgiving sin, that it
shall not be imputed unto punishment. 4. there is macula, the blot and stain
of sin, whereby the soul is defiled, and this is taken away when a man is
justified: and therefore he is said to be washed: hence Pererius infers,
that sins to them which are justified, nulla ex part remanere, do not
remain at all: And this he would further prove by that place, 1. Cor. 15. 17.
If Christ be not raised, ye are yet in your sins: the Apostle counts it an
absurd and impossible thing, that sin should remain in a man regenerate.

Contra. 1. Pererius not citing any Protestant that so affirms speaks, but
by guess and ^urmise: for the Protestants do not hold that in the regenerate
their former sins still remain, being only covered: but that they are
forgiven and removed indeed, never to be remembered again. This is that we
affirm, that for the sins past, they are abolished: but for the time to
come, there remains an aptness to sin, with some stain and blemish, which
continues with the faithful as long as they are in the flesh.

2. Thomas observations may be admitted all but the ^ast: in that he holds
the stain or blot of sin to be washed away: if he speak of such a blot,
qua, sublato nitore gratiae, animus per p^ccatum foedatur, whereby the soul,
the brightness of grace being taken away, is defiled by sin, as his words
are, such a stain, to the extinguishing of grace, cannot be in the righteous:
but such a blemish and stain remains, whereby the soul is hindered in
every good work, and whereby the flesh resists against the spirit: which
combat and strife between the flesh and the spirit remains even in the
righteous, as S. Paul gives instance in himself, Romans 7. 22. 23.

3. We must distinguish with the Apostle between the dwelling of sin, and
the reigning of sin, Romans 6. 12. and between the warring after the flesh, and
walking in the flesh, 2. Cor. 10. 3. Though sin reign not in the regenerate,
yet it is in the regenerate, as the Apostle says, 1. John. 1. 8. if we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

4. In that place, 1. Cor. 15. 17. the Apostle means that if Christ were not
risen again, they could not have remission of their sins: for then our
redemption had not been perfited: he speaks not of evacuating of sin, that
it should have no more being in the faithful, but of the not imputing of
sin, as the next words before show: if Christ be not risen again, your
faith is in vain, etc. that is, by faith ye could have no remission of sin:
But see more of this question, how far sin remains in the regenerate,
Synops. Papis. Centur. 3. quest. 10.

10. Controv. That charity is not more principal in the matter of
justification, then faith.
v. 24. To bring in everlasting righteousness: Hence Pererius would prove,
that charity is the chiefest, and preferred before faith in the work of
justification: because this justice is everlasting, and therefore faith is not
this justice, which remains not always: but charity remains for ever, and
therefore the Apostle concludes, that the chiefest of these is love.

Contra. 1. We do not say, that faith is the justice it self, whereby we are
justified: but it apprehends instrumentally the justice of Christ, whereby we
are justified: and therefore he concludes not to the purpose. 2. though faith
remain not, yet the effect of faith, which is our justification, abides for
ever: no more shall the preaching of Gods word be necessary in the next world:
yet it is called the immortail seed, 1. Pet. 1. 13. because it is the seed
whereby God begets us, who lives for ever: and in respect of the
everlasting fruit that comes by the word, it begets faith, and faith
brings everlasting righteousness. 3. charity is everlasting, but it is not
the everlasting righteousness here spoken of, which is the righteousness of
Christ applied by says. 4. And charirie is the chiefest, not simply, but in
respect of the perpetuity: it is not preferred, as more avayleable then faith
to justification: wherefore it follows not, charity is chiefer then faith,
because it endures longer: therefore every way it is the chiefest.

11. Controv. That the Pope does blasphemously usurp the title of Christ, to
be called most holy.
v. 24. To anoint the most holy: Pererius here makes this collection, that not
only Christ is called holy, but whatsoever belongs unto Christ, as the
Church is called holy, the faithful are called Saints, that is holy: And the
Pope, because he is Christ's Vicar, and represents him in earth, is called
most holy, yea sanctitas, holiness it self.

Contra. 1. True it is, that the things which belong unto Christ, are holy by
the participation of Christ's holiness, as his spouse the Church, and his
members: but they which are neither this spouse, not members (as the Pope is
the head of the Antichristian Church) have no part in this holiness. 2. And
though they are called holy, yet the title of most holy, and of holiness it
self, cannot without blasphemy simply be given unto any mortal and sinful
man. 3. Christ needs no universal Vicar in earth: and it is impossible that
to one man should be committed the dispensation of the whole Church. 4. Every
prince is Gods Vicar and Vicegerent in his kingdom: they are called Gods,
being in Gods stead, and they are the Lords anointed, and so holy: But yet the
title of most holy, is peculiar unto Christ: his Vicar and representer may be
holy, but the person represented is only most holy.

12. Controv. Whether the Sacrament of the Altar be most holy.
The Romanists do give this title of most holy, unto the sacrament of the
Altar, as they call it: as simply giving it the pre-eminence of holiness
before all other things. Contra. 1. If there were present indeed the very
body of Christ, which is but their superstitious imagination, then it would
follow, that it were most holy: But that is their own conceit without any
ground, for S. Peter says, that the heavens must contain Christ, until the
time that all things be restored, Act. 3. 21. And Christ's body being in
heaven, is not at the same time in the earth: neither is in more then one place
at once: for otherwise the Angel had not reasoned well, Matthew. 28. 6. He is not
here, for he is risen. 2. As it is a sacrament, and so represents the body
and blood of Christ, we confess that the Eucharist is holy, and to be
reverenced: yet most holy it can not be said to be, as having the pre-eminence
before all other things. The word of God is not inferior to the Sacrament, if
not before it: for that which sanctifies, is greater then that which is
sanctified: as our Savior reasons concerning the Altar, and the offering,
Matthew. 23. 19. but the Sacrament is sanctified by the word, Ephesians. 5. 26. That he
might sanctify it by the washing of water through the word: for all things are
sanctified by the word of God, and prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 5. Augustine also to this
effect says, Dicite mihi, etc. tell me, which seems greater unto you, the
word of God, or the body of Christ^ respondere debetis, quod non sit minus
verbum Dei, you must answer, that the word of God is not inferior. Homil. 26.
But if the Sacrament were simply most holy, then it should be more holy then
the word. 3. Yet may the Sacrament in some respect be called most holy, namely
comparatively, if it be set against other things which are profane, or not of
like holiness: for like as in the Sanctuary, the most holy place, where the
Arc was, had simply that name of most holy; yet other things also
comparatively were called most holy: as the altar of burnt-offering, Exodus 29.
37. and the perfume, c. 30. 36. the altar was most holy in comparison of all
other things in the outward Court, and the perfume being set against all other
perfumes: So simply the most holy of all, is the sweet smelling sacrifice of
our blessed Savior upon the cross: as Origin says, ipse est hostia sancta
sanctorum, he is the offering most holy of holies, in Levit.7. comparatively
the Sacrament and other holy things may also be said to be most holy. 4. But
their Sacrament of the altar, which they have made an abominable idol, giving
the highest adoration to a piece of bread, which they make their impanate god,
has no holiness at all, and therefore is far from the title of most holy.

13. Controv. That Christ is mediator both as God and man.
In that the most holy is said here to be anointed, first the Arrians infer,
that Christ is not God, for God can not be anointed: secondly, the Romanists
collect, that Christ was our Mediator according to his humane nature only;
because he was anointed only in his humanity. Contra. 1. If this anointing be
taken only for the collation of the gifts and graces of the spirit, it is
true, that the humane nature of Christ was only in this sense anointed: But by
this anointing also is understood, the ordaining of Christ to be the Mediator
and Savior of the world: and so Christ is our Mediator according to both his
natures: for in the office of the Mediatourship there are two things to be
understood, a ministry, and power and authority: the ministerial part, as
to be borne, to fast, to preach, to suffer, to die, Christ executed as he was
man: but the power to rise again, to ascend into the heavens, to reconcile us
unto God, must be ascribed unto his divine nature. So the Apostle says, God
was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2. Cor. 5. 19. Christ then not
only as man, but as God reconciled the world. So Bernard well says, singula
illius opera ad hanc sive illam necesse est pertinere naturam, ad hanc scilicet
miseria, ad illam pertinet potestas, etc. all his works must of necessity
belong either to the one or to the other nature: to his humanity must be
referred his abasing and misery, to the other his power, etc. Sermon. de verb.
sapient. See more hereof, Synops. Centur. 5. err. 29.

14. Controv. Against the sacrifice of the Mass.
v. 27. He shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease: All external
sacrifices then ceased, and were abolished in the death of Christ. They then
which would bring in a new external sacrifice into the Church, as the
Romanists, which do hold, that in the Mass they do offer up in sacrifice the
body and blood of Christ, do deny the sufficiency and efficacy of Christ's
death, and make the covenant, confirmed by his blood, of no effect: for the
testament being once confirmed and ratified by the death and sacrifice of
Christ, there need no iteration of that sacrifice, unless they will make void
the confirmation of the covenant by Christ's death: for as the Apostle says,
Christ with one offering has consecrated for ever, them that are sanctified,
Hebr. 10. 14. there needs no more offering, but only a fruitful application
of that offering, which is by a thankful commemoration of Christ's death and
passion in the Sacrament received by faith. Oecolampad.

15. Controv. Against the Jews, that the Messiah who was expected of the
fathers, is already come into the world.
By this prophecy of Daniels 70. weeks, in the end whereof the Messiah
should be slain, the Jews are evidently convinced, that the Messiah is come:
which may further be confirmed by these reasons taken out of this prophecy.

1. The holy ointment, wherewith they anointed their Kings and Princes, which
was a type of the spiritual anointing of the Messiah, is now abolished, and
out of use among the Jews: the type was to remain until the body and
substance came: it being now ceased, it follows that the Messiah, the true
anointed of God, is exhibited to the world.

2. The Messiah was to be slain before the end of Daniels weeks, or together
with the expiring of them: but Daniels weeks are long since ended, even by the
testimony of the Jews themselves: therefore the Messiah is come, and they did
unto him what they would.

3. When the Leuiticall sacrifices should cease, the Messiah was come, for his
most perfect and holy sacrifice should determine the imperfect sacrifices of
the law: But the legal and Leuitical sacrifices are ended: Ergo.

4. The blessed Messiah was to come before the destruction of the second
Temple: and therefore the Prophet says, Hagg. 2. 10. The glory of this last
house, shall be greater then the first: because the Messiah should come, the
second Temple yet standing: as the Prophet says in the same place, v. 7, 8.
Yet a little while, and I will move all nations, and the desire of all netions
shall come. And for the further evidence and confirmation hereof, we have
thereceiued opinion of many of the Jews themselves.

R. Moses of Tyrol, and Bioces, looked for the coming of Christ toward the
end of the second Temple: which they gathered partly out of this prophecy of
Daniel, partly out of that place, Isa. 66. 7. Before her throws came upon her,
she was delivered of a man child: therefore some of the Rabbis hold, that the
Messiah was borne the same day, that the Temple was destroyed.

In their book called Bereshith Rabba, there is this parable: how a certain
Arabian passing by a certain Jew, as he was at plow, hearing one of his oxen
low, he bad him unyoke, for the destruction of Jerusalem was at hand: and
hearing the other low also, he bad him unyoke again, for the Messiah was
already come. R. Aaron telling the same parable, says, what need we learn
it of an Arabian, seeing the text it self declares it.

Josephus l. 7. de bell. Iudaic. c. 12. writes, that therewas a prophecy
found in holy Scripture, that at the time of the overthrow of Jerusalem, there
should come a king which should reign over the world, which he in flattering
wise interpreted of Vespaesian.

There was an other prophecy bruted among the Jews, that Doctor Hillels
scholars should never fail till Christ were come: the youngest of them was R.
Iochanan the son of Zacheus, who lived to see the destruction of the Temple:
a little before, a certain gate opened it self, which Josephus speaks of in
his 7. book, c. 12. where at R. Iochanan being amazed, remembered that place,
Zachar. 11. 1. Open thy gates, O Lebanon, and let fire consume thy cedars:
which he applied to the destruction of the city, which was set on fire.

Hereof it was, upon this common received opinion, that the Messiah should come
before the destruction of Jerusalem, that diverse taking advantage of the time,
took upon them to be Christ: as one Theudas a Iugler, made the people believe,
that he was a Prophet, and that he would divide the waters of Jordan before
them, as in the time of Ioshuah: and when Felix was governor, an other coming
out of Egypt, making himself a Prophet, persuaded the people, that if they
would follow him to mount Olivet, they should see the walls of Jerusalem fall
down. By these testimonies of the Jews, and their own practices it is
evident, that they expected the coming of Messiah, before the destruction of
the second Temple.

Hereunto may be added that notable confession of R. Samnel, sent in an epistle
to R. Isaak above 600. years since, who upon the evidence of this prophecy of
Daniel, was convinced to confess, that the Messiah was come: which testimony
being very notable, it shall not be amiss to set it down at large, A notable
confession of a learned Jew, that the Messiah was come long since.
as Dyonts. Carthusian. has it in his commentary upon this 9. chapter of
Daniel: Videtur (Domine mi) Danielis Prophetia, quae scribitur nono capite iam
completa esse, etc. It seems (reverent Sir) that the prophecy of Daniel,
which is written in the 9. chapter, to be now fulfilled: after 62. weeks
Messiah shall be slain, and a people shall come with a Prince to come, and
destroy the city, and the house, and the destruction and desolation thereof
shall be perpetual. Now it is not to be doubted (my good Sir) but this is the
perpetual destruction and desolation in this captivity, wherein we are: for
now there are a thousand years since, and the Lard plainly says by his
Prophet, that the desolation shall be perpetual for the killing of Christ, as
our desolation is after the slaying of Christ: for the Lord threatened not
perpetual desolation, but after the slaying of Christ. And if we will say,
that before the killing of Christ, we were in desolation, the Christians will
answer us, that before his death we had but a desolation for 70. years: and
after this we were brought into the land of promise, and were in grace and
favor with God. Truly (Sir) I see no evasion: for it is proved unto us in
fact, that after seventy weeks of years were fulfilled from the reedifying
of the Temple, then was Jesus slain of our fathers: and afterward came a
captain, even Titus, and the people of Rome, and did unto us according to this
prophecy. Now a thousand years are past, and we are notwithstanding under
Gods wrath, and yet we trust in him, expecting a Messiah to come: and that we
shall return into the land of promise, and restore the city and Temple, and
that we shall be in favor with God, and so this desolation not to be
perpetual, but temporal. Alas (Sir) this excuse and evasion hangs not
together, and such expectation seems to be altogether vain.

A more plentiful and evident testimony can we not have, then from this
learned Rabbin, who gives a most perfect and sound exposition of Daniels
prophetical weeks. Seeing then it is evident, that the Messiah is come, who
else can he be but Christ Jesus: in whom all these things are fulfilled,
prophesied of the Messiah. 1. the anointing is now ceased. 2. so are all the
Leuitical sacrifices since his death. 3. he came while the second Temple stood.
4. and suffered after 490. years from the reedifying of the city and Temple.
5. immediately upon his death the city and Temple was destroyed. 6. and the
same destruction is like to be perpetual, having continued almost 1600.
years, according to this prophecy of Daniel. So that if they were not
wilfully blinded, they must needs confess with R. Samuel, that the Messiah is
come, and that he was that JESUS, whom their forefathers killed.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Of diligent and careful preparation to prayer.
v. 2. I Daniel understood by books, etc. Daniel comes not rashly or of a
sudden to prayer, but he before meditated upon the word of God, and carefully
considered, what he was to pray for: he also set himself to seek the Lord by
fasting, and so humbled himself. All this teaches us, that we take heed that
we come not presumptuously, or unprepared into Gods presence, as the Preacher
advises, Eccles. 5. 1. Be not rash with thy mouth, etc. God is in heaven, and
thou art in earth. In this kind of rash prayer the Pharisie offended, Luke 18.
who not having first truly humbled himself, presses vaingloriously into Gods
presence, whereas the Publican stood a far off, knocking upon his breast, and
calling for mercy.

2. Observe. That the promises of God should not make us more slack to pray.
v. 2. I Daniel understood by books the number of the years, etc. Though
Daniel was assured by the prophecy of Jeremy, that the captivity should be
dissolved after 70. years, yet he is not therefore secure, and careless, but
he is thereby more stirred up to prayer: So the children of God, which do
ground themselves upon Gods promises, are thereby encouraged the more earnestly
to pray: imagis stimulantur ad preca^dum, they are more pricked forward, and
animated to prayer, Calvin. So Iaacob prays, Genesis 32. 9. O God of my father
Abraham, etc. which saidest unto me, Return unto thy country, etc. and I will
do thee good: he is not negligent and secure, because he had Gods promise; but
he is so much the more diligent in prayer.

3. Observe. The Scriptures are diligently to be read.
If Daniel so great a Prophet did exercise himself in the reading of the
books of the Prophets, how much more ought we to be conversant in the
Scriptures, Bulling. So the Prophet David says, Psalm. 119. 24. Thy testimonies
are my delight, and they are my counselors. If these holy men endued with such
excellent gifts, and having so great a measure of Gods spirit, that they were
used thenselues as penmen of Scripture, did yet frequent the reading of
Scripture; it teaches us not to neglect so great a means of our salvation.

4. Observe. Of the efficacy of prayer.
v. 21. While I was speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, etc. came. In this
that the Angel came instantly to Daniel, as he prayed; we see that the prayers
of the righteous are available with God: as the Prophet Isai says, c. 30. 19.
He will certainly have mercy upon thee at the voice of thy cry: when he
hears thee, he will answer thee. So the Lord heard Nehemiah, c. 1. and 2. and
Jonas, c. 2. 1. I cried in my trouble to the Lord, and he heard me. This
therefore should encourage the children of God to pray, seeing the Lord hears
them; What subject, knowing the ready inclination of his Prince to hear him,
would not with boldness offer his suit and supplication unto him?

5. Observe. To be mindful of the Church of God in our prayers.
v. 20. For the holy mountain of my God. Daniel though he were in prosperous
state himself, yet remembers the affliction of Gods people, and the
desolation of Gods house: teaching us, that in our welfare we should think of
the misery of other Churches. Moses living in Pharaohs court, would not so
content himself, but he goes forth to visit his brethren: the Prophet David
having prayed for himself, thus concludes his prayer, Deliver Israel, O God,
out of all his troubles, Psalm. 25. 22.

6. Observe. That we must always in heart communicate with the public service
and worship of God.
v. 21. About the time of the evening oblation. Though the service of God were
now intermitted, and there was neither morning nor evening sacrifice, the
Temple lying desolate, yet Daniel still bears it in mind, though in the land
of captivity: teaching us, when we are otherwise let by sickness,
imprisonment, absence, we should in heart and desire be present with those that
serve the Lord: as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 42. 4. When I remembered these
things, I powered out my heart, because I had gone with the multitude, etc.

7. Observe. God afflicts and chastises whom he loves.
v. 23. Thou art greatly beloved. Daniel was a man highly in Gods favor, yet
he was lead into captivity, and there continued 70. years: let not men
therefore be dismayed, though they continue long in affliction: yea, the Lord
consecrated the Prince of our salvation through affliction, Hebr. 2. 10. yea,
his whole life was nothing else but a tragical story of crosses and
tribulations: the members must not think much to take part with the head,
neither is the disciple better then the master.

CHAP. X.
1. The Argument and Method.
IN these three last chapters, the 10, 11, 12. the fourth and last vision,
which Daniel had, is set forth: whereof there are three parts. 1. the
preparation to the vision, contained in the 10. chapter. 2. the prophetical
vision it self, in the 11. chapter. 3. the consolation ministered unto Daniel,
after the prediction of such heavy things.

In the preparation, or preamble to the vision in the 11. chap. there are these
four parts. 1. the sum of the vision in general, to v. 5. 2. a description
of the glorious person that appeared, to v. 7. 3. the effect that followed,
Daniel and his companions fear, v. 7. to the 10. 4. the erection and animating
of Daniel by the Angel, v. 10. to the 21.

1. In the general sum, 1. the time is expressed. 2. the person to whom the
vision was revealed, to Daniel. 3. the manner of the vision: for the certentie,
it was true: for the continuance, long: for the clearenes, he understood it. 4.
then the disposition of Daniel is showed, how he was affected, when this vision
came: he was in heaviness: the effects whereof were, he eat no pleasant bread,
v. 3.

2. In this description, 1. the circumstances are set forth, the time and
place, v. 4. 2. the glorious person described by his form, he was as a man, by
his raiment, v. 5. by his parts and voice, v. 6.

3. The fear of Daniel and his companions is diversely set forth: they fled
away and hid themselves, v. 7. Daniel stayed by it, though his strength was
much abated, v. 8. and the cause of this great fear is showed; the hearing of
the voice like thunder, v. 9.

4. The erecting and animating of Daniel, is set forth in four degrees. 1. the
first degree is in setting Daniel upon his knees, and the palms of his hands,
which was caused partly by an hand that touched him, v. 10. partly by words, v.
11.

2. In the second degree, he stands, but trembling: the comfort is ministered
by the speaking of the Angel: where he shows, 1. when he was first sent
forth, v. 12. 2. what was the cause of his stay, v. 13. 3. to what end he
came, v. 14.

3.In the third degree is showed, 1. the Prophets infirmity: he set his face
toward the ground, but held his tongue, v. 15. 2. the consolation, an hand
touched his lips. 3. the effects: he speaks showing his fear, v. 16. and
the cause thereof, v. 17.

4. In the fourth and last degree, 1. the Prophets infirmity is expressed, his
great fear, v. 17. 2. the erection of him, partly by gesture, an hand touches
him, v. 18. partly by speech. 3. the effects, Daniel speaks boldly to the
Angel. 4. the Angel declares three things: 1. of his fighting with the Prince
of Persia. 2. of the coming of the Prince of Grecia. 3. of the assistance and
help of Michael the Prince of Gods people.

2. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1. In the third year of ( the reign. L. ad) Cyrus ( Choresh, H. which in
the Persian language signifies, Lord, and therefore they call the son,
choresh, his name before was Spaco, as Herodotus, which in the Medes language
signifies a dog) king of Persia, a thing ( a word. H.) was revealed unto
Daniel, who was called by his name Belteshatzar: and the word was true (
proper. Br. truth in the word. H.) but the time appointed was long ( great. H.
the strength or force was great. L. V. S. tzaba signifies both, but the first
rather here) and he understood the words ( word. H.) and had understanding in
the vision ( he understood both the words of the vision, because they were
plain, and the matter of the vision.)

2 At the same time ( in those days. H.) I Daniel was in heaviness for three
weeks of days.

3 I ate no pleasant bread ( or meat. I. bread of desires. H.) neither came
flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint my self at all ( in anointing
anointed me. H.) till three weeks of days were fulfilled.

4 And in the four and twentieth day of the first month, I was by the bank (
side, B. G. hand. H.) of the great river, even Hiddekel ( that is, Tigris, L.
V. in Dekel. S. cor.)

5 And I lift up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, a man clothed in linen, end
his loins were girded about with gold of Vphaz ( not fine gold. L. V. it is
the name of the place from whence they had fine gold. Ier. 10. 9.)

6 His body was like Tharsis ( H. S. the chrysolite. L. G. the turkeis. B. the
hyacinth. V. berill. I. see more, qu. 14.) and his face as the sight of
lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and feet were like the
color ( shining. V. show. L. eye. H.) of polished brass, and the voice of his
words, as the voice of a multitude.

7 And I Daniel alone saw the vision, and the men that were with me, saw not
the vision: but a great fear fell upon them, so that they fled away, to be
hid ( and hid themselves. B. G.)

8 Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there remained no
strength in me, and my comelines ( my form. L. glory. S. color. B. strength.
G.) was turned into corruption (was corrupted and deformed. V.) and I retained
no power.

9 Yet I heard the voice ( sound. I.) of his words: and when I heard the voice
of his words, I slumbred ( fell a sleep. G. was astonished. B. but the word
signifies to slumber) on my face, and my face was turned toward the ground.

10 And behold, an hand touched me, which set me up ( moved or strengthened
me. H.) upon my knees, and upon the palms of my hands.

11 And he said unto me, O Daniel, a man much desired ( a man of desires. H.
see c. 9. 23.) understand the words that I speak unto thee, and stand in thy
place: ( station. H.) for unto thee am I now sent: and when he had said this
word unto me, I stood trembling.

12 Then he said unto me, Fear not, Daniel: for from the first day that thou
did set ( give. H.) thine heart to understand, and to afflict ( chasten. B.
humble. G.) thy self before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for
thy words.

13 But the Prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me ( stood before. I.
rather against me) one and twenty days: but lo, Michael, the first ( one. V.
L. cum caeter. but achad signifies the first, Genesis 1. 5. as well as one) of
the chief Princes, came to help me, and I remained there by the kings ( not
king. L. S.) of Persia.

14 Now I am come to show thee, what shall befall thy people in the latter ( or
ensuing. I. not last. L.) days: for yet the vision is for many days ( not of
these days. I. (days) put absolutely without any other addition, signify
many)

15 And when he spoke these words unto me, I set my face toward the ground, and
held my tongue.

16 And behold, as the similitude of man ( of the sons of men. H.) touched (
upon. H.) my lips: then opened I my mouth, and spoke, and said to him that
stood before me, O my Lord, by the vision, my sorrows are returned ( I. G. not
my joints are turned out of their place, L. V. B. or my inward parts are
turned. S. the word, tzir, signifies sorrow, anguish,) and I have retained no
strength.

17 For how can the servant of that my Lord, talk with that my Lord (A. P.
better then how can this servant of my Lord, talk with that my Lord. I. or how
can the servant of this my Lord talk with this my Lord. V. Pol. or how can the
servant of this my Lord talk with my Lord being such an one. B. G. the
demonstrative, zeh (that, or yonder) is in both places joined with adonai,
Lord: see more, qu. 17. following) for as for me, there remained no strength to
me, neither is there breath (L. S. B. G. spirit. V. the soul. I. A. the first
rather) left in me.

18 Then there came again ( added. H.) and touched me, as the appearance of a
man, and strengthened me:

19 And said, O man, much desired: peace be unto thee, be strong, and be of
good courage: ( be strong, be strong. H.) and when he had spoken unto me, I was
strengthened, and said, Let my Lord speak: for thou have strengthened me.

20 Then said he, Know thou wherefore I am come unto thee? for now I will
return to fight against the Prince of Persia: and as soon as I go forth ( am
going forth, H.) the Prince of Grecia shall come ( comes. H. not is come. L.
S.)

22 But I will show thee, that which is expressed ( decreed. G. appointed. S.)
in the Scripture of truth: and there is none that holds ( confirms
himself. H.) with me in these things, but Michael your Prince.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. Of the excellency of this vision revealed in this Chapter and the
two next unto Daniel.
This vision, which Lyranus counts the ninth from the beginning of this
book, c. 2. but indeed it is but the fourth vision, which Daniel properly
had, beginning at the 7. chapter: It is a most worthy and excellent vision in
diverse respects. 1. because of the preparation: Daniel fasted and humbled
himself 3. weeks of days, before this vision was showed unto him. 2. The
reuealer of this vision, was the chief of the Angels, even Christ himself, as
is further showed, qu. 12. following, who appeared not in the ordinary shape
of a man, but in a glorious manner, his body was as the Chrysolite, and his
face like lightning, etc. v. 6. Perer. 3. Whereas other visions were dark and
obscure, this vision is plain and manifest: and therefore it is said, the word
is true, or proper, not figurative. H. B. 4. This vision is continued, and
contained in these three last chapters, which was all one vision: so were not
any of the other so long continued and produced. Iun. Polan. 5. It is said,
the time was long, when these things should be fulfilled, many years after:
some read, and the power and force is great: for the word is tzaba, which
signifies an army, and so some of the Rabbis understand here an army of
Angels, which appeared to Daniel: but the first seems to be the better sense,
Iun. Polan. Some think, that this was a long prophecy, the accomplishment
whereof is extended unto the end of the world, Bulling. Perer. But, though in
the last chapter mention be made by occasion of the resurrection, yet this
prophecy was properly fulfilled before the times of the Messiah: though
typically it may be applied to the times succeeding; as concerning the
perfection of Antichrist prefigured by Antiochus, and other accidents, which
did befall the Church of Christ.

2. Quest. How the third year of Cyrus is here to be understood.
1. Some Greek copies here for the third year, do read the first year of
Cyrus: the occasion of which error Theodoret thinks to be this, because it is
said, c. 1. 21. that Daniel was unto the first year of Cyrus: which doubt
Theodoret thus takes away, because in the original it is said, unto one
year of Cyrus, not to the first: But it is evident, that in the Hebrew phrase,
one is taken for the first: the solution then is this, that Daniel continued in
authority with the Babylonian kings, and ministered unto them, as long as that
Monarchy continued, and then he served Cyrus and Darius. Lyran. Perer. Polan.

2. This third yeeare of Cyrus some understand to be the 4. year from the
solution of the captivity: first Darius reigned one year, and died in the
beginning of the next, and then Cyrus succeeded: But Cyrus and Darius reigned
together, because it is said c. 1. 21. that Dael was unto the first of Cyrus,
which was in the first of Darius also, for otherwise he should be omitted with
whom Daniel was in great grace.

3. The better opinion is that Cyrus in the very first year, when Babylon was
taken, gave the Jews liberty to return, in the second year they began to
build, and were the same year hindered, and in the beginning of the third year
this vision was revealed unto Daniel.

4. This was the third and last year of Cyrus reign over the Persian
Monarchy: who reigned 30. years in all, and in the 28. year of his reign
over Persia, he took Babylon, Polan. Pelican. he did not reign 30. after the
taking of Babylon, as M. Lively, Pererius, with others think.

Quest. 3. Of Daniels understanding of this vision.
Here is to be considered a threefold distinction of those which have visions.

1. Some have visions, but they understand them not: such were Pharaoh,
Nebuchadnezzar, and Balthazar: lib. 11. Moral. cap. 12.
and of these Gregory says, cum aliquid ostenditur, and intellectus non
tribuitur, prophetia minime est, when any thing is showed, and understanding
not given, it is no prophecy: lib. 12. de Genesis ad liter. c. 9.
neither are they Prophets to whom such things are showed, etc. And Augustine
says, magis Joseph Propheta fuit qui intellexit, etc. Joseph was rather a
Prophet, who understood the dream, then Pharaoh, which had it and understood
not.

2. Some there are which may understand in some sort, and have the gift of
prophesying, and yet not be in the state of grace: such an one was Balaam, who
uttered most clear prophesies of things to come. And that the gift of
prophecy may be separated from the grace of God, and charity, the Apostle
shows, 1. Cor. 13. 2. If I had the gift of prophecy, etc. and had no love, I
were nothing, Pintus.

3. But there are some, which are the faithful servants and true Prophets of
God, who have both the gift of Prophecy, with the understanding thereof, and
are also in Gods favor, and in the state of grace: such an one was Daniel.

Quest. 4, v. 1. Why Daniel makes mention of his name Belteshazzar.
What the meaning of this name is, is showed before, c. 1. quest. 28. But
Daniel names himself here Belteshazzar for these cause. 1. voluit hoc
vaticinium celebre esse per omnes nationes, he would have this prophecy famous
among all nations, where he was known rather by the name of Belteshazzar, then
by the name of Daniel, Calvin. 2. by this means, though he were called by a
strange name, yet he would make it known, se non alienum esse a populo Dei,
that he was not enstranged from the people of God, but continued still in their
communion. 3. And hereby also Daniel intimates, that he was the same man, unto
whom the former visions were showed, and the understanding of secret things:
and so by this means this vision was received with greater credit and
authority, Polan.

Quest. 5. v. 2. Why Daniel was so long in heaviness.
1. Theodoret thinks, this was one cause thereof, because all of the Jews
having liberty to return, yet many of them, being in love with the pleasures
of Babylon, neglect^ in patriam reditu tanto beneficio vti noluerunt,
neglecting to return into their country, would not use so great a benefit:
But if this had been the cause, Daniel would not have deferred the time of
mourning so long, for this backewardnesse of the people was known in the 1.
year of Cyrus, when the people had license to return.

2. An other cause of Daniels mourning is supposed to have been the
remembrance and consideration of so many heavy things, as were foreshewed him
in time to come to befall his people.

3. As also because it was revealed unto him, to what blindness and obstinacy
his people should grow, as to put to death the Messiah, Perer. But if either
of these had been the cause, Daniel would not have put off his mourning so
long: for the first was signified unto him in the 3. of Balthazar, c. 8. and
the other in the 1. of Darius, c. 9. But this mourning of Daniel was in the 3.
year of Cyrus, two years after.

4. Therefore this indeed was the cause: the people which were returned had
begun to reedifie the Temple, and presently they were hindered by Cambyses,
Cyrus being occupied in wars abroad: this hard news came to Daniel in
Persia, and therefore he mourns, entreating the Lord that the business might
go forward, Iun. Polan. Oecolampad. Pellic. with others.

Quest. 6. Of the time that Daniel mourned, which was three weeks of days.
1. This is added (of days) by way of distinction, because in the former
chapter he had spoken of weeks of years, Polan. 2. Some think he mourned 3.
weeks, to signify the Trinity, gloss. interlin. but that is too curious. 3.
Some, because the people having leave to return in the first of Cyrus, had
deferred their journey until this 3. year, and therefore Daniel mourns 3.
weeks, for every year a week, least this negligence should have been laid
unto the peoples charge, Hugo: but this is contrary to the story, Ezra. 2.
where it is declared that they began to build the Temple in the second year,
therefore they did not put off their return unto the third year. 4. Further
Hugo has an other conceit: that as Daniel fasted 21. days before the Angel
appeared, which represented Christ, so the Church has the like use to fast 21.
days before the aduent: But such superstitious customs are not grounded upon
either precept or example in Scripture: superstition was the mother and founder
of such inventions. 5. This then was the cause: Daniel herein shows his
constancy, not that sorrow is valued before God by the length of time: but
Daniel continues in fasting and prayer, expecting still some comfortable
answer from God: he therefore gives not over until he saw that the Lord
graciously inclined unto his prayer, Iun. 6. And in that he fasted 21. days in
the 1. month, the 1. day, which was the new moon, which they were commanded
by the law to keep with rejoicing, seems to be excepted, Iun. 7. And
whereas within this time they used to keep the Passover, which was a time
also of rejoicing, it seems that in the captivity that solemnity was
omitted, and so thinks R. Leui: whereupon Theodoret reprooueth the Jews in
his time, who used to celebrate the Pasch, with all the rites and ceremonies
thereto belonging, wheresoever they were, whereas by Moses law it was only to
be kept in the place which the Lord should choose.

Quest. 7. Of Daniels abstinencie.
v. 3. I ate no pleasant bread. In the Hebrewe, it is called bread of desries:
which Theodoret takes to have been common bread, because it was desired of
all: but it rather signifies some fine pleasant bread, such as whitebread or
manchet is to brown, Vatab. for afterward he speaks of wine, which is a
pleasant and principal drink, from the which also Daniel abstained: it is not
like that for 3. weeks he did eat no bread at all.

2. Now in that Daniel the space of 3. weeks refrained the drinking of wine,
and eating of pleasant bread or meat, it seems that before he used them: so
that Daniels abstinencie, when he did choose at the first to be fed only with
bread made of pulse, c. 1. seems only to have been for a time: which some
think was for that he was now in years, and therefore it was not fit he
should use such a sparing and course diet, as he did before: or now he was at
his own finding, and needed not to be forced to eat any meat, that was
polluted, but might provide such as he thought best himself, Lyran. Perer. But
this rather was the cause, as M. Calvin well notes: that now there was not the
like danger, as then, in eating delicate meats; for then they were used as
baits to corrupt Daniel, and win him from his faith and religion: But
afterward Daniel, elapsus e Diaboli and Regis insidijs, having escaped the
snares of Satan, and of the king, uses greater liberty.

Quest. 8. Of the custom and use of anointing, which Daniel also forbeareth.
Hierome here writes, that the Persians in stead of bathes used to anoint
themselves, ye^ to besmeare themselves all over with ointment, as Pliny
writes lib. 13. c. 1. which they did both to defend themselves from the
intemperat heat, and to keep their bodies in health, Lyran. this custom of
anointing was very ancient: Pliny in the same place says it was not in use
in the time of the Troiane warte: But that is not so: for Diodorus Siculus,
lib. 2. c. 1. reports how a king of Egypt, called Miridies allowed unto his
wife, for ointment and other ornaments of her body, a talent of silver every
day: which king was long before the Trojan war. And we read in the Scripture
that long before the Troiane stirs, Moses prescribed an ointment to be made
for the use of the Temple, Exodus 30. And before that Joseph embaumed his
fathers body with ointments and other spices, Genesis 50. 3. And ointment was
used to diverse purposes. 1. There was a religious use in the anointing of the
Tabernacle, their Priests also and kings were anointed. 2. It also had civil
uses. 1. as first it was used for ornament, as Ruth anointed her self when she
went to Boaz, Ruth. 3. 2. they used to entertain holy persons with anointing
their head and feet: as Marie Magdalen anointed Christ's feet in the gospel.
3. they anointed also the bodies of the dead, and burned sweet odors over
them: as it is said, that they laid Asa in a bed of spices, and burned sweet
odors for him with an exceeding great fire, that is in great abundance, 2. Chr.
16. 14.

Quest. 9. Of the river Hiddekel, where Daniel had this vision.
1. This was the same river called Tigris, not as Hierome thinks of the beast
called the Tiger, because of the swiftness of the stream: but Tigris in the
language of the Medes signifies a shaft or an arrowe, whence this river is so
called of the swiftness, Plin. lib. 6. c. 7. 2. This Hidekel is commonly taken
for the river Tigris, Pint. Perer. some think it was a branch of Euphra^es
falling into Tigris about Apameae, Polan. But it was rather a part of Tigris,
which in the one part is called Hidekel, in an other Phison, or Phasitigris,
Calvin. see further hereof else where. Hexapl. in Genesis 2. quest. 13 14. 16.
3. it is called a great river in respect of other smaller rivers, though
Euphates which is sometime simply called the great river, and Nilus in Egypt,
were greater then it.

Quest. 10. Whether Daniel were only in spirit, or bodily present by the river
Tigris.
1. M. Calvin thinks, that he was carried thither in spirit only, as before
c. 8. 2. he is said in Balthazars time to be in Shushan: but there is not the
like reason: for then, while the Babylonian Monarchy yet stood, Daniel had no
occasion to be in Sushan, which was the chief city of Persia: But now being
in Persia, or among the Medes, it is like, that he was in that Province where
Tigris was. 2. Pelican and Oecol. leave it as a matter indifferent, whether he
were there in spirit only, or otherwise. 3. But it is most like, that the very
place is described in deed, where this vision was revealed, as Iunius, that
these things were showed unto Daniel, in regione trans-Tigritana, in the region
beyond Tigris: and Bullinger does gather so much by that which follows, of
Daniels companions, that being afraid of that glorious sight, they fled
away, and hid themselves, v. 7. by which it appears, that Daniel was not
alone transported only thither in spirit, but that he had company with him,
and so was verily in that place.

Quest. 11. Why this vision was showed unto Daniel by the river Tigris.
Hierome here notes that holy men usually had their visions and revelations by
rivers sides, as Esechiel by the river Chebar, Esech. 1. John Baptist by the
flood Jordan: and herein the heathen Poets imitated the true Prophets,
imagining themselves to be infused with their poetical furies, in fountains,
and by rivers: whereupon it was commonly held, that their gods and goddesses
had their habitation in fountains and rivers. Now these reasons may be given,
why this vision was showed to Daniel in this place. 1. vt aquae labentes essent
simi^^lum gratiarum spiritus, that the running waters might be a sign of the
graces of Gods spirit, which were powered upon the Prophets, Polan. to the same
purpose Pererius, that by the abondance of water is signified magna vis
prophetica illuminationis, the great plenty of prophetical illumination. 2.
some think that the vanity of the world, is compared aqui^ praeter
fl^^^tibus, to the passing of waters, Oecolampad. 3. But this is more probable,
secessum contemplationis gra^^ia quaesisse, that Daniel went apart, to give
himself to contemplation, because the city was full of noise and tumult:
Pollican. as Paul with the disciples prayed by a river side, Act. 16. 4. And
this special reason there was beside, because Nicator the founder of the
f^milie of the Seleuci^ns, whom the prophecy c. 11. chiefly concerns,
founded his chief city Seleucia, upon the river Tigris, H. Br. (...) Daniel.

Quest. 11. Whether it were an Angel or Christ which appeared here unto Daniel.
v. 5. There was a man clothed in (...) not that he was a man in deed, but he
appeared in humane sl^^pe. 1. Some think that this was the Angel Gabriel, as
Theodoret, Ca^thusianus, Lyranus, who (they think) was the special protector
of the Jews in captivity, as Michael (...) of those which were returned: so
Gregor. lib. 17. (...). Cassan^^ c^^^ation. 8. Hugo Cardinal. of the same
opinion is Calvin, Bullinger, Osiander, that this was an Angel. And Pereius
reason is, because in the visions showed unto Daniel, c. 8. 9. the Angel
Gabriel is expressed by name, that wat sent to declare the meaning of the
vision to the Prophet: But it follows not, that therefore this was the Angel
Gabriel which appeared in this glorious manner: It was the Angel Gabriel which
afterward speaks with Daniel; but it was Christ which in this glorious manner
manifested himself.

2. The reasons to confirm this, that Christ himself appeared, are these: 1.
Hyppolitus urges the difference between the apparition of Gabriel before, and
this here: for he is said before c. 9. to come fleeing as a ministering Angel;
but here is no such thing: he that appears now, shows himself in his
majesty, as the Lord, himself. 2. Pappus infers as much out of v. 17.
because Daniel calls this Angel Lord, and himself his servant: but the holy
Prophets did not call themselves the Angels servants: the Angels did rather
acknowledge them to be their fellow servants, Revel. 22. 8. 3. Iunius and
Polanus do prove the same by that place, c. 12. 6. where one, namely an
Angel, speaks thus unto the man clothed in linen, When shall be an end of
these wonders? this was Christ then, of whom the angels learn the knowledge of
things to come: who is called c. 8. 13. Palmoni, one that has secrets in
account: to whom one of the Angels propounded the like question. 4. this vision
agrees with that Reuelat. 1. almost in every respect: But there Christ
appeared in this manner, in a long raiment, girded about with a golden girdle,
his eyes were as flames of fire, his feet as fine brass, his voice as the
sound of waters: And so does Christ appear here, in a long white garment, his
face as lightening, his eyes as flames of fire, his arms and feet like
polished brass, his voice, like the voice of a multitude: the likeness and
agreement of the apparitions shows that he was the same, which in both places
appeared.

3. Now this strong objection there is, that it was not Christ but an Angel
which appeared, because afterward v. 13. he speaks of Michael the Prince
which came to help him, which Michael is understood to be Christ: and Christ
needed not to be helped: beside he says, v. 11. unto thee am I now sent. But
Christ is none of the missiue or ministering Angels, he sends them, he is not
sent.

Answ. 1. Some here answer, that though Michael afterward be understood to be
Christ, yet in this place, Michael signifies one of the principal Angels,
Pappus. But that seems not so fit, in the same prophecy, and at the same
time, by Michael to understand not one and the same, but diverse.

2. Oecolampadius, who holds this to be Christ that appeared in this
majesty, thus interprets those words, now I am sent to thee: placuit pairivt
te nunc consoler, it pleases my father that I now should come to comfort thee:
But we do not find, that Christ as the son of God, is said to be sent of
his father: as he was man he was sent into the world: Again, he gives this
sense of the other words, Michael helped me, hunc meum erga vos fauorem magis
declarauit, the Angel Michael has more declared my favor toward you: so also
Pelican. but it may seem an harsh and hard speech in any sense, to say that
Christ is helped of the Angels.

3. Therefore this is our answer, that it was the person of Christ the son of
God, which was seen of Daniel in that great majesty: And he is that Michael
afterward spoken of: But it was the Angel Gabriel that had the communication
with Daniel: for the Prophet himself distinguishes the person of the Angel,
from him that appeared in that glory: as v. 16. he says, I said unto him that
stood before me: that was another beside Christ that appeared: whom the Prophet
points out by the pronoune demonstratiue dubled, v. 17. how can the servant
of my Lord talk with that my Lord, Polan. So c. 8. 16. there is the like
distinction between the Angel Gabriel, and another that spoke unto him in a
man's voice, called before Palmoni, v. 13. the like also see, c. 12. 5. where
one of the Angels standing by the river, speaks unto the man clothed in
linen, that is unto Christ, to know when should be the end of those things.

Quest. 13. Of the description of the manner how Christ appeared, and first of
his apparel.
Christ is described by the adjuncts of his vesture and raiment, and by the
parts of his body set forth by certain similitudes. There are two parts of
his apparel named, his white garment, and his girdle, which shall be handled
in their order.

1. The word is ^aldi^, which Amm^nius takes for a variable vesture of diverse
colors, which he would have to signify the diverse virtues, which the servants
of Christ should be endued with: but it was a kind of fine white linen, such as
was used in those countries by Princes and great men: And such were the linen
garments prescribed to be used by the Le^^es*, and Priests in the old
Testament, Exodus 28. Pererius hereby understands the innocence and purity
of the Angelical nature. Oecolampadius applies it to the innocence that
ought to be in the preachers of the Gospel. But it better expresses the
Priesthood of Christ, who is described in the like manner, with a long garment
down to the feet, Reu. 1. yet sometime Christ appears with a garment dipped
and besprinkled with blood, as Isay. 63. v. 1. 2. and Apoc. 19. v. 13. but that
is in a diverse sense: he has a bloody garment in respect of the wicked, to
show his victory and triumph over them: but a white garment toward the
righteous, because he is their righteousness: and in his blood they do wash
their garmens white, Apoc. 7. 13. 14. that is, are justified and made righteous
by the blood of the Lamb, Polan.

2. His girdle was of fine gold of Vphaz: the Latin interpreter reads, for
Vphaz, Obrizum: so also Lyran. Vatab. which is a name given unto the finest
gold, called obrizum, quia obradiat, because it glistereth, as Isidor. lib. 16.
Etymol. c. 17. or, quia rubeat, because it is read, Pline lib. 33. c. 3. or
rather as Pagnine it is called obrizum, quasi Ophirizum, because it came from
Ophir: for that place which here is called Vphaz, and Ierem. 10. 9. is
elsewhere called Ophir, from whence Solomon had his gold. It is a place in
India, about the river Ganges, called Malaca, Polan. Pererius thinks it to be
the same place, which the Portugals call Sophala. The girding of the loins
with this girdle of gold, some expound of the pure affection of the Angels,
because the reins are held to be the seat of the affections, that their
revelations savor not of any carnal thoughts, Bulling. Some of their delight
which they have in God, Perer. But this being a vision of Christ, not of a
created Angel, both shows his strength wherewith he had girded himself, as
the Prophet David says, Psalm. 93. 1. as Pererius expounds that part of the
vision, Apocal. 1. or it shows Christ's readiness and alacrity to finish
that work which was committed unto him: as they in those countries wearing
long garments, used to gird and trusse them up, when they went about any
business, Iun. Polan. Oecolamp.

Quest 14. Of the glorious parts of this heavenly body which appeared unto
Daniel.
1. His body was like unto the Chrysol^^e, L. Genevens. Turkeis, B. to the
Hyacinth, Vatab. to the Saphir, Osiand. rather like the berill, which is of Sea
or Sky color, Iun. Pol. the word is tarshish, which is diuersely taken: for
it signifies the Sea, then a country in India, from whence Solomon had his
gold, 1. king. 10. 22. and there was a precious stone of that name, Exodus 28.
20. And sometime it is taken for Carthage, as where it is said, Ezeck. 27. the
merchaunts were of Tarshish; the Septuag. read, the Carthaginians were thy
merchants: But for Tharsus the chief city of Cilicia, it is never taken, as
Josephus thinks lib. 1. antiquit. to this purpose Pererius. In which
observation of his, this may be excepted against, 1. he thinks that Tarshish
is a country in India: but no such thing is gathered in that place, 1. king.
10. mention is made only of the ships of Tarshish, that is, of the Ocean sea
which brought Salomons gold. 2. In that place of Ezechiel, the Cilicians, or
any other inhabiting upon the sea, may as well be understood, as the
Carthaginians. 3. And it is evident, that Jonas 1. 3. by Tarshish Tarsus of
Cilicia is understood, which was so called of Tarshish one of the sons of
Iavan the son of Iapheth, Genesis 10. 4. And this may appear by the words of
the text, he paid his fare, and went down into the ship that he might go
with them to Tarshish: this is not here understood to be the Sea, for as soon
as he was in the ship, he was in the sea: and the mariners intended their
course to some certain place, not to sail up and down in the sea: Therefore
Hierome need not to have found so much fault with Rheticius Bish. of
Augustadunum, for taking Tarshish here for Tarsus in Cilicia, epist. 133. ad
Mar. 4. Further this Tarshish here cannot be the Chrysolite, which is a
precious stone yellowish like gold, as Pliny writes, that Aethiopia sends
forth Chrysolites, aureo color translucentes, which shine with a golden
color, lib. 37. c. 9. and so Hugo de S. Victore says, Chrysolithus fulget
quasiaurum, the Chrysolite shines like gold: as the word signifies: But
Tarshish properly signifying the Sea, must be here taken for a precious stone
of sea or sky color: See more hereof, Hexapl. in Exodus quest. 21. 10. 5. But
R. Saadiah his conceit here is very strange, who thinks this glorious body
to be likened to the Sea, for the height thereof: the Sea is 2000. cubits
deep, as he sounds the depth, and so imagines that here appeared a shape of
an huge proportion, far exceeding the statute of a Giant: But in that the
text says, there was a man clothed in linen, thereby is signified that he
appeared in the ordinary shape of a man.

6. For the signification hereof: some think that this sky color signifies
immortality, Pintus, or the celestial nature of the Angels, Oecolamp, rather
it betokens, that Christ is the Lord of heaven, Iun. comment. and that he is
the Lord heaven, as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 15. 47. Polan.

7. But it will be questioned how the color of his body could be perceived,
seeing it was covered with a linen garment: Pererius answers, that it
appeared as a most fine linen garment, thorough the which the heavenly color
of his body might be seen.

2. His face was like the lightening. So we read, that Christ's face in the
mountain did shine as the Sun: Hereby is signified the excellency of his
glory, Pintus: and his terror against his enemies, Perer. and as the
lightening, and fulget, and terret, both shines bright, and terrifieth, so
Christ is terror to the wicked, and a comfortable light to the righteous,
Oecolamp. Bulling. But it rather shows celerrimam eius ad omnia presentiam,
his swift presence in every place: as lightening appears quickly from the
East to the West, Mat. 24. 27. Iun. Polan.

3. His eyes were as lamps of fire: so he is described Apocal. 1. that his
eyes appeared as flames of fire: whereby is signified ardor amoris, his ardent
love, Perer. or the perspicuitie of Angels, Lyran. Pintus. or quia illuminat
oculos, because he lighteneth the eyes of the mind, Bulling, and inflammat
impios, he consumes the wicked, Oecolamp, rather hereby is signified, that all
things are manifest to Christ's eyes, and nothing can be hidden from him, as the
Aposte shows, Hebr. 4. 13.

4. His arms and feet were like polished brass. Ammonius by the arms
understands the fathers of old time, by the feet, the faithful that are
now, all which as the arms and feet belong unto one body: but this is far
fetched: some applying it to the Angels do give this sense, thereby they will
have signified their great strength, ad operandum per brachia, ad mouendum per
pedes, to work with their hands, and move with their feet, Lyran. Pint.
Perer. some refer it to the life and works of Christ, which did shine,
Oecolamp. But more properly it shows the great power of Christ, in rebus
agendis efficacissimam, most effectual in doing and working of things, Iun.
commentar. and in treading and trampling upon his enemies, as if one should
stamp upon an earthen vessel with iron or brazen shoes. Polan.

5. Lastly this glorious and goodly man is described by his voice, which was as
the voice of a multitude. 1. Albertus thinks that this Angel was accompanied
with many Angels beside, for the greater consolation of Daniel, and so his
voice with the rest seemed as the voice of a multitude: But Daniel says the
voice of his words, was as the voice of a multitude, he speaks of the voice
not of many, but of one. 2. The Lord uses before any notable vision to send a
great noise or sound, as Ezech. 1. 24. the sound of the wings of the beasts
which appeared, was as the noise of great waters: and Christ's voice was like a
trumpet, Revel. 1. 10. and as the noise of many waters, Revel. 1. 15. So before
the coming of the Holy Ghost, there was a mighty rushing wind, Act. 2. 2.
and this the Lord does to prepare his servants, to whom he revealed himself,
that they should attend with greater reverence, Polan. 3. Now this sound Daniel
heard at the first, but he sets it in the last place: because it is the
manner of the Prophets to speak of that last, where the narration following is
to begin, as afterward v. 9. he shows how he was astonished at the hearing
of this mighty voice, Iun. comment. 4. For the signification of this voice, 1.
Calvin thinks that it was only to this end, to discern this Angel from the
common sort of men: but there was more in it. 2. Hyppolitus by the many waters
understands the multitude of the faithful; All that believe, eloquia Christi
sonamus, do ^ound forth the words of Christ. 3. they which apply it to an
Angel, do signify thereby the singular faculty of the Angels, e^nuntiandi
arcana, in declaring hid things. Perer. Lyran. Bullin. 4. But it rather shows
the mighty power of Christ in teaching of men, whose one voice preuayleth more
then the voice of many beside, Polan. as in the Gospel it is said of our
blessed Savior, Math. 7. 29. he taught them, as one having authority, not as
the Scribes: the teaching of Christ only was more effectual and of greater
power, then all the babbling of the Scribes and Pharisees.

15. Quest. How Daniel is said to see the vision alone.
1. The Hebrews think, that all this was done in vision, and that Daniel
imagined, that Hagge, Zachary, and Malachie were present, to whom yet so much
was not revealed as to him: But the description which follows afterward of
their fleeing and hiding themselves, shows, that it was done in deed. 2.
Some think that the rest saw not this vision, because they were afraid, and
durst not look up. Iun. in commentar. But the like thing happened rather here
unto Daniels companions, which did befall those which accompanied Paul, Act. 9.
they saw not the vision, only Paul's eyes were opened to perceive it. Iun.
annotat. 3. But where it is said, Act. 9. 7. that the men which iourneied with
Paul, heard a voice, but saw no man: and yet, Act. 22. 9. it is said, that
they saw a light, but heard not the voice: the meaning is, that they heard
Paul's voice answering, but not the voice of Christ speaking unto him: and they
saw a light confusedly, but distinctly they saw not him, which was both seen
and heard of Paul. 4. Pintus thinks that they saw in deed the Angel, but
perceived not what he said, and therefore they are said, not to have seen the
vision: so also Lyran. but the text evidently shows, that they did not see
the vision at all, but Daniel only saw it: they heard the sound, and therewith
were astonished, and fled away, but they saw nothing. 5. Calvin thinks, that
Daniel was in his chamber at this time, and in his spirit only by the river,
and so falling into a trance, the rest were stricken with a terror: But if
Daniel in spirit only had seen this vision absent, it were needelesse to say,
that the rest saw it not: for how could they see a thing absent. 6. In that
Daniel had company and witnesses present, it so sell out by Gods providence,
that the truth of this vision, which Daniel afterward was to communicate to the
Church, should not be doubted of. Polan.

16. Quest. The causes of Daniels great fear.
v. 8. There remained no strength in me. It was usual with the holy Prophets
and servants of God to be stricken with a great fear, when they received any
vision: as Jeremy says, c. 23. 9. Mine heart breaks within me, etc. for the
presence of the Lord, and for his holy words: so Habac. 3. 2. O Lord, I have
heard thy voice, and was afraid: likewise Dan. c. 7. 28. My cogitations
troubled me, and my countenance changed in me: etc. 8. 27. I Daniel was
stricken, and sick certain days: Thus were the holy Prophets affected in
these visions. Now these reasons may be alleged of this their fear:

1. The great majesty and glory which appears unto them, far exceeding
man's capacity, makes them afraid, and abateth their strength: as this was a
most glorious sight which here was showed to Daniel: If we can not behold the
Sun without dazeling of the eyes, how much less is man able to behold such
excellent brightness.

2. The heavy things, which were declared in those visions, did also terrify
them: as the prediction of the calamities and miseries which should befall the
people of God, cast Daniel into a sick fit, c. 8.

3. It is the quality and condition of spiritual contemplation, that the more
the mind is intent thereupon, the less vigor and strength the body has,
all the powers of nature bending and applying themselves to the disposition of
the mind: as Gregory observes well, cum ad virtutem Dei men's astringitur, a
propria fortitudine caro lassatur, lib. 4. mor. c. 30.
when the mind is bent toward God, the strength of the flesh is abated, etc.
and this he resembles fitly to Iaacobs halting after he had wrestled with the
Angel.

4. By this means man sees his own infirmity, and the greater evidence he
has of Gods power and glory, the more he sees into his own estate, and
feels his own wants: As Abraham being admitted to that familiar conference
with God, Genesis 18. confessed himself to be dust and ashes: Moses who thought
himself some body before, as being brought up in the learning of the
Egyptians, yet after he had talked with God, he then began to see his
imperfection, that he was flow of speech, Exodus 4. 10. and the Prophet Isai,
after he had that vision, c. 6. cries out, that he was a man of polluted
lips: to this purpose Gregor. homil. 8. in Ezechiel.

17. Quest. Whose hand it was that touched Daniel.
1. Iunius in his commentary, by this hand understands the spirit of God, by
the which we are comforted: as Ezekiel says, c. 1. 3. the hand of God was upon
me by the river Chebar: But this thing was not mystically, but histotically*
done: yet this hand was symbolum virtutis spiritus, a symbol or sign of the
virtue of the spirit. Polan.

2. Some take this for the hand of the Angel, which appeared in that glorious
manner unto Daniel before, Hierome, Pintus, Calvin, Genevens. But it is showed
before, that it was not an Angel which there appeared, but Christ himself.

3. Lyranus has this conceit, that the same Angel touched Daniel as it were
with a man's hand, but in an other shape, then he appeared at the first: for the
Angels can easily change their shape. But there is no reason to suppose, that
in the same vision, the same Angel should assume a diverse shape, neither do I
think that the like can be showed in Scripture.

4. Some think that this was Christ who touched Daniels lips: and this
Polanus would confirm by these two reasons. 1. because it is God that used at
other times to touch the Prophets lips, and to strengthen them: as Ierem. 1.
9. and Revel. 1. 17. 2. he is said to be like the similitude of the son of
man, v. 16. and so Christ is described, c. 7. 13. one like the son of man,
Answ. 1. True it is that God only gives strength and utterance, but the
Angels also may be as ministers of Gods work, though they do it not by their
own power: as Gabriel touched Daniel and strengthened him, c. 8. 18. And
Polanus himself upon the 18. v. says, that the Angel, tanquam administer Dei,
as Gods minister did strengthen Daniel. 2. v. 18. he says, one like the
appearance of man touched me: there he shows what he meant before, by the
similitude of the sons of men: for not only Christ appeared in vision as a
man, but the Angels also, as Gabriel c. 8. 15. appeared in the similitude of a
man: and c. 9. 21. he is called the man Gabriel.

5. Therefore I subscribe to Iunius in his annotations, that this was the Angel
that touched Daniel, because the same that speaks, touches, as may appear
v. 11. 19. And Hierome says, that the Angel touched him with a man's hand, vt
sui generis corpus aspiciens, that seeing a body of his own kind, he should
not be afraid: but the arms which Christ appeared with, were as polished
brass, and therefore not of the same kind: and Daniel would have been more
afraid, to have been touched with such glorious hands. So that hereby it is
evident, that the hand which touched Daniel was an ordinary man's hand: it was
not then the hand of that glorious body, which appeared before, v. 4.

18. Quest. Why Daniels prayer being heard at the first, yet the Angels
coming was deferred one and twenty days, v. 12.
In that the Angel meets with a secret objection, and vouchsafes therein to
satisfy Daniels mind, therein the Lords singular mercy appears toward his
servant: for Daniel might have thus thought, after the Angel had told him, that
his prayer was heard, the very first day, that he humbled himself, why the
Angel came not till now, which was three weeks after: to this therefore the
Angel makes answer, showing the cause of his stay.

1. Hierome makes this the cause, data est per moram occasio amplius
deprecandi Deum, etc. by this stay, occasion is given to Daniel, the more
earnestly to pray, that he might the more effectually be heard, etc. This
indeed was the use that Daniel made of this stay, still continuing in prayer,
and not giving over: but this was not the cause, which kept the Angel from
coming.

2. The ordinary gloss adds further, that when Daniel began to pray, the
Angel took occasion, and went into Gods presence, pro re oraturus, to pray for
thee: and this was that which occupied the Angel: but the text is, I am come
for thy words: he came forth, as sent from God; he did not go to God: neither
needed Daniel the mediation of an Angel in his prayers; he had a sufficient
Mediator beside, even Michael, Christ Jesus the Prince of his Church.

3. Pererius adds further, that this was an other cause of this stay, that it
might appear what an hard thing Daniel entrea^ed for, namely, the deliverance
of the rest of the people, which were yet in captivity: not that it was an
hard thing with God, but in respect of the sins and ingratitude of the
people, which hindered this work. But these are men's conjectures: the Angel
afterward expresses the very cause, which is none of these alleged.

4. Osiander thus writes, that while the good Angel resists Satan (whom he
understands by the Prince of Persia) aliquot dies in deliberationibus
elabuntur, certain days pass in deliberation: But the Angels need not any
such time to consult and deliberate of their business, as men do: their
counsel is always ready, without d^bating, and their execution speedy without
opposition.

5. Oecoliampadius alleges out of Chrysostom, an other cause of this let,
to show unto the Prophet, (...), that he asked things which were not lawful,
and forbidden: that the people should return, which benefit they were
unworthy of. But this petition of Daniel was grounded upon Gods promise, that
the people should return after 70. years captivity, and therefore it was not
unlawful.

6. The Angel therefore shows, whereabout he was hindered these 21. days: he
was empl^ied in the affairs of Persia, to stay the proceedings of them, which
had hindered the building of the Temple, and intended to work yet further
mischief against the people of God: and therein Daniel had his desire: for
from the first day, that he prayed, forward, the Angel was occupied in the
defending and protecting of the Church. Calvin.

19. Quest. What it was that Daniel prayed for, and how he was heard.
1. Some think that Daniel here prayed for the return of the people out of
captivity, which was granted by Cyrus, sed non sine magna disceptatione, but
not without great disceptation and opposition, the Devil interposing himself
to hinder this business. But the people returned out of captivity two years
before this in the first of Cyrus, for which thing Daniel had prayed for
before, c. 9. Of this opinion seems also to have been the author of the
interlinearie gloss, Daniel prayed vt captivus populus sub Dario relaxetur,
that the captive people under Darius might be released: he means Darius the
Mede, that reigned with Cyrus: by whom, as Hugo Card* notes, initum fuit
consilium, the counsel first was begun for the peoples return. But this, as
I said, was done two years before this prayer of Daniel.

2. Lyranus thinks, that although this liberty were granted by Cyrus, yet
because most of the Jews were borne in the captivity, which had continued
from the first taking of the city in Iehoiakims reign 70. years, from
Iehoiachins carrying away 66. from Zedekiah 56. years, they being in love
with Babylon, where they had possessions, and there were borne, deferred their
going two years: and so Daniel feared, ne totum hoc negotium de eorum reditu
impediretur, least that all this business concerning their return might be
hindered, etc. But it is evident that the return of the Jews out of captivity
was not so long put off: for they according to Cyrus edict returned in the
first year, and in the second year the seventh month, they began to build
the house of God, Ezr. 3. 1.

3. Pintus thinks that Daniels desire was to know, what should become
afterward of the Persian Monarchy, and what should befall the people of God:
But though these things be afterward revealed to Daniel, c. 11. yet that was
not it for the which Daniel was in heaviness three weeks of days. The Lord
grants more, then he desired, and revealed unto him things to come, as c. 9.
Daniel only prayed for the temporal deliverance of the people, but he is
iustructed also by the Angel concerning the Messiah, which should bring
spiritual deliverance, and redemption.

4. Pererius thinks that Daniel prayed, that the rest of the Jews which
remained yet behind, might return also into their country: but Daniel was not
heard in this: for many of them being entangled with the pleasures of Babylon,
never returned.

5. Wherefore Daniels prayer was this rather, that whereas the building of the
Temple and City was hindered by Cambyses, it would please God, that the work
might go forward, and that the impediments might be removed, and the enemies
of his Church prevented: herein Daniel was heard: for the present in the one,
that the malice of the adversary might be stayed, which was the cause of the
Angels stay, to bridle the enterprise of the king of Persia: the other was in
due time effected afterward, when the Temple was reedified under Darius, and
afterward Ezra, and Nehemiah were sent to set the city in order, and to finish
the building of it. And that this was Daniels request, may be gathered by these
two reasons. 1. Daniel was heard concerning that matter for the which he was in
grief so many days: but that is showed before to have been for the hindering
of the building of the Lords house. 2. that which detained the Angel 21. days,
was to show the effect of Daniels prayer: but the business of Persia stayed the
Angel, that the enemies of Gods people should not proceed in their malice:
therefore for that Daniel prayed.

20. Quest. Who is understood to be the Prince of Persia.
1. Some do think, that this Prince of Persia was an evil angel, and no
other but Satan: this was the opinion of Julian the Apostata: and some do
father it also upon Hierome, as Rupert. lib. 9. de victor. verb. Dei. Thomas p.
1. qu. 113. Carthusian. and Hieromes words seem to import so much: for he
thinks that this Prince of Persia, was of those Princes, whom S. Paul
calls princes of the world, which crucified Christ, 1. Cor. 2. 8. which are
understood to be the evil angels* though indeed in that place S. Paul
speaks of the Princes and governors of the world, which set themselves
against Christ. But whether Hierome were or not of that opinion, Cassianus
evidently says, quem principem regni Persarum, minime dubitandum est
adversariam fuisse potestatem, quae favebat genti Persarum inimicae populo Dei,
which Prince it is not to be doubted but was the adversary power which
favored the nation of the Persians, which was an enemy to the people of God,
etc. Cassian. collat. 8. c. 13. Rupertus also concurreth with him, prudens
auditor principes illos angelos malos intelligere non dubitaret, a discreet
hearer will not doubt to understand by those Princes (of Persia and Grecia) the
evil Angels: the evil angel of Persia labored to keep the people in
captivity, because he was delighted with their afflictions, and would have the
Persians thereby sin more grievously by oppressing the Lords people: the
evil Angel of Grecia labored for the same reasons, to bring them in
captivity to the Grecians. Thus Hugo Cardinal. delivers Hieromes exposition:
of the same opinion that this Prince of Persia was Satan, are Melancthon,
Osiander, and Pappus.

But thus it may be objected against this exposition. 1. the evil angels are
not able to resist the good, but the most inferior of the good angels is of
greater power, then the most mighty of the evil: for as Thomas says, 1. p.
qu. 109. art. ^.
ordo gratiae praeponderat ordini naturae, the order of grace prevails
against the order of nature.

To this it is answered, that the evil angels have not power to resist the
good by any natural faculty, but by reason of the sins of the Jews: malus
pugnat accusando, bonus defendendo, the evil does fight in accusing, the good
in defending: And Rupertus shows how the evil angel withstood the
deliverance of the Jews* four ways. 1. instigando ad gravissima scelera, by
provoking them unto great sins, whereby God should be offended with them. 2.
exaggerandis bonis, quae in captiuitate possidebant, by amplifying and setting
forth those good things which they enjoyed in Babylon. 3. alienando animum
Cyri, by alienating the mind of Cyrus from them. 4. and by accusing them, and
presenting their sins before God: so Rupert. lib. 9. de victor* verb. c. 6.

Contra. But it is evident by the text, that no such resisting by persuasion,
suggestion, or seduction is meant, but by a contrary power and endeavor:
because the Angel speaks of Michaels ayding and helping him against the
Prince of Persia, v. 13. and v. 20. of his fighting with the king of Persia. As
the angel fights against him, so the Prince of Persia resisted the Angel: But
he did fight, not by persuasion, or suggestion, but by hindering and suppressing
his enterprises.

2. Again it is objected, that the evil spirits are not made presidents of
nations: as some imagine, that every nation and kingdom has both a good, and
evil angel set over it: to this it is answered, that the evil spirits have
not this power given them of God over nations, but they have it by reason of
men's sins: and indeed the Persians and Grecians worshipped devils in their
idols, and so they themselves made the devils and evil spirits their Princes.

Contra. True it is, that the Prince of darkness rules in the hearts of the
disobedient: but it is one thing to seduce and entice men unto sin, an other
to manage the affairs of kingdoms. This Prince of Persia hindered the building
of the Temple, and the return of the people. This Satan had no power to do,
otherwise then by his ministers and instruments. So then the evil spirits, are
the Princes of darkness, and of the world of the wicked: but Princes of
countries and kingdoms they are not. Satan indeed said unto Christ, that all
the kingdoms of the world were his, to give to whom he would, Luke 4. 6. but
therein he lied: for the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, Psalm. 24.
1.

2. An other opinion is, that this Prince of Persia, was a good Angel to whom
the care of that nation was committed: of this opinion are Gregory, Theodoret,
Thomas, 1. p. q. 123. ar. 7. Lyranus, Carthusianus, upon this place, and
Vatablus in his annotations, and Pint* so also Oecolampad. Pellic. And whereas
one Angel is said to withstand an other, it is not they say, so to be
understood, as though they did contend, and strive together: but as long as the
will of God is not yet revealed, the Angels, populorum, quibus praesunt,
diuersa merita exponunt coram Deo, do only lay open before God, the diverse
state and deserts of the people, over whom they are set: Perer. yet so
reasoning the case, vt quando revelata fuerit divine voluntas, simpliciter
concordent, that after Gods will is revealed, they simply accord together.
Lyran. Pererius brings in the Angels thus reasoning together: first the Angel
of the Persians thus alleges, that it was not fit for the Jews to return,
1. because it was profitable for them to be under affliction; in their
prosperity they would quickly forget God. 2. And their sins were so great,
that they deserved a longer time of captivity then for 70. years. 3. And
beside, some respect was to be had unto the Persians, that they by the Jews
cohabiting among them, might be brought to the knowledge of the true God. On
the other side Gabriel for the Jews might thus allege, 1. that it was
requisite they should now be delivered as God had promised, seeing the 70.
years of captivity was determined. 2. there was great fear, least, if they
should continue longer among the Idolatrous Gentiles, they might sooner be
perverted to idolatry, then the other converted to their religion. 3. And
though they were unworthy in respect of themselves, of this benefit, yet the
Lord would respect them for the Messiahs sake, that was to come of that nation.

Contra. 1. It is a very base thing to imagine, that there is any such
altercation or dispute between the good Angels, among whom there is a most
sweet concent and harmony: If Satan be not divided against Satan, Matthew. 12.
25, 26. but they work together to uphold their kingdom; much more do the
good angels consent together to do the Lords will. 2. All the Angels are sent
forth to minister for their sakes, that shall be heirs of salvation, Hebr. 1.
14. therefore they will not persuade any thing against the people of God. 3. If
they rest contented, when Gods will is known, then they would not reason
against the deliverance of the people of Israel* wherein the Lords will and
pleasure was revealed already.

3. Therefore* this Prince of Persia, was none other then Cyrus, or Cambyses in
his absence, being at this time in war against the Massagetes, who by the
suggestion of some enemies to the Jews, and false informations given in
against them, caused them to cease from building of the Temple: All this was no
doubt wrought by the malice of Satan. But Cambyses is this Prince of Persia,
who withstood the Angel, not as opposing himself, but interposing his
authority to hinder the work of Gods house, which the Angel furthered: And
who this Prince of Persia was, the end of the verse shows, where the Angel
names the kings of Persia.

21. Quest. How the Prince of Persia is said to have withstood the Angel.
1. They which understand the Prince of Persia here spoken of, v. 13. and the
Prince of Grecia, mentioned v. 20. to be evil angels, do verily think that
there is striving and fighting between them in deed: as Cassianus thus
conludeth, Discordias gentium and conflictus, quos istis instigantibus inter se
gerunt, etiam contra se aduersae exercent potestates, the discords and
conflicts of the nations, which they make among themselves, by the instigation
of these spirits, even the adversary powers do exercise among themselves,
etc. He thinks, that by the variance between nations, which is caused by
evil spirits, the Devils themselves may be thought likewise to be at variance.

2. Rupertus goes further, Etiam sibimet semper dissentiunt, and inter eos
semper sunt iurgia, quia superbi sunt, the evil Angels do not only resist
the good, but they are at variance between themselves always, and there are
continually brawles among them, because they are proud, etc. But both these
opinions are contrary to that saying of our Savior, that Satan is not divided
against Satan, for then his kingdom could not long stand.

3. The evil Angels likewise resist the good, as Hierome says in this place,
enumerando peccata Iudaeorum, by rehearsing the sins of the people, for the
which they were justly held in captivity: and Rupertus shows how they
contradict the good Angels about our prayer, lib. 9. de victor. verb. c. 8.
nostra contra nos declamando causas iniustitiae, etc. by declaiming against
us, and showing our unrighteousness, for the which we deserve not to be heard.
But in this sense they might as well be said to contradict God, and to
withstand him, when they seek to hinder his gracious will and purpose toward
his: and thus the evil angels oppose themselves not only 21. days, but
continually, they never give over.

4. Pappus seems to understand this resistance of the Devil, of his
suggestions and tentations: which he works five ways: 1. by perverting the
understanding and judgment, and corrupting it with error, as Idolaters, and
heretics are seduced. 2. by incensing the will and affections to anger, envy,
lust, and such like. 3. by offering the objects, and occasions of sin, as
opportunity of time, person, place. 4. by driving men to despair through
adversity and affliction. 5. by puffing them up with prosperity. But this is
not the withstanding here spoken of, which continued but an 21. days, whereas
Satan never cease in this manner to tempt.

5. Some refer it unto Satan's instruments, that Satan in respect of them is
said to resist, because he turned the mind of Cambyses, and of the nobles of
Persia, against the people of God, Osiand. Indeed Satan's instruments properly
resisted herein, as is before showed: But Satan is not here said to resist in
them: for then they should have resisted still, for Satan never left egging and
sti^^ing of them up against the Church of God.

6. They which understand and this of the good Angels, do think they are said
to resist and withstand one an other, allegando contraria merita, etc. by
alleging the diverse merits of the nations, over the which they are set,
Lyran. Pint. with others: but this is confuted before in the former question.

7. This Prince of Persia then being understood to be Cambyses the governor
of Persia, he is said to withstand the Angel: not that any moral Prince can
oppose himself against the Angels: but this was done, per accidens, by an
accident, because mora iniecta est Angelo, the Angel was stayed, being
occupied in hindering the contrary endeauours of the Prince of Persia against
the people of God: who, while he practiced against the Church of God, whose
cause the angel sought to further, is said to withstand him. Iun. in commentar.

7. Vatablus thinks that this is but a prase of speech, that one Angel
withstood an other, res exprimit Scriptura more nostro, the Scripture
expresses things according to our manner. Emmanuel Sa resolves thus, that it
seemed an hard thing to him to understand, and admirable, how there should be
any contention among the Angels: the best resolution then is, to insist upon
the plain and literal meaning, that this Prince of Persia was Cambyses, as is
showed before.

22. Quest. Who this Michael was, that helped the Angel.
1. The most take Michael for one of the chief Angels, which assisted Gabriel:
Hierom, Pintus, Pererius, Bullinger, Oecolamp. with others: and Lyranus
thinks that this Arkangel had the protection of all the people of God
wheresoever, as this Angel was set over those which were left in Persia.

2. But the better opinion is, that this Michael was none other but Christ the
Son of God, the Prince and chief of the Angels: the reasons are these. 1.
the word Michael signifies, who is as God: whereupon it can not be inferred,
that he is not God: for the essence of the Son is not compared with the
essence of the Father, but the comparison is of their persons: and so Christ is
called the image of the invisible God, Coloss. 1. 15. the engraven image of his
person, Heb. 1. 3. 2. He is called the chief of the Angels, who are called
Princes in comparison of all other terrene Princes: the word achad here used,
signifies as well the first, as one: as the word achath, of the same sense is
taken, Dan. 1. 21. he was unto the first year of Cyrus. Christ then, was not
one, but the first or chief of the Princes, that is, the Angels. 3. This
Michael is called the Prince of the people of God, v. 21. who is Christ, and
the great Prince, c. 12. 1. 4. He is said to help the Angels, then he was
greater then the Angels: for there is no power greater then the Angelical
power, but the divine only: Polan. Melancth. Genevens. H. Br. Iun. all
consent, that Michael is not here a created Angel, but Christ Jesus the Son
of God, the Prince of the Angels: M. Calvin leaves it as a thing indifferent.

23. Quest. How Michael helped the other Angel.
1. Lyranus thinks, that he was a superior Angel, and so helped him, as
being of greater power: but God would not employ an Angel in the defense of
his Church, not being of power sufficient to go through with the business.

2. Pererius thinks he helped him, validissime repellendo rations Principis
Persarum, by valiant repelling the contrary allegations of the Prince of the
Persians, whom he supposes to have been a good Angel: But it is an
inconvenient thing to imagine, that there is such dispute and arguing among the
Angels.

3. Oecolampad. who takes the Angel that speaks to Daniel, to be Christ, and
Michael, for another chief Angel, makes this the sense, that Christ calls
an Angel his ^elper, vt commodius fauere videatur, that he might seem more
commodiously or fitly to favor and protect his people: his meaning is, that
Christ herein applies himself to their capacity, and as he alleges out of
Chrysostom, (...), he does incorporate his cause, that is, speaks as it were
grossly to their understanding: such he takes those speeches to be of the
Angel, that wrestled with Jacob, which was Christ, let me alone, because the
day is risen: and the Lord said to Moses, Exodus 32. let me alone, tht I may
destroy them: But these speeches are not alike: for there God has to do with
men, and so applies his speech to their best understanding: but here the Angel
is helped of Michael, which must be taken properly, this matter being done
among the celestial spirits: Then to say that Christ is helped and aided of
the Angels, is a very improper speech, and agrees not with the analogy of
faith.

4. Bullinger and Calvin think that although God could have protected his
people by one Angel, yet quo magis testatam faceret curam, etc. alterum
submisit Angelum, the more to testify his care to his Church, he sends an
other Angel to help: But this is more to the comfort of Gods people, when they
understand, that not only the Angels fight for them, but even Michael the
Prince of the Angels, the Son of God himself protecteth them.

5. Wherefore it is the sounder opinion, that this Angel was helped, non
accessione numeri, sed virtutis, not by the increase of the number, but by the
accession of a greater power and strength, Iun. Polan. for it is sufficiently
proved in the former question, that this Michael was Christ.

Quest. 24. How the Angel says he was left with the kings of Persia.
1. The Septuag. whom Theodoret follows, read thus, whom I left with the
kings of Persia, that is, Michael: but the true reading is, I remained, or was
left with the kings of Persia. 2. the ordinar. gloss. which Hugo Cardinal.
follows, by the king of Persia understands Michael: but the construction of
the text will not bear it: for Michael helped him against the Prince or king
of Persia. 3. Oecolampad. refers it unto Christ, who is said to remain in
Persia in his members, that were captives there, as Paul is said to have
persecuted Christ in his members: But the text shows, that this is given as a
reason, why the Angel came no sooner to Daniel, because he remained all that
while, and was stayed in Persia by occasion of the business, which there fell
out: the Angel speaks then of a personal remaining or staying, which could
in no wise agree unto Christ, who was not yet incarnate, and as he is God he is
in every place at once. 4. the most, by the kings of Persia, do understand
the Angels which were presidents of Persia, against whom this Angel striued for
the people of God: But Rupertus reasons against this: because Angels are not
called kings of countries: and beside he would have said, be remained against,
rather then with those Angels which did contradict him. 5. Therefore Rupertus,
though by the Prince of Persia before he understood the evil Angel of Persia,
yet here resolves that by the kings of Persia, must be understood Darius or
Cyrus, with whom the Angel furthered the business, for the return of the
people: and afterward in the reign of Assuerus, he prevented the mischievous
counsel of Haman against the Jews, and turned it upon his own head. And this
indeed is the right meaning of these words: saving that the Angel speaks
only of his remaining at this time with the kings of Persia, Cambyses and his
nobles, or Cyrus and Cambyses rather: not of his remaining there still, as
though the charge of that Province were committed still unto this Angel; for no
such thing can be gathered out of the Scripture, that the nations and kingdoms
of the earth are assigned to particular Angels as their presidents.

Quest. 25. Who it is, whom Daniel calls Lord, v. 17.
1. Lyranus understands it of the Angel Gabriel, that spoke unto Daniel
before: and some think, that Daniel modestiae causa, for modesty sake does so
call the Angel Lord, whereas indeed the Angels count the Prophets their fellow
servants, Apocal. 22. 8. Vatab. Pintus. so also Calvin, honorifice cum Angelo
locutus est, he gives honorable terms unto the Angel: so also Iunius
reads thus, how can this the servant of my Lord talk with that my Lord, that
is, I so weak a man talk with an Angel so glorious, Osiander. But it is
evident, that he to whom Daniel, spoke was an other beside him that stood by
the river, described v. 4. for this that he here speaks to, stood before him,
v. 16. but the other clothed in linen, stood by the river, c. 12. 6. Neither
is it like that the Angel would have received this submission of so great a
Prophet, seeing he refused it at John's hand, Revel. 22. 8. and take him as his
servant, whose fellow servant he was, as the Angel says to John in that place:
He calls the Angel afterward Lord, which was an honorable salvation used
among men, but servant he was only to Jesus Christ.

2. Oecolampadius takes this to be Christ, whose servant Daniel here
professes himself to be: and he notes therein the distinction of persons, in
that Daniel speaks to one present of an other absent, the servant of that my
Lord. But he thinks all this to be uttered also by Christ, and not by the
Angel: whereas it is evident, that many things here spoken in this conference
with Daniel, cannot be understood of Christ: as that he was sent, that he
speaks of Michael, which was Christ, as an other person beside himself, in
that he says, he was helped, and remained in Persia: these things cannot agree
unto Christ.

3. Wherefore I think rather with Polanus, that Daniel turning himself to the
Angel Gabriel, which was before him, speaks of Christ, that glorious person
which appeared, v. 4. as may be gathered by the demonstratiue which he uses:
how can the servant of that my Lord, talk with that my Lord, that is, seeing I
am so afraid talking with thee, how should I be able to endure to talk with
yonder my Lord: So it is evident that there is an interchange of persons in
this chapter, as shall further appear now in the next question.

Quest. 26. Who it was that had this communication with Daniel in this vision.
1. Some think, that the Angel which appeared at the first in that glorious
manner, v. 4. has this conference with Daniel: so Hierome, in hominis figura
videtur Angelus, etc. the Angel is seen in an humane shape, and stretches
forth a man's hand unto Daniel, that he should not be afraid: So also Hugo
Cardin. Perer. Pintus, Pappus, Bullinger, Calvin, with others. But it is showed
before, quest. 12. that it was Christ, not a created Angel, which so appeared,
v. 4.

2. Some think, that as Christ appeared there, so it was he that had all this
conference with Daniel, and thrice touched him with his hand, so Oecolamp. but
it is showed before, quest. 25. 2. that many things are uttered by the Angel,
which can no way agree unto Christ.

3. Some will have that to be an Angel, which was seen of Daniel, v. 4. but he
that stretched forth his hand they think to be the son of God, whose office
it is to comfort and strengthen, Osiand. But if that glorious vision should be
of an Angel, and the appearance of a man's hand signified Christ, the minister
should have appeared more gloriously then the Lord.

4. Some think that these things were done interchangeably, that some things
were done by the Angel, some by Christ: the touching of him with an hand was
Christ's action: but when mention is made of Michael, the angel speaks: of
this opinion seems Iunius to be in his commentary upon these words, one like
the similitude of the son of man, touched my lips, personam agentem
Christum designari minime dubium est, qui singularia and praecipua opera sibi
in hoc reuelationum genere reseruavit, it is not to be doubted, but that Christ
is signified to be the person agent here, who in such kind of revelations
reserueth the most singular and special works to himself, etc. But it was
the same person which touched Daniel, and strengthened him, and after spoke
unto him, as is evident, v. 11. and 19. let my Lord speak, for thou have
strengthened me. Now it is the Angel that spoke to Daniel, for he speaks of
Michael, whom Iunius well understands here to be Christ, as of an other
person beside himself: therefore it was he also, that touched him.

5. Wherefore it being confessed and granted, that it was Christ, which
appeared, v. 4. yet the rest is done by an angel, who as Polanus well says,
tanquam Dei administer, as Gods minister, on this behalf does minister
strength unto Daniel: and this may be made plain by these two reasons. 1.
because the same person strengthens Daniel, and speaks unto him being
strengthened: as is evident, v. 11. and 19. 2. and the like was done by the
Angel Gabriel before, c. 8. 18. who touched Daniel, and set him up in his
place: And so Iunius in his annotations, thinks that this was the angel
Gabriel that touched Daniel in the similitude of a man, in v. 16.

Quest. 27. Who is meant by the Prince of Grecia.
1. Some do here understand by the Prince of Persia, and Grecia, the evil
angels which bare sway in those kingdoms: and 1. some think that those evil
angels did oppose themselves one against another, as Hierome says, that the
Prince of the Grecians came into Gods presence, vt accusaret Persarum
principem, to accuse the Prince of the Persians, that the kingdom of the
Macedonians might succeed in place of theirs. 2. others think, that ^his evil
angel of Grecia did not so much set himself against the angel of Persia, as
against the people of God, seeking to hold them under in captivity also under
the Grecians, Osiand. 3. Rupertus likewise understands this place of the
evil angels, but thus applies it, that they set the Persians and Grecians
together by the ears: for about the same time Darius the 3. king of Persia was
overcome of the Grecians, and his son Xerxes after him coming against the
Grecians with an huge army, was constrained to flee away with shame. 4.
Melancthon says that the good angels did fight against the evil angels of
Grecia, which stirred up the people of Ionia, to rebel in Cyrus time, who were
suppressed by Harpagus. But all these are wide: for 1. the evil spirits are
not said to be Princes of countries. 2. neither are those subtle spirits at
variance among themselves. 3. and here the Prince of Grecia is brought in as
assisting the angel against the Prince of Persia: but the evil angels do not
join with the good.

2. Some take these Princes to be good angels: and these also are of diverse
opinions. 1. Some think that the prince of Grecia did fight, that is, the good
Angel also of Grecia did reason the case with Gabriel, that the Hebrews should
not yet be delivered, and that the Grecians were more to be respected then
they. Theodoret. 2. Gregory gives an other reason: because Iudaei aliquid in
Graecos commiserant, the Jews had committed somewhat against the Grecians,
which was objected by the angel president of Grecia, why they should not be
delivered, so Gregor. lib. 17. moral. c. 8. But the Jews are not found to have
had any dealing at all with the Grecians, until Alexanders time: and the Jews
were delivered out of captivity already, therefore that could not now be
hindered. 3. Some think that the angel of Grecia expostulated for the wrongs
which the Persians had done unto the Grecians, Oecolamp. 4. Some think, that
this angel after he had finished his battle with the Prince of Persia, he was
afterward to go against the Prince of Grecia, Sa. But how can it be imagined,
that there should be such expostulating and parts taking among the angels? for
wars and strife do arise of natural desires, as S. James says, 4. 1. From
whence are wars and contentions among you? are they not hence, even of your
lusts, that fight in your members?

3. Bullinger thinks that by the Prince of Grecia may be understood, some man
of Grecia, that appeared in vision, as approaching unto God, as by way of
advise or consultation: But an angel reports this, who have not visions
showed them as men.

4. The best sense then is this, that by the Princes of Persia and Grecia, are
understood the kings of the Persians and Grecians, with the one, the Angel
himself will encounter now, and the other, namely the Prince of Grecia, in time
to come should be raised up against him also. So two things are here declared
by the Angel: first that he will go forth and fight against the Prince of
Persia: for both Cyrus, after the edict for the reedifying of the Temple was
reuersed, prospered not, but was slain in the Scythian wars: and Cambyses
likewise fell into great enormities: first he caused his own brother
Tanaoxares to be killed, being falsely accused by Sphendadates the Magician,
of some practicing against Cambyses: he made his mother drink poison, and so
die, he killed his own sister being his wife, and great with child, his wife
Roxane brought forth a child without an head, which the wisemen interpreted,
that he should have no heir to succeed him in the kingdom: At the last he was
wounded with his own sword falling out of his sheath, and so died. Secondly,
the Prince of Grecia is armed against the Persians: for beside, that many
valiant captains of the Grecians were raised up, as Leonides, Miltiades,
Themistocles, which put the Persians to the soil, in Darius Hystaspis, and
Xerxes reign; at the length Alexander captain of the Grecians, was stirred
up, who ouerthrewe the Persian Monarchy.

Quest. 28. Of the original of the Grecians here called Iavan, v. 20.
1. Though the Grecians are ignorant of their own original, and beginning,
yet the Scripture shows from whom the nations were propagated, as may appear
by the names, which a long time after they retained, as of Assure came the
Assyrians, of Canaan, the Cananites, and of Elam the Elamites, and of Iavan who
was one of the sons of Iapheth, the Ionians.

2. And that Iavan was father of the Ionians and Grecians, it may thus
evidently appear: 1. because there was a remainder a long time of the names of
Iapetus and Ion among the Grecians: Euripides makes Ion one of the nephews
and grandchildren of Deucalion: but he was long before Deucalions time,
Melancthon. 2. Joel. 3. 11. where in the original is read Ievanim, the plural
number of Iavan, the Septuagint there translate (...), the Grecians: so
likewise, Dan. 8. 21. and in this place c. 10. 20. 3. This is further evident
by the places and countries, which the children of Iavan inhabited: as Elisha,
who was the founder of the Aeolians, and Kittim, who are taken for the
Macedonians. 1. Macch. 1. 1. Alexander is said to go forth of the land of
Kittim, and of the word kittim, is derived by all likelihood, the name (...),
which signifies a Macedonian, Melancthon. Alexander the king of Macedonia, is
called the Prince of Grecia, because both the Macedonians and Grecians had one
and the same original founder Iavan: and beside he was aided and assisted in
his wars by the Grecians.

Quest. 29. In what sense the Angel says, that none held with him, but Michael
their Prince.
1. They which think that this Michael was an Arkangel, do give this reason
hereof, why Michael only joined with this Angel, because he had the chief
charge of the people and Church of God, under Christ, Genevens. and to the same
purpose, Lyran. quia princeps erat totius synagogae generaliter, because
Michael was the general Prince of the whole synagogue and Church of the Jews.

2. Vatablus understands, in his pugnis, in these battles against the king of
Persia, there is none that helps me but Michael. But neither can it be showed
that one Angel only has the protection of the Church, seeing two armies of
Angels attended upon Iakob, Genesis 32. 1. and when Elisha prayed that the eyes of
the young man might be opened, all the mountains seemed full of fiery horse
and chariots: neither is it like, that the Angels would withdraw their helping
hand one from another.

3. The gloss. gives this reason, that none helped him in presenting their
prayers unto God, but Michael this Arkangel: But by this reason Christ the
Mediator should be excluded from mediating for them: neither can it be showed
out of Scripture, that the Angels have any such office to offer up men's prayers.

4. Theodoret says, that all the heavenly spirits were in deed against the
deliverance of the people, propter multa eorum scelera, because of their many
sins: But it is not like this people being so dear unto God, that the holy
Angels would so set against them.

5. Albertus thinks that by Michael is not understood only the person of the
Arkangel, but likewise all the company of the angels which were under him, as
Revel. 12. mention is made of Michael, and his angels, which fought with the
dragon, ex Perer. But it is evident, that the Angel speaks only of this
Michaels person, because it is added your prince* now Michael only, and not
the rest of Angels, was their Prince.

6. Some show this reason, why Michael only helped the Angel, because he
helped Michael, c. 11. 1. Oecolamp. But that place is not understood of helping
of Michael, but rather of protecting the kingdom and Monarchy of Persia.

7. Calvin thus resolves, why only one other angel helped him, and not many:
because God is not to be tied to any certain means, to use always many
Angels, vt eodem modo semper nobis succurat, that he should succor us always
after one manner: But this satisfies not, for the Lord might have helped only
with one Angel, and without any at all, if it had pleased him: therefore yet
the reason appears not, why this Michael is singled out to help him.

8. Dyonisius further says, lib. de coelest. hierarch. c. 4. that no Angels
do undertake any ministry or service, nisi sibi a Deo iniunctum, unless it
be enjoined them of God: and therefore these two angels join together, because
unto them only was committed this business of seeing the people delivered: to
the same purpose also, Osiander. This is true, but yet it is not apparent, why
this business should be committed to Michael, more then to an other.

9. But this being granted; that this Michael is Christ the son of God, as
is proved before, quest. 22. who is indeed the Prince of the people of God,
the reason is evident, why Michael only assisteth this angel, because when all
other terrene powers do fail, he takes upon him the defense and protection
of his Church, Iun. Polan. H. Br.

4. Places of doctrine.
1. Doct. Of the difference of true and false Prophets.
v. 1. A thing was revealed to Daniel: To the end that this might appear to
be a true vision, Daniel is named, both by his original name, and that which
was given him in Chaldea, namely Belteshazzar, to whom the Lord had showed many
visions before: So then before we receive any prophecy, we must acknowledge
them to be Prophets, which are the ministers thereof, such as the Lord uses to
reveal himself unto: Therefore Hananiah, who prophesied that the Lord would
break the yoke of king of Babel, Ierem. 28. was not to be heard, because the
Lord used not to speak by him. Such were the revelations, which in time past,
Montanus and Priscilla pretended, and the Enthusiasts, and Anabaptists in
these days: which are no to be credited, because they are known not to be
Prophets.

2. Doct. That idolatrous and heathenish names must be shunned.
v. 1. Daniel whose name was called Belteshazzar: Daniel could not help it
that he was named by Bell the idol of the Chaldeans, yet he does avoid it as
much as he can, retaining in his prophecies and visions the name of Daniel
still, as 7. 1. 8. 1. 9. 2. whereby we learn how circumspect we ought to be,
not to impose any names upon men, which have any show of heathenish idolatry:
much less should we call God, by the names of the Gentiles gods, as of
Jupiter, Apollo, Juno, Pallas: as some Christians think such names to be a
grace unto their poetry: for if Christians may name God under such names, why
might not the Jews as well have worshipped God under the names of Baal, or
Belus, which words signify Lord: and beside, while the name and memory is
retained of their goddesses, the divine nature is dishonored with distinction
of sexes: we must therefore say with the Prophet David, I will not make mention
of their names within my lips, Psalm. 16. 4.

3. Doct. God only can foretell things to come.
v. 1. The time appointed was long: Hereby the God of Daniel shows himself
to be the true God, because he could foreshewe things, that should come to
pass long after: Things at hand, which already are begun in their causes,
the subtle spirits can give notice of: nay we see that diverse creatures by
their natural sense, can prognosticate of the change of weather which is
instant: But things a far off and to come, none but God can foretell, as he
says by his Prophet Isay, 44. 7. what is at hand, and what things are to come,
let them show unto them: The Lord by this argument shows himself only to
be God, and all the idols of the heathen, to be but vain, because they can
declare no such things aforehand.

4. Doctr. Of the diverse kinds of fear.
v. 7. A great fear fell upon them, so that they fled away, etc. Here is
great difference between the fear of Daniel and his companions: they were so
frighted, that they ran away and hid themselves, and so were deprived of this
goodly vision: but Daniel, though much amazed, yet staieth by it, and to him is
this vision revealed: So there are some, which through their infirmity and
weakness do quite fall away: others though they have their imperfections,
yet do recover themselves, and return again, Iun. of this sort was Peter, of
the other Judas: and to this purpose says the Apostle, Heb. 12. 13. make
straight steps unto your feet, least that which is halting be turned out of
the way, but let it rather be healed.

5. Doct. Of the office of Angels.
v. 14. Now I am come to show thee, etc. Here are three special things
expressed wherein the Lord uses the ministry of Angels to the comfort of his
children. 1. They are sent of God upon their prayers to comfort them, as God
sent his Angel to Peter being in prison, Act. 12. 2. their office is to
protect and defend the children of God: as here the Angel fights against the
Prince of Persia in defense of the Jews: so was the Angel sent to stop the
lions mouths against Daniel. 3. they are employed to instruct men, and give
them knowledge of such things as concern them: as here the Angel reuealeth
diverse things to Daniel, that afterward should come to pass: so the Angel
appeared to Cornelius, aduising him what course to take for his further
instruction.

6. Doct. Of the power of Angels.
These Angels are spirits of great power, to whom all earthly Potentates must
give place, there is no creature that can withstand them, being armed with
power from God: therefore they are called principalities, Romans 8. 38.
Principalities and powers in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1. 21. One Angel in David's
time destroyed 70. thousand, when David had numbered the people, 2. Sam. 24. 15.
One Angel slew in Senacheribs host in one night, an 185. thousand, 2. king. 19.
And here one Angel encountreth with the whole power of the king of Persia: yet
the Angels power is limited: they can go no further, then they are authorized
of God.

7. Doct. Of the presence of Angels.
The Angels, though they are of great agilitie, and can speedily pass from
place to place, yet are they not every where, nor in many places at once: this
Angel while he was stayed about these affairs in Persia, could not be present
with Daniel, and while he was communing with Daniel, he was absent from Persia:
as he says, v. 20. know thou not wherefore I am come unto thee? but now
will I return to fight with the king of Persia: Only it is peculiar unto God
to fill heaven and earth with his presence, and to be every where in the same
instant, as he says by the Prophet, Heaven is my seat, earth is my
footstool, Isay. 66. 1.

8. Doctr. The cause of the ruin of kingdoms.
The efficient cause is the Angel the minister of Gods wrath and vengeance, as
here the Angel sighteth against the kings of Persia, until by little and
little, their kingdom was taken away from them by the Prince of Grecia. The
occasion of the fall of kingdoms is the afflicting and oppressing of the
Church of God: as the Babylonians for holding the people of God in captivity
were surprised by the Persians: and they likewise for hindering the work of
Gods house, and suffering the people of God to be molested, were subdued by the
Grecians: and these also, especially the Seleucians for tyranizing over the
people of God, were rooted out by the Romans.

9. Doctr. Of the certainty of Gods decrees.
v. 21. I will show thee what is decreed in the Scripture of truth: that is,
in the prescience of God: who needs not any books to put him in mind, but
this is taken from the use of Princes and Judges which have their Registers and
Records wherein their decrees and ordinances are set down: This Scripture of
truth is nothing else but Gods infallible and unchangeable decree, which cannot
alter: But as the Lord has decreed, so certainly shall every thing be
fulfilled, Isay. 14. 24. The Lord of hosts has sworn, saying, Surely like as
I have purposed, so shall it come to pass, and as I have consulted, it shall
stand.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. Against superstitious fasting.
v. 3. I ate no pleasant bread, etc. Daniel being purposed to humble himself
by fasting, did not only abstain from flesh, but from wine also, yea from
fine bread, and from other delicates, as in anointing himself with oil:
whereby their nice superstition, or superstitious nicen^sse is reproved, who
though they forbear the eating of flesh in their fastings, yet will fill their
bellies with other delicate meats, with dainty fish, and curious confections:
But here Daniel contenteth himself with course bread and water, Calvin.
Neither did he thus fast, as thereby thinking to merit any thing at Gods hand,
but only that he might be the more humbled thereby, and to make his prayers
more fervent and effectual, Osiand. See more of the abuse of fasting
elsewhere. Synops. pap. Centur. 4. cr. 96. 97.


2. Controv. That Paradise was a terrestrial place.
v. 4. I was by the side of the great river Hiddekel. Whereas some were of
opinion, that the history of Paradise, with the trees and rivers, is
spiritually to be understood, and in an allegory, as Plilo lib. 1. allegor,
Valentinus apud Ireneum lib. 1. aduers. hares. c. 1. Origin mentar. in Genes.
and of late days Franciscus Georgius tom. 1. problemat, S. Hierome out of this
place confuteth them, where mention is made of one of the rivers which flowed
out of Paradise, namely Hiddekel, or Tigris. Hieromes words are these, Vnde
eorum deliramenta conticescant, qui vmbras and imagines in veritate quaerentes,
ipsam conantur evertere veritatatem, etc. whence their mad conceits are put
to silence, who seeking shadows and shows in the truth, go about to
overthrow the truth, in making an allegory of Paradise, of the trees, and
rivers thereof.

3. Controv. Against the curious distinction of the orders of Angels.
The Romanists following counterfeit Dyonisius in his book of the celestial
Hierarchy, do make nine orders of Angels, which they distinguish into three
ranks: in the first are Seraphims, Cherubims, Thrones; in the second
Dominions, Principalities, Powers; in the third Virtues, Archangels, Angels.
True it is, that Angels are called by these names in Scriptures, but whether
there be so many orders of them, as names, and how they are distinguished, is a
thing too curious for any to define, the Scripture being silent therein. But
this text overthrows the former distribution and disposing of them: for here
Michael, whom they hold to be an Arkangel, is one of the first of the chief
Princes: how then do they make him the second of the last rank, seeing he is
said to be one of the chief Princes.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. That the school of Christ is the school of patience.
v. 1. But the time appointed was long. The servants then of Christ have need
of patience to wait the appointed time, seeing it is long unto it: so S. James
says, c. 1. 4. Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing: he then that has patience, wants nothing, though he
want all things beside. Likewise our blessed Savior says, Luke 21. 19. By
your patience possess your souls: he that has patience, has a good
possession: he that wants it, is not owner or possessour of his own soul,
but vexes and disquieteth it.

2. Observe. Of the sympathy and fellow-feeling of the members of Christ.
v. 2. I was in heaviness. Daniel mourned not for himself, but for his people,
that being returned, were hindered in the work of Gods house: by whose example
we learn, that we should be touched with a feeling of the miseries of others:
as the Apostle says, Romans 12. 15. Rejoice with them that rejoice, weep with
those that we^pe: be like minded one toward an other. So did Nehemiah, who
being himself in prosperous state, attending upon the kings cup; yet his
countenance was sad, because his city lay wast, Nehem. 2. 3.

3. Observe. Of the interchangeable course of things.
In that the building of the Temple was now hindered in the 3. of Cyrus, whereas
in his first he gave license for the people to return, and to build the city
and Temple; we see the inconstancy of Princes favors, and the changeable
seasons of the Church: which sometime prospers and goes forward, and again
is often hindered and pulled back, Bulling. therefore is the Church compared to
the Moon, which sometime is at the full, and sometime in the wane, Canticl. 6.
4. at times increasing, and decreasing again.

4. Observe. God prepares his servants by fear.
v. 8. There remained no strength in me. Thus God uses to humble his children
before he reveal himself unto them: so Ezekiel fell upon his face, c. 1. 29.
and Saul when he was converted, Act. 9. 3. 4. S. John likewise, when Christ
appeared unto him, Rev. 1. 17. Thus men must be humbled by seeing and
acknowledging their own weakness, before they receive spiritual strength: and
the preaching of the law goes before the glad tidings of the Gospel.

5. Observe. The prayers of the faithful are heard at the first, though they
presently see it not.
v. 12. As Daniels prayer was heard at the first, yet the Angel came not till
21. days after, yet in the mean time he was effecting that which Daniel
desired, namely, to fight against the enemies of the Church: so this is the
case of all the faithful servants of God, that God hears their prayers, and
secretly works for them, though at the first they see it not: as while Paul
prayed for further strength, the Lord spoke unto Ananias to go unto him for
behold he prays, Act. 9. 11. even while Paul prayed, the Lord wrought for
him, to effect his desire, though at that instant Paul perceived it not.

6. Observe. God does by degrees, not all at once minister comfort to his
children.
v. 10. He set me up upon my knees, and upon the palms of my hands. Daniel is
not raised up all at once, but by certain degrees: first, he lying flat, is
raised by ones hand upon the palms of his hands and knees, but yet he
continued trembling, v. 11. then he is animated and emboldened by the Angels
words, v. 12. and so his trembling is somewhat stayed, but yet he durst not
look up, but set his face toward the ground, and held his peace, v. 15.
thirdly, one touches his lips, and he begins to speak, but yet in great
fear and perplexity, v. 16, 17. lastly, an hand touches him the third time,
and so he receives strength, v. 18, 19. This was not done, as though the Angel
by Gods power could not at once have strengthened Daniel, but to this end,
that Daniel might acknowledge his own infirmity, and be the better prepared
to attend unto that, which should be delivered: Even like as Christ dealt with
the blind man, Mark. 8. 24, 25. at the first putting on of his hands, he saw
men walk as trees, but when Christ had put on his hands the second time, he
saw perfectly: So then the children of God are hereby taught patience, that
though they recover not at once the full measure of spiritual strength and
sight, yet they should wait upon God patiently till it shall please him to
confirm his work in them.

CHAP. XI.
1. The Argument and Method.
IN this chapter are described, what things should happen under three
Monarchies, 1. of the Persians. 2. of the Grecians united, v. 4. 3. of the
kingdom of the Grecians divided, v. 5. unto the end.

1. For the Persian Monarchy, 1. the rising of it is described under Darius by
the help of the Angel, v. 1. 2. the flourishing estate thereof, v. 2. 3. the
fall, v. 3.

2. In the second Monarchy, 1. the rising thereof is showed. 2. the decaying.
3. the event afterward, how it should be dispersed to the four winds.

3. In the third Monarchy of the Grecians: the acts and exploits of two kings
are foreshewed, the kings of the North, and the South with their successors:
but chiefly of the kings of the North.

This Prophetical narration is brief and compendious to v. 10. then more
large to the end of the chapter.

In the compendious narration, 1. the power of the two first kings, of
Ptolomeus Lagi of the South, and of Seleucus Nicanor of the North is set forth,
but the one is mightier then the other, v. 5.

2. The combination by marriage between Ptolome Philadelphus, and Antiochus
Theos, with the evil success thereof is foreshewed, v. 6.

3. Then Ptolome Euergetes victory against Callinicus is declared to v. 10.
see the several parts, qu. 23.

In the larger description, the exploits of two kings of the North are
rehearsed, of Antiochus Megas to v. 20. then of his two sons, Seleucus
Philopator, and Antiochus Epiphanes.

The exploits of Antiochus the great are either against the king of the South,
to v. 18. or against other nations, v. 18.

The kings of the South, against whom Antiochus deals with his brother
Ceraunus, was first Ptolome Philopator, who overcomes Antiochus Megas, v. 10.
11. 12. see quest. 24. Then Ptolome Epiphanes against whom Antiochus makes
three several expeditions: the first, v. 13. 14. see quest. 25. the second, v.
15. see quest. 26. the third, v. 16. 17. which ends with an intendement of
marriage, but with evil success.

Then Antiochus goes against other foreign nations, but is discomfited by the
Romans, returns with shame, and dies, v. 18. 19. see quest. 28. 29.

The rest of the chapter is spent in set^ing forth the exploits of Antiochus
Megas his sons: first of Seleucus Philopator, v. 20. see qu. 30. then of
Antiochus Epiphanes, whose history is set forth at large.

In Antiochus Epiphanes history, 1. his manner of entering into the kingdom is
described: see the particulars qu. 32. 2. his exploits to v. 44. 3. his end, v.
44, 45.

His acts and exploits are, 1. against Egypt: where three expeditions and
voyages of his are set forth. The first, v. 22, 23, 24. see qu. 33. the second,
v. 25. to v. 28. see qu. 34. the third with his repulse, v. 30. qu. 35.

2. Against the people of God: where it is showed, 1. what means he shall use
against them, v. 32, 33. see qu. 40. 2. what they shall suffer, v. 33. and how
they shall be comforted, v. 34, 35. see qu. 41, 42.

3. What Antiochus himself shall do: where, 1. his acts concerning religion
are described, in abrogating of all religion both true, v. 34. and false, v.
37. qu. 43, 44. and bringing in a new god, v. 38. qu. 46. 2. his civil and
politic acts, v. 39. qu. 47.

3. His exploits are against Egypt, Judea, and other countries, v. 40 to 44.
see the particulars, qu. 48.

Lastly, the death and destruction of Antiochus is set forth, with the signs
precedent, and manner thereof: see qu. 50.

2. The text with the diverse readings.
v. 1 And I in the first year ( from the first year. V.) of Darius the Mede,
even I stood ( stand. V.) to encourage and strengthen him.

2 And now I will show thee the truth: there shall stand up yet three Kings in
Persia, and the fourth shall be far richer ( enriched with riches. H.) then
they all: and when he is grown mighty in wealth ( has strengthened him in
his riches. H.) he shall stir up all against the kingdom of Grecia. ( Iavan.
H.)

3 But a mighty king shall stand up, and shall rule with great dominion, and
do according to his pleasure.

4 And when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken, and shall be
divided toward the four winds of heaven: and not to his posterity, nor
according to his dominion, which he ruled: for his kingdom shall be plucked
up, and be for other beside those.

5 And the king of the South shall be mighty, and one of his Princes, and
shall prevail against him, and bear rule: his dominion shall be a great
dominion.

6. And in the end of the years they shall be joined together: for the kings
daughter of the South shall come unto the king of the North, to make an
indifferent peace, ( to make an agreement. B. C. friendship. L. league. S. to
make equity. H. that is, peace with equal conditions) but she (not he. B.)
shall not retain the power of the arm: ( shall effect nothing. V.) neither
shall be continue, nor his arm: (not his seed. L. S. zeroagh signifies an
arm) but she shall be delivered up, and they that brought her, and he that is
borne of her ( her young man. L. S. not he that begat her. V.B.G. for this
agrees not with the story, see qu. 21. following: the word ioledah signifies
a birth or generation.)

7 But out of a sprigge ( budde. G.B. of her roots shall one stand in his
stead ( shall succeed in the kingdom. V. the sense, not the words* his plant*
L. his base. A. or foot. Polan, rather in his stead. B.G.I.) which shall come
with an army ( to the army. A.) and shall enter into the fottresse (province.
L.) of the king of the North, and shall do with them as he list, (B.G. do so
that. I. abuse them. L. do great matters. V.) and shall prevail:

8 And he shall also carry into captivity ( captives. L.B.G.) into Egypt
their gods with their Princes ( A.V.I. not, with their molten images. L.B.G.S.
the word is nasich with iod, a Prince, but nesech, is a molten image) and with
their precious vessels of silver and of gold: and he shall continue more years
then the king of the North. ( shall prevail against. L. but here the word
(shanim) years, is not translated.)

9 So the king of the South shall come into his kingdom, (not into the
kingdom of the king of the South V. S.) and shall return into his own land.

10 Then shall his sons be stirred up, ( move battle. I. Br. Pol. but then
an other word is joined with garah, as lamilcamah, to battle, v. 25.) and
shall assemble a mighty great army, ( a company of many armies. H.) and one
shall come and ouerflow, and pass through: then shall he return, and move
battle ( be stirred. L.V.) even unto the fortres, ( at the fortres. B.G.)

11 Then the king of the South shall be angry, and shall come forth and fight
with ( against. L. I. but (ghim) signifies more properly, with) him, even with
the king of the North: for he shall set forth ( cause to stand up. H.) a great
multitude, and the multitude shall be given into his hand.

12 Then the multitude shall be lifted up (not he shall take the multitude. L.
or the multitude shall be taken away. I. the word (nissa) may be either in
niphal, or piel, and so may be translated actiuely or passiuely, but the first
rather, because it follows) and he shall lift up his heart: for he shall cast
down thousands: but he shall not still prevail.

13 For the king of the North shall return, and shall set forth a greater
multitude then the former, and shall come forth after certain years ( in the
end of the time of those years. H.) with a mighty army, and much riches.

14 And at the same time shall many stand up against the king of the South, and
the seditious children ( the violent. V. pestilent. S. offenders. L.
rebellious. G. the word is pharatze, breakers, violaters, that is of the peace,
such as the factious and seditious are) shall exalt themselves ( be lifted up.
H. better then be taken away. I. Pol. as before v. 12.) to establish the
vision, but they shall fall.

15 So the king of the North shall come, and cast up a mount ( cast forth with
slings, Pol. the first rather, for the word shaphach, to pour out, or s^ed
forth, is more fi^ly used of the casting up of earth, then of casting out of a
sling: and the other word sallelah, is taken for a mount, rather then a sling,
as Iunius there reads, 2. king. 19. 32.) and take the strong city: and the
arms of the South shall not resist, ( stand. H.) nor his chosen people, (
people of his chosen. H.) neither shall there be any strength to withstand.

16 And in coming against him ( unto him. H.) he shall do as he list, (
according to his will. H.) and none shall stand against him: and he shall stand
in the pleasant (or excellent. V. famous. L. sebi. S. but it is no proper name)
land, and his hand shall finish ( consummation in his hand. H. Pol. better
then, he shall consume it with his hand. L.S.I.B.G. see qu. 26. in the end.)

17 Again he shall set his face to enter with the power of the whole kingdom,
and he shall make equal peace with him ( L. V. and equity he shall do with
him. H. better then his confederates with him. B.G. or he shall pretend right.
I. the same phrase signifies before v. 6. to make peace) and he shall give him
the daughter of women ( a virgin. Fr. I. see qu. 27.) to corrupt her ( I.S.
that is, craftily to use her against her husband: not to destroy her. G.B.V. or
it, for the pronoune affix is of the feminine gender) but she shall not stand
on his side, nor be for him.

18 After, he shall turn his face unto the Isles, and shall take many: but a
Prince shall cause his reproach to cease to him (that is, shall make him leave
his reproaching: not he shall cause to cease the Prince of his reproach. L.S.
for Prince, is put in the accusative, which should be in the nominative) beside
that he shall cause his own shame to return upon himself: (he shall both
cause him to leave his reproachful words and deeds, and return them on
himself. Some do read thus, he shall cause his shame to light upon him,
beside that he shall cause his own shame to turn upon himself. B.G. but here
the same thing should be expressed twice.)

19 So he shall turn his face toward the forts of his own land, but he shall
be overthrown ( or stumble. V.L.I.) and fall, and be no more found.

20 Then shall stand up in his place, a raiser of taxes (a sender forth of
exacters. H. that is, to gather tribute, not a vile person. L.) in the glory
of the kingdom (not the glory of the kingdom, that is tribute. V. the
preposition in is better supplied. G.B.I. nor, unworthy the glory of the
kingdom. L. ad) but after a few days he shall be destroyed, neither in wrath,
not in battle.

21 And in his place shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall not give
the honor of the kingdom: but he shall come in peaceably, (not secretly. L.
or with riches, V. or abundance. S. shalvah signifies peace) and obtain the
kingdom by flatteries.

22 And the ouerflowing arms (arms of the ouerflowing. H.) shall be
overflowed before him: (the arms shall be overflowed with a flood, or
inundation. A.B.G. but (inundation) is better referred to the former word,
arms: they shall be overflowed by ouerflowing arms. I. but, arms, is better
put in the nominative, see qu. 33.) and shall be broken: and also the Prince of
the covenant.

23 And after the league made ( consecration. H.) with him, he shall work
deceitfully: for he shall come up, and strengthen himself ( overcome, B.G.
prevail. V.) with a small people.

24 He shall enter into the quiet and plentiful Province, and he shall do that
which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers fathers: and he shall divide
among them the pray and the spoil, and the substance, yea and against the
strong holds he shall forecast his devises ( devise his devises. H.) even for a
time.

25 Also he shall stir up his power and his courage ( heart. H.) against the
king of the South with a great army, and the king of the South shall stir
himself to battle with a great and mighty army: but he shall not stand, for
they shall forecast devises against him.

26 Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat ( they that eat bread
with him. L. his domesticals. V.) shall destroy him: and his army shall
ouerflow, and many shall fall and be slain.

27 And both these kings hearts shall be to do mischief: they shall talk of
deceit ( a lie. II.) at one table: but it shall not prosper: for yet the end
shall be at the time appointed. ( the end shall be put off to an other time.
L.)

28 Then shall he return into his land with great substance: for his heart
shall be against the holy covenant: so shall he do, and return to his own
land.

29 At the time appointed he shall return, and come toward the South: but it
shall not be, as at the first, and at the last (not the last shall not be as
the first. L.V.B.G. for he made more then two expeditions against Egypt, see
qu. 35. following.)

30 For the ships of Chittim (the ships of the Romans. L. the Citians. S.
ships of Cyprus. V. see qu. 36.) shall come (they shall come in ships of
Chittim. Pol.) against him: therefore he shall be sorry (or grieved) and
return, and fret against the holy covenant, and practice: (and do H.) for he
shall return (having finished his business he shall return. V. so shall he
do, even he shall return. B.G. but the distinction (athnah) at (ghasah, do)
does sever it from the clause following) and have intelligence with (B.G. or
set his mind toward. I. understand toward. H. not against. L. shall
understand those, etc. S. but here the preposition ghal, is not translated)
them, that break the holy covenant.

31 And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the Sanctuary,
and strong hold ( I.V. better then the Sanctuary of strength. caeter. see qu.
39. 2.) and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and shall set up the
abomination ( detestation. I. Pol.) bringing desolation ( making desolate. H.
the abominable desolation. G.B. or abomination for desolation. L. but the word
is a participle, and signifies desolating, or making desolate.)

32 And such as wickedly break the covenant, shall he cause to dissemble (V.
Pol. better then shall dissemble, for the word is in hiphil, which signifies
to cause to dissemble: shall cause to sin. B.G. chanaph signifies to
dissemble, to play the hypocrite) by flattery: but the people, that know their
God, shall prevail and prosper. B.G. shall lay hold and prosper. H. A. shall
do courageously. V. Br. not they shall apprehend the people of God and
prosper. I. Pol. see qu. 40.)

33 And they which understand among the people, shall instruct many: yet they
shall fall by the sword, by fire, ( by the flame. H.) by captivity, and by
spoil many days.

34 Now when they shall fall, they shall be helped with a little help: but
many shall cleave unto them fainedly.

35 And some of them of understanding shall fall to try them, and to purge,
and to make white, till the time determined: (time of the end. H. til the time
be out. G.B.) for it is yet for an appointed time, (A. P. Pol. better then, yet
a term remains to the appointed time. I. ad. or there is an other time
limited. L. V. other is not in the original: for there is a time appointed.
B.G. but here the preposition is omitted.)

36 And this king (I. the king. caeter. but the article set before notes some
special king) shall do what he list: (according to his will. H.) he shall
exalt himself, and magnify himself above (against L.B.G.) all that is God,
yea above the God of gods: he shall speak marvelous things, (he shall speak
marvelous things against the God of gods. B.G.L.V. but the distinction rebia
coming between, does distinguish the sentences) and shall prosper, till the
wrath be accomplished: for the determination is made. (in the decree of God.
B.G.A. the determination shall be effected. I. but the verb is in the
pretreperfect tence: the definition is perpetrated, that is, effected. L. but
the thing decreed and defined was not yet come to pass: when impiety is come
to the extremity. V. but, impiety, is not in the text.

37 He shall not have any mind ( understand. H.) unto the gods ( not god. L.
the word ^lohee, is in the plural) of his fathers, nor to the desires of women:
(not he shall be in the desires of women. L. for the negative lo, must be
supplied) nor to any god shall have any mind: for he shall magnify himself
above all.

38 But in his place ( that is, of the true God) shall he honor the god of
munitions ( that is, whom he set up in his strong holds: the God of strength.
V. to whom he ascribes his power: the god Mauzzim. B. G. L. S. but it is no
proper name, as the next verse shows: as for the God of strength he shall
worship in his place. I. Pol. Br. they understand Mauzzim here to be the true
God, which can not be, see qu. 46. 10.) even the god, whom his fathers knew
not, shall he honor with gold, and with silver, and with precious stones, and
with pleasant things.

39 And he shall make to be for holds ( or places of defense) strong places (or
places of munition. S. he shall make for the munition of the god Mauzzim. V. or
he shall do this to defend Mauzzim. L. or this shall he do in the holds of
Mauzzim. B. G. but, Mauzzim is here no proper name: he shall commit the
munitions of the God of strength to a strange god. I. but Mauzzim here is not
taken for the true God, see qu. 47. 7.) with a strange god: whom he that
acknowledges ( V. ^. better then whom he shall acknowledge. B. G. I. whom he
shall not acknowledge. L. but there is no negative in the original) he shall
increase with glory, and shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide
the land for a price. ( V. for gain. B. G. gifts. S. not freely. L. or in
stead of a price. I. see 47. qu. 7.)

40 And about the time of the end (not, and of time. B. G. S. or appointed
time. L. at the last. V. that is toward the end of his days) shall the king
of the South push at him, and the king of the North shall come against him like
a whirlewind, with charets, and with horsemen, and with many ships, and he
shall enter into the countries, and ouerflow, and pass through.

41 And he shall enter also into the pleasant land (or glorious. L. excellent.
V. beautiful. I. tzebi. H. into the land of Sebain. S. but it is here no
proper name) and many countries shall be overthrown: but these shall escape
out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.

42 He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries ( lands. H.) and
the land of Egypt shall not escape.

43 But he shall have power over the hid treasures of gold, and of silver, and
over all the precious things of Egypt: and the Lybians, and the Ethiopians (
black Mores. G.) shall follow him ( I. at his footesteppes. H. not in their
munitions. S. or the Lybians and Ethiopians shall be in his passage. L.V.G. see
qu. 48. in the end)

44 But the tidings out of the East, and North shall trouble him: therefore he
shall go forth with great wrath (not with a great multitude. L.) to destroy
and slay V. (or bequeath to slaughter. I. root out. G. B.) many.

45 And he shall plant ( pitch. L.) the tabernacles of his palace ( his
tabernacle Apadno. L. or Aphadano. S. see qu. 50.) between the two seas, in
the glorious and holy mountain ( mountain of glory and holiness. H.) yet he
shall come to his end (or when he is come to his end. I. V. and none shall
help him.

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
1. Quest. Whether this vision in the 11. Chap. be diverse from the former
vision in the 10. chapter.
1. Hierome, who takes the first words of v. 1. to be uttered by Daniel, that
he prayed for the prosperity of Darius, thinks that this vision is diverse
from the former, for that happened in the third year of Cyrus, c. 10. 1. this
in the 1. of Darius: and so his opinion is, that at what time Daniel prayed for
Darius in his first year, then these things were revealed unto him by the
Angel: and so there is in the text a sudden change of the person: for in the 2.
v. the Angel speaks, behold, now I will show thee: whereas the former words
were uttered by Daniel. And this he says is not unusual in Scripture, for a
person suddenly to be brought in not mentioned before: as, Psalm. 32. v. 7.
after David had said, thou art my secret place, then v. 8. the Lord is brought
in speaking, I will instruct thee, and teach thee the way that thou shall go,
etc. Of this opinion with Hierome are the author of the scholasticall history,
Albertus, and Carthusian. Hug. Cardin.

2. But the better opinion is, that this vision contained in this chapter, is
continued with the former: which Lyranus proves, because this chapter
begins with the Hebrewe conjunction va^, which shows a coherence with the
former. And it may further be thus confirmed, in the former chapter, v. 14. the
Angel says, I am come to show thee, what shall come to thy people in the
latter days: But these things are not there declared to the Prophet: the
things then which should befall the people of God, which the Angel came to
declare to the people, are those things which are expressed in this chapter.

3. Some do make this verse a part of the former chapter, and will have this
to be the sense, as Michael helped me, so I again helped Michael, Vatab.
Bulling. But it shall appear in the 3. question, that the Angel says not here
that he helped or strengthened Michael, but Darius rather.

Quest. 2. v. 1. Who it was that here says, I stood up, etc.
1. Hierome, whose opinion is in part showed before, thinks that Daniel
speaks these words, that he prayed unto God for Darius, that his kingdom
might be confirmed and established, who had as much as in him lay, delivered
Daniel from his enemies, and sealed the stone upon the mouth of the lions
den, that none of his adversaries should go in to hurt him: But the phrase
shows, I stood up to strengthen him, that this is not understood of prayer or
desire to strengthen him, but of a power whereby he was strengthened.

2. Some think, that these words were uttered by the Lord Jesus Christ, as the
former also in the 10. chapter, Oecolampad. But Christ needed not the
assistance of any Angel, as he says that Michael helped him, v. 13. and
Michael which helped the Angel is rather understood to be Christ, see before,
c. 10. quest. 22.

3. Therefore this was the Angel Gabriel, who spoke before unto Daniel, and
continues his speech still: for whereas he faith, I stood up to strengthen
him, he speaks not this, as though he did it by his own power, but in Dei
persona, in the person of God, Calvin. and officium suum solum commemorat, the
Angel shows only his office and ministry, Polan. he did only strengthen
him, as Gods minister therein.

3. Quest. Who it was whom the Angel stood up to strengthen.
1. Lyranus understands here Daniel, whom the Angel strengthened in offering
up his prayers unto God: that as Daniel prayed for Darius, so the Angel
furthered therein Daniels prayers, quia efficacior est virtus angeli, quam
hominis, because the strength of an Angel is greater then of a man: But beside
that the Scripture does not give any such office unto the Angels, to be the
presenters of our prayers, the Angel speaks to Daniel in the second person,
v. 2. I came to show thee: but this speech is uttered in the third person, I
stood up to strengthen him.

2. Some do take this to be Michael the Arkeangel, whom this angel
strengthens, Oecolamp. Vatab. and some make this the sense, that these two
Angels joined together to suppress Satan, who animated and stirred up the
Persians against the people of God, O^^and. But in the first of Darius, nothing
was attempted against the Lords people: all made for them: for the people then
by the joint edict of Cyrus and Darius, were set free: some expound it thus:
that if these two angels Michael and Gabriel were able to assist Darius to
overcome the mighty Monarchy of Babylon, much more were they able to preserve
the people of God now, Bulling. This sense is much to the purpose, saving that
he understands Michael here to be an Angel, who is before proved to be
Christ himself, c. 10. quest. 22. who could not be helped by a ministering
Angel, being the commander and helper of Angels himself.

3. The meaning then is, that the Angl helped Darius to subdue the Monarchy of
Babylon: and herein is showed the accomplishment of the vision of the hand,
writing the destruction of Balthazar and his kingdom upon the wall, Dan. 5.
which handwriting was made by the Ministry of the Angels, who by Gods
appointment assisted Darius in the subduing of the Babylonian state and
Monarchy: so in effect the Angel thus reasons, that seeing by their
ministry, the Babylonian Monarchy was overthrown, and the Persian state set
up: they are as able to bridle the rage and fury of the Persian kings, as they
were first to set them up, Calvi^* and the Angel here makes mention of Darius,
because he would briefly set forth both the beginning and end of the Persian
Monarchy.

Quest. 4. Why the Persian Monarchy is so briefly touched, and the Grecians
set forth at large.
These reasons may be yielded thereof. 1. because that the Empire of the
Persians, was not so greiuous unto the Jews, neither did they so cruelly
entreat the people of God, as did the Grecians, as the kingdom of the
Seleucians, and P^olomies: therefore the Angel (...) them lightly over. 2. And
an other reason is, seeing the people were to endure much affliction under the
kings of Syria and Egypt, but especially of Syria, it was requisite, that the
people should be comforted against those times: and therefore the Angel at
large declares such things, as should befall the people of God, under those
kings, but chiefly under Antiochus Epiphanes, Iun. commentar.

Quest. 5. That there were more then three kings of Persia, as may be gathered
out of the Scripture.
1. Concerning the just number of the kings, that there were neither three
only, as the Hebrews, nor 5. as Tertullian lib. aduers. Iudaeos, nor 8. only
as Isidor. lib. 5. Etymol. and Ioannes Annius, whom I^annes Driedo, and Ioannes
Lucidus follow, not yet so many, namely 14. as Pererius, and the most do
hold, as is showed before quest. 37. upon the 9. Chapter.

2. But the opinion of the Hebrews, who most of them hold that there were but
3. kings of Persia, Cyrus, Assuerus the husband of Esther, and Darius whom
Alexander overcame: and some of them name a fourth beside, Cambyses between
Cyrus and Assuerus: This opinion may evidently be refelled by Scripture: which
makes mention at the least of 5. kings of Persia: Pererius thinks that six
are named in Scripture: 1. Cyrus. 2. then Assuerus, called also Artaxerxes,
which was Cambyses, who hindered the building of the Temple, Ezra. 4. 3. then
Darius the son of Hystaspis, under whom the Temple was reedified, Ezra. 5.
under whom the Prophets Haggie and Zachary prophesied. 4. Artaxerxes
Longimanus by whom Ezra and Nehemiah were sent, Ezra. 7. Nehem. 2. 5. the fifth
was Assuerus the husband of Esther, which is thought to be Artaxerxes Mnemon.
6. and the sixth was Darius whom Alexander overcame, in whose time Iaddua was
high Priest, Nehem. 12. 22.

But in this collection Pererius diuersely fails. 1. in that he makes
Assuerus and Artashasht mentioned Ezra. 4. to be all one, whereas the last
named was Cambyses, the other Darius Hystaspis, as is showed before quest. 58.
c. 9. 2. he thinks the Temple began to be reedified under Darius Hystaspis,
which was Darius Longimanus, as is showed before likewise, quest. 45. c. 9. 3.
he takes Assuerus, Esthers husband to be Artaxerxes Mnemon, which was rather
Darius Hystaspis, for Mordecai his age, who was one of the captivity of
Iechonia, will not suffer the story to be deferred so long: see before c. 9.
quest. 44.

3. This then may be affirmed, that at the least five several kings of Persia,
are named in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah: as Cyrus is mentioned, Ezra. 4.
3. then Assuerus, which was Darius Hystaspis, and before him, Artashasht, that
is Cambyses, which first hindered the work of the Temple, Ezra. 4. 6, 7.
afterward Darius, which was Artaxerxes Longimanus, Ezra. 6. 1. called also
Artashasht, v. 24. and Darius the last king, Nehem. 12. 22.

Quest. 6. Who were these four kings of Persia here named.
1. Hierome leaving out Cyrus, because the account begins from him, names
Cambyses, then Smerdes the usurper, after him Darius Hystaspis, and the fourth
Xerxes: so also Hugo Car. and unto this opinion inclines Iunius in his
commentary: and he yields this reason thereof, because Smerdes, though he
were an usurper, yet quietly a while enjoyed the kingdom: But this Smerdes is
not to be counted any of this number, because both he was an usurper: for this
Smerdes, or as Polanus out of Ctesias calls him Sphendadates, was he that
accused Tanyoxares Cambyses brother, whom Cambyses caused to be taken out of
the way by giving him bulls blood to drink, and then this Sphendadates was
taken for Cambyses brother, and Cambyses being dead he usurped the kingdom:
But he being discovered by Tibethes Eunuch unto Amytis, Cambyses mother, the
7. governors of Persia conspired to kill him, and then Darius Hystaspis was
elected king, because he procured by art his horse first to neigh at the rising
of the Sun, (whom the Persians worship as their God) as was agreed between
them before. Beside, as this Sphendadates was an usurper, so he reigned only
7. months, as Herodotus, therefore in both these respects, because he was an
usurper, and held not the kingdom long, he is to be excluded out of the number
of the Persian kings, Bulling.

2. The Hebrews thus count them, Cyrus, Cambyses, Artaxerxes Assuerus, making
Darius the fourth, whom Alexander overcame: But it is proved before quest. 5.
that the Scripture makes mention of more kings of Persia then these: and this
Darius, as Hierome says, was the 14. king from Cyrus: but he was in true
account the tenth at the least.

3. Pintus out of Metashenes thus sets them down, after Cyrus, the first
was Artaxerxes Assuerus, then Darius Longimanus, after him Darius Nothus, and
the fourth was Artaxerxes Mnemon: But here are two famous kings omitted: Cyrus,
who must be numbered for one, because this vision was in the 1. of Darius: from
him Cyrus was the first: and Xerxes, who was indeed that rich king of Persia.

4. Melancthon likewise omitteth Xerxes and names Artaxerxes Longimanus for
the fourth, because he reigned at home while Xerxes made war abroad in
Europe: But this fourth king must be he, that stirred up all against Grecia,
which was Xerxes, and not Artaxerxes his son.

5. Oecolampadius and Pelican, do thus name them. 1. Cyrus. 2. Cambyses. 3.
Smerdes. 4. Darius Hystaspis: But this Darius of purpose invaded not the
Grecians, but set upon Asia minor, and then the Grecians chalenging Ionia to
belong unto them, by that occasion Darius also encountered with the Grecians,
and was overcome by Miltiades at Marathon: But Xerxes continued the war
begun by his father, and did of purpose provoke the Grecians to battle, Iun.
commentar.

6. These then were the three Rings. 1. Cyrus. 2. Cambyses his son. 3. Darius
Hystaspis. 4. and the fourth was Xerxes, who is described by his riches, and
his attempting of war against the Grecians: to the three first kings the
Grecians gave these titles: Cyrus was called, (...), a father, Cambyses, (...),
a Lord over them, and Darius, (...), a merchant: a railer and extorter of
tribute, H. Br. in Daniel. this reckoning follow Calv. Pol. Iun. in his annot.
Osiand. Pappus.

Quest. 7. Of the fourth king of Persia his riches and power.
Two things are here expressed concerning this fourth king, 1. that he should
be richer then they all: for beside the great sums of treasure which Darius
Xerxes father had gathered together, he was 6. years after in making
preparation for the wars of Grecia: and being thus grown to exceeding great
riches, then he began these wars against the Grecians, which though
intermitted a while, yet were not fully ended until the Monarchy of the
Persians was finally overthrown by the power of Grecia under Alexander. 2. it
is said, he should raise all against the realm of Grecia; herein three things
are to be considered: 1. the preparation to this war. 2. the success
thereof. 3. the end of this rich king. First his preparation was wonderful,
Polanus out of Ctesias says his army consisted of 800. thousand men, and a
thousand ships. Calvine reckons 900. thousand: Osiander out of Iostine
counts a 1000. thousand men, and a 1000. thousand ships: but Herodotus
goes yet further, and makes the whole sum 23. hundred thousand. Pererius
exceeds them all, collecting that the whole army, quinquies continebat
decies centena millia, contained 5. times 10. hundred thousand. But this number
seems to be incredible: yet without question he provided an huge army, in so
much that it is said, he drunk up rivers, made bridges over the Sea, cast
down huge mountains, and made them even with the ground. 2. now for his
success, he was overcome in 4. battles, and within the space of two years,
all this huge company was vanquished and destroyed: first, he was foiled at
Thermopilae, where 300. Lacedaemonians discomfited the whole army of the
Persians: then he was overcome by Sea at Artemisium, afterward at Salamine,
where finding the bridge broken down, he was constrained to fly away in a
small boat: lastly Mardonius, by whose counsel he took that war in hand,
was vanquished at Plateae; And such was the success of that war. 3. Now the
end of Xerxes was this, at his return he fell into inordinate lust and
cruelty: he committed incest with his brothers wife, and daughter, and caused
his own brother Masistes to be slain, and he himself was killed by
Artabanus, who a while usurped the kingdom after him: And this was the end of
this rich and mighty king of Persia.

Quest. 8. Why the Angel leaves at the fourth king of Persia, seeing there
were more.
1. Lyranus his opinon here is not sound, that thinks, following the
Hebrews, that none of the Persian kings are here omitted: and takes this
fourth king to be the last Darius, that was overcome by Alexander: but both the
continuance of the Persian Monarchy, and the number of the Persian kings
agreed upon almost by all historians, overthrows this opinion. 2. yet
although there were more kings of Persia then sour, diverse reasons may be
alleged, why the Angel staieth at the fourth and proceeds no further. 1.
the spirit of God intended not to follow the order of the history, sed
praeclara quaeque praestringere, but to touch only the principal and special
things, Hierome, Hugo Card. 2. Theodoret says the reason is, because the Angel
would only set down the most mighty kings of Persia, omitting the rest: and
to the same purpose Bullinger and Polanus, because it is said, there shall
stand up three kings of Persia: the Angel only speaks of the flourishing
state of ^^ at Empire, before it began to decay, as it did presently after
Xerxes time. 3. Some give this reason, that the other kings of Persia are
omitted here, because they are supplied out of other books of the Scripture,
as of Ezra, Nehemiah, and some of the Prophets, Pappus. 4. Iunius adds,
because the history of the Persian kings following concerned not the people of
God: their chief business afterward fell out with the Grecians, in commentar.
5. But the most special reason is, the Angel only names those kings by whom
the Jews were held in captivity: and such as hindered the work of the
Temple; and as Oecolampad. out of Eudoxius, their gouernements are spoken of,
in which there was (...), the hinderance of the work, and staying of the
building of the Temple, which the Prophet took greatest care and thought for:
to the same purpose M. Calvin. by standing, understands those kings, which
stood against the people of God. 6. Add hereunto that the Prophet makes a
cursary mention of them, to insinuate in what short time these four kings
should run out the race of their kingdom; for first Cyrus, in whose third
the Temple was hindered, reigned not long after: some think that Cyrus going
against a people of the Indians called Derbices, which used to devour their
parents when they were old, thinking it a more honorable end for them, then
to be eaten of worms, fell from his horse, and then was wounded in the thigh
by a dart cast at him by an Indian, and so died, Polan, ex Cresia. but the more
received opinion is out of Herodotus, that he was slain of Queen Tomyris, and
his head being cut off was cast into a bowl of blood: yet Xe^ophon writes
that Cyrus being aged died in his bed, giving fatherly and grave exhortations
to his sons. After him Cambyses having reigned not much above 6. years, was
wounded by his own sword, and so died: Darius Hystaspis, being 20. years old
when Cyrus went against Queen Tomyris, and living but 43. years in all,
enjoyed not his kingdom 36. years, as most think, nor yet half so much:
Xerxes time could not be long: H. Br. gives but 31. years to the Persian
Monarchy unto the second of Darius Longimanus, and makes the 49. years, for
the reedifying of the Temple, to coucurre with the 20. of Darius Longimanus,
whom he supposes reigning at home, while his father Xerxes was occupied in the
Greek wars, being but then a young man, to have given liberty in his 2.
year for the reedifying of the Temple: but if 30. years be only allowed for
the reign of Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius, and Xerxes, Darius Longimanus cannot be
thought to be then of years to have sons, as he had, Ezra. 6. 10. But allow
49. years unto the 2. of Darius, as is further proved, c. 9. quest. 58. this
was but a short time for the reign of four such potent kings.

7. This also being joined to the former may make the former reasons more
full, why the Angel ends it at Xerxes, and so passes unto Alexanders time,
because then the quarrel begun between the Persians and the Grecians, which
was never laid down, till the Grecians had overthrown the Persian Monarchy.
And so Alexander in an epistle to Darius Codomannus, as Arrianus writes, lib.
2. pretends this as the cause of his war against the Persians: Maitores
vestri Mecedoniam ingressi, etc. Your Ancestors invaded Macedonia, and all
Grecia beside, and offered them many wrongs, whereas they had received none:
wherefore I being created Emperor of the Grecians, being willing to revenge
their wrongs, am come over into Asia being provoked by you.

Quest. 9. A brief description of the rising and fall of Alexanders kingdom,
v. 3. 4.
The Angel briefly touches both the rising up and the fall of Alexanders
kingdom. 1. the rising of his kingdom is described, by two adjuncts. 1. he
shall be mighty: for with 30. thousand footmen, and 5. thousand horsemen, he
took upon him to conquer the whole world. 2. and it is said he shall stand up:
whereby is noted the suddenness of his rising, and the singular dexterity
that was in him to atchieue that which he intended and purposed: the effects
are likewise two, 1. he shall rule with great dominion: his Empire was large,
for beside other countries, which he subdued, he possessed all the great
Monarchy of Persia. 2. he shall doc according to his pleasure, he shall be
prosperous in all his enterprises, and prevail in his wars, according to his
own desires.

2. The fall and ruin of his kingdom is likewise described, first in
general, then in particular. 1. In general both by the circumstance of time,
when he shall stand up, that is, after he has stood a short time: for not
above seven years had Alexander reigned, when his kingdom, together with his
life was dissolved, Iun. commentar. and even when his kingdom was come to the
height, and he expected ambassadors at Babylon from all the world, he died at
Babylon: As also the manner is showed, by a Metaphor, it shall be broken, like
as when a brittle thing is broken into many pieces and shiuers.

2. In particular two things are expressed, the subject of this kingdom, and
the quality and condition of it. 1. the subject is declared affirmatively, it
shall be divided into the 4. winds, that is to four kings and chief
governors, negatiuely, not to any of his posterity, which is amplified by a
Metaphorical speech, it shall be pulled up, as a thing by the roots, in
respect of his own succession: and others shall be planted in their stead, in
the place of his successors: for so is the meaning of those words, to others
beside those, that is, it shall be given unto those four successor, of
Alexander, beside his own heirs.

2. For the quality of these kingdoms, they shall not be like in power unto
Alexanders. as it is said, not according to his dominion.

Quest. 10. Of Alexanders birth, and education, acts and life, end and death
abriged.
1. For the first, Philip king of Macedonia, was father to Alexander, and his
mothers name was Olympias: he was borne about the 2. year of the 106.
Olympiad: the same day, wherein he was borne, the great Temple of Diana at
Ephesus was set on fire, which the Magicians interpreted to signify, that one
was then borne, who should set all Asia on fire: at 15. years of age he was
committed to Aristotle to be instructed, and in his youth was of such
magnanimity, that when his father had conquered any city he would say, that
his father would leave nothing for him to win.

2. At 20. years of age he sit upon the conquest of all the world: in his acts
and life three things are memorable, his virtues, his monuments and exploits,
his notable vices. 1. his virtues may be thus divided, into his moral, and
military virtues: As his moral were these, his continency, before he tasted
of the pleasures of Asia: he preserved the chastity of Darius beautiful wife
and daughters, and would not so much as see them: his clemency and humanity
was great even towad his enemies: but his liberality exceeded all the rest: he
gave 23. thousand talents among his soldiers: see more of his virtues, c. 2.
quest. 48.

His military virtues were excellent. 1. his courage, that with 30. thousand
footmen, and 5. thousand horsemen durst adventure to bid battle to the whole
world. 2. his patient labor in enduring hunger and thirst, frost and cold. 3.
his dexterity and celeritie in omitting no opportunity. 4. and hereunto may
be added his singular success, he never besieged any city but he took it.

2. His exploits were singular. 1. he enlarged the Empire of the Grecians, and
made them Lords of the whole world. 2. he built many cities 70. in number as
Plutarch writes, whereof Alexandria in Egypt was one. 3. he reduced many
barbarous nations from their savage and brui^ish manners to civility, as is
further showed, c. 2. quest. 48.

3. And his vices which he fell into after he had glutted himself with the
pleasures of Asia, were not inferior to his virtues: four notable vices among
the rest reigned in him. 1. drunkenness, he would drink so excessiuely, that
he would lie 2. or 3. days till he had s^^pt out his drink. 2. in his drink
he was cruel and outrageous: in his rage he killed his dear friend Clitus,
much lamenting his death afterward. 3. he was given to the wantonness and
pleasure of the flesh. 4. And at length he grew so intolerable proud, that he
made himself Jupiters son, for which cause he commanded Calisthenes to be
killed, because he refused to worship him: see before, c. 8. quest. 16.

3. Then Alexanders end was this, in the 32. year of his age he died at
Babylon. some think of poison: but he died rather of surfeiting and
drunkenness, continuing quaffing so long, at a Physicians house a Thessalian,
that he fell into a burning fever, at such time, as he expected ambassadors
from the remote countries of the world, out of Africa, Europa, as out of
Spain, and Italy, and so in few days after he sickened, he died, having no
time to return into his own co^ntrey, nor space to appoint his successor: see
more c. 8. quest. 16.

Quest. 11. Of the four successors of Alexander.
Concerning three of Alexanders successors there is no question: Ptolomeus the
son of Lagus possessed Egypt the kingdom of the South: Seleucus reigned in
Syria and Babylon, in the East, which in respect of Judea was counted the
North: and Antigonus held Asia minor in respect of Egypt on the North: but
there is some question, who was Alexanders successor in the kingdom of
Macedonia in the West.

1. The received opinion is, that Arideus called Philippus the brother of
Alexander succeeded in the Macedonian kingdom, as Hierome, Lyranus, Hugo Card.
Pintus, Bullinger. But Arideus cannot properly be counted Alexanders successor,
because he was but chosen king for a time until Alexanders sons came to age:
and he had but the name of a king: Perdiccas was chosen Tutor and protector of
the Empire, and Seleucus master of the horse, which was the second place in
dignity: Craterus Treasurer, Antipater governor of Macedonia and Grecia: and
beside the text says, that the kingdom should not be left to any of
Alexanders posterity, that is, heirs or kindred: But his brother was one of
his posterity and kindred.

2. An other opinion is, that Antipater one of Alexanders chief captains
succeeded in Macedonia, Osiand. but this can not be neither: for though
Antipater were set over Macedonia, as other of Alexanders captains were
appointed their several regiments, before the kingdom was shared and divided
into four parts; yet because Aridaeus was then living, to whom by general
consent of the captains, the name and title of the king was yielded, during
the nonage of Alexanders children, Antipater could not be said to succeed in
that kingdom.

3. Wherefore Cassander rather the son of Antipater, who usurped the kingdom
of Macedonia, as soon as Aridaeus was dead, is rather held to be one of the
four successors in the kingdom, Iun. Polan. Calv. Pap. Calvin thinks that
Cassander was Antipaters father: true it is that he had two sons, Antipater
and Alexander; but they by mutual parricide made an end one of an other, and
held not the kingdom long after their father: But Cassander which reigned 18.
or 19. years over Macedonia, was the son also of Antipater.

Quest. 12. How all Alexanders posterity was rooted out, that none of them
succeeded in the kingdom.
1. Hierome thus expounds these words, not to his posterity, quia Alexander
liberos non habuit, because Alexander had no children, which Pintus thus with
favor interprets, that he had no son, which succeeded him: but if Hieromes
words be well marked, he gives this as a reason, why the kingdom was devolued
to strangers, because Alexander had no children: whereas he had two sons,
Alexander by Roxane, and Hercules of Barsines, as Trogus and Justinius testify.

2. Some writers think, that Alexander had a son called Alexander by
Thalestra, Queen of the Amazons, as Q. Curtius, Clitarchus, Polycritus,
Onexicritus affirm: but that is by other historians held to be but a fable: as
Hecataeus, Philippus Chalcidicus, Duris Samius, Plutarchus Cheronens. Philo
Thebanus, with others, ex Pinto. for this Alexander was Alexanders son by his
wife Roxane.

3. This then was Alexanders posterity and kindred which he left behind him:
his mother Olympias, and Pyrrhus his uncle king of Epirus, his brother Aridens,
and his sister Cleopatra, his two wives with their two sons, Roxane with
Alexander, and Barsines with Hercules, they were eight in all: Olympias causes
Arideus to be killed: Cassander thereupon takes occasion to put Olympias to
death being almost 80. year old, and poisoneth both Alexanders sons,
Alexander and Hercules, with Roxane Alexanders wife: Cleopatra Alexanders
sister, the governor of the Sardians, who was base brother to Philip
Alexanders father, procured to be killed, therein thinking to gratify
Antigonus: last of all Pyrrhus was vanquished by Antigonus Demettius son, and
his head cut off. And thus in few years all Alexanders posterity was cut off,
that none lived to succeed him.

13. Quest. Of the meaning of these words, v. 4. It shall be for others beside
those.
1. Whereas it is said in the text in the end of the fourth verse, it shall be
given to others beside, Hierome reads strangers for others: the word acharim,
signifies both strangers and others: by strangers Hierome understands other
captains, beside these four, as Perdiccas, Crateron, Lysimachus, which had
some part of Alexanders dominions. Theodoret interprets it of other strangers
of foreign nations: as in the reign of some of the posterity of the first
successors of Alexander, the Parthians fell away from the kingdom of Syria
and Babylon, by the instigations of Arsaces a Persian, of whom the kings of
Persia a long time after were called Arsacidae. But neither of these
expositions can stand here: not the first, because before in this verse,
mention is made only of the division of the kingdom into the four winds: so
that we are referred only to that famous division of the kindome into four
parts, and to none other: not the latter, because that falling away of the
Parthians was well nie an 100. years after Alexanders death, in the time of
Seleucus grandchild to Antiochus the son of Seleucus Nicanor, as Iustine
writes, lib. 41. By others then, here are meant none else, but those four
general captains, who divided Alexanders kingdom among them: yet it shall
not be amiss here somewhat to touch the petie divisions of the kingdom,
before it grew into four parts, and of Alexanders several captains, with
their ends.

14. Quest. Of the petie divisions of Alexanders kingdom among his several
captains, before it grew into four, and of their mutual dissension.
Three things here shall be briefly touched concerning Alexanders captains, 1.
of their feuerall divisions. 2. of their civil wars, which they made one
with an other. 3. of their bloody ends.

1. After that Alexanders captains had by a general consent chosen officers
for the whole kingdom, Arideus was appointed Viceroy during the nonage of
Alexanders children: Perdiccas, protector, whom Antipater afterward succeeded
in that place: Seleucus general for the army: Craterus Treasurer: then they
sorted the several Provinces among them: Ptolomeus had Egypt, Laomedon Syria,
Philotas Cilicia, Antigonus Lycia, Pamphylia, and Prygia the greater, Cassander
Caria, Menander Lydia, Leonatus Phrygia the less: Eumenes Cappadoeia and
Paphlagonia, Phiton Media. ex Curtio. Lysimachus Thracia, Antipater Ma^edonia.
H. Br. And Justinius makes mention beside of others: to Nicanor called
Seleucus, were committed the Parthians, to Amyntas the Bactrians, to
Neoptolemus the Persians, to Peucestes the Babylonians, to Philippus the
Hircanians. And the other Provinces remained under their government, which held
them Alexander yet living. Thus Alexanders Empire being distributed among so
many petie gouerners, 15. or 16. in all, could not long so continue under so
many masters, but they presently fell at variance among themselves. And in this
respect Demades wittily compared Alexanders army when he was dead, to Cyclops
the huge giant when he had lost his eye: for as that huge body wanting light
to direct it, hit here and there, and could not guide it self: so this unruly
company wanting a guide, dashed one upon an other, as a ship without a
pilote runs upon the rocks and sands.

2. We are in the next place then briefly to see the civil dissension and
wars which were moved among these captains.

1. The first war was begun thorough the ambition of Perdiccas, who being
in greater authority then the rest, intended to marry Cleopatra Alexanders
sister, and so to take upon him the government: which his purpose that he
might the better atchieue, he first enterpriseth to remove the lettes and
impediments: and sends Eumenes against Antipater, and Antigonus, and he
himself goes against Ptolome into Egypt: but he was slain of his own
soldiers: and not long after Alcetas his brother, and his sister were slain
also: and this was his end, who was the first beginner of sedition.

2. After this a second stir began between Eumenes, and Antigonus: in
which battle Neoptolemus and Craterus were slain, and Eumenes was betrayed by
his soldiers unto Antigonus, whom he killed.

3. Then Cassander after he had most treacherously extinguished Alexanders
family, quarrelleth with Antigonus, from whom he would have taken certain
cities in Asia, and joins with Ptolome, and Seleucus, who feared Antigonus
greatness: but Antigonus vanquisheth Cassander, and makes him to restore the
cities in Asia.

4. After this Antigonus sets upon Seleucus, and Ptolome: but first he was
overcome by Ptolome at Tyrus, who took Demetrius Antigonus sons pauilion,
with all the princely furniture, but restored it again: afterward Demetrius
surprised Cilles one of Ptolomes captains, and 8000. men, but returned them
safe to Ptolome, to requite his former humanity and kindness.

5. Then followed a soar battle between all of the chief captains
remaining, not far from Ephesus: on the one side were Seleucus and his son
Antiochus, Lysimachus, and Ptolomes forces: on the other Antigonus: the night
before the battle, Antigonus had a vision, wherein Alexander appeared, saying
unto him, that now he would go unto his enemies: whereby Antigonus understood,
that having been hitherto victorious, he should be overcome now: And so it
fell out, for as he pursued Antiochus in battle, he was slain by Seleucus
horsemen, being almost 80. year old: his son fled to Athens, and renewed
the war, but he was taken by Seleucus, and long suruiued not his father: then
the rest divided the kingdom of Antigonus among them.

6. The last battle between Alexanders captains, was between Lysimachus and
Seleucus. This Lysimachus was a man of valor: for being familiar with
Callisthenes, whom Alexander killed, he was commanded to be cast unto the
lions: but he killed the lion, and so escaped: for which his valor he was
afterward much made of by Alexander. But this Lysimachus among his virtues, had
enormous vices: he married two sisters, and had children by them both, but the
one killed the others child: the mother for succor fled unto the other kings
allied unto her: hereupon began the quarrel between Lysimachus and
Seleucus: but Lysimachus being overcome, was slain. Melancth. ex Pausan.

3. In the last place let us take a view of their bloody ends. Perdiccas
first killed Meleager: Ptolome kills Cleomenes Perdiccas friend: and
Perdiccas himself is slain of his own soldiers, going against Ptolome.
Craterus and Neoptolemus are slain in battle: Philotas kills Phiton: and he
with Eumenes are slain by Antigonus: Antigonus fighting against Seleucus is
killed: Lysimachus by Seleucus, Seleucus is slain by Ptolome Ceraunus brother
to Ptolome Philadelphus then reigning in Egypt: and the same Ceraunus not long
after was slain by Brennus: Demetrius Antigonus son rooteth out the house of
Cassander: and so he and his posterity held the kingdom of Macedonia, until
the Romans possessed it. And this was the end of Alexanders captains.

15. Quest. Why the Angel prosequuteth the story only of the king of the
South, and of the North, omitting the the rest.
Two reasons may be yielded hereof. 1. The other kingdoms, the one of Asia the
less in the North to Egypt, which fell unto Antigonus, after he was slain and
vanquished by Seleucus, was divided among the other captains, and so it was
extinguished: and the other kingdom of Macedonia in the West, was translated
from Cassander and his posterity, unto Demetrius the son of Antigonus:
neither was it in power answerable unto the other two kingdoms, of Syria, and
Egypt: and therefore these only are mentioned: for verse. 5. the Angel speaks
only of two mighty kingdoms, which should prevail above the rest.

2. An other reason is, Judea stood in the mids between these two kingdoms
of Syria and Egypt, by which occasion, these kings waging battle one against
an other, Judea being in the mids, went to wrack between them: Melancthon.
And sometime the Jews favored one, and sometime an other, and then the
adversary part still afflicted them: and thus between these two kings were
the Jews molested the space of three hundred years. Lyranus. And a third
cause there was of trouble unto the Jews: sometime the Ptolomies of Egypt
challenged the government and sovereignty of Judea, sometime the kings of
Syria: but in the last sociall war against Antigonus it was agreed, that the
most part of Judea should belong unto the Seleucians, as Antiochus the great
alleges in an embassage sent unto Ptolome Philopator king of Egypt: Polyb.
lib. 5. Therefore mention is made only of these two kings, because they only
had to do with the people of God: and as Hierome says, scripturae propositum
est, non externam absque Iudais historiam texere, it is the intent and purpose
of the Scripture, not to follow a foreign history without respect unto the
Jews. And Josephus hereof thus writes, Antiocho magno in Asia regnante, etc.
While Antiochus the great reigned in Asia, Judea was continually troubled and
Coelesyria: for while he had war with Ptolomeus Philopator, and his son
Epiphanes, whether he did overcome, or were overcome, they went to wrack, even
like unto a ship driven to and fro of the winds: inter prosperam and
adversam Antiochi fortunam iactat a est, Judea was tossed up and down between
the prosperous and adverse fortune of Antiochus. Joseph. lib. 12. antiquit. c.
3.

16. Quest. Of the Kings of Egypt, and Syria, of whom Daniel prophesies in
this Chapter.
The kings of Egypt which succeeded one another after the division of
Alexanders kingdom into four parts, were these:

1. Ptolomeus the son of Lagus, called Ptolomeus Soter, which signifies a
savior; because he rescued diverse kings that fled unto him for succor, as
Seleucus, and Pirrhus king of Epyrus: but he contrary to his name made havoc
of Syria and Judea.

2. Ptolomeus Philadelphus, so called, either because he married his own
sister, or by the contrary, because he killed two of his brothers. Iun. in
commentar.

3. Ptolome Euergetes, a benefactour: he was a great favorer and patron of
learning, as his father was: the Egyptians called him a benefactour, because he
brought home the images from Babylon which Cambyses had carried away.

4. Ptolomeus Philopator, so called by the contrary, for he killed his father,
mother, and brother.

5. Ptolomeus, surnamed Epiphanes, that is, the famous or renowned.

6. Ptolomeus Philometor, which signifies a lover of his mother, or beloved of
his mother, by the contrary, for his mother hated him.

7. Ptolomeus Physcon, so called of his great belly.

8. Ptolome Lathurus, so named because being exiled by his mother, he secretly
practiced to return again.

9. Ptolome Auletes, so surnamed the piper, because he would publicly in his
princely habit contend with fiddlers and pipers, to exceed them in fidling and
piping.

10. He left behind him his son Ptolome Dyonisius, and Cleopatra: this
Dyonisius caused Pompey to be killed, that fled thither for succor, being
overcome of Caesar: who because he afterward practiced against Julius Caesar, was
by him commanded to be slain, and the kingdom was given to Cleopatra his
sister, who afterward married to Antonius. ex Melancth. Bulling. And these were
the Egyptian kings, until the Romans reduced it into a Province after the
death of Antonius and Cleopatra.

These also were the kings of Syria, called the kings of the North.
1. The founder and beginner of this kingdom was Seleucus surnamed Nicanor.

2. Next unto him was Antiochus surnamed Soter, a savior.

3. Then Antiochus called Theos, which signifies God, because he required
divine ho^^^^ to be given unto him, Bulling. or, as Pausanias, he was saluted
by that title of the Mile^ians for expelling their tyrants.

4. Seleucus Callinicus, which signifies an excellent warriet, the son of
Antiochus Theos by Laodice: his brother Antiochus Hierax, so termed for his
rapacitie, reigned together with him in an other part of the kingdom.

5. Seleucus Ceraunus, that is, a flashing or lightning, was the next, but he
reigned not long, therefore by some he is omitted, as Hugo Card. Melancth.

6. Antiochus surnamed Megas, the great, succeeded his brother Ceraunus.

7. Then Seleucus Philopator (so called, because his father loved him) reigned:
but not long.

8. Antiochus Epiphanes, the famous, by the contrary, for he was of a base
nature, and despised, v. 2. or rather as some call him Epimanes, the mad or
furious Antiochus, succeeded Philopator.

Thus far the prophecy of Daniel is extended to the 8. king of Syria, which
was Epiphanes, and to the 6. of Egypt Ptolome Philometor. At these the
prophecy staieth, because the principal intendement of this prophecy is, to
foreshew the troubles, which the people of God should endure under Antiochus
Epiphanes: and this prophecy there ending, signifies that the coming of the
Messiah was not far off: and beside after this time, when such ^auocke was
made of the people of God by Antiochus, the kings of Syria (as a just
recompense for their cruelty against Gods people) did one cut an others
throat, and so the kingdom by civil dissension was rent a sunder, until it
came unto the Romans. These then were the kings that succeeded Epiphanes.

9. Antiochus Eupator Epiphanes son, whom Demetrius his uncles son kills.

10. Demetrius succeeds, whom one Alexander faining to be Epiphanes son,
kills, and usurps the kingdom by Ptolome Philometors means.

11. Demetrius Nicanor son of the other Demetrius, kills Alexander.

12. Antiochus Sedetes expels Demetrius his brother.

13. Tryphon kills Sedetes, and is king.

14. Antiochus the brother of Demetrius called Eusebes for his piety, because
having besieged Jerusalem in the feast of the Tabernacles, for reverence of
their feast he did forbear them, and sent them sacrifices to offer, he kills
Tryphon: and he himself is slain in a bat^ell by Arsaces king of the
Parthians.

15. Demetrius Nicanor is restored again to his kingdom.

16. One Alexander usurps the kingdom, who is overcome by Antiochus Gryphus.

17. Antiochus called Gryphus of his Eagles or hooked nose, was the son of
Demetrius: between him and Antiochus Cyzicenus so named of the place where he
was brought up, the son of Sedetes, was great war.

18. Seleucus the son of Gryphus prosecuteth his fathers quarrel, he kills
Cyzicenus. Thus the family of the Seleucians by mutual discord, was at the
length extinquished, and then Tygranes king of Armenia taking advantage of this
civil dissension, usurped the kingdom, and held it certain years until he
was subdued by Pompey. Melancth. Bulling.

17. Quest. Of the first Ptolome called here the king of the South.
1. This Ptolome was held to be the son of Lagus, but in truth he was the
son of Philippus king of Macedon, who married his mother being great with
child, unto Lagus. 2. Alexander for his singular valor exalted him, Justin.
for when Alexander was in danger at Oxydrace, he only of all his friends
rescued him. 3. He was the chief author of dividing the Empire, and took upon
him the government of Egypt, slaying Cleomenes the governor thereof, and he
overcame Perdiccas, that came against him with an army. 4. After the death of
Perdiccas, he recovered Phoenicia, Syria, and Cyprus to his kingdom, and by
his son Megas obtained Cyrene. Pausan. in Attic. 5. He restored Pirrhus king
of Epyrus to his kingdom, and Seleucus expelled by Antigonus, fleeing unto him
for succor. Hierome. 6. But he was cruel to the Jews, inuading them upon the
Sabbath day, when they suspected nothing, and carried many of them away
captive: but afterward he became more indifferent toward them, giving them the
like privilege in Alexandria, as the Macedonia^s had. Joseph. lib. 12.
antiquit. 7. He reigned well nie forty years after Alexanders death, and
died in the 124. Olympiad, (as Polybius writes) in the same year that
Lysimachus, Seleucus, and Ptolome Ceraunus likewise ended their days. 8. He
left behind him Philadelpus, Ceraunus, and other children beside. Pausan. And
this was the king of the South (that is of Egypt, which was South to Judea,)
which (the text says, v. 5.) shall be mighty.

18. Quest. v. 5. One of his Princes shall prevail, who is meant hereby.
1. Hierome, whom Lyranus, Hugo Card. Pintus follow, understand this to be
Ptolome Philadelphus, who succeeded Ptolome Lagi, and grew to be mightier then
he: he had 200. thousand footmen, and 20. thousand horsemen, 15. hundred
ships of war, and a 1000. ships for burden: so Hierome.

2. Iunius in his commentary, and in his annotations is of the same opinion,
that the pronoune (his) has reference to the king of the South before named:
and by Princes, understands sons: as David's sons are said to be his
chief Princes, 2. Sam. 8. And they are called Princes, rather then sons,
because they were not the legitimate sons of Ptolome. And beside this
philadelphus, after the manner of the Persians, married his own sister
Arsinoe, so that the children which he had by her, were rather called his
Princes, then sons; Iun. in commentar.

But the words of the text following, he shall prevail above him, (or, as some
read) against him, G. B. will not bear this sense: for these words do implie
a contention, which should be the greater: but this was not between the father
and the son: rather Ptolome the father made his son great, being his
younger son he appointed him to be heir of the kingdom, and as Iustine
says, resigned unto him the kingdom being yet alive, thinking it to be a
greater honor to be a kings father, then the king: neither can it be showed,
that this Ptolome more enlarged the kingdom, then his father had done.

3. Therefore, by one of his Princes, is rather to be understood, one of his,
that is, Alexanders Princes, and that was Seleucus Nicanor, who was king of
Babylon and Syria, which was North to Judea: so Melanct. Vatabl. Calvin,
Osiand. Bulling. Genevens. B. Polanus. 1. This Seleucus was of such strength,
that when a wild bull, as Alexander was sacrificing, brake loose, he held him
by the horns alone and stayed him, whereupon he gave the horns in his arms:
which does fitly answer unto the description of the fourth beast with ten
horns, c. 7. 8. which signified the kingdom of the Seleucians, Appian. in
Syriac. it is said, that Seleucus and his posterity had naturally the sign of
an anchor in their thigh, Melanct. 2. This Seleucus overcame Antigonus, though
he were before by him expelled out of Babylon: and he divided his kingdom:
likewise he caused his son Demetrius to yield himself unto him: he also slew
valourous Lysimachus, who in Alexanders time, being cast unto a lion, slew him.
3. He much enlarged his kingdom: he reigned over Babylon, and Media,
Mesopotamia, Armenia, Cappadocia: and over the Persians, Parthians, Arabians,
Bactrians, Hyrcanians: and possessed all from the borders of Phrygia even unto
the river Indus: and passing over that river, he likewise warred with
Sandracotus king of the Indians: never any possessed more countries in Asia
then this Seleucus, only Alexander excepted. Polan. 4. He builded many goodly
cities, sixteen of them he called after his fathers name Antiochia, six by
his mothers name Laodicea, nine after his own name, Seleucia: three by his
wives name Apamea, and one Stratonica by his other wives name: the most famous
of these cities, which afterward continued, were two called by the name
Seleucia, one by the Mediterranean sea, the other by the river Tygris: Laodicea
in Phoenicia, Antiochia under Libanus, and Apamea in Syria. Many other cities
he called by Greek or Macedonian names: as Berrhea, Edessa, Perinthus,
Maronea, Callipolis, Achaia, Pella, Amphipolis, Arethusa, Cholcis, Larissa,
Apollonia: In Parthia Sotera, Calliope, Hecatompolis, Achaia: in India
Alexandropolis: in Scythia Alexandrescota: So that Seleucus dominion was
mightier and larger, then the kings of the South. H. Br. in Daniel. 5. This
Seleucus was somewhat equal and favorable toward the Jews: he did
enfranchise them in all his cities which he builded in Asia and Syria, with the
same privileges which the Macedonians had, Joseph. lib. 12. c. 3. which he did
to make them his friends against Ptolome Soter. 6. But at length he was
circumvented, and slain by Ptolome Ceraunus, brother to Ptolome Philadelphus.
Melancthon.

19. Quest. That this kingdom of the North is the same which Ezekiel calls
Gog and Magog.
That Ezekiel, c. 38. and Daniel here agree in their description of the same
kingdom, may appear by these reasons. 1. because the kingdom of Gog is also
there called the kingdom of the North, Ezekiel. 38. 15. Come from thy place out
of the North parts, thou, and much people with thee: and here also he is called
the king of the North. 2. The nations which do accompany Gog, as Magog,
Meshech, Gomer, Togarmah, Pharas, Put, the ^^ebrews themselves understand to be
the nations inhabiting, Cappadocia, Galatia, Iberia, Armenia: all which were
under the command and obedience of the king of the North. 3. The building of
cities thoroughout those countries, and the calling of them by the names of the
Seleucians, and their kinted, are evident arguments of the foueraigntie which
they had over those nations: so that we need seek no further for that great
Gog, whom Ezekiel speaks of. 4. And further, as Ezekiel prophesies, c. 38.
23. that after the overthrow of Gog, the Lord would be magnified and sanctified
among many nations, which was performed by the coming of the Messiah: so it
came to pass: for not long after the destruction of this kingdom of the North,
and the end of that family of the Seleucians, Christ came into the world. And
this is the common opinion of the Hebrews, as Ab. Ezra, and Kimhi testify,
that after the overthrow of Gog, Messiah should ^aigne. 5. Wherefore seeing
this Prophecy is fulfilled already, they are deceived, which defer the
fulfilling of Ezekiels prophecy until the end of the world, wherein they
give great advantage unto the Jews, who think that their Messiah, when he
comes, shall vanquish the power of Gog and Magog. H. Br. in Daniel.

20. Quest. Of the first variance between the king of the South, and the king
of the North: and of their joining together again.
v. 6. In the end of the years they shall be joined together again. 1. It is
evident then that first the league made between the first kings of the North
and South Ptolome Lagi, and Seleucus, was afterward broken: which was upon this
occasion: Antiochus Soter succeeded Seleucus, and married his fathers wife
Stratonica, by the advice of Erasistratus his Physician, by whom he had issue
Antiochus Theos: Megas the brother of Philadelphus king of Egypt, married a
daughter of this Soter, by which occasion Megas claiming to be king of Cyrene,
which his father made him governor of, was aided by his father in law against
Philadelphus, and so the truce was broken.

2. Then Philadelphus to accord this dissension, gives his daughter Berenice
to wife to Antiochus surnamed Theos, the son of Soter: and Philadelphus
accompanied her unto Pelusium, giving unto her a rich dowry of silver and
gold, whereupon she was called Phernophoras, of her great dowry.

3. But this conjunction did not long hold: for Antiochus Theos had a former
wife Laodice, by whom he had two sons, Seleucus Callinicus, and Antiochus
Hierax: whom he did repudiate, and took Berenice to wife, by whom he had a
son. But not long after Laodice with her sons were received to favor;
which Laodice, suspecting the inconstancy of her husband, poisoned him: and
her son Callinicus took Berenice, and her son, and all her company, and
put them to the sword: whereupon the quarrel was renewed between the kings of
the North and South. Appianus in Syriac. thinks that these were two sisters,
Laodice and Berenice both daughters to Philadelphus: but that is not like,
because the text speaks but of the kings daughter (not daughters) of the
South, that should come to the king of the North.

4. Thus have we the meaning of these words, she shall not retain the power
of the arm: she, namely Berenice, should not long continue in grace and
favor with Antiochus, who was as an arm to embrace the two kings together:
neither should be continue and his arm: some read, and his seed. L. Calvin.
because vau is wanting in the latter word, whereas zeroagh with vau signifies
an arm, which word was used before: but it is an usual thing in the Hebrew
tongue sometime to express, and sometime to suppress that letter: Lyranus
expounds it of Berenice and her seed: but that can not be, for the verb is
put in the masculine: some refer it to Antiochus, that he should not stand
with his arm: he should cast off Berenice, who was suborned as an arm to bind
them together, Iun. but it may better be referred to Philadelphus, that he
should not long continue after, nor this his arm (his daughter) which he used
as a band of peace: but she shall be delivered to death: for Callinicus took
Berenice and all her company, and put them to death, before they could be
rescued: and her son, Iun. Polan. Lat. rather then he which begat her.
Genevens. Vatab. And he which had comforted her, or made her mighty in his
times, that is, Antiochus Theos, who had before advanced her, and cast of
Laodice, should not continue: for his wife poisoned him. Osiand. Polan. some
understand it of those which took her part, Iun. but because it is put in the
singular number, and mention is made before of those which had brought her out
of Egypt, and so attended on (...), the former sense is better.

5. Thus we see fulfilled, that which was revealed long before unto
Nabuchadnezzer, c. 2. 43. that they should mingle themselves with the seed of
men, but they should not join one with an other, as iron cannot be mixed with
clay: this place therefore shows, that that vision of the iron and clay legs
is understood of the two kingdoms of the North and South.

Quest. 21. What king of the South this was whose daughter came to the king of
the North.
1. It is agreed that this was Ptolome Philadelphus, as is before showed, but
some mistake Ptolome Ceraunus for Philadelphus his brother, affirming that this
Philadelphus killed Seleucus, that had slain Lysimachus, that had married his
sister Arsinoe, Oecolamp. whereas it was Ceraunus not Philadelphus that killed
Seleucus.

2. This Philadelphus, was the son of Ptolome Lagi, by his second wife
Berenice: he had other sons by Euridice his first wife the daughter of
Antipater, but he disinherited them, and for love of his wife Berenice he made
Philadelphus his youngest king, as Iustine ^aith, while he lived; but as
Pausanias, it was a little before his death: he killed two of his brothers that
he might be more secure in the kingdom, and therefore was called by the
contrary Philadelphus, a lover of his brethren, Iun.

3. He had an other enormous fault beside, he married his own sister Arsinoe,
who died before she was delivered of child, and afterward had children by an
other Arsinoe daughter of Lysimachus: of the first Arsinoe, was the region
Arsinoitis called, Pausan. in A^tic.

4. This Philadephus was exceeding rich, as is partly touched before: Hierome
here writes, that he had 200. thousand footmen, and 20. thousand horse, 400.
elephants, and 1500. long ships of war, and a 1000. ships of burden: he
received yearly out of Egypt 14. thousand and eight hundred talents of silver,
and 15. thousand measures of wheat, called artaba, which contained 3. bushels
and almost an half: and least this might seem incredible, that Egypt should
affoard yearly so great a tribute, Strabo lib. 17. reports out of Cicero in
one of his orations, that Ptolome Auletes, who was but a remiss and negligent
Prince, received yearly 12. thousand and 500. talents of silver.

5. This king is commended for his singular love of learning, whom Tertullian
affirms in Apologet. to have been most learned himself: he founded a famous
library at Alexandria, whereof Demetrius Phalereus had the oversight: he
caused the Scriptures to be translated into the Greek tongue by the 70.
interpreters, whom Eleazar the high Priest sent unto him: which book was
carefully kept in the kings library, wherein were many thousand books: for
the question being asked by him of Demetrius, how many thousand books he had
gathered together, he answered he had gotten 200. thousand, but shortly he
would make them up 500. thousand, Perer.

6. This Philadelphus was very beneficial to the Jews: he redeemed an 120.
thousand of them, that were slaves in Egypt, and sent them home, and bestowed
many rich gifts upon the Temple at Jerusalem, Joseph. lib. 12. antiquit. c. 2.

Quest. 22. Of the translation of the Septuagint, which was procured by this
Ptolome Philadelphus.
Seeing mention is made of the acts of this Ptolome Philadelphus, among the
which the most famous was the translating of the Hebrewe Scriptures into the
Greek tongue, it shall not be amiss to insert somewhat concerning that
translation.

1. It is evident that the translation which goes under the name of the
Septuagint, in many places is very corrupt, and varieth from the original: as
Pagnin shows, Isagog. c. 9. And as it is evident, Genesis 5. and 11. they fained
a 1350. years more, and Genesis 11. they put in Cainan one more then the
original text has: and they make but 70. persons to descend into Egypt with
Iaakob, to answer unto the 70. languages, which they think to have been
spread over the earth, Genesis 10. Hierome thinks, that the special principles
of our faith, they either omitted in their translation, or interpreted after an
other manner, to the intent to conceal the secrets of their faith.

2. Ireneus, Justinius, Chrysostom, Hilarie, Augustine do ascribe very much
unto this translation, and think that the interpreters were put into so many
several celles, and yet agreed together, except only in some certain places:
But Hierome praefat. in pentate^^. thinks that to be a fable of their 70.
celles at Alexandria.

3. But there is great uncertainty beside. 1. Hierome writes, that it is the
general opinion of the Jews, that the Septuag. only translated the 5. books
of Moses, in 5. cap. Ezech. 2. And there were diverse copies of the Septuagint:
Alexandria and all Egypt followed Hesychius copy: Constantinople and all unto
Antioch, used Lucianus edition: And the middle Provinces between them,
preferred the translation amended by Origin, and set forth by Pamphilus,
Hierome praefat. in Paralip. 4. And beside the translation of the Septuag.
whereof there were so many editions, there were other translations of the
Scriptures into the Greek tongue, as by Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotian:
wherefore in so great variety and uncertainty of translations, the most sure
way is, to have recourse unto the original, as Hierome and Augustine do well
advise, ex Bulling.

Quest. 23. Who was the bud of her roots, v. 7. and of his exploits.
1. Theodoret gives this interpretation here: these wars here prophesied of
he understands of the wars between Ptolomeus Philopator and Antiochus the
great: by one of his captains before spoken of, v. 6. he would have understood
Scopas general of Philopators army, who wunne diverse places out of Antiochus
jurisdiction, and joined them to his kingdom: After this Ptolome gave his
daughter in marriage unto Antiochus: but she was returned home again: yet there
came a bud of her, she had a son that became an enemy unto her father.

Contra. This exposition cannot stand. 1. the wars between Antiochus the
great, and Philopator are afterward spoken of in this chapter. 2. It is unlike
that one of his captains should be said to be greater then the king himself:
seeing all his endeavor was to advance the honor and dominion of the king. 3.
neither did the king of Egypt give his daughter to Antiochus the great: but he
gave his daughter Cleopatra in marriage to Ptolome Epiphanes. 4. beside this bud
here spoken of inuadeth the kingdom of the North, whereas Theodoret
understands this bud to rise up an enemy to the king of the South.

2. This then is the true interpretation. 1. This bud of her, that is,
Berenices roots, was Ptolome surnamed Euergetes, her natural and Germane
brother: who rose up to revenge his sisters death. 2. He came with an army and
invaded Syria, and wunne the strong holds: many cities abhorring the cruel
fact and parricide of Callinicus revolted, and submitted themselves to Ptolome:
who took possession of the country, and caused himself to be crowned king.
3. but hearing of some commotion in Egypt, he returned, and carried away with
him many nobles captives, and a very great spoil beside, 40. thousand talents
of gold, and many precious vessels, and 2500. images of their gods, and among
them those, which Cambyses before had carried out of Egypt, whereupon the
superstitious Egyptians called him Euergetes, benefactor, Hierome.

3. After Ptolome was returned, Seleucus prepared a great navy, which was
overwhelmed in the Sea, and he himself hardly escaped with a few of his
company, having nothing left of all that great preparation: in so much that
his case was pitied of those which before had revolted from him: Then he craved
aid of Antiochus. Hierax his brother, which Ptolome perceiving, made peace with
Seleucus for 10. years, Oecol. Melanct. ex Justin.

4. Hierax seeing this, then turns his force against his brother Seleucus:
which war tended to the ruin and destruction of them both: for Hierax was
slain of certain robbers and thieves, and Seleucus died of a fall from his
horse.

5. All this being thus reported by foreign writers, Justin. lib. 27. Polybius
lib. 5. agrees with this prophecy of Daniel, both of the preparation and
expedition of Ptolome Euergetes against Callinicus, v. 7. his success in
carrying away much spoil and captives, v. 8. and his return into his
country, v. 9.

6. But where it is said, v. 8. he shall continue more years then the king of
the North: some refer it to the time of their reign: Calvin says, whom the
Genevens. follow, that Euergetes reigned 46. years* Oecolamp. 26. whereas
Callinicus reigned but 20. years* but it is better understood, that Euergetes
continued diverse years in this victorious estate, having the chief dominion
in Syria, Iun. Polan. for this best agrees with the former words, wherein his
victory and prosperous success is described: And Polybius writes, that
Euergegetes and Callinicus died much about the same time, lib. 5.

7. I^ his return which is mentioned, v. 9. Josephus writes, that Euergetes
coming to Jerusalem did offer sacrifices unto God, for his great victory, and
bestowed great gifts upon the Temple, lib. post. aduers. Appion. yet afterward
he demanded the ordinary tribute 20. talents of silver, which was detained by
the covetousness of Onias the high Priest: Euergetes sent unto him,
threatening that if the tribute were not paid, he would divide their country
among his soldiers. Then Josephus Onias sisters son went in the name of the
Jews in embassage unto Ptolome, and pacified him, and grew in great favor
with him, Joseph. lib. 12. antiquit. c. 3.

Quest. 24. Of the third battle between the king of the South, and the king
of the North, v. 10. 11. 12.
This battle is described in three parts. 1. the preparation made by the king
of the North, and their diverse attempts, v. 10. 2. the resistance made by the
king of the South, with his good success, v. 11. 3. the events, that followed
upon this victory, v. 12.

1. The attempts made, are either jointly by the two sons of Seleucus
Callinicus, namely Seleucus Ceraunus, and Antiochus surnamed Megas the great:
in these words, his sons shall be stirred up, and shall assemble a mighty
great army; or severally, by Antiochus Megas only in the latter part of the
verse.

First, Ceraunus and Megas joining together, partly to revenge their father
Callinicus, and their grandmother Laodices death, partly in hope to recover
Syria, out of Ptolome Philopators hand, who succeeded Euergetes, whom some
think he killed, and therefore was called Philopator, that is, a lover of his
father, by the contrary: they first set upon Ptolomies captains, which held
Syria for Philopator: But Cerannus passing over the mount Taurus, to go
against Attalus, who possessed the country beyond Taurus, was slain by the
treason of Apaturius and Nicanor, in the 2. or 3. year of his reign: of whom
Acheus that went with Seleucus being his kinsman was presently revenged, and
put them to the sword, Polybius lib. 4. all this agrees well with this
prophecy, saving that Polybius writes that Acheus went in this battle with
Seleucus, and that Antiochus the great lived as yet a private life, not meddling
at all, lib. 5. But it is evident by this prophecy, that both the sons of
Callinicus joined together.

Now then Seleucus being dead, Antiochus Megas takes upon him the kingdom,
being then, as Polybius writes, not above 15. year old: two of his
expeditions are here described: the one in passing thor^gh in recovering Syria,
and other parts of his own country: the other in assaulting Ptolome at home,
even at his own fortress and munition cities in the borders of Egypt.

In the first expedition, Antiochus had two great lettes in his way, which he
overcame, first two brethren Molan and Alexander, contemning Antiochus youth,
would have usurped all the country beyond Taurus: them first he overcame: then
he had to deal with Ptolomes captains, which held Syria for him: but here
Theodotus helped him, who revolted from Philopator, both taking advantage of
his voluptuous and slothful life, and for that he had sustained some disgrace
being called to Alexandria, where he was in danger of his life: This
Theodotus upon these occasions betrayed Syria into Antiochus hands: And upon
this advantage he still proceeded, and recovered many cities and countries, as
Polybius shows at large, lib. 5.

Then sent Ptolome an embassage unto Antiochus, somewhat to stay him, until he
might make himself strong: and Antiochus admitted some parle and treatise of
peace: But there could be no agreement, for Ptolome challenged those countries
as belonging unto him by right of inheritance: Antiochus laid claim unto them
by a former composition, made by Cassander, Seleucus, Ptolome, when they
overcame Antigonus, that Syria and Palestina should belong unto Seleucus: Thus
they breaking off without any conclusion of peace, Antiochus goes forward, and
had diverse conflicts with Nicolaus Philopators captain both by Sea and land,
and still prevailing he comes even unto the munition towns in the borders of
Egypt, and pitcheth at Raphia, which was 4. days journey from Pelusium,
Hierom. Bulling Oecolamp Perer Iun Polan.

2. Now follows the second part of the description, how Philopator being
thus provoked even at his own doors did come against Antiochus with a great
army, and encountered with him at Raphia and prevailed, as is showed here, v.
11. more particularly thus is this story reported by Polybius and Iustine. 1.
Ptolome, while the treatise of peace was in hand, hired soldiers out of
Grecia, and gathered together a great army of 70. thousand footmen, and 5000.
horsemen, and 73. elephants: Antiochus also came against him with an other
great army, of 62. thousand footmen, 6000. horsemen, elephants 102. 2. These
armies meeting at Raphia, after certain days joined battle: the fight was at
the first doubtful: for the right wing of Antiochus had the better, but the
left wing the worse: But at last the victory fell out unto Ptolome, but not
without great slaughter of his mercenary men. 3. In the 3. book of the
Macchabes in the beginning an other circumstance is added, which furthered the
fight on Ptolomes side: how Arsinoe Ptolomes sister, went up and down the
camp as they were in fight, calling upon the soldiers, and encouraging them,
promising to each man two pound of gold, if they got the victory: But whether
this were so or not, Ptolome obtained the victory: and of Antiochus side there
were 10. thousand footmen slain, and 300. horsemen, 4000. taken prisoners,
and 3. elephants were killed in the fight, and two afterward died of the wounds
which they had in the battle: thus according to the text, the multitude was
given into his hands.

3. The events which followed this victory are rehearsed to be three. 1. the
insolenci^ both of Ptolomes army, called here the multitude: for he had as
great an army as Antiochus: and of Ptolome himself: who thinking it
sufficient that he had gotten the victory, was content, giving himself to
case and pleasure, to accept of conditions of peace, which Antiochus entreated
of him: whereas, as Iustine writes, spoliavisset regno Antiochum, si fortunam
virtute iuvisset, he had spoiled Antiochus of his kingdom, if by his own
valor he had helped his good fortunes.

2. An other event was, he shall cast down: housands: which Hierome
understands of his former victory: but it may better be referred to his
cruel outrage practiced upon the Jews: for coming to Jerusalem he pressed to
go into the most holy place, but was gainesayed by the high Priest: yet he
forcing to enter, was stricken of God, and carried away half dead: whereupon he
afterward returning to Alexandria, gave forth very cruel edicts against the
Jews, commanding many to be killed, others to be fettred and imprisoned, and
some to be trampled upon under the camels feet, 3. Macchab. c. 7. Bulling.
Melancth. Polan. And hereof Josephus makes mention, that between Antiochus
Megas and Philopator, Judea was as ship tossed to and fro of the waves, and
went to wrack on both sides, lib. 12. c. 3.

3. The last event is, he shall not prevail, which was diverse ways effected:
1. for he neither prevailed against Antiochus, who escaped his hands, and held
his kingdom still, Hierome, 2. And notwithstanding his rage against the people
of God, the Lord defended them. 3. After this he gave himself to all beastly
pleasure: for he killed his wife and sister Euridice: he kept both a male
concubine Agathocles, and Agathoclea his sister, Justin. lib. 30. 4. And within
few years he himself died, Melancthon.

Quest. 25. Of the first expedition of Antiochus the great against Epiphanes
king of Egypt, v. 13. 14.
Now follow diverse other expeditions and attempts of this Antiochus against
the king of Egypt, unto v. 18. with his end, v. 19.

In this first is set forth his preparation, v. 13. then his success, v. 14.
In his preparation there are three things expressed, the number of his army,
the time, after certain years, and his great riches: for Philopator being
now dead, and Epiphanes his son left but young, whose tuition together with
the government of the kingdom was committed to Agathocles an infamous person,
Philopators minion, by which occasion many fell away from the king of Egypt;
Antiochus took this to be a fit opportunity to recover his former estate, both
in the nonage of the young king, who was but 4. year old when his father died,
and because the Egyptians were at variance among themselves: for they rose up
against Agathocles, and killed him, and the strumpets they hanged up, and then
sent ambassadors to Rome, that they would take upon them the protection of the
young king and his kingdom, to whose trust Philopator dying had commended his
son. The Romans twice sent ambassadors to Antiochus, who had invaded
diverse cities in Syria, belonging to the king of Egypt: but for all this
Antiochus surceased not, Hierome ex Justin. therefore it is said in the text,
veniendo veniet, he shall certainly or speedily come, nothing could let him.

And concerning his rich preparation, this may be an evident proof thereof:
that afterward, when he prepared in like manner to encounter with the Romans,
and at that time, Hannibal being overcome of the Romans was fled unto him,
he showed unto him his chariots and Elephants set forth with ornaments of
silver and gold, and asked him if this were not sufficient for the Romans, who
made this answer, satis esse credo Romany haec omnia, licet sint auarissimi, I
think these things may suffice and content the Romans, though they were most
covetous, etc. Gellius in Noctib. Attic. lib. 5. c. 5. his meaning was, that it
would be a sufficient pray, whereas Antiochus had asked his opinion of the
sufficiency of his preparation.

2. Then in the success described, v. 14. is showed, 1. the help that
Antiochus had. 2. how he prevailed against those factious persons which took
part with the king of Egypt.

1. The text says, that at that time, many shall stand up against the king of
the South: which some understand of the Jews which hitherto had taken part
with the king of Egypt, who should now join with Antiochus, Iun. but it is
better understood, of the league and confederacy which Antiochus made with
Philip king of Macedon, that they should both join together against the king
of Egypt, and part his cities among them, each of them to take the cities next
adjoining, Hierome. which confederacy was the occasion of war between the
Romans and the said Philip: who being overcome by Flaminius the Consul, lost
a great part of his kingdom, even all the cities of Thraci^, only Macedonia
being left him, Melancth. Bulling.

2. Then follows what became of the rebellious sons of the people, that is,
the refractarie Jews, which stood against Antiochus, and were refractarie
against God and his laws. 1. These rebellious and refractarie Jews are well
understood to be those which fled with Onias (being expelled by Jason) unto
the king of Egypt, (which Josephus says was Philometor) but by the words of
the prophecy it is better referred to these times of Ptolome Euergetes, who
gave unto Onias leave to build a Temple in Egypt in the region of Hierapolis,
about 180. furlongs from Memphis, which Onias accordingly did: making it in
some things like, in some things unlike to the Temple of Jerusalem: So herein
they are called refractraie, because against the ordinance of God, that
appointed the place of his public worship only at Jerusalem, where they
should offer all their sacrifices, yet did erect a Temple in an other place.

2. Whereas it is said, to establish the vision: this also agrees very fitly:
some understand it, of the fulfilling this present vision, Iun. annot. Polan.
but that fulfilling was against their will: now here their purpose and
intendment seems to be noted: to establish the vision: and so Onias
pretended, that herein he fulfilled the prophecy of Isay. c. 19. v. 19. that
the altar of the Lord should be in the mids of Egypt, Hierome, Pelican.
Calv. Melancth. whereas that place is understood of the spiritual worship of
God, which should be established in Egypt at the coming of the Messiah, which
evidently appears out of the same place: for there the Prophet speaks of a
general unity and concord, that should be between Assure, Egypt, and Iudaea,
which was not now in the time of this Onias: for the Assyrians now under
Antiochus were enemies to the Egyptians. And beside Eusebius out of this very
place shows, that the sacrifices and ceremonies of Moses law were to cease:
for seeing by Moses law they were not to sacrifice, nor to set up any altar
but at Jerusalem, if that law should not be abolished, the prophecy of Isay of
setting up an altar, that is the true service of God in Egypt, could not have
been fulfilled: to this purpose Eusebius, lib. 1. de domonst. Euangel. c. 4.

3. Then it follows what shall become of those refractarie persons: they
shall fall. 1. Hierome understands it of the destruction of this new Temple,
and the city, which came to pass, 330. year after, as Josephus writes,
under Vespasian the Emperor: who when he had destroyed the Temple at
Jerusalem, sent unto Lupus president of Alexandria, to demolish the other
Temple in Egypt, least it might be an occasion of mutiny and rebellion to the
Jews: But this Lupus only spoiled the Temple of the ornaments thereof:
Paulinus succeeding him utterly abolished the service, which the Jews there
exercised, and shut up the Temple for ever, not suffering the same to be used
at all: and so it came to ruin, Josephus lib. 7. de bello Iudaic. c. 30. But
this ruin and fall here prophesied of seems to have been present, to show
how Antiochus prevailed against them. Some understand it of the Jews in
Palestina, which rebelled against Antiochus, Polan. Iun. in his last edition:
But in his first annotations he seems to refer it to the Jews, whom
Antiochus destroyed at his coming into Egypt.

Quest. 26. Of the second expedition of Antiochus the great against Ptolomeus
Epiphanes.
v. 15. The king of the North shall come, and cast up a mount, etc. In this
expedition, first is described his preparation, then his success.

In the preparation it is expressed, how he should cast up a mount: Iunius and
Polanus expound the word otherwise, taking it for a sling and other engines,
which were used in the besieging of cities: the meaning is, that Antiochus
should besiege the strong cities of Egypt: and it has special reference
beside unto the besieging of Scopas, Ptolomes captain, whom the king of Egypt
had sent against him: who encountering with Antiochus at Pan^as was put to the
worse, and fled unto Sidon, where Antiochus besieged him with ten thousand
men: then Ptolome sent three captains, Eropus, Menocleas, and Damaxenus to
rescue him: but they could not raise the siege, till Scopas forced by famine
yielded himself. Antiochus also laid siege to the fortified place or tower in
Jerusalem, which he took by help of the Jews, Hierome ex Joseph. lib. 12.
antiquit. c. 13. And many other strong cities did Antiochus take at this time
in Syria, which did hold with Ptolome before.

2. The success was this. 1. concerning Egypt: the armies of Egypt were not
able to resist, nor his chosen people; that is, the armies and strength of the
king of Egypt, and his valiant captains had no power to resist Antiochus, but
he should do what he would. 2. Then it is said, he shall stand in the pleasant,
beautiful, or excellent land, that is Judea, so called, not for any terrene
excellency in it, but it was excellent because of the worship of the true God:
This land he should also possess, not so much by conquest, but the Jews
willingly submitted themselves unto him: they received him into Samaria with
his army, and provided prouender for his elephants: of the which their
kindness he wrote letters to his friends purposing to requi^e the same,
Josephus. lib. 12. c. 3. the words then following, which some read, he shall
consume it with his hand, Hierome, Iun. Calv. Genevens. (understanding it of
the miseries and afflictions which he brought upon the Jews) cannot have that
sense; because at this time he received kindness at their hands, and intended
to recompense them with the like again, as Josephus says. Some give this
sense, deficiet in manu eius, it shall fail or faint under his hand, Bulling.
that is, shall yield themselves unto him, Vatab. not resist him, but bear the
tribute which was imposed upon them, Melancth. rather this is the meaning,
consummatio in manu eius, consummation shall be in his hand; his hand shall
consummate and perfect his desire, in obtaining the land of Judea, which
willingly yielded it self, Polan.

Quest. 27. Of the third expedition of Antiochus Megas against Epiphanes, v. 17.
Here two things are declared in this third exploit: first the attempt of
Antiochus, then the event.

His attempt was partly by force, but seeing he could not prevail that way, he
seeks to compass his desire by subtlety and craft, (affecting the
government and kingdom of Egypt) in giving his daughter Cleopatra to
Epiphanes: wherein three things are expressed: 1. his subtle intent, he
pretended peace and amity, offered equal conditions of peace, vt recta faciat,
to do rights, as the Latin interpreter: some read, his confederates with him,
B. G. but the other sense is better, Iun. Polan. for, as Appian writes,
Antiochus feared the Roman power, and when they sent unto him ambassadors to
restore the cities which he had taken from Ptolome, he made answer, that there
was amity between him and Ptolome, and that he intended to make him his son
in law, Appian in Syriac. 2. then it is said, he shall give him the daughter of
women: which Hierome thinks to be a pleonasme, as when we say, he spoke with
his mouth: but it signifies more: Iunius understands by this phrase, to be a
virgin: Polan. that she was ferme lactens, yet but young, and in a manner a
suckling: but (though this were true) yet it is better interpreted, that she
was bath nashim, a daughter of women, that is, of special womanhood: to the
which answers her name Cleopatra, the glory of the country: H. Br. concent.
and so Vatablus translateth, pulcherrima foemina, she was a most beautiful
woman, so also Perer. a choice woman, Osiand. And together with this daughter,
Antiochus promised by way of dowry, Coelesyria, Phoenice, Iudaea, and Samaria,
the revenues to be divided between them, Joseph. lib. 12. antiquit. c. 3. 3.
It follows to corrupt her, not, as the Latin, to destroy it, that is, the
kingdom: or as Perer. reads, to destroy him, that is her husband: for the
pronoune affix is of the feminine gender: neither is the meaning, to destroy
her, V. G. B. for Antiochus had no meaning herein to seek the destruction of
his daughter, but he corrupted her with evil counsel: for as yet neither of
them were mariageable. Hierome says, that Epiphanes was but four year old
when he began to reign, and Cleopatra was betrothed to him in the 7. year
of his reign, and married in his 13. year: In the mean time Antiochus had
the keeping of her, and so corrupted her with evil counsel, and gave her
instructions how she should practice to take her husband away by poison, or
some such like means: and this is understood by corrupting her.

2. Then the event was this, contrary to his expectation: for Cleopatra like a
good wife took part with her husband, and obeyed not her fathers wicked
counsel: and by her means Epiphanes recovered much in Asia minor.

28. Quest. Of Antiochus expedition against foreign countries, v. 18.
Here is described first his attempt, with his success; then the event which
followed.

1. Antiochus being disappointed of his hope for Egypt, both because his
daughter had deceived him, and Epiphanes was in league with the Romans, then
he set his mind to invade other countries, which are here called the Isles,
because they were divided from him by Sea: as Hellespontus, Chersonesus,
Euboea: then he stroke over into Europe, and took diverse Islands, Rhodes,
Cyprus, Samos, Colophon: and so did bid as it were open battle unto the
Romans: which he before intending, thought to make himself strong, by a new
alliance with foreign Princes: for as he had married his daughter Cleopatra to
Epiphanes king of Egypt, so he gave in marriage his daughter Antiochis to
Ariaratus king of Cappadocia: and a third daughter he offered unto Eumenes king
of Pergamus, but he refused, because of the wars which he had with the
Romans. Appian.

2. The event follows: that in the end Antiochus was foiled by the Romans,
and the shame returned upon his own head: but first the words of the text must
be opened, and then the sense considered.

1. The words are diversely read: 1. the vulgar Latin reads thus, he shall
cause the Prince of his shame to cease: which Lyranus expounds of himself,
namely, Antiochus: but he misliketh this sense, because Antiochus rather still
increased his own s^ame, he caused it not to cease. 2. Then he gives an other
interpretation, a Prince or Lord shall bring his shame upon him, that is God,
whom he had blasphemed, shall bring him to shame. Pererius rejects this
sense, because it is not found, that this Antiochus blasphemed God: wherein he
is deceived: for the contrary is evident, that Antiochus, when all things went
cross against him, accused God, as though he were his enemy, Polan. but the
word katin signifies a leader, or gouerner, which is not so fitly referred
unto God. 3. Theodoret reads in the (plural) he shall cause the Princes of
his shame to cease, that is, shall vanquish diverse Princes, and put them to
shame: but the word is put in the singular. 4. Some apply it to Epiphanes king
of Egypt, who by his captain Scopas had put Antiochus to shame, in taking
certain cities from him: gloss. interlin. Hug. Card. and Pererius misliketh
not this exposition: But the truth is, that Antiochus put Scopas to shame,
causing him to yield himself. 5. The words then, are thus to be read, a Prince
or captain shal^^ause his shame to cease, beside that he shall cause his shame
to return upon him, Polan. that is, the shame which he offered to others shall
return upon himself.

Now for the meaning of the words, two things are declared. 1. the Prince or
captain shall cause his shame to cease. 2. then it shall return upon his own
head. 1. First, his contumelious and opprobrious words, and acts, spoken and
done against the Romans, ceased, when first he was overcome by Marcus Attilius
Glabrio the Roman captain, afterward by L. Scipio Nasica (accompanied with
Publius Scipio Africanus his brother) by Sea: After this foil Antiochus,
being not ruled by Hannibals counsel, who was with him, who gave him advise
to remove his forces into Italy, and to occupy the Romans at home at their
own doors, was in such fear of the Romans, that he fled from Chersonesus,
leaving all the furniture and provision of his own behind, which the Romans
surprised: then he sent Ambassadors unto the Scipios, offering to bear half
the charges of their battle, and to relinquish all the cities which he had
taken in Ionia, and Aeolia: but they made answer that they would have all the
charges of that expedition, which he had been cause of, and he must surrender
all the country on this side the mount Taurus: But Antiochus refusing these
hard conditions, encountered with the Romans again, who had not above 30.
thousand men, and he 70. thousand, in which battle he was discomfited, and
lost 50. thousand men, and all his Elephants, saving 15. which were taken
alive: and thus his proud spirit was abated, and his contumelies offered unto
the Romans in word and deed, were at an end.

2. Then last of all his shame was brought upon his own head: for upon a
second embassage he was forced to accept of most hard conditions. 1. that he
should leave all Asia on this side Taurus. 2. he should pay in present money
fifteen hundred talents for the charges of the war. 3. he should deliver up
all his Elephants, and ships so many as they should require: and should be
stinted afterward for the number of his ships. 4. he should pay yearly 12.
thousand talents for tribute for 12. years. 5. and give 20. hostages, whereof
one should be his son, for the performance of these conditions: all which he
undertook: and thus his own shame returned upon him: and further in disdain,
whereas he was called before, Antiochus the great, it grew into a byword among
the Romans, Antiochus sometime the great king. ex Livio decad. 4. l. 8. and
App. in Syriac.

29. Quest. Of the death of Antiochus the great, v. 19.
Two things are here declared, his shameful flight, and his shameful end.

1. After that he had received the last great overthrow, with the loss of so
many men, he fled away incontinently, and about midnight came to Sardis: thence
to Apamea, from whence he sent Ambassadors, which concluded the former peace
with the Romans upon those hard conditions. Then he betook himself to the
remote parts of his kingdom, to his munitions and holds, being in such fear,
as that he durst not endure the sight of Cn. Manlius, who succeeded L. Scipio.
Thus Antiochus was confined within Taurus: who in this disgrace, was wont to
say iestingly, as Tullie reports in his oration pro Deiotaro, benign sibi a
Romany factum, etc. he was beholding to the Romans, who had eased him of the
trouble of so great a kingdom, that he now contented himself with a less.

2. Now touching his end, there are diverse opinions. 1. after that he had such
an imposition of tribute laid upon him, partly through necessity, and partly
of a covetous mind, he went about (...) rob a Temple of their treasure:
Lyranus thinks it was the Temple of Naneas among the Persians, where he
entering into the Temple with his company, were hewn in pieces: as the story
is set down 2. Macchab. c. 1. and therefore it is said here, he was no more
found, etc. because his body being thus mangled could not be known: But that
story rather shows the end of Antiochus Epiphanes, this Antiochus son, as
may appear by comparing that place with 2. Macchab. c. 9. see more before c.
8. qu. 33. 2. Some following Iustine lib. 32. think, that he would have
invaded the Temple of Iuppiter Dyndinaeus, or Dodonaeus: but he was far off
from that place, Bulling. 3. Hierome following Strabo, lib. 16. says, that he
with all his army was slain of the Elymeans, when he went about to rob the
Temple of Iuppiter Belus: so also Polan. and so it is said, he was no more
found, because he was tumultuously killed of the rude people coming together
to defend their Temple: Calvin. H. Br. in Daniel. and because he died in
Persia, and returned not into his own country. Osiand.

30. Quest. Of the acts and end of Seleucus Philopator the son of Antiochus
the great, v. 20.
First it must be agreed, who this was, who is said to rise up in his place.

1. P^rphyrius, as Hierome shows upon this place, takes this to be Ptolomeus
Epiphanes king of Egypt: but as Hierome well shows, he did not succeed
Antiochus the great in his kingdom, and therefore can not be said to stand up
in his place.

2. R. Levi understands here the son of Antiochus Epiphanes, called
Antiochus Eupator, who was slain by his uncles son Demetrius: and the former
part of the prophecy he interprets of Antiochus Epiphanes: ex Oecolampad.
But it is evident, that hitherto the Prophet has described the acts and
exploits of Antiochus, surnamed the great: for he it was, that gave his
daughter Cleopatra in marriage unto the king of Egypt, as is prophesied, v. 17.
And the rest of the prophecy can agree to none other.

3. Some Hebrews, as Hierome also here writes, think that this was Tryphon,
which was the tutor of Antiochus son: but that can not be: for Tryphon
followed many generations after: for after Antiochus the great succeeded in
order, Seleucus, Epiphanes, Eupator his son, Demetrius, Alexander, Antiochus,
before Tryphon usurped the kingdom. He that rose up in Antiochus place, was
the 7. king of Syria, but Tryphon was the 13. or 14. Bulling. Perer.

4. Wherefore this that rose up in Antiochus place, was Seleucus his son.
Antiochus the great had three sons, Antiochus, Seleucus, and Antiochus
Epiphanes: but Antiochus* being a Prince of great hope and towardnes, died
about the same time, that his father fleeing to Apamea, sent Ambassadors to the
Romans about the former conclusion of peace, not without suspicion of poison:
then succeeded Seleucus Philopator, so called because he was beloved of his
father, called also Soter. Joseph. lib. 12. c. 4. Polan.

Secondly we come to the parts of the description. 1. This Seleucus acts are
described, he shall cause to pass up and down an exactor of tribute: not take
away the exactor of tribute, as Vatabl. for the word is ghabar, which
signifies to pass, and in hiph^l to caus^ to pass. And so was Seleucus a
great exactor of tribute: for being given to voluptuous living, he must needs
also be immoderate in his expenses: when he was admonished by his familiar
counselors, that he should take heed least he alienated the minds of his
friends, by his immoderate taxations, he would answer them, that his money was
his friend. This Seleucus is he that sent Heliodorus to spoil the treasure of
the Temple at Jerusalem, which Simo^ had bewraied unto him: which Heliodorus
coming thither, and offering by violence to take the treasure away, he and his
company were terrified by a fearful (...): they saw an horse with a terrible
rider, and so they desisted from their purpose: see the story 2. Macchab. 3.

2. Then the end of Seleucus is prophesied of. 1. concerning the time, after a
few days he should be destroyed: then can not 12. years be assigned to his
reign, as Oecolampad. and it appears 2. Macchab. 4. 7. that he lived not
long after Heliodorus attempted to rob the Temple at Jerusalem. 2. for the
manner of his death: it should neither be by wrath, nor by battle, either by
the general hatred of his subjects, or by open war: but it is thought that
he was poisoned by Heliodorus, and that by the practice of Antiochus Epiphanes
his brother, who was coming from Rome, where he was left as an hostage, and
was at Athens at that same time when Seleucus died. And this was a just
recompense upon him for his sacrilege, that he should be cut off even by him,
that was an instrument of his impiety. Melancth. Polan.

31. Quest. Whether the rest of this chapter be properly understood of
Antiochus Epiphanes, or of Antichrist.
1. Some would have this to be a prophetical narration of the acts and doings
of Antichrist, and make no mention at all of Antiochus, as Polychronius: But it
is evident that many things can not be otherwise applied, then to Antiochus: as
v. 21. in his place shall stand up a vile person, that is, in the room of
Seleucus Philopator, before spoken of: and v. 25. it is said, he shall stir
up his power against the king of the South, who is understood before to be the
king of Egypt: so that it is evident, that this is a continuance of the same
prophetical narration.

2. Some do apply some part of this prophecy unto Antiochus, yet as a type
of Antichrist, and some things only unto Antichrist: and these things are
intermingled together: as Matthew. 24. Christ prophesies of the destruction of
Jerusalem, and of the end of the world jointly: so in this place, they think
that the manners of Antiochus and of Antichrist are described interchangeably:
Theodoret. So also Lyranus, who thus distinguishes of figures and signs: that
some things are so figures, as the thing prefigured concerns them not at all:
as Psalm. 72. His dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the river to the
ends of the world: this place he thinks only to be true of Christ, and not
at all to agree unto Salamon: some figures are such, that the thing affirmed,
agrees both to the figure, and to the thing prefigured: as, 1. Chr. 22. 10. He
shall be my son, and I will be his father: this was true of Solomon in part,
but of Christ more fitly: so some things here are spoken of Antiochus as of a
figure of Antichrist, and some things only agree unto Antichrist: as from the
36. v. to the end of the chapter: But, as Melancthon says, non avellam hanc
partem ab historia Antiochi, I will not pull away this part neither from the
history of Antiochus: for mention is made after that of Edom, and other
nations adjoining, which is evident to be historical.

3. Some wholly refer this prophecy unto Antiochus, without any relation at
all unto Antichrist, as Hierome here affirms of Porphyrius. But it is evident
by the prophetical book of the Revelation, which takes many things from this
prophecy, that there is some relation and allusion in this prophetical
discourse unto Antichrist.

4. Some do make Antiochus a special type of Antichrist, and make him the
image, and Antichrist the Archetypus, the principal person represented and
resembled: and think that many things here done do more fitly agree unto
Antichrist, then unto Antiochus. Pappus. But it is evident, that the
description of Antiochus, and his cruel outrage against the church of God, is
principally intended by the Prophet; because this prophecy was delivered for
the comfort of the Church in those days, to the coming of the Messiah.

5. Wherefore the literal and proper sense of this prophecy aymeth only at
Antiochus: yet so, as by way of allusion and analogy, as a common type,
Antiochus example, conditions, practices, may be drawn and by way of
application accommodated to decypher Antichrist. Iun. Polan. But these typical
applications unto Antichrist, shall be referred unto their proper and peculiar
place among the controversies.

32. Quest. of Antiochus Epiphanes first entrance to the kingdom.
Three things are orderly handled in this prophecy. 1. of Antiochus succeeding
in the kingdom. 2. of his acts and exploits. 3. of his end: In the handling
of which things the rest of this chapter is spent: for seeing this Antiochus
should be the greatest and most cruel adversary unto the Jews, and that
under him, they should endure much misery, it was necessary that the people
of God should aforehand be prepared for those times.

First then his entrance to the kingdom is thus set forth, 1. by the very act
of his succession. 2. by the small right which he had unto it. 3. and by the
evil means, which he used.

1. It is said, that in his place one should stand up: namely, Antiochus
Epiphanes in the room and stead of his father. 2. but his right should be
small thereunto: for whereas succession unto kingdoms is either by the
natural right of succession, or by election and consent; he came by neither of
these means to the kingdom: for he was the younger brother, and left hostage
at Rome for his father, and so he was in that behalf neglected and despised,
not designed or appointed by his father unto the kingdom: and when his elder
brother was dead, he left behind him his son Demetrius, who was left as a
pledge for Antiochus at Rome, whom Seleucus sent for to aid him in his wars:
thus Antiochus was despised and neglected in respect of natural succession.
Iun. Polan. And in regard of his vile conditions, and loathsome vices he was
despised also: so that it seems, he was called Epiphanes, famous, by the
contrary, being indeed despised: which name was turned by the change of a
letter, into Epimanes, which signifies furious, mad. Athenaeus ex Polyb. And
concerning the right of succession, which is by election, Antiochus wanted it
likewise: as it follows in the text, to whom they shall not give the honor
of the kingdom: he was not called or adopted to the government by the consent
of the nobles of the land: Only he was favored and helped by two foreign
kings, Eumenes, and Attalus. 3. Then the manner is showed how he attained to
the kingdom: he at the first took upon him to be the protector of the
kingdom for his brothers son Demetrius being absent, until by flattery he
had established himself. He was very popular and familiar even with mean
persons: he would stand in the streets and cast abroad money, crying out, Let
him that fortune favors take it: he used to wash in the common bathes, and
to drink with common persons, he would give large gifts to whomsoever he met,
though he had never seen them before: he would sport himself with those that
attended upon him, and hit stones at them in jest: and thus by his flattery
and popular behavior he insinuated himself, and got the hearts of the people:
as Absalom by the like means stole away the hearts of the people from his
father. Thus Ptolome testifies of this Antiochus, lib. 1. and 5. Hypomemnat.

33. Quest. Of Antiochus Epiphanes his first expedition against Egypt, v. 22,
23, 24.
Secondly the entrance of Antiochus into the kingdom being thus described,
then follows a declaration of his acts and exploits, which are of three
sorts. 1. his practicing against Egypt. 2. his persecution of the people of
God. 3. his inuading of Egypt, Judea, and other countries.

Three expeditions he made into Egypt: the first whereof is here described. In
this first the means are showed, which he should use, partly violence, partly
fraud: and the success of them both.

His forcible and violent attempt together with the success, is expressed v.
22. his attempt is compared to an ouerflowing flood: Antiochus taking advantage
of the minority of Ptolomeus Philometor, the son of Epiphanes by his sister
Cleopatra, and having a desire to join Egypt to his kingdom, comes with a
great power with chariots, horse, Elephants, and a navy beside unto Pelusium,
ouerflowing like a great stream: his success was this: First, the arms and
power of the Egyptians were overcome, the chief captains of Philometor Euleus
and Leneus encountering with Antiochus between Pelusium and Casium, were there
vanquished and slain: Hierome out of Porphyrius following Suctorius* so also
Bulling. Melancth. Osiand. Polan. Iun. with others.

The second part of this success was, the Prince of the covenant was
overthrown likewise. 1. which was not Ptolomeus Epiphanes, as Hugo Cardin. who
was now dead. 2. nor yet Seleucus Philopater Antiochus brother, Iun. annotat.
H. Br. concent. for it is said before, v. 21. that Antiochus named a vile
person, stood up in his place: his brother Seleucus was now dead. 3. neither
was it Judas Macchabeus, as Lyran. for as yet Antiochus had nothing to do with
him. 4. nor yet Ptolome Philopator, as Melancth. Oecolamp. Pellic. Vatab. for
he was yet very young, and made no covenant: and beside the Prince of the
covenant here spoken of was slain, which is expressed by the metaphor of
breaking: but Philometor suruiued, and reigned long after. 5. And to apply it
with Hierome to Antichrist, who shall faigne himself to be Prince of the
covenant, that is, of the law and Testament of God, is not proper: for if
Antiochus be a type of Antichrist, then is not this Prince of the covenant,
which is overcome by him, Antichrist also. 6. Wherefore this Prince of the
covenant was Tryphon, who was a chief man in compounding and making a league
with Antiochus after the former overthrow, that he should have the tutelage of
the young king of Egypt Philometor his nephew: this Tryphon the chief
contriuer of this covenant, Antiochus causes to be taken away, that he might
work his pleasure without any let.

Then follows his second practice by fraud, with the success: first
Antiochus having now committed unto him the protection of his nephew, under
this pretense enters into Egypt, but with a small company, being not
suspected as an enemy, but held as a friend: and therefore it is said, he
shall strengthen himself with a small people, v. 23.

His success by this his fraudulent practicing was this. 1. he shall enter
into the quiet and plentiful Province: for he settled himself in Memphis in
the heart of the country. 2. then he robbed and spoiled, as never any of his
predecessors did in Egypt before: for he is not said simply to do that, which
his fathers had not done, but only in respect of Egypt, otherwise Seleucus
Nicanor, their first founder, and Antiochus the great his father, had in other
countries done more then he, Calvin. therefore this is no argument for Pererius
to understand this of Antichrist, and not of Antiochus, because his
predecessors had been of greater power: for, as is said, it is not simply
and absolutely so spoken, but in comparison of Egypt only, which he robbed and
spoiled* as none of his fathers had done before him. Hierom. ex Porphyr. And
these spoils he partly carried away, partly he distributed them among the
Egyptians, to make himself stronger. Iun. 3. Then he cunningly cast about how
to get into his hand the strong holds in Egypt: and therein showed more
cunning, then the wisest among the Egyptians: he deceived them with his wiles
and politic devises. Hierom. ex Porphyr. following Suctorius. Iun. Polan. But
he did not long hold those places in Egypt, it was but for a time, as the text
shows: for Philometor afterward recovered them again.

Some otherwise understand this whole description: that the league spoken of
was made with Seleucus Philopator, who upon agreement with Antiochus then
hostage at Rome, sent thither his own son Demetrius, to be in his stead: and
so Antiochus returning first practiced by the means of Heliodorus to take away
his brother Seleucus, called here the Prince of the covenant. Iun. in annotat.
And this plentiful Province which he invaded, some understand to be Syria,
Iun. Oecolampad. some Phoenice, where the rich city Tyrus was, which Antiochus
spoiled, Melancthon.

But this exposition can not stand. 1. Seleucus Philopator was dead before
these things were done, and Antiochus tose up in his stead: these things
followed then after Seleucus death. And before the Prince of the covenant is
taken away, it is said the arms were broken, which were the captains with
their power: but Antiochus had no open war with his brother Seleucus, he was
dead before his return.

2. This pleasant Province was not Syria, but Egypt. 1. for it is said, that
he did that, which none of his fathers before him: now both Seleucus Nicanor,
and Antiochus the great had done greater exploits in Syria and Phenice, then
this Antiochus: but none of them had spoiled Egypt like unto him. 2. he held
these strong places only for a while: but the strong cities of Syria and
Phenicia he held and possessed as his own, as of right belonging unto to him:
he soon lost the strong cities and holds in Egypt, which Philometor recovered
again: therefore this expedition upon the former reasons is better understood
to have been made against Egypt, then Syria.

34. Quest. Of the second expedition of Antiochus Epiphanes against Egypt, v.
25, 26, 27, 28.
In this second expedition, three things are declared, 1. the attempt, which
these kings made one against the other, with the success, v. 25. and the
means thereof, v. 26. 2. the event, which happened hereupon, v. 27. a
dissembled peace. 3. the consequents, and such matters as followed, v. 28.

1. The king of the North Antiochus, seeing he could prevail no longer by his
fraud and deceit, who hitherto under color of his protectourship, robbed and
spoiled Egypt, (Philometor being now somewhat more grown in years) he
seeks now by open force to invade Egypt: and the king of Egypt, called here
the king of the South, prepares to meet him with a great army likewise: this
was the preparation. But the success was this: the king of Egypt was not able
to stand, he is overcome with his army: and the means which Antiochus vfed,
was this: he corrupted Ptolomes captains and counselors with gifts, who
betrayed Ptolomes army: even his own feed men, and courtiers, that lived upon
him, should deceive him, v. 26.

2. The event was this, that after Philometor was overcome, he should make some
peace with Antiochus: but it was a fraudulent peace: where 1. their intent and
purpose is expressed; both the kings hearts shall be to do mischief. 2. their
dissimulation, they shall speak deceitfully at the same table: for Philometor
feasted Antiochus, and gave him great gifts. 3. but the issue was this, nothing
was effected or concluded by this peace: for the time appointed of God was not
yet, v. 27.

3. The sequel was this. 1. Antiochus returns into his country with great
substance, partly by the gift of Ptolome, partly by spoiling with his army. 2.
In his return he set his heart against the holy Covenant, that is, the people
of God: for he entered into Jerusalem being received by wicked Jason, and
robbed and spoiled the Temple, though as yet he set not up the abomination of
desolation: as is further showed, 1. Macchab. 1. 18. and 2. Macch. 4. 24.

Some understand this battle to have been fought under Euleus and Leneus
Ptolomes captains, at which time Antiochus entered into Egypt, robbing and
spoiling, and came to Memphis. Iun. annotat. 1. and 2. edit. Oecolampad.
Bulling. But this can not be: 1. this was Antiochus second voyage into Egypt,
2. Macch. 5. 1. but that battle under those captains was fought in his first
voyage. 2. at this time Ptolomes captains were corrupted, which could not be
the foresaid Euleus and Leneus, for they were slain in battle. 3. hitherto
Antiochus had dealt by cunning and fraud, but now he went about by force to
reign over Egypt, 1. Macchab. 1. 17. which he did not attempt at the first:
for he had sent in peaceable manner before Apollonius to the coronation of
Philometor, 2. Macchab. 4. 22. 4. the kings now practiced deceit one against an
other: it seems then that Philometor was of years of discretion: but when
Euleus and Leneus were slain, he was under their tuition: this Hierome
foreseeing, that Philometor being a child could not practice any deceit or
mischief against Antiochus, thereupon says, that some will have it understood
of Antichrist, who should first overcome the king of Egypt: But Philometor was
not now a very child in Antiochus second expedition: he was somewhat grown in
years, Osiand. for this happened in the sixth year of Antiochus reign, who
began to reign in the 137. year of the reign of the Greeks, and this was
in the 143. year, 1. Macchab. 1. 11. 21. Wherefore I rather follow Iunius
interpretation in his commentary, with Polanus, who refer the battle of
Euleus and Leneus to the first voyage of Antiochus into Egypt.

35. Quest. Of the third expedition of Antiochus Epiphanes against Egypt, v.
29, 30, 31.
Three things are here declared, 1. his attempt: he shall come again against
the king of the South: and the time is set down, at the time appointed: which
was about two years after, as may be gathered, 1. Macchab. 1. 30. Bulling.
then entering into Egypt, and having taken Memphis, Philometor fled to his
younger brother Physcon to Alexandria: and thither Antiochus followed, and
besieged the city, Joseph. l. 12. c. 6.

2. Then the success is showed, not to be like unto the former: it should not
be as at the first, and as at the last: for so are the words, not, the last
shall not be as at the first, Geneuens. for two expeditions or voiages are
mentioned before: then the reason is showed of this cross, success, he shall
be stayed by the Romans, which arrived there in ships of Cilicia, called the
ships of Chittim: for Ptolome had sent unto the Romans for aid, who sent
Popilius, or as some call him Pompilius, who in their name should charge
Antiochus to depart: who arriving at Alexandria found Antiochus upon the shore,
who first would have saluted Popilius with a kiss, being of his old
acquaintance in Rome, and would with flattering words have put off that matter
for which Popilius came, and have craved some time to consider of it: But the
courageous Roman, bid him leave off his trifling, and upon the sand did with
his rod make a circle before Antiochus, requiring his present answer before he
went from that place: who, though much against his will, there yielded himself
to obey his embassage: and therefore it is said in the text, he shall be sorry
and return: thus Hierom. out of Justin. lib. 34. the same is reported by
Florus, in epitom. lib. 45.

3. The event was this, that this cruel Tyrant being disappointed of his hope
in Egypt, shall freat against the holy covenant: for in his return he entered
into Jerusalem being received in peaceable manner at the first: but afterward
he made havoc of the city, put them to the sword, caused the daily sacrifice
to cease, and set up the abomination of desolation, a filthy idol in the
Temple, and burnt the books of the law: as is declared, 1. Mac. 1. 57. 58.

And the means is showed also how he compassed this his wicked purpose: he had
inelligence by those which did forsake the holy coueuant, he was brought in by
the wicked counsel and practice first of Jason, then of Menelaus, 2. Macchab.
4. Iunius, Polanus, Oecolampadius.

Quest. 36. Of the meaning of the word Chittim, v. 30.
1. Here are two words used, tziim, and Chittim, which some Hebrews understand
to be the Italians and Romans, Hierome: but the first word signifies ships:
it comes of tzi, which properly betokens a bird, and so consequently a
ship, which being under sail is like a bird that flies. 2. Josephus whom
Theodoret follows, and Vatablus, understand the ships of Chittim to be
ships of the Isle Cyprus, where was a town called Citium, where Zeno the
Stoike was borne: But the word Chittim is more general, then to be taken for
one small Island: and Cyprus was under the command of Alexandria, which now
Antiochus besieged, and therefore the ships of Cyprus could not repel
Antiochus. 3. Some take Chittim directly for the Romans, as Hierome, so also
the Chalde paraphrast. and the Tharg. Hierosol. so interprets that place of
the Italians and Romans, Numb. 24. 24. the ships shall come from the coasts
of Chittim, and subdue Ashur, and shall subdue Heber: But originally Chittim,
are not the Italians or Romans: for Chittim was one of the sons of Iavan the
father of the Grecians: as likewise were Elisha the founder of the Aeliseans or
Aeolians, and Dodanim of the Dodoneans, and Tharshish of the Cilicians where
Tarsus was: all these were countries belonging unto Grecia. 4. Some think that
Chittim signifies both the Grecians, Macedonians, and Romans, Calvin: but so
we should make it too general a name. 5. Some understand the ships of the
Romans which were kept in the coasts of Cilicia, (where the Isle Cetis was)
that they might the better command the Seas, Polan. Iun. But that seems not
to be so proper to call them ships of Chittim, that is of Cilicia, because
they only harbored there. 6. And it is too slender a conceit, to think that
the Roman Ambassador came thither in ships of Grecia, ex Bulling. as if
that potent nation of the Romans had no ships of their own. 7. nor yet is
Chittim taken only for Grecia, for the ships of Chittim came now against
Antiochus, which were not the Grecians, but the Romans. 8. Wherefore, I think
with Melancthon, that Chittim originally is taken for some countries of Grecia,
and comprehends also Macedonia: whereupon Alexander king of Macedonia, is
said to have come from the land of Chittim, 1. Macchab. 1. 1. and the two last
kings of Macedonia Philip and Perses, are called kings of Cittim, 1. Macchab.
8. 5. And the word (...), a Macedonian, has some affinity with Chittim, the
first letter being added: And further Melancthon shows out of Homer how the
(...), the Citians, came with Telephus the king of the Mysians to the battle
of Troy, as next adjoining.

But yet though originally Chittim are the Grecians; which name might first be
given unto the Islands of Grecia, as Cyprus, Rhodes, and the sea coasts as of
Cilicia, and then generally was taken for other vpla^d countries of Grecia:
this name also was extended to the Italians as having their original from the
Greeks: Melancthon shows out of Suidas, that Latinui the son of Telephus
brought the Citians into Italy, and gave the name to the country: but
howsoever this is, it is certain, that the Grecians came into Italy and there
inhabited, whereupon it might be called magna Graecia, great Greece: and thus
much for the word Chittim.

Quest. 37. Of the persecution of the people of God by Antiochus, and the
manner thereof.
This is the second persecution raised by Antiochus against the people of God,
the first was touched before, v. 28. the occasion of the second is expressed in
the former verse, partly because Antiochus being disappointed by the Romans,
turns his rage against the Church of God, and partly being thereunto induced
by such amongst the Jews as had forsaken the covenant.

In this second persecution, 1. there are declared the means, which Antiochus
used in oppressing Gods people: which were partly the forces, and captains, and
foreign helps which he used: partly the seditious and factious among the people
themselves. 2. the godly are described which shall suffer persecution, to v.
36. 3. then it is showed, what Antiochus should do himself, thence to v. 40.

Now in v. 3. the foreign help is described, which Antiochus should use:
namely, his captains with their forces, which are called arms: and the
effects and works which they shall do are four. 1. They shall pollute the
Sanctuary. 2. then the city it self, called the munition. 3. the daily
sacrifice shall be taken away. 4. and the abomination of desolation set up.

Quest 38. What is understood by the arms, v. 31.
1. Some of the Hebrews by the arms do understand Thus that came of
Vespasian, and was as his arm, that destroyed Jerusalem and the Temple. 2.
Oecolampadius by the arms interprets the captains of the Romans, Pompey,
Crassus, Sabinus, Cumanus Florus, with others, which diverse times made havoc
of the city, spoiled and profaned the Temple: But the coherence of the text
will allow neither of these interpretations: for the story of Antiochus still
is continued: he that set his heart against the holy covenant, v. 28. is the
same that fretteth against the holy covenant, being repelled by the ships of
Chittim, v. 30. and he that there fretteth, is the same that here polluteth the
Sanctuary. 3. Some by the arms understand the towers and fortresses of the
city, which are as the arms of it, Pintus. But the arms are said to pollute
the Sanctuary: this cannot be properly understood of the towers. 4. Calvin,
whom Geneuens. follow, by the arms thinks to be meant the faction of the
wicked Jews, that held with Antiochus, but they are spoken of in the next
verse, which shall wickedly break the covenant. 5. Therefore by the arms are
better understood Antiochus Princes and captains, whom he sent to spoil
Jerusalem, Bulling. Melancth. as Philippus a Phrygian, whom he left at
Jerusalem, after the first taking of it, and Andronicus at Garazin, 2. Macchab.
5. 22. to them he joined Bacchides, of whom Josephus makes mention, lib. 1. de
bello Iudaic. c. 1. And he sent also Apollonius two years after to Jerusalem,
who made great havoc and spoil of all, as is showed, 1. Macchab. 1. and 2.
Mac. 5. Polanus.

Quest. 39. Of the defiling of the Sanctuary and the manner thereof.
Four wicked exploits done by Antiochus forces are expressed here. 1. they
defiled the Sanctuary: for they entered into it, robbed, and spoiled it; as
Antiochus had done before himself: for he entered into the Temple Menelaus
being his guide, and touched the holy vessels with his own hands, 2. Macchab.
5. 15. and carried them away, 1. Mac. 1. 23. 24.

2. They took also the city, and the munition, the strong places thereof.
Some refer it to the Sanctuary, thus reading the Sanctuary of strength, so
called, because it was situate in a strong place, and had the tower of David
adjoining unto it, Osiand. or because the people fled thither as to a sure
hold, when the city was taken, Oecolamp. or because the people put their
confidence in the Temple, as the rock of their defense, Bulling. or to put
them in mind that they should trust in God, who was yet their strength,
although for their sins he suffered his Temple to be defiled for a time,
Calvin. But it is better understood of the city, which is called the munition,
because of the strength thereof: for as Strabo writes, lib. 16. Geograph. it
was compassed with a strong wall of stone, and within was a ditch 60. foot
deep, and 200. foot wide, made out of a rock, the stone hewne out made the
walls about the Temple: Apollonius being sent to Jerusalem by Antiochus, was
received peaceably into the city: but being entered he went up and down
killing and slaying, sparing none: but fell upon the Jews (having an army of
22. thousand) upon the Sabbath, while they were keeping their feast, 2.
Macchab. 5. 24. 25. Iun. Polan. as also they fortified the city of David, with
a great and thick wall, and mighty towers, and set people to keep it, and
brought in the spoil of the city thither, 1. Macchab. 1. 35. 36. this may be
well understood, (the event so fitly answering the prophecy) to be the
munition or strong place here.

3. They caused the daily sacrifice to cease, that is, discontinued the service
of God which was celebrated by sacrifices in the Temple: one kind of sacrifice
is taken for the rest: for Antiochus commanded that they should forsake their
laws, and he would have them all brought to an uniformity, to live according
to the laws of the heathen: likewise he enjoined his captains to forbid burnt
offerings and sacrifices, and all manner of offerings in the Sanctuary: this was
accordingly done, as we may read, 1. Macchab. 1. 47.

4. Then they set up the abomination of desolation, which 1. some take for the
soldiers placed in garrison, who were addicted to abominable idolatry, and
brought both the city and Temple to desolation, Iun. Pol. but the soldiers
are before signified by the arms, and this is one of their effects, to set up
the abomination: and they were rather abominable, not the abomination it
self. 2. some translate the word shamam, by an other sense: it signifies both
to make desolate and to astonish: and so they read, they shall set up the
abomination, which shall cause them to wonder, or astonish them, Pagnin.
Vatab. they should wonder to see the Temple so defiled and forsaken, Calvin.
but that the word rather signifies here to make desolate, then to astonish,
appears both by the former use thereof, c. 9. v. 26. 27. for the further
explication whereof I refer the Reader to the questions upon that place. 3.
Some understand nothing else here, but abominable desolation, Bulling. but that
was signified before, they shall take away the daily sacrifice: and beside, the
phrase of setting up shows, that there was somewhat actually set up in deed.
4. Oecolampadius refers it to the Roman ensigns and banners which were set
up in the Temple, and round about: But this place is not understood of the
Romans: Antiochus profanation of the Temple is here described. 5. Wherefore
this abomination of desolation, or making desolate, cannot be better
understood, then of those filthy idols which Antiochus and his captains
caused to be set up in the Temple: as there was set up upon the altar, the
abominable idol of Jupiter Olympius: Pellic. Melancth. Osiand. Lyran. Perer.
for both idols are usually in Scripture called by that name, abominations, and
the sequel and event shows it to be so understood, as 1. Macchab. 1. 57. it
is said, they set up the abomination of desolation upon the altar: there was
then some abominable thing in very deed set up upon the altar.

Quest. 40. How Antiochus used as his instruments certain wicked persons of
the Jews, that forsook the law.
1. The second kind of help which Antiochus used, was beside his captains and
soldiers, certain wicked factious people among the Jews: which were seduced
by his flattery to betray their own country. Such were wicked Jason, that
entered into the city with a thousand men, and slew his own citizens without
mercy: and wicked Menelaus that was himself a guide unto Antiochus, and
brought him into the Temple, to rob and spoil it, 2. Macchab. 5. As these
assisted Antiochus in his first taking of the city: so afterward when he sent
Apollonius, diverse of the people joined with him: as 1. Macchab. 1. 55. then
went many of the people unto them by heaps, every one that forsook the law.
And after these times such an one was Alcimus the high Priest, who came with
Bacchides, the kings captain: the people trusted Alcimus, because he was the
high Priest, and he swear unto them, that he would do them no harm, but he
took 60. men and killed them, 1. Mac. 7. 15. 16.

2. The other part of the verse is diversely read. 1. Iunius and Polan. thus
interpret, and the people of those that know God, they shall apprehend, that
is, the wicked apostataes shall betray their own brethren: but in this sense
the word chazak is put with the preposition beth most commonly: as Isay. 4. 1.
and Zachar. 8. 13. as our English phrase is, to lay hold on, and the word
people, being set first, is rather the nominative then the accusative case,
which for the most part follows the verb in the Hebrewe tongue. 2. Therefore
here I rather approve the received interpretation: that though many shall fall
away, yet those among the people, which fear and know God, shall encourage
themselves, and go on in their duty: which is the meaning of the last word:
they shall do, do their part and office, Bulling. Melan. Calv. Osiand.
Genevens. cum caeter.

Quest. 41. Of such things as the faithful people of God should do and suffer
in this persecution.
v. 33. They that understand, etc. shall instruct many: Three things are
expressed concerning the faithful people. 1. what they shall do, they shall
not give over one instructing and conforting another. 2. what they shall
suffer. 3. how they shall be comforted, v. 34.

1. Concerning the first. 1. Some because mention is made here of instruction,
will not have it here understood of the persecution of the Jews, in the time
of the Macchabees, for they were fighters rather then instructors: and
therefore they think it more fitly to be referred unto the persecution of the
servants of God in the times of the Apostles, as is declared in the book of
the Acts: for then the Apostles ceased not to instruct the people and Church of
God, Oecolamp. 2. But though Mattathias and his sons were stirred up to
defend the innocent by their valiant resisting of wicked Antiochus proceedings,
yet they also instructed and encouraged the people, and exhorted them to
continue steadfast, as we may further see 1. Macchab. 2. and 2. Macchab. 8. 16.
21. And that this persecution is not that which the history of the Acts makes
mention of, is evident by this; that the Romans and their agents were then the
persecutors: but here this Tyrant and persecutor was somewhat curbed by the
Romans, as is before showed v. 30. And for the same reason this cannot be
referred unto the last destruction of Jerusalem by Vespasian and Titus, as some
of the Hebrews think. 3. Those then which instructed the people, were
chiefly the faithful Priests, the Macchabees, the father and his sons, 1.
Macchab. 2. and other faithful people are not excluded, who did their part one
instructing and encouraging an other.

2. Then it follows, what they endured and suffered, even all kind of most
grievous torments, by the sword, by flame, by captivity, by spoil: how they
were put to the sword, when Apollonius with an army of 22. thousand entered the
city, as is showed, 2. Macchab. 5. 25. and the younger sort with the women
were sold into captivity, v. 24. the spoil of the city is described, 1.
Macchab. 1. 37. And how they were tried by the flames of fire and other
torments, is declared in that lamentable story of the mother with her 7.
children, how cruelly they were put to death, 2. Macchab. 7. their skin was
fleyed off, their tongues cut out, and their utmost parts cut off: their flesh
was boiled in hoate caldrons: The like report Josephus makes of that cruel
persecution, verberati, and diuersis cruciatibus fatigati, etc. they being
scourged and wearied with diverse torments, yet being alive were hanged up
upon pearches: the children which were circumcised, were strangled and hung
about their parents necks, lib. 12. antiquit. c. 6. 7. And of these
persecutions seems the Apostle to speak, Heb. 11. 35. 37. they were racked,
etc. they were stoned, they were hewed asunder: they were tempted or they were
burned, as Iunius and Polanus think it should be read (...), rather then
(...), they were slain with the sword, etc.

Quest. 42. Of the consolation of the afflicted Church of the Jews, v. 34. 35.
v. 34. They shall be helped with a little help. The Lord forgets not his
Church in their affliction, but sends them a breathing time, and some help
to comfort them in the mids of their trouble. This consolation here
propounded, consists of three parts. 1. it is described by the adiunct, the
small help, that shall be raised unto them. 2. by the end, wherefore God
suffers them to be afflicted, namely, to purge and try them. 3. by the
circumstance of the time, which shall not continue, but so long only as God
has appointed.

Concerning the first (for the other two parts are plain enough) 1. the
Hebrews understand this small help of some Emperors, which favored the
Jews, such were Seuerus and Antoninus.

2. Some refer it unto the time of Julian, who gave the Jews liberty to
build the temple again: but he did it fainedly, for he intended thereby only
the advancement of idolatry, and the defacing of Christian religion.

3. Oecolampadius interprets this little help of the favor showed by some
Emperors unto the Christians, as Marcus Aurelius protected them: and by those,
that should cleave unto them fainedly, he understands the heretics, as
Cherinthus, Menander, the Ebonites, with other who joined with the Christians,
yet were great enemies unto the truth of Christian religion: But all these
opinions may be confuted by one and the same argument: because here is a
continuance of the same history, from v. 30. he which was repelled by the
ships of Chittim, which were the Romans, is the same which persecuteth the
Church here: the Romans are not these persecutors, but they somewhat bridled
and stayed the persecutor.

4. Some further apply this to the last times of persecution under Antichrist,
that then the Saints shall resist him, but by small help, Hierome. Indeed
typically this Scripture may be so applied, but historically it was performed
in the time of Antiochus, as Pererius observes.

5. Wherefore here there is evident relation unto the Macchabees, unto
Mattathias and his sons, who being but an handful and a small company in
respect of Antiochus, and his army; yet God so prospered this small help,
that the tyranny of Antiochus was somewhat stayed for the time: and in the
end of the appointed time, after three years and certain days from the
abolishing of the daily sacrifice, which began the 15. day of Casleu, in the
145. year 1. Mac. 1. 57. the Temple was cleansed on the 25. of the same month
in the 148. year, 1. Macchab 4. 52.

Now while this small help prospered, some as the text says, did but cleave
fainedly unto them: there were diverse, that as long as they prevailed, which
stood for the law, would seem to join with them, but if their busi^esse went
not forward, then they were as ready to take part against them: and such we
shall find to have been am^^g the Jews in the time of the Macchabees, as
that story makes mention, that were but false brethren, Bulling. Polan.

Quest. 43. Of Antiochus pride, and the exalting of himself against God.
v. 36. And the king shall do what him list, etc. In this second persecution
which Antiochus moved against the Jews, which consists of three parts,
first it has been showed what ministers and instruments he should use:
secondly, what the faithful should endure and suffer: now follows the third
part, what Antiochus himself should do: And his acts are either concerning
religion, in abrogating all religion both true and false, v. 36. 37. and in
establishing a new religion of his own, v. 38. or such as concern civil and
politic matters, verse. 39.

But interpreters do much differ in the exposition of this Scripture, of whom
it should be understood. 1. The Hebrews take this king to be Constantine the
great: of whom Ab. Ezra is not ashamed to tell these lies, that there were but
318. which received the Christian religion, which afterward he compelled all
Princes and people to embrace: But all this is false: he thinks there were no
more Christians but only those 318. Bishops which were assembled in the Nicen
Council: neither did Constantine compel any to receive the Christian faith,
but forbad the worship of Idols, and protected the Christian religion: but he
was so far from lifting himself up against God, that every where he
commanded Churches to be erected to the honor of Christ, in whose name he
overcame his enemies. Some of the Jews understand this king to be Vespasian;
some an Emperor, that should rise up after Julian, who seemed to favor them:
so well they agree together.

2. Oecolampadius and Melancthon, will have this king to be the Pope and Turk,
who both are blasphemous against God: but the Prophet speaks but of one king:
neither is it like that the Angel breaking off at the persecution under
Antiochus, would immediately join the history of such things, as should come
to pass above a thousand year after: for so many years and more came
between Antiochus persecution, and the beginning of the Monarchy of the
Turk, and of the tyranny of the Pope.

3. M. Calvin thinks this place not to be understood of any one king, but of
a continued government: which he refers to the Monarchy of the Romans,
not beginning at Julius Caesar, but at such time as they began to oppress
Judea: as first Pompey took the city, though he spared the Temple: after him
Crassus spoiled and robbed the Temple: whose insatiable covetousness was such
in those countries, that he was hated of all: in so much that when he was
slain they filled his skull full of gold, and carried it up and down in
derision. The Romans exalted themselves against God: for they took upon them
to determine who should be counted Gods: and Cicero in his oration pro Flacco,
speaks basely of the God of the Jews, not holding him worthy to be compared
with Bacchus or Venus: and that Judea being so often overcome, was hated of
all the gods: T^us M. Calv. But although diverse of these things here
prophesied of may by way of analogy be applied to the Romans, whose pride was
into lerable, and their superstitious religion, a very profaneness: yet they
cannot well be understood here: seeing at that time there was no king among the
Romans: but here the Angel directly speaks of a king: and the inuading of
the city by Pompey was an 100. year and more after this: which distance of
time, the continuance and coherence of this story will not admit.

4. Lyranius, with other writers of that side, Pererius, with the rest, and
before him Hugo Card. do understand this prophecy directly of that Antichrist
whom they suppose shall come in the end of the world, and reign but 3. years
and an half: and so Hugo a little before expounded that little help of Henoch
and Elias, which shall stand up against Antichrist. And to this purpose
Pererius alleges out of Hyppolitus, how Antichrist shall send his mandates
through the world, to call together people and nations to come to worship
him: who shall cause to be proclaimed in their hearing: quis Deus magnus
praeter me, quis potentiae meae resistet? who i^ so great a God as I, who is
able to resist my power? etc. But that this devise of some singular man, which
shall stand up in the end of the world to be Antichrist, is but a mere
fiction, is afterward more at large declared among the controversies handled
out of this chapter: And beside it is not like that the Angel would join
together two stories so far asunder.

5. Some other writers do so understand this of the very Antichrist the Pope,
as that they apply it not to Antiochus at all: but think that Antichrist is
properly described from hence to the end of the prophecy of Daniel, Osiander,
Pappus. But it is one thing historically to interpret a prophecy, an other
typically to apply it.

6. Now then that all these things were historically performed by Antiochus,
and are in the intendement of the prophecy specially meant of him, thus it may
be showed:

1. The time, when all these things should be fulfilled, is expressed, c. 12.
11. the days are summed to a 1290. days, that is, 3. years, 7. months, and
about 13. days: therefore this prophecy could not be put off so long.

2. The word hamelech, this king, has reference to the former history: and
the article ha, is a note of demonstration, pointing out the king before spoken
of:

3. All the other expositions bring us to a time far distant and remoote,
from the former history of Antiochus; but these things here described follow,
as the next in the consequent of time.

4. Beside, the Angel in this prophetical narration satisfies Daniels desire,
which was to know, what should befall his people: but these things as the
other expound them, do nothing concern the Jews: neither came they so much as
into Daniels thought to enquire.

5. The sequel of the story answeareth to the prophecy: for Antiochus did
all this: he advanced himself above God, and spoke blasphemous things against
him, in defiling his Temple, abrogating the sacrifices, burning the books of
the law: he wrote also his letters, that they should forbid the offerings and
sacrifices, and defile the Sabbaths and feasts, and pollute the Sanctuary and
the holy men, and to set up altars, and groves, and chapels of idols, and to
offer up swines flesh and strange beasts, 1. Mac. 1. v. 47. to 51. and v. 57.
58. Thus ti is evident that Antiochus magnified himself against God: see
further Appendix following, exercis. 2. argum. 3.

Quest. 44. Antiochus impiety and inhumanitie further described out of the 37.
v.
Some take not this to be understood at all of Antiochus, but do otherwise
apply it: the Hebrews of Constantine, and of some other Emperors: Calvin of
the politic state of the Romans before the coming of Christ: Melancthon,
Oecolampad. of the Turk and the Pope: some of the Pope only, Bulling. Osiand.
some of Antiochus only, Porphyrius, Pelican, whose opinions are discussed in
the former question.

But most of these will not have Antiochus here understood. 1. because we do
not find that Antiochus neglected the worship of all gods, especially the god
of his fathers, Calvin. for he set up the idols of the Gentiles, Lyran. 2. and
whereas it is said, he shall not regard the desires of women: it is evident,
that Antiochus was given over unto all carnal lust and licentious life: thus
obiecteth Pererius, that these things can not quadrare in Antiochu^, agree unto
Antiochus, who was famous for his beastly and filthy lust: and he set up
temples to Iuppiter Olympius, and Iuppiter Hospitalis, which were his fathers
the Grecians gods: to these objections answer shall be made afterward: now we
will examine the several opinions.

1. Ab. Ezra thinks this prophecy to have bin fulfilled in Constantine the
great, when he embraced the Christian faith, and abrogated Gentilisme and Pagan
idolatry: But Danie^ says not, he shall abrogate or deny the gods of his
fathers, but he shall not regard them.

2. Some apply this unto the Turk, who honors Mahomet before Christ the
ancient God of Christians, and prefers Mahomets laws before Christ's:
Melancth. Oecolamp. But, as Calvin well notes, voluit Deus sustinere animos
suorum vsque ad Christi exhibitionem, God in this prophecy does intend only
the relief and comfort of his, till Christ should be exhibited.

3. The same reason may serve against their opinion, which think the Atheism,
irreligion, and new worship brought in by the Popes to be here described: as
Illyricus, lib. advers. primat. Pap. Osiander, Bulling. Graser. exercit. 3. p.
185. all these show how the Pope has left the ancient faith, and true worship
of Jesus, in setting up other Mediators, and bringing in traditions, making
them equal, if not superior to the laws of Jesus Christ: so that in effect
he worshippeth Christ but in name and show only. All this may fitly be applied
under the type of Antiochus, to the Roman Antichrist, but there is difference
between the historical and typical sense.

4. The Romanists, as Pererius, Vatablus, do here dream of their imagined
Antichrist, that shall come before the end of the world, and grow into such
pride, that he shall cause himself only to be worshipped, as God: But this
their fantastical conceit is rejected before, qu. 43. 4. and shall be at large
confuted among the controversies.

5. Calvin understands the Roman state, who daily invented new gods, but in
effect cared for none: but at this time there was no king or Emperor of the
Romans: as the Angel here speaks directly of a king, hamelech: the article
set before the word shows, that one particular king is meant.

6. Wherefore this was historically fulfilled in Antiochus: 1. not in that he
profaned the Temple and the God of the Jews, whom Antiochus the great his
father honored, and gave unto the Temple great immunities: Joseph. lib. 12. c.
3. for the God of the Jews was not the God of his fathers, that were
idolaters. 2. nor in compelling the Jews not to set by the honor of their
fathers, 2. Ma^chab. 4. 15. for this must be his own act. 3. nor in setting up
the gods of the Grecians, as Iuppiter, Bacchus, Hercules, which were not the
Syrian gods: for all the Gentiles worshipped in effect the same idols, though
under other names. 4. But herein was his impiety and prophannes seen, that
though he set up the idols of the heathen, and spared for no cost, in adorning
them, and therein exceeded all his predecessors, as Polybius in Athen. yet in
effect he cared for no god: he was vacuus omni numinis reverentia, void of all
reverence of the godhead: Iun. Pellic. and Graserus, who applies all this to
the Pope, denies not but that in this sense it may be understood of Antiochus.
page 191.

45. Quest. How Antiochus should not regard the desires of women.
1. Some do read these words affirmatively, that he shall be in the desires of
women. And here 1. Pelican applies it to Antiochus, that was luxuriosissimus,
most lascivious, in so much that publicly he was not ashamed to use his
concubines. 2. some refer it to the Antichrist in the end of the world, qui
futurus est Iudaeorum Messiah, who shall be the Messiah of the Jews, who*
because the Jews do expect the multitude of wives to be granted them by
their Messiah, shall by no means command, or commend caelibatum, single life:
Bellar. lib. 3. de Romans pont. c. 21. But it is evident, that in the Hebrew the
negative particle must be supplied in every clause, as has been showed in the
diverse readings of this verse: and so Anquila reads, (...), he shall not
attend to the desires of women. As concerning that conceit of their Antichrist,
the Jews Messiah and that Antichrist shall come together.

2. Pererius thinks, that the spirit of God of purpose left the Hebrew
Scripture ambiguous, that in both senses it might agree to Antichrist: for he
secretly shall be given to all lust, and yet outwardly feign chastity: but
the Scripture uses not to speak doubtfully.

3. Wherefore the best reading is negatiuely, he shall not have respect to the
desires of women. 1. which neither do we take generally for his inhumanitie,
becasue kindness and humanity is likened to the love of women, 2. Sam. 1. 26.
as Iunius referring it to Antiochus, and Calvin to the Romans, and some other
to Herod that was cruel toward his wife and children. 2. nor, becasue
Antiochus regarded not the desire and request of his wife for sparing the
Temple: for the text speaks of women, not of one woman. 3. nor yet is here
signified the tenderness of women, whom he cruelly put to death, not sparing
their sex: Bro. for the word chemidah, desire, is not taken in that sense. 4.
nor yet is it meant, he should altogether be alienated from the desire of
women; as Vatablus does, applying it to their Antichrist. 5. But the word
signifies the lawful desires of women: he shall contemn matrimony, and be
given over to vagrant lust: and this to be the sense Graserus shows by three
arguments: 1. by the use of the word, which is for the most part taken for
lawful desire: as Daniel is called, a man of desires, Dan. 9. 23. and Ezekiels
wife is called the desire of his eyes, c. 24. 17. 2. the word signifies a
reflection of desire: in desiring and being desired: as 1. Sam. 9. 20. the
desire of Israel was toward Saul: but this reflection of desire is only seen
in lawful matrimony. 3. the phrase shows so much, he shall not regard: as
before it signified not the abolishing of all gods, but a contempt of them: so
here he shall not altogether despise women, but he shall not regard their
desire: he shall contemn matrimony: and so did Antiochus, who had a famous
strumpet Antiochis, to whom he gave the cities of Tharsus and Mallot, 2.
Macchab. 4. 30. Theodoret: and he openly joined himself to strumpets: as
Hierome. 6. This being thus literally true of Antiochus, may be applied
typically to the Pope, who has brought in contempt of Matrimony, etc. but
this is not the historical meaning, as Bulling. Osiand. Illyricus, Graserus
do think. 7. But Oecolampad. is further off, who understands this of
Antiochus contempt of the beutiful goddesses, as the Moon, or Venus: for the
text speaks of women, not of goddesses.

46. Quest. Of the strange god that Antiochus should set up, v. 28.
This verse is diversely interpreted, and there is great difference about the
meaning of these words, in his place he shall honor the god Mauzzim. These
diverse opinions may be thus sorted: some do understand these words of the
false god, which shall be set up: some of the true God, in whose stead
Antiochus, or Antichrist, shall set up an other strange god.

Of the first sort: 1. some think that Mauzzim should be the name of the place
where Antiochus set up his idol, and caused it to be worshipped, which
Porphyrius thinks to have been called Modin, the country of Mattathia:
Pelican also misliketh not this sense. But Mauzzim has an other sense, it
signifies munition or strength: and between the words Mauzzim, and Modin,
there is small affinity.

2. Some apply this unto Antichrist, and think that he shall secretly worship
the devil, whom he shall call the god of his defense, Lyran. and Bellarmine
does hereunto incline.

3. Theodoret thus expounds, that Antichrist shall call himself the god
Mauzzim, that is, a strong god: but it has been showed sufficiently before,
that this prophecy is historically and literally understood of Antiochus. And
if it should be referred to Antichrist, that he is himself this god Mauzzim,
there can be made no sense of these words, he shall worship the god Mauzzim in
his place: for how can he be said to worship himself? here is one that
worshippeth, and an other that is worshipped.

4. Some understand this prophecy of the Turk, and this god Mauzzim to be
Mahomet, whom the Turks adore with silver and gold; and whose religion he
maintains by force and strength; still seeking to enlarge his Empire, and to
subdue nations, which was one of Mahomets special precepts and principles: and
it is said, he shall worship him in his place, that is, according to his
quality and dignity, not as a God, but as a great Prophet: thus one Christian
Irenophil. ex Polan. Oecolampadius much varieth not, having reference here unto
Mecca the temple of Mahomet, which is adorned with silver and gold. But I have
showed, that this prophecy concerns not the Turk, whose Monarchy began a
1000. years after Antiochus: and the affairs of the Turk did not belong to
the state and condition of the Jews the people of God then, for whose comfort
specially this prophecy was penned.

5. M. Calvin still proceeds, applying all this unto the Romans, that they
had their peculiar god Iuppiter Olympius, Iuppiter set up in the Capitol, whom
they made the chief of all other gods: but in effect they only magnified
themselves, their power and riches above all other gods: And so far as it was
for their advantage and profit, they did pretend the name and worship of the
gods: but in effect, they set up altars, and offered sacrifice, suae
foelicitati and fortunae, to their own happiness and fortune: so also Genevens.
following Calvin: but this application to the Roman state we have upon diverse
reasons refused before, qu. 44.

6. Melancthon by the god Maosim, that is, of munitions, understands the god
variorum templorum, that was worshipped in diverse temples: for as the Jews had
but one Temple called before Maosa, v. 31. the Sanctuary of strength: so the
Gentiles had their Maosim, their diverse temples, wherein they worshipped a
number of gods: as the Athenians worshipped Pallas, the Thebanes, Bacchus; the
Eleusines, Ceres; the Sic^lians, Proserpina; the Argives, Juno; they of
Delphos, Phoebus; the Lemnians, Vulcan; the Lampsacenes, Priapus; the
Phrygians, Cybele: But M. Calvin does not much weigh this distinction of the
singular and plural, for the word Maozim, he takes it to be curious. And
seeing Melancthon first understands this of Antiochus, it can not be showed
how he brought in all these gods: and the text only speaks in the singular,
of the god Mauzzim.

7. Some do properly understand here the Pope the Roman Antichrist, and
retaining the word as a proper name Mauzzim do specially apply it to the
idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass: Osiander makes some allusion in the word
Mauzzim, to the word Mass: Melancthon observes that the word mazon, which
signifies food or meat, has some assinitie with Mauzzim, noting the Papists
breaden god: but Oecolampad. refuses this conceit, because the word mazon is
written without the letter ain, which the other word has, Bullinger makes
this application, that Mauzzim which signifies holds, may be taken for the
Temples, which they adorn with silver and gold, and do tie thereunto the
corporal presence of Christ: But all these are analogicall applications of
this prophecy: we must seek for an historical sense beside, which was to
take place long before the Roman Antichrist appeared in the world.

8. All these do by the god Mauzzim, understand a false god, which should be
brought in by this adversary here spoken of. Polychronius by the god Mauzzim,
that is, of strength, would have signified the true god of Isreal, whom
Antiochus at length was forced to confess by the extremity of his disease,
and sent great gifts and presents to Jerusalem to the Temple: But neither is
mention made in the story, 2. Macchab. 9. of any such gifts which he sent,
Oecolampad. and it is a strange god, not the true God, which Antiochus here is
said to worship with gold and silver.

9. Iunius and Polanus do concur together, thus reading, as for the God of
strength, in his place he shall honor: he shall honor a god, whom his
fathers knew not, etc. And Polanus will have the first clause distinguished,
because of the accent zakeph katon, which divides it from the words following:
so that they would have the god Mauzzim here taken for the true God, called the
God of strength, Polan. or the God of munitions, that is, whose seat was at
Jerusalem, which is called in Scripture a city of munition: Iun. commentar.
But 1. neither that accent, nor yet the imperfect distinction rebia, which is
over the word maghuzim, or (as Montanus) mahuzim, are of such force wholly to
suspend these words from the clause following; but only they make a little
pause or stay, not dividing the sense: for then the words, leeloha maghuzim,
the god Mauzzim, standing by themselves, should make no sense at all. 2. And
again, the same word leeloha, God, is repeated in the next sentence: it must
therefore be taken in the same sense in both places: if in the latter, it might
be translated, and God, he shall honor, whom etc. it must be so taken in the
first place: and the god Mauzzim, or of munitions: not, as for the God: the
preposition lamed must have the like use in both places: and this reason
chiefly makes me to dissent from these learned men in this place.

10. Wherefore I rather condescend to that other interpretation of Melancthon,
that Mauzzim signifies not only strength, but an hold, munition, a place of
defense: and so Antiochus after he had set up the idol of Iuppiter Olympius in
the Temple, he built a strong tower or place of defense, near unto the Temple,
where he set a garrison, to force the people to worship that idol: so the
author of the Scholasticall history interprets, Maozim praesidium sonat, and
Antiochus in Jerusalem praesidium posuit, Maozim signifies an hold or
garrison, and so Antiochus set garrisons in Jerusalem: Lyranus takes Mauzzim
for a strong place, where Antichrist shall worship his idol: Vatablus by the
god of strength, understands the idol, cuius fortitudini tribuet acceptum
imperium, to whose fortitude he shall ascribe his Empire and dominion, which he
had obtained. But I prefer rather the former sense for these two reasons: 1.
because an other word by way of explanation is added to Mauzzim, which
signifies holds: he shall make or set in the holds, Mauzzim, munitions with a
strange god, v. 39. 3. The history hereunto agrees, how they built a strong
wall and made towers in the city of David, which was near unto the Temple:
and so they were an ambushment to the Sanctuary, 1. Macchab. 1. 35. 38. This
god of munitions then was Iuppiter Olympius, whom Antiochus caused to be set
up in the Temple at Jerusalem, and to be called by the name of that idol, 2.
Macchab. 6. 2. which idol he guarded with munitions, worshipped with silver and
gold: which was a strange god, because the Syrians worshipped other gods, and
goddesses, as Apollo, Diana, Atargates: Strabo lib. Geogra. 16. Iuppiter
Olympius was the idol of the Greeks, which was not known in these places
before: at the least never set up in the Temple at Jerusalem, by any of
Antiochus predecessors: so four things are here declared concerning this
abominable idol: 1. he shall be guarded with munition. 2. he shall be set up in
his place, that is, in the seat and place of the true God of Israel. 3. it
shall be a strange idol, not known in that country before. 4. he shall honor
him with silver and gold.

47. Quest. Of Antiochus politic devises to continue the idolatrous service of
his new god, v. 39.
This wicked and subtle Tyrant having brought in a new Idol, uses two means
for the establishing of this new come image: first he by force, planting
garrisons, and fortifying strong holds, seeks to defend his false worship;
then by rewards, honors, preferments, he inticeth base fellows to maintain
his idolatry: but first the meaning of the words must be examined, and then
the accomplishment and fulfilling thereof showed.

1. Some do join both the parts of the verse together, and make this the
sense; thus shall he do to the strong garrisons, that shall defend his strange
god: he shall give rewards, honors, and preferments, Melancth. Oecolampad.
Osiand. but beside, that the distinction rebia does divide the first part of
the sentence from the latter, the words themselves will not beat this sense:
for it is said, he shall divide the land for a price, not freely: but to his
soldiers and garrisons he gave rewards freely, yea he gave them a years pay
before hand, 1. Macchab. 3. 27.

2. M. Calvin reads thus, faciet adversus munitiones fortitudinum, etc. he
shall do against the strong munitions with a strange god: that is, prevail,
etc. which he understands of the prosperous success of the Romans, who
shall prevail and overcome by this their strange god; that is, by their own
power and strength, which they shall magnify as a god. But beside that the
Romans are not here understood at all, this sense is contrary to the scope of
the text: for he shall prevail by these strong holds, not against them.

3. The vulgar Latin reads thus, and he shall cause to fortify Maozim with
a strange god, that is, as Lyranus expounds, he shall fortify the place,
when he worshippeth this strange god; applying it to Antichrist: but although
this sense be not much to be misliked, the words are not well translated: for
the word lemibizere, is a noune put in the plural number, and not a verb, and
signifies holds, munitions, forts, not to fortify.

4. Bullinger thus interprets, faciet, scilicet praedicta, he shall do, that
is to say the former things, with silver and gold, in the holds, that is, the
temples of Maozim, with a strange god, in setting forth the worship of this
strange god: to this purpose also the English translations, thus shall he do
in the holds of Maozim, B. G. But these make here Maozim a proper name of the
idol, which rather is a name appellatiue, and signifies holds or garrisons, as
is showed in the former question: and it is evident, that Maozim is a diverse
thing from the strange god here spoken of.

5. Bullinger delivers this as an other sense; he shall do in the holds of
Maozim, as the Gentiles used to do with their strange gods: But this strange
god here is the same, which before he called the god of Maozim, which is
Antiochus new idol, which he set up.

6. Iunius thus reads, he shall commit the munitions of the (God) of strength
unto a strange god: so also M. Br. and Polanus agrees, saving that he
inserteth not (God) as the other do: and they make this the sense, that
Antiochus shall commit the custody of the strong holds of Judea unto Iuppiter
Olympius, as though he had vanquished the mighty God of Judea himself. But it
seems, that he had more confidence in his munitions and fortified places,
then in his strange god: and that he committed this new god to the custody and
defense of them, rather then strong places to him.

7. Therefore I prefer Vatablus translation for the first words, who reads
thus, faciet ac vertet in munimenta, these things he shall turn to the
defense, etc. of the (god) Maozim: saving that he makes here Maozim a proper
name, and supplieth the word (God,) and so makes the (god Maozim) to be diverse
from the strange god here mentioned, (...)
being the same: I rather take Maozim with the Septuag, to be here an
appellatiue, who translate it, a place of refuge: thus then are the words to be
read, he shall make (to be) for holds, Maozim, strong places with a strange
god: so the author of the Scholasticall history interprets Maozim to be
garrisons or forts, and Em. Sa, castella fortia, strong castles: the (...) is,
he shall make strong places of defense, where he shall set up his strange god:
which Antiochus accordingly did: for he fortified the tower of Sion, near unto
the Temple, where he set the idol of Iuppiter Olympius, 1. Macchab. 1. 35, 36.
as Hugo Card. well observes: and he set garrisons in other cities of Judah
also, as in Garizin he placed Iuppiter hospital^^, that is, which keeps
hospitality, as he had set Iuppiter Olympius in Jerusalem, 2. Macchab. 6. 2.

For the second part of the verse: 1. for this clause, whom he knows, some
copies of the vulgar Latin have, whom he knows not: which translation
Vatablus and Pintus set down: but there is no negative in the original. 2.
some refer this clause, whom he knows, unto Antiochus, that is, the idol
which he approoueth, and chooses, Lyran. Hug. Melancth. Calv. Papp. with
others: but it is said before, that he should not care for any god: he
acknowledges none at all. 3. Iunius gives this sense, those whom he knows,
that is, favors, and sees to further his wicked devise, them he shall
honor: so also Polanus. 4. But the better sense seems to be this; that him,
which acknowledges this idol, and yields himself to this abomination, him
will he honor. Vatabl. Bulling.

The last words, he shall divide the land for a price, are diversely
interpreted: 1. the vulgar Latin reads, gratuito, he shall divide the land
freely: so Lyran. Hug. Osiand. Papp but the original has bimchir, in a price.
2. some read, loco pretij, he shall divide the land in stead of a price, Iun.
but the word is in a price, that is, for a price. 3. the best reading is, for a
price, Bulling. Calv. Vatab. Polan. so also the Septuag. (for gifts,) non
gratuito, not freely, or gratis. Pelican.

For the accomplishment hereof: 1. Lyranus thinks that this can not be
understood of Antiochus, for he had no lands to distribute, having little
beside the kingdom of Syria: But this is understood of the dividing of Judea,
which now was in Antiochus hand. 2. M. Calvin understands it of the Romans,
who took great sums of the kings, whom they subdued, to retain their
dignities, as of Philip king of Macedon, whom they had overcome before. 3. But
the history of the Macchabees shows evidently, that all these things here
prophesied, were so done by Antiochus: for so he bestowed the office of the
high Priest for money, first Jason bought it, and he was defraueded thereof by
Menelaus, who carrying the money obtained the Priesthood for himself, 2.
Macchab. 4. And three things Antiochus is said here to bestow, honors,
authority, possessions: which accordingly he did, distributing unto the
Apostatate Jews the dignities, offices, and lands in diverse places of Judea:
Polan. see it accomplished 1. Macchab. 3. 35, 36.

48. Quest. Of the last expedition of Antiochus against the Egyptians, Judea,
and other nations. v. 40. to 44.
There are two parts of this narration: 1. what countries he shall invade, v.
40, 41. and what countries shall be free. First, he shall set upon Egypt,
being provoked by the king thereof, and shall come against him with an huge
army both by sea and land, v. 40. then he shall enter into the land of Judea,
called the pleasant land, v. 41. Secondly, the nations which are freed from
these troubles, are either those which he shall spare, as being confederates,
Edom, Moab, and the first, that is, the chief of Ammon, v. 41. and those
nations which shall aid and assist him, as the Lybians and Aethiopians, which
shall help him to take the spoil of Egypt: here then are in all these four
particular members: 1. of the battle between the king of the South, and the
North. 2. of the pleasant land. 3. of Edom, Moab, and Ammon, which escaped. 4.
of Lybia and Aethiopia that helped: of all these, how they should be taken,
there are diverse opinions.

1. Some do understand all this of the Antichrist, who, as they imagine, shall
come in the end of the world. 1. he shall be that king of the North, who shall
first subdue Egypt. 2. and the^ he shall invade Judea, called the pleasant, or
glorious la^d, because of the miracles which were wrought there. 3. Moab,
Ammon, Edom shall escape, because diverse in that great persecution of
Antichrist, shall save themselves there in the mountains, for these were hilly
countries. 4. he shall take also Lybia and Aethiopia, which shall first of all
be subject unto him, Hierome, Lyran, Perer. But this exposition of such a
singular Antichrist has been refused before, upon these two reasons. 1.
because the Angel prophesies only of such things as should befall the people
of the Jews, for whom Daniel was so soliicitous and careful. 2. that there
shall be no such singular Antichrist, whom they suppose to be one particular
person, is showed afterward, controv. 2.

2. M. Calvin gives this interpretation: 1. that the king of the South and the
North shall encounter with the Romans: for so Mithridates and Tigranes in the
North, had long war with the Romans: and Cleopatra with Antonie in Egypt
fought a great battle with Augustus. 2. the Romans shall prevail and invade
Judea also. 3. But the hilly countries of Moab, Edom, Ammon, shall escape
them, or they shall not greatly regard them. 4. the Romans also shall conquer
the Lybians and Aethiopians.

But this exposition cannot stand. 1. because the kings of the North and South
do not join together, but it is said, the king of the North shall come
against him, that is, against the king of the South. 2. here is no mention made
of any third king or power, beside the king of the North and South: and he that
is the king of the North, is said to do all that follows in the next verses,
v. 41. he shall enter into the pleasant land, v. 42. he shall stretch forth his
hands, that is, the king of the North shall do all this.

3. Bullinger thus interprets. 1. by the king of the North and South he
understands the Turks and Saracenes which should come from the North and
South, with huge armies of footmen, and horses, and strong ships. 2. They
shall invade the pleasant land, and many shall falk which he refers to the
holy wars decreed against the Turk, by Gregor. 2. in the Council of
Claromont, which was the occasion of the ruin and overthrow of many. 3. Edom,
Moab, and Ammon, that is the people inhabiting those countries, shall join
themselves unto the Turks and Saracenes, and so be free. 4. The Lybians also
and Aethiopians, shall be confederate with the Turks: who shall overcome
Egypt, and expel the Sultane thereof, which was brought to pass by Selymus
the great Truke.

But these exceptions likewise may be here taken. 1. that this prophecy
beginning with Antiochus, is not like to end with the Turk, and so the space
of a thousand years coming between, should be left untouched. 2. the kings
of the North and South are not here confederates, but they one fight* with an
other. 3. the names of Moab, Edom, Ammon, and their generation were
extinguished before the Turks Monarchy began: this prophecy then cannot be
extended so far, but must be restrained to those times, while these names and
nations continued.

4. Osiander and Pappus, 1. by the king of the North understand the Roman
Antichrist: by the king of the South, Christ: for as from the North they say
comes all evil: so from the South that which is good: and thus the king of
the South, that is Christ, has raised up from time to time diverse of his
saithfull servants, which have opposed themselves to Antichrist. 2. by the
pleasant land is understood the Church, which Antichrist shall continually
afflict. 3. Edom signifies read, Moab the father, Ammon my people: and these
three sorts shall be free from the corruptions of Antichrist: the martyrs that
are made red with their blood: they which depend only upon the mercies of
God the father: and the first of Ammon, that is, infants which are as the first
fruits of the people of God. 4. And though the Popes authority be not
received in Lybia, Egypt, Aethiopia, yet he challenges jurisdiction over them
all, etc.

But this exposition also fails: 1. the king of the North and South are
literally to be taken, See more Appendix exercis. 7. argum. 3.
as before in the rest of this chapter: and who sees not how improperly Christ
is said to be king of the South: if the Pope of Rome be the king of the North,
Christ borne in Jerusalem which is not South, but East to Rome, is unfitly
called king of the South: And seeing he is king of all the world, his kingdom
must not be restrained to the South. 2. by the pleasant land Judea is
understood here as also before, v. 16. 3. as Egypt and other countries are here
understood literally for the nations so called, so likewise must Edom, Moab,
and Ammon be taken. 4. Lybia and Aethiopia, which never yet received the Pope,
are very improperly said to be in subjection to him.

5. It remains then, that all this was historically fulfilled in Antiochus.
1. the occasion of his coming against Egypt was this, Philometor king of
Egypt, had an other brother called Physcon, who sought to expel Philometor out
of his kingdom: with Physcon Antiochus takes part, and prepares an army to
come and help him, which Philometor understanding, here called the king of the
South, went against him: and this is the battle here spoken of between the
king of the South, and of the North: But the king of the North prevailed, whose
army is compared to a whirlewind, and to an ouerflowing water: but the other
is said only to push at him. This history is touched by Florus in the Epitome
of Livie, lib. 46. and by Iustine also, and Zonaras tom* annal. 2.

2. As Antiochus returned from the spoil of Egypt, he took Iudaea, and other
countries in the way, and spoiled them also.

3. But he spared the Edomites, Moabites, and Ammonites, because they took his
part against them, and much molested the Jews: and therefore Judas Macchabeus
did fight against the children of Esau, and Timotheus the captain of the
Ammonites, besieged their cities, and put them to the sword, 2. Macchab. 5.
Joseph. lib. 12. antiqu. c. 11.

4. The Lybians also and Ethiopians, which before were on Philometors side,
being allured by his fair promises joined with Antiochus, and therefore it is
said, they were at his footesteppes or pases, that is, they followed him as
their captain: see further in the appendix, Exercis. 8. argum. 2. answer. 9.

But thus it is argued against this exposition. 1. Porphyrie who literally
understands this prophecy of Antiochus, says that these things happened in
his 11. year, whereas in the beginning of that year he died far from home
in Persia, Perer.

2. After the Romans by their Ambassador Popilius had discharged Antiochus
out of Egypt, he never returned thither again, Perer.

3. Antiochus never subdued the countries of Lybia, and Aethiopia, as here it
is said of this king, Hierome.

4. Neither had Antiochus all countries in subjection unto him, only these
three excepted, of Edom, Moab, Ammon.

Answ. 1. Though these things were not done in the 11. year of Antiochus as
Porphyrius thinks, who was therein deceived, yet this lets not but that
this prophecy was fulfilled in Antiochus: these things might fall out two
years after he had set up idolatry, and some two years or thereabout before
his death, Iun. annot.

2. Though Antiochus did forbear to invade Egypt, after that discharge by way
of hostility and conquest, yet he might and did affoard his helping hand to
one of the brothers against the other: which might be taken for no breach of
his promise made unto the Romans to depart out of Egypt.

3. Neither does the text say, that he subdued Lybia, and Aethiopia; but as
Hierome says he passed thorough or by them: and Hierome himself gives this
satisfaction, that when Egypt was taken, the countries next adjoining
conturbatae sunt, were troubled: But the word is bemitzghadaiv, in his pases,
or footings, that is, Lybia and Aethiopia followed his footsteppes, they obeyed
him as their captain.

4. Neither are all the countries of the world here spoken of: for never any
Conqueror subdued the whole world, neither ever shall: but the country
adjoining to Egypt, See more in the appendix exer. 6. argum. 1. respons. 8.
and Palestina felt Antiochus hand: the meaning is, that only these three
countries in those parts, and in that tract and circuit escaped his hands,
namely, Edom, Moab, Ammon.

Quest. 49. Of the Lybians and Aethiopians where they inhabited.
v. 43. Because mention is here made of the Lybians and Aethiopians, which
should take part with Antiochus against the king of Egypt, it shall not be
amiss briefly to describe what nations these were.

1. For the Lybians: they were people that inhabited Africa: but the country
called Lybia, was either taken for the larger country of Africa, or for that
part only which was next unto Egypt, called Cyrenaica, as Act. 2. 10. it is
said by way of distinction, the parts of Lybia, which is beside Cyrene. And
that larger country, and the remoter parts of Lybia, are called in Scripture,
Phut, as Nahum 3. 9. the Phutei and Lybians are named together: they were so
called of Phut one of the sons of Cham, Genes. 10. 6. in which country there
was a river called Phut: The Lybians then here spoken of, were those people of
the nearer Lybia to Egypt.

2. Cush here is taken for Aethiopia: so called of Cush the son of Cham: but
there were two countries called by that name Cush or Aethiopia: one was Arabia
in Asia, and therefore Zipporah Moses wife, is called a Cushite or Aethiopesse,
Numb. 12. of this Aethiopia was Zerah king, that came against Asa, with such an
huge army, 2. Chron. 14. 9. the king of the other Aethiopia, Se^ a singular
opinion of (...) concerning these Lybians and (...) Appendix Exercis. 8. argum.
2.
which was in Africa beyond Egypt, he is not like to be, because of the great
distance of the place, and there was no cause of hostility between them: the
Aethiopians here spoken of, were of that larger country adjoining upon Egypt,
see further Hexapl. in Genes. c. 10. quest. 9.

3. But Pintus by occasion of this word Cush, which signifies a Niger, or
black Moore, will have it taken not only for one that is black in the color
and complexion of his body, but black also in manners and conditions:
according to that saying of the Poet Herace, hic niger est, hunc tu Roman
can^eto, etc. this is a black fellow, thou Roman take heed of him: Whether
Sa^l be called Cush in the title of the 7. Psalm.
This his opinion he would warrant by the title of the 7. Psalm, Shigaion of
David, which he sang, etc. concerning the words of Cush the son of Iemini:
which he takes to be understood of Saul the king, who is called Cush, because
of his evil and cruel conditions: Now for the meaning of this place, there
are diverse opinions. 1. Some think that this is understood of Chushai David's
friend, who opposed himself to the counsel of Achitophel: of this opinion are
Basil, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Euthymius, with others: but this cannot be so:

1. His name is Cushat, with other letters and pricks, this is Cush. 2. that
Cushai was an Archite, that is, of Benjamin. 3. he was David's friend, but this
was David's enemy, of whom he complains in this Psalm.

2. An other opinion is, that this Cush was Saul, because he was of Iemini,
that is, of the tribe of Benjamin: Thus expounds Ionathas the Chalde
paraphrast: as though Cush should be here taken for Cis the father of Saul: of
the same opinion that Saul is here understood, are Hierome, whom follow herein
Raynerus, Isidor. Brixianus, Iansenius, Vatablus, Pintus, with others: But this
we refuse also: for when the word is taken for a Cushite or Ethiopian, it is
Cushi, not Cush: for so the Hebrews end their gentile names in I: so Cushi
signifies a Cushite or Ethiopian, Ierem. 13. 23.

3. Some do here refer us to Shemei, that cursed David, 2. Sam. 16.
Genevens. as though he should be called by another name, beside Shemei: but
there being no such thing mentioned in Scripture, I leave it as a bare
conjecture.

4. Wherefore it is more like, that this Cush was some other of Saul's followers
that gave in false information of him unto Saul: as David complains of such
unto Saul himself, 1. Sam. 24. 10. wherefore give thou an care to men's words
that say, Behold David seeks evil against thee, Iun.

Quest. 50. Of the end of Antiochus, and such things as immediately went before.
In this last part of this prophetical narration, there are first showed the
signs and forerunners of this cruel Tyrants end and sudden destruction:
secondly, his end and ruin it self: there ate three signs which went
before, as ominous accidents. 1. the rumors which he heard from the East and
the North. 2. his indignation and fury thereuppon. 3. the planting of his
tabernacle in the holy mount. 4. then follows his final ruin.

1. What these rumors should be, there are diverse opinions. 1. Hierome
understands it of the fame and rumor of wars, which should be raised by the
faithful and Chrstian people against Antichrist in the end of the world: But
such an Antichrist to be one particular person to come in the end of the
world, has no ground in Scripture: neither is the accomplishment hereof to be
deferred so long unto the end of the world.

2. M. Calvin still continues his interpretation of the Roman state: these
rumors which troubled them, were the evil news which was brought them, how
Crassus was vanquished at Carras, and Antonie also after that, was there foiled
with all the power of the Romans: But this text speaks of one particular
man, whose end is described: it cannot be referred then to a whole state or
Monarchy.

3. These rumors, M. Bullinger thinks, to be the tidings brought to the
Roman Antichrist, concerning the wars of the Turk: whereupon Gregor. the 2.
combined all Christian princes to join together against the common enemy the
Turk, which was the beginning of those long and bloody wars, called the
holy wars.

4. Osiander and Pappus understanding here also the Roman Antichrist, by these
rumors think to be meant the preaching of the Gospel, which began in the
parts of Germany, which are East and North unto Rome: But though this
prophecy analogically may be applied to Antichrist, yet there is another
historical meaning, as shall be showed afterward.

5. Melancthon will have the Turk here to be described, who shall be terrified
with rumors: that is, whereas by humane force he could not be resisted, the
Lord from heaven shall stay his rage: But we must not defer the fulfilling of
this prophecy so long: it served specially for the comfort of those times.

6. These rumors then were the tidings of wars which were brought unto
Antiochus, and drew him out of Egypt: these rumors from the East, were of the
Parthians, which invaded his kingdom; and from the north, of the Romans whose
nauies and ships were in the coasts of Cilicia: Iun. annot. who in his
commentary thinks that these rumors were only of the overthrow of his
captains in Judea, while he was in Persia: the news whereof was brought him
both to Persepolis which was in the East, and to Ecbatane in the North, 2.
Macchab, 9. 2. 3. Porphyrius by these rumors understands the fame of wars
which were intended against him from the East, by Artaxias king of Armenia: But
Polanus better joins these together: that first the rising of the Parthians
and Persians troubled him, which was the cause that brought him into that
country; and being there he was much more vexed, hearing of the evil
success that his captains Timotheus and Bacchides had in Judea, whom Judas
Macchabeus vanquished, and slew at one time 20. thousand of their army: see
2. Macchab. 8. 30. and c. 9. 3.

2. The second precedent of Antiochus ruin, was his great wrath and
indignation, with the which he went forth and destroyed many. But this is
likewise diuersely interpreted. 1. Hierome understands it of Antichrists rage,
against those which shall not receive his decrees: so also Pererius. 2. M.
Calvin of Augustus Caesar, who overcame the Parthians, and recovered that which
Antonie had lost. 3. M. Bullinger of the combination made by Pope Gregory 2.
whetting and stirring up Christian Princes to take in hand the wars for the
holy land. 4. Osiander of the cruel rage of Antichrist against the preachers
of the gospel, Luther, with others, the rumor whereof troubled him. 5.
Melancthon of the rage of the Turk. 6. Porphyrius of the overthrow, which
Antiochus gave to Artaxia^ king of Armenia, subduing also the Aradians and
Phenicians in the way. 7. But the event of this prophecy shows, that this
cruel rage of Antiochus was but against the Jews, intending to make an utter
destruction and desolation of them, as is declared 1. Macchab. 3. 27. when king
Antiochus heard these tidings, he was angry in his mind, wherefore he sent
forth and gathered all the power of his realm, a very strong army: and what
he intended against them, is further showed, v. 35. 36. 37.

3. Then follows the third ominous and precedent sign, of the planting of
the tabernacles of his palace between the Seas in the glorious and holy
mo^ntaine. 1. Aquila makes Apadno, which signifies his tabernacle, a proper
name, and Saba he makes the name of an hill: the holy mountain Saba, which is
translated glorious: so likewise Th^dotian interprets, whom Theodoret
follows, taking Apadno to be the name of a place near to Jerusalem, where
Antichrist shall be overthrown: But it is evident, that the word tzebi,
glorious, is here no proper name, as before it is an epithet given unto Judea:
and as Hierome notes, aphadno is compounded of two words, aphad, which
signifies a throne, and no, his.

2. Hierome therefore gives this sense, whom Lyranus, Pintus, Pererius
follow, that Antichrist shall pitch his tabernacle in Judea, between the two
Seas, the dead Sea, and Mediterranean Sea: in the holy mountain, mount Sion or
mount Oliver, where Christ ascended, where Antichrist shall be overthrown: of
which mountain Hierome lib. de locis hebraic. tells two strange things: that
in mount Oliuet in his time were to be seen the print of Christ's feet on the
ground, where he last stood, when he ascended; and beside in the same place
where Christ is thought to have ascended, there is a Church, which will not
endure a roof or covering upon it. But I will leave the credit of these
strange reports to those, which have seen those countries, which do find no
such thing: either Herome might be too credulous in reporting such things, or
some forging finger has thrust it in: If this report have no more truth, then
that other conceit of Antichrists spreading his palace in mount Oliuet, they
are both mere fables.

3. Porphyrius takes these two Seas to be Tigris and Euphrates, and Apadno to
be the name of a place between those rivers: and this mountain he thinks to
be in Elymais, Armenia, or Mesopotamia, where Antiochus pitched his pauilion:
But though this prophecy were historically fulfilled in Antiochus, wherein he
gesseth right: yet the other are but his fancies, by two Seas to understand two
rivers: and why should any such hill among the idotrous Persians be called
holy, unless he think it were for the superstitious adoration of some Gentile
idols there: which the spirit of God would never in that respect have called
holy.

4. Some applying this to the Turk, do show how his seat at Constantinople
is between the two Seas Aegeum and Euxinum, where sometime the Church of God
was, called the holy mountain, Melancthon. M. Calvin shows how the Romans
set their palace and dominion in those countries, and especially in Judea,
after they had quieted those parts: But this prophecy was not deferred so
long, as to reach unto the Turks: and it is evident, that some singular person
is here described, whose end is foreshewed: therefore not the whole state of
the Romans.

5. Some do interpret it of the Roman Antichrist, whose seat is between the
two Seas, Tyrrhenum, and Adriaticum: and they think Rome to be called the holy
mountain, because sometime there Paul planted a famous Church, Osiand. Pappus.
But though this by way of application may be referred to Antichrist, that is
not the original and historical sense: and it seems to be somewhat hard, to
call the seat of Antichrist great Babylon, the city of abominations, the
holy mountain.

6. Oecolampadius likewise here understanding Antichrist, takes this holy
mountain for the Church of God, which was prefigured by Judea, which was
situate between the two Seas, the dead Sea, and the mediterrane sea: But it is
evident that the glorious mountain is here taken for Judea, as it is called
before the beautiful or glorious land, v. 16. 41.

7. Iunius in his commentary takes Apadno for Mesopotamia, for he says that
country was called Apadan: as Theodotian retains the same word Apadon, and
there Antiochus pitched his pauilion between the Seas, among the Chalde
fennes: and in the holy mountain he interprets, when they went against the
holy mountain, that is Judea, which was an hilly country: And this may seem
some probability hereof, because the word padan is taken for Mesopotamia in
Scripture, which comes somewhat near the word aphadno: But the two seas
cannot properly be said to be fennes: And the very description of the holy
mountain between the two Seas, shows that Judea is understood by the right
situation thereof.

8. Some do think, that Antiochus himself returning out of Persia, was
entering into the borders and confines of Judea, when he was stricken of God:
and then he pitched his princely tents between the dead sea, and the
Mediterranean: so Polanus out of Josephus, who thus writes, that Judas
Macchabeus, eum in sines Iudaeae ingredientem, vehementissima plaga percussum,
repressit, etc. did recoile him or drive him back entering into the borders of
Judea, being stricken with a great plague, etc. lib. 1. de bello Iudaic. c. 1.
But this cannot stand with that report, 1. Macchab. 9. 4. that Antiochus fell
sick in Babylon, and their died: he was dead then before he came near Judea:
and he could not spread his tents there after he was returned from Persia:
wherefore either Josephus writes here somewhat loosely and slenderly of this
matter, as he does elsewhere: or he speaks of some other foil that Judas
gave unto Antiochus, and not at that time, when he had been in Persia.

9. Wherefore the meaning is this, that not Antiochus should pitch his pauilion
in his own person, but his viceroy Lysias, with whom he had left his son
Antiochus, and half of his army, and made him governor in his absence of all
his kingdom from Euphrates to the borders of Egypt: then he pitched in Emmaus
with the kings forces, 1. Macchab. 3. v. 32. 40. H. Br. in Daniel. which was
since called Nicopolis: which though it be said to be in the plain, yet there
the hilly tract begins, that extends to Jerusalem, the mount Oliuet not
being above a mile from Emmaus, Lyran. Hugo. the two Seas are the dead Sea and
the Mediterranean Sea, which are the limits of Judea, Iun.

Quest. 51. Of the sudden and fearful end of Antiochus.
v. 45. He shall come to his end, and none shall help him. 1. Hierome thus
delivers the sense, that Antichrist shall go up to the top of mount
Oliuet: for so he reads, veniet ad summitatem eius, he shall come to the
height thereof: that is, of mount Oliuet, whereon he shall be confounded: And
this he would prove by that place, Isay, 25. 7. I will destroy in this
mountain the covering, that covers all people, etc. But the meaning of this
place is, that Christ, of whom the Prophet there speaks, (who shall prepare a
spiritual feast, which is mentioned in the former verse, by the preaching of
the gospel) shall remove the covering of ignorance and darkness, which had
ouerspread the world: And the Prophet there names not mount Oliuet, but has
reference to that mount spoken of, c. 24. 23. which was mount Sion: a figure of
the Church, which should be illuminate with the knowledge of Christ. 2. and the
text speaks not of the end of the mountain, but of Antiochus end, when his
time was come which was limited of God.

2. Some proceed yet further, and show the manner how Antichrist shall be
ouerthrown: that first he shall feign himself dead, and rise again the third
day, and then upon mount Oliuet he shall make as though he would ascend into
heaven, and so shall be lifted up into the air by the help of the devil and
his Angels: at which instant he shall be destroyed by Christ from heaven, by the
spirit of his mouth, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Percrius, Some add
further the particular manner how Antichrist shall be destroyed: as the author
of the scholasticall history says, ascendente per era Antichristo, audietur
vox Christi de coelo missa, morcre: as Antichrist is ascending into the air,
there shall come a voice from heaven, die, and presently he shall be smitten
with lightening and perish: so also Lyran. But Lactantius is yet more bold, who
thus describes the destruction of Antichrist: that he with an huge army shall
compass about the Saints in a mountain, whether they fled, then they shall
call upon God for his help: And presently the heavens shall open, and
lightening shall break forth: and this shallbe a sign of the Lords
descending, cadet repent gladius, a sword shall suddenly fall from heaven: and
then Antichrist shall be overcome by the Angels, and all his power: he only
shall escape, sed quarto praelio debellatus, etc. but he in the fourth battle
with all his host shall be subdued, and then shall suffer worthy punishment
for his wickedness: to this purpose Lactantius lib. 7. institution. c. 17. 18.

But 1. beside that these show great boldness in thus expounding, taking
upon them without warrant of Scripture to express the very form of words,
which shall then be used, and the very signs which shall be showed. 2. herein
further they fail, in confounding the two overthrows of Antichrist, which the
Apostle does separate: for first he says, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth: that is, by his word: and the final destruction
follows: and abolish with the brightness of his coming, 2. Thessal. 2. 8.
first Antichrists hypocrisy shall be discovered by the preaching of the
Gospel, which is already fulfilled: but the remainder of his kingdom shall be
reserved for the judgment of the great day.

3. They which understand this of the Turkish Monarchy, as Melancthon, or of
the Antichrist of Rome, as Bulling. Osiand. or of the Roman state, as Calvin,
are confuted by this argument: because here the destruction of one particular
man is set forth, as in the precedent part the prophecy runs still upon one
principal agent, in the wars before mentioned.

4. Iunius in his annotations, understanding all this of Antiochus, does thus
interpret these words: he shall come to the end, that is, of his kingdom,
namely to Persepolis in Elymais, which was in the utmost bounds of his
dominion: But in his commentary he better expounds it of the end of his
life: so also Polan. H. Br. Porphyrius, though an enemy to the Christian
faith, yet herein agrees with the truth, applying this whole prophecy unto
Antiochus: but he is deceived, in naming the place of his death to be Tabis, a
town of Persia: whereas he was carried to Babylon, and there sickned, 1.
Macchab. 6. 4. and was stricken of God with an incurable disease, that no man
could help him: for he crawled full of worms, and his flesh fell off from
him, so that no man could endure his stink: yea he was loathsome to himself,
as is further declared, 2. Macchab. 9. 10. 12. This was the end of wicked
Antiochus.

But against this exposition it is thus objected. 1. that Antiochm died not
between the Seas, and upon the mountain, as is here described, but as he came
out of Persia, Lyranus. 2. Seeing these latter words of the chapter are joined
with necessary coherence to the former; as they are not understood of
Antiochus, no more are these, Perer.

Answ. 1. It is not said here, that he died upon the mountains, or between
the Seas, but there was his princely pauilion spread: for while Antiochus went
into Persia, he left half of his army, and his son Antiochus, with Lysias,
who pitched in Emmaus at the entrance or beginning of the hills, as is showed,
1. Macchab. 3. 34. 40. Now while Lysias with other captains were busy in
suppressing of the Jews, and were discomfited, as is further declared, 1.
Macchab. 5. the news thereof was brought to Antiochus being in Persia:
whereupon he fell into a great rage, purposing utterly to destroy Jerusalem:
but the Lord plagued him, and he died in the way, 1. Macchab. 6. 2. Macchab. 9.
And thus was the horn broken without hand, as is prophesied, c. 8. 25.

2. This argument may be returned upon Pererius: for seeing these words hang
together with the former; and it has been sufficiently showed before, that
the former part of this prophecy, is understood of Antiochus, so must the
latter also.

3. This ^ore plague fell upon Antiochus (which Appianus thinks to have been
a venereous or leacherous disease, in Syriac.) but it was more strange and
extraordinary, though that be foul and filthy enough: he was thus smitten,
not as Polybius thinks, because he would have spoiled the Temple of Diana:
for as Josephus says, tantum cogitavit, he only intended it, he did it not:
and therefore he well concludes against Polybius, that Antiochus perished, ob
templi Hierosolymitani excidium, for the spoiling of the Temple of Jerusalem,
lib. 12. Antiquit. c. 12. And thus far of the questions and doubts moved out
of this chapter.

4. Places of doctrine.
1. Doct. The Scripture the rule of truth.
v. 2. Now I will show thee the truth: The truth is only revealed in
Scripture; the truth of God is first manifested unto the world in Christ, as he
says, Ioh. 14. 6. I am the way, the truth, and the life: and this truth is
revealed in Scripture, as our blessed Savior says, Ioh. 17. 17. thy word is
the truth: the Scriptures of truth are committed to the Church, which is called
the pillar of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15. not because it bears up the truth; but it
rather is borne up by the truth: but both because the truth of God is only
revealed to the Church, as here the Angel delivers the truth of this
prophecy unto Daniel: and the truth is set forth and professed in the world by
the Church, as a light set upon a pillar, or a beacon raised upon a mountain.

Doctr. 2. Of the impotencie of images.
v. 8. He shall carry away captive their gods, with their molten images:
quales dij sunt, qui captiui ducuntur, what manner of gods are these which are
carried into captivity? Bulling. so the Prophet Isay derideth the idols of the
Chaldeans, Bell and Nebo, which were carried upon beasts into captivity, Isay.
46. 1. how should they be able to help others, that can do nothing for
themselves?

Doct. 3. Victory not always a sign of a good cause.
v. 11. And the multitude shall be given into his hand: Ptolome Philopator a
most vicious king, who slew Eurydice his both sister and wife, and used both a
male concubine Agathocles, and his sister Agathoclea: yet he overcomes
Antiochus Magnus, not so bad as himself: which shows that the victory
always falls not on the better side, as the Israelites fighting against
Benjamin, having the better cause, were twice overcome, Bulling.

Doct. 4. The Church of God makes a land glorious.
v. 16. He shall stand in the pleasant (glorious, or beautiful) land: which
was Judea, not so much glorious because of the fertility thereof, Pintus, or
for the miracles done therein, Lyran, for many great works had been done in
Egypt: but because there was the Temple and public service and worship of God:
this shows that religion makes lands famous and glorious, Polan.

Doct. 5. Of the fidelity of wives to their husbands.
v. 17. She shall not stand on his side: Antiochus the great gave his daughter
Cleopatra unto Ptolome Epiphanes, thinking to use her as an instrument to
destroy him; but she contrary to the expectation of her father, cleaves to
her husband: wherein she showed the part of a dutiful obedient wife,
preferring the life and safety of her husband before her fathers ungodly
desire: thus the Scripture says, for this cause shall a man forsake father and
mother, and cleave to his wife, Genes. 2. If in the degrees of lawful
affection the wife (or husband) must be preferred before the parents, much more
in unlawful desires, Polan.

6. Doctr. That tribute must be paid to the Prince.
v. 20. Then shall stand up in his place, one that shall raise taxes. This was
Seleucus Callinicus, who raised immoderate taxes. Tribute is to be paid unto
Princes, and they may lawfully take it: for what God gives, they may take: but
such things are given unto Princes: as our blessed Savior says, Give unto
Caesar, the things that are Cesars: and such things are to be yielded unto the
Magistrate, because they are helps to suppress the evil that disturbes the
peace: and in that behalf they are due, as the Apostle shows, Romans 13. 4. 7.
But two cautions are to be observed: 1. that such taxes be moderate, not
excessive, tending to the overthrow and undoing of the subject: as Seleucus
here was such a raker: and the king of Spain of late days, who exacted the
tenth part of the things which were sold in the low countries. 2. such taxes
and leuies of money, must not be wasted in riot and excess, but ^mploied for
the most part to the good of the Commonwealth.

7. Doct. Religion is not to be compelled or urged by torment.
v. 33. They shall fall by flame, by sword. Antiochus did wickedly force the
faithful by such torments to forsake their religion: so does that Antichrist
of Rome, that by fire and sword forces men unto his superstitions. Lactantius
says well, Religio cogi non potest, verbis potius, quam verberibus res agenda
est, religion is not to be forced, by words rather then swords the matter must
be handled. Among the Protestants none are put to death for religion, but for
their rebellion, and sedition, and practicing against the state.

8. Doctr. The end of persecution is to try and purge the faithful.
v. 33. Some shall fall, etc. to try and purge them, and make them white.
There are two ends of persecution: the one is, that trial may be made of the
constancy and faithfulness of the servants of God: the other to purge out that
dross which is in them, and to wash them white: whereby we see, that the most
faithful servants of God have their blemishes, errors, and imperfections, and
therefore had need to be purged. Calv.

5. Places of controversy.
Here follow certain controversies concerning Antichrist.
1. Controv. Of the birth and offspring of Antichrist.
Many of the ancient writers, as they living many years before the
manifestation of Antichrist in the world, were deceived in these particulars;
so also they were much out of the way in true understanding of other points
belonging to this mystery of iniquity. 1. Hyppolitus thought that Antichrist
should be a Devil incarnate, Antichrist not a devil incarnate.
and be begotten by fornication, and phantastica carnis substantia organi vice
vtetur, and should use a fantastical body, as his organe, etc. he thinks
that he should not have a true body, but only in appearance.

2. Damascen thinks not that Antichrist should be a Devil incarnate, yet he
says, Antichrist whether actually possessed of the devil.
that illum inhabitet Diabolus, etc. the devil should dwell in him, lib. 4. de
fide orthodox. c. 18. that the Devil should possess him both body and soul,
that in him and by him he should exercise and practice all his malice. But
these are men's fancies: 1. S. Paul calls him the man of sin: therefore a
man he shall be, and not a devil in man's likeness. 2. and his coming shall be
by the operation of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. not by the possession, and
habitation of Satan: Satan may work by those whom he possesses not, and he
may possess their bodies by whom he works not.

3. An other opinion of some ancient writers is, Whether Antichrist shall be
borne in Babylon.
that Antichrist should be borne in Babylon: as Gregory would gather so much
out of the 2. of Numbers, where it is said, that Dan pitched his tents toward
the North: for Babylon Antichristi patria Aquilonaris est, etc. for Babylon the
country of Antichrist is North to Judea. Gregor. lib. 31. moral. c. 10. But
this is a very slender collection: 1. there only the situation of the several
tribes is described, how they were placed in respect of the Tabernacle, which
marched in the mids among them: and not only the tribe of Dan, but of Asher
also and Nepthali did camp Northward. 2. Babylon is not now standing, but is
come to perpetual desolation, according to the prophecy of Isai, c. 13. 19.
that Babylon should be as the destruction of God in Sodom and Gomorrha.

4. But it is almost a general opinion among the ancient writers, Whither
Antichrist shall be of the tribe of (...).
that Antichrist should be borne of the tribe of Dan: thus thought Ireneus,
Hyppolitus, Hierome, Augustine, Prosper, Ambrose, Beda, ^upertus, with many
others, which they would prove by these three places of Scripture, as Genesis 49.
10. Dan shall be a serpent by the way, biting the horse heels. Ierem. 8. 16.
The neying of his horses is heard from Dan: and because Apoc. 7. where 12.
thousand are reckoned of every tribe, Dan is left out: the reason whereof they
say is this, because Antichrist should come of Dan. Pererius subscribeth to
this opinion, and allows of these reasons. But Bellarmine rejects this
opinion as a fancy, and very sufficiently answers all the former places
objected: for the first place is understood of Sampson, who was of the tribe of
Dan: the second of Nebuchadnezzers coming to destroy Jerusalem, and so Hierome
also expounds it: and in the third place Dan is left out, and so is Ephraim;
because Joseph is named for the latter, and Levi for Dan. Thus Bellarmin. lib.
3. de Roman. Pontif. cap. 12. Thus in this question one Jesuit (or if you will
Iudasite) is opposite to an other.

2. Controv. That Antichrist shall not be one particular man.
All these aforesaid, which affirm that Antichrist shall be a Devil
incarnate, shall be borne in Babylon, and come of the tribe of Dan; they
likewise hold, that he shall be one particular man. And this generally is the
opinion of the Romanists at this day: so Pererius, Pintus, Bellarmine, with the
rest: for if this could be proved, the Pope should be freed from the
imputation of Antichrist.

But this opinion has as small ground as the other, and it may thus be
refelled by Scripture. 1. S. Paul says, that the mystery of iniquity began
even then already to work in his time, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. and S. John also
agrees, Of whom ye have heard (namely of Antichrist) how that he should come,
and now already he is in the world. If Antichrist begun to show himself by
his Antichristian doctrine even in the Apostles time, which is above 1500.
years since, then can he not be one singular or special man.

2. S. John again says, 1. Ioh. 2. 18. Babes, it is the last time, and if ye
have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists,
whereby we know that it is the last time: out of this place two conclusions may
be inferred: the first is, Antichrist was to come in the last times, but
Antichrist is now come, therefore these are the last times: If then Antichrist
was come in his members and forerunners, he could not be one man, to have so
many forerunners, and so long before: The other conclusion is this, that one
Antichrist is many Antichrists, which is thus proved; those are the last
days, wherein the Antichrist shall come: but in these last days there are
many Antichrists: therefore many Antichrists are that one Antichrist.

3. S. Paul says further, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. There must come a departing first,
and that man of sin must be disclosed: from hence we may reason thus: There
shall be a general departure from the faith when Antichrist comes: but a
general apostasy or departure from the faith, can not be in one particular
enemy: therefore there shall not be one particular enemy to Christ, when
Antichrist comes.

But whereas the Scripture speaks of the Antichrist in the singular number,
the reason thereof is, because the Antichrist shall be the head of that
Antichristian body, which shall set it self against the Church whereof Christ
is the head: which Antichristian headship shall not rest in the person of one
particular man: but shall adhere to a personal succession of particular men,
who shall be the captains and ringleaders unto all Antichristianisme.
Antichrist then upon the foresaid reasons shall rather be an Antichristian
body politic, as are the Popes and Bishops of Rome, then any particular
body. See more of this question Synops. Centur. 1. err. 56.

3. Controv. That Nero the Emperor shall not be the great Antichrist.
Severus Sulpitius writes, lib. 2. sacr. histor. that it was the opinion of
some, that Nero should come again in the end of the world to be that great
Antichrist: his words are these, Nero creditur, etiamsi seipsum gladio
transfixerit, curato vulnere eius servatus, Nero is held, although he did
thrust himself through with a sword, being healed of his wound, to be
preserved: and to that purpose they allege that place, Apoc. 13. 3. I saw one
of his heads as it were wounded to death, but his deadly wound was healed:
which they understand of Nero his wound healed again.

But the same Sulpitius dialog. 2. reports an other opinion, that Nero should
come again in the end of the world, and tyrannize in the West parts,
compelling men to worship the idols of the heathen: and Antichrist should rage
in the East, whose seat should be at Jerusalem, commanding men to be
circumcised, and making himself the Messiah.

Augustine likewise remembers this opinion of the coming again of Nero in
the end of the world: Nonnulli Neronem resurrecturum and futurum Antichristum
suspicantur: alij ^um non occisum putant sed subtractum potius, etc. diverse do
think, that Nero shall be raised again to be that Antichrist: some think
that he was not slain, but rather taken away, and preserved in the same state
of years, etc. lib. 20. de civit. Dei. c. 13.

But Augustine misliketh this opinion, and says it is mira praesumptio, a
wonderful presumption for any so to think. And beside there is no
probability of it: for it is not like that God would work such a miracle for
so notorious a wicked man, as either to raise him from the dead, before the
general resurrection, or to preserve him alive: we read only of two that were
translated, Henoch and Elias, both holy men: for such a wicked man to be
translated, it neither has probability, neither yet is there any example for
it.

That place in the Revelation is indeed understood of Nero, but not in that
sense: in him the stock of the Cesars was extinguished, and so the Imperial
succession received a deadly wound: but it was cured, in that the dignity of
the Empire was restored in the Emperors succeeding, though not lineally
descended from Cefar.

4. Controv. That Antichrist shall be a deceiuer rather then a victorious
conqueror.
Pererius concurring with other Romanists, thinks that Antichrist shall be
the greatest Monarch that ever was: and that he shall overcome three kings, of
Egypt, Africa, Ethiopia, and all the rest shall submit themselves unto him.
lib. 14. in Daniel. in v. 24. Of the same mind was Lactantius, that Antichrist
should overcome three kings, qui tum Asiam obtinebunt, and in societatem
assumetur a caeteris, which shall then reign in Asia, but he shall be admitted
to the society of the rest, etc. Lactant. lib. 7. c. 16. But Lactantius here
says, that the three kings, which Antichrist shall subdue, shall be three
kings of Asia; whereas Pererius, and so likewise Bellarmine suppose them to be
in Africa: so well men agree together, when they follow their own fancies.

2. Whereas Pererius would have Antichrist to be the greatest Monarch that ever
was in the world, because it is said, v. 24. that he should do that, which his
fathers had not don, nor his fathers fathers, that place is understood of
Antiochus, who is not simply said to do that, which his fathers had not done:
for there were of his predecessors, mightier then he, as Seleucus Nicanor, and
Antiochus the great: but none had made such spoil of Egypt before, as he
should do, as has been further showed, qu. 31.

3. But that Antichrist shall insinuate himself rather as a crafty deceiuer,
then as a mighty conqueror, is evident by S. Paul's description, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
9. Whose coming is by the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders: in all deceiueablenes of unrighteousness: and v. 11. God shall
send them strong delusions to believe lies. He shall deceive rather with lies
and false doctrine, then conquer by force and violence. So S. John describes
the Antichrists in his time by their corrupt doctrine, 1. Ioh. 2. 18. and 4. 3.
see more hereof Synops. Centur. 1. err. 64.

5. Controv. Of Antichrists miracles.
1. It is also an old opinion, that Antichrist shall work many strange
miracles: as Hyppolitus thus sets them down, Leprosos mundabit,
paraclyticos sanabit, daemones expellet, etc. he shall cleanse the lepers, heal
them that have the palsy, cast out devils* he shall tell things far off, as
if they were present, raise the dead, remove mountains, walk with his feet
upon the sea, bring down fire from heaven, he shall turn the day into
darkness, and night into day, and bring the Sun about which way he will, and
he shall show that all the elements are obedient unto him: so also Lactantius
says, l. 7. c. 17. that he shall stay the sun from his course, and cause
images to speak.

2. Pererius also delivers his opinion thus, speaking more distinctly of
these miracles: Some are profitable miracles, as such as Christ did in healing
of the lame, and sick: some are curious, as to cause images to speak, and to
cause ignorant persons, and children to speak with diverse tongues: some are
powerful miracles, as to bring down fire from heaven, and to command the
Sun: all these things he thinks Antichrist shall do. But yet there are
some miracles which are done by a supernatural power, as to raise the dead,
which only God can do, and these shall be exempted out of Antichrists power:
yet whatsoever may be wrought by natural causes, Antichrist, the devil
concurring with him, shall do, though they be never so strange.

3. But these are men's phansies and dreams: 1. to heal diseases naturally
incurable, as to make men see or hear, that are naturally blind, is beyond any
natural cause: and only the Creator can heal those defects in his creature.
2. much more supernatural is it to command the Sun, and to change the season
of the day or night: the Devil can do none of these things. 3. Neither can he
by his own power raise lightning and tempest: for the Lord brought upon Egypt
by Moses ministry the great thunder and lightening: and the fire which came
down from heaven, and destroyed Jobs sheep, is called the fire of God,
wherein it pleased God to use the ministry of Satan: for if this were in
Satan's power, then Baals priests that served the Devil, might have brought
down fire from heaven to consume the sacrifice, as Elias did. 4. The Devil
yet, when the natural causes begin to work, can apply them, and remove
them from place to place, as the fire and lightning being caused by Gods
power, he might bring it down upon Jobs sheep: and the winds first raised, he
directed upon the house, where Jobs children were: though of his own power he
can not cause lightening and tempest: see this question handled more at large,
Hexapl. in Exodus c. 7. qu. 15. 5. Whereas then it is said, that Antichrist
shall bring down fire from heaven, and cause an image to speak, though some
understand these things mystically, Synops. Centur. 1. err. 63.
Bulling. as I have showed else where; yet it may literally also be understood:
for in the Popes legends such things are to be found, that their canonized
Saints are said to have raised tempests, walked upon the sea, and caused images
to speak: such things their legend stories are full of. And at the tombs of
their Saints, to the which simple people come in pilgrimage, they made them
believe, that many blind received their sight, many coming lame, returned
hole and sound: yea they imagined the dead to be raised out of their graves. 6.
And these strange things, so far as the power of Satan could extend, were
done verily: for even such things were wrought by the operation of Satan among
the heathen: as Claudia a Vestal Virgin to prove her chastity, did stir a
ship alone by tying her girdle to it: and Tucia an other Virgin of the same
order, did carry water in a sive from the river Tibris to the Capitol. Plin.
lib. 28. c. 2. But many of their strange works, were but fained and counterfeit
miracles, such are those forenamed, which they fable to be done at their
Saints tombs. So that, though all the foresaid miracles, mentioned by
Hyppolius (Pererius subscribing) shall be wrought by Antichrist: yet many of
them, some true, some forged, have been practiced in the Papal Church, that in
this behalf, we need go no further to seek Antichrist.

6. Controv. That Antichrists coming shall not be deferred to the end of the
world.
This is the general opinion of the Romanists, that Antichrist shall reign
but 3^ years and an half, and then at the end of the world shall be slain:
so Bellar. lib. 3. de Romans Pontif. c. 4. and the rest do concur with him
therein. Lactantius also seems to favor this opinion, who thinks that the
coming of Antichrist shall be in extremis mundi temporibus, in the last times
of the world. lib. 7. c. 16.

But this opinion can not stand with the Scriptures: 1. the mystery of
iniquity began to work in S. Paul's time, even then a way was preparing for
Antichrist: If even then Antichrist were in hatching, it is not like, that all
this while he should only be in the egg: that unclean bird has long since
broken the shell, and the cockatrice egg a good while since has brought forth
a serpent. 2. Antichrist must come at the loosing of Satan: for then, when
Antichrist should show himself, he shall come by the operation of Satan, with
all power and signs, and lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. But Satan is let
loose many years since: he was to be bound but for a thousand years, Rev. 20.
3. which thousand years are long ago expired. 3. We grant that Antichrist
shall not utterly be confounded till the second coming of Christ: some
relics of that adversary shall remain for Christ to abolish at the
brightness of his coming, as S. Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. but his coming
upon the foresaid reasons cannot be deferred so long: Synops. Centur. 1. err.
57.
see more also of this matter elsewhere.

7. Controv. That Antichrists seat shall not be at Jerusalem.
So hold the Romanists generally that Antichrist shall have his Imperial seat
at Jerusalem, command circumcision, and cause the Temple to be reedified.
Bellar. lib. 3. de Roman. Pontif. c. 13. Rhemists 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 11.

But this is a groundless and weak conceit of theirs, as it may appear
evidently by these reasons: New Babylon shall be the seat of Antichrist, Apoc.
17. 5. but Rome is new Babylon: the great city which then ruled over the earth
was Babylon, Apoc. 17. 5. 18. but that was Rome, which then had the command of
the earth: Hierome also says, speaking of Rome, dum in Babylone versarer,
while I was conversant in Babylon. praefat. ad Paulin^m. 2. Again, in the same
chapter, Apoc. 17. v. 9. it is said, the seven heads are seven mountains,
whereon the woman sits: the city which stood upon seven mountains should
be the seat of Antichrist: but Rome is notoriously known to be that city
built upon seven hills: Synops. Centur. 1. err. 6^
therefore none other seat shall Antichrist have then the city of Rome: see
further elsewhere: we must but touch every thing briefly here.

8. Controv. That the city of Rome shall not be utterly destroyed before
Antichrist shall come.
This was an other of Lactantius conceits, approved by Pererius, Incolumi vrbe
Roma nihil istiusmodi videtur metuendum, as long as the city of Rome is safe,
no such thing is to be feared; but when that head city of the world is fallen,
and Rome begun to be (...), (that is, a ruin) as Sybil said, who will doubt
but that the end of humane things is then at hand, etc.

1. The same Lactantius was of opinion, that the world should end within 200.
years after his time: the one is as true as the other. 2. True it is that as
long as the Roman Empi^e continued in the full strength and authority,
Antichrist was kept out, and that is it which should with old and let
Antichrists coming, till it were taken out of the way, whereof S. Paul
speaks, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. for it is evident, that the Pope increased in power
by the ruin and decay of the Empire. 3. It is also true, that the city of
Rome was never more ruinated, defaced, and spoiled, then since it has been
under the command and obedience of the Pope, by the Goths, Vandals, Lombards,
and others. 4. But that Rome should be utterly desolate, and brought to a
final ruin, is contrary to the divine prophecy of the Revelation, which
makes the city with seven hills to be the seat of Antichrist, as is showed in
the former controversy.

9. Contro^. That the Papists Antichrist, and the Jews Messiah shall come
together.
Hyppolitus, whose opinion herein Pererius follows, thus writes of
Antichrist, Potissimum Gens Hebraeorum prae omnibus Antichristo chara erit,
etc. The nation of the Hebrews shall be before all other most dear unto
Antichrist, and one shall say unto an other, can a man in our age such as this,
so good, and so just be found? the Jews therefore hoping that he shall obtain
a most large Empire, shall thus say unto him: We will all obey you, for we
acknowledge you to be just above all the earth, all we hope to obtain
salvation by you, etc. Gregory also in his time seemed to favor that fancy:
quia Iudaizare populum compellet, vt ritus Mosaicae legis revocet, etc. because
he shall compel the people to Iudaize, that he might revive the rites of Moses
law, and bring the Jews in subjection unto him, he shall cause the Sabbath to
be observed, etc. lib. 11. epist. c. 3.

These scrappes of some ancient writers the Romanists in these days have
gathered up, who affirm the same, that Antichrist shall have his seat at
Jerusalem, reedifie the Temple, and command circumcision.

The same is the general opinion of the Jews, that when their expected
Messiah comes, the city and Temple shall be built again, and he shall
restore unto them their kingdom and country, and be a victorious conqueror,
suppressing the armies of Gog and Magog.

Now then, as the Romanists themselves hold the obstinate Jews to be in error,
that deny the Messiah and Christ to be come, looking for an other: so they
making their Antichrist to be the same with the Jews Messiah, are in the like
error, expecting for the coming of an other Antichrist, who long since is come
already, and manifested in the world: and as soon shall the Jews Messiah
come, as this their imagined Antichrist. Having now thus briefly discovered
these errors of the Romanists concerning Antichrist, we will now come to set
forth the true signs and marks, whereby the Antichrist is discovered, and so
find him out where he is.

10. Controv. Of the true marks whereby Antichrist may be discerned.
1. As he is called Antichrist, so he shall in all things be opposite and
contrary unto Christ. 1. Christ was most holy* and by the spirit of God which
remained in him, was moved in his thoughts, words, and works only to that
which was good: but Antichrist by the operation and instinct of Satan shall be
stirred up unto all kind of evil: this Pererius confesses: and how this has
bin performed in that Romish chair of pestilence, all the world sees, and
they which are not wilfully blinded must needs acknowledge: what blasphemy,
idolatry, profanenes, uncleanness of life, murders, and other impieties have
been committed by that Sea, has been abundantly showed elsewhere: so that
that title, which the holy Apostle has given unto Antichrist, calling him the
man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. does more fitly agree unto none, then to the
Bishop of Rome. 2. Christ was humble and meek: but Antichrist shall be most
proud. 3. Christ was most obedient unto his father, and gave most honorable
testimony of him: Antichrist shall be most contumelious and blasphemous
against God, and therefore he is said Apoc. 13. to be full of the names of
blasphemy. 4. Christ came to preach the truth, Antichrist shall be the sower
of all corrupt and false doctrine. 5. Christ said his kingdom was not of this
world: but Antichrist shall altogether seek the pomp and glory of this
world. 6. Christ was the head of all good and holy men, and Antichrist shall be
caput malorum, the head of the evil and wicked men. These notes and marks
Pererius gives of Antichrist, showing wherein he shall be an enemy and
adversary unto Christ. All which notes and marks do most fitly agree to the
Bishop of Rome: for what place can show more examples of all kind of wickedness
then that? who is more proud and ambitious blasphemous then he? where is taught
more false and corrupt doctrine then there? who seeks more the outward pomp
of the world then he? and who else chalengeth to be head of the (malignant)
Church but he?

2. Pererius says that Antichrist shall be a great dissembler and hypocrite,
he shall make a show of three great virtues, chastity, abstinencie, and
piety. And who makes a greater show of these then the Pope? he would seem to
be so chaste, that he forbids his Clergy lawful marriage, yet suffering
them to practice secretly all kind of uncleanness: he would seem to be
abstemious in forbidding the use of lawful meats: and for his piety he will
be saluted and called the most holy father.

3. Antichrist shall corrupt many with his great gifts and liberal rewards:
And so the Pope has Cardinals hats, Archbishops palles, Bishops miters, and
other dignities, with ample and large revenues to bestow upon his followers: as
Bishop Fisher in king Henry's days was rewarded with a Cardinals hat for his
good service in maintaining the Popes supremacy: but the head that should have
worn it, was first set up upon London bridge. Bellarmine for his great pains
taken in defending of the Popes supremacy, and other points of Antichristian
doctrine, was made a Cardinal.

4. Pererius adds further, that whom Antichrist cannot win with flattery
and gifts, he will seek to overcome by terror and torments, lib. 14. in 11.
Dan. v. 21. Such has been the practice of the Antichristian Prelates, as the
former days of persecution in England do plentifully testify: for first they
would set upon the faithful servants of God by flattery and fair promises,
and so not prevailing, they would threaten faggot and fire: this may be
evidently seen in the examinations of the blessed servants of God, D. Tailor,
M. Philpot. M. Bradford, with the rest.

5. Last of all, Antichrist shall deceive, says Pererius, faciendo plurima and
admiranda prodigia, by working many prodigious things: And this has been the
continual practice of the Papal Church, with forged miracles to deceive the
simple people, as has been before declared: And hitherto I have followed
Pererius steps, showing how his marks of Antichrist do most fitly agree
unto his Pope holy father the Bishop of Rome.

11. Controv. How the description of Antiochus historically, does typically
decypher the Pope and Antichrist.
Though in this prophetical narration of Daniel, c. 11. from v. 21. to the
end, Antiochus be properly described, yet figuratively it may be applied unto
Antichrist. And it lets not, that Antiochus was a civil and temporal king,
and the Pope takes upon him chiefly to be a spiritual governor: for as
Doeg, notwithstanding he was one of Saul's courtiers, yet was a type of Judas
one of the twelve Apostles, as appears, Psalm. 69. 26. and 109. 8. compared
with Act. 1. 20. And so Achitophel also one of David's politic Counselors of
state, a figure of the same Judas, Psalm. 55. 14. and Mark. 14. 20. So Antiochus
as well may be a figure and type of the Antichristian Prelate.

1. Antiochus is said to be a vile and abject person, 1. note of the rising of
th^^ 1. shop of Rome by craft and flattery.
and not to have come unto the honor of the kingdom by any right and title,
or by consent or election, but by flattery: So the Roman Bishop was at the
first of small respect, who by little and little usurped over the Church, not
by any right or title thereunto, or by common consent and suffrage of the
Church, but by flattery and deceit, Bulling. Polan. Hereunto also agrees the
former prophecy, c. 7. 8. where this enemy unto the people of God is called a
little horn, in respect of his obscure and base beginning: and Revel. 13. the
beast which signifies Antichrist, is said to ascend out of the ^arth.

2. Antiochus is set forth as a victorious conqueror: 2. ^ore his prospering
and prevailing.
the arms shall be broken before him, v. 22. So the Antichrist of Rome has
much prevailed and prospered in the world, though not so much by force as by
craft and subtlety, Oecolamp.

3. Antiochus is set forth by his rapacitie: 3. his rapacitie and covetousness.
he spoiled and robbed Egypt, and the most pleasant places thereof more, then
ever did any before him, v. 24. And thus has the Roman Antichrist in time
past polled and pilled the world, by his annates, first fruits, tenths,
Peter Pence, pardons, and such like devises to get money.

4. Antiochus is also described by his dissimulation, 4. his dissimulation.
that he with the king of Egypt shall talk of deceit even at the same table,
but his heart even then shall be to do mischief, v. 27. So there has not
been more deep dissimulation practiced with kings and Princes, then by the
Bishops of Rome.

5. As Antiochus practiced with the forsakers of the holy covenant, 5. the
general apostasy and falling away from the faith.
v. 30. by their means to seek to prevail against Gods people: So has the
Pope used as his ministers and instruments runnagates from their country, and
Apostataes from the faith: as is evident to all the world in those monstrous
and unnatural treasons, which have been attempted against this nation and
Church of England: And as Daniel prophesied of Antiochus, that he should have
intelligence and consult with them that did forsake the covenant, v. 30. so S.
Paul says that there shall come a departing first, (that is, from the faith)
and that man of sin shall be disclosed: But because there is some difference
between us and the Papists, what this apostasy and departure from the faith
should mean, it shall not be amiss a little to insist thereupon.

Controv. 12. That S. Paul speaks of an apostasy and departing from the
faith, 2. Thessal. 2. 3.
1. Pererius thinks that this Apostasy is to be understood of the departure
and falling away from the Roman Empire, lib. 14. in praefat.
and to that purpose he alleges Lactantius, who faith, incolumi vrbe Roma
nihil istiusmodi esse metuendum, that so long as the city of Rome is safe, no
such thing is to feared, etc. Bellarmine also brings this for one exposition.
2. and further he adds that by this apostasy we may understand,
dispositionem adregnu^ Antichristi, a disposition or preparation to the
kingdom of Antichrist. 3. and if it be understood of a defection or falling
away from the faith, he thinks it rather to agree to the Protestants, then
any other, who are departed from the unity of the Church.

Contra. 1. It shall be showed that apostasy is here to be taken, not as the
word is used in the Civil law, for a departure either of a subject from the
obedience of his prince, or of a soldier from his captain: for S. Paul
speaks not here of such civil and politic matters: or as the Romanists call
apostasy, when one leaves the order and sect into the which he was entered:
for in S. Paul's time, there were no such superstitious sects of Monkerie: but
that Apostasy here is to be taken for a departure and falling away from the
faith, it may thus appear.

1. So is this word used in other places of the new Testament: as Act. 21. 11.
They are informed of thee (says James to Paul) that thou teach the Jews to
forsake (or play the Apostataes from) Moses: 1. Timoth. 4. 1. the spirit
speaks evidently, that in the latter times, some shall depart from the faith,
and shall give heed to the spirit of error, and to the doctrine of devils. 2.
The event is answerable hereunto: for together with the rising and
manifestation of Antichrist, came in a general corruption and deprauation of
the most of the a^^icles of Christian religion. 3. thus also diverse of the
ancient writers expound this place: Justin. Martyr calls Antichrist,
defectionis homo, a man of apostasy or falling away, dialog. cum Tryphon.
Ireneus says, he shall be sine lege quasi Apostata, as an Apostata without
law, lib. 5. aduers. haeres. c. 21. So also expound Primasius, Cyrillus,
Chrysostom, Oecumenius. 4. Thus also Thomas in explanation. Lyranus, Hugo
Card. expound, and the Rhemists also upon this place mislike not this sense.

2. A disposition or preparation it cannot be unto Antichrists kingdom:
because it is said that the man of sin shall thereby be disclosed: he shall
then come together with it, because he shall be revealed by it.

3. But it is a false imputation upon the Protestants, that they are
Apostataes: They have separated themselves from the Church of Rome, as did
Enosh, and the faithful of the old world from the posterity of Caine, and as
our Blessed Savior and his Apostles divided themselves from the synagogue of
the Scribes and Pharisees: But they were departed first from the doctrine of
Moses: as the Roman sectaries have declined from the ancient Apostolic
faith, in stead thereof establishing their own traditions, and the doctrines
of men.

13. Controv. Of other notes and marks wherein Antiochus and Antichrist agree.
6. As Antiochus used the arms and armies of his captains to oppress the
Jews: 6. note: the abusing of the secular power to be ministers of their
cruelty and butcherie.
So likewise the Bishops of Rome have abused the secular arm and power to
maintain their pomp, and ambition, and to establish their superstition.

Marcellinus the historian (who was no Christian) writes of the dissension
between Damasus and Vrsicinus, about the Episcopal seat, that the contention
between them was so hoate, and such parts taking; that in one day in the
Church of Seruinus there were found an 137. dead bodies, which were slain in a
skirmish: And yet the ambition of the Roman Bishops was in those days nothing
like to the pride of that vainglorious Sea now.

Gregory the 7. called Hildebrand, as witnesses Benno a Cardinal of that
Sea, did move and make great wars to uphold his papal dignity: so did
Paschal. 2. Innocentius 3. Gregory 9. fill all Germany, France, Italy,
Spain with wars: and so have the Popes maintained their factions and
quarrels a long time by the Civil power.

Phocas the Emperor, that killed his Lord and Master: Pipinus king of France
that murderer: Rodolphus that disloyal duke to Henry the 4. Emperor: Henry
5. that disobedient son to Henry the 4. his father; were all the Popes
vassals to fight his battles, and to maintain his quarrels with the sword. So
have been of late the kings of France on a row, Henry the 2. Francis the
second, Charles the 9. Henry the 3. Such was the Duke of Albanie in the low
countries, and other captains and Generals under the king of Spain.

By the secret practicing of Nicolaus 3. all the French in one day were killed
thorough out Sicilia: Matchiavil: with the priuitie and knowledge of Vrbane the
6. was Ioanna Queen of Naples slain before the altar, Theodoric. a Niem. lib.
1. de schism. c. 25. Julius the 2. was a warrior himself, and present in the
battles which he fought. Sixtus the 4* spent most of his time in wars: and
when they were ended upon a conclusion of peace, he died for grief. Paulus the
third was author of the German war, Polan.

The Pope sent his secular arms, the king of Spains forces, among the Indians,
under pretense of embracing them to his religion: but they practiced most
horrible butcherie and cruelty among them: they hewed them in pieces, roasted
them at the fire, worried them with dogs: ^ipped their bellies, and drew out
their bowels: opened the wombes of women with child: hung them up, and burned
them: set them on stackes of straw, and set fire to them: and thus in 40.
years space they destroyed 15. millions of men, that is, 150. hundredth
thousand, and left wast and unpeopled five times so much ground as all Spain
contains. They put them to unspeakable torments, some they shodde with iron
shoes nayling them to their feet, some they fleaed, and cast in salt, to put
them to more pain: they cut off their lips, noses, ears, their fingers and
toes: and with fire and sword, they consumed an infinite number, as is before
rehearsed: Polan. ex Bartholom. Casa.

As Apollonius sent by Antiochus against Jerusalem, made fair promises until
he was received into the city, but then he fell upon them on a sudden, and put
them to the s^ord, and fell upon the Jews on the Sabbath, 2. (...)
while they kept the feast, and used all outrageous cruelty against the^: So
within these few years, perdinandus Mendoza, with his crew of Spaniards, a
champion for the Pope-catholik faith, practiced most horrible and savage
cruelty in Westphalia, sparing neither age nor sex, no not them which submitted
themselves, and were of their own religion: the women great with child they
stretching out their hands nailed to bourds, Most vnspeak^able and (...) heard
of (...) of the (...) Papists.
and ripped their bellies, took out the infants, cut them in pieces, and hung
them about their mothers necks: they compelled the men with long famine to
eat their own children, and some they hung up by the pri^ie members, and the
women's bellies they opened, and thrust in children of two years old, and
strangled them in their mothers blood: Never did any Turks or infidels show
such examples of cruelty, as those the Popes arms and champions, Palanus.

7. As Antiohus by his captain Apollonius caused the daily sacrifice to cease,
set up abominable 7. note: the setting up of (...) in the Church and abrogating
the rig^^ use of the E^charist.
idols, burnt the books of the law: So the Antichrist of ^ome has abolished
the right use of the Eucharist, which is a continual commemoration of Christ's
death: yea the sacrifice of Christ's death, and the virtue thereof is by them
obscured, if not abolished, while he brings in other satisfactorie and
propitiatory sacrifices in their ordinary masses: the Pope sets up in
Church idols and imagerie, which are things abominable in the service of God:
the books of Scripture being in the vulgar tongue he commands to be burned,
and hererein he treads in the steps of his forerunner Antiochus.

8. Antiochus beside his foreign power used the service of the Apostatate
Priests, and 8. note: the Pope uses the pen and tongue of false teachers.
Jews, as Jason, Menelaus: So the Pope beside the secular power has his
runnaga^e and fugitive Priests, Jesuits, Seminaries, which do by their
subtle persuasions seduce many: Gregory setting forth Antichrist, shows
that he shall use two kind of ministers: conatur ad se cord^ hominum and missis
praedicatoribus trahere, and commotis potestatibus inclinare, he shall
endeavor both to draw men's hearts unto him by sending of preachers, and to
bend them by the moving of Potentates, in Job lib. 33. c. 23. This also he
shows further by that place, Apocal. 9. 19. their power is in their mouth and
in their tail: in ore doctorum scientia, in cauda secularium potentia
significatur, etc. in the mouth the knowledge of the learned is signified, and
in the tail the power of secular men.

Thus the Roman Antichrist bestirreth himself using both the sword of cruel
potentates, and the pen and tongue of corrupt teachers, whom he enticeth with
rewards, and promise of dignities to uphold by their subtle wits the
kingdom of darkness: and so in every point he imitateth the example of
wicked Antiochus his lively image, that both these ways practiced against the
people of God.

Controv. 14. How the Antichrist of Rome has persecuted Emperors, Kings,
Princes, learned men, whole Churches for religion.
9. As in this great persecution under Antiochus there were many faithful,
that did not forsake the law, but did cleave unto the Lord, and instructed
others so to do likewise, who were most cruelly persecuted for their faith: so
in the times of persecution under the Roman Antichrist, many of all sorts,
that have opposed themselves to his ungodly proceedings have been evil
entreated, and cruelly handled. 1. both Emperors. 2. Kings. 3. Princes. 4.
Learned confessors of the truth. 5. whole Churches, as now shall be briefly
showed in order.

1. Of the Emperors. First, Philippicus Bardanius, because he commanded all
images to be removed out of Churches by the consent of John Patriarch of
Constantinople, Emperors persecuted by the Pope.
was declared to be an heretic together with the said Patriarch, and publicly
excommunicated in a certain Synod by Pope Constantine, who inhibited that the
image of the said Emperor should be stamped in any silver or gold, or any
mention to be made of him in the common prayers, Vrspergens.

Leo the 3. Isauricus, called Iconomachus, a fighter against images, caused
images in Italy and Sicilie to be cast out of the Churches, and by his public
edict commanded all images to be removed: for the which fact he was
excommunicated of Gregory the 2. and Gregory the 3. and the Venetians with
others were stirred up to rebellion, and the Eparch or viceroy with his son
slain: by which occasion the Pope stripped the Emperor of his Exarchateship
or government of Italy, which the Emperors of Constantinople had held an
164. years.

Constantine the 5. in a synod at Constantinople of 330. Bishops, decreed that
images should be cast down and burned, and no more be worshipped, nor the
Virgin Marie prayed unto: that Saints relics should not be kept: that it
should be lawful for Monks and Nuns to marry: for the which Stephanus the
2. translated the Empire of Constantinople into France: and his body was
taken up 23. years after it was buried, by the Empress Irene (to please Pope
Adrian) and burnt to ashes.

Constantine the 6. for remoouing images which his mother Irene had set up, was
by her deprived of his kingdom, sight, and life also.

No better dealt the Popes with their own Emperors of the West. Henry the 4.
who had encountered with his enemies 62. times in open battle, was by Gregory
the 7. Vrbane the 2. Paschal the 2. excommunicate: his Empire was first given
to Rodolphus the Duke of Suevia: then his sons were set against him, under
color of religon: first Conrodus, afterward Henricus the 5. his son, who
deprived him of his Empire, and caused his body to be dug up, after it was
buried, and cast forth as a carrion into the fields, where it lay unburied five
years, until it was brought to Spire, and there buried. Friderike the 1.
called Barbarossa, was most hardly used by the Popes Adrian the 4. and
Alexander the 3.

Philip the son of the said Friderike by the procurement of Pope Innocent the
3. who established transubstantiation, was slain at Bamberge by Otto Count
Palatine.

Otto the 4. and Friderike the 2. were excommunicate by Pope Innocent the 3.
and Gregor. 9.

Henry the 7. was poisoned with a consecrate host by a Monk of the faction of
the Guelphes, which was on the Popes side: the Gibellines were an other
faction, which held with Emperor.

Lodovike the 4. was likewise excommunicate by the Pope, who sent forth his
Monks and Friars into every quarter to defame the Emperor, and the Cardinals
did stir up the Princes to war against him, Avent. And thus have the Popes
handled the Emperors: Kings, and Princes, opposing themselves to their
superstition, have found no better measure.

2. Childericus king of France was deposed and thrust into a monastery. Kings
hardly used by the Pope.


Rachis king of the Lombards, was by the same Pope Zachary put into a
monastery.

Lodovike the 12. was much encumbred by Julius the second: who himself leading
his army from Rome, as he went over the bridge of the river Tiber, threw S.
Peter's keys into the river; and seeing they would do him no good, he said he
would betake himself to Paul's sword.

Henry the 4. now king of France, was assaulted by 6. Popes, Gregor. the 13.
Sixtus the 5. Vrbane the 7. Gregor. the 14. Innocentius the 9. Clement the 8.
who the last named, having brought the king to be reconciled to the Church of
Rome, did thereupon triumph insolently over him: As in a certain book set
forth of that matter, there is a tractate, de victoria Clementis 8. de Henric^
4. etc. gloriose triumphantis, of the victory of Clement the 8. most
gloriously triumphing over Henry the 4. king of France and Navarre.

Thus have the famous kings also of this Realm of England been served by the
Popes and their ministers. King John was poisoned by a Monk.

King Henry the 8. that most famous and renowned king, was by the bull of
Paulus the 3. deprived of his kingdom, and his subjects freed from their oath
of alleagance.

Queen Elizabeth our late Gracious Sovereign of blessed memory, before she
came to her crown was persecuted by her sister Queen Marie, and her chief
agent Stephen Gardener, for her religion: and after that by Gods fatherly
providence and care to his Church, she was advanced to the kingdom, she was
practiced against by nine Popes: the six before named, and by Paulus the 4.
Pius the 4. Pius the 5. both by open war and hostility, wherein the two
Philips of Spain bare the chiefest stroke, and by privy treachery and
treason.

Our kings majesty that is now, both in Scotland had experience of Popish
practices against him; and since his happy coming into England, some of the
Popish faction have more then once or twice conspired against him. But blessed
be God he has escaped their snares.

3. Now in the third place, Princes and Nobles (...) by the Pope.
Some Princes and nobles shall be produced whom the Popes have cruelly
assaulted.

The Exarc^ or viceroy of Ravenna, under Leo the 3. Emperor, by the Popes
faction was slain with his son.

The Medices at Florence were set upon in the Church by the counsel of Sixtus
the 4. the Popes legate gave the sign, when the host was lift up, Volaterran.
lib. 5. Geograph.

The Earl of Toulouse was pursued by the French king by most fierce war, at
the instigation of the Pope, only because he favored the Albigenses.

John Friderike Duke of Saxony, and Philip the Lantgraue of Hassia, were
assaulted by most cruel war, only for the cause of religion.

Count Egmond, and Count Horn were beheaded for favoring the Protestants.

The Prince of Condie was poisoned.

Caspar Colignius slain in the Massacre in France.

Antelot and Cardinal Castilion poisoned.

William prince of Aurane was slain by a villane.

Charles the king of Spaines son, because he was thought to favor the
Protestants, whom they call heretics, was made an end of by the Inquisitors
for religion, neither could his father, or would not deliver him.

4. These learned confessors also, Learned (...) and confessors of the (...)
against the ^ope.
and some holy martyrs have in diverse ages opposed themselves against the
Pope, and were evil entreated for it.

Vigilantius Bishop of Barcellona in Spain, because he found fault with the
adoration of relics, and with single life, was counted an heretic.

The Bishops and Presbyters, which held a synod at Eliberine in Spain, were
adjudged heretics by Pope Adrian in a synod at Frankefort.

Ann. 840. Bertram writ against transubstantiation.

So did Ioannes Scotus Ann. 869. and was slain of his scholars with their
writing pens.

Ann. 964. Huldericus Bishop of Augusta impugned the single life of the Clergy.

Ann. 1039. Berengarius bent himself against transubstantiation.

Ann. 1157. Ioannes Sarisburiens. did teach, that the Pope was Antichrist, and
Rome Babylon.

Arnoldus Bishop of Brixia denied unto the Pope the use of the temporal sword.

About the same time lived Peter Bloix, who publicly maintained in his
writings that Rome was Babylon, the Popes officers harpies, his Priests
Baalites.

Ann. 1160. Petrus Waldo of Lions, ann. 1240. Petrus de Vineis, ann. 1260.
Gulielmus de S. Amore, ann. 1306. Petrus Cassiodorus a learned Noble man of
Italy, 1314. Dulcimus of Navarre. 1315. Arnoldus de noua villa. 1383. John
Wicleffe in England. 1405. John Hus and Nicolaus Clemangis a Doctor of Paris.
Hyeronym. Savonarola a Monk of Ferrara, whom Alexander the 6. caused to be
burned. Antonius Mancinellus, Gulielmus Occam: All these were great impugners
of the Pope.

Ann. 1517. Martin Luther. ann. 1519. Huldericus Zuinglius: and since many
learned men in Germany: Oecolampadius, Capito, Melancthon, Martyr, Bullinger,
with others: in France, Calvin, Beza, Farellus, Viretus, with others: in
England, B. Cranmer, B. Ridley, B. Hooper, M. Latimer, M. Filpot, M. Bradford,
holy martyrs, and since B. Jewel, D. Fulke, D. Whitakers, D. Reynolds, with
many more excellent writers, and worthy preachers have discovered the
nakedness of the whore of Babylon.

5. Lastly whole Churches have been persecuted for resisting the Pope and his
doctrine: Whole Churches persecuted by the Pope.
the Albigenses under Innocentius the 3. the Waldenses under Pope John the 22.
the Church of Calabria, of Sevill in Spain, of England in Queen Mary's days:
and the Curches of France under Charles the 9. and Henry the 3. endured much
oppression, by the tyrrannie of the Popish faction.

And thus does the Pope resemble Antiochus in persecuting with fire and sword
the faithful servants of God professing the truth.

15. Controv. Of the pride and blasphemy of Antichrist against God.
10. v. 36. He shall magnify himself against all that is God: This is most
true of the Antichrist of Rome: for he exalts himself above the Angels which
are called gods in respect of their excellency of nature and condition, 10.
note: the Pope exalts himself above all that is called God.
making himself judge of the Angels. Princes and Magistrates also are called
gods: them has the Pope caused to kiss his feet, and has troad upon their
necks, disposing of their kingdoms at his pleasure. Innocentius the third
thus writ unto the Emperor of Constantinople: that as gold exceeded le^d* so
the Papal dignity the Imperial: as the Sun was the Lord of the Planets, so
the Pope of all secular dignities: and as the Moon receives light from the
Sun, so the Emperor has his dignity from the Pope: thus he exalts
himself above temporal governors, which are as terrene gods. Likewise the
Pope makes himself superior to Saints, whom he takes upon him to canonize or
not to canonize at his pleasure, Polan. The Pope also challenges to be
Superior to all other Bishops and Pastors, who are as Angels set over the
Churches: and so he magnifieth himself above whatsoever is called God,
Bullinger.

11. Antiochus did exalt himself against the true God, 11. note: Antichrist
shall exalt himself against the true God.
who is here called the God of gods: so the Pope glories to be called God in
earth: as Nicolaus the Pope in his epistle to Michael Emperor of Constantinople
says, that the Pope a pio principe Constantino Deum appellatum, was called God
of the godly Emperor Constantie, distinct. 96. c. satis: So in a certain
gloss in the end of the Extravagantes, the Pope is called Dominus Deus noster
Papa, our Lord God the pope: which gloss is not ignorantly thrust in, but
wittingly and well allowed of among the Papists: for notwithstanding that the
Canon law was by the appointment of Gregory the 13. reuised and corrected by
certain Cardinals and others, they suffered that gloss to remain unaltered.
At the coronation of Sixtus the 4. there was this inscription in a certain
triumphall pagen, at one of the gates thorough the which he should pass, and
merito in terris crederis esse Deus, thou art worthily held to be a God in
earth. Ludovicus Gomesius in reg. Cancellar. says, that the Pope is quoddam
numen, a certain divine thing representing a visible God in earth: And
Stapleton the Jesuit in his preface to Gregor. 13. before his book de
princip. fid. doctr. calls the Pope, supremum in terris numen, the most
divine power in earth. Therefore Friderike the 2. in his epistle to Otto Duke
of Baevaria says, not without just cause, Pontifices Romani affectant
Dominationem quandam and diuinitatem, the Roman Bishops affect a kind of
Lordlinesse, yea divinity in earth.

12. Antiochus uttered horrible blasphemies against God: 12. note: Antichrist
blasphemous against God.
The Pope therein is no whit inferior unto him: Boniface the 8. in c. quoniam
de imm. in Sext. calls the Church his spouse, which only is peculiar to
Christ to be the husband of his Church, 1. Cor. 11. 3. the same Pope also,
among many other his arrogant speeches, says, haec authortas non humana, sed
diuina, this our authority is not humane, but divine: and again, subesse
Romano Pontifici omni creaturae, definimus omnino esse de necessitate salut is,
we do define, that it is of necessity of salvation for every creature to be
subject to the Bishop of Rome, extrav. commun. de maiorit. and obedien. lib. 1.
titulo 8. The same Boniface the 8. in the 1300. year, when the Iubile was
solemnized, showed himself the first day in his pontifical attire: the next
day he came forth in the Imperial robes, causing a naked sword to be carried
before him, and he himself came after crying with a loud voice, Ego sum
Pontifex and Imperator, terrestreque and coeleste imperium habeo, I am both
chief Bishop and Emperor, and have both the terrene, and celestial
government. Sixtus the 5. in his bull against Henry king of Navarre, now king
of France, and the Prince of Condie, boasts, that his authority delivered
unto him from Christ and S. Peter did exceed the power of all kings and
Princes, and incumbere sibi, ecclesiarum omnium, populorum, and gentium
sollicitudinem, that the care of all Churches, peoples, and nations did lie
upon him, etc. so that the Pope does challenge to himself, that which is
peculiar to Christ, ex Polan. Such like blasphemies are those which are current
among the Popish sort: as in the gloss of the decrees, the Pope is said
neither to be God, nor man, sed medius inter vtrunque, but a middle thing
between both: Augustine. Boethius adds further, Papam omnia in terris posse,
quae Deus potest in coelis, that the Pope can do all in earth, which God can
do in heaven: and Philippus Decius, Papam omnia posse facere, quae Deus facit,
etc. that the Pope can do all things, which God does: such horrible
blasphemies do proceed from that pestilent Sea.

And as that man of sin speaks wondrous and marvelous things against God:
so does he take upon him to work wonders against the truth: which are called
lying wonders in two respects, because they are not done indeed, but in show,
and because they are wrought against the truth: both these are touched by the
Apostle in the description of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. the first. v. 9. Whose
coming is by the working of Satan, by all power, and signs, and lying
wonders: the other, v. 11. God shall send them strong delusions to believe
lies. Papp^^. And thus this blasphemous Antichrist has according to this
prophecy magnified himself against the God of gods: and as S. Paul prophesied
of him, that he should sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is
God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. for the further explaning of which words, I will make here
a short digression.

16. Controv. How Antichrist is said to sit in the Temple of God.
1. Some do understand it of the Temple of Jerusalem, which they say,
Antichrist shall cause to be builded again, and therein he shall sit to be
worshipped as God: so Hyppolitus, Cyrillus: and Chrysostom misliketh not this
sense in his Commentary upon the 2. of the 2. epistle to the Thessal. But this
can not be the meaning: 1. because the Temple of Jerusalem shall never be
builded again, according to the saying of our Savior, that one stone should
not be left upon an other. The Jews were licensed by Julian the Apostata to
reedifie their Temple, but they could not go forward: that which they built in
the day, was cast down in the night, and beside a strange fire came forth,
which consumed the instruments and engines of the artificers. 2. And though
that Temple should be builded again, it could not be called the Temple of God,
seeing it should be set up to revive the sacrifices and ceremonies of Moses
law, which are abolished by Christ.

2. Theodoret and Damascen understand it of the Temples of Christians which
Antichrist shall command to be set up and erected to his worship: but thus he
should sit in many temples, whereas the Apostle speaks of Temple, in the
singular: neither does the Apostle call the Churches of Christians by the name
of (...), temple.

3. Wherefore the Apostle means hereby, not material temples, but by the
Temple he understands the Church of God, as it is called, 1. Cor. 3. 16.
Apoc. 3. 12. Not that Antichrist shall in deed sit in the true Church of God,
for he shall be an enemy to the Church of Christ: but he shall sit in the
visible Church so reputed: and he shall style and title himself by the Church:
As he takes upon him to be Head of the Church, and to be Christ's Vicar in
earth: Melancth. Papp. Fulke annotat. 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 4. He sits also in the
temple of men's consciences, taking upon him to have power to forgive sins,
and to make laws to bind the conscience. Bulling.

4. Some, that hold the Turk to be Antichrist, may by the Temple understand
those places, where sometime was the Church of God: but the Apostle speaks of
the Temple, that shall then be so reputed and taken, at the time of Antichrists
sitting therein.

17. Controv. Of the prosperity and outward success of Antichrist.
As it is here said of Antiochus, 13. note: of the prosperous success of
Antichrist for a time.
that he shall do what him list, and again, that he shall prosper: so the
Roman Antichrist has both so taught, that he is to do what he list, and he
has practiced, and prospered accordingly. For the first: Nicolaus the Pope
thus writes to Michael the Emperor, a seculari potestate nec ligari posse, nec
solvi Pontificum, etc. that the chief Bishop can neither be loosed, nor bound
of the secular power: and then he infers how that Constantine the Emperor
called the Pope God: and so concludes, nec posse Deum ab homme iudicari
manifestum est, it is manifest, that God is not to be judged of man, etc. And
these are their positions in their Canons, that the Pope is without law, and
that he is to be judged of none: and if all the world should determine any
thing against the Pope, yet the sentence rather of the Pope must stand: and
seeing he has all fullness of power, no man is to say unto him, why do you
so? for his will stands for reason, distinct. 19. 17. quaest. 4. nemini.

And as this is their doctrine, that the Pope may do what he list, and no man
is to check or control him: so he has mightily prospered in his wicked
proceedings, as Antiochus did: for Emperors, Kings, and Princes have furthered
his enterprises: learned men have and do desend his errors: All kingdoms
almost in the Christian world, Universities, scholars, have applauded him: So
many Monasteries in diverse countries with their Monks and Friars depended of
him. This is the prosperity and external happy success, which the Romanists
do boast of; and Bellarmine among the rest, makes it a special note to know
the true Church by: but as Antiochus prosperous success against Christ's Church
was no sign of Gods favor toward him, no more is it in the kingdom of
Antichrist. But I will here stay a while, a little further yet to sift and
examine this point.

18. Controv. That external happiness is not a sure note of the Church.
Bellarmine making external felicity a note of the Church, lib. 4. de Eccl.
c. 18.
gives these instances of the good success of the Romanists in their battles.

1. In the time of Innocentius the 3. the Catholics in France with an army of
8000. conquered an 100. thousand of the Albigenses. Aemil. lib. 6. hist.
Francor.

2. Anno 1531. the Helvetian Papists, had five conflicts with the Helvetian
Protestants, and still had the better.

3. Charles the 5. ann. 1547. obtained a miraculous victory against the
Protestant Princes in Germany.

4. In France and the low countries, the Papists have had many victories, not
without miracle: and the Protestants seldom had the better.

1. Ans. These instances produced by Bellarmine are false, as shall now appear
in the particular examination of them. 1. Mathias Parisiens. reports far
otherwise of that battle, writing, that Jews the French king died in the
siege of Avenion, and that his son having the leading of a great army
against the Albigenses was overcome ab exiguis copijs, of a few small bands.
And this is like to be the truer report: for it seems not probable, that the
persecuted Church of the Albigenses could set forth such an huge army. 2. The
Popish Helvetians had not so many battles with the Protestants: there was but
one battle and a skirmish: the Popish sort had the better, having the
advantage of the higher ground: neither was it such a great victory, for they
were glad to ask peace, and to compound the matter upon equal conditions. 3.
It was no miracle for Charles the 5. to prevail in that battle, setting upon
Duke Frederick on a sudden, and some of his confederates having forsaken him:
neither did the Emperor long enjoy that victory, for he was not long after by
Mauritius, who aided him against Duke Frederike, chased out of Germany for the
wrongs offered unto Philip the Lantgraue, and never after that returned he into
Germany again. 4. Of the success of the battles in France and low Germany,
they have no cause to brag: Henry the 4. ^ow king of France and Navarre, when
he professed and maintained the Gospel, was always superior in battle: and
how the wars have prospered on the Protestants sides in the low countries, no
man is ignorant. So that if the goodness of the cause is to be esteemed by the
good success, if they had no other arguments to defend themselves, this might
plead for them, that God has above these 30. years vpheld that small country
miraculously against all the power of Spain. But they have diverse reasons
besides, which may justify their wars against the king of Spain.

1. The breaking of their privileges by the Duke of Albanie: 2. the
unreasonable exacting of tribute upon things which were sold: The reasons which
moved the low countries to defend themselves by war against the king of
Spain.
3. the unjust execution of diverse both noble and others: 4. the setting of
garrisons of strangers in their cities: 5. the building of castles and sconces:
6. the constituting of Judges of the Spaniards, and not of their own country:
7. the general restraining of their liberty, Polan. p. 1070. 8. beside the
bringing in among them of a strange religion.

2. Now that outward prosperity is not a sign of Gods favor, or a mark
whereby to discern the Church, it is evident by the example of Antiochus here,
who mightily prospered in his wicked attempts against the people of God: So
also Nebuchadnezzer prevailed against Jerusalem, and destroyed the very Temple.
All the tribes of Israel being assembled together, against the children of
Benjamin, having the better cause, yet were twice overcome, Judge. 20. God then
in suffering his Church to be for a time afflicted and oppressed, does not
thereby testify his favor toward their oppressors, but does rather show his
wrath against his own people for their sins: which was the cause that
Antiochus prospered, whom the Lord used as his scourge: as it is here said,
till wrath be accomplished: that is, Gods wrath kindled against his people. And
the same is one of the reasons, why the Lord shall suffer Antichrist to rage in
the world: whereof more shall be here inserted in the next controversy.

19. Contr. Why the Lord suffers Antichrist to rage against his Church.
That is no reason which Bellarmine pretends, that the Roman Church is by
their outward prosperity known to be the true Church, and therefore it is
given unto them to prosper: but these rather are the causes:

1. That herein Gods mercy may appear, who for a long time tied up and bound
Sa^han, though for a while he be let loose: yet in that until the revealing of
Antichrist, he was bridled, and not suffered hitherto to power out all his
malice against the Church of God, it must be ascribed to his mercy.

2. The Lord by this persecution under Antichrist will try out the faithfulness
of his servants, that they may be discerned from the hypocrites: as it is
showed here in the former verse, that diverse were suffered to fall into
affliction, to try and purge them: both that they might be scuered and purged
from hypocrites, as the wheat is from the chafe and dross; and that the Lord
also might have experience of the faithfulness and constancy of his servants.
Hereupon Hyppolitus thinks, that the Martyrs under the tyranny of
Antichrist, shall be the most glorious Martyrs, that ever were in any
persecution before: which verily may be affirmed of our holy Martyrs that
suffered in the days of Queen Marie in England, and then and since in other
places: for beside that their torments and cruel manner of death were
equivalent, (...)
the cause for the which they suffered was more hard to be judged of, and their
enemies more subtle: for the Martyrs of the Primitive Church died for not
yiedling unto most gross idolatry of the heathen, which was most manifest
impiety: and their adversaries were professed enemies to all Christianity:
But these latter Martyrs suffered for matters of religion, even controuerted
among Christians, and their persecutors themselves pretending to be Christians.

3. A third reason is, that God by the hypocrisy and tyranny of Antichrist,
punishes the sins of the world, which abounded at the revealing of
Antichrist. Hyppolitus thus well sets forth the iniquity of those times,
wherein Antichrist shall come: omnes suo arbitratu vivent, silij manus
inijcient in parents, etc. all shall live as they list, the sons shall lay
violent hands upon their parents: the wife shall deliver the husband to death,
the husband the wife: masters shall be cruel toward their servants, and
servants shall be stubborn against their masters: no man shall reverence the
aged, nor have pity on the poor: then shall enchanters and sorcerie be in
force: Pastors shall become wolves, and Monks shall covet and desire the
things of the world, etc. All these vices and corruptions abounded in the
world, when Antichrist began to show himself, and these things are yet
practiced under the Roman tyranny: Wives do accuse their husbands, and
husbands their wives, children the parents, and parents the children, one
brother rises against an other to put them to death for religion. So that for
these and other sins, the hard yoke of Antichristian bondage yet lies upon
the world. And S. Paul shows the reason thereof, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. God
shall send them strong delusions to believe lies, that all they might be damned
which believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. And so those
nations, which are yet in bondage under Antichrist, because they desire not to
leave their superstition, and unrighteous living, but still continue enemies to
the truth, therefore they are by the just judgment of God kept still in
ignorance and misbeleefe.

20. Controv. That out of this text, v. 36. it can not be proved that the Pope
is not Antichrist, as Bellarmine intends.
Bellarm. lib. 3. de Romans Ponti^. c. 21. goes about to prove by diverse
arguments out of this text, that the Pope can not be Antichrist.

Argum. 1. Antichrist here described, shall do what he list, and exalt
himself against God, as not holding himself tied unto any law, nor
acknowledging any superior: so does not the Pope, who takes himself to be
bound unto the law, and confesses Christ to be his Judge and superior.

Ans. The Pope confesses thus much in words, but in effect he abrogateth the
law of God, and so consequently denies Christ to be his superior.

1. The Pope dispenses against the law of God, which shows his superiority
over the law: Pope Martin the 5. with the advice of his Popish divines,
dispensed with one to marry his own sister germane: this is committed to
writing by Antoninus Florentin. sum. 3. p. tit. 1. c. 11.. quod Papa. whom
Necolaus Boerius follows, consil. 20. vtrum papa. numer. 26. such were the
incestuous marriages of Egypt: for Ptolome Philadelphus married his own sister
Berenice, and so did Ptolome Philopator his sister Eurydice, whom he killed:
Ptolome Physcon married Cleopatra his brother Philometors wife: in which very
case the Pope dispensed with Henry the 8. to marry his brother Prince Arthurs
wife.

Likewise the law of God forbids the setting up of all images to be
worshipped, Levit. 18. 9. which the Pope commands every where to be done. The
holy Apostle says, that concupiscence is against the law, and consequently
sin, Romans 7. 7. But the Pope in his Council of Trent decreed the contrary,
that concupiscence is not vere and proprie peccatum, verily and properly sin.

2. As the Pope allows that which Gods law forbids and condemns, so
likewise he forbids that, which Gods word allows and commands. As Gods
word commands obedience to parents, but the Pope set Conradus and Henry
against their father Henry the 4. who warred against him; and Henry deprived
him of his Empire, and of Christian sepulture. Our Savior bids to give unto
Caesar, the things which are Cesars; as homage, tribute, obedience: but Gregory
the 2. forbad tribute to be paid to Leo the 3. for pulling down of images, or
any obedience to be yielded unto him. The Scripture allows, that they which
have not the gift of continency, should marry: but Calisthus the 3. refused
to dispense with the marriage of a certain Deacon, that alleged he had not
the gift of continency, for whom also Cardinal Senensis entreated, who was
afterward Pope called Pius the 2. who writ hereof unto his friend in these
words, alterum Papam expectandum, qui melior sit, that an other Pope must be
expected, who should be better. Boerius loc. citat. number. 20. The Scripture
counts marriage honorable, and makes it free for all men, Hebt. 13. 4. yet
the Pope forbids marriage to his Clergy, as a disgrace to their orders.

3. And that it yet may more evidently appear, how the Pope extolleth himself
above Christ: In the year 1447. when Felix was Bishop of Rome, who succeeded
Eugen^us, this answer was made by the Cardinal of S. Angel to the Ambassadors
of Bohemia, Siquis non crederet Christum esse verum Deum and hominem, and idem
sentiret Papa, eum, non damnatum ^ri, if any did not believe Christ to be God
man, and the Pope did so think also, he should not be damned: and at the same
time Henricus the master of the Palace said to the same Ambassadors, Papa
potest mutare S. Evangelium, and potest S. Evangelio pro loco and tempore alium
sensum tribuere, the Pope may change the holy Gospel, and may give an other
sense to the Gospel, according to time and place. ex Polan.

Argum. 2. Antichrist shall care for no God at all: But the Pope worshippeth
God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: yea all the Saints in heaven,
images and relics in earth (if we will believe the Protestants, says
Bellarmine) he adoreth also.

Answ. In that the Pope inuocateth Saints, prays unto images, adoreth
relics, and so sets up other gods: it is an evident argument, that he
denies the true God.

Argum. 3. Antichrist shall overthrow the policies and states of kingdoms, so
does not the Pope.

Answ. The contrary is evident: for Gregory the 2. forbad any obedience to be
yielded to Leo the 3. and Gregory the 3. deprived him of his Empire. Alexander
the 3. so served. Frederike the 1. Frederike the 2. and Jews the 4. were so
likewise used. Gregory the 7. deposed Bol^slaus king of Polonia: Julius the 2.
gave away the kingdom of Navarre. How then is not Bellarmine ashamed, these
things being so manifest, to say, that the Pope is not an enemy to politic
states?

Argum. 4. Antichrist shall prosper: but the Pope, since the Protestants made
him Antichrist, has much decreased: he has lost a good part of Germany, of
France, Helvetia, Bohemia, Pannonia, Eagland, and all Suetia, Gothia, Norway,
Denmark: but Luther has prospered, by his carnal preaching seducing many,
who of a silly Monk became as it were Pope over all Germany; he rather may be
taken for Antichrist.

Answ. 1. The Protestants in these days are not the first, that discovered
Antichrist, he was so called and counted many years since. 2. the prospering
here spoken of is not understood of any spiritual success by the preaching of
the Gospel, but of such prosperous events as are compassed by violence and
force of arms, and cunning devises. 3. it is no carnal preaching to teach men
not to be addicted superstitiously to carnal ^ites and ceremonies, which was
the scope of Luthers preaching. 4. neither did Luther affect a papal
preeminence over Germany: though it be true, that of late one Felix Peretus of
a poor Monk came to be universal Pope, called Sixtus 5. 5. God be thanked
that many good morsells are snatched out of the wolves mouth: he speaks but
of a good part of England, that is revolted from the Pope: But all England in
general and Scotland do detest the Pope with his superstitious and
treacherous practices, except only a few tha^ are Popishly addicted; whose
number I trust daily will decrease. 6. And though Antichrist do not prosper,
as he has done, and I am sure, never shall: yet that follows not, but he is
Antichrist still: for he shall prosper only for a time, not always.

21. Controv. How Antichrist shall forsake his fathers God, v. 37.
v. 37. He shall not regard the god of his fathers. 1. This is most true of the
Pope, 14 note: the (...)
who has swarued and departed from the religion and faith taught by the holy
Apostles, and Apostolical men in the purer ages of the Church: 1. as S. Paul
teaches, 2. Tim. 3. 17. that the Scriptures are able to make the man of God
perfect to all good works; and so consequently are perfect, and
all-sufficient: so Tertulliane, aliunde suadere non poterunt de rebi^^ fidei,
quam ex literis fidei: de praescript. haeretic. c. 15. they can not otherwise
persuade of matters of faith, then by the Scriptures of faith: But the Pope
teaches that beside the word of God written, there are traditions, which he
calls the word of God not written, which they make of equal authority to
the Scriptures: and so they bold, that the Scriptures contain not all things
necessary to salvation. 2. Their forefathers have taught, that the Scriptures
are plain and easy, and therefore are to be heard, and read of all: as Iren.
lib. 2. adv. haeret. c. 46. vniversae Scripturae, etc. apertae and ab omnibus
audiri possunt, all the Scriptures are open, and may be heard of all: But the
Pope holds them to be obscure, and not safe to be read of the lay people. 3.
Clemens teaches, ex ipsis Scripturis capere sensum veritatis opor^et, we must
take the sense of the truth out of the Scriptures, distinct. 37. c. relatum.
but the Pope will have the sense of Scripture depend of his own mouth. 4.
Their fathers have taught that the translation of the Scriptures must be
examined by the original, distinct. 9. c. 6. ve^erum librorum fides de
Hebraeis voluminibus examinanda est, the credit of the books of the old
Testament must be examined by the Hebrew: but now among the Romanists, the
vulgar Latin is made authentical, Trident. sess. 4. and preferred before the
original Hebrew and Greek. 5. Their Elders have taught, that we are only
justified by faith, Basil. concion. de humilitat. this is perfect righteousness,
etc. when a man knows himself sola fide in Christum iustificatum, to be
justified by faith only in Christ: so also Ambrose, impius sola fide
iustificatur apud Deum, a wicked man is justified only by faith with God. in
4. ad Roman. But the Romanists hold, that we are also justified by the merit of
our works. 6. The Fathers have taught that there are no other mediators of our
prayers but Christ, as Chrysostom, nihil tibi opus est patronis apud Deum,
etc. you need no patrons with God: for God will not hear so easily, if other
pray for us, as if we pray our selves, though we be full of evil, etc. And in
many other points of doctrine it is evident, that the Pope has lost and
forsaken the faith and the religion of the ancient Fathers, and so
consequently their God also.

But Bellarmine thus would wipe away this mark: that this no way can be
fastened upon the Pope, who confesses the God of his fathers, God the Son,
God the Father, and God the holy Ghost. lib. 3. de Roman. Pontif. c. 21.

Contra. In words indeed they confess Christ to be their God, but in fact
they deny him: 1. They do not acknowledge him to be their only Prophet,
seeing they detract from the Scriptures, making them obscure, and imperfect:
whereas Christ only is to be heard in the Scriptures: yea Boniface the
Archbishop of Mentz uttered this blasphemous speech, magis ab ore eius quam a
sacris pagini^ antiquam Christianae religionis institutionem expetant, let them
seek and desire the ancient institution of Christian religion rather at his
mouth, then from the sacred book, etc. which horrible blasphemy is inferted
in their Canon law: distinct. 40. cap. Si Papa. Bellarmines best answer here is
to doubt of the truth of this speech: but if it be not true, why stands it in
the Canon, after so often reuising and perusing of the Canons. 2. They deny
Christ to be our only Priest, in making other Mediators and intercessors
beside him, contrary to the Apostle, 1. Tim. 2. 5. There is one Mediator of
God and man, the man Jesus Christ. 3. Neither do they acknowledge Christ to be
the only king of his Church, making the Pope his Vicar, and head of the
Church: and they say that unto the Pope is given all authority in heaven and
earth: lib. 1. Ceremoniar. cur. Roman. Bellarmine answers, that the Pope no
more denies Christ to be king, then a Viceroy in a country denies the king
of the land. Ans. 1. The reason is not alike: for a king can not be present in
every part of his kingdom, and therefore commits many things to his
deputy, which he can not do himself: but Christ is for ever present with his
Church. 2. the Viceroy takes not upon him to be the king and head, as the Pope
does. So then it is evident, that the Pope in effect renounceth the God and
religion of his fathers: see further in the Appendix exercis. 3. argum. 1.

22. Controv. How the Roman Antichrist regards not the desire of women.
Though the Antichrist of Rome does publicly pretend chastity, (...)
yet all fornication and uncleanness both natural and unnatural, is practiced
and suffered under that licentious government. And herein the Pope regards
not the desires of women, in that he is an enemy unto lawful marriage,
forbidding his Clergy to marry: which is made lawful to all men, 1. Cor. 7.
1. Hebr. 13. 4. And while marriage is restrained, there is a way open to all
other kind of uncleanness, even that filthy Sodomitrie, which is against
nature: in commendation whereof, a great Bishop of Italy did write publicly,
and that without any check. Papp. This sin some scoffingly have called,
mutum peccatum, a dumme sin: but they shall find that it is peccatum
clamans, a crying sin, which called for fire and brimstone from heaven upon
the Sodomites. Bulling.

But Bellarmine to clear his great Master the Pope of this suspicion also, he
alleges, that in the original the words stand thus; and he shall be in the
desires of women: though that in the Greek translation it be read negatiuely,
he shall not, etc. And he gives two conjectures why it should be read rather
affirmatively, then negatiuely; both because Antiochus, as Hierome writes, who
is here historically meant, was given unto the desire and lust of women:
neither is it probable, that Antichrist should command or commend single life:
but the Jews rather do expect, that Antichrist shall suffer them to have many
wives, which they count a part of their terrene happiness.

Contra. 1. That it is more agreeable to the original to read here negatiuely,
he shall not have respect to the desires of women, then affirmatively, is
showed before, qu. 45. whether I refer the Reader. 2. Though Antiochus were
one way given unto the desire of women, in respect of his carnal lust, yet an
other way he was not, in not regarding the request and desire of his wife, for
to spare Jerusalem, as is showed likewise before, qu. 45. 3. It is most
probable, nay rather that Antichrist shall enjoin single life, and restrain
marriage, because he shall maintain the doctrine of devils, whereof this is
one. 4. And though the Jews expect such carnal liberty, when their Messiah
comes, that is nothing to the purpose: for such a Messiah, as they expect,
shall never come. But we know certainly that the Antichrist should come into the
world, and is indeed already come. 5. And that Antichrist shall outwardly
seem to maintain single life, it is the opinion of their own writers,
exterius finget castitatem vt facilius decipiat, he shall outwardly feign
chastity, that he may the more easily deceive, Lyran. so also Pererius,
Intimis animi sensibus erit super omnes libidi^osus, etc. in his inward
disposition he shall of all men be most licentious and lustful, though he
shall outwardly dissemble chastity.

23. Controv. That Antichrist shallnot care indeed for any God, nor have any
sense of religion.
That the Antichrist of Rome herein also was well resembled by Antiochus, 16
note: Atheism, prophannes, not caring in effect for any God.
may be proved first by particular induction, that many of their Popes have
been found in a manner to be very Atheists, having ^o sense of religion. John
the 12. whom Platina makes John the 13. nec Deum nec hominem prae oculis
habuisse, had neither God nor man before his eyes: so testifies Theodoric. a
Niem. lib. 3. c. 9. Innocentius the 8. was seen for the most part to sleep in
the time of divine service: of Alexander the 6. says Guicciardine, that he had
nullum religionis sensum, no feeling of religion: his holy days exercise was
to see Plautus comedies played: of Leo the 10. it is reported, that he should
thus say, quantum nobis profuit fabula ista de Christo? how much has this
fable or tale of Christ profited us?

Secondly, this may be showed how the Pope does magnify himself against God,
by those blasphemous titles and prerogatives, which he suffers to be given
unto him by his Canonists: as Osiander does exemplify these, the Pope is the
universal father of all the faithful and of all the sheep of Christ, Ioannes
de tur. cremat. the Pope has the same consistory with God, and the same
tribunal with Christ: the Pope is a certain divine power, representing a
visible God in earth, Gomesius: All power is given unto the Pope in heaven and
earth: from the Pope appeal is not to be made, no not unto God: the Pope can
make something of nothing: the Pope can do all that God does, Decius: the Pope
is God, Felinus: the Pope is greater, then any other creature, and his power
extends it self to celestial things, terrestrial, and infernal, Antonin.
Florentin. the Pope may change the form of the Sacraments delivered from the
Apostles, Archiadiacon. the Pope is the foundation of faith, as the canons
speak: God has subjected all laws to the Pope, and no law can be imposed
upon his highness, (...) Gratian. the Pope may decree against the epistles of
S. Paul, Carolus R^^nus: God has brought all things in subjection under the
Popes feet, Barbazia: none is equal to the Pope but God, August. Beroius: the
Pope is the husband of the whole Church, Joan. de tur. cremat. These and such
like blasphemies are uttered by the Popes claw-backes, and ^e accepts them:
for if he misliked them, why does he not prohibit them to use such gross and
blaspemous seatteries? By this it is evidently manifest, that the Pope, as here
it is said of Antiochus, seeks only to magnify himself, and in effect
cares not for any God.

24. Controv. How Antichrist shall bring in a strange God, which his fathers
never knew, v. 38.
As Antiochus brought in his new God Mauzzim, that is, (...)
of munitions, namely the idol of Jupiter Olympius into the Temple, and guarded
him about with munitions and garrisons, such an idol as his fathers never knew:
so likewise the Roman Antichrist has brought in a new kind of images into
the Church: as one of them obtained of Phocas the Emperor, the Church of
Gentile idols called Paentheon in Rome, and set up the images of Saints in
stead thereof: likewise they do make the virgin Marie their Lady and
goddess, making her their Mediatrix, and offering up prayers, consecrating
Churches unto her: And thus they have framed unto themselves a new goddess
whom their fathers knew not.

But the most famous idol of all is their new devise of transubstantiation,
and of their breaden god, and their idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass: wherein
they commit many profanations. 1. They give unto every Priest power to make
the body of Christ, and therein think them more worthy then the Virgin
Marie: for she was conceived but once with the holy flesh of Christ, but they
do make it daily. 2. they detract from the virtue and efficacy of Christ's
alsufficient sacrifice upon the cross, in adding as a supplement thereof their
daily unbloody sacrifice (as they call it) of the Mass. 3. they ascribe unto
the Mass such virtue, as that thereby they think the souls to be delivered
out of purgatory. 4. they hold that the Mass is available ex opere operato,
by the very external work, without the good intention, faith, or preparation
in them, to whom it is apply. 5. They carry their impanate god about in
procession, requiring adoration with knocking, kneeling, lifting up the hands
to be yielded unto it. 6. And they make their Mass a general remedy not
only against all spiritual but temporal evils and calamities, and a mean
to obtain both spiritual and temporal blessings: as health of body, good
success in any business, victory in war, good speed in marriage matters, in
battle, in navigations, and such like: whence they have devised so many kinds
of votiue Masses, as they are called: as for peace, for rain, for fair
weather, for women in travail, for those which are upon their journey, against
the pestilence, lightening, and such like: All which are new brought in
devises, never known in the former ages of the Church: and this may well be
called their new come God Mauzzim, which signifies munitions: for the
idolatrous service of the Mass, is the chief pillar of Popish superstition,
their munition and fortress, Pappus.

25. Controv. Of the theatricall and pompous service with silver and gold,
which Antichrist has found out for his new idol.
As Antiochus spared no cost to set forth his new idol, 18. note: Antichrists
new theatricall service of his new idol.
he bestowed upon it silver and gold, and precious things: and as Marcellus
among the Romans robbed all other Temples, to set forth and beautify the
idol-Temples at Rome: So the Roman Antichrist with all external pomp,
outward glory, and glittering show of silver and gold, does adorn and
beautify this his new coined service. And how all their religion consists in
nothing else but in an outward show, and vainglorious pomp, it is evident in
these three things, in their persons, Churches, and solemnities.

First for their persons, they count them good Catholics, that observe their
outward rites and ceremonies, though they have no good motion and instinct at
all: as if they be in their baptism exorcised, anealed, afterward confirmed
with chrisme, and keep fasting days, be sprinkled with holy water and ashes,
creep to the cross, be confessed at Easter, kiss the pax, go in pilgrimage,
offer to their idols, and when they die, be anealed, and carried to the grave
with tapers and dirges, they think they have performed all offices of
Christianity.

Concerning their Churches, there is no preaching, or very seldom, and that to
small edifying, no singing of Psalms, or praying with understanding: but all
things are set forth to the ear, in singing and sound of instruments, and to
the eye, in adorning their images with silver and gold, and such like.

And touching their solemnities; all their service is nothing else but a mere
stage play, from one end of the year to the other.

At the nativity of Christ, an infant made of wood wrapped up in swathing
cloutes is carried up and down by boys and girls.

In the festival of the three kings, which they say came to worship Christ,
three apparelled like kings do go from door to door singing and begging
with a star made of paper.

In the day of the purification candles are carried about: and ashes are
sprinkled on ashwednesday. In lent certain persons disguised go up and down
the streets whipping themselves: the images in the Churches are clothed in
black as though they mourned, the altars are covered.

On Palm Sunday, an ass is led about, and palms carried before: on the day
of resurrection, after midnight the Priest takes the image of the crucifix out
of the sepulcher, and goes about knocking at the Church doors, and crying, be
ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the king of glory shall come in: and
then the question is asked, who is the king of glory? and the Priest makes
answer, the Lord strong and mighty in battle, he is the king of glory: and
so they blaspemously ascribe that unto an image, which is due only unto Christ.

Before the ascension day they have solemn processions, and then all the
images of the Saints are brought forth, and carried in show: on the ascension
day one is drawn up in a wooden tutret to the top of the Church, and as if
he represented Christ, he cries out, I ascend unto my father and your father:
and when he is at the top he throws down certain consecrated hosts, and
while they are gathering them up below, water is powered down, whereupon there
is raised a great laughter in the Church.

On the day of Pentecost the image of a dove is let down from the top of the
Church, together with fire, and a noise like thunder, with this voice, Receive
ye the holy Ghost.

On corpus Christi day, the host is carried about in solemn procession, with
instruments of music, and love songs, such as minstrels use to sing at
feasts, to make ghests mertie: And after this manner is the Popish service
devised to attend upon their impanate God. ex Polano.

But Bellarmine labors likewise to free the Pope of these imputations, that
this prophecy of the new God Mauzzim, cannot in any sense agree unto him.

1. First he reasons thus: this Mauzzim is either Antichrist himself, or the
devil, whom he worshippeth: he shall command himself to be worshipped, and be
a great sorceter and Magician: but the Pope is none of these.

Answer. 1. We will yield unto him the proposition: though indeed this place
has no such sense, either to understand Antichrist himself, or the devil by
the God Mauzzim, as is showed before, quest. 46. 2. But both the parts of the
assumption are true of the Pope: for he commands himself to be worshipped:
as appears. lib. 1. ceremon. Pontifical. sect. 3. c. 3. quod omnes mortales,
etc. that all men of what dignity soever, as soon as they come into the Popes
sight, shall thrice bend their knees, and then come and kiss his feet.

And that diverse of the Popes have been great Magicians, is extant in
histories: Sylvester the 2. gave himself to the devil to obtain the Papacy,
Platin. fascicul. tempor. Benno writes of Gregory the 7. that he sent two
young men to fetch a book of Necromancie* which he had forgotten, charging
them not to look upon it: but they thereupon were the more desirous to pry
into it, and while they read in it, the devils ministers came about them to
know what they should do: who being amazed at the first, bid them presently
to cast down a great wall which was near unto Rome, which was done forth
with. Luithprandus writes of John the 22. that he was wont, Diabolum in alea
invocare, to call upon the devil as he played at dice: And diverse of the
Popes beside have been noted, to use familiarity and conference with spirits:
So that taking Bellarmines own sense we shall find the Popish Antichrist to
worship this God Manzzim.

2. Bellarmine has here an other evasion, that Mauzzim is like to be the name
of the place where Antichrist shall lay up his treasure, and shall there
secretly worship the devil.

Answ. 1. Thus Bellarmine shifteth up and down, not knowing what to make of
this Mauzzim: one while he thinks it to be Antichrist himself, then again
he will have it to be the devil, and now a name of a place. 2. But we admit it
that Mauzzim is the name of a place, for it signifies a munition or garrison:
And may not such a place be found out in Rome, where the Popes treasure lies,
namely the castle of S. Angel?

3. Bellarmine adds yet further, that Antichrist shall worship this god in
secret, for openly he shall worshp no god at all, because the text says, he
shall not care for any God: but this cannot be said of the Pope, who professes
publikly the service of God.

Contra. 1. These two may well agree together, not to care indeed for any god;
and yet to pretend outwardly a kind of public worship in hypocrisy: as
Antiochus set up the idol of Jupiter Olympius at Jerusalem, being himself
without all sense of religion. 2. So the Roman Antichrist, does profess
himself a Christian, yet is indeed an enemy to true Christianity: And
though he pretends to be but Christ's Vicar, yet he does magnify himself,
against Christ and his gospel, as has been showed before.

26. Controv. How Antichrist shall distribute honors and possessions unto his
favorites, and that for money.
As Antiochus bestowed upon the idolatrous Jews offices and dignities and
possessions, 19. note: Antichrist distributeth dignities and possessions to his
flatterers but for money.
but not without money: for Jason and Menelaus brought the Priests office for
money: so the Antichrist of Rome takes upon him to be the Lord of the world,
to give kingdoms, Lordships, Manners, to those which will receive the mark of
the beast: here two things are expressed of Antiochus, what he gives, and for
what. The like are observed concerning Antichrist.

The things which are given are three, honors, places of authority and
command, lands and possessions: in every one of these kinds the Pope takes
upon him to be a distributor both in the Church and commonwealth: for Civil
titles and honors: he takes upon him to create Emperors, Kings, Dukes: and
to dispose of the kingdoms of the world, as there is extant, lib. 6. Avent. an
epistle of Pope Adrian, to the Archbishops of Trevire, Mentz, and Collen, to
this effect: sicut Zacharias transtulit imperium a Graecis ad Theutonicos, as
Zachary translated the Empire from the Greeks to the Germans, so we may
remove it from them to the Grecians again: ecce in potestate nostra est dare
illud cui volumus, behold it is in our power to give it to whom we will:
wherefore we are set by God over nations and kingdoms, to destroy and pluck
up, to build and to plant, etc. And thus said the devil to Christ, that all
the kingdoms of the world were his to give unto whom he would: In like manner
the Pope has Church dignities to bestow, Cardinalships, Archbishoprikes,
Bishoprikes, Abbeys, and such like, which he conferreth upon those which will
worship the beast, Bulling.

But for the manner: he bestows them as Antiochus did the Priesthood not
without money: Alexander the 6. made 12. Cardinals, not of those which best
deserved, but of such as would give most for them: Guicciardin. lib. 5. histor.
sui tempor. Leo the 10. had two calls or elections of Cardinals, wherein he
made very few without money: Clement the 7. as Onuphrius writes, sold 3.
Cardinals hattes to those, which would give most: Hereupon it comes to pass,
that many unworthy persons are preferred in the Popish Church, such as are
able to give most: as Bernard complained in his time, honorati incedunt de
bonis Domini, qui Domino honorem non deferunt, etc. plus calcaria quam altaria
fulgent, etc. they iet up and down honored with the goods of the Lord, but
themselves give no honor unto the Lord, etc. whence it is that they wear more
gold in their bridles and spurs, then is to be seen in the altars, etc. ser.
33. super Cant. Budaeus has the like complaint, that the rewards of learning
and virtue were bestowed upon such asses and doults, vt illis anima data sit
pro sale, vt suibus, that their soul seems to serve for their bodies, as
falt for swines flesh, that is, to keep it from corruption.

But Bellarmine to help out his Grand-master, tells us, 1. that there have
been many learned men among them, which have taken great pains, as Eckius,
Cochleus, Latomus, Driedo, Tapperus, Petrus a Soto, with others, that have not
received an halfepennie of the Pope for their great pains. 2. and yet they
labored night and day to suppress the furies of Protestants. 3. who expect
their reward from heaven, for setting forth and maintaining Gods glory. 4. And
if the Pope do bestow the reuennues of the Church upon Cardinals and Bishops,
he is not said so much to confer them, as they who in their godly zeal gave
such large reuennues to the Church. Thus Bellar. lib. 3. de Romans Pontif. c. 21.

Contra. 1. Bellarmine discrediteth the Pope, and notes him with the infamous
mark of ingratitude, in that he suffers such patrons and defenders of his
papal sepremacie to go unrewarded: and yet there was none of these whom he
names, but enjoyed much more then many worthy ministers of the gospel. 2.
can he for shame object fury unto the Protestants, seeing it is notorious,
that diverse of these his learned men, became furious and mad indeed. Eckius
when he died cried out, why do not ye give me my gold, where is my gold? it
seems he should have bought some dignity which he missed of. Latomus, when
he should have made an oration at Bruxels against Luther, before Charles the 5.
and could not go forward, being sent out with hisses, was so ashamed, that he
fell mad; and uttered diverse blasphemies in the Schools, and in the Readers
chair, whence he was taken by Ruardus Tapperus, and was carried to his bed,
and died in despair, saying he was damned. Friar Cherubin, which in the year
1598. challenged the ministers of Berne and Geneve to dispute with them, after
he had both in words and deeds bewrayed his madness, was tied with chains,
and had keepers appointed him. 3. neither is it true that they strive for Gods
glory, but for the Popes, whom indeed they make their terrene god; and
therefore they cannot expect any reward from God: he must reward them whose
servants they are. 4. And these great reuennues, which the Pope has to
bestow, he has rather gotten by rapine and violence, then by the piety and
devotion of others: As the Dukedom of Ferrara ann. 1598. was by Pope Clement
the 8. by force and violence taken from the right heir thereof. ex Polan.

27. Controv. Of Antichrists insatiable ambition, cruelty, and covetousness.
1. As Antiochus upon every occasion was ready to invade Egypt and other
countries: so the Pope usurps upon the nations and kingdoms of the world
without any title, 20. note: Antichrists ambition.
but with pretenses and fogeries: as by that forged donation of Constantine, he
challenges to be Lord of the Occidentall Empire: there is no king in all these
West parts, whom either the Pope has not made in times past his vassal, or at
least will not say, that he holds his kingdom of him, and therefore ought to
do him homage: Boniface the 8. decreed, that it was of necessity of
salvation, for every creature to be subject to the Pope, Extrav. de maiorit.
and obedient. c. Vnam sanctam. And in the same canon he glories, that he is
set over nations and kingdoms, to plant and pull up, to build and destroy: he
challenges unto himself power in heaven and earth, and dominion from sea to
sea, and from the flood to the ends of the world, lib. 1. ceremon. pontifical.
c. 7.

2. As Antiochus took every opportunity to afflict the people of God, 21.
note: cruelty toward the Church of Christ.
but he spared the Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites that assisted him, and hated
the people of God as he did, v. 41. So Antichrist cease not to persecute the
Church of Christ, and by all means to oppress it, and to trample upon it: But
such as are addicted to his superstitions, and are affected toward him, he
spares, and favors.

3. As Antiochus hunted after nothing else, 22. note: the covetousness of
Antichrist.
but the spoil of Egypt, the treasurers of gold and silver, and other precious
things: So the Roman Antichrist gapeth after the treasure and riches of the
world, raking unto him whatsoever he can lay hold of: he sells men's sins
and pardons for money, releaseth the pains of purgatory for money, dispenses
almost with any thing for money: he imposes taxes, tenths, mulcts of money by
way of penance. As Henry the second had a mulct set upon him for the murder of
Thomas Becket, and it was enjoined him to go a warfare at his great charge, as
a part of his penance. Frederike the Emperor being excommunicate by Gregor.
the 9. bought his absolution for a 100. thousand ounces of gold, as witness
Onuphryus and Guicciardin. Alexander the 6. appointed certain rich Cardinals
to be poisoned, that he might seize upon their riches, Onuphryus in Alexand. 6.
The Pope exacteth great sums of the Jews dwelling at Rome, of the harlots
and usurers. John the 22. lest when he was dead 25. millions of ducats of gold
in the treasury. Boniface the 9. gathered out of one Province an 100. thousand
Florence pieces by his indulgences in a very short time: the Senate of Paris in
their petition to Jews the 11. alleged that the Pope every year had out of
France 946. thousand marks. Leo the 10. received a great sum of money by his
pardons and indulgences out of Germany, and gave them to his sister Magdalen a
most famous strumpet. Guicciard. lib. 13. ex Polan. Therefore Theodor. a Niem
thus well resembled the Pope-Apostolike sea, camera Apostolica mari
assimilatur, in quod intrant omnia flumina, and non exvndat, the Apostolical
chamber is likened to the Sea, into the which all rivers do run, and yet it
never ouerfloweth: so many thousand pounds are brought into it, and it is never
filled. etc. Union. tract. 6. c. 37.

28. Controv. Of the rage and fury of Antichrist.
v. 44. Like as Antiochus when he heard of the evil success of his captains,
23. note: Antichrist. (...). against the faithful.
how they were overthrown and discomfited in Judea, went forth with a great
rage thinking to destroy many: so the Roman Antichrist has fretted and fumed,
when he heard of any that were revolted from his obedience: As Leo the 10. and
after him Adrian the 6. sent out their bulls against Martin Luther, Zuinglius,
and other ministers, that preached the Gospel in Germany. When king Henry the
8. had abolished the Popes supremacy in England, Paulus the 3. thus bestirred
himself: he deprived the king of his kingdom, disinherited his children of
the crown, released his nobles of their oath of alleagance, gave the
possessions and lands of his subjects to be a pray to any, that list to invade
them, he interdicted them from the Church and Sacraments: made void all
leagues confirmed with foreign kings and states.

After the same manner proceeded Pius the 5. against Queen Elizabeth,
depriving her of her crown, releasing her subjects of their fealty, and
excommunicating all her subjects, that continued in her obedience: the like
also did Sixtus the 5. who also pursued Henry king of Navarre now king of
France, and Henry of Burbon Prince of Condie, with the same weapons: deposing
them by his sentence from their honors and dignities, freeing their subjects
of their fealties, and disinheriting them of their title to the crown of
France.

29. Controv. How Antichrists palace is planted between the two Seas.
As Antiochus pitched his pauilion between the two Seas, 24. note: the palace
of Antichrist situate between two Seas.
the dead Sea and Mediterranean Sea, where Judea was situate, v. 45. So the
Roman Antichrist has his seat just between two Seas, the Sea called
Tyrrhenum and Adriaticum: and he sits in the Temple of God: not either the
Temple of Jerusalem, which is long since destroyed, and never shall be builded
again, nor in any other material Temple; but he sits in the Church of God,
taking upon him to be the head of Christ's Church: but he with his faction, are
not the true Church of Christ, though he sit in the Church, as the vicious and
corrupt humors are in the body, but are no part of it, Polan. And the Popes
palace may fitly be compared to a Tabernacle: because his seat was removed by
Clement the 5. from Rome to Avenion in France, where it continued 74. years,
Osiander.

30. Controv. Of the fearful end of diverse Popes.
As Antiochus came unto a terrible end: he was eaten of worms, 25. note: the
miserable end of diverse Popes.
and his flesh fell away from him, that he could not endure his own stink: so
herein he was a figure and type of diverse Popes of Rome, who came to an
untimely death.

Sabinianus who first brought in the canonical hours, and the use of tapers in
the Church, was frighted by a vision, wherein Gregory the 1. appeared unto
him, whose books of mere envy he thought to have burned, and smote him, upon
the terror whereof he not long after died, Fascicul. tempor.

Boniface the 3. after he had obtained of that parricide and murderer the
Emperor Phocas, that the Church of Rome should have the principality before
other Churches, came home and ended his days in sorrow and grief, having not
enjoyed his papacy above a year and 5. months.

Leo the 3. was taken by the citizens of Rome and imprisoned, and making an
escape went by stealth into France, where he ended his days miserably, having
not been Bishop full 20. months.

Pope Lando was suffocated by John the 11. by thrusting a pillowe into his
mouth.

Sylvester the 2. that obtained his papacy by the devil, when he had
solemnized Mass in a chapel called Jerusalem, which sign the devil had
given him that he should not die till he came to Jerusalem, died presently: and
his body was cut into gobbets, least the devil should have carried it away,
Naucler.

John the 13. that had committed incest with two of his sisters, was slain in
adultery.

John the 15. had his eyes put out by Boniface the 7. and was famished to death
in the castle of S. Angel: the same Boniface the 7. died suddenly a very short
time after: and his body was drawn with a rope by the feet through the streets
of Rome: the history called fascicul. tempor. gives this note here of the
Popes: note says he, that the Bishops of Rome are killed, as in the Primitive
Church, but they were no martyrs, par poena, sed dispar causa, the punishment
was like, but the cause unlike.

Benedict the 5. fled to Hamburge, and was there strangled in prison.

Benedict the 6. was taken by the citizens, and strangled in the castle of S.
Angel.

Gregory the 7. by poison and other means made an hand of 6. Popes one after
another, to make a way for himself to the Popedom. And he himself who so
persecuted the Emperor Henry the 4. was taken by Cynthius a citizen of Rome
and imprisoned: and afterward was besieged by the Emperor, and at the last
escaped into a poor village in Apulia, where he died miserably.

Victor the 3. was poisoned in a chalice by a subdeacon, and thereof died.

Paschal the second after he had stirred up Henry the 5. against his father,
was taken by the same Henry, and cast into bonds, and so died in prison.

Adrian the 4. was choked of a little fly, and so ended his life.

Boniface the 8. who had been a terror unto Princes, died mad in prison, and
bonds: of whom it is said, that he entered like a fox, reigned like a wolf,
and died like a dog.

Clement the 5. was poisoned.

Paulus the 2. who as Platina writes, exceeded Heliogabalus in riot and
filthy pleasure, through gluttony and leacherie fell into an apoplexy.

Sixtus the 4. died of very grief that his wars were ended.

Alexander the 6. died of the same poison, which his son Caesar Borgias had
provided for Adrianus Cardinal of Corneta.

Paulus the 3. that spent his time in filthy pleasure, after he had heard of
the death of his son Pertus Aloisius, died in a peuish rage, and crying out
in despair, peccatum meum contra me semper, my sin is always against me, so
gave up the ghost.

Julius the 3. that belli-god died of a surfeit, and not without suspicion of
poison.

Pius the 5. that had like a wolf sucked the blood of many of Christ's lambs,
fell thorough grief into a consumption, and sucked asses milk, but it helped
him not.

Sixtus the 5. who so pursued and baited with his bulls Henry the 4. now king
of France, died of poison, whereas the king yet lives and prospers.

After him followed Vrbane the 7. Gregor. the 14. and Innocentius the 9. who
died all in a very short time, one after an other, ex Polan.

Thus Antiochus miserable end was a right figure and pattern of the like end
of the like Roman tyrants.

And as Antiochus tyranny ended with him: so at the length the kingdom of
Antichrist shall be extinguished: as it is prophesied, Apocal. 14. 8. It is
fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great city, for she made all nations to
drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornications, etc.

Thus have I by Gods grace showed how diverse ways Antiochus was a type and
figure of the Roman Antichrist: and so much of the controversies out of this
chapter.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. The Angels assist Princes in the defense of the Church.
v. 1. I stood to encourage him: that is, the Angel assisted Darius in his
godly purpose in sending the people of God out of captivity: If the Angels
assist infidels, when they favor the Church, much more faithful Princes: for
the special office of the Angels is to be empolyed for their sakes, which
shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14.

2. Observe. Ambition and covetousness the causes of the ruin of kingdoms.
v. 2. By his riches he shall stir up all against the Realm of Grecia:
Xerxes, who by oppression grew rich, and by his riches waxed proud, and
thorough pride moved unnecessary war, warring against the Grecians with
800. thousand men, was the occasion of the ruin and fall of the kingdom of
the Persians: for these wars continued still; and though sometimes
intermitted, yet were not fully ended until Alexanders time, who took
occasion by those wars to go against the Persians.

3. Observe. God resists and punishes the proud.
v. 4. And when he shall stand up his kingdom shall be broken, etc. Alexander
being lifted up in mind for his great success, made himself equal unto
God: when he heard that the Arabians worshipped two gods, the heavens which did
bear the Sun, and Dyonisius because he went with an army against the
Indians, thought himself worthy to be the third god: and sometime he would
come forth like Jupiter, sometime like Diana: for this his pride and
unthankfulness to God, he continued not long, being cut off in the 32. year of
his age, and all his posterity and kindred, his mother, sister, sons, and
wives, within a short time after his death, were all slain: this is the end
of proud persons. So it befell unto proud Pharaoh king of Egygt, who was
drowned in the red Sea, and unto Herod, that was devoured of worms, Act. 12.

4. Observe. Incestuous marriages unhappy.
v. 6. The kings daughter of the South, shall come to the kings daughter of the
North. Ptolomeus Philadelphus gave unto Antiochus Theos first his daughter
Laodice, and then afterward his other daughter Berenice: they (...) two
sisters, as Appian in Syriac. whom Polanus follows: But whether they were
sisters or not, Antiochus did repudiate his lawful wife Laodic, by whom he
had two sons Seleucus Callinicus, and Hierax: but this marriage prospered not,
for Berenice was slain by Callinicus: which shows what is the end of such
unlawful marriages: and that all leagues and confederacies combined by such
means, can not hold. So Ferdinand gave unto Sigismund king of Polonia first
one of his daughters, and after her death an other, by the Popes dispensation:
And in this age the Pope has dispensed with the like incestuous marriages, for
the uniting and maintaining of some great houses, Polan.

5. Observe. Princes that are enemies to the Church shall not long prosper.
v. 12. But he shall not prevail. Ptolomeus Philopator, having obtained an
exceeding great victory against Antiochus Megas, because he was listed up in
mind, and afflicted the people of God, profaned the Temple, and cast many of
them before the Elephants in open shows; he was given over to a reprobate
sense, spending his days in most filthy pleasure, and lived not long after:
such is the end of those, which are enemies to the people of God: according to
the prayer of the Prophet David, Up Lord, disappoint them, cast them down,
Psalm. 17. 13.

6. Observe. There can be no firm peace among the wicked.
v. 27. They shall talk of deceit at one table. Antiochus Epiphanes, and
Ptolome Philometor made semblance and show of friendship, but it was not in
truth: such are the truces between Princes that profess not true religion: as
between the kings of France and Spain in times past, as Sleidan and
Gnicciardine note in their stories: so the Prophet Isai says, c. 57. 21. There
is no peace to the wicked.

7. Observe. Peace between Princes enemies to the Church, dangerous.
v. 28. His heart shall be against the holy covenant. As this peace between
Antiochus Epiphanes, and Ptolome Philometor redounded much to the hurt of Gods
people: such are the leagues made in these days between the Princes of the
Popes faction, which tend to the ruin of the Church: as Herod and Pilate were
made friends by persecuting of Christ. But God shall break the bonds of all
such carnal devices, and not suffer his Church to be trodden down.

8. Observe. That we be not dismayed, when religion is hindered.
v. 31. They shall pollute the Sanctuary. As Antiochus Epiphanes caused an
idol to be set up in the Temple, and the daily sacrifice to be intermitted: so
for a while God may suffer his Church to be tried, and his service to cease: as
here in England in the days of Queen Marie, when the Churches were defiled
with idols: but as Antiochus tyranny continued not much above six years, so
God shortened those wicked days, which were under that time not full out six
years.

9. Observe. The end of the wicked shall be sudden and fearful.
v. 45. He shall come to his end, and none shall help him. As Antiochus was
plagued of God for his wickedness, and so he died: the like end wicked tyrants
shall have: as Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the upright man, for the end of that man is
peace: but the transgressors shall be destroyed together, etc.

CHAP. XII.
1. The Argument and Method.
THis Chapter, which contains the comforts and consolations ministered unto
Daniel is divided into three parts. 1. the conference of the Angel with Daniel,
to v. 5. 2. of one of the Angels with Christ, v. 5. to v. 8. 3. of Christ
himself with Daniel, thence to the end of the chapter.

1. In the first part there are 4. comforts given unto Daniel. 1. one is taken
from the efficient cause and author of their deliverance, Michael shall stand
up for his people, v. 1. 2. in the second place of comfort, first the time of
trouble is set forth by way of comparison, then the comfort is taken from the
issue of their trouble: they which are found written in the book of life,
shall be delivered, v. 1. 3. the third comfort is from the hope of the
resurrection: they which are not temporally delivered, shall rise up in the
end unto life everlasting. Here the resurrection is set forth. 1. in general,
many, that is all shall awake out of the dust. 2. in particular: there shall be
two sorts, some shall rise to life, some to shame, v. 2. 3. of those which rise
to life, some shall shine among the rest, as the brightness of the firmament,
and as the stars, v. 3.

4. The fourth comfort is, that notwithstanding those troublesome times, yet
the Church of God shall continue, and many shall seek for the understanding of
this book, which to that end Daniel is bid to seal up, v. 4.

2. In the second part is described. 1. the vision, that Daniel saw, both the
number, he saw two, and the site or place of them, v. 5. 2. their speech. 1.
the question moved, unto whom, namely, to Christ, and what, concerning the
end. 2. the answer. 1. by whom, by him that stood upon the waters. 2. in what
manner, by an oath with the lifting up of both his hands. 3. what he answers,
both for the continuance of the time, and for the end, v. 7.

3. In the third part, there is 1. Daniels question, with the occasion thereof,
his not understanding, v. 8. 2. the answer of Christ, partly denying Daniels
request, the things were secret, and sealed up, v. 9. partly giving him
satisfaction: 1. concerning the Church, wherein is showed the end and fruit of
their afflictions, set forth by the contrary, the frowardnes of the wicked, v.
10. and the term, first 1290. days, then a 1335. v. 11. 12. 2. concerning
Daniel himself, that he should be content: with a double promise made unto
him, that he should presently after his death, rest from all his labors: and
afterward stand up in his lot in the resurrection.

2. The text with the diverse readings.
1. And at that time shall stand up Michael the great Prince, which stands
for the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as
never was since there began to be a nation unto this time: and at that time the
people shall be delivered, every one that is found written in that book. ( in
the book. B. G. but the article is prefixed, which notes some special book)

2 And many of them which sleep in the dustie earth ( V. I. earth of dust. H.
not dust of the earth. B. G.) shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some
to shame and perpetual contempt ( not to contempt, that they may see always)

3 And they which instruct ( cause to understand. H. are teachers. V. are wise.
G. B. are taught or learned. L. but the word is in the active) shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament: and they which bring many ( turn many. B. G.)
to righteousness ( justify many. H.) as the stars for ever and ever.

4 But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book until the time
determined: ( I. L. until the last time. V. time of the end. H. B. not end of
time. G.) many shall run to and fro ( or here and there. B. not, pass
through. L. or wander up and down. V.) and knowledge shall be increased. ( see
qu. 15.

5 Then I Daniel looked, and beheld other two standing, the one on this side of
the brinke of the river, and the other on that side of the brinke of the river.

6 And one said (not, I said. L.) to the man clothed in linen, which was upon
the waters of the river, ( above at the waters of the river. V.) How long unto
the end of these wonders? (not, when shall be the end of these wonders?)

7 And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the
river, when he held up his right hand, and his left hand unto heaven ( the
heavens) and swear by him that lives for ever, that at the appointed time,
times, and a part, I. (or half, caeter. for cheizi, signifies both. I. not
unto the appointed time, whether long or short. V. he expresses not the words)
and when he has accomplished to disperse the power ( hand. H.) of the holy
people, all these things shall be finished.

8. And I heard, but understood not: and I said Lord, what shall be the end of
these things?: (not what shall be in the end of these things. A. P. or what
shall be after this. L. acarith, here signifies the last end.

9. And he said, go thy way Daniel, for the words are cloased up and sealed,
unto the time determined ( L. I. time of the end. H. S. B. not end of time.
G).

10. Many shall be purged ( chosen. L. S. barar, signifies both, but the first
here) and made white and tried ( as fire. L. S. ad.) but the wicked shall do
wickedly, neither shall any of the wicked understand, but they which instruct (
I. V. cause to understand. H. the wise. B. G.) shall understand ( observe,
mark. I.)

11. And from the time that the daily. sacrifice shall be taken away, and the
abomination bringing desolation ( making desolate. H. not the abomination for
desolation. L. or abominable desolation. B. G. for (shamem) making desolate,
is here a Participle) set up, there shall be a thousand two hundredth and
ninety days.

12. Blessed is he that waits and comes ( shall come. H.) to the thousand
three hundredth and five and thirty days.

13. But go thou thy way to the end, (not thou Daniel to the appointed or
defined time. L.) for thou shall rest and stand up in thy lot at the end of
days: the Septuag. here add many words, there are yetdayes and hours to the
fulfilling of perfection.)

3. The questions and doubts discussed.
Quest. 1. What time is here meant, and in that time shall Michael stand up,
ver. 1.
1. Some refer it unto the last time of world, after that great Antichrist
shall have raged against the Church of Christ, which shall continue three
years and an half, Lyran. Perer. Pintus, with other writers of that side: But
we hold that to be a dream, that any such singular Antichrist shall come in
the end of the world: see more c. 11. controv. 2.

2. Bullinger understands it of the coming of Christ to judgment, when
there shall be such great tribulation, as never was in the world before: and
this may seem as an argument hereof: because afterward v. 2. mention is made
of the resurrection: But that is added as a consolation: they which were not
temporally delivered in those troublesome times, yet should be sure to rife
unto life everlasting.

3. Some do expound this prophecy of the persecution in the last times under
the Turk, Melancth. and the Roman Antichrist, as Osiand. Pappus.

4. M. Calvin refers it to the time of Christ's coming in the flesh.

5. M. Iunius in his commentary interprets it of all the time of the
gospel, the beginning whereof is in his first coming, and the end in his
second.

6. But it is most properly referred to that time, when Antiochus left half
his army with Lysias, while he went unto Elymais in Persia: for about the same
time did Judas Macchabeus, by the asistance of the great Prince of the Church
Michael, which is Christ Jesus, recover Jerusalem, and purge the Temple, which
had been defiled, 2. Macchab. 10. Iun. in his annot. the reasons why this
place is thus to be understood, are these: 1. because the time here spoken of
has relation to the former story: in that time, that is, the same time
wherein the former things should be done: non post multa annorum millia, not
after so many thousand of years, Pelican. 2. the Angel says, thy people, the
people of the Jews must be understood, who, and not the Christians among the
Gentiles, should be persecuted for religion, H. Br. 3. the event also
confirms this exposition: for if Michael the great Prince had not then indeed
stood up for his Church, it had perished.

But thus it is objected against this interpretation: 1. that Porphyrius in
hatred to Christian religion, to obscure the truth has devised this sense,
Perer. 2. the rest Porphyrius cannot make to hang together; how in Antiochus
time some should awake out of the dust: which Porphyrius understands of those
which were shut up in caves and rocks, and afterward came out again, Hierome.

Ans. 1. Though Porphyrie were an enemy to the Christian faith, yet he might
in some particular hit upon the truth: neither herein is the light obscured,
but rather more manifested: and though his hatred were great against the
Christian religion, yet this is no impediment to faith, though every point of
faith be not proved out of every place of Scripture: the article of the
coming of Christ to judgment, is sufficiently proved out of other places of
Scripture, though it be not directly concluded here. Pelican here thus
writes, I give thanks to Hierome, qui tam diligenter adnotauit Phorphyrij
expositionem, who has so diligently noted Porphyrie his exposition, which he
holds to be most reasonable. 2. though he fail in some one point in his
exposition, yet it follows not, but that he may come near the truth in the
rest.

Quest. 2. Who is understood here to be Michael the great Prince.
1. Some take Michael here for a created Angel, who as he had the protection
before of the Jews under the law, shall afterward protect the people of God
under the Gospel: Anchrist by him shall be destroyed executiue, in execution,
by Christ imperative, by his commandment and authority, Lyran. Perer. Pintus.

2. Bullinger takes this Michael to be that Arkeangel, which S. Paul speaks
of, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. that the Lord shall descend from heaven with a shoot, and
with the voice of the Arkeangel.

3. Osiander thinks that Christ is here called Michael the Arkeangel, in
respect of his office; as in the prophecy of Ezekiel he is called David, yet
was he not Michael the Arkeangel.

4. M. Calvin leaves it as indifferent, whether we understand Christ the
Mediator, or a created Angel.

5. But that this Michael was none other but Christ, the Prince of the Angels,
may be made plain by these reasons:

1. By the name Michael, which is compounded of these three particles, mi, cha,
ell, which signify, which is as God, noting both the distinction of his
person, and the identitie of his nature, that he in power is equal unto God:
as the Apostle says of Christ, Phil. 2. 6. who being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal unto God, and Heb. 1. 3. he is said to be
the brightness of his glory, and the engraued form of his person. This
annotation of the word is well urged by Melancthon, upon this place,
Oecolampad. Iun. in comment, Polanus, M. Br. in Daniel.

2. This Michael is here called shar hagadol, the great Prince: there are
principalities and dominions so called both among Angels and men: but this
Michael is called prince in the superlatiue and highest degree, and in this
respect the Apostle says, Ephe. 1. 21. that God has set Christ above all
principalities and powers, etc. and every name that is named: And hereunto may
be applied that saying of the Apostle, that Christ is made so much the more
excellent then the Angels, as he has obtained a more excellent name then they,
namely, to be called, a great Prince, Iun. this name or title shar hagadol, a
great Prince, is translated by the Apostle (...), an Arkangel, which signifies
the chief or Prince of Angels. And though it be there said, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
that the Lord shall descend with the voice of an Arkangel, it follows not
that Christ is not that Arkangel, no more then it follows, because it is said
also in the same place, with the trumpet of god, that Christ should not be God.
Polan. And the trumpet of God, is the voice of God, as Psalm. 47. 6. God is gone
up with triumph, even the Lord with the sound of a trumpet: God shall then
descend in the voice of a trumpet, as in the giving of the law. So is this
voice interpreted to be the voice of the Son of God, which the dead shall
hear and live, Ioh. 5. 25. Polan. M. Br.

3. Further this is showed by the office of this Michael, which is to stand for
the people of God: whose protector and captain is Christ Jesus, called
therefore, Joshua 5. 15. captain of the Lords host: which place Justin. Martyr
dialog. cum Tryphon. understands of Christ: for who else is captain of the
Lords host, and protector of his Church?

4. This great Prince here mentioned, is the same, who had written upon his
thigh, the king of Kings, and the Lord of Lords, Apocal. 17. 16. who sat upon
a white horse, his eyes were as a flame of fire, and the wariers of heaven
followed him upon white horses: who was called the word of God. This was no
other but Christ: for to no other but unto him, do all these glorious titles
agree, Oecolampad.

5. This Michael is said to have Angels, Apocal. 12. 17. but the blessed
spirits cannot be said to be any others Angels save Christ's, Fulke annot. By
these and other reasons it is evident, that this Michael is no other but
Christ: see more hereof, c. 10. quest. 22.

But it will be objected, that Michael is not always taken for Christ, as
epist. Jude 9. that Michael the Arkeangel striving with the devil about the
body of Moses, durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but said, the Lord
rebuke thee: Answ. Christ so speaks as the Mediator of his Church, referring
all to the glory of his father: as the like we read, Zach. 3. 2. where it is
said, Jehovah said unto Satan, Jehovah rebuke thee Satan. Polan.

Quest. 3. What time of trouble the Angel here speaks of.
v. 1. There shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there began
to be a nation unto that same time. 1. This time of trouble, such as never was
any before, some refer unto the last persecution under Antichrist, whom they
suppose shall be one particular man: that whereas the Church has been
persecuted by five several enemies, the Jews, the Gentiles, by heretics,
schismatikes, and evil livers: this last persecution shall exceed all other:
for both it shall be corporal, in tormenting the body, and spiritual, in
abrogating the service of God, burning the books of Scripture, abolishing the
use of the sacraments. Perer. This is true, that there shall be a most grievous
persecution under Antichrist: but that is not signified here: for the
accomplishment of this prophecy must not be deferred so long: and beside, that
is but a groundless conceit, that Antichrist shall be one particular person.

2. Iunius in his commentary thinks this time of such trouble, to be that
when Christ was borne: for the Jews were never in any such slavery, both
corporally, being diverse ways afflicted, oppressed, and kept under by the
Romans, and spiritually by the superstitious traditions, and corrupt doctrines
of the Scribes and Pharisees: But at that time Christ the Messiah came in great
humility, he did not then show himself as the great Prince, in triumphing
over his enemies.

3. M. Calvin understands the great persecution of the Christians under the
Roman Empire: but the Angel still speaks of Daniels people, that is the
Jews, how they should be delivered: this text then concerns not the
believing Gentiles.

4. Osiander thus interprets, haec non de corporalibus afflictionibus, sed de
carnificina conscientiarum, etc. these things must not be understood of
corporal afflictions, but of the tormenting of the conscience under the Pope
of Rome by his superstitious traditions, whereby men's consciences were snared
and entangled: as the doctrine of merits, Purgatory, and such like: But the
Angel speaks here of such troubles, as should befall the Jews.

5. Bullinger does take these for the last times, when Christ at his coming
shall judge the world: whose judgment shall be more terrible unto the wicked,
then was either the destruction of the old world by water, or of Sodom by
fire: the elect only shall be delivered: But the Angel speaks here of
troubles which should fall upon the elect, out of the which they should escape:
Now the terrors of the last day of judgment shall not touch the righteous; who
shall stand forth, and appear before Christ with boldness.

6. These days of trouble then, are those which came upon the Jews in the
time of Antiochus Epiphanes: which are said to be the greatest troubles, that
fell upon that nation, because their other captiuities in Egypt, and in
Chaldea, were but corporal; but this was both corporal, in tormenting their
bodies, and spiritual, in foreing them by torments to forsake the law. And
whereas before time some particular men were tried for their conscience, as
Daniel and the three children, Dan. c. 1. c. 3. yet there was never an
universal persecution before for religion among the Jews. H. Br. in Daniel.

But Lyranus obiecteth, so also Pererius and Pintus, that there were greater
persecutions before, then this under Antiochus, both intensive and extensive,
in the intending and extending thereof, in the greatness, and in the
continuance: the persecution by Nebuchadnezzer was both greater, for the city
and Temple was destroyed, and many carried away captive, and many slain: it
was also longer, for it continued full 70. years.

Contra. It is true, that the captivity of Babylon continued longer then this
persecution, but it was not greater: for beside, that all these outward
calamities, of the sword, captivity, spoiling of city and Temple here
concurred, they were generally persecuted for their conscience and religion,
which trial they were never put unto before: so that in this respect, these
may be said to be the greatest troubles, which ever that nation had.

4. Quest. What deliverance the Angel speaks of, and of whom.
v. 1. At that time shall thy people be delivered, every one that shall be
written in that book, etc. 1. Bullinger understands this deliverance not in
this life, but at the coming of Christ, which time is called the day of
refreshing: But then this clause should be confounded with the next, v. 2.
where he speaks of those that shall rise and awake out of the dust unto
eternal life: he therefore speaks of an other deliverance here.

2. Some refer it to the spiritual deliverance of the faithful from the
persecution of Antichrist in the end of the world, isti vere salvabuntur de
tribulationibus Antichristi, these shall truly be delivered from the
tribulation of Antichrist, Lyran. so Calvine understands it of the spiritual
victory and conquest, whereby the faithful are conquerors even in the mids
of death: Osiander of the spiritual deliverance of the faithful from
Antichrists superstitions, by the preaching of the Gospel. But Daniel doubted
not, but that all the elect should be spiritually delivered: therefore some
other deliverance is spoken of from those external troubles.

3. Iunius in his commentary applies it to the vocation of the faithful by
Christ, that although many should be called in common to the knowledge of
Christ, at his coming; yet the Elect only should be effectually called unto
life eternal. But some external deliverance is here signified, as the Angel
spoke before of an outward troublesome time.

4. Iunius in his annotations follows an other sense: that every one should
be temporally delivered from those troubles, even every one whom it seemed
good unto God in his immutable decree to preserve: but by the book here is
understood the book of life, wherein they were written, which were ordained to
everlasting life, not any such knowledge or decree of God for a particular
deliverance.

5. Some give this sense: that all the Elect of the Jews should by these
afflictions be brought unto life eternal: God would sanctify their
afflictions unto them, that thereby they should be consecrate unto God, and so
obtain everlasting life according to their election: M. H. Br. But in this
sense is excluded the temporal deliverance, which is promised for the comfort
of the people.

6. Pelican does expound it altogether of their temporal deliverance, that
they which then stood for the law, obtinuerunt claram Deo auxiliante victoriam,
obtained a most glorious victory by the help of God: But every one of the
Elect in that time of persecution were not delivered: and all that temporally
escaped, it is hard to say, whether they were all elected.

7. Wherefore both these the spiritual and temporal deliverance must be
joined together: that every one of Gods elect should be delivered: some both in
body and soul: if any of the elect were slain and put to death in that
persecution, though their body suffered, yet their soul should be delivered,
and afterward in the resurrection, both soul and body should be saved: as it
follows v. 2.

5. Quest. Whether all the Jews shall be called before the coming of Christ.
Because some understand this deliverance of the people of the Jews, of their
last conversion and calling in the end of the world, as Lyran. Perer. it shall
not be amiss by the way to touch somewhat of that matter.

1. Theodoret upon this place, and Gregor. hom. 12. in Ezech. do deliver their
opinion, that not all the nation of the Jews, but only so many, as shall by
the preaching of Henoch and Elias be converted to the knowledge of Christ,
shall be saved: the rest which shall cleave unto Antichrist, who shall most of
all deceive the Jews, they shall be damned: as it is said, Apoc. 14. 9. If any
man worship the beast, and his image, etc. he shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God. But 1. if none else of the Jews shall be called, save such as
shall be converted by the preaching of Henoch and Elias, none are like to be
called at all: for that is a mere fable of the return of Henoch and Elias in
their own persons, to preach unto the world, as is afterward showed, Controv.
2. 2. this opinion includes a contradiction, for if at the coming of
Antichrist, whom the Jews suppose to be their Messiah, he shall most of all
seduce them: then is it like that very few of the Jews shall be converted, but
rather more hardened, their hoped for Messiah (as they think) being come.

2. An other opinion is, that universally all the Jews shall be called, as
Chrysostom infers upon those words, Romans 11. 13. if the diminishing of them
be the riches of the Gentiles, how much more, shall their abundance or fullness
be: which fullness Chrysostom thus expounds, quando vniuersi ad fidem
accessuri sunt, when all of them shall come unto the faith, hom. 19. in epist.
ad Romanos.

3. But the safer opinion is, between both these, that neither universally the
whole nation is like to be called: for in their best times, when as the worship
of God most flourished among them, there were many carnal men and ungodly
persons among them: neither yet shall so few of them be converted, because of
the generality of the Apostles words v. 26. and so all Israel shall be saved:
as here in these troublesome times every one of the elect was preserved: But
it is evident by S. Paul's prophecy of the calling of the whole nation, that
the greater part shall be converted and believe: so that the other part of
those which shall remain in their blindness and hardness of heart still,
shall be but small in respect of the other: And thus the Scripture uses to
take ( all) for the most and greatest part. Now that there shall be before the
coming of Christ, such a general calling of the Jews, the Apostle proves
out of Isay, 59. 20. the deliverer shall come out of Zion, and shall turn
ungodliness from Iakob: this prophecy is not yet fulfilled, for though some
of the Jews in every age have been called, yet the nation has remained in
unbelief still. Perer.

Quest. 6. What kind of book Daniel here speaks of.
1. Theodoret takes this book for the knowledge of God: but there is great
difference between Gods prescience, and the decree of predestination: the one
is an act of his all-seeing knowledge, the other of his will: as the Apostle
says, Romans 8. 29. those whom he knew before, he also predestinate to be made
like the image of his son.

2. Iunius seems to understand it of Gods immutable decree concerning their
preservation from those troubles: but this book is else where called the book
of life, that is, of eternal life, not in respect of any temporal deliverance
in this life.

3. Osiander by this book means the preaching of the gospel: so also Pappus
of the book of the Scriptures: that every one which believes them shall be
saved and delivered: other secret book of Gods decree, Pappus acknowledges
none, non fingendi sunt aliqui occulti libri, qui nomina saluandorum
conteneant, we must not imagine, that there are any secret books which do
contain the names of such as should be saved: But this is a very corrupt
opinion. 1. though God need not any material books, yet that he has set
down in his everlasting decree the number of such as shall be saved, and that
whosoever is not so written in that book, that is appointed of God unto
salvation, shall be damned, it is evident out of Scripture: as S. Paul speaks
of certain his fellow laborers, Philip. 4. 3. whose names are in the book
of life: and Apocal. 20. 15. Whosoever was not found written in the book of
life, was cast into the lake of fire. 2. And that this is in an other book
beside the book of the Scriptures, is also evident: for neither in the
Scriptures is any man's particular election set down: and the Scriptures are
offered unto all, both the elect, and not elect: but in the book of life only
are the elect written.

4. Euthymius in Psalm. 68. and 138. says, that there is a threefold book of
the divine knowledge, vnus est vniuersalis, etc. one is a general or
universal book, wherein all both righteous and sinners are witten, which come
into this world: of which book speaks the Prophet David, Ps. 139. 16. in thy
book were all things written: there is another book magis privatus, more
private, wherein the righteous only are written: whereof the Prophet David
speaks, 69. 28. Let them be put out of the book of life, neither let them be
written with the righteous: the third book is that, wherein the sinners only
are written, as Dan. 7. 10. the judgment was set, and the books were opened.
This tripartite division may safely be received, saving that the sinners are
not said to be written in any book, but not to be written: as Apoc. 17. 8.
Whose names are not written in the book of life from the foundation of the
world: these books here opened, are books of every ones conscience, wherein
all men's works both good and bad are written: which books are diverse from the
book of life, Apoc. 20. 15. See more hereof c. 7. qu. 36.

5. This book then here mentioned is Gods immutable decree of predestination,
whereby they are ordained unto everlasting salvation, whom the lord has freely
elected in Christ: Lyranus says well, that this book is conscriptio electorum
in mente diuina, the writing of the elect in the divine mind or knowledge. God
needs not any material book: but this is a figurative phrase taken from the
custom of men, who use to write into a book all that are made free of a city
or corporation: as Augustine says, non liber iste Deum commemorat, ne
obliuione fallatur, this book serves not to put God in mind, least he should
be deceived through forgetfulness: but this book is, ipsa Dei praescientia,
etc. the prescience of God concerning the elect, which cannot be deceived, lib.
20. de ciuitat. Dei, c. 15. So also Euthymius, liber Dei est summa eius
scientia, scriptura perpetua memoria, the book of God is his high knowledge,
and the writing is his perpetual memory, in Psalm. 68.

Sometime it is called the book of God, simply without any addition, (...),
because of the excellency, as in this place: sometime the book of life,
Philip. 4. 3. and the book of the living, Psalm. 69. 29. the book which god
has written, Exodus 32. the book of heaven, as Luke 10. 20. your names are
written in heaven: and in the Revelation, the lambs book of life, c. 21. 27.
It is also called the writing or catalogue of the house of Israel, Ezech. 13.
9. So three things are observed out of these places concerning this book. 1.
that God is the writer. 2. that the faithful only are there written. 3. that
it is the Lambs book: all there written shall be brought by the Lamb unto
everlasting life.

Quest. 7. Why this mystery of the resurrection is here revealed plainly to
Daniel.
1. True it is, that the mystery of the resurrection was shadowed forth, and
yet darkely in the law: for the translation of Henoch, was an evident proof
thereof: and our blessed Savior infers as much, because the Lord is said in
the Law, to be the God of Abraham, Izaak* and Jacob, he is not the God of the
dead, but of the living: by which necessary collection, Christ proves the
resurrection of the dead against the Sadduces, Matthew. 22. The Apostle also
Hebr. 12. 13. shows that these mysteries were known to the Fathers, because
they confessed themselves to be strangers and pilgrims in the earth: for they
that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a country. 2. But these
deep mysteries were but obscurely opened in former times to the Israelites,
the reasons whereof the Hebrews yield to be these two specially: 1. because in
Moses time, when the law was given, there were many which did not believe that
God created the world and governed the same by his providence; and if Moses had
spoken unto them of the higher mysteries, they in their weakness not being
able to receive such mystical doctrines, would have rejected them as fables.
2. beside then the people were fed and allured with temporal promises, for
as yet they had hope of such things, to enjoy great external happiness in the
land of Canaan: But now when all hope of temporal blessings is cut off, and
that even in the land of Canaan such troublesome times are foreshewed to come
upon them, now it was very seasonable, to comfort them with the hope of
eternal life, H. Br. in Daniel.

Quest. 8: Of the coherence of this comfortable mention made of the
resurrection with the former prophecy.
1. Porphyrius and Polychronius, continuing their interpretation of this
prophecy concerning Antiochus, by those that sleep in the dust, understand
such as fled into the rocks and caves in the persecution of Antiochus: and
after the city was recovered they returned again as out of their sepulchers:
And by the writing in the book, they mean such as faithfully stood in the
defense of the law: this exposition also follows Pelican.

But Theodoret confuteth this interpretation by two sufficient reasons. 1. they
which fled away, and hid themselves in the caves, were all faithful men, they
fled because they would not be forced to forsake the law: but these that
awake out of the dust, arise some to life, some unto shame: so it would follow
in their sense, eosdem fuisse pios and impios, that the same men were both
godly and ungodly. 2. these do rise up to eternal life: but they which so
returned from their dens and caves died again. 3. wherefore though hitherto
Porphyrie has followed the sense of this prophecy well in applying it unto
Antiochus, yet here he fails. 4. But it is no marvel that he being an
enemy to the Christian faith, does obscure by his gloases so clear a place
for the resurrection of the dead: it may seem strange that Pelican a
Christian interpreter, should approve that sense: This was the heresy of
Philetus and Hymeneus, which said that the resurrection was past already, 2.
Timath. 2. 17. as Porphyrie here affirms the same, understanding this so
evident a place for the resurrection, metaphorically.

2. Some think that mention is made here of the resurrection, because it shall
follow immediately after those troublesome times before spoken of: of this
opinion are all they which do apply the times of trouble before spoken of, to
the last persecution under Antichrist, as Lyranus, Perer. Pintus, with the rest
of that side: likewise Melancthon statim post haec certamina fiet resurrectio
mortuorum, straight after these combats shall be the resurrection of the dead:
so also Osiander, huic postremae reformationi Ecclesiae sinis mundi imminet,
straight after this last reformation of the Church, the end of the world shall
be at hand: But it is at large showed before, quest. 3. that the times of
trouble before spoken of, were those which fell out under Antiochus Epiphanes.

3. Iunius in his commentary makes this to be the coherence: that the Angel
having spoken of the first coming of Christ before, does now join thereunto
his second coming, declared by the effects, the resurrection of the dead: so
also M. Calvin: But it has been showed before likewise, that Christ's first
coming in the flesh is not here intended by the Angel.

4. This then is the reason of the connection: that whereas before the Angel
spoke of the deliverance of the people of God, so many as were written in the
book of life: because many of the Saints should be put to death, the Angel
adds an other comfort, that they should rest in the hope of the resurrection,
Polan. And that place Heb. 11. 35. may serve fitly to expound this: some were
racked, and would not be delivered, that they might receive a better
resurrection: this also is further showed by the example of such as suffered
then, how they comforted themselves in the hope of the resurrection: as Razis
when he pulled out his own bowels (which act of his cannot be commended)
called upon the Lord of life and spirit, that he would restore them again unto
him, 2. Macchab. 14. 46.

Quest. 9. Why it is said, many of them that sleep, etc. shall awake, and not
all.
1. Lyranus thinks the reason to be this, because of infants which shall rise
again; but they cannot be said properly to awake; because they shall neither
have sensum poenae, vel gloria, sense of pain or of glory: But this is an
idle conceit: for in the resurrection our bodies shall rise in perfection:
corruption shall put on incorruption, 1. Cor 15. 53. then if our body shall
rise perfect and incorruptible, they shall have perfect sense, and other
qualities of the body.

2. Some think it is said many, and not all, in respect of the wicked, of whom
it is said, non resurgent impij in iudicio, Psalm. 1. the wicked shall not rise
in judgment: because they shall not rise unto life, Pintus. But the vulgar
Latin translateth not that place well, the true reading is, non consistent in
iudicio, the wicked shall not stand in judgment. And again in this place, the
wicked are a part of this many, some shall awake unto shame.

3. Wherefore these answeares may better serve: 1. Augustine says, ponit
aliquando scriptura pro omnibus vocabulum (multis.) the Scripture puts
sometime for (all) this word many: and he gives instance of Abraham, of whom
the Lord says in one place, I have made thee a father of many nations, Genesis
17. and yet in another he says, in thy seed shall all nations be blessed,
Genesis 22. But this example is not so fit, for in the one place the Lord speaks
of Abraham's carnal generation, in the other of his spiritual seed, namely
Christ, in whom all the nations of the world should be blessed: that other
instance given by Theodoret is more to the purpose, Romans 5. 18. by the offense
of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation: and after in the next verse
following, the Apostle says, by one man's disobedience many were made sinners.
Here it is evident that many is taken for all. 2. An other answer is, that many
are said to rise, because all indeed shall not rise again, because all shall
not sleep, but they shall all be changed, 1. Cor. 15. 51. Bulling. Vatab. and
again in another place the Apostle says; we which live, and are remaining in
the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent those which sleep, Osiander. 3. And
otherwise it may be yet answered, that this word rabbim, many, as it appears
by the accent Zakeph ghadol, is taken distributiuely; that many should awake
unto life, and many unto shame, Iun. in commentar. Polan.

Quest. 10. A description of the resurrection of both good and bad, verse. 2.
The resurrection of the dead is here described* 1. in general, that many that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake. 2. the particular events are
showed, that some shall awake unto life, some unto shame.

In the first part. 1. in that they are said to sleep, the being and
remaining of the soul after death is signified: as the soul lives when the
body is laid a sleep. 2. and by this phrase is also noted, the natural
affection which the soul has to the body, that although they be sundred and
separated a while by death, yet they both make but one man, as the soul and
body are united together in natural sleep: for the union of the soul and
body is essential, but the dissolution by death is accidental, by reason of
sin, and therefore cannot hinder for ever the natural and essential union,
Iun. 3. in that mention is made of the dust of the earth, it puts us in
mind of the first creation of man, which was out of the dust of the earth; out
of the which the Lord shall raise our bodies again, Bulling.

Secondly, in that both good and bad are raised* 1. we must consider that all
are raised both the one and the other, by the power of Christ in common: but
the righteous are raised unto life, by the peculiar operation of Christ as he
is the head of the faithful. 2. the wicked also shall be awaked up unto a kind
of life, for they shall never die, but live in continual torment: but eternal
life is to be considered two ways, simply and essentially in respect of the
creature it self, as it lives by the power of the creator; so the wicked
shall live: and in respect of the habit and affection which the creature has
unto God, the author of life; and so the faithful only shall live for ever.
So everlasting death is not so called essentially, which consists in the
final dissolution of humane nature: but (...), habitually and respectively,
because though they live, they have no communion with the life of grace, Iun.
in commentar. 3. they shall awake to shame and contempt, not as the vulgar
Latin, that they may see always, for the word is deraon, which signifies
contempt, loathsomenesse, as it is taken, Isay. 66. 24. they shall go forth,
and look upon the carkases of those, which have transgressed, etc. and they
shall be an abhorring to all flesh: like as a stinking carkase is abhorred of
all; so the wicked then shall be an abomination to God, to Angels and men.

Quest. 11. Of the great glory, which shall be given unto those which instruct
others to salvation, v. 3.
v. 3. They that cause (others) to understand, (that is, teach others) shall
shine as the brightness of the firmament: and they that justify many, shall
shine as the stars. These words are diuersely expounded: whereas here a
reward is promised, and they are described also to whom this reward shall be
given:

1. Some do make the first and the second clause all one in sense, but set
forth with variety of words: as Pererius thinks that both the same
excellency of glory is set forth by the brightness of the heavens and of the
stars: and they are the same, which first are said to be wise and
understanding, and afterward, to justify many: But it is not like, that in
this prophetiall narration, being so concise and compendious, there should be
such a multiplying of words, without insinuation of some further sense.

2. An other sort do make a difference both in the reward, and in them which
shall obtain it: and here 1. by the wise hearted or understanding,
Carthusianus thinks to be meant those only, which are sanctified by the
spirit of grace, neither having gifts, nor calling to teach others: and they
only shall be like the brightness of the firmament: but they which justify
others by their doctrine, and bring them unto Christ, shall shine as the
stars: which are the brighter parts of the firmament: this sense also follow
Osiander, and Pappus, that do conclude from hence the diverse degrees of
glory in the kingdom of heaven. 2. Some contrariwise, by the first understand
those which are teachers of others, by the second, those that are only
righteous in themselves: so Lyranus, and the interlinearie gloss, and before
them Theodoret following the Septuag. who read, and many just, whereas it is in
the original, matzedike harabbim, justifying many: and these make the
brightness of the firmament a greater degree of glory, then the light of the
stars.

3. Some do distinguish here the persons which shall be rewarded, but take the
similitude expressing the reward, the bright heavens and the stars to
express the same thing, the great glory of the next life: the righteous are
likened for their great glory unto the clear azure sky in the day, and to
the bright shining stars in the night: But here also, 1. Some by the first
understand such as teach and instruct others, as preachers and ministers; by
the other that justify, such as by discipline and good order are the means of
the salvation of others, as godly magistrates, Parents, Schoolmasters,
Bullinger. 2. some by the first do understand the faithful, by the second
ministers and teachers, Calv. Genevens.

4. Some distinguish not the persons, but diverse parts of their office, for
they are said to teach, or cause others to understand (for the word is maschill
in hiphil) which signifies to cause to understand, in respect of the
administration of their office: in setting forth the truth, and making them to
understand it: and they are said to justify others in regard of the work and
effect, because by their ministry faith is wrought in them, whereby they are
justified, Iun. in commentar.

5. But Polanus does more fitly apply this text unto martyrs (for to their
consolation this is specially ministered that should suffer in those troublesome
times under Antiochus.) And them he makes of two sorts: some that by the
constant confession of the truth, and suffering for the same, therein by their
example did teach others: and some beside their constant suffering, had by
their godly instructions also edified many: and this comes nearest unto the
true sense, because as is said, this consolation is specially intended for the
comfort of the holy martyrs: Now further although in this verse, the diverse
degrees of glory are not described: yet in comparing it with the former verse,
the diversity is expressed: for all the faithful and righteous, as is before
said, shall rise unto life: but among these faithful, these holy teachers, and
instructors of others, shall shine as the clear heavens, and as the bright
stars.

Quest. 12. How the faithful teachers are said to justify others.
That this may be the better understood, we must consider the causes of our
justification, which are these. 1. the efficient and principal cause is God
himself, Romans 8. 33. it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? and the
moving cause was only the mercy and love of God toward us, 1. John. 4. 10.
herein is love, not that we loved God, but he loved us.

2. The material and meritorious cause is the perfect obedience of Christ,
which was either active or passive, active either the original and native
righteousness of Christ, who knew no sin, he was without all spot: or his
actual obedience through his life in keeping the whole law, and the
commandments of God for us: so that which was impossible to the law in us,
was fulfilled in Christ, as the Apostle shows, Romans 8. 2. his passive
obedience was in suffering the most ignominious death of the cross for us,
Philip. 2. 8. he became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross: and
so did bear the curse of the law which was due unto us, Galat. 3. 13.

3. The isntrumental cause on Gods behalf is the preaching of the Gospel,
whereby faith is wrought in us: for faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17. on
our behalf the instrument of our justification is faith, whereby we apprehend
the righteousness of Christ.

4. The ministering and under working or helping causes, are the teachers and
preachers, who are as ministerial causes of our justification, in setting
forth the gospel of Christ, and declaring the way unto salvation: in which
respect they are said to justify: And in this sense also they are said to save
others: as S. Paul thus writes to Timothy, 1. epist. c. 4. 16. take heed
unto thy self and unto doctrine, etc. for in doing this thou shall save thy
self, and them that hear thee: so also S. James says, 5. 20. he that
conuerteth a sinner, shall save a soul from death, etc.

Quest. 13. Why Daniel is commanded to seal the book, and what is the meaning
thereof.
1. Some give this sense, praecepit vt involuat sermones, and signet librum, vt
legant plurimi, he bids, that he should fould up this prophecy in dark
speech, and sign the book, that many may read it, and seek the truth of the
history, Hierome. But not only the speech is folded up, but the book was
also kept secret: because if it had come to the hands of the profane sort,
they would have made a scorn of it.

2. Seal it up as a perfect and absolute prophecy, cui nihil sit amplius
adijciendum, to the which nothing is to be added, Bullinger. But S. John is
bid, that he should not seal up the prophecy of the Revelation, c. 22. 10.
and yet it was perfect, nothing was to be added thereto, v. 18. 19. this then
is not the meaning.

3. Some say he is bid to seal it up, because it should not be accomplished
till toward the end of the world: and till this prophecy began to take
effect, it should not be understood, Pap. But this prophecy was fulfilled
before the first coming of Christ, it was not therefore sealed up to that end.

4. Wherefore by sealing up the book of this prophecy, 1. it is insinuated,
that he should commit it to writing, consigna librum, make a book. 2. efferas
aenigmatice, he must set forth this prophecy in obscure terms and words,
Vatab. As Daniel uses many strange words and phrases in this prophecy: as c.
8. 3. Palmon^, c. 11. 38. Mauzzim, v. 45. aphadno, M. Brought. 3. maneat apud
te instar theasauri, let it remain, and lay it up with thee as a treasure:
though others make small account of it, yet do thou keep it as a treasure for
the Church in time to come, Calvin. 4. seal it up, impart it not generally to
all: ne si in manibus prostaret omnium, ludibrio esset, least if it should come
to every ones hands, it might be made but a laughing game by the profane and
wicked, Iun. in commentar. so also Lyranus, divina secreta non sunt omnibus
reuelanda, the divine secrets must not be revealed unto all: As our Blessed
Savior faith. Matthew. 7. give not that which is holy unto dogs: so our
Savior spoke unto others in parables, but unto his disciples he expounded them
apart: as here these mysteries are revealed unto Daniel, though they must be as
a sealed book unto others. And hereof two reasons may be yielded, vt maligni
non habeant materiam deridendi, and studiosi materiam se exercendi, that both
the evil and malicious should have no matter to laugh at, and the studious
might have matter wherein to exercise themselves.

5. And further the sealing up shows, that there were many years yet to come
before this prophecy should be fulfilled: for it was 300. years from this
time, unto Antiochus: and for the same reason John is bid not to seal up that
prophecy, because some part thereof was presently to take place, Apocal. 22.
10. see before c. 8. quest. 36.

Quest. 14. Until the time defined or appointed, v. 4. what time this was here
limited.
1. Some understand the end of the world, when these things should be
fulfilled, Bulling. Osiand. and so Pagnin reads, vsque ad tempus finis, unto
the time of the end: But it has been showed before that this prophecy
contained in the 11. chapter, was fulfilled in the days of Antiochus, and much
of it before. 2. Some understand the time of Christ's coming, who opened the
seals of the book, Apocal. 5. and revealed the mysteries which were hid
before: whereof this was a sign, that in his passion the veil of the Temple
was rent: Christ took away the veil and the covering, which hid from us the
mysteries and high things of God: so Theodoret, Pintus, Pererius: But in this
sense Christ opened not only the secrets of this prophecy, but of all other
in the old Testament. 3. he means then the time, which was appointed of God
when this prophecy should be fulfilled: as Calvin, Deus probabit ipso euentu
se non frustra locutum, etc. God shall prove by the event that he has not
foreshewed these things in vain; and est hic terminus non vnus, sed multiplex,
and this term was not one, but diverse: as the prophesies of this book are
diverse, and so were to have their diverse times of fulfilling, Iun. So in the
time of the Macchabees, when diverse of these things were fulfilled, the Jews
did then begin to look into this prophecy, as the story of the Macchabees
shows, M. Br. And at the coming of Christ, there was great expectation of
the fulfilling of that prophecy, Dan. 9.

Quest. 15. Of these words, many shall run thorough, and knowledge shall be
increased.
1. Bullinger thus interprets, that toward the end of the world, men shall
run to and fro, being certain of nothing, but distracted in opinion, varijs
se adiungent sectis, they shall join themselves unto diverse sects: but the
last words, knowledge shall be multiplied, are against this sense, for where
such uncertainty is, there knowledge cannot be increased.

2. Some read thus: oberrabunt multi, many shall go to and fro to get
knowledge, Vat. Genevens. B. but knowledge is not had by wandering from place to
place: that shows rather ignorance, Amos. 8. 12.

3. Some expound thus, many shall run thorough this book, and they shall
diuersely expound it: Lyran. gloss. Hugo. because the Scripture admits
diverse senses, Perer. But thus opinions are multiplied, not knowledge.

4. Hierome well by running thorough understands the diligent perusing of
this book: that though now it were not regarded, yet many in time to come
should give their mind unto it: so also Iun. Polan. and so M. Calvin
expounds the word shuth, investigabunt, they shall search: multi se ad
scripta tua legenda conferent, many shall settle themselves to read thy
writings, Osiand. And withal here is signified, that Deus sibi multos
discipulos colliget, God shall raise up unto him many disciples, Calvin. So
that in the great persecution under Antiochus, many shall be found faithful,
who shall cleave unto this prophecy, Polanus.

16. Quest. What two they were, whom Daniel saw by the brinke of the river, v.
5.
1. This is not a new vision, as Bullinger makes it in number the fifth, so
also Oecolampad. but it is the same vision continued: as both the circumstance
of the place shows, it was by the same river Tigris, mentioned before c. 10.
5. and of the person, the man clothed in linen before also described: and the
question demanded is concerning the continuance of those wonders and strange
things before spoken of.

2. These two Angels Hierome thinks to have been the one the Angel that
stood for Persia, the other that was President of Grecia, which did hinder the
deliverance of the Hebrews: But it is evident, that these Angels stand for the
people of God: for as affected with the troubles which here are prophesied to
come upon Gods people, they desire to know the time of the beginning and end
of them.

3. Oecolampadius thinks, that here were not three in all* but one more came
unto him that had talked with Daniel all this while: and they are said to be
two other, because alio modo, etc. they appeared in an other manner: But it is
evident by their site and standing, that they were three: for two stood by the
brinke of the river, one on the one side, and one on the other, and the third
was upon the waters.

4. R. Levi thinks that one of these two was Gabriel: but Gabriel was he,
which had this communication with Daniel all this while, and now two other
appear: they had not been other two, if there had been but one beside
Gabriel. Polan.

5. Hyppolitus by these two Angels standing by the brinke of the river,
understands the law and the Prophets: but Daniel saw some real thing, for he
says, I Daniel looked. Pererius out of Hierome by these two Angels standing
upon the rivers bank, interprets the flourishing and standing of the Persian
and Greek Monarchy: and by the third upon the waters of the river, the
troublesome state of the Church: for so in Scripture afflictions are signified
by waters. But hereby rather is signified, in that the Angels stand on this
side and on that side, the ready administration of the Angels, which are
always at hand to expedite the commandment of God. Polan.

17. Quest. Who it was that inquired of the man that was clothed in linen, v. 6.
1. The Latin translator reads, and dixi, and I said, referring it to
Daniel: but in the original the word is vaiomer, and he said, in the third
person: not Daniel, but one of the Angels.

2. Some Greek copies read in the plural, and they said: but in the original
it is in the singular, and he said: one Angel might ask in the name of the
other. Oecolampad.

3. Like unto this place is that in the Revelation, where the souls under the
altar, that is, which yet were not glorified with their bodies, did ask the
like question, which the Angels do here, How long, Lord, holy and true, do
thou not judge and avenge our blood, etc. Rev. 6. 10.

18. Quest. Who the man was clothed in linen, of whom the question was asked.
1. The most general and received opinion here is, that this third Angel of
whom the question is asked, was Gabriel: Lyran. Pint. Perer. Bulling. with
others: But how could one Angel ask and learn of an other? seeing they are
all ministering spirits, and do all fetch their light and knowledge from the
same fountain Christ Jesus the reuealer of secrets. M. Calvin here answers,
Est aliquod discrimen inter Angelos, sed non perpetuum, that there is some
difference between the Angels, but not perpetual, only for a time: his
meaning is, that God may at some time give greater illumination to one Angel
then to an other, and so one Angel may receive direction of an other. But the
Angels rather receive their direction from Christ, who is that Palmoni, one
that has secrets in account, and number: of whom an Angel likewise enquireth,
c. 8. 13.

2. Pintus thinks that these three Angels do signify the Trinity, the two
Angels that stood by the river, represent the Father and the holy^Ghost, and
the third upon the waters the Son of God: as the three Angels which appeared
to Abraham, Genesis 18. did likewise represent the Trinity. But 1. in that one of
the two Angels asks of the third as his superior, they can not signify the
Trinity, for this would argue an inequality in those most glorious persons.
2. One of those three, which appeared to Abraham, was Christ himself, whom
Abraham there prays unto, and calls him Jehovah: the other two were indeed
ministering Angels, which afterward went to Sodom, and were received into Lots
house.

3. But this man which was clothed in linen, was none other then Christ
himself: 1. because he is the same, which so appeared before, c. 10. 4. which
was Christ, as in that place has been showed. 2. he is the reuealer of
secrets, and of him the Angel asked the like question before, c. 8. 13. 3. this
vision is interpreted by the like, Apoc. 10. 1. where a mighty Angel came
down from heaven, with a rainbow about his head, and his face was as the
Sun, he stood upon the land and the Sea, signifying his power over both, and
lift up his hand to heaven; as this Angel here stands upon the waters, and
lifts up both his hands to heaven: but that great Angel was Christ: the
similitude of the vision argues the identitie of the same person. 4. and
beside his standing upon the water does signify, quod olim super Iordanem
testimonium accepturus, that in time to come he should receive testimony from
heaven upon the waters of Jordan.

But it will be objected, that this was not Christ, because he lifts up his
hand, and swears by God: but he that one swears by, is greater. Answ. 1.
Christ appearing as a man, is here to be considered both as God and man, and so
as man is inferior unto God, and swears by a greater. 2. or rather Christ as
God swears by himself, as one everliving God with his father, but a distinct
person: so that this oath is the same in effect with that, Deuteronomy. 32. 40. I lift
up my hand to heaven, and swear for ever: sic vides quod jurat per seipsum,
etc. so you see that he swears by himself, touching the heavens with his
hand, and setting his feet upon the water and land, showing his dominion
therein: Oecolampad.

And in that he lifts up both his hands, whereas usually in taking an oath
one hand is lifted up, Genesis 14. 22. Deuteronomy. 32. 40. hoc ad plenissimam pertinet
rerum confirmationem, this is for the more full confirmation of these things,
Bulling. and voluit hoc modo exponere rei magnitudinem, he would hereby show
the greatness of this thing, Calvin. And because, an Angel stood upon each
side of his hands, he lifts them both up, that each of them might have a
sign of the certainty of this thing, Iun. Polan.

Quest. 19. What is meant by a time, two times, and an half. v. 7.
Some do take this for an uncertain and indefinite time: Some for a certain
and limited term: and of both sorts there are sundry opinions.

Of the first sort: 1. some do think, that the time of the afflictions of the
people of God, certissimum esse apud Deum, sed nobis incognitum, is certain
with God, but to us unknown, Bulling. B. so that the meaning is no more but
this, these things shall most certainly come to pass, but whether, post
modica, vel multa temporis intervalla, after a long or short time, it is not
known to us: Bulling.

2. Some because the time is here halued, do think, that thereby is
signified, modicum tempus, a short time, a little while: and do expound it by
that place, Apoc. 6. 11. They should rest for a little season, until their
fellow servants, etc. were fulfilled. Oecolampad. Pappus.

3. But some contrariwise here understand a long time, tempus hic ponitur pro
longo tractu, tempora, pro longiore tractu, here (time) is put for a long tract
or continuance, (times) for a longer. M. Calv. Genevens.

Now all these opinions are confuted by these reasons. 1. because the same
phrase of a time, two times, and a part of time, are taken before, c. 7. 25.
for a certain and definite term, therefore it is like to be so taken here.
2. this time is divided, a part of time, therefore it is a certain and
definite number: for that which is uncertain and indefinite uses not to be
divided into parts. 3. And what comfort had there been in this prescription
and naming of time, if there were given no certain direction, how long this
troublesome time should continue.

4. Of the second sort: some take this for a certain number of years, whereof
some understand by days years, some so many days literally: by a time, two
times, and an half, which make years three, and an half or a part, that is,
days 1225. or thereabout, are signified so many years 1200. and odd: which
Melancthon begins from Daniels time, whereof 600. years were expired unto
Christ, and about 600. years after the sect of the Mahumentans did spring in
the East, and religion began to be corrupted in the West, by the Bishops of
Rome.

5. Osiander begins this term, where Melancthon ends it, and continues
it unto the destruction of the Roman Antichrist, and of his tyrannical
kingdom: But all these things here must be accomplished, while the Church of
the Jews yet continued, which are here called the holy people.

6. They which understand by a time, two times, and an half, a year, two
years, and an half (as indeed they signify, as c. 4. seven times during the
humiliation of Nebuchadnezzer, are understood to be feuen years) some do
refer it unto the time of Antichrists tyranny, who shall rage against the
Church of Christ three years and an half, as Christ preached three years and
an half, Hierome, Lyran. Hugo. Pintus, with others. But they think that their
Antichrist shall bear sway longer in the whole: yet the heat of his most
cruel and outrageous persecution shall continue but 3. years and an half.
But this interpretation is refused upon the former reason, because this
prophecy concerned the holy people of God, that then was: and beside, that
imagination of some one singular person to rise up to be Antichrist, is but a
fabulous and fantastical conceit, as is before showed, c. 11. Controv. 2.

7. This time then here prescribed and limited, precisely signifies three
years, and an half, or rather part of time: for so long continued the
desolation of the Sanctuary under Antiochus: which began in the 145. year,
the 15. day of the month Casteu, 1. Macchab. 1. 57. and ended in the 148.
year on the 25. day of the same month, 1. Macchab. 4. 52. so that the event
of the history does very fitly explane this prophecy, Iun. Polan.

But against this exposition, which Porphyrius also did hit upon, Hierome thus
obiecteth: 1. if the time, two times, and an half, that is, three years and
an half, must be referred unto Antiochus, whereof mention is made before, c.
7. 25. then that which follows also in the same place, v. 27. The kingdom
under the whole heaven shall be given unto the holy people of the most high,
etc. and all Princes shall serve him, must be applied either to Antiochus, or
to the people of the Jews: which is manifestly false. 2. the defolation of the
Temple continued but three years, as Josephus writes, l. 12. c. 10. but this
term is of three years and an half. 3. Lyranus obiecteth, that the
persecution under Antiochus continued six years, from the year 143. 1.
Macch. 1. 21. to the year 148. 1. Macch. 4. 52.

Answ. 1. There is no consequent, that those words which follow should be
either understood of Antiochus, or of the Jews, who never ruled over the whole
world: for there the Prophet shows the destruction and ruin of the tyranny
of Antiochus, by Christ, See in the Appendix (...). 1. argum. (...). answ. 2.
to whom reigning spiritually in his Church (there called the holy people) the
kingdom should be given over the whole earth. 2. The word chatzi, signifies
not only the half, but the part of a thing: as the same is expressed by an
other word pelag, c. 7. 25. which signifies a division: and so indeed the
desolation of the Temple continued just 3. years, and a part of a year,
namely ten days, as is before showed: therefore Josephus is deceived, which
makes account but of three years: for there were ten days above. 3. The
persecution under Antiochus was either of the city, with spoiling also and
robbing only of the Temple, or in laying wast the Sanctuary, and causing the
daily oblation to cease: the first continued above six years, even 2300.
days, as is prophesied c. 8. 14. but the other endured only three years and
ten days: so these diverse persecutions, had their diverse terms: and both may
well stand together.

Some think that this term of 3. years and an half, shows the term of
Christ's persecution in the days of his flesh, which was just so many years:
M. Br. this prophecy may have such an analogicall application; but the
historical accomplishment was under Antiochus, as has been sufficiently
proved.

20. Quest. Of the meaning of the words, v. 7. When he has made an end to
disperse the hand of the holy people.
Some refer these words to the coming of Christ in the flesh, some to the
end of the world, some to the days of Antiochus.

1. Of the first sort, some give this sense, when God has dispersed the hand,
that is, the place and city of this holy people, which came to pass in the
destruction of Jerusalem, then these things shall be fulfilled. Iun. in
comment. But 1. beside that the Jews after they had put Christ to death, were
not worthy to be called the people of God, but were rejected of God, and not
held to be his people. 2. this prophecy of the tyranny of Antiochus was
accomplished before Christ came in the slesh.

2. Osiander thus interprets, that first before the end be, populus Dei per
Evangelij praedicationem colligendus est, etc. the people must be gathered
together by the preaching of the Gospel: but the text speaks of dispersing
and scattering, not of gathering together the people of God.

3. Of the second sort: some do thus interpret, that before the end of the
world the Church shall be afflicta, lacerata, and contrita, afflicted, rent as
it were in sunder, and trodden down, Bulling. Oecolamp. But they read in the
passive, when the dispersion of the hand, that is, the power of the holy people
is accomplished, etc. whereas it must be read actively, when he has
accomplished to scatter, etc. and it has been before showed, that this
prophecy concerns not the end of the world.

4. Some refer it to the coming of Antichrist in the end of the world, and
make this the sense, when as Antichrist being destroyed, the faithful which
were before dispersed, are returned to their place, and freely profess the
Gospel, then shall an end be of these things: Perer. But this were to make the
sign and the thing signified, one and the same: for the thing signified, is
the peace and restitution of the Church: this then cannot be given as a sign.

5. Hierome expounds it, of the oppression of the people of God by the hand
of Antichrist, ista generalis populi dispersio, this general dispersion of the
people of God is given as a sign of the end of these things, Perer. when
Antichrist shall be killed, Hug. Card. then shall be the resurrection of the
dead, Lyran. But neither does this prophecy concern the end of the world,
neither yet shall there be such a singular Antichrist, as they imagine.

6. Some understand these words, of the dispersion of the Jews in the end of
the world, after the death of Antichrist, to whom they did cleave, as their
Messiah: then the persecution of the Christians shall cease, Hug. Card. But
this devise of the Jewish Messiah, and Popish Antichrist, is of like truth and
certentie, the one as the other.

7. Of the third sort, which apply these things unto the time of Antiochus,
some understand, the hand of the holy people passively, manum prementem, the
hand that oppressed the people of God, that is, Antiochus: that after his end
and dest^uction, there should be an end of these troubles. Iun. M. Br. in comm.
Polan. But 1. it seems an harsh interpretation, the hand of the people, that
is, the hand which was against the people. 2. neither did all the troubles of
the people end after the death of Antiochus, as the story of the Macchabees
shows.

8. Wherefore I take rather Calvin's sense, for the general meaning of the
words: that when the people shall be brought to so low an ebb, as that they
shall seem to have no strength, ac si manus illis contritae essent, as though
their hands were weakened; and when there shall be such a persecution of the
people of God, vt nullus apparere audeat in publico, that none da^e to appear
openly, then shall these things come to pass, Lyran. And this sense P^ppus
well confirms by the like place, Apoc. 6. 11. where unto the like question,
the like answer was made: it was said unto them, that they should rest for a
little season, until their fellow servants, and their brethren, which should
be killed, as they were, were ful^illed: the same thing is here meant by
accomplishing to disperse the hand (that is the power) of the holy people: that
is, when they are at the lowe^t, and there is small hope of any deliverance,
and the Lord has fulfilled the number of the faithful, which he purposed to
try, then shall an end and consummation be of all these things: which came to
pass under Antiochus, when the faithful were dispersed, the Sanctuary lay
wast, and small hope remained, then the Lord looked upon his people, and sent
them deliverance: and this is that which is said, c. 11. 34. that when they
shall fall, they shall be helped with a little help: when their state seems
most desperate, then God shall raise them up an helper, which was Judas
Macchabeus, who was but small in respect of the power of Antiochus.

21. Quest. What it was that Daniel understood not, v. 8.
1. Some think, that Daniel here enquired of the end of the world, as the
Apostles asked of Christ: and as Christ answered his Apostles that the day and
hour of his coming was not known, no not to the Angels, the like answer is
made to Daniel here. Bulling. Oecolampad. But, as has been often fhewed
before, this prophecy concerns not the end of the world: Daniel only
desires to know, what should befall his own people.

2. Pappus thinks that Daniel understood not, what was meant by the time, two
times, and half or a part of time, that he took it not for any certain time:
for otherwise interrogationis illius nulla fuisset necessitas, there had been
no necessity of that interroga^ion, or question. But if Daniel had been
altogether ignorant hereof, he might have asked the same question before, c. 7.
25. where mention is made of a time, two times, and an half.

3. Pererius thinks that Daniel was ignorant of the particular circumstances
of the former Prophetical narration, as of the persons, times, and place, of
those several prophesies of the battles of the kings of the North and South,
revealed unto him, c. 11. so also Lyran. Hugo. But Daniel enquired not of those
particular circumstances, which he might be ignorant of, for that had been too
great curiosity; but he asks* What shall be the end of these things: that
is it then whereof he was ignorant. As M. Calvin says well, haec ignorantia
restringitur ad eius interrogationem, this ignorance is restrained unto the
interrogation or question.

4. Calvine further thus says, that Daniel was not altogether ignorant of the
meaning of this prophecy, but yet he understood not in every respect, as
afterward it was fulfilled: he did not fully conceive, what should be meant by
the time, two times, and a part of time: Iun. in commentar. that is, though he
did know how long the time of this great persecution should continue, yet he
was ignorant where it should begin, and where end: M. Br. and therefore his
question is, when shall be the end of these things.

22. Quest. Whether Daniel had altogether a repulse in his demand.
1. Some think, whereas this answer is made to Daniel. Go thy way Daniel,
that because his question was curious, to enquire of the end of these things,
quod illum non exaudi^rit Angelus, that the Angel did not hear him* Calvin.
and that the Angel stayed Daniel, curiosity here, as Christ did the Apostles,
Act. 1. It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which the father has
kept in his own power: Perer. and so he says in effect, Go thy way, nihil
amplius dicturus sum, I will say no more at this time unto thee: Vatab. Pintus.
But it appears by the explanation, which follows, that Daniel was not
altogether repelled.

2. Wherefore in part Daniel has his request, pleniorem explicationem Christus
exhibuit, Christ does more fully explane the former prophecy of the time of
the persecution: M. Br. partly he fails in his desire: for he obtains not
singularem and minutam istarum rerum cognitionem, a particular and several
knowledge of these things, which are sealed up, until the time come, when they
should be fulfilled: Iun. in commentar. for if all these things had been
particularly expounded aforehand, the faith and patience of Gods servants had
not been so fully tried; if every thing had been manifest as in their sight
before: for as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5. 7. We walk by faith, and not by
sight.

23. Quest. Of those words, v. 10. The wicked shall do wickedly, and none
shall have understanding: what wicked he speaks of.
1. Some expound this place by that place, 2. Pet. 3. 3. that in the last days
there shall be mockers, which shall say, Where is the promise of his coming?
that although some shall profit by the Lords chastisments, and thereby be
purged, and made white, yet others shall be secure, passing their time in
pleasure, and carnal delight, Oecolampad. even as it was in the days of Noe
and Lot, Bulling. But the understanding or not understanding here spoken of, is
concerning the prophecy of this book, as Lyranus observes: which concerns
not the afflictions of the last times otherwi^e then by way of analogy.

2. Pererius and Pintus think, that the wicked may attain unto some
knowledge, but it shall be infructuosa cognitio, an unfruitful and
unprofitable knowledge: But this rather is given as a reason, why they shall
do wickedly, because nihil intelligent, quia excaecati sunt, they shall
understand nothing, because they are blinded, Calv. the knowledge of these
secrets and mysteries shall be kept from their eyes.

3. Here then is special relation had unto the false brethren, that should be
in those days of persecution, which should give way unto Antiochus wicked
proceedings, and labor to seduce and betray their brethren, Iun. annot. which
should not have any care to observe the accomplishment of this prophecy, nor
compare the event therewith: of these the Angel foretold before, c. 11. 34.
Many shall cleave unto them fainedly. And as it was in those days of
persecution, so should it be afterward: as S. Paul says, 2. Tim. 3. 12. All
that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution: but the evil
men and deceivers shall wax worse, deceiving, and being deceived: of such
also speaks S. John, Apoc. 22. 11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust
still, he that is filthy, let him be filthy still, etc.

24. Quest. What the abomination of desolation is, mentioned v. 11.
1. Hierome and Theodoret understand hereby the discontinuing of the true
service of God by Antichrist at his coming: he shall bring in an horrible
desolation, and abolish the true service of God: he shall Dei cultum
interdicere, forbid the service and worship of God: But neither does this
prophecy concern the end of the world: nor yet shall there be any such
singular Antichrist.

2. Pererius and Pintus, with other Romanists, understand this of the
abrogating of the sacrifice of the Mass, and in stead thereof Antichrist shall
command himself to be worshipped: so also Hug. Card. Antichristus se exhibebit
ad adorandum, Antichrist shall cause himself to be worshipped. But 1. that
idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass, is rather the abomination of desolation it
self, whereby the true service of Christ, and the right use of the Eucharist
according to Christ's institution, is abolished: 2. neither shall this
abomination be Antichrist himself, but he shall set up this abomination: as it
is said before, c. 11. 31. They shall set up the abomination, etc. that is,
wicked Antiochus with his captains: he that sets up, and that which is set
up, is not the same.

3. Bullinger thinks it is, abominanda gentis and vrbis vastatio, the
abominable laying wast of the nation and city of the Jews at the destruction
of Jerusalem by the Romans: but this prophecy was rather fulfilled in
Antiochus time, as afterward shall be showed.

4. M. Calvin understands the sacrifices of the Jews, which were abominable,
after the sacrifice of Christ's death performed upon the cross: so also Pellic.
but the daily sacrifice of the Temple was not taken away presently after
Christ's death.

5. Osiander thinks this abominable desolation to be the idolatrous service
brought into the Church by the Roman Antichrist: but then can not the time
here described by days agree: for more then so many days or months, has the
true service of God been corrupted by them: and so many years, as here are
named days, God forbid that Antichrists corrupt religion should continue.

6. Wherefore, this abomination which shall be set up, was no other but the
profanation of the Temple by Antiochus, when he caused that abominable idol of
Iuppiter Olympius to be brought into the Temple, and the daily sacrifice to
cease, 1. Macchab. 1. 57. 2. Macchab. 6. 2. And hereof mention is made before,
c. 8. 13. and 11. 31. likewise c. 9. 27. but there the abomination of
desolation is spoken of, which should be set up in the final destruction of
the city and Temple by the Romans, as is showed, c. 9. quest. 88.

Quest. 25. The 1290. days mentioned v. 11. how to be taken.
1. Lyranus takes this to be the term of Antichrists tyrannical reign in
the end of the world, even 3. years, 6. months, and 12. days: so also
Pererius: but he counts only 10. odd days: so also Pintus with other
Romanists think that Antichrist shall reign 3. years, and an half: but as
Bullinger says, it is not like that Antichrists kingdom should continue ad
tempus vsque adeo breue, for so very a short time.

2. Bullinger shows how the Jews war before the final destruction of the
city, begun by Vespasian in the 14. year of Nero his reign, and ending the
second year of Vespasian, continued about a 1290. days, that is 3. year and
an half: but the text is, that these days must begin from the time of that
abominable desolation, and continue only during that time: but after these
wars which held 3. years and an half, that desolation of the city and
Temple began, which then ended not, but continues unto this day.

3. Some by so many days understand so many years, a 1290. years, so long
Osiander thinks, that the profanation of religion should continue under the
Roman Antichrist, from the first beginning thereof, unto the utter ruin of
Antichrist: But we trust that God will not suffer that man of sin so long to
afflict his Church.

4. Some understand here no certain but an indefinite and unlimited time: as
Oecolamp. multiplicatione dierum longum tempus Antichristianae impietatis
agnoscas, by the multiplying of days know that the time of Antichrists
impiety shall be long: so also Calvin by this number of days, thinks, that
tempus immensum, a great time is signified.

5. Pelican contrariwise infers, magnus numerus, sed breue tempus
significat, a great number of days, but it signifies a short time, that the
Jews sacrifices should not long continue after Christ's death. But in that this
number receives an addition of 45. days which make with the former sum a
1335. days, it is evident, that a certain time is hereby signified.

6. Wherefore, that which he called before, a time, two times, and an half, is
here explained to be 1290. days, that is 3. years, 7. months, and about 13.
days, which must begin from the profanation of the Temple by Antiochus,
which was in the 145. year, the 15. of Casleu, which was the ninth month, 1.
Mac. 1. 57. and must end 45. days before Antiochus death.

Iunius sets down the time precisely, when the 1290. days ended, in the
15. day of the month Xanthicus, which is the 11. month, in 48. year, when
Antiochus by his public edict and writing confirmed and ratified the Jews
religion, restored by Judas Macchabeus: But the time will not agree, if we
begin from the profanation of the Temple, from the 15. of the 9. month
Casleu in the 45. year, from whence to the 15. of the 11. month Xanticus in
the 48. year, are but 3. years and just 2. months: therefore Iunius in his
commentary to help this, begins the profanation of the Temple in the 15.
day of the 4. month, in the 145. year, and cites 1. Macchab. 1. and so the
time will agree: but there the month Casleu is named, 1. macchab. 1. 57. which
was the ninth not the 4. month, 1. Macchab. 4. 52. therefore I rather with
Polanus, think that the 1290. days, determine at such time as Judas
Macchabeus had prosperous success against the Ammonites with their captain
Timotheus, after he had cleansed the Temple, and Antiochus himself was forced
to suffer the Jews to enjoy their liberty and religion, and this was 45.
days before the death of Antiochus, though the precise and particular time, be
not expressed in story.

Quest. 26. The term of 1335. days expounded.
1. This term of 45. days added to the former number, of a 1290. days,
makes it a 1335. days: so many days after the death and slaughter of
Antichrist shall Christ come in his majesty, Hierome, with whom consents
herein Pererius, and the Romanists in general, because they think by this
means to free the Pope from this imputation, to be Antichrist: But this
opinion cannot stand. 1. they cannot assign the right cause, why these 45.
days should be given after the death of Antichrist: Theodoret thinks that in
this space Henoch and Elias shall preach unto the world: but Hyppolitus
holds, and so the Romanists generally, that they shall be slain by
Antichrist: some think this respite shall be given for the repentance of the
world: but 45. days is a small term for repentance: God gave the old world
an 120. years for their repentance. 2. if Christ shall come to judge the world
just 45. days after the death of Antichrist, then the very day of Christ's
coming may be known before, which is contrary to the Scripture. 3. Lyranus
thus argues, that whereas at the coming of Christ there shall be great peace
and security, eating and drinking, and feasting, this great security would
ask a larger space then of 45. days.

2. Lyranus notes, that some Hebrews take these days for so many years,
that after the setting up of that abomination in the Temple, there should be a
1335. years to the coming of their Messiah: But they are herein much
deceived: for if they reckon from the setting up of the idol by Antiochus in
the Temple, which was, as Eusebius counts, in the 153. Olympiad, there are
run above a 1700. years: if from the last setting up of the image of Adrian,
which was in the year of the Lord an 140. according to Eusebius, then are
there expired above a 1460. years from thence.

3. M. Calvin thinks that this addition of 45. days, signifies no certain
time: but only hereby is signified, that although the time seem to be
prolonged for the deliverance of the Church, yet the godly should wait with
patience: so also, Oecolampad. Pelican. But this adding and putting to of one
number to another, evidently shows, that a certain sum of years or days
is intended.

4. Melancthon puts both these numbers of a 1290. and a 1335. together,
which make 7. years and three months: which term he begins in 145. year
of the Greeks, and ends in the 151. year, when Nicanor was overcome: But
these two numbers have the same beginning from the time that the daily
sacrifice should cease.

5. Some by these two sums put together, understand so many years, namely,
two thousand six hundred and odd: whereof 6. hundred were expired at Christ's
coming, and two thousand should run out afterward: But who can define
whether the world shall yet continue 400. years, the day, year, or hour is
not revealed.

6. Osiander thinks this last sum of a 1335. years to be set for the
continuance of the kingdom of Antichrist, understanding so many years: but he
thinks it is not known when this term takes beginning, because God would
have the time of Christ's coming to judgment kept secret: But neither shall
the kingdom of Antichrist continue so many years: neither does this prophecy
properly, but by way of analogy, concern the latter times.

7. Bullinger takes these 45. days to begin from the taking of the city:
for immediately after, many were sold into captivity, condemned unto the mines
and stone quarries, some reserved for triumph: therefore he should be thought
an happy man, that suruiued unto the end of these days: But these miseries
of the Jews continued longer then 45. days or 40. years after the
destruction of the city: and what happiness could there be unto that nation,
to see their, Temple and city laid wast.

8. Therefore these 45. days added to the former sum, are prescribed to
show the death of Antiochus, which was in the 149. year, as 1. Macchab. 6.
16. though the very month and day of his death be not expressed in that
history, yet it is without question, that it was 45. days after the religion
of the Jews was restored, and their state settled, Iun. Polanus.

Thus have we four terms set down concerning the persecution of Antiochus,
1. 2300. days, c. 8. 14. which makes 6. years, 3. months, and 20. days,
which comprehends the whole time from the first beginning of that
persecution, before the Sanctuary was defiled: see more hereof, c. 8. quest.
24. 2. there is a time, two times, and a part of time mentioned, c. 7. 25. and
c. 12. 7. which contains the precise time of three years and 10. days,
during the which the daily sacrifice was discontinued. 3. here is one time of
1290. days, which ends at such time as religion was fully restored after the
purgation of the Temple. 4. and there is mentioned a fourth time of a 1335.
days, which ends at Antiochus death.

Quest. 27. Of the last words spoken to Daniel: go thy ways unto the end, v.
13.
1. Melancthon hence infers, because mention is here made of the last
resurrection, that Daniel shall stand up in his lot; that the prophecy of
Daniel reaches unto the end of the world: But this follows not because the
resurrection is here spoken of, that therefore Daniels prophecy comprehends
the last times, no more then it can be hence concluded, that Daniel should
himself live unto these times: yet we deny not, but that typically many
things in this prophecy may be applied unto the persecutions of the Church, in
the latter days.

2. Chrysostom thinks, that by this speech the Lord revealed unto Daniel,
that he should not return into his own country, but die in Babylon in the
land of the captivity, as the Lord told Moses, that he should not go into
Canaan: But though thus much is not here signified, it is true, that Daniel
died out of his own country: and he is forewarned of his end, which could
not be far off, Daniel being now very old, of more then an 100. years.

3. These words* go thy way unto the end, do put Daniel in mind of diverse
things. 1. contentus sis hac mensura, be content with this thy lot, Calvin. he
should from henceforth expect no more visions. 2. that he should persevere and
continue unto the end, Bulling. 3. and that he should set all things in an
order, and not trouble himself any further with curious searching out of these
things, but prepare and make himself ready for his end, Iun. in comment. 4.
that which God had yet further to reveal for the comfort of his Church, he
would reserve for other times, as Ezra, Zachary, Haggie, Malachie were raised
up afterward: the Lord would adorn his Temple at the reedifyi^^ thereof with
some prophetical visions, M. Br. in commentar.

Quest. 28. Of these words, thou shall rest, and stand up in thy lot.
Here two things are promised unto Daniel. 1. his rest that should follow
immediately after his death both in body and soul. 2. his reward, he should
stand up in his lot in the end of days.

1. He shall rest, both in body, in the grave, and in soul, being taken up
into everlasting joy: the wicked do not rest after their death: for their
souls go immediately to the place of torment: as is showed in the parable of
the rich glutton, Luke. 16. But this is the privilege of those which die in
the Lord, they do rest from their labors, Apocal. 14. 13.

2. He shall stand up in his lot. 1. Melancthon thus interprets, docebis and
confirmabis Ecclesiam, etc. thou shall teach and confirm the Church in the
last times: but it is evident, that he speaks of his standing up in the
resurrection: because mention is made before of his rest. 2. he shall stand up:
for the wicked being condemned of their own conscience, shall not be able to
stand in judgment, Psalm. 1. 5. But the righteous shall stand forth and appear
with boldness before the Lords tribunal seat, Perer.

3. And the lot and portion of the righteous is everlasting life: which is
called a lot, because it is given freely, and cast out unto them, without any
desert of theirs, Perer. and because every one has his lot, all shall not
have the same measure of glory, Polan. And unto this gracious promise made
unto Daniel, answeareth that holy and comfortable saying of S. Paul, I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, from
hence forth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous judge shall give unto me, at that day, and not unto me only, but
unto all them that love his appearing, 2. Tim. 4. 8. God grant unto us so to
keep the faith, and to fight a good fight, that we may obtain that crown of
righteousness, through the merits of our blessed Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus, to whom be praise for ever.

4. Places of doctrine.
Doctr. 1. Of the person and office of Christ.
v. 1. Michael shall stand up, the great Prince, which stands for the
children of thy people: here are three things showed concerning Christ: 1. his
person, he is called Michael, that is, as God, one equal unto God, a distinct
person from the Father, but of the same essence, power, eternity, who is the
brightness of the glory, and the engraued form of his person, Hebr. 1. 3.

2. His office is described: he is the great Prince: the government is upon
his shoulder, Isa. 9. 6. the Lord of Lords, and the King of Kings, Apocal. 17.
14. the mighty protector and defender of his Church.

3. The benefit which we have, is this, this Michael stands for his people to
defend them from the rage of Satan and of his ministers: as our Blessed
Savior says, I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my hand, Ioh. 10. 28.

Doctr. 2. Of the resurrection of the dead, and the manner thereof.
v. 2. Many of them which sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, etc. 1.
Here is confirmed that article of our faith concerning the resurrection of the
dead: the like has Job. 19. 26. Isay. 26. 19. Ezech. 37. 12. and this is the
first place in the old Testament, wherein evident mention is made of eternal
life.

2. The diverse state and condition is described of those which shall rise
again, some unto everlasting life, and some to perpetual shame: as our
Savior says in the same manner, Ioh. 5. 29. they shall come forth (of their
graves) that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, but they that have
done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation.

3. The easines and facility of this work is showed with God: that it is no
more for him to raise the body out of the grave, then for the body to awake
from sleep, and to rise out of the bed: and so the righteous are said to rest
in their beds, that is, in their graves, Isa. 57. 2. sleep then is an image of
death, then the awaking from sleep, should put us in mind of our resurrection,
and assure us thereof: as Tertullian well says, cum evigilaverit corpus
redditum officijs eius, resurrectionem mortuorum tibi affirmat, when thy body
is awaked being restored unto the duties thereof, it does affirm and testify
unto thee the resurrection: lib. de anim. c. 43. the same Tertullian concludes
the resurrection by the example of the Phoenix, which is said to rise out of
the ashes of the old Phoenix, whereupon he infers, that the bodies of men
shall rise again, avibus Arabiae de resurrectione securis, the birds of Arabia
being secure of their resurrection, lib. de resurrection. Pintus thinks that
mention is made of the Phoenix in the Psalm. 92. 12. for where we read the
righteous shall flourish like a palm tree, in the Greek it is (...), which
signifies both the bird Phoenix, and a palm tree: but the original puts
it out of doubt, where the word tamar is used, which is a palm tree: see more
concerning the Phoenix, Hexapl. in Genesis c. 7. quest. 7. We have better
arguments to assure us of the resurrection, then this from the Phoenix.
Bullinger, because mention is made of sleeping in the dust, whereout man was
taken at the first, does hence gather an other argument of the resurrection,
because it is as possible for the Lord to raise the body out of the dust of
the earth, as he created it at the first out of the dust.

4. The quality of the body is showed, what it shall be in the resurrection,
they shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: some qualities of the
body are essential unto it, without the which it cannot be, as to be visible,
to be palpable, to have parts, as the head, hands, feet, and the rest: these
qualities it shall have in the resurrection: some qualities are essential, but
not natural, as to be hungry, thirsty, heavy, weary, of a gross or thick
substance, dark: these qualities shall be laid aside together with corruption:
then the bodies of the Saints shall shine as the Sun, Matthew. 13. 43. Polan.

Doctr. 3. The difference between Philosophy, and the Christian religion.
v. 3. They which turn many to righteousness: This cannot Philosophy do,
convert men unto righteousness: for like as the stars do somewhat lighten
the night, but they cannot expel darkness: so philosophy may give some
light unto the understanding, but it cannot utterly chase away ignorance, or
give true knowledge: it is the light of the Gospel that chaseth away
darkness, as the Apostle says, Romans 13. the night is past, the day is come,
and Christ only has the words of ^^ernall life, Ioh. 6. 68.

Doctr. 4. That the word of God is not revealed to all.
v. 4. Thou Daniel shut up the words: Like as this prophecy of Daniel was
commanded to be shut up and sealed, and was not communicated to all: so the
secrets of Gods word are only revealed to those whom it pleases God, Psalm.
147. 19. he shows his word unto Jacob, his judgments to Israel: in the old
Testament, the knowledge of the Messiah was not made manifest unto the
Gentiles: and there are now many nations, in Asia, and India, that have not
heard of Christ: hereof no other reason can be given, but that it is so the
good pleasure of God.

Doctr. 5. Of the office, quality, and condition of Angels.
v. 6. And one said unto the man clothed in linen, etc. when shall be the end
of these wonders, etc. 1. In that the Angels do ask of Christ touching the
end of these afflictions, and calamities of the Church: their compassion
therein appears, and love toward the members of Christ, desiring the end of
their troubles and afflictions. 2. in that they stand on each side of the man
clothed in linen, which was Christ, they show their readiness, being always
at hand to execute the will of God for the good of his Church. 3. in calling
these things wonders, they therein declare, that they wonder at and admire the
works of God in the Church. 4. and they in asking this question, show their
desire to profit in the knowledge of Gods secrets: as S. Peter says, 1. Pet.
1. 12. which things the Angels desire to behold: teaching us by their example,
to proceed in the further knowledge of the mysteries of God.

Doct. 6. Concerning the person, dignity, and office of Christ.
v. 6. The man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river: 1.
here first the person of the Son of God is set forth, being both God and
man: this appearing in humane show was a praeludium, and foreshewing of his
incarnation, and assuming of our flesh. 2. for his dignity, he is the word of
his father, from him all the elect both Angels and men receive their
illumination and knowledge, for in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom,
and knowledge, Coloss. 2. 3. 3. for his office, he is our high Priest, which is
signified by his linen garments. 4. for his authority, he has rule and power
over all nations: and therefore he stands upon the waters, which signify the
people. 5. his mercy also and love appears, being ready to declare unto
the Angels, the thing, which they desired.

Doct. 7. Of the lawfulness of an oath, and the manner of it.
v. 7. He swear by him that lives for ever. 1. In that Christ here takes an
oath, we see that it is lawful to use an oath, contrary to the opinion of the
Anabaptists. 2. as Christ here in swearing lifts up his hands unto heaven; so
in taking of oaths some external ceremony by gesture, or otherwise, may be
used, which yet is no part of the oath. 3. but an oath must only be made by
the name of God, as here Christ swears by him that lives for ever. 4. the
end of an oath is here observed: which is either to end strife and
controversy, or for the confirmation of the truth, as in this place.

Doct. 8. Of the inequality and diverse degrees of glory in the resurrection.
v. 13. Thou shall stand up in thy lot: which shows that the Saints shall
have their diverse lots and portions of glory: for as Christ the head shall
excel all his members in glory, so his members shall have their diverse lots
and degrees: there shall be one lot of the holy Prophets and Apostles, another
of the martyrs, another of the holy pastors and teachers, an other of the
faithful and believers: as before the Angel showed, v. 2. that all the just
shall rise unto eternal life: but they which convert others to righteousness,
shall shine as the stars, Polan.

Doct. 9. Election of grace, not by merit.
v. 13. In thy lot. Pererius well infers hereupon, that as a lot is that
which is not procured by any man's industry, but it comes out unlooked for, so
gratia praedestinationis conting it electis nullo ipsorum merito, etc. the
grace of predestination falls unto the elect without any merit of theirs,
only by the mere good will and love of God: as the Apostle shows, that the
purpose of God might remain according to election, not by works, but by him
that calls, Romans 9. 11.

5. Places of controversy.
1. Controv. Against blasphemous Seruetus, that made himself Michael.
It has been showed before, quest. 2. that this Michael was no created Angel,
but Christ the Mediator, who is the Prince and protector of his Church, as is
there proved by these 3. aguments out of this place. 1. by the name Michael.
2. by the title here given unto Christ, called the great Prince. 3. by his
office, he stands for the people of God: Herein then appears the horrible
blasphemy of Seruetus, who as M. Calvin reports his words, was not afraid to
say, se esse illum Michaelem Ecclesiae custodem, that he was that Michael the
protector and keeper of the Church, etc. What presumption is this for a mortal
man to arrogate unto himself that name and title, which is too great to be
given unto the Angels?

2. Controv. Whether Henoch and Elias shall stand up with Michael in the last
times.
Pererius, concurring with other Romanists, says, that beside Michael, who
shall be the invisible protector of the Church, shall stand up two faithful
witnesses Henoch and Elias, who shall oppose themselves against Antichrist; and
they shall preach repentance unto the world a 1260. days, that is 3. years
and an half, Apocal. 11. 3. And that Elias should come in person, beside the
received opinion of the fathers, as of Theodoret in this place, August. lib.
20. de ciuitat. Dei c. 29. he alleges these Scriptures for it, Malach. 3. 4.
5. I will send Elias the Prophet before the coming of the great and fearful
day of the Lord: which must be understood of the second coming of Christ,
which shall be fearful and terrible: Again, Apocal. 11. 6. it is said of
these two faithful witnesses, these have power to shut heaven that it rain
not in the days of their prophesying: wherein there is an allusion unto Elias,
at whose word the rain was stayed three years and six months: so Pererius
upon this place.

First, these places give no warrant for this opinion. 1. the two witnesses are
the ministers and preachers of Gods truth, who are said to be two, because
their number shall not be great, and yet they shall be so many, as one shall
give witness to an other: neither Henoch nor Elias are here named: for these
1260. days being taken prophetically for so many years, two Prophets could
not continue preaching so long. 2. that place in Malachie our Blessed Savior
expounds of John Baptist, Matthew. 11. who should come in the spirit of Elias,
to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, as the Angel says, Luke 1.
17. And the first coming of Christ is there understood to be that fearful
day: for in the same place the Prophet says, v. 2. unto you that fear my name
shall the Sun of righteousness arise: which Zachary applies to the first
coming of Christ, Luke 1. 78. whereby the day spring from an high has visited
us: It shall be a day of health and salvation unto the faithful, but a day of
terror to the wicked and unbelievers, as John Baptist says, Mat. 3. 12. which
has his fan in his hand, and will make clean his floor, and gather his
wheat into his garner, but will burn up the chafe with unquenchable sire.
3. And by the shutting of heaven is by an allegory signified the efficacy of
the preaching of the Gospel, in opening the heavens to the faithful, and
shutting up the same to all unbelievers, as our Savior faith to Peter, Matthew.
16. 19. whatsoever thou shall bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

Secondly, concerning these witnesses, there is great difference and variety
of opinion, 1. both for the number of them. 2. and who they shall be. 3. and
when they shall preach: for the first: the common opinion is, that they shall
be but two: yet Lactantius affirms, that there shall be only one Prophet,
lib. 7. c. 17. Some think there shall be three, Henoch* Elias, and John the
Evangelist, and this is one of their reasons: because as in the world there
have been 3. laws in force, the law of nature, the law of Moses, the law
of grace; so it is requisite there should be 3. witnesses that lived under
these three laws, Henoch, Elias, and John: Hyppolit. oration. de consum.
secul. A^br. Catharin. in Genes. 2.

As great diversity there is of opinion, who these witnesses should be: Elias
is agreed upon by the most, to be one: but it is doubted who should be the
other: Victorinus in Apocal. 11. thinks, that Jeremy the Prophet shall be
the other witness: because the Lord says Ierem 1. 5. I have ordained thee a
Prophet unto the nations: but then Ieremias only prophesied to the Hebrews:
to fulfill therefore that saying, he shall come in the end of the world to
prophecy unto the nations: But Pererius well answeareth unto this reason: that
Jeremy is said to prophecy unto the nations; because he fortelleth the
destruction in his prophecy of diverse nations, the Egyptians, Moabites,
Ammonites, Philistims, with others: Areta upon the Apocalypse thinks, that
John the evangelist shall be one of the witnesses, whom they suppose yet to be
kept alive in Paradise with Henoch and Elias, because it is said Apocal. 10.
11. thou must prophecy again among the people, and nations, and tongues, and
to many Kings: which was not done in John's life time, and therefore he thinks
he shall come in the end of the world, to prophecy unto nations: But the
meaning of this place is, that John should prophecy unto nations in the rest
of the visions of this book: and now though John be dead, his Revelation
prophesies still: Pererius also understands it of the Gospel, which John did
write after his return from the Isle Pathmos, whereby he prophesies unto
nations. But it is certain, that John is not yet alive in the flesh: as
Eusebius proves by the testimony of Polycrates, who was the Apostles
disciple, lib. 3. Ecclesi. histor. c. 25. Lyranus thinks that the two
witnesses spoken of Apocal. 11. were Sylverius the Pope and Menna that resisted
the Eutychiane heresy. Ioachimus Abbas, and Gagnaeus, upon the Apocalypse, c.
11. do think that Moses shall be one of these witnesses: that like as he was
raised to life to be a witness of Christ's first coming, when he was
transfigured in the mount, so he shall be raised to be a witness of his second
coming. And this is brought as a probability thereof: because these witnesses
are said to have power over waters to turn them into blood, Apocal. 11. 6.
which thing Moses had done before.

But 1. it follows not because Moses was seen in the mount talking with
Christ, that therefore he shall come again before his second coming: for by
the same reason it may be inferred, that his three disciples also which went up
to the mount, and saw him transfigured, should also be witnesses of his second
coming, and be sent again into the world to preach: Sure it is that both the
Prophets and Apostles shall accompany Christ in his second coming, and by the
doctrine, which they preached, judge and condemn the world, Matthew. 19. 28. But
neither the one nor the other shall be raised up before the general
resurrection, and sent into the world to preach. 2. by the turning of waters
into blood, is understood the threatening of Gods judgments for the contempt
of the ministry of the word.

3. A third uncertainty there is concerning the time of the preaching of these
two witnesses: Theodoret thinks that Elias shall preach 45. days after that
Antichrist is slain: and therefore it is said, v. 12. blessed is he that shall
come to the 1335. days, which is 45. days more then the former sum of 1290.
days. But Hyppolitus thinks that Antichrist shall put to death Henoch and
Elias, after they have preached 3. years and an half: and that after their
death, Antichrist shall reign 3. years and an half more. Bellar. lib. 3. de
Romans Pont. thinks that these two Prophets shall preach 3. years and an
half, that is, 1260. days, a cap. 8. month before Antichrist is slain, who
shall reign a 1290. days. This uncertainty shows, this to be but a Jewish
fable, and a mere imagination of the coming of Henoch and Elias in person in
the end of the world to preach.

3. Controv. What manner of persecution shall be under Antichrist.
Pererius thus far proceeds well in describing the grievous persecution
which shall be under Antichrist, that it shall not be only corporal and
external in tormenting of the body, but it shall be also spiritual in
abolishing all exercise of religion: he shall burn the books of the
Scripture, and burn the righteous together with those books: he shall forbid
the use of the Sacraments; and as Augustine says, there shall be great
difficulty in baptizing of the infants of Christians: lib. 20. de civitat.
Dei, c. 8. the sacraments shall not publicly be administered, but privately.
All this is most true, and every one of these things has thus come to pass
under the tyranny of Antichrist: the true service of God was abolished, and
prayer in an unknown tongue brought into the Church: they have burned the
Martyrs with books of Scripture and of godly prayers together: as is set forth
in the story of the burning of Bucer and Fagius bones, and one Hilliard at
Cambridge: the Christians children could be hardly baptized, but after their
superstitious manner, as the history of M. Hawks martyr shows.

But herein Pererius is deceived: he thinks that Antichrist shall take away
all images, neither shall suffer any man to sign him with the sign of the
cross, but shall abolish that sign out of every place.

Contra. 1. It is certain that Antichrist rather shall set up images and idols
of silver and gold: as in the Revelation, c. 9. 20. after the opening of the
sixth and last trumpet save one, toward the end of the world, mention is made
of those that worshipped idols of silver and gold, of brass, etc. and had not
repented: now there are none known worshippers of such idols in these days in
these part of the world, under the Roman Empire, but the Papists.

2. And Antichrist, as he shall cover his hypocrisy with the name of Christ,
so he shall not abolish the sign of Christ's cross, but still rather
superstitiously abuse it: robbing Christ indeed of his due honor, and giving
him reverence only in outward shows and signs: as the Jews clothed Christ
in purple, and did obeisance to him in mocking: So that whether by the mark of
the beast, we understand with Iunius the Popish chrysme, which in confirmation
is laid on with the sign of the cross upon forehead and hand: or with Napier
the crosses of all kinds superstitiously abused by the Romanists, which are
represented in the number of the beasts name expressed in these three Greek
letters (...). as he pithily proves, propos. 31. or with D. Fulke S. Peter's
crosse-keyes, which the Pope uses as his ensign, to the which he forces
every one to submit himself; we shall find, that the Antichrist shall not
abolish all such signs, but abuse them rather to superstition and idolatry.

4. Controv. Of the certentie of election, that none of the elect can finally
fall away.
v. 1. In that the Angel here says, thy people shall be delivered, every one
that shall be found written in the book, it is evident, that none there
written shall perish: and so consequently whosoever is not there written, can
not but perish: the first our Savior affirms, saying unto his Apostles, Luke
10. 20. Rejoice, for your names are written in heaven: that is, were so
written, as that they could never be blotted out: in which sense the Prophet
David says, Psalm. 119. 89. O Lord, thy word remains for ever in heaven: the
other also is evident, Apoc. 20. 15. Whosoever was not found written in the
book of life, was cast into the lake of fire.

But against this position of the certentie of Predestination, these places of
Scripture are objected, Exodus 32. 32, 33. Moses says unto God, if not raze me
out of the book which thou have written: and the Lord answeareth, him that
sins, will I blot out of my book: likewise Psalm. 69. 29. Let him be put out
of the book of the living, and let him not be written with the righteous.
Apoc. 3. 5. He that overcomes, etc. I will never blot his name out of the
book of life. Apoc. 23. 19. If any shall diminish of the words of the
prophecy of this book, God shall take his part out of the book of life.

Ans. 1. We refuse here the opinion of Ambros. Catharinus, lib. de praedest.
that makes two orders of those which shall come to everlasting life: one of
such as are predestinate being excellent and worthy men; an other of such as
are not elected, that is, by the grace of God ordained to salvation, yet
through Gods mercy shall be saved. But this opinion is contrary to the
Scriptures, which testify, that whosoever is not written in the book of life,
shall be cast into the lake of fire, Apoc. 20. 15.

2. Thomas Aquin. here has this distinction, Thom. 1. part. qu. 24. ar. 3.
that some are said to be written in the book of life, simpliciter, simply,
such as are in deed predestinate according to the good purpose of God, and
these can never be blotted out: others are written secundum quid, after a sort,
in respect of their present justice, these may be blotted out: And as these in
respect of their present state may be said to be written in the book, so the
elect indeed may in respect likewise of their present state, while they
remain in sin, be said to be blotted out: And therefore some think that
the book which was showed unto Ezekiel, was written within and without, in the
inside were written only those, who should be saved, on the backside they
which are written only there for a time.

Contra. 1. This distinction may well be admitted, if some be said to be
written in the book in respect of their own opinion, and outward appearance:
but none can be said to be there written by God: for as the Preacher says,
Eccles. 3. 14. I know, that whatsoever God shall do, it shall be for ever: his
works are perfect, therefore he writes not any there, and blotteth them out
again.

3. Wherefore the best solution is this: that God is said to blot out, not
properly, but by a certain similitude, as he is said in Scripture, to repent,
to be angry: they are blotted out, that is, the Lord declares by the event,
that they were never written there: as Augustine well says, hoc dictum est
secundum spem ipsorum, this is said in respect of their hope, they took
themselves to be written there: and they are said accordingly to be blotted
out, that is, non ibi se script^s agnoscent, they shall find and acknowledge
that they are not written there in deed. August. in Psalm. 68. So the Scripture
sometime speaks, (...), according to the opinion of men: as Matthew. 8. 12. the
children of the kingdom shall be cast out into darkness: and Matthew. 9. 12. I
come not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: here they are called
the children of the kingdom, and the righteous, in respect of their own
opinion, and others, not that they were so in deed: And so some making a
glorious show for the time of righteousness, seem to themselves and others to
be written in Gods book, and yet are not. Pelican.

But yet a further doubt is moved, concerning Moses words, that wished to be
rased out of Gods book: he was there written in deed, and therefore this
solution will not serve here: of this now more in the next place.

5. Contr. In what sense Moses wishes to be rased out of Gods book, Exodus 32.
32.
Though this question be sufficiently handled elsewhere, Hexapl. in Exo. c. 32.
qu 78. 82.
yet it shall not be amiss to add somewhat more concerning that matter: and
the rather because the other book may be not so ready at every ones hand.

1. Some think that Moses speaks of the book not of eternal, but of this
present life, desiring in effect to give his life, and to shed his blood, that
the people might be saved: in which sense also S. Paul wishes to be anathema,
and accursed for Isreal's sake: thus Origin in 9. ad Roman. so also Hierome,
noluit deleri de libro vitae perpetuo, sed in present^: he would not be blotted
out of the book for ever, but for the present: qu. 19. ad Algasiam: to the
same purpose Euthy^ius, who makes three books of Gods prescience, as is showed
before, quest. 6. and here Moses speaks, de libro vitae corporis, of the
book of the life of the body, wherein all men both good and bad are written:
But Chrysoctome lib. de compunct. cord. and lib. 3. de pr^^ident. by this
argument confuteth this opinion: Moses and Paul's desire were all one: now Paul
desires to be separated from Christ for his brethrens sake, Romans 9. 3. but the
death of the body does not separate from Christ, but rather more speedily
brings the faithful to Christ, as the Apostle ^aith, I desire to be dissolved
and to be with Christ, Ph. 1. 23.

2. Basil thinks that Moses and Paul in thus desiring, were not ignorant that
they could not be separated from God in thus praying, it proceeding from so
great charity: but they rather hoped to receive so much the more at Gods hand
for it: in libr. regular. But if they had thus prayed only of this mind, they
had respected themselves more then the glory of God.

3. August. queast. 140. in Exodus thinks, that this wish of Moses proceeded
ex ingenti quadam divinae familiaritatis securitate, from a wonderful
security and familiar assurance that he had with God: and he makes this to be
the effect of Moses speech; either forgive the people this sin, or blot me
out: but I am assured, thou will not blot me out: therefore forgive them. But
the Lords answer, I will blot out him whosoever sins, shows that Moses
wish was to be blotted out, and he shows not his assurance in so wishing, not
to be blotted out.

4. Bernard thinks that this wish came a paterno affectu, from a fatherly
affection, ne solus ipse, excluso populo, etc. that he alone without the people
would not attain unto everlasting life: sermon. 12. in Cant. But this had been
no orderly affection, to wish to be damned with others: the hope of the
faithful is such, that they doubt not to be saved, though all the world beside
be damned.

5. Rupert. lib. 3. in Exodus gives this sense; either forgive them, or else it
must needs follow, that I also be blotted out of thy book, because I am
likewise a sinner: But this had showed some diffidence and doubtfulnes in Moses
of his own salvation.

6. Hugo in Psalm. 138. makes two books of life, one of the present state of
justice, out of the which Moses wishes to be rased out, the other the book of
predestination: But this had been to tempt God, to wish to fall from the state
of grace into sin.

7. Caietane thinks the meaning to be but this, that he desires to be
blotted de libro principatus, out of the book and decree of his principality
and government: to loose that princely office, over the Lords people, which God
had assigned him unto.

8. And R. Salamon Ioachi much to the same purpose, understands by the book,
the Pentateuch, out of the which Moses wishes his name to be blotted, that is,
no mention to be made of his name, or of his acts therein: But Gods answer
takes away both these interpretations, him that sins will I blot out of my
book: but in the Pentateuch the names of many sinners are written. And Moses
only had the principality appointed unto him for his time, there was none other
written there but he: but God speaks of the blotting out of others.

9. Lyranus thinks, that as Christ secundum voluntatem partis sensitivae, in
the will of his sensitive part desired the cup to pass, quem voluntas
rationalis appetebat, which the will of his reason desired: so Moses here,
secundum desiderium partis inferioris, in the desire of the inferior part of
his mind, (that is, his will and affection) wishes to be blotted out, though
in his superior part, that is, in his judgment, he would not have it so. But
this comparison is not alike, for the desire in Christ to escape death was
natural; but this wish of Moses to perish not only temporally, but eternally,
was supernatural: and to wish one thing one way, and not an other way,
includes a contradiction.

10. Alphons. Abulens. in Exodus thinks it is an hyperbolical speech, and not
literally to be taken, as was that of Rachel to Iaakob, Give me children, or
else I die: not that she preferred the having of children before her life; but
in so speaking she shows her vehement desire. But Gods answer to Moses in
the same phrase, shows, that Moses so meant in deed.

11. I prefer here therefore the interpretation of Chrysostom in the place
before alleged, that Moses and Paul, tanto Dei amore flagrabant, etc. did
burn with such love and zeal to the glory of God, that in respect thereof,
Deo ipso frui pro nihilo reputarunt, they made no account of the fruition of
God himself: hoc erat eorum propositum, ne Deus ab ipsis sum dilectus,
irrideretur ab impijs, this was the purpose and scope of their desire, least
God whom they dearly loved, should have been laughed to scorn and derided
of the wicked: which Moses feared would have been, if the Lord should at this
time have destroyed his people: as Moses had declared before in his prayer,
Exodus 32. 12. Wherefore shall the Egyptians speak and say, He has brought
them out miraculously to slay them in the mountains. These holy men preferred
the glory of God before their own salvation.

6. Controv. That the souls of the faithful departed, do not sleep until
the resurrection, but presently enjoy the sight of God.
Bellarmine falsely ascribes this opinion unto Luther and Calvin, and unto the
reformed Churches, that the souls of them which depart hence in the Lord, do
not enjoy the presence and sight of God until the general resurrection. Tom.
1. contr. 7. l. 1. c. de canon. sanct.

But 1. Bellarmine is much deceived: for they hold no such thing: it was the
opinion of one of the Popes, John 22. which is thus reported by Hadrian the 6.
an other of their Popes, in 4. sententiar. de sacram. confirm. artic. 3.
Ioannes 22. public docuit, etc. John the 22. did publicly teach, and
commanded also to hold, quod animae purgatae ante sinale iudicium non habent
stolam, quae est clara and facialis visio Dei, that the souls being purged
receive not their stoale or garment before the final judgment, which is the
clear vision of God face to face, etc. 2. This his error might seem to be
grounded out of this text, they that sleep in the dust shall awake: but this
is evidently spoken of their bodies, which are laid in the grave and dust of
the earth: which are said to sleep, because their bodies do but rest there
for a time, they shall be raised again. But that the souls of the believing
do presently pass out of their bodies unto heaven, is manifest by the answer
of our Savior unto the thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: out
of which place Gerson Chauncelour of the University of Paris, in an oration
before the states of France, infers, Latronem etc. beatificatum suisse in
Paradiso in ipsa hora mortis, that the thief, though he had not fulfilled his
penance, was made blessed in the very hour of his death. Gaguin. histor.
Francor. lib. 8. 3. The truth then is this, that the souls of the faithful
departed are presently taken up unto rest: but yet their glory shall be more
full and absolute, when the bodies together with souls shall be glorified in
the resurrection: as S. Peter faith, 1. epist. 5. 4. When the chief shepherd
shall appear, ye shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory. So the
Angels that fell, are said to be kept in chains of darkness unto damnation, 2.
Pet. 2. 4. they are already damned, but yet they shall have a further
consummation of judgment at the last day. Likewise the wicked are said to go
into everlasting fire in the day of judgment, Matthew. 25. 46. and yet presently
after death their souls go unto the place of torment, Luke 16. 23.

7. Controv. That all men shall rise again, and not only the faithful:
neither shall they die again.
Two errors of the Jews are here convinced: 1. they hold that the resurrection
shall be only of the righteous, but the wicked, they think shall abide in
death for ever: But the Angel says, that of these, which awake out of the
dust, some shall awake to shame: the wicked then shall rise again. 2. The
Jews hold with the Chiliasts, that the just shall rise again, and shall live
a thousand years in the earth without any war or trouble, and afterward they
shall die again: But here the Angel says, that some shall rise unto
everlasting life: they shall rise then never to die again.

8. Controv. That Christ died not in general for all, but for such only as
believe.
The Vbiquitaries, which hold an omnipresence of Christ's flesh in every place,
do also hold, that Christ died universally for all men: and that where the
Scripture seems to speak otherwise, naming many, and not all, as Matthew. 26.
28. the blood of Christ was shed for many for remission of sins: Romans 5. 19.
by the obedience of one many were made righteous: In these and such like
places, many are understood for all, as here in Daniel, many that sleep in the
dust of the earth, shall awake, Pap.

Contra. 1. Why in this place of Daniel, many are named not all, diverse
reasons are before alleged, quest. 9. 2. and though in this place many be
taken for all, yet it follows not, that every where it should so: in this
place it is so, because it is warranted by other places of Scripture: as Ioh.
5. 28. the hour shall come, in the which all that are in the graves, shall
hear his voice: But in the other places, many cannot be all, because the
Scripture does not warrant that sense, that Christ intended the benefit of his
death to all, but only to those which believe, the holy and undefiled, Apocal.
14. 3. they sung a new song before the throne, etc. and no man could learn
that song, but the hundredth four and forty thousand, which were bought from
the earth: by this place it is evident, that all are not bought by Christ's
blood, but only a certain number, for whom it is ordained: Christ's death is
indeed sufficient for all the world, but is effectual only to those which
do believe in him: see more of this question of the universality of grace,
Synops. Centur. 4. err. 23.

9. Controv. That the faithful do not justify other by way of merit or
satisfaction, but as ministers only of salvation.
In what sense the faithful servants of God are said to justify others, as
here the Angel faith to Daniel, v. 3. is before sufficiently showed, qu. 12.
But the Romanists by occasion of this, and other such like places, as namely
that Coloss. 1. 24. where S. Paul thus faith, I fulfill that which is behind
of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the
Church: whence the Rhemists infer: that the sufferings of Christ's members are
not only satisfactorie for the sufferers, but for others. But this is a
blasphemous assertion, that the passions of any are meritorious or
satisfactorie, saving only of Christ. 1. The sufferings of Christ's members are
called his sufferings, because Christ suffers in his members: 2. but their
sufferings are to a far diverse end, then Christ's passion was: for Christ
suffered for our redemption: his members suffer not for that end: for Christ's
offering was sufficient, which otherwise should have been imperfect, if it
needed any other supply: but they suffer both for themselves to be made
conformable unto Christ, and for the confirmation and example of others: in
which sense S. Paul says, 2. Tim. 2. 10. I suffer all things for the Elects
sake, that they may also obtain salvation. So Thomas Aquinas well expounds,
Part 3 Sum. qu. 48. artic. P^nult.
passiones sanctorum prosiciunt Ecclesiae, non quidem per modum redemptionis,
sed per modum exempli and exhortationis, etc. the passions of the Saints do
profit the Church, not by way of redemption, but of example and exhortation:
according to that saying, 2. Cor. 1. 6. Whether we be troubled, it is for your
consolation and salvation, etc.

10. Controv. That the Saints merits as they are diverse do not merit diverse
degrees of glory.
v. 3. They that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament. Though
we admit, that there shall be diversity of glory among the Saints in the next
world, as one star differs from an other in glory; yet two errors are here
to be taken heed of: 1. the curiosity of the heretics called Cataphryges,
whose sect-masters were Montanus, and his two Prophetesses, Prisca and
Maximilla: who imagined that the bodies of the Saints should some exceed the
Sun in glory an hundred fold, some more, some less: which is a curious and
idle fancy and speculation: the Scripture says, that the righteous shall
shine as the Sun in the kingdom of Christ: Matthew. 13. 43.
but by how many degrees their bodies shall exceed the brightness of the Sun,
it is a superfluous and curious inquisition. 2. The Romanists think, that this
difference and diversity of glory is measured unto the Saints, according to
their diversity of merit, which is a great error: men's works as they are great
and small, shall be a rule, according to the which men shall be judged, but the
greatest works are not meritorious of the least degrees of glory, as Christ
teaches his disciples to say, Luke 17. 10. When ye have done all those things,
which are commanded you, say ye are unprofitable servants.

11. Controv. The Scriptures not so obscure, but all may be admitted to the
reading of them.
v. 4. Thou Daniel shut up the words, etc. Hence Pererius infers, that not
only this prophecy of Daniel, but other books of Scripture also are obscure,
and hard to be understood: it should be as a cloased book to them that would
read it: and thereupon he cries out against heretics (meaning in his
Iesuited, or rather Iudasited sense the Protestants) which should affirm,
omnem diuinam Scripturam cuilibet etiam de vulgo facilem esse and perviam, that
all the divine Scripture is easy and plain to be understood even of every one
of the common people. Likewise the Rhemists do falsely charge the Protestants
to say that the Scriptures are so easy, that they may not only be read, but
expounded of the learned and unlearned, and that every one may make choice of
such sense as himself likes, in 1. Pet. 3. verse. 16.

Contra. 1. They do here notoriously slander the Protestants: fot we deny
not but that many places in Scripture, are hard to be understood: neither do we
give liberty to ouery one to expound the Scripture as they list. 2. But this
we affirm, that the doctrine of faith and of all things necessary to
salvation, is set forth in plain and manifest places of Scripture, to the
reading whereof even the unlearned may safely be admitted: as our Blessed
Savior exhorts generally all, Search the Scrptures, for in them ye think
to have eternal life, Ioh. 5. 39. 3. Neither does it follow, because some
things in Daniels prophecy are hard, that all the Scripture is so: and yet the
hardness of this prophecy was but for a time: for when these things were
accomplished, then the meaning thereof plainly appeared: And therefore Daniel
is bid to seal it up but for a time: See more of the perspicuitie and
plainness of Scripture, Synops. Centur. 1. err. 6.

12. Controv. Bellarmine confuted, who by diverse arguments out of this chapter
would prove the Pope not to be Antichrist.
1. Argum. Antichrist shall reign only 3. years and an half, called here a
time, two times, and an half: which is defined to be a 1260. days, Apoc. 11.
3. and 12. 6. But the Pope has reigned in the Church now more then 1500.
years at the least: therefore the Pope is not that Antichrist. Bellarm. lib.
3. de Romans pontif. c. 8.

Ans. 1. The proposition is false: for this place of Daniel is understood of
Antiochus, that so long the Sanctuary should lie profaned and polluted by
him: he was indeed a type of Antichrist, but not in every respect, as namely
in the time and continuance of his tyranny: types do not answer in every
respect unto the thing that is shadowed forth, but only in that wherein they
are types: as David and Solomon were types of Christ, yet it follows not,
that Christ's kingdom shall continue but 40. years, because they reigned no
longer.

2. That term of a 1260. days, mentioned in the Apocalypse, Polanus takes to
signify that time precisely, namely 3. years and an half, when the Church of
Christ fled from Jerusalem unto a town called Pella, where they were
preserved, during which time the city was besieged, and at the last taken and
destroyed: but these days are rather taken prophetically for so many years,
1260. during which time the mystery of iniquity did work in the Church:
which term some begin in the year 300. so Napier upon the Revelation,
propos. 36. Iunius also takes those days for so many years, Apoc. 11. 3.

3. In that he says the Pope has reigned 1500. years in the Church, therein
he confesses that the Pope is the Antichrist, that takes upon him to reign
in the Church: whereas S. Peter says, 1. ep. 5. 3. Not as though ye were Lords
over (Gods) inheritance. And thus also is evident by his confession, that the
said term of a 1260. days taken for years, and beginning in the year 300.
will make that sum of 1500. and somewhat more.

2. Argum. When Antichrist comes, all external ceremonies of religion shall
cease, and the public worship of God: but so is it not under the Pope: for
they have the daily sacrifice of the Mass: Ergo. Bellarm. lib. 3. c. 7.

Ans. 1. Whereas it is here said, v. 11. That the daily sacrifice shall be
taken away: it is understood not of Antichrist, but of Antiochus, who in deed
caused the daily sacrifice to cease: as the author of the books of the
Macchabees takes it, 1. Macchab. 1. 57. and Joseph. lib. 2. antiquit. c. 10.
so also Chrysostom expounds, and Hierome upon the 11. chap. v. 30, 31.

2. Neither is it true, that all outward ceremonies of religion shall cease
under Antichrist: for he shall fit in the Temple of God, and so retain some
outward marks of Christian religion, as baptism, and yet in deed be an
enemy to the Christian faith.

3. Though in the reformed Church there is (thanks be to God) public exercise
of the right sernice of God; yet under the Papacy, the true worship of God is
abolished: idolatry, invocation of Saints, and other strange worships are
brought in.

4. The Mass is not that daily sacrifice here spoken of, it is rather that
abominable idol, which abrogateth the virtue of Christ's sacrifice upon the
cross, and makes the oblation of a piece of hallowed bread a sacrifice
propitiatory for the quick and the dead.

3. Argum. They which go about to abrogate the sacrifice of the Eucharist, are
the forerunners of Antichrist: but the Protestants, not the Papists abolish the
sacrifice of the Eucharist: Ergo. Bellar. ibid.

Answ. 1. The Protestants do observe and keep the true institution of the
Lords Supper, called the Eucharist: which they celebrate as an Eucharisticall
and commemoratiue sacrifie, not as propitiatiue, as the Papists do: for Christ
has with one offering consecrated for ever, them, that are sanctified, Heb. 10.
14. therefore he was not to offer himself up often, Heb. 9. 25. we use it as a
commemoration of Christ's sacrifice, according to his own commandment: do
this as often as ye do it in remembrance of me: Thus Theodoret writes, having
moved this question, cur noui testamenti sacerdotes mysticum sacrisicium
peragunt, etc. why the Priests or ministers of the new testament do celebrate
a mystical sacrifice, seeing Christ by his sacrifice, has made other
sacrifices not now to be necessary: clarum est ijs, qui in rebus diuiuis sunt
eruditi, nos non aliud offerre, sed illius vnius and salutaris memoriam
peragere, it is well known to those which are skillful in divine things, that
we offer no other sacrifice, but celebrate a memory of that one healthful
sacrifice: for this the Lord himself commanded, do this in remembrance of me,
etc. so Theodoret in c. 8. ad Hebraeos.

2. But the Papists indeed have abrogated the true use of the Eucharist;
turning bread into flesh, a Sacrament into a sacrifice, a commemoration into an
oblation, eating and drinking, into gazing, and shaking to and fro, and lifting
up: in stead of worshipping God, adoring a piece of bread: and such like
profanations have they brought in of the Lords Supper.

4. Argum. 45. days after the death of Antichrist, Christ shall come unto
judgment: But the Pope has reigned these 500. years in the Church, vtroque
gladio, by both swords, even by the protestants own confession, and yet Christ
is not come unto judgment: Ergo. Bellar. lib. 3. de Roman. Pontisi. c. 9.

Answ. 1. If just 45. days after the death of Antichrist, Christ shall come to
judge the world, then they which live at that time shall be able to assign the
very day of Christ's coming, and so shall be wiser then the Angels, to whom
the day and hour of Christ's coming is unknown.

2. This prophecy of a 1335. days concerns not Antichrist, it was fulfilled
in the death of Antiochus, who miserably ended his days 45. days after the
restitution of religion among the Jews: see before quest. 26.

3. In that Bellarmine confesses, that the Pope has reigned so long with both
swords, therein he shows him to be the Antichrist: for Christ says, learn
of me, for I am humble and meek, Matt. 11. 29. and the Prophet Isay says,
speaking of the kingdom of Christ, c. 11. 9. then shall none hurt or destroy
in all the mountain of mine holiness: the Pope then, that kills and
destroys with the sword the innocent sheep of Christ, is the very
Antichrist.

6. Moral observations.
1. Observe. Michael the great Prince stands for his people.
v. 1. At that time shall Michael stand up, etc. This is the comfort of Gods
Church, though Turk and Pope, and other aduersaties do stand up against them,
yet they have Michael the great Prince to fight for them, who shall deliver his
Church from their cruel rage, and not suffer them further to prevail, then it
shall be for his glory, and the trial of their faith: and this is that, which
our Savior has promised, Behold, I am with you always to the end of the
world, Matthew 28. 20.

2. Observe. The hope of the resurrection does arm us against all afflictions,
yea death it self.
v. 3. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, etc.
This ought to be our comfort, that although the members of Christ are
persecuted in this world, vexed and tormented, given to the fire, slain with
the sword, cast into the Sea, yet God shall restore unto them all their parts
again: this was Jobs comfort in his greatest extremity, c. 19. 25. 26. I
know my Redeemer lives, etc. and I shall see him in my flesh.

3. Observe. It is not sufficient to know the will of God, but we must teach it
others, and do it our selves.
v. 3. They that turn many to righteousness: Christ requires of his disciples
both to teach, and themselves to observe his commandments, Matthew. 5. 19. for
like as the ostrich has wings, but flies not with them: and as the stomach
which receives meat, and keeps it, never digesteth well, unless it
transmit it over unto other parts: so are they which have knowledge and other
gifts, and seek not to benefit others thereby.

4. Observe. The glory of the next life, should teach men temperance and
sobriety.
v. 3. They shall shine as the stars: The bodies of the Saints shall be so
glorified in the resurrection, that they shall shine as the stars, yea as the
Sun, in the kingdom of God, Matthew. 13. 42. If men do hope to have their
bodies vessels of so great glory, they must take heed that they defile them
not with surfeiting, drunkenness, uncleanness: Such filthy and polluted
vessels, are no fit temples for the spirit of God: Thus S. Peter exhorts, 2.
epist. 3. 14. Beloved, seeing ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye
may be found of him without spot and blameless.

5. Observe. Against curiosity.
v. 9. Go thy way Daniel, for the words are cloased up: In that Daniel
obtains not altogether his desire for the knowledge of these hid mysteries,
it teaches us that we should not curiously press to know such things, which
it has pleased God to keep secret: So the Apostle advises, that no man
presume to understand, above that which is meet to understand but that he
understand according to sobriety, Romans 12. 3.

6. Observe. Of the use and end of affliction.
v. 10. Many shall be purisied, made white, and tried. Here are three effects
of affliction expressed. 1. as the wheat is purified from the chafe, so by
affliction the fathfull are discerned from the hypocrites: as the Apostle
says, in an other case, 1. Cor. 11. 19. there must be heresies, that they
which are approved may be known. 2. as the cloth by often washing is whited,
so by affliction men are purified from their corruptions: as the Prophet David
says, Psalm. 119. 67. before I was afflicted I went astray. 3. as the gold and
silver is tried in the fire, so the Lord takes trial of the faith and
patience of his servants by affliction: as S. Peter says, 1. epist. 4. 12.
Dearly beloved, think it not strange concerning the sierie trial, which is
among you to prove you, etc.

7. Observe. Of the fruitful meditation of death.
v. 13. Go thy way, for thou shall rest, and stand up in thy lot: After that
the Lord had revealed to Daniel by his Angel, the coming of the Messiah, that
should finish sin, and reconcile sinners, c. 9. 24. and beside he had heard
what should be the end of the just, they should awake unto everlasting life:
now he is called to prepare himself to his end: so after we have attained to
the knowledge of Christ, we should desire nothing more, then with S. Paul to be
dissolved and to be with Christ: and to sing with old Simeon, Lord now let
thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have
seen thy salvation. And now blessed be the Lord, who has suffered me to live
with Simeon to see this great mystery of salvation revealed in this book, who
I trust will yet strengthen me in other books and parts of holy Scripture, to
embrace Christ as it were in mine arms, and to show him unto others: that when
the course of my poor ministry is fulfilled, I may sing nunc dimittis with
Simeon: and so we the servants of Jesus Christ may comfort our selves with this
gracious promise made to Daniel, to rest in peace, and stand up in our lottes
in the day of the Lord: to whom be praise for ever.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX unto this Commentary, wherein are examined the reasons and
Arguments urged by GRASERVS, against JUNIUS exposition of the Image which
Nabuchadnezzer saw in a dream, c. 2. and of the visions set forth, c. 7. c. 8.
and of the 11. chap. from v. 36. to the end.
AFter I had by the Lords gracious assistance finished this Commentary, there
came unto mine hand a ^reatise set forth this last year 1608. by Graserus.
entitled historia Antichristi illius magni, the history of that great
Antichrist: wherein he takes upon him to infringe and impugn the
interpretation of Iunius throughout this book. This his Censure and
animadversion he divides into ten exercises, as he calls them: I think it
not amiss speedily to run through all of them, and to weigh his principal
reasons and objections, wherein he seems to be so confident: whose learned
travail in this argument in applying Daniels prophetical visions against
Antichrist, as it deserves commendation, so yet some of his reasons are not so
pithily set down, but that they may be revewed and examined.

The first exercise perused and examined.
In this first part of his treatise Graserus takes upon him to prove, that
the legs of the image, c. 2. and the fourth beast described c. 7. cannot
signify the kingdom of the Grecians, which succeeded Alexander, as of the
Seleucians in the North, and of the Ptolomes, and Lagidae in the South, as
Iunius does well interpret: but that by the fourth Monarchy of the Romans is
signified, which to this day continues, divided into two parts, as the two
legs thereof, the kingdom of the Pope in the West, and of the Turk in the
East: and that not the Monarchy only of Alexander, but of him and his
successors jointly is described, by the belly and sides of the image, c. 2.
and by the third beast, c. 7. His arguments are these.

Argum. 1. The third beast called the leopard, is unlike unto the other two
before it, the lion, which signifies the Chaldean Monarchy, and the bear
taken for the Persian state: But if Alexander in his own person were this
Leopard, he should not be unlike the first, for he was an absolute Monarch, as
the Chaldean kings were: whereas the Persian state was not entire, but
consisted partly of the power of the Persians, partly of the Medes, like to the
Polonian state, which stands in the joint authority of the Polonians and
Lithuanians: And beside, not the persons of the kings, but the kingdoms
themselves, are here compared together, P. 37.

Answ. 1. The dissimilitude of these beasts consists not in the unlike form
of government: for the state of the Persian kings was as absolutely
Monarchical, as was the Empire of the Chaldeans: though their kingdom
consisted of diverse united parts, yet that lets not the kingly power to be
absolutely Monarchical: but the difference between these kingdoms, was in
other qualities, as the one exceeded the other in strength, or in more hard and
cruel government: as is showed before in the 17. and 18. questions upon the
7. chapter. 2. not the kingdoms only, but the kings together with their
kingdoms are compared together: as c. 2. 38. Daniel says to Nebuchadnezzar,
thou art this kingdom of gold: as his Monarchy was as gold in respect of them
which succeeded, so he was as gold being compared also to his successors. So
Alexanders person together with his kingdom was this third beast: as the
little horn, cap. 7. ver. 8. signifies Antiochus person with his kingdom.

Argum. 2. The lives of these beasts were prolonged for a certain time, and
period, c. 7. 12. But Alexanders kingdom over the Macedonians continued but
12. years from his fathers death: his Monarchy but half so long, after he
had overcome the power of Persia: in so short a time what periods, and
conversion of times could be observed? p. 38.

Answ. That place is not understood of the continuance or periods of those
kingdoms, (and yet this supposall of the fatal periods of kingdoms, is found
by experience, to be but a speculatiue imagination) for the text says, the
dominion of the beasts they had taken away before: the meaning is, that their
lives, that is, some remainder and relics of those beasts should continue
after their dominion and kingdom was ended, and determined: and so there
remained some portion of the Macedonian kingdom even after Alexander, and of
other the former Monarchies, as is further showed, c. 7. quest. 39.

Argum. 3. The third beast had 4. heads: which are taken by Iunius for the
four chief regiments, which were under Alexander, managed by his principal
and chief captains: But those 4. captains are signified by the four horns,
which came not up, till the great horn, which signifies Alexander, was
broken, for they came up in stead of that great horn, c. 8. 8. page 40.

Answ. 1. Graserus here confounds the visions of the 7. and 8. chapter: he
makes the Leopard, c. 7. and the Goat, c. 8. to signify the same, whereas the
goat more generally comprehends the whole Grecian Monarchy, both under
Alexander and his successors: as appears by the little horn, which in the
vision of the 7. chapter comes out of the fourth beast: but in the 8.
chapter, both that great horn, which was Alexander, and the 4. horns which
came up in the place thereof, and the little horn which came forth out of one
of the four horns, do all arise out of one and the same beast, namely the
goat. 2. these four principalities in the 7. chapter, are 4. heads of that
beast, while they managed the affairs of the kingdom under Alexander, and
Arideus his brother: But after they took upon them to be kings, they are said
to be four horns, which did rise up in the place of the great horn.

Argum. 4. In the 8. chapter, the goat is interpreted to be the kingdom of
Grecia, and the great horn, is the first king thereof, namely Alexander: he
then makes not that beast alone, but the whole kingdom of Grecia is
understood, whereof Alexander was but the first king.

Answ. It is granted, that the goat in the 8. chapter, signifies the whole
kingdom of Grecia, both of Alexander and his successors: but it follows not,
that the third beast, the Leopard in the 7. chapter, should therefore
comprehend likewise both the one and the other, as is showed in the answer to
the former argument. 2. in the 11. chapter, v. 4. there is an evident
distinction made between the kingdom of Alexander and of his successors: for
it is said, his kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four
winds, and not to his posterity: Graserus here answers, that the same
kingdom remained still; for that which is divided, is not destroyed or
dissolved, page 43. If this were a good answer, the 4. Monarchies described by
the image, c. 2. should be all one: for they made all but one general body
set forth by that image, one succeeding another, as the parts and members of
the body do one depend upon another.

Argum. 5. The 4. beast was unlike to all the rest, it had iron teeth, it was
more fierce and terrible then the former, but so was not the kingdom of the
Seleucians more terrible to the world, then the three former of the Chaldeans,
Persians, Alexander: it cannot therefore be taken for that kingdom, p. 50. And
whereas Iunius well observes, that these beasts are described respectively, as
they were toward the people of God, unto whom the Seleucians were more cruel,
then any of the other Monarchies: Graserus would thus remove this answer:

1. The beasts c. 7. are not more strictly to be taken, then the parts of the
image, cap. 2. but there they are described generally by the defferent
qualities of gold, silver, brass, iron, one being thus compared to an other.
2. Daniel in particular shows, in the description of the little horn,
wherein this beast should be more terrible to the people of God, then the
other: so that in so general a description it had been superfluous to
insinuate the same. 3. If these visions had specially concerned the people of
God, the Prophet would have penned his prophecy in the Hebrewe, not in the
Chalde tongue, Graser. p. 52. 53.

Answ. 1. In the vision of the image, the four Monarchies are compared
together by those different qualities of the four metals, yet with relation
unto the people of God: toward whom the first Monarchy in general was as
gold, the second as silver, to the rest, see quest. 45. c. 2. 2. though in
particular that little horn were more cruel to the people of God, then the
other horns, yet generally also the fourth beast, was more savage unto Gods
people, then the precedent Monarchies: therefore in this description there is
no superfluous iteration: and yet it is not denied, but that typically this
fourth beast may shadow forth the Monarchy of the Romans: because c. 7. 23.
it is said to devour the whole earth, and the Evangelist S. John, Apocal. 13.
in the description of the Roman Empire, which is likened to a beast with 7.
heads, and ten horns, has reference to this vision.

3. This book is written in Chalde, because when Daniel wrote he was in
Chalde, where these things were showed and done: and therefore for the more
credit of the story, it is written in the Chalde. And beside it was requisite
that the Chaldeans should understand what was to befall them in time to come,
how their Monarchy should be subverted for their pride and oppression, that
hereby they might be admonished to be more equal toward the people of God: see
more hereof in the general observations premised, concerning the diverse
readings used in this book.

Argum. 6. This fourth beast is set forth to have iron teeth, it devoured, and
brake in pieces, and stamped the rest under the feet: this description agrees
not unto the kingdom of the Seleucians, or Antiochians. 1. for they did not
not stamp the rest under their feet: they were rather stamped upon and trodden
under feet by the Romans; who triumphed over Antiochus the great, who far
exceeded in power his son Antiochus Epiphanes, p. 58. 2. and if this be
referred to the violence offered to religion, for the which Antiochus did
grievously torment diverse: others did the like before, as Nebuchadnezzar by
setting up a golden image would have drawn them from their religion, p. 56. 3.
neither did Antiochus so prevail against the Jews: for in the end they
resisted him, and restored religion, and settled the state of the commonwealth,
p. 62.

Answ. 1. This their stamping and treading under feet, is especially meant of
the oppression of the people of God: although Antiochus also did more hurt and
damage unto Egypt, then any of his fathers before him, c. 11. v. 24. 2. though
Nebuchadnezzar commanded his golden image to be worshipped, yet that was but
one special act in a particular place: he did not cause a general reuolting
from religion, not yet profaned and polluted the Sanctuary, which things
Antiochus did. 3. In the end Antiochus tyranny was stayed by the valiant
resistance of the Macchabees, (as there is no tyrannical government
perpetual) but yet, while he had his time, he did much mischief, and
tyrannized more cruelly then ever any had done before.

Argum. 7. Iunius interprets the 10. horns of the fourth beast, c. 7. to be
the ten kings of Syria, among whom two kings of Egypt must be counted,
Ptolome Euergetes, and Ptolome Philopator, who subdued Syria, and so Antiochus
Epiphanes was the 10. from Seleucus Nicanor. Against this interpretation,
Graserus thus obiecteth: 1. that if these ten horns were ten kings, whose
particular history is described, c. 11. why should there be more then 10.
kings there spoken of: there are 14. kings of the North and South at the least
there pointed at. 2. there is no reason, if any of the Egyptian kings shoud be
numbered among the Seleucians, that the first Ptolome the son of Lagus should
be omitted, that twice subdued Syria, p. 66. 3. Iunius himself excludes
Seleucus Nicanor in that prophecy, c. 11. 5. by one of his Princes
understanding Philopator the son of Ptolome Lagi: whereas the pronoune has
relation unto Alexander, and by one of his Princes, is understood Seleucus one
of Alexanders Princes, page 68.

Answ. 1. True it is, that the history of 14. kings is abridged c. 11. 6. of
the South, and 8. of the North: but the other are prophesied of for the more
evidence of the history: and in that prophecy the Angel does not only
entreat of the ten horns of the beast, which came out of the kingdom of
the North, but expounds the first vision of the two legs of the image,
showing how they knocked and beat one upon an other. 2. Graserus himself
gives the reason, why Ptolome Lagi is not counted among the rulers of Syria,
because he then subdued Syria, quando Seleucus de eius possessione ne cogitare
audebat, etc. when Seleucus as yet durst not so much as think of possessing
that kingdom, p. 69. the kingdom of the Seleucians then was not yet begun,
when Ptolome subdued Syria, and therefore the other two rather are counted in
the number of the Syrian horns and kings then he, namely Euergetes and
Philopator, who subdued Syria after the Seleucians were confirmed and settled in
their kingdom: and because special mention is made of the victory and
conquest of these two against the kings of the North; of Euergetes, c. 11. 8.
of Philopator, v. 11. 3. Iunius is deceived, in understanding these words, one
of his Princes, of Ptolome Philopator, rather then of Seleucus Nicanor: as is
further showed, c. 11. quest. 18. and we confess with Graserus, Iunium
interdum dormitare; that Iunius and his followers may sometime be a sleep, and
be deceived, p. 70. for no man's judgment is so perfect, to be followed in
every thing: yet this is no let but that his former exposition of the ten
horns, may very well stand.

Argum. 8. Further Graserus thus obiecteth against these ten horns thus
interpreted, and the little horn coming up among them understood to be
Antiochus: 1. These ten horns of the beast must come up at one time, for how
can it be called a ten horned beast, if one should come up after an other?
and the little horn is said to come up among them, therefore they came up
together. 2. the little horn shall rise up after the ten, c. 7. 24. it was
then the eleventh rather then the tenth. p. 73. 3. The kingdom of the beast
ends with the destruction of this little horn, c. 7. 11. and then the
everlasting kingdom of Christ succeeds: but the kingdom of the Seleucians
ended not in Antiochus: many of that line succeeded afterward: and there was
almost as many ye^^es from Antiochus Epiphanes death unto the coming of
Christ, as there were from Alexanders death unto Antiochus, Graser. p. 74.

Answ. 1. It is not necessary, that these 10. horns should come up all at
once, because the beast is said to have ten horns: like as the beast is
described with seven heads, Apoc. 17. which are interpreted to be 7. kings v.
10. and yet were they not altogether, but five were fallen, one is, and one is
to come, v. 10. this little horn is said to come up among them, that is, it
was one of them: see more hereof, c. 7. quest. 26. in the end.

2. The little horn is said to come up after them, that is the last of them:
as Iunius translateth, post quos exurget postremus, after the which it shall
rise up last, c. 7. 24. as the word acharan, signifies both an other, and the
last, so it was the tenth in number, and in some sort the eleventh also, as
much differing from the rest: see c. 7. 29. 2.

3. The beast is said to be slain, when the little horn was destroyed, not
because then the kingdom of the Seleucians was utterly extinguished: but the
power and glory thereof began more and more to be abated after Antiochus,
until it was taken from the Seleucians, and given to Tigranes king of Armenia,
and last of all dissolved by the Romans. This translating of the kingdom from
the house of the Seleucians unto Tigranes, happened about 80. years after
Antiochus death: and about 80. years after this translating of the kingdom
was our Blessed Savior borne: see before, c. 7. qu. 38.

Argum. 9. And that Antiochus Epiphanes cannot be the little horn spoken of,
Graserus thus argues: 1. it is called a little horn: but Antiochus Epiphanes
could not be said to be little, being son unto Antiochus the great, though
he had an elder brother, page 76. 2. the show of this little horn in the end
was greater, then of his fellows: but Antiochus Epiphanes was not greater then
his father called Antiochus the great. 3. this little horn had a mouth, that
spoke words, not against the most high, as the most interpreters read: but ex
part al^issimi, letzad, on the part of the Almighty: as Vatablus, Pagnin, and
Montanus: Thus did not Antiochus: But it must be referred to him, qui impietati
suae Dei nomen praetendet, which shall pretend the name of God in all his
impiety, Graserus page 80.

Answ. 1. Antiochus Epiphanes, is said to be that little horn, because he was
the younger son, and so not borne unto the kingdom, and his elder brother
had a son Demetrius: so that Antiochus Epiphanes was an usurper of the
kingdom.

2. Antiochus Epiphanes was not simply greater then his father, but he carried
himself more stoutly and proudly against the people of God, then any of his
predecessors: and he also practiced against Egypt, and did them more hurt then
any of his predecessors: as it is said, Dan. 11. 24. he shall do that (namely
to Egypt) which his fathers have not done, not his fathers fathers: these words
being so manifest, I wonder that Graserus so much forgets himself thus to
write, constat parentem Antiochum non minores yes contra Egyptum gessisse, it
is evident that Antiochus his father did attempt no less matters aganst Egypt.

3. That word letzad, signifies not on the part, but rather against the part
of the most high: as let ziddim is used, Judge. 2. 3. thorns against their
sides: and that this is the meaning, that he shall speak words against the
most high, is evident, c. 7. v. 8. where he is said to have a month speaking
presumptuous things: and c. 11. 36. he shall speak marvelous things against
the most high.

Argum. 10. Further he thus obiecteth: 1. this little horn pulled away three
other before it: this can not be showed of Antiochus: Iunius understands,
that he removed Philopator, who had overcome Antiochus his father: but yet he
continued king of Egypt still, his horn then was not broken: an other of these
horns pulled away, he says was Seleucus, his elder brother, whose death he
procured: but the text says contrary, that he entered peaceably, c. 11. 21.
Demetrius Seleucus son was the third: but neither can it be showed, that
Antiochus caused him to be killed, neither was he any of the ten horns, he was
not king before Antiochus: these three horns then, are rather three kingdoms,
which this little horn should surprise. p. 84.

2. Iunius by a time, two times, and a part, understands the term of 3.
years and 10. days, during which the profanation of the Sanctuary continued:
But then the spirit of God had of purpose wrapped up a manifest history in
obscure terms: and the word here used signifies rather half, then a part of
time: this prophetical prediction of a time, two times, and an half, is in
the Apocalypse applied to signify the whole time of the persecution of the
Church under Antichrist: which is set forth by such obscure terms, to the
end that the time of Christ's coming, which should immediately follow after
that term ended, be not known. Graser. p. 86.

Ans. 1. Though Philopators horn, that is, government in Egypt, were not
pulled away, yet his power and dominion over Syria was removed by Antiochus
Epiphanes, and so his horn there was broken. And although Antiochus entered
peaceably by flattery, yet he might secretly contriue the death of Seleucus
his elder brother, as he did: and the third horn plucked up before him, was
not Demetrius, but rather Antiochus his father, whom he procured to be slain
in a certain sedition: see before c. 7. qu. 28. in the end.

2. The time of profaning the Temple is expressed in prophetical terms, as
other prophesies are, not with affected obscurity, but to the end that they
might be held in suspense, until they saw the accomplishment thereof: the word
pelag used c. 7. 25. and chatz, c. 11. 7. signifies, not only an half, but a
part of time: see before c. 12. qu. 19. in the end. In the Apocalypse there is
an allusion to this time: but the historical accomplishment was before the
first coming of Christ.

Argum. 11. Whereas Iunius understands, c. 7. 11. by the slaying of the
beast, the death of Antiochus, by the destruction of his body, the extirpation
and rooting out of his family, and by giving it to the burning fire, the
torments which he endured being alive: Graserus thus obiecteth: 1. That S.
Paul refers this to the destruction of Antichrist, which he sets forth in
three degrees: the revealing or detecting of that wicked man; the consuming of
him by the spirit of Christ's mouth; and his utter abolishing with the brightness
of his coming: and he understands not the first coming of Christ in the
flesh, as Iunius, but his glorious coming to judgment, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
Graser. p. 89.

2. Whereas Iunius thinks the little horn described in the vision in the 7.
c. and in the 8. c. to be the same: Graserus thinks that the little horn
spoken of in the 7. signifies Mahomet, and the little horn in the 8. the
Pope. p. 92.

3. Whereas Iunius thinks that the history of this little horn is more
fully described in the end of the 11. chapter these reasons are against it: 1.
because no mention is made in the 11. chapter of the ten horns, nor of the three
horns taken away before the little horn. 2. nor of the eyes and mouth of the
little horn. 3. and his end is far diverse: for c. 7. his body is destroyed
and given to the burning fire: but in the 11. chap. he is described dying by
some fatal disease, as being forsaken of his friends. p. 98.

Ans. 1. S. Paul may in the same phrase of speech set forth the destruction of
Antichrist, whereby Daniel describes the death of Antiochus, and yet not
understand the same thing: As in the Apocalypse the Evangelist in the phrase of
speech alludeth to diverse visions in Ezekiel and Daniel, and yet applies them
to a diverse purpose.

2. The little horn spoken of, c. 7. and c. 8. is the same, as may appear by
the description of it: it is in both places called a little horn, in the 7. it
has a mouth speaking presumptuous things, v. 8. and in the 8. chapter v. 25. he
shall extol himself against the Prince of Princes: Mahomet and the Pope came
too late, to be historically understood by this little horn: for this little
horn must come forth out of one of the four horns, which did rise up in the
place of the great horn (which was Alexander) being broken: But there was no
remainder of Alexanders kingdom long before the rising up of the Mahometane or
Popish sect.

3. It is not necessary, because the particular history of the little horn
is more at large followed, c. 11. that therefore there should be a rehearsal
of the same things, which were touched before concerning the same horn, but
rather one vision supplieth that, which was omitted in the other: for to what
purpose should the vision be renewed, if the same things in every respect
should be iterated: The four Evangelists do write the same history of the
doings and sayings of Christ; yet some have one thing that is not to be found
in an other. And the diverse relation of the end of Antiochus is no such matter
to insist upon: for the diversity is herein, that chap. 7. the destruction of
the beast, that is, of the kingdom of the Seleucians, is set forth, and in the
11. c. the death of Antiochus, as is before showed at large, c. 7. qu. 38.

Argum. 12. Graserus proceeds to deliver and confirm his own interpretation
of these visions: by the fourth beast he understands the Roman Empire, and
by the two legs of the image, the two parts of the Roman Empire, one in the
East, the other in the West, which was extended in length from one to the other
700. Germane miles: this division began under Augustus and Antonius:
afterward Constantine built new Rome in the East: and these two legs to this
day, are the Turk in the East, and the Pope in the West. p. 99. 100.

Ans. That neither the Roman, nor Turkish Empire is signified by the two
legs of the image, c. 2. nor by the fourth beast, c. 7. is at large showed
before, c. 2. qu. 49. and c. 7. qu. 21. whether I refer the Reader. And
further this evident argument there is thereof, that the toes of the image
being partly of iron, partly of clay, are said to mingle themselves with the
seed of men, they shall join in marriage one with an other, but that band
shall not hold: this was evidently performed, when the kings of the North and
South, were linked in marriage together, as Ptolome Philadelphus gave his
daughter Berenice to Antiochus Theos in marriage, as is prophesied, Dan. 11. 6.
see c. 11. qu. 20. 21. and the king of the North, namely Antiochus Megas, gave
his daughter (to wit) Cleopatra, to wife to Ptolome Epiphanes, c. 11. 17.
Seeing that the Prophet himself expounds the vision, showing, how and of
whom this mingling of seed is to be understood: they weary themselves in
vain, that seek for the accomplishment of this prophecy elsewhere, as
Graserus does in the Papacy, where there has been such combination of
marriages. p. 103. But he can not show how the two legs, the kings of the
North and South, have in the Papacy so joined and combined themselves.

Arg. 13. 1. By the ten horns are rather understood ten kingdoms, then kings,
as Grecia, Macedonia, Asia, Syria, Egyptus, Africa, Hispania, Gallia, Germania,
Illyricum. 2. The little horn signifies Mahomet, called little in respect of
his obscure beginning. 3. The 3. horns plucked up before it are the 3.
kingdoms of Syria, Egypt, Africa, which the Turk invaded. 4. The mouth
speaking proud things, is the new Law of the Turks Alcaron brought in by
Mahomet. p. 109.

Answ. 1. That these visions appertain not unto the Roman or Turkish Empire,
is showed at large, c. 7. quest. 21. whether I desire the Reader to have
recourse: 2. seeing the 10. horns, and the 3. horns which were plucked up
before the little horn, are interpreted by the Angel to be so many kings, not
kingdoms, it is too great boldness to understand them to be kingdoms, not
kings. 3. this little horn must come out of the fourth beast or Monarchy, and
have the power thereof: But Mahomet and the Turk did not spring out of the
Roman Empire, but always did oppose themselves unto it. 4. though Mahomet had
a mouth speaking presumptuous things, it follows not, that he was this little
horn: for not one of the properties, but all must agree unto him, that is
signified by this little horn. 5. Graserus himself conesseth, spiritum
sanctum in hac visione Antiochi historiam tractare, that the holy spirit does
in this vision handle the story of Antiochus, but yet so, as that he makes
him a pattern to describe and proportion our Antichrist by, p. 91. If then
this prophecy were historically fulfilled in Antiochus, it is not properly
referred to any other, but only typically and by way of analogy, which we do
not deny.

Argum. 14. These visions showed unto Daniel concern the last times toward the
end of the world, as 1. appears by the phrase of speech, which the Prophet
uses: as c. 8. 17. in the last time shall be the vision: v. 19. I will show
thee, what shall be in the last wrath: but the wr^th which Antiochus showed
against the people of God, was not the last: p. 103. and v. 26. it shall be for
many days: p. 115. and c. 10. 1. the time appointed is long. 2. The Prophet
Isai speaking of the reiection of the Jews, and calling of the Gentiles says,
c. 29. 17. Yet a little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into Carmel, etc. this
was above 500. years before the coming of Christ: if the space of 500. years
be counted but a little time, how then can half that time be counted long,
from the time of this prophecy to the destruction of the Temple by Antiochus?
Graser. p. 119. 3. The Prophet himself makes evident mention in these
prophesies of the second coming of Christ to judgment, as c. 2. he speaks
of the cutting out of the stone without hands, whereby is signified the
suddennes of Christ's second coming: and c. 7. of the setting up of the
thrones, and of the coming of the Son of man in the clouds: and c. 12.
evident mention is made of the resurrection of the dead. p. 121. 4. The Prophet
is bid to seal up the vision, because it was for many days, c. 7. 26. as for
the same reason John is bid not to seal up the words, because the time was at
hand, Apoc. 22. 10. p. 122. 5. And that Daniels prophecy concerns the last
times, may be thus gathered: Apoc. 10. 7. there it is said, The mystery of God
shall be finished, as he has declared to his servants the Prophets: of these
Prophets Daniel was one, therefore to him was declared this mystery,
concerning the final destruction of Antichrist. p. 123.

Ans. 1. The words, in the time of the end (shall be) the vision, are well
interpreted by Iunius in the time defined or determined: legneth ketz, at the
end of time, signifies the same, that lemoghed ketz, the appointed time of
the end: so likewise v. 19. the words are, what shall be in the last of this
wrath, not in the last wrath: for the word acharith is a substantive, and
signifies the extremity and end of this wrath; which should be showed by
Antiochus. 2. Time is said to be long and short in respect of the subject, and
matter in hand: so that the same continuance of time may be said to be long in
one respect, which is counted short in an other. The Prophet Isai counted but a
short time unto the coming of Christ, in regard of the continuance of the
Church of Christ afterward: and so all the time after the first coming of
Christ in the flesh, is but short in comparison of his everlasting kingdom.
This notwithstanding, this term of 300. years, from Daniels time until
Antiochus, may be counted long, in respect of the present state of the Jews
Commonwealth, which was not to continue long. So the servant, whose ear was
boared through, is said to serve his master for ever, Exodus 21. 6. namely unto
the year of Iubile, which might take up the whole term of his life. 3. That
neither in this place, c. 2. nor in the other prophecy, c. 7. the second
coming of Christ to judgment is described: see before at large, c. 2. qu. 55.
c. 7. qu. 31. and to what purpose also mention is made of the resurrection of
the dead, c. 12. see further handled, c. 12. qu. 7. qu. 8. 4. John is willed
not to seal up the prophecy, because part thereof was presently to take
effect: but Daniel is bid to seal up his, because yet 300. years should
expire, before the prophecy should take place. 5. The Prophets, which are
there spoken of, might be the Apostles, as S. Paul among the rest, to whom the
mystery of iniquity was revealed: and the old Prophets also prophesied of
the last times, which also was revealed to Daniel: but hereof it follows not,
that therefore Daniel in these visions specially prophesies of the great
Antichrist: whom notwithstanding typically we grant he describes under this
prophetical prediction of Antiochus.

The second Exercise.
In this second part Graserus takes upon him to prove, that in the 11. chapt.
from v. 36. the history of Antichrist is set down, and not of Antiochus,
whose acts and doings were treated of before: and this difference he makes
between the prophecy in the 8. chapt. and this in the 11. chap. that there
the Prophet speaks of Antiochus and Antichrist jointly together: confuso typo
cum eius antitypo, the type being confounded with that which answers to the
type: but here se^r sim tractat, etc. he handles asunder the history of both:
p. 107. His arguments are these:

Argum. 1. These general reasons he enforces, that this part of the 11. chap.
from v. 36. can not be interpreted of Antiochus.

1. The Prophet uses manifest words of digression from the former history of
Antiochus, v. 35. that^^ is yet an appointed time or period. p. 128.

2. The Prophet had absolved all the acts of Antiochus before, both against
Egypt, and especially his attempts against the people of God, excepting only
that clause concerning his death: when then, and at what time should these
things be done by Antiochus, which are contained in those ten verses following?

3. There is a manifest difference in the phrase: the Prophet uses certain
strange words and terms, which do insinuate some deeper mystery then of
Antiochus. p. 131.

4. And if these exploits were done by Antiochus, they must fall out within the
compass of 2. years: which could not be, unless we will make an other Alexander
of Antiochus. p. 131

5. If all these things were determined in Antiochus, and his doings against
the Jews, it may seem strange, that the Prophet makes no mention of the
restitution of the Temple and religion. p. 132.

6. And if nothing were intended beside the history of Antiochus, the Prophet
would not have counted them such great wonders, as he does, c. 12. 6. p. 132.

Ans. 1. The like words of digression were used before, v. 27. chi ghod ketz
lamoghed, because yet the end (shall be) at the time appointed: Graserus would
make some difference between this form of speech used, v. 27. and the other,
v. 35. but there is none at all, saving that in the former the word ketz is
used, which signifies ( the end) which word must be supplied in the other.

2. The history of Antiochus by his own confession is not complete and
absolved before the 36. verse, because the clause of his death follows last
cf all, v. 45. And these things expressed in the ten last verses, were done in
such order, as is set down, after he had begun to tyrannize and rage against
the Church of God.

3. It is no marvel, that the phrase is somewhat strange and changed, because
he touches more strange acts and practices of Antiochus, then he had done
before.

4. Neither are Antiochus exploits here set down to be compared with
Alexanders acts: for his chief attempts were against the pleasant land and
Egypt, v. 40. 41. 43. which might easily be done in the compass of two years.

5. This reason as well may exclude Antiochus altogether out of this prophecy,
as from the latter part thereof: for it may be as well objected against the
former prophetical narration to v. 36. that no manifest mention is made of the
restitution of the Temple, after the profanation thereof by Antiochus: And yet
this also is insinuated, both v. 34. where it is said, they shall be h^lpen
with a little help: and v. 35. that this persecution should be unto the
appointed time: which was before showed c. 7. 25. a time, two times, and a part
or dividing of time: which makes 3. years and 10. days: for so long the
profanation of the Temple continued.

6. Though all this history be determined in Antiochus, yet might it seem a
great wonder unto Daniel, that God would suffer such a wicked Tyrant so to
prevail, and to defile his Temple in such sort, as it was never profaned
before.

Argum. 2. Graserus further takes upon him to prove, that the 36. v. is not
understood of Antiochus, but properly of the Roman Pope.

1. Hitherto the Prophet having spoken of the kings, Seleucians and Ptolomes,
used the distinct terms of the kings of the South, and the kings of the
North: but here he says absolutely, the king shall do what him list, without
any addition: which name of king agrees unto the Pope, to show a difference
between him and Christ, whose kingdom was not of this world: but the Pope
takes upon him to be a terrene king, nay to be the king of kings. p. 144. 145.

2. And this clause, shall do^ what him lists, agrees not to Antiochus, who
was curbed by the Romans, and was circumscribed by Popilius, drawing a circle
with his rod, and made to return out of Egypt: but it does most fitly agree
unto the Pope, who does all things according to his own will: he boasts
omnia se iura in scrinto pectoris habere, that he has all laws enclosed in
his breast. Graser. p. 152. 153.

Ans. 1. Though in this place, the addition, king of the North, be not
expressed, yet afterward it is supplied: he is called the king of the North,
and the king of Egypt, the king of the South, v. 40. and though the Pope take
upon him the Civil and temporal power, yet directly he names himself not a
king: but he challenges chiefly to be head in spiritual matters.

2. And though it be most true, that the Pope holds himself tied to no law,
but does what he list; yet it follows not, that every king that does what him
list, should be here signified: for so did also Caligula and Nero, and other
wicked Emperors. Though Antiochus were restrained from Egypt by the Romans,
yet this his unlimited will he followed in his own kingdoms, and specially in
Judea: where he prevailed for a certain time according to his own untoward
and wicked desire: for he abolished true religion, and brought in the rites of
the heathen, abrogatee the laws of God, and burnt the books of Scripture, and
set up an abominable idol in the Temple, and so he ruled all according to his
own will.

Argum. 3. An other note is set forth of Antichrist, that he shall magnify
himself against all that is called God: which is most fitly applied to the
Popes, who only by a certain inherent ambition, have aspired unto such degree
of pride, nec divino aut humano iure, by neither divine or humane right:
although they pretend, but without all show of ground, the prerogative of Peter
given him by Christ, and the donation of Constantine: which allegations, if
they were true, both S. Peter might be condemned of great simplicity, and all
the Bishops of Rome for a 1000. years, until the time of Gregory the 7. and
Boniface the 8. who never took upon them this princely prerogative. Graser. p.
155, 156. But Antiochus succeeded in the kingdom by descent from his father,
and so held the kingdom by right of succession.

Ans. 1. We deny not but that Antiochus was herein an evident type of
Antichrist, as S. Paul prophesies of him, that he shall exalt himself above
all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. but literally this is understood of
Antiochus: as is evident by comparing this place with c. 8. 11. where he which
thus extolleth himself against the Prince of the host, that is, God, is said
also to take away the daily sacrifice, and to cast down the Sanctuary, which
things were so fulfilled and came to pass under Antiochus. 2. Though Antiochus
was rightly descended of Antiochus the great, and so under that title possessed
the kingdom; yet to that height of pride, in exalting himself against God,
his Temple, sacrifices, and laws, and so trampling under feet all divine
things, he had no show neither of divine nor humane right: as neither has that
Roman Antichrist. See c. 11. qu. 43.

Argum. 4. Further, he shall speak marvelous things against the God of gods:
which most properly fitteth the Roman Antichrist, both in respect of his
marvelous and strange doctrine, which he has brought in, full of curious
questions, and school divinity: in which sense he is said to understand dark
sentences, c. 8. 23. p. 163. and beside his sophisticate doctrine, this may be
applied also to that counterfeit service which he has brought into the Church,
only feeding the eye and ear, bewitching the senses, with superstitious
objects of images, and such like: p. 165. add hereunto his sophisticate and
cousening miracles, p. 166. and the snaring and entangling of men's consciences,
with auricular confession, his penal injunctions, works of satisfaction, and
such other: All these things most truly are verified in the Pope: But to
Antiochus they agree not, who either had no knowledge at all of this great God,
or he spoke rather open blasphemy, then marvelous things against him: p. 167.

Answ. 1. We deny not, but that all these things given in instance, are most
lively and evidently verified in the Pope: but yet this prophecy is rather
thus typically accommodated to him, then literally spoken of him. 2. And this
prophecy was verily accomplished in Antiochus, who in respect of his subtlety
and cunning, his fetches and devises, in compassing his purposes, is said to
understand dark sentences: though he had no true knowledge of God, he might
blaspheme him so much the more: for if he had known him, he would not have
blasphemed him: and what else are blasphemies, but wonderful and strange things
uttered: the same which are here called niplaoth, marvelous, wonderful things,
are said to be rabhreban, presumptuous things, c. 7. 8. in a Chalde word. 3.
But Graserus would have that place understood of Mahomet, this of the Pope: p.
168. whereas it appears, by the description of the little horn, both c. 7.
and 8. and the properties, that in both places the same enemy is discovered by
the Prophet.

Argum. 5. 1. It follows, it shall prosper, till the wrath be accomplished,
etc. The long prosperity, which here the Prophet speaks of, better agrees
unto the Pope of Rome, then unto Antiochus: he uses here the word tzalach, to
prosper, which thrice before is inserted in the prophecy, c. 8. 12. 24, 25. In
setting down the prosperous success of Alexander, the Prophet uses not this
word: so that he speaks of a longer prosperity then Alexander had, which is
not seen in Antiochus. p. 173. 2. Neither need this limitation be added, the
determination is made, if Antiochus only were here meant: for his prosperous
success must needs determine with his life. p. 180. 3. Therefore it is most
fitly referred unto the perpetual prosperous success of the Popes, who for
six hundred years together have so wonderfully prevailed and prospered, that
they only have not deluded the world, to receive their pretended title of
their supreme Vicarship in earth; but have by the aid and help of temporal
Princes enlarged their kingdom, and triumphed over those that set themselves
against them. p. 176. to 178.

Ans. 1. In that this very word of prospering is used in the former vision, c.
8. where evident mention is made of taking away the daily sacrifice, and
casting down the Sanctuary, it is manifest, that these things were fulfilled,
the Jews Temple and Sanctuary yet standing. And the reason why Alexander is
not said so to prosper, is, because he attempted no such things against the
Jews, neither so prospered in any devise against them. 2. Though Antiochus
prosperous prevailing in these his enterprises could not exceed the term of
his life, yet it was requisite, that the Church of God should be comforted,
understanding that this success against the Church of God should be but for a
time. And indeed this his prosperity ceased before his death, at the
appointed time: before likewise v. 35. which Graserus confesses to be
understood of Antiochus, the like phrase is used: there is an appointed time,
that it need not seem strange, the like clause to be added here.

Exercise 3.
Wherein Graserus out of the 37. and 38. v. goes about to prove, this
prophecy literally and historically to be understood of the Roman Antichrist,
and not of Antiochus.

Argum. 1. He shall not regard the God of his fathers. 1. This was not true of
Antiochus, for he set up the idols of Iuppiter Olympius, and Iuppiter Xenius,
or Hospitalis, and caused them to be worshipped, which were the idols of the
Grecians. p. 183. 2. But this is performed by the Pope, for he regards not
Christ the God, whom the Apostles worshipped, whose successor he boasts to
be: he is not said to deny or abjure him, but not to regard him. Aben Ezra
maliciously here understands Constantine, who did for sake the idols which
his fathers adored, when he embraced the Christian faith. But he is said here
not absolutely to reject the God of his fathers, he only shall not have due
respect unto him: And the Romanists can not wipe away this imputation from the
Pope, though he often make mention of Christ in all his edicts and bulls: he
may notwithstanding, and in truth does, little regard him: not so much opposing
himself to his person, as impugning his offices: both regal, in arrogating
unto himself power over heaven, earth, and hell, p. 185. and priestly, in
setting up an other propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass, in making other
Mediators: his Prophetical, in detracting from the authority of the
Scriptures, making them imperfect, and adding thereunto traditions, which they
are not afraid to call (the word of God unwritten,) and the Pope reserueth unto
himself power to interpret Scripture, as he list. And thus he derogateth both
from Christ's kingdom, priesthood, prophecy, and so regards not his fathers
God. p. 186. to 190.

Answ. 1. Antiochus did diuersely depart from his fathers Gods. 1. those idols
of the Grecians, were new gods among the Syrians, whom he made to forsake their
own laws and rites, to receive his new idols, 1. Macchab. 1. 43. 2.
Macchab. 2. 3. 2. he cared not in effect for the idols of the heathen,
otherwise then they were for his profit and advantage: for he would have robbed
the Temple at Persepolis, 2. Macchab. 9. 2. 3. whereas some of his predecessors
had great respect unto the Temple at Jerusalem, giving unto it great gifts, as
namely Seleucus and Antiochus the great, as it showed, c. 11. quest. 44. he
robbed, spoiled, defaced, and polluted it.

2. All these things are also typically verified in the Roman Antichrist, as
further has been declared, c. 11. controu. 21. he many ways is departed from
the faith and doctrine of the Apostles, and ancient fathers of the Church: and
in effect uses the name of Christ but for his own gain and advantage: but
yet the historical application of this prophecy belongs unto Antiochus.

Argum. 2. An other note is, that he shall not regard the desires of women: the
word chemedath, here signifies the lawful desire and love of women, which is
in matrimony: not that he should utterly condemn marriage, but not give it
that reverence, which is due unto it. This fitly ageeth unto the Bishop of
Rome, who although he make matrimony a Sacrament, yet he holds it a
profanation of orders, and therefore forbids any of his Clergy to marry:
And in that the natural and lawful desire and affection of women is not
regarded, 2 way is given unto unnatural lust to that filthy sin of
Sodomitrie, and to other kinds of unnatural concupisence, as of adultery,
fornication, p. 196. 197. 2. But to Antiochus it cannot be referred, who was
married and had children, whom he was careful of, as appears 2. Machab. 9.
what though he might be unkind unto his wife or wives, that was not a matter of
such note, that it should be specially touched in this prophecy. Graser. p.
200.

Answ. 1. All this (we grant typically and analogically) is fitly urged
against that Antichrist of Rome, who allows his Clergy rather to commit
fornication, then to be lawfully married: as has been at large declared
before, c. 11. controv. 22. 2. But properly Antiochus is here decyphered, who
being an idolater, and so polluted with spiritual fornication, was also no
doubt an unclean person of life: and though he were married, yet he might be,
and was carried away with vagrant, wandering, and inordinate lust: see more
hereof, c. 11. quest. 45.

Argum. 3. 1. The next note is, he shall not care for any God: which Graserus
thus expounds: that he shall acknowledge no power or majesty in earth: and
this word eloah he understands of the Civil magistrate, for as before the
Prophet showed, how he should carry himself in the Ecclesiastical, and
Oeconomical estate, neither caring for the God of his fathers, nor for the
desire of women: so now it follows how he should use the civil state; not
regarding them, or giving them due reverence: he should not utterly take away
magistracy or government, but he should make no great reckoning or account
thereof: Thus have the Popes done, both challenging unto themselves power to
command Emperors, and kings, to translate the Empire, and accordingly they have
made kings to hold their stirrup, to lead their horse by the bridle: This great
power, Augustine de Ancona, who lived under Pope John the 22. ascribes to the
Pope, thus writing, Papa habet omnem Regalem, Imperialem, and Sacerdotalem
potestatem in toto mundo, quia cosecratur quemadmodum sacerdos, coronatur vt
Rex, etc. the Pope has all Regal, Imperial, and Priestly power in the whole
world: for he is consecrated as a Priest, and crowned as a king, etc. 2. But
Antiochus was so far from depressing and despising Magistrates, and the
Civil power, that one captain of the Romans with a message from Rome
terrified him, and made him give way: yea, and the Macchabees, being of no
great power, resisted him. Graser. p. 205.

Ans. 1. That the Pope is a despiser of the Civil government, and has
despightfully and disdainfully used both Emperors, kings, and Princes, it is
evident to all the world, wherein he does manifestly detect himself to be
Antichrist: according to S. Iudes description, v. 8. That they shall despise
government, and speak evil of them that are in authority. 2. Yet hereby is
it not euicted, that this is the proper and literal meaning of this place: for
though elohim in the plural, be in Scripture applied to Princes and rulers, yet
eloah in the singular is seldom found in that sense; but is better interpreted
(God.) 3. And so indeed Antiochus cared for no God, but was lift up in pride
beyond the condition of man, as though he could command the floods, and weigh
the mountains in a balance, 2. Macchab. 2. 9. And yet in the other sense it
was also true, that Antiochus, though he were kept in awe by the Romans, yet
he made no account of the gouerners and Elders among the Jews: (toward whom
the greatest respect is had in this prophetical description of Antichrist) for
he put them to the sword, as common and vile persons: as is touched, 1. Macch.
1. 27. The Princes and Elders mourned, etc.

The fourth Exercise.
Wherein the idolatry of this Antichrist is described, as it is set fourth in
the 38. v. which Graserus contendeth by diverse reasons to be understood of the
Roman Antichrist, and not of Antiochus.

Argum. 1. It is said, that in his stead he shall honor the God Mauzzim, that
is, as Graserus interprets, basilicarum Deum, the God of Temples: for so
before, v. 31. the Sanctuary is called mahoz, of the strength: and Ezceh. 24.
25. the same word is used, where the Prophet says, shall it not be in the day,
when I take from them their strength, the joy of their heart, the pleasure of
their eyes, etc.

2. Thus the Romanists have set up a new God, the God of their Temples, which
they consecrate unto several Saints, as several gods: making vows unto a
Saint of such or such a place, and going in pilgrimage unto them: to this end
they hollow Churches, consecrate Altars, as tying the divine worship unto such
places: whereas Christ has left his worship free for all places, not limiting
it to Jerusalem, or any other place, but every where God is worshipped in
spirit and truth. Graser. p. 317. to 319. And thus they set up in Christ's place
and stead their Temple gods, and that strange idol of the Mass, which all they
say tend unto the honor of Christ: they might as well say that the abominable
idols which Antiochus set up in the Sanctuary, tended also unto the honor of
God, p. 239.

3. Graserus after this, enters to confute Iunius translation of this place,
who thus reads: as for the God of strength, in his seat he shall honor; be
shall honor (I say) a God, whom his fathers knew not with gold and silver:
against which interpretation Graserus produces these reasons.

1. It cannot be showed in Scripture, where God is called, eelohe mauzzim, the
God of strength or munitions, without any other addition, but either the God of
my strength or refuge, or for my refuge, or the rock of my refuge, and in the
Psalms and deprecations made unto God, not in prophetical predictions.

2. In the second clause, he translateth leeloah God, why then in the first
clause should it be interpreted, as for the God: if the the word cabadh, to
honor, usually admit not this construction with the preposition lamed, it must
be considered, that the Prophet speaks of no usual, but of a strange matter:
and yet, as Graserus well observes out of Iunius Grammar, this preposition is
often set before such words, as are governed of verbes, which signify, study,
desire, attributing of any thing, as here in this place.

3. The conjunction van, veleeloah, shows that there the second clause
begins, and must be read distinctly from the first.

4. If we should not read thus, and the god Mauzzim shall be honor in his
place: but thus, as for the God Mauzzim, and make a pause there, the sentence
should be imperfect.

5. The general consent of interpreters, which take Mauzzim here for the name
of an idol: and the Rabbines some understand here Mars, some Margolith the God
of the Arabians: ought somewhat to move, Graser. p. 246. to 249.

4. Graserus also misliketh Iunius sense, who applies this unto Antiochus, who
set up the image of Iuppiter Olympius in the Temple of God: because (says
Graserus) this had been no such strange thing for an idolater to magnify his
idols, and to worship them with silver and gold, p. 249.

Answ. 1. The word Mauzzim here rather signifies holds and munitions, then
temples, as the word is taken, v. 19. he shall set his face against the fortes
of the land: and so is the word also taken, v. 31. as is showed before, c. 11.
quest. 39. for it cannot be read thus in construction, to be joined to the
former word, Sanctuary of strength, because each word has the article h^
prefixed, as Graserus notes: nor yet, by way of apposition, the Sanctuary
(that is) the strength, as Graserus would have it: for the word Mahoz is not
taken for the temple: But in this 31. v. Antiochus assault is described both
against the Sanctuary, and the munition, that is the city: so the word Mahoz
is taken for a rock or fort, Iud. 6. 26. and in that place of Ezekiel it also
signifies strength.

2. It is most true, that the Romanists have erected unto themselves many
temple gods, and typically this prophecy may be applied unto their Pope, the
very Antichrist, see c. 11. contr. 24. But this prophecy literally
decyphereth Antiochus, as has been proved at large, c. 11. quest. 43.
whether I send the Reader.

3. Iunius interpretation is here refused by Graserus upon very good ground:
so also before, c. 11. quest. 9. upon these and other reasons it is misliked:
though Iunius may in some particular interpretations be deceived, yet in
general his relation here in this prophecy unto Antiochus is not therefore to
be rejected.

4. It was no very strange thing, that Antiochus should set up idolatry,
being a professed idolater: but it was to be wondered at, that he should set up
such an abominable idol in the Temple of God: that the Lord for the sin of
his people would suffer his own Sanctuary to be defiled.

Argum. 2. The god whom his fathers knew not. 1. This cannot be understood of
Antiochus, for he set up no such strange god whom his fathers knew not: if
they say this was Iuppiter Xenius, that keeps hospitality and entertaineth
strangers, which was set up in Garizim among the Samaritanes, 2. Macchab. 6. 2.
neither was this a strange god, though worshipped of strangers, neither set up
in the Temple of Jerusalem, as this idol must be honored in the place of God:
if they will have it to be Iuppiter Olympius, neither was this god unknown to
his fathers; for Seleucus the founder of the family of the Seleucians, did
sacrifice unto Iuppiter at Pella, being to set forward with Alexander, where
Pausanias writes, lib. 1. that the wood prepared for the altar came of it own
accord unto the image of Jupiter, and burnt of it self no fire being put
under, Graser. p. 252.

2. But this strange god, is indeed that new devised and vpstart idol of the
Mass, with the superstitious inventions of transubstantiation, sacrifice for
the quick and the dead, purgatory fire, indulgences, and such like: for
although the use of the Lords Supper were known and practiced in the Church
even since the Apostles time, yet this idolatrous sacrifice, was not once
thought of, p. 254. 255.

Answ. 1. This strange god might very well be Iuppiter Olympius, who though he
might be worshipped by Seleucus a Grecian (though that fabulous report of
Pausanias prove it not) yet the immediate predecessors of this Antiochus
being kings of Syria, by all likelihood worshipped the country gods and idols
of Syria; so that Iuppiter Olympius the idol of the Greeks, might seem in
that behalf a strange god: and beside it is so called, because never any of
his ancestors did offer or attempt to set up such an idol before in the holy
Temple of God: see before c. 11. quest. 46. in the end.

2. That this prophecy notwithstanding is most fi^ly by way of analogy and
typically applied unto the strange idol of the Popish Mass, we do willingly
grant: as is showed before, c. 11. controv. 24.

Argum.3. It follows, he shall honor this strange God, with gold and silver,
and precious stones. 1. This is most true that the Romanists do in most costly
manner set forth their new breaden god, which they adore in the Mass; As the
whore is thus described, Apocal. 17. 14. arrayed in purple, scarlet, with gold,
precious stones, and prarles, etc. 2. But concerning Antiochus, he was more
ready to spoil the temples of the idols of their treasury, as he would have
done at Persepolis, 2. Macchab. 2. 9. then to bestow any such costly gifts
upon them: which if he had done, it had been no such strange thing for
idolaters to be prodigal and excessive in bestowing cost upon their idols, p.
257. 258.

Answ. 1. It is also confessed that herein Antiochus king of the North, was a
true type of the Roman Northern Antichrist, who spares for no cost to set
forth and adorn his new found idol: as is proved before c. 11. contr. 25.
But still we affirm that Antiochus is here historically described. 2. Though
Antiochus might at some time spoil the Temples of idols of other nations, it
follows not but that he might be very sumptuous in garnishing his own idols:
as the Romans did spoil the temples of other nations, as at Athens, and other
places, to garnish their own at home: So in like manner, Antiochus that had
robbed and spoiled the Temple at Jerusalem, afterward purposed if he had lived,
to have bestowed as great gifts upon it, as he had taken from it, 2. Macchab.
9. 16. his mind then might change toward his own idols: And though special
mention be not made in the story of the Macchabees, of his honoring this new
idol with gold and silver, yet so much may be gathered, that he spared for no
cost, because he commanded altars to be builded throughout the cities of Judah,
on every side: and before the doors and in the streets they offered incense,
1. Macchab. 1. 58.

The fifth Exercise.
Wherein the 39. verse is interpreted, which Graserus also remooueth from
Antiochus, and applies to the Roman Antichrist by these reasons:

Argum. 1. The first part of the verse he reads thus: he shall make the
munitions of the (God) of the Temples, with this strange God: and whom he
likes he shall increase with honor, etc. this he shows practiced among the
Romanists: for all the strength of the Roman Church consists in the defense
of this idol of the Mass; their Churches, Monasteries, Abbeyes, so many orders
of religions are sounded upon this idol, p. 272, 273. And those whom he finds
pliable to his purpose, and maintainers of this idol, he aduanceth, he makes
them Cardinals, Abbots, and such like: So the Pope magnifieth his Clergy,
enlarges and increases them, in so much that in some countries beyond the
Alps, the Clergy takes up the third part, in some the half part of the
whole multitude, p. 280.

2. But of Antiochus Graserus thinks this prophecy is not uttered, how he
should set up his strange god in the fortes and strong places, and favor those
which received his idol, and played the Apostataes, but the faithful he
persecuted: for Antiochus persecution was so notorious and evident, that if the
spirit of God should in such obscure terms have spoken thereof, magnam
prophetia suae iniuriam facturus fuisset, he should have offered great wrong to
his prophecy, page 282.

Answ. 1. We answer here, as before, that typically all this may be well
applied to the Roman prelate and Antichrist, as is also showed, c. 11. contr.
26. but the historical application of this prophecy concerns Antiochus, who
fenced his new idol with strong holds and garrisons: as is evident, 1.
Macchab. 1. 35. 36. and has been further declared, cap. 11. quest. 47.

2. Graserus reads not right: for he both leaves the preposition lamed
untranslated, reading, he shall make munitions, whereas the word is lemibtzere,
for munitons: and beside he adds ( God) of the temples or basilikes, which
first word ( God) is not in the original: he justly misliketh Iunius
translation: he shall commit the munitions of the God of strength to a strange
God: that is, shall make his strange idol the protector of Judea, which is
understood by the munitions of God: for the word Mauzzim, as has been showed,
c. 11. quest. 46. 9. is not understood of the true God. As Iunius fails one
way, so Graserus misseth another way in his translation: the meaning is this
then, that he shall make for strong holds places of munition: So Antiochus
caused the tower of Silo to be fortified, and set garrisons there to annoy
those which went up into the Temple, as is before showed.

3. And though Antiochus persecution, were notoriously evident, after it came
to pass, yet it being prophetically described, was after the manner of other
prophesies to be set down somewhat obscurely, that both it might be kept from
the notice of the profane sort, and yet be evident to the faithful, that
would search for the meaning thereof.

Argum. 2. Whereas it follows in this verse, he shall cause them to rule over
many. 1. this is evidently fulfilled by the Roman Antichrist, who gives
dominon and authority unto his followers and favorites, creating them
Cardinals, Prelates, Abbots, making them Princes, Counties, Barons in their
dioceses and seignories. 2. But to Antiochus it cannot well agree, for he
brought not in new titles of dignities into the commonwealth. And if he
bestowed honors upon those which favored his wicked proceedings, that was no
strange thing: for kings and Princes usually do so, Graser. p. 286. 287.

Answ. 1. All this is granted, that the Pope of Rome does wage his pharisaicall
clawebacks, with great honors and dignities, to maintain his crown and
supremacy, which is vpheld with a new kind of idolatry: and herein
Antichrist is typically described under Antiochus, as is at large showed, c.
11. contr. 26. 2. But yet the literal and historical sense will direct us to
Antiochus, who gave honors and dignities, as namely the Priesthood to Jason,
and Menelaus, which were Apostataes from the faith, and furthered his wicked
and ungodly attempts, 2. Macchab. 4. 3. What though it be usual with kings to
reward their favorites: yet this was a rare thing, and never attempted before,
that one should by gifts and rewards pervert the faith of an whole nation, as
Antiochus did: see further, c. 11. quest. 47. in the end.

Argum. 3. Further, he shall divide the land, as with a cord or line, and that
for a reward, or exchange. 1. The Popes jurisdiction extends it self to the
whole earth; it is not limited: yea by his instruments the Spaniards he has
also subdued the Indians and remote parts of the world under his jurisdiction:
And it is memorable, that Alexander the 6. drawing a line in the terrene globe
from pole to pole, made this division between the Castilians and Portugals,
that they should possess all that part of the new found world, which was on
the West, and the other the parts on the East: which division a certain
Castilian objected unto a certain petty king of America, who answered, sibi
non boni Dei, sed diaboli vicarium videri, etc. that he seemed unto him not to
be the vicar of the good God, but of the devil, which gave unto another, that
which he had no right unto himself, p. 290. 291.

2. Neither does the Pope distribute his honors and preferrements for nothing,
but conditionally, and upon a composition, that they which receive any
dignities at his hand, shall be bound by oath unto him, to maintain his
supremacy, and other Papal privileges: and for the more evidence hereof, it
shall not be amiss to set down the oath, which every popish Bishop takes at
his consecration.

Ego N. electus Episcopus N. etc. I such an one being elected Bishop of such a
place, The form of oath which the Popish Bishops make at their consecration to
the Pope.
from this hour, as before, shall be faithful to S. Peter, and to the holy
Apostolic Roman Church, and to our Lord (the Pope) and to his successors
entering canonically: I shall not be in counsel, consent, or fact, that they
shall loose their life or member, or be taken, or violent hands laid upon them,
under any pretended color whatsoever: the counsel, which they shall credit me
withal by themselves, or their messengers, wittingly to their hurt, I shall
not open to any: the papacy of Rome, and reg^lities of S. Peter, I will help
them to maintain and defend against all men (even though it be the king:) the
Legate of the Sea Apostolic going and returning, I will honorably entreat,
and help him with necessaries: the rights, honors, privileges, authorities
of the Church of Rome, and of our Lord the Pope, and of his successors, I will
endeavor to preserve, defend, increase, and promote: neither will I be of
counsel, practice, or treaty, where any sinister thing or prejudicial to
their persons, rights, honors, state, power, is attempted against our Lord the
Pope, or the Roman Church: And if I know such things to be treated of or
procured by any, I will hinder them, as much as I can, and as soon as I can I
will signify the same to the same our Lord (Pope) or to some other, by whom it
may come to his notice: The rules of the holy father, the decrees, sentences,
dispositions, reseruations, provisions, the Apostolic mandates I will observe
with all my power, and procure to be observed of others: they which are rebels
(as all schismatikes and heretics) unto our Lord, or his said successors, I
will to my power persecute, and impugn: Being called to a synod, unless I
be hindered by some cononicall let, I will be present: the Apostles threshhold
(that is, palace or Church) the Court being at Rome, if I be on this side the
mountains, once every year, if beyond, every third year will I visit by my
self or my messenger, unless I be freed by the Apostolic license: the
possessions belonging to my table I will not give, nor lay to pawn, nor let
out to fee farm, though it be with the consent of the Chapter of my Church,
without the priuitie of the Bishop of Rome: As God shall help me and his holy
Gospels, etc.

In which oath this is worthy to be observed, that the Popes Bishops are not
bound by any promise or otherwise, to preach the Gospel of Christ, to feed
his flock, to read and study the Scriptures: but only to be true unto the
Pope, and to maintain the rights and privileges of that Sea: And thus it is
evident, how the Pope of Rome does distribute the honors of the earth, unto
his flatterers by a certain compact and covenant, Graserus. p. 293. 294.

Answ. 1. All this we grant to be most true, that is here alleged, and more
too: that the Pope does not only exact an oath of obedience of his Prelates,
but he does even sell them their prelacies, Cardinalships, Bishoprics,
Abbacies, and other preferments for momoney: as is at large showed, c. 11.
contr. 26.

2. Yet notwithstanding this was historically performed by Antiochus, who
expelled the ancient inhabitants of Judea and Jerusalem out of their
possessions, and parted their lands among strangers, 1. Macchab. 3. 36. the
Priesthood also was sold to Jason first, and then to Menelaus for money, 2.
Macchab. 4. see c. 11. quest 47. in the end.

The sixth Exercise.
Wherein is expounded the 40. verse. which Graserus also contendeth to be
understood of the Roman Antichrist, and not at all of Antiochus, by these
reasons:

Argum. 1. At the end of the time shall the king of the South push at him,
etc. Whereas Iunius understands this literally of the king of Egypt
Philometor, who withstood Antiochus by force, coming to aid his brother
Physcon against him: Graserus thus obiecteth:

1. If Daniel here had meant by the kings of the North and South, the kings of
Syria and Egypt, he would have so expressed them by those names as the other
Prophets do, and not by so general terms, p. 304.

2. This Iunius supposes to have been done in the last year but one of
Antiochus reign; but then he wanting money, took his journey into Persia,
there to gather tribute, 1. Macchab. 3. 39. how then was he able to furnish
himself with such great power to go against Egypt.

3. And seeing he had been discharged out of Egypt before by the Romans,
Popilius being sent unto him, it is not like that he durst attempt and
adventure to go into Egypt again.

4. If Antiochus had lately made such a conquest in Egypt, it is not like when
news was brought him in Persia, how the Jews had prevailed against his
captains; that he would have taken it so to the heart: he might easily have
recovered that loss, p. 307.

5. In the last year but one of his reign, Antiochus went into Persia, which
is quite opposite to Egypt: neither did he send his captains thither: for he
left Lysias with half of his army to invade Judea, neither did he give him
charge concerning Egypt, p. 308.

6. And the king of the North here does not offer battle to the king of the
South, but only defends himself.

7. Justinius lib. 34. says, that after Antiochus was discharged out of Egypt
by the Romans, reuersum in regnum ibi decessisse, relicto filio impubere, he
returned into his kingdom and there died, leaving his young son behind him:
after that discharge then he returned not into Egypt, p. 309.

8. We read but of two expeditions of Antiochus into Egypt, in the second
whereof he was sent out of Egypt by Popilius in the Romans name: he made not a
third expedition, page 303.

Answ. 1. As though throughout this 11. chapter, the kings of Syria and Egypt,
are not continually expressed by the names of the king of the North, and the
king of the South.

2. The journey which Antiochus took into Persia, was after his return out of
Egypt: from the which though he brought great riches and spoils, yet his
treasure was wasted by his exceeding liberality toward his soldiers, which
far passed other kings, that had been before him, for he gave unto his
soldiers a years pay aforehand, 1. Macchab. 4. 28. 30.

3. It is not like he would after that discharge by the Romans, invade Egypt
by way of hostility and conquest: yet as a friend to one of the brethren, to
aid him against the wrongs of his brother, he might although he were
discharged, enter into Egypt, or he might notwithstanding this discharge, yet
after practice again against Egypt.

4. It was so much the more grievous to Antiochus, to be foiled of the Jews,
having overcome the power of Egypt: And Gods hand being then upon Antiochus,
he was stricken with such a fear, that he knew not how to bestirre himself:
but partly of grief of mind, and partly tormented by the stroke of Gods hand,
he upon that occasion ended his days.

5. Neither do we say, that Antiochus made this conquest of Egypt, at that
time, when he went into Persia: but he had spoiled Egypt before: and therefore
he needed not give any charge to his captains concerning Egypt, but only
concerning the Jews.

6. While Antiochus was preparing to come and help Physcon against Philometor,
then Philometor hearing thereof did also provide to resist him: which here is
called pushing at him: and then Antiochus came upon him like a whirlewind: so
both may be true, that first Antiochus made his preparation; but before he gave
the onset, the king of the South first provoked him to battle.

7. Iustins report is in some things imperfect: that Antiochus died presently
after he was charged by the Romans to depart out of Egypt: for after that he
went into Persia, 1. Macchab. 3. 31. Justinius as well may fail also in the
rest: that Antiochus returned no more into Egypt after this discharge by the
Romans: for Florus in his epitome of Liuies history, lib. 46. after that
Antiochus had been thus discharged by Popilius out of Egypt, whereof he makes
mention in his 45. book, writes that the ambassadors of the king of Bythinia
called Prusias, complained of king Eumenes, eum conspirasse cum Anitocho contra
populum Romanum, that he had conspired with Antiochus against the people of
Rome: it seems then, that after this discharge Antiochus practiced secretly
against the Romans.

8. Antiochus made more then two expeditions against Egypt: for evident mention
is made of three before in the 11. chapter, one v. 23. 24. see quest. 33. an
other mentioned, v. 25. see qu. 34. though Iunius take this for the first: the
third v. 29. see quest. 35. And that Antiochus made more then two iourneys into
Egypt, may be proved out of the story of the Macchabees: for that was his
second voyage into Egypt, when in his return he spoiled and robbed the Temple,
wicked Menelaus being his guide, 2. Macchab. 5. 1. 15. which is the same
voyage mentioned, 1. Macchab. 1. for in his return there spoken of he robbed
the Temple, v. 23. But this was not his last voyage: for after this he went
into Egypt, when he was countermaunded by Popilius the Roman Embassador^ as it
may thus appear: Antiochus in this his second return out of Egypt, brought
great spoils from thence, 1. Macchab. 1. 20. but when Popilius discharged him,
he returned against his will, having not that success which he had before as
is expressed, v. 29.

And further that Antiochus made more then two voyages, may be collected, v.
29. it shall not be as at the first, and as at the last, that is, in his third
attempt, when he was stayed by the Romans, he should not have the like
success, as the two former times: But Graserus makes an other sense,
posteriora istius expeditionis non respondebunt initijs, the end of this
expedition, shall not be like the beginning, p. 306. and he would have it
understood of one and the same expedition, that whereas at the first, he was
likely to have overcome all Egypt, in the end he was restrained and curbed by
the Romans: so also read Genevens. the last shall not be as the first: to the
same purpose Vatablus: but the original stands thus: and it shall not be, as
the first, and as the last: in the other reading both the conjunction vau,
should be superfluous, and as the last, and the note of similitude caph, should
be in the same clause used in a double sense: in the first word carishonah, it
should be taken for sicut, as, and in the latter caacharonah, for sic, so:
whereas in both places it is better interpreted as.

But here it will be further doubted, which of Antiochus voyages into Egypt
this was which is here prophesied of v. 40. and in the verses following: for
the satisfying of which doubt, I neither think with Iunius, that this was his
second voyage, the next before that, when he had his discharge from Popilius,
annotat. 101. in ver. 29. for such a preposterous placing of matters
historical is not to be admitted, in so orderly a narration, as the Prophet
has continued through this 11. chapter: that he should speak of Antiochus
third voyage v. 30. and defer the second to v. 40. 2. neither do I think
that this is a recapitulation of Antiochus expeditions formerly mentioned: but
it much differs from the former: because the king of the South, here gives
the first occasion: but in all the other attemps the king of the North was the
first agent. And again here mention is made of other nations, with whom
Antiochus had to do, as the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, the Lybians and
Mores. 3. This then was the last exploit of Antiochus in Egypt, as the 40. v.
shows, in the end of time. And though before this he had been
countermaunded by the Romans to depart out of Egypt, yet he afterward was had
in jealousy to conspire against the Romans, as is before showed out of
Florus, and so might contrary to his promise invade Egypt again: and the
rather because P^olome Physcon the younger brother sought to drive Ptoleme
Philometor out of his kingdom, which occasion Antiochus took to aid Physcon
the younger brother against Philometor: of this variance between the brethren,
who seemed to be reconciled before, when Popilius made Antiochus to depart out
of Egypt, Livie decad. 4. lib. 5. and Florus likewise makes mention in the 46.
book of his epitome: see further of this matter, in the 11. chap. quest. 47.
toward the end.

Argum. 2. Graserus proceeds and as he excludes Antiochus out of this
prophecy, so he by the kings of the North and South would have understood the
Pope, whose jurisdiction is most in the Northern parts of the world, and the
Turk who rules chiefly in the Sotherne: his reasons for this opinion are
these.

1. Because there is great affinity between the first kings of the North and
South, which are before spoken of in this chapter, namely the kings of Syria
and Egypt, and these kings of the North and South. 1. as they branched out of
the Monarchy of Alexander, so these two, the Pope and the Turk, are risen out
of the Monarchy of the Romans. 2. as they had their situation, the king of
Syria toward the North, and of Egypt toward the South: so these two the Pope
and Turk have their chief dominion the one in the Northern parts of the
world, the other in the Sotherne. 3. as both those kings of Syria and Egypt
afflicted the people, yet diversely: for Antiochus would not suffer the Jews to
enjoy their religion, but put them to grievous torments: yet the kings of Egypt
permitted the Jews to follow their own rites, in so much that they suffered
them to build a temple in Egypt like to that in Jerusalem: So the Christians
are tormented and persecuted for their conscience under the Northern Tyrant,
yet under the Turk they may have toleration of their religion, Graser. page
314.

2. The phrase also well agrees to this sense: 1. the word tzaphon, which is
interpreted the North, signifies also hid, which fitteth the whore of Babylon,
in whose forehead is written, a mystery, etc. Apoc. 17. 5. p. 310. 2. the king
of the South shall push, which cannot be understood of Ptolome, who was of no
such force to push at Antiochus: but this well agrees unto the house of the
Ottomans, the great Turks, which have pushed at these Northern parts of the
world, p. 318. 3. the other word ijshtagher, he shall come like a whirlwind,
shows not an absolute and entire power, as in the horn to push, but rather a
confederacy of united forces: such as the papacy consists of in gathering
of Councels, sending up and down of Legates, stirring up and co^bining Princes
together to fight for the holy land against the Saracens: to this purpose
Graser. page 320.

Answ. 1. In that Graserus makes the kings of the South and the North, that is
of Egypt and Syria, types and shadows of his kings of the North and South the
Turk and Pope in their original, situation, affection toward the people of
God, therein he grants the same, which has been so often affirmed, that
typically Antichrist is here shadowed forth, but not literally and
historically. 2. neither yet in these things is there so great affinity
between them: for the Turkish dominion did not spring out of the Roman
Empire, as the Seleucians and Ptolomes had their original from Alexanders
Monarchy, and the Turkish Empire is in the East, not Southward from Rome: who
also are held to have had their beginning from the Scythians, who are a
Northern people.

2. Concerning the phrase it is not so correspondent nor fitting unto his kings
of the South and North. 1. seeing throughout the whole chapter hitherto, the
kings of the South and North, are understood to be the kings of Syria and
Egypt, there is no reason to take them otherwise here: especially seeing
evident mention is made of Egypt, v. 42. 43. 2. the king of the North here is
described to come upon the king of the South as a whirlewinde, and to pass
through his land, and to carry away much silver and gold: This more fitly
agrees unto the Turk then the Pope: for he has rather fallen as a
whirlewinde upon Christendom: whereas the Pope has but pushed at him, and
attempted rather then prevailed against him.

Arg. 3. The circumstance also of the time here noted agrees with the
revelation of the Roman Antichrist: at the time appointed shall Antichrist
come, or as Iunius translateth, about the end of time (which Graserus
misliketh.) 1. This time the Ebionites therein consenting with Aben Ezra,
assign unto the reign of Constantine, when he building new Rome in the East,
left old Rome unto Sylvester then Bishop of Rome: But this is their vain
conceit, for Constantine had no such intendment to resign the city of Rome
unto the then Bishop there, which afterward he bequeathed with the Empire of
the West unto his son Constance: neither if Constantine had been so minded,
was Syluester then Bishop there capable of so great a gift; the most part of
the city being yet Pagans and Infidels: As for that donation of Constantine,
it is found to be but a forged thing, and of small credit: and it is like, as
if one should imagine, that the Duke of Venice should give the city of Venice
to the Parish Priest of Saint Marks: Graser. page 326. to page 328.

2. But thus rather this time appointed may be scanned, that as Antiochus
rainged 12. years, though not complete: the six first years whereof,
Antiochus making a way unto his tyranny, yet did not show himself such an
adversary to the Church of God, as afterward: In the last six years he raged
against the people of God, spoiled their Temple, and made havoc of the
Saints: from which time, namely the sixth year of his reign, which was in the
143. year of the kingdom of the Greeks, the story of the Macchabees takes
beginning, 1. Macchab. 1. 21. So unto these 12. years of Antiochus reign, who
herein was a type of Antichrist, do answer, the 12. ages wherein Antichrist
shall reign: the first six ages do end at Gregory the 7. if we begin to
count in the sixth age after the birth of Christ: until this time, the rest of
the Popes, made a way for Antichrist: but then he showed himself in his
colors: when as Gregory the 7. excluded the Emperor from intermedling with
the election of the Bishop of Rome: and first prohibited the marriage of
Ministers: of this Antichristian practice of this Gregory the 7. thus
complained, an. 170. years after, the Archbishop of Salisburge, in the
Council of Ratisbone, as Auentinus reports, lib. 7. Annal. Hildebrandus
primus sub specie religionis Antichristi fundamenta iecit, etc. Hildebrand
first under color of religion, laid the foundation of Antichrist, etc. and
then he proceeds to show, how he excluded the Emperor from their
Pontificiall Councels: and thus in the end concludes; credit experto, etc.
believe one that has tried, they will not give over, till having brought the
Emperor to order, pastoribus veris, qui pascant, oppressis, etc. the true
Pastors being suppressed, which should feed, the dogs being taken away that
should bark, they make havoc of all: from this Gregory then begun the
last six ages, which answer unto the last six years of Antiochus, Graser. p.
329. to p. 333.

Ans. 1. Whereas Graserus misliketh Iunius translation, at the end of time,
whereas he says he translateth the same phrase, v. 35. and c. 12. 4. at the
time appointed, as Graserus would have it taken here: there is great difference
between ghad gheeth ketz, unto the time of the end, that is, the appointed
time, which phrase is used in the two places given in instance, and these
words, begheth ketz, in the time of the end: and v. 35. that phrase is
expounded by an other word lamoghed, unto the time appointed. If this then were
to happen in the end of time, it agrees not with Graserus coni^ctures: for
Gregory the 7. came not in the end of time, there being toward 600. years
passed since: The Ebionites fancy, together with some of the Rabbis, we do
with Graserus reject upon those reasons alleged, and other weighty arguments
beside, that might be produced.

2. In that he makes Antiochus a type and figure of Antichrist, it is as much
as we desire to be granted: whence it will follow that Antiochus is here
understood (which is before denied by Graserus) for how else could Antiochus
typically decypher Antichrist, if he were not comprehended in this prophecy?
But, seeing there is no mention made in this prophecy of the years of
Antiochus reign, therein he can be no type of Antichrist. And for every year
to understand an hundred, is not the use of Scripture: neither does the casting
of the years agree with Graserus conjecture: for since Gregory the 7. who
attained to the Popedom about ann. 1070. or there about, there are expired
about 530. years: so that by this reckoning, there should remain but 70.
years of Antichrists dominion, which were too great boldness for any to affirm.

Argum. 4. Graserus proceeds further thus: 1. this preparation with charrets,
horsemen* and ships made by the king of the North against the king of the
South, he understands, of the holy wars (as they were called) which were
decreed by Vrbanus the 2. in the Council of Claromont in France, for the
recovery of the holy land against the Saracens, which was ten years after
Gregory the 7. which Pope Vrbanus, being the author of those cruel and
bloody wars, was t^ereupon called Turbanus, because he thereby procured so
much woe and trouble unto Christendom: page 334. 335.

2. Of Antiochus expedition against Egypt and the holy land, this prophecy can
not be understood: for he needed not to have invaded Egypt by ship, which is
in the same continent with Syria, neither could he by ship assault Judea, ab
omni maris imperio separatam, being separated and divided from all command by
the Sea: page 342. 343. whereas every part of this prophetical description
agrees with those former wars attempted by the Christians against the
Saracens: for they were transported thither in ships, and first invaded
Syria, and being thence expelled, they prayed upon Egypt: p. 344. 345.

Ans. 1. Typically we deny not, but that here the wars between the
Christians and Saracens may be shadowed forth by some analogy, or allusion:
but that is not the historical intendment of this prophecy: for here the king
of the North is set forth as a conqueror over the king of the South, coming
against him like a whirlewind: But those attempts of the Christian Princes
against the Saracens came to small effect: neither did the Pope himself in
person go against the Saracens and Turks, though those wars were taken in
hand by his counsel and persuasion.

2. Though Egypt were joined unto Syria in one continued continent, yet
Antiochus might and did assault the same both by Sea and land: he had his army
upon the land, and his navy upon the Sea, when he assaulted the two brethren
at Alexandria, as Livie writes, lib. 5. decad. 5. Neither is it here said,
that he by ships invaded the pleasant land: but only it is set down thus,
v. 41. he shall enter also into the pleasant land. Neither is it true, that
Judea is altogether separated from the Sea, and without the command thereof:
for Iaakob prophesies thus of Zebulun, Genesis 49. 13. Zebulun shall dwell by the
Sea side, and shall be an haven for ships, and his border shall be unto Zidon.

The 7. Exercise.
Wherein Graserus expounds the 41. verse, and takes upon him to prove, that
it can not be understood of the expedition of Antiochus against Judea, but of
the attempts of the Bishop of Rome against the Saracens.

Argum. 1. Graserus first confuteth their opinion, who think all this to be
understood of the king of the South, that he should enter into the land of
Palestina, applying it to the Saracens, who possessed that country: But this
he well shows, can not be so: for the king of the North is brought in as the
principal: the king of the South is mentioned but by occasion of the other, as
it were by an accident: and therefore the story still runs upon the acts
and exploits of the king of the North. p. 148. 149. Then he comes to examine
Iunius opinion, that interprets all this of Antiochus, who in his return out
of Egypt, invaded Judea, but spared the Edomites, Moabites, and the chief of
the Ammonites, as confederate with him. His reasons are these:

1. If by the pleasant land were here meant the land of Judea, why is it not
described by that name, in all this whole prophetical vision of Antiochus,
wherein so many attempts of his are described against the Jews? this therefore
shows, that by this name given unto that land, some other thing is signified.
2. And if the Moabites and Edomites be here meant, who were in such league and
amity with Antiochus, that they aided him in his wars, and Judas Macchabeus
was revenged upon them, as his enemies: it could not be said of them, that they
escaped out of his hands, which phrase rather presupposes some former
hostility and persecution, out of the which they hardly escaped. 3. And why
should he say the first and chief of the Ammonites: if the Edomites and
Moabites were wholly spared, who were as in the heart of Syria, why should the
first and nearer parts of the Ammonites only escape, whose country is
extended to Arabia? Graser. p. 353. 354.

Ans. 1. Judea is before described by this name of the pleasant land, v. 16.
when Antiochus the great father to Antiochus Epiphanes, first subdued it:
therefore Judea being before expressed by that name, is most likely also to be
signified here: the reason, why in the prophecy of Antiochus expeditions
against the people of God, it is described by other names, as the holy
covenant, and Sanctuary, is, because Antiochus sought more to deface their
religion, then to invade their land.

2. The Edomites and Moabites are said to escape his hand, not as though he
attempted any thing against them, but because their countries lying and
bordering upon Palestina, were in danger also to have been smitten and
oppressed by him, but that he spared them as his confederates: so they are
said to escape, in regard of their present danger, in respect of the nearnes
of the place.

3. The reason is evident, why only the first and nearest of the Ammonites do
escape, because their country was more remote from Syria, then Edom and Moab
was, extending to Arabia: and therefore the nearest parts of the Ammonites were
most in danger: see before c. 11. qu. 48.

Argum. 2. Further Graserus would prove by the phrase and words, that
Antiochus inuading of Judea is not here meant.

1. By the inuading of the pleasant land, such war is here understood, in quo
de terrae illius poss^ssione praecipuum certamen fuit, wherein the chiefest
strife was about the possession of that land: Now Antiochus had that land in
subjection before, he now sought only to root out their religion: But this
very well agrees to those holy wars made between the Christians and
Saracens, which was for the possession of that country.

2. Again, the king of the South and North strove about this country: but
Ptolome let not Antiochus, neither resisted him in his proceedings against
Judea.

3. It is said that many shall be overthrown: which is fitly applied to those
bloody wars between the Christians and Saracens, wherein so much blood was
shed, as Vrspergensis writes, vt in ipsius Templi pavimento is equorum genua
attigerit, that in the pauement of the Temple, it took the horse up to the
knees.

4. And whereas the word rabbath, many, is put in the feminine gender, here may
very well be understood the word keholoth, Churches; because indeed many
Churches should be ruinated and made desolate at the coming of Antichrist.
page 355. to p. 362.

Ans. 1. Antiochus did not only pollute and defile the Sanctuary, but he made
havoc also of the cities and country: for his captains spoiled Jerusalem,
set it on fire, cast down the houses and the walls, and took the women and
children captive, 1. Macchab. 1. 33. 34. Neither were those bloody and most
cruel wars between the Christians and Saracens taken in hand only upon a
civil respect to possess the country of Judea, but because they had a
superstitious opinion of that country, as being counted more holy then other,
at the instigation of the Pope those troublesome wars were undertaken,
whereupon they were called the holy wars.

2. Neither is it here said, that the king of the North and South strove about
this country, but only that the king of the North shall invade it, and enter
into it, as before he set himself against the holy covenant, v. 29. 31. which
thing Antiochus did: in his return out of Egypt, he set upon Judea.

3. Because many did fall in those wars, it follows not, that they
therefore should be comprehended here: it is not enough for one of the parts
of this prophetical description to agree, but all must be made to accord.

4. We need not seek for any strange word here to be supplied: the word
eeretz, earth, before used in the beginning of the verse, is most fit to be
understood here: and so the meaning is, that many nations and lands, saving
those few here excepted of the Moabites, Edomites, Ammonites, should feel
Antiochus hand.

Argum. 3. By the Edomites, Moabites, and the chief of the Ammonites, Graserus
understands the Church of the Grecians, Ethiopians, and the Elect, which all
escape the tyranny of Antichrist: which he would show in this manner:

1. Like as the pleasant land generally betokens the Catholic visible
Church, which shall be surprised by Antichrist: so by the other three, which
were allied unto the people of God the Edomites, which came of Esau the brother
of Iaakob, the Moabites and Ammonites, which issued from Lot Abraham's brothers
son: by these three are understood three sorts of people, which have some
affinity with the Church of God: The Edomites may signify the Grecians, which
came nearest in judgment of religion unto the Church of God in these West
parts, as the Edomites were next in affinity unto the Israelites.

2. The Moabites do shadow forth the Ethiopians: that as they were also of
affinity unto Israel, but somewhat further off, and differed more in religion
from the Israelites, then the Edomites did: so the Ethiopian Christians differ
much from the Christianity of the Western Churches: yet among them there are
to be found some seeds and remainder of the Christian faith: for even from the
Apostles times, they had the Scriptures, as is evident in the history of the
Eunuch, who did read upon the Prophet Isai, as he sat in his charret: Act. 8.
These two Churches of Grecia, and Ethiopia, the Roman Antichrist has
attempted to subdue unto his jurisdiction, but he has not prevailed: and so
the Edomites and Moabites have escaped his hand.

3. The chief of the children of Ammon, which signifies my people, are the
elect of God, who also shall escape in the persecution of Antichrist: he shall
have no power to pervert them: thus it it is said, Apoc. 18. 4. Come out of her
my people: and here c. 12. 1. the Angel says, at that time thy people (that
is, Ammon) shall escape: to this purpose Graser. from page 365. to page 378.
this allegorical interpretation he fathereth upon Theodoret. page 377.

Ans. 1. As by Egypt here is understood literally the region, and country so
called, so must the rest of the nations here named, of Edom, Moab, Ammon, be so
taken likewise: and seeing that when the Prophet speaks of the Grecians, he
describes them by the name of Iavan, c. 8. 21. c. 10. 20. who came of Iapheth;
by the Edomites of Esau, of Isaak, who came of Sem, the Grecians can not
properly be understood.

2. And seeing express mention is made afterward of the Lybians and
Ethiopians, by them rather the Church of the Ethiopians should be signified,
then by the Moabites.

3. And as unfitly by the Ammonites, are the elect people of God shadowed
forth, seeing that the Ammonites in Scripture are usually taken to be enemies
unto the people of God: as Psalm. 83. 5. They have consulted together in heart,
and made a league against thee, etc. as Gebal, Ammon, Amalek.

4. Wherefore, these nations are literally to be taken for the Edomites,
Moabites, Ammonites, whom Antiochus spared, as being adversaries and enemies
unto the Jews: and therefore Judas Macchabeus did fight against them, namely
the children in Idumea, and against Timotheus the captain of the Ammonites, 1.
Macchab. 5. 3. 6. There we see sensibly and evidently performed this prophecy:
see further hereof before, chap. 11. qu. 48. 4.

The eight Exercise.
Wherein Graserus labors, in the explanation of the 42. and 43. verses, to
remove the received interpretation, which is of Antiochus exploits against
Egypt and other countries, and to apply this prophecy unto the Roman
Antichrist, and his attempts against foreign nations.

Argum. 1. As before by the pleasant land he would have understood generally
the whole visible Church: so by Egypt he insinuates all those barbarous
nations in the unknown parts of the world, in India America, whether the
Roman Antichrist has also extended his hand.

1. In all the prophecy before concerning Antiochus, the name of Egypt is not
used, but it is described by the name of the South: which shows that an other
kind of Egypt is here signified.

2. Neither is here any mention made of the king of the South: it was then such
an Egypt, as the king of the South did not meddle with: which was not Egypt,
for that was under Ptolome the king of the South.

3. If the land of Egypt were here properly signified, then a tautologie, or
vain repetition of the same thing should be admitted, seeing in that sense
mention is made of Egypt in the next verse. p. 382. 383.

Ans. 1. Though this land be not in the prophecy concerning Antiochus
expressly named Egypt, it sufficed to be so called once before in this
chapter, v. 8. that it may be known in the rest of the prophecy following,
what is meant by the king of the South.

2. Though here the king of the South be not named, yet Egypt is understood to
be his kingdom by the former parts of this vision: as v. 8. Egypt is
expressly mentioned, and then it follows v. 9. the king of the South shall
come into his kingdom.

3. The contrary follows, because the same name of Egypt is again repeated
in the next verse, that it is not to be taken in an other sense, but rather the
same word is to be understood after one and the same manner, where the
circumstances of the place otherwise infer not: neither is it therefore a
vain repetition: for the same word is repeated, both by way of explanation,
and for greater emphasis sake, that special note should be taken of this
surprising even of Egypt.

Argum. 2. By the Libyans and Cushites or Aethiopians, Graserus also would have
understood, the Americans in the West, and by the Cushites the Indian countries
in the East. His conjectures are these:

1. The words Lubbim and Cushim are not here fully expressed with van, as else
where, but only with kibbutz in stead of vau schurech: which may signify,
that not the Aethiopians, which inhabited beyond Egypt toward the South
eastward, nor the Lybians, which dwelt in the nearer parts of Africa toward
Europe, but such nations are rather to be understood, as came of them: such are
the Indians and Mores of the West and East India. p. 389.

2. The phrase here used, of extending or stretching forth the hand,
signifies, that he should unprovoked set upon these countries, and without any
great labor take them, as by the putting forth of his hand: and beside, the
distance of these places is hereby noted, that he should stretch out his hand
unto them, as being not otherwise within his reach, or under his command. p.
391.

3. He shall have power over the treasure of gold and silver, and over all the
precious things of Egypt: this cannot be understood of Egypt literally: for
though their might be abundance of silver and gold, yet the having power over
the hid treasures, and over precious things, as pe^rles; precious stones, so
well agrees not to Egypt: Hereby rather is signified the rich spoils which
the Spainyards, the Bishop of Romes right hand, have taken from the poor
Indians, and so have corrupted all Europe with their Indian silver and gold:
And so Augustine speaking of Antichrist says, dabit credentibus in se
abundantiam auri and argenti, he shall give to such as believe in him abundance
of silver and gold, Graser. p. 394. 395.

4. And this shall be done successiue and per certos progressus, successively,
and by certain pases as it were, and degrees: so Graserus interprets the
word bemitzeghadau, at his footesteppes or pases. p. 386. But this was not true
of Antiochus, whom Iunius supposes to have done all this in his last two
years: nor yet of the Papists Antichrist, who they imagine, shall reign but
3. years and an half. p. 398.

Answ. 1. It is a slender conjecture, that because cushim and lubbim, are
written without vau shurek, that thereby are signified such nations as came out
of those countries: for Zipphorah Moses wife is called Cushith, ^ Cushite,
which word is written without vau shurek, Numb. 12. 1. and yet she was indeed
of that country, a Cushite or Aethiopisse of Arabia, for there was one
Aethiopia in Asia, which was Arabia, an other in Africa beyond Egypt: neither
can it be showed, that the East and West Indians had their beginning from the
Lybians and Aethiopians.

2. The phrase of stretching out the hand, has no such special signification,
the phrase in Hebrewe is, shalach iado, he sent his hand, which is
indifferently used, when any are assaulted near or far off, whether provoked
or not: as Exodus 24. 11. upon the nobles of the children of Israel, lo shalach
iado, he laid not his hand.

3. Egypt was very rich in silver and gold and other precious things: It is
said before, v. 8. that the king of the South having overcome the king of the
North, should carry into Egypt precious vessels of silver and gold: and v. 28.
Antiochus returned thence with great substance: this therefore may very well
agree unto Egypt literally, that he shall have power over the silver and gold.

4. The word bemitzeghadau, properly signifies in his progress, or at his
footsteppes: for so the word tzaghad, of the same root is taken for going:
Proverb. 30. 29. the words then are thus to be read, the Lybians, and
Aethiopans at his footesteps or pases, that is, shall follow him: for the
distinction athnah divides the Lybians and Aethiopians from the first clause:
though Graserus thinks, that it serves rather for ornament here then
distinction, p. 386. the meaning is, that the Lybians and Aethiopians, who
joined upon Egypt, and used to assist the Egyptians in their wars, as may be
gathered, Nahum. 3. 9. should leave the king of Egypt, and join with
Antiochus, being allured by his promises and rewards: Here then no such
successiue proceeding is signified, as Graserus supposes: see c. 11. quest.
48. toward the end.

Argum. 3. Graserus proceeds to show the probability of this his opinion,
that by the Cushites and Lybians are understood here the East and West Indians.

1. First the Americans are without all question descended of Noah, and most
like of Cham, whose seed was accursed: and those beastly people of the Indians
therefore may be thought to be of his line.

2. The coasts of Africa are nearest unto the West Indians, and parts of
America, and most like in that behalf to have been stored with people from
thence.

3. The likeness of beastly and brutish manners, and the affinity in color
between the Indians inhabiting between the tropike of Cancer, and the
equinoctial, do show them to come of the same offspring with the black
Mores and Aethiopians, p. 400. 401.

Answ. 1. The contrary is evident out of Scripture, that the East Indians are
not descended of Cham, but of Sem: As Ophir and Havilah, who inhabited the
golden Indians, were the sons of Ioktan, of Eber, and so of Sem, Genesis 10. 29.
though the Americanes and West Indians should derive their petigree from Cham,
yet the other Indians in the East must certainly come of Sem.

2. America is more like to have been replenished from the East India, from
the which it is thought either not at all to be divided by Sea, or by a very
small cut, then from the coasts of Africa, from whence it is separated by the
large and great Ocean: And if the old inhabitants of America had come from
Africa, there would have been greater intercourse between them: whereas till
of late, those parts have been utterly unknown, both to the Africanes and
Europians.

3. The similitude of color is caused by the quality and condition of the
climate: for otherwise, if their original from black or tawnie Moors were
the cause; not only in that climate, between the tropike of Cancer, and the
equinoctial, but in other climates and regions also the people would retain
the same complexion and color, if it were natural unto them in respect of
their parentage and beginning, and not rather caused by the quality of the
climate and region.

4. This conceit then of Graserus in taking these Lybians and Aethiopians to be
the East and West Indians, has no probability: and we further reject it upon
these reasons. 1. The Lybians and Cushites are here to be understood, according
to the phrase of Scripture in other places: But where they are named elsewhere,
they are taken for the people inhabiting in the parts of Africa near unto
Egypt, as Ierem. 46. 9. Nahum. 3. 9. therefore so are they also to be
interpreted here. 2. the king of the North who throughout this whole prophecy
is understood to be the king of Syria, had power over these countries: but the
kings of Syria never stretched their hand unto the Indians. 3. the Bishop of
Rome cannot be said to be the king of the North in respect either of the East
or West Indians: but he is toward the East to the one, and Westward to the
other. 4. by the king of the North one special king is signified, whose end
is described, v. 45. therefore not a succession of Kings or Popes.

The ninth exercise.
Wherein Graserus expounds the 44. v. applying the same still to the Roman
Antichrist and his proceedings.

Argum. 1. By the rumors from the East and North, he understands the evil
news, both from the East, of the Turks victories, and of his taking of
Constantinople, ann. 1453. the hearing whereof did terrify all Europe: but
more afterward, when in the year, 1481. Geduces a Bassa of the Turks invaded
Calabria, and made the Pope himself Sixtus 4. and all Rome afraid: the rumors
from the North, was the fame of Luthers preaching, and of others which set
forth the gospel, and discovered the hypocrisy and false doctrine of the
Bishop of Rome, p. 410. 413.

2. These reports make him fret and fume, so that he prepares himself to go
forth against them: for as Antiochus hearing of the rumors of wars from
Parthia, and of the rising of the Macchabees in Judea, divided his army, and
left half thereof with Lysias to suppress the Jews, and the other half he
took with him into Persia: So the Pope bends his force partly against the
Turk in the East, but more against the Protestants in the North that trouble
him, p. 407.

3. He goes forth in great wrath, the word here used is chema, with aleph,
which properly signifies butter, but with he, it betokens wrath: here he is
put for aleph, to insinuate what manner of wrath this should be, under pretense
of amity: his words should be as oil and butter, while he meditateth
mischief in his heart: as was evidently seen in the massaker at Paris some
34. years since, p. 418.

4. He shall go forth and destroy many: no special enemy is named, but he
shall intend a general persecution: in which behalf this prophecy cannot be
so fitly applied unto Antiochus, who had his certain enemies: here the great
number also is noted, that should be destroyed: and so one has noted, that
within the space of 30. years, from the year 1550. to the year 1580. ^.
hundred thousand in 30. years space flaine by the Popish Spanish faction.
not so few as 900000. have been slain, partly by the Spanish inquisition,
and the Spanish wars, p. 429. And thus Graserus would persuade, that this
prophecy, is most fitly applied to the Roman Antichrist.

Answ. 1. No man can mislike Graserus diligence, in setting forth by so lively
demonstration the Antichristian proceedings of the Popes of Rome: And it cannot
be denied, but that there is a near resemblance between Antiochus exploits
and Antichrists: and this his application of these rumors is not without great
probability: But yet the historical sense of this prophecy will direct us
thus rather to understand those rumors, that from the East out of Parthia and
Persia, and then out of the North from Judea, troubled Antiochus, as has been
further showed, c. 11. quest. 50.

2. In that he makes Antiochus a type of the Roman Antichrist, and specially
in the dividing of his forces against his two chief adversaries the one in the
East, the other in the North, we take no exception to it: We affirm the same,
that historically Antiochus is here described, and typically Antichrist.

3. It is usual among the Hebrews to use indifferently aleph, in stead of he,
and contrariwise: as sometime chemah with he is taken for butter, as Job. 29.
6. and chema with aleph without he for wrath, as in this place: Graserus
collection then upon this change of the letter, though it be fitly applied to
his purpose, it is not of such weight as to exclude Antiochus out of this
prophecy: nay it fitly describes Antiochus, whose captain intending
mischief, upon his flattering words, and fair speeches was received into the
city, 1. Macc. 1. 31.

4. Antiochus likewise in his beastly rage destroyed many: for in 3. days
space, he put to the sword 80. thousand, and took 40. thousand prisoners, 2.
Macchab. 5. 14. So that herein he was a type of the great Antichrist, that
should shed so much blood.

The tenth Exercise.
Wherein the 45. verse is explained.
This verse also Graserus interprets of the Roman Antichrist, and not
properly of Antiochus.

Argum. 1. Whereas there is great difference among interpreters concerning the
meaning of this word apadno: 1. it cannot be a proper name as the Septuag. and
vulgar Latin read, as appears by the affix which is annexed thereunto. 2.
Neither is it derived of the Chalde word padan, as some think: for to what
purpose should the Prophet writing in Hebrew, use a Chalde and strange word
here? and beside, padan in the Chalde, signifies a yoke of oxen, in which
sense it has no agreement with this place. 3. Graserus therefore takes it to
be an Hebrewe word, and to be derived of the root aphad, which signifies to
put on: and hence comes the word eephod, which was a special garment, and
ornament of the Priests: upon this reason, Graserus interprets apadno, his
Clergy, he shall plant the tabernacle of his Clergy, which he applies to the
Tridentine Synod: which is fitly said to be planted, as a plant, that was set
only but took no root, neither came to any perfection: for it was scarce
finished in the space of 18. years: And the intendment of this Synod was to
destroy many, even to extirpate and root out all which professed the Gospel.

2. Hereof Antiochus made some show and shadow, when by his captains Lysias,
Ptolome, Nicanor, Gorgias, he pitched his tents in Emmaus with an intent to
destroy Judea, 1. Mac. 3. 38. 39. But the style of the Prophet aims at a
greater adversary then Antiochus, which was Antichrist. Graser. p. 434. to p,
448.

Answ. 1. It being admitted, that the word apadon is best derived of aphad,
which signifies to put on, or close in, or compass about: it may as well
signify, a robe of honor, for so David also had his linen Ephod, as a
priestly garment: but it is better translated, a palace, a place of honor and
estate: as Hierome thinks it signifies a throne: see more hereof before c.
11. quest. 49. 3. 2. If this were fulfilled in Antiochus, as he confesses, we
will easily grant further, that typically it may be applied unto the Roman
Antichrist: so that Antiochus be not excluded.

Argum. 2. Whereas against this exposition two special objections may be made
out of the text: 1. that these tents are pitched and planted between the Seas,
as Trent is not, where this Council was held. 2. and beside upon the glorious
mountain: Graserus frames this answer:

1. That by the Seas, or waters we must understand much people, as it is
interpreted, Apocal* 17. 15. the waters upon the which the woman fitteth, are
people and multitudes, etc. And this especially is meant of Europe, which is
environed and distinguished into diverse parts by the boughtes and turnings of
the Ocean sea, more then any part of the world is.

2. And by the glorious mountain we understand the Church of God, which in
regard of the excellency thereof, and of the flocking of all nations
thereunto, is compared to a mountain, as Isay. 2. 2. the mountain of the
house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of the mountains: this
glorious mountain then is the Church of God, which most flourished in Europe.

3. These two Seas cannot be the Mediterranean, and dead Sea, as Iunius: for
both the Prophet should have spoken darkely and obscurely, of an evident
matter: and beside the lake Asphaltes, called the dead Sea, compared with the
Mediterranean, is not worthy the name of a Sea, p. 448. to p. 459.

Answ. 1. There is great difference to say between the Seas, and upon the Seas
or waters: here he pitcheth his tent and palace, not upon them, but between
them: and seeing here there is evident description of a place, the words are to
be taken literally, not in allegorical sense: as Nahum, 3. 9. art thou better
then No, full of people, which lay upon the waters, whose ditch was the Sea,
etc.

2. True it is, that the Church of God is in diverse prophesies resembled to a
mountain, by allusion unto the mountain, whereupon the Temple was built: but
to appropriate this to any particular place, as namely to the city of Trent in
that sense is not safe: for so the title of the true Church of Christ, should
be given to that Antichristian assembly: This may more fitly be applied unto
that Laterane Council under Leo the 10. which was held at Rome, which is
situate indeed between two Seas. Tyrrhenum and Adriaticum.

3. If the Prophet had in direct terms expressed the Seas by their names, it
had been an history, rather then a prophecy: and it is evident, that in
Scripture that salt lake is called by the name of the Sea, as Numb. 34. v. 6.
the Mediterranean is called the great Sea, and the other the salt Sea, v. 3.
wherefore seeing we can find this prophecy to have been literally and
historically fulfilled, when Antiochus captains pitched in Em^aus in the
beginning of the mountains; as has been showed at large, cap. 11. quest. 50.
it is in vain to run to allegories.

Argum. 3. The words following also, he shall come to his end^, and none shall
help him: Graserus proceeds to apply unto the Roman Antichrist, and
shows the fatal end of his Antichristian kingdom to be at hand: which 1. he
does gather by two arguments: the great insolency of the Papal Sea, for pride
goes before a fall: and the most desperate means which the Romanists use to
maintain their kingdom: their sophisticate doctrine, and their perfidious and
treacherous practices: which being the chief means, which are left unto
them, it is evident that their disease is dangerous and deadly, the means
being so desperate, page 462.

2. And further it is said, none shall help him: herein Antiochus in his
miserable end was a type of the ruin of Antichrist, who was stricken with such
a loathsome disease, that his own friends did forsake him, and could minister
no help unto him: Such was the fall of Babylon, as the Prophet describes it,
Ierem. 51. 8. howl for Babel, bring balm for her sore^f she may be healed: So
the sickness of Antichrist, when God strikes him, shall be incurable and
remediless.

By two special means is Antichrists kingdom vpheld, by the Jesuits corrupt
seducing, and by the se^ular arm, afflicting the Church, especially by the
Spaniards: But neither of these can restore unto Antichrist the former glory
of his kingdom: The first may be likened unto the Ass^ssines among the Turks,
whose founder was one Alohadinus, who invented this devise to increase his
sect: he caused to be planted in a most fruitful valley pleasant orchards and
gardens, which all kind of carnal delight, ex Cael^i Augustine. Curion. histor.
Sarac^a. 2. lib. 3.
variety of delicate ments, with beautiful damsels to attend upon them. This
being done, this Alohadinus fained himself to be Mahomets companion, and to
have received power of him, to confer Paradise upon whom he would: Hereupon
he would make choice of the best witted and most goodly young men, whom he with
a certain drink would cause to be cast asleep, and then convey them to that
valley, where awaking they should enjoy al terrene pleasure: then he would cast
them into a sleep again, and convey them thence: so they made report that
they had been in Paradise: and by this devise he drew unto him 60000. to be
of his sect: the like sleights do the Jesuits use, to promise heaven, and
releasing out of purgatotie, to those that will set afoote their wicked
devises: But they notwithstanding labor in vain.

So likewise the secular powers have labored to advance the papal kingdom,
as Henry the 3. in France; the king of Spain in the low countries, which
wars the Prince of Parma confessed had cost the king of Spain unto the year
1585. six hundred tun of gold; The like attempt he made against England in
the year 88. which he assaulted with that great navy and army, the
maintenance whereof stood him in 30000. ducates every day: yet they ^aue
missed of their purpose. Thus Christ the king of his Church, shows his power
in abating the pride of Antichrist: but he at once thinks it not good to
dissolve his kingdom, to try the fidelity of his servants, and to take away
security: to this purpose Graserus p. 465. to p. 467.

Answ. All this we willingly confess may typically be applied, and that very
fi^ly, to the Roman Antichrist: so that the historical ground be first laid
in Antiochus, which Graserus seems to acknowledge; whose singular industry,
and judicious application of this prophecy deserves much commendation, though
he fail in the historical sense. And this shall suffice briefly to have
been touched out of Graserus.

God be praised.
A Table of the questions.
THe prophecy of Daniel explaned. General observations upon the whole book.
Of the diverse languages used in this book, and why Daniel writes a great part
thereof in the Chalde tongue. 1. qu. Of the author of this prophetical book of
Daniel. 2. qu. Of the signification of the name Daniel. 3. qu. Of the kindred of
Daniel. 4. qu. Why Daniels kindred is not particularly expressed in the text. 5.
qu. When Daniel began to prophecy, and at what age. 6. qu. Of the time when
Daniel had his several visions. 7. qu. Of the whole time of Daniels age, and
time of prophesying. 8. qu. Why Daniel is not mentioned to have returned with
the rest out of captivity. 9. qu. Of the times wherein Daniel lived, compared
with foreign Chronicles, and of the memorable things which happened therein. 10.
qu. Of the excellency, use, and utility of this book of Daniel. 11. qu. Of
the authority of the prophecy of Daniel. 12. qu. Of the obscurity of this
prophecy.
Questions upon the first Chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. Of the third year of Iehoiakim, which is called the fourth, Ierem. 25.
1. how these places are reconciled. 2. qu. How this third year of Iehoiakims
reign is to be counted. 3. qu. Of Iehoiakim and Iehoachaz, what difference
between them. 4. qu. Why the king of Babel had such an envy against
Iehoiakim. 5. qu. Of Nabuchadnezzer the king of Babel, and how many there were
of that name. 6. qu. Of the acts and exploits of Nabuchadnezzer. 7. qu. Of the
time of Nabuchadnezzers reign. 8. qu. Of the city of Babylon. 9. qu. Of the
city Jerusalem. 10. qu. v. 2. What this phrase means, to be given into ones
hand. 11. qu. How Iehoiakim was given into Nabuchadnezzers ^and, whether he
carried him to Babylon. 12. qu. Whether Daniel at this time went into
captivity with Iehoiakim. 13. qu. Why it pleased God that Daniel and others
that feared God, should be taken captives. 14. qu. The meaning of those words,
which he carried into the land of Shinar to the house of his god. 15. qu. Of
the land of Shinar or Shingar. 16. qu. Of the god and idols of the Chaldes. 17.
qu. v. 2. What is to be commended, what discommended in Nabuchadnezzer in
carrying part of the vessels of the Temple. 18. qu. Why it pleased God to suffer
that the vessels of the Temple should be carried away. 19. qu. Of Ashpenaz the
master of the Eunuchs his name and office. 20. qu. Whether Daniel may be
proved from hence to have been an Eunuch in the first sense. 21. qu. Who are
understood here by the Princes. 22. qu. Why the children of the Princes and
nobles were taken captives. 23. qu. How the Lord performed his promise to
David, that his kingdom should be established for ever, 2. Sam. 16. seeing
lehoiakim was given into Nabuchadnezzers hand. 24. qu. Whether it were lawful
for Daniel to be taught the learning of the Chaldeans. 25. qu. Of the Chalde
language, and the difference between it and the Hebrew. 26. qu. Of the
necessary institution of schools, and the manner and order thereof. 27. qu.
Why other names were given them. 28. qu. Of the signification of their names,
both the new and the old. 29. qu. v. 8. Why Daniel refused to eat of the kings
meat, and of the diverse kinds of abstinence. 30. qu. The causes which moved
Daniel to forbear the kings meat. 31. qu. v. 8. How Daniel should have been
defiled with the kings meat. 32. qu. whether Daniel ever after abstained from
the kings meat. 32. qu. v. 9. What favor it was which Daniel found with the
chief of the Eunuchs not obeying his request. 33. qu. Of Daniels request to
the butler. 34. qu. Whether Daniel tempted not God, in setting a certain
number of days. 35. qu. Why Daniel did choose rather to eat of pulse, then of
the kings meat. 36. qu. verse. 15. Whether the beauty and strength in Daniel
and the rest feeding on this course food, were a natural work. 37. qu. v.
17. Of the knowledge and understanding which God gave unto Daniel and the other
three, whether it were natural or supernatural. 38. qu. Whether Daniel and
the rest learned the curious arts of the Chaldeans. 39. qu. Whether it be
lawful to use the arts and inventions of the heathen. 40. qu. Of the dreams
and visions which Daniel had understanding of. 41. qu. Whether this gift of
understanding visions and dreams were in Daniel as an habit permanent and
remaining always in him. 42. qu. Of the diverse kinds of dreams. 43. qu.
Whether there be any divine dreams. 44. qu. Whether there be any truth or
certentie in dreams. 45. qu. Of the causes of true dreams. 46. qu. How
diabolical and divine dreams may be discerned. 47. qu. Why it pleased God by
visions and dreams to instruct his servants. 48. qu. Why visions and dreams
are often showed unto simple and unlearned men. 49. qu. Why dreams are not
always clear and manifest, but darkely and obscurely propounded. 50. qu. what
dreams may be observed, and by whom. 51. qu. Whether in divine dreams there
is a free use of reason and the will, and the same acceptable to God. 52. qu.
v. 21. How Daniel is said to have been unto the first year of king Cyrus.
Questions upon the second chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. v. 1. How the second year is to be counted wherein Nabuchadnezzer had
this dream. 2. qu. What Nabuchadnezzer this was, and whence he was so called.
3. qu. v. 1. Why he is said to have dreamed dreams. 4. qu. What manner of
dream this was, which Nabuchadnezzer had. 5. qu. Why it pleased God to send
this dream upon Nabuchadnezzer. 6. qu. v. 1. Of the meaning of those words,
And his sleep was upon him. 7. qu. Of the four kind of wise men whom the
king sends for. 8. qu. Why Daniel was not called and sent for among the rest
of the Chaldeans. 9. qu. v. 4. Of the Aramites language, whether it differ from
the Hebrew, and be all one with the Chalde. 10. qu. Why the Chaldeans spoke in
the Aramites language. 11. qu. v. 8. Why the king says, they would gain or
redeem time. 12. qu. v. 10. Of the Chaldeans answer unto the king. 13. qu. Of
the impostures and falsehoods in the answer of the Chaldeans. 14. qu. what the
Chaldeans mean in these words, Except the gods whose dwelling is not in the
flesh. 15. qu. v. 12. Of the kings rash sentence, in commanding all the wise
men of Babylon to be slain. 16. qu. v. 13. whether the wise men indeed were
slain. 17. qu. what office Ario^h had to whom Daniel makes this motion. v.
14. 18. qu. v. 15. How Daniel was ignorant of the kings decree against the
Soothsaiers. 19. qu. v. 19. How this secret was revealed unto Daniel in the
night. 20. qu. Of the form and order of Daniels thanksgiving. 21. qu. v. 19.
How Daniel is said to have blessed the God of heaven. 22. qu. verse. 21. How the
Lord is said to change times and seasons. 23. qu. v. 22. what secret things the
Lord is said to discover. 24. qu. v. 22. How light is said to dwell with God,
whereas it is said, Psalm. 18. 11. he made darkness his secret place. 25. qu. v.
24. whether Daniel did well in staying the execution of the kings sentence upon
the wise men. 26. qu. v. 25. whether Arioch lied unto the king in saying, I
have found a man. 27. qu. v. 25. why Arioch named Daniel to be one of the
captives rather then of the wise men. 28. qu. v. 26. How the king is said to
answer, no question being demanded. 29. qu. v. 27. why Daniel denies that any
of the wise men could expound this dream. 30. qu. v. 28. whether God only be
the reuealer of secrets and things to come. 31. qu. v. 28. What Daniel means
by the latter days. 32. qu. v. 29. whether Nebuchadnezers thoughts were the
cause of his dream. 33. qu. v. 29. why it pleased God to impart unto
Nebuchadnezer this dream. 34. qu. v. 30. This secret is not showed me for my
wisdom: whether Daniel by any natural wisdom could have obtained the
knowledge of this dream. 35. qu. v. 30. why Nebuchadnezer could not understand
the dream which he saw. 36. qu. v. 30. Of the two ends why it pleased God to
reveal unto the king his dream. 37. qu. v. 31. of the vision which the king
saw in his dream, the manner and parts thereof. 38. qu. of the diverse kinds of
signs of things to come, and of which kind this image was. 39. qu. what
kingdoms of the earth are not comprehended in this vision. 40. qu. v. 8. why
the Chaldean Monarchy is compared to the head of gold. 41. qu. Of the largenes
of the Empire and dominion of Nebuchadnezer. 42. qu. whether Nebuchadnezers
dominion were at that time the greatest in the world. 43. qu. v. 39. Of the
second Monarchy described by the arms and breasts of silver, what it was. 44.
qu. v. 39. why the Persian Monarchy is said to be inferior to the Babylonian.
45. qu. whether the Monarchy of the Chaldeans or of the Persians was more
cruel toward the Jews. 46. qu. why the Persian Monarchy is compared to
silver. 47. qu. why the third Monarchy is likened to the belly and the thigh,
and unto brass. 48. qu. Of the largenes of Alexanders Empire, and of other
memorable and notable things in him. 49. qu. v. 40. whether this fourth
kingdom must be understood to be the Roman Empire. 50. qu. That this fourth
kingdom divided into two kingdoms, resembled by the tw^^^gges of the image, was
the kingdom of Syria and Egypt. 51. qu. Of the beginning and continuance of the
four general Monarchies of the world. 52. qu. v. 43. Of the meaning of these
words, they shall miagle themselves with the seed of men. 53. qu. v. 44. What
manner of kingdom the Prophet speaks of which God should set up. 54. qu.
Whether the stone cut out of the mountain, do signify Christ and his
kingdom. 55. qu. Whether this prophecy be fulfilled in the first or second
coming of Christ. 56. qu. The description of the kingdom of Christ by the
Prophet, v. 44. 45. 57. qu. That this kingdom which God shall raise up must be
understood of the kingdom of Christ. 58. qu. That this kingdom of Christ is a
spiritual, no temporal kingdom. 59. qu. v. 44. In the days of what kings
Christ's kingdom should be raised up. 60. qu. How Christ's kingdom is said to
destroy other kingdoms. 61. qu. Whether Christ at his coming did indeed
destroy the temporal dominions. 62. qu. How Christ is said to be the stone cut
without hands. 63. qu. In what sense Christ is compared to a little stone, and
how it filled the earth. 64. qu. v. 46. Whether Nebuchadnezzar did well in
bowing unto Daniel, and commanding odours to be offered unto him. 65. qu.
Whether Daniel refused this worship offered unto him. 66. qu. Of
Nebuchadnezzars ample and large confession of God. 67. qu. Whether
Nebuchadnezzar had the true knowledge of God. 68. qu. Whether Daniel did well
in accepting the gifts and honors which the king bestowed on him. 69. qu.
Whether Daniel could with a good conscience be set over the wise men and
soothsayers of Babylon. 70. qu. How Daniel is said to have sat in the kings
gate. 71. qu. Whether it be lawful for a Christian to live in an idolatrous
kings Court.
Questions upon the 3. chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. At what time Nebuchadnezzar set up this great image. 2. qu. To whom
Nebuchadnezzar erected this image. 3. qu. To what end this image was set up.
4. qu. How it came to pass that Daniel hindered not the kings purpose in
setting up this image. 5. qu. of the place where this image was set up. 6. qu.
of the greatness of this image compared with others, and in it self. 7. qu. of
the mystical application of this image. 8. qu. of the several names and titles
of the kings nobles and officers here rehearsed. v. 2. 9. qu. why Nebuchadnezer
only called his nobles and officers. 10. qu. v. 5. of the diverse kinds of
instruments here rehearsed. 11. qu. v. 5. of their falling down and
worshipping this image. 12. qu. That it is not lawful to bow unto an image,
though one in his heart abhor it. 13. qu. Of the malice of the Chaldees
against the Jews. 14. qu. why they say in the plural, they will not serve thy
gods, v. 12. whereas there was but one image. 15. qu. why these three,
Shadrach, Meshack, and Abednego, are only called. 16. qu. what age these three
were of, when they were brought before the king. 17. qu. why Daniel m^de not
intercession to the king for his three friends. 18. qu. Of Nebuchadnezers
speech unto these three brought before him. 19. qu. Of the religious and
resolute answer of these three conuented before the king. 20. qu. why the Lord
does not always deliver his out of temporal dangers. 21. qu. why they are so
resolute not to worship the golden image. 22. qu. whether the Prince is by fire
and sword to root out the^ which are of contrary religion. 23. qu. of the
extraordinary heating of the furnace. 24. qu. of the exquisite cruelty and
torments which these three were put unto. 25. qu. of the apparel which they
were cast into the fire with. 26. qu. why Daniel was not cast into the fiery
furnace with the rest. 27. qu. How the flame of the fire slew those which were
the ministers of the kings cruelty. 28. qu. How these three men cast into the
fire were preserved. 29. qu. of 7. miraculous things concurring in this
preservation of them from the fire. 30. qu. whether any thing without miracle
may be preserved from the fire being in the flames thereof. 31. qu. That these
three were true martyrs, though they escaped by miracle the danger of death.
32. qu. whether all those are to be held martyrs which die constantly and
courag^ously. 33. qu. Why it pleases not God always to deliver his servants
out of danger, as he did these at this time. 34. qu. v. 25. In what sense the
king says, that the fourth was like the son of God. 35. qu. of the
apparition of Angels in humane shape, what manner of bodies they appeared in.
36. qu. why the Angels used to appear in humane shape. 37. qu. Of the sudden
change and conversion that was in Nebuchadnezzer, with the parts thereof. 38.
qu. whether this were a true conversion in Nebuchadnezzer. 39. qu. whether
blasphemy is to be punished with death. 40. qu. whether the 3. last verses do
belong unto this third chapter.
Questions upon the 4. chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. of the kings epistle, the sum and parts thereof. 2. qu. At what time
Nebuchadnezer wrote this epistle. 3. qu. How Nebuchadnezer could write unto all
the people in the world. 4. qu. Of the signs and wonders which Nebuchadnezer
declares. 5. qu. whether Nebuchadnezer were now at the last truly converted.
6. qu. Of the author of this epistle. 7. qu. whether this history contained in
this chapter of Nebuchadnezers transmutation, were so done in deed. 8. qu. why
Daniel was called by the name of Belteshazzar. 9. qu. In what sense
Nebuchadnezer says, that Daniel had the spirit of the holy gods. 10. qu. Of
Nebuchadnezers dream and the sum thereof. 11. qu. why this tree is said to be
in the mids of the earth. 12. qu. why Nebuchadnezer is compared to a tree. 13.
qu. v. 11. who are understood by the beasts and fowls. 14. qu. v. 12. how
Nebuchadnezer was bound with a band of iron and brass. 15. qu. v. 11, 12. why
this prophecy is uttered in the imperative mood, hew down the tre^ etc.
leave the stumpe. 16. qu. v. 14. why the Angels are called watchmen. 17. qu. By
whom the 14. v. was pronounced, by the Angel or by the King. 18. qu. v. 14. Of
the meaning of those words, According to the request of the holy ones. 19. qu.
of the meaning of those words, v. 14. and appoints over it the most abject of
men. 20. qu. Why Daniel held his peace for the space of an hour. 21. q. v. 16.
In what sense Daniel wishes this dream to the kings enemies. 22. qu. That a
tyrannical government is better then an Anarchie, or no government. 23. qu. v.
20. What is meant by hewing down the tree. 24. qu. v. 22. How Nebuchadnezzer
was driven from among men, and dwelt with beasts. 25. qu. How Nebuchadnezzer
did eat grass like an ox. 26. qu. How the kingdom of Babylon was governed in
Nebuchadnezzers absence. 27. qu. v. 22. what is understood by 7. times. 28. qu.
Of Nebuchadnezers transmutation, but first in general of the diverse kinds of
transmutations. 29. qu. what manner of change Nebuchadnezers was. 30. qu. How
Nebuchadnezzers body was changed. 31. qu. v. 24. How Daniel gave counsel to
the king to prevent this judgment, seeing it was determined. 32. qu. whether
Daniel did counsel the king to redeem his sins by alms deeds. 33. qu.
whether Daniel spoke doubtfully saying, v. 24. It may be thy prosperity may be
prolonged. 34. qu. whether Nebuchadnezer did follow Daniels counsel. 35. qu.
Of the greatness of the city of Babylon. 36. qu. whether Nebuchadnezer were the
builder of Babel. 37. qu. Of Nebuchadnezers pride in saying, which I have built
for the house of etc. 38. qu. what manner of voice it was which came down from
heaven. 39. qu. The sum of the sentence denounced against Nebu^hadnezer. 40.
qu. v. 30. of the execution of the sentence upon Nebuchadnezer, he did eat
grass etc. 41. qu. v. 31. After the end of what days Nebuchadnezer was
restored. 42. qu. of the restitution of Nebuchadnezer. 43. qu. That God only
is without check, and not to be controlled in his works. 44. qu. whether
Nebuchadnezer were saved. 45. qu. why Nebucdadnezer was saved, and not Pharaoh,
both being in the same cause. 46. qu. why Nebuchadnezer being thus converted,
the Jews kept in captivity were not delivered, nor Ieho^akim released out of
prison.
Questions upon the fifth chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. Why this chapter is transposed, and no^ set down according to the
order of time. 2. qu. Of the kings of Chalde which succeeded after
Nebuchadnezer. 3. qu. Of the diverse names of this Balthazar. 4. qu. In what
year of Balthazars reign this history fell out. 5. qu. of the greatness of
Balthazars feast. 6. qu. of the manner and order of this feast. 7. qu. of the
occasion of this feast. 8. qu. who commanded the vessels of the Temple to be
brought, and how. 9. qu. Of Balthazars profaning of the holy vessels. 10. qu.
Whether Nebuchadnezer did not likewise profane the vessels in laying them up
in his idols temple. 11. qu. Of the blind and obscene idolatry of the
Chaldeans. 12. qu. How far it is lawful to apply some things to profane
uses. 13. qu. Of the fingers which appeared on the wall, how they were caused.
14. qu. whether it were the likeness of an hand only, and seen of Balthazar
alone. 15. qu. Of the manner of the apparition of this hand. 16. qu. Why the
hand appeared over against the candle stick. 17. qu. Of Balthazars sudden
fear, and the manner thereof. 18. qu. v. 7. Why Daniel is not here called
among the rest. 19. qu. How it came to pass that the wise men could not so
much as read the writing. 20. qu. What Queen it was which came in. 21. qu. In
what sense Nebuchadnezzar is called Balthazars father. 22. qu. of the Queens
oration to the king. 23. qu. of the excellent wisdom and other princely parts
in this old Queen. 24. qu. of Belshazars speech unto Daniel. 25. qu. Of
Daniels answer to the king, and the several parts thereof. 26. qu. Of Daniels
abrupt beginning in his speech to the king, v. 17. keep thy rewards to thy
self. 27. qu. why Daniel rejects the kings rewards. 28. qu. why Daniel
receives the like rewards from Nebuchadnezer, and refuses them from
Balthazar. 29. qu. Whether Daniel after his refusal accepted afterward of
these rewards, v. 29. 30. qu. whether in these words, he put to death whom he
would, v. 19. Nebuchadnezzars tyrannical government be expressed. 31. qu. Of
the writing, and interpretation thereof in general. 32. qu. Of the
interpretation by writing in general. 33. qu. why the first word Mean is
doubled. 34. qu. Of the meaning of the word, tekel. 35. qu. Of the meaning of
the word, Pheres. 36. qu. Of the tropological, that is, the moral application
of this vision. 37. qu. why Balthazar commanded Daniel to be honored hearing
so evil news. 38. qu. Of the honors here bestowed upon Daniel. 39. qu.
whether Daniel did well in accepting of these honors. 40. qu. why Daniel
exhorted not Balthazar to repentance as he had done Nebushadnezzar before. 41.
qu. v. 30. whether Balthazar were slain at that time. 42. qu. whether
Balthazar were slain the same night* and the city taken. 43. qu. whether
Balthazar was taken in Babylon. 44. qu. By what means Babylon was taken. 45.
qu. By whom Balthazar was slain. 46. qu. By whom the city of Babylon was
taken. 47. qu. who was chief in the taking of Babylon Darius or Cyrus, and why
mention is made only of Darius. 48. qu. Of the cause of this Babylonian war.
49. qu. whether Babylon was at this time finally destroyed according to the
predictions of the Prophets. 50. qu. How long the Chaldean Empire and Monarchy
continued. 51. qu. Of the years of the reign of the several kings of
Babylon.
Questions upon the sixth chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. what Darius this was which took upon him the kingdom of Babylon. 2.
qu. of the diverse names which Darius had. 3. qu. How Darius took upon him the
kingdom of Babylon. 4. qu. when Darius took upon him the kingdom of the
Chaldeans. 5. qu. Of the officers which Darius appointed, and the reason
thereof. 6. qu. Whether Darius did wisely in thinking to set Daniel, being a
stranger, over the whole realm. v. 3. 7. qu. Whether Daniel did well in taking
upon him to bear office in an idolatrous kings court. 8. qu. How the rulers
failed in their purpose, finding no fault at all in Daniel. 9. qu. Of the edict
and decree made to entangle Daniel, the occasion thereof, and injustice
therein. 10. qu. Of the immutable decrees of the Medes and Persians. v. 8. 11.
qu. why Daniel did not stay the kings decree by his contrary advise. 12. qu.
Of Daniels constancy of praying, with the circumstances thereof. 13. qu. How
Daniels custom in opening the windows when he prayed, agrees with our
Saviors precept, Matthew. 6. to shut the doors of the chamber in prayer. 14. qu.
Why Daniel opened the window of his chamber toward Jerusalem. 15. qu. why
Daniel prayed thrice in a day. 16. qu. whether Daniel did well in this praying,
to offer himself to public danger. 17. qu. Of Daniels adversaries practice
and accusation against him. 18. qu. How the king labored to deliver Daniel
till the Sun went down. 19. qu. whether Darius might not have broken this
decree. 20. qu. whether Darius prayer for Daniel were of faith. 21. qu. v. 17.
why the king sealed the stone with his seal. 22. qu. Whether Darius were truly
converted, confessing Daniels God to be the living God. 23. qu. Of Daniels
deliverance from the lions, and the cause thereof. 24. qu. Of Daniels
salutation to the king, O king live for ever. 25. qu. Of Daniels manner of
deliverance from the lions, that it was divine and extraordinary. 26. qu. why
the Lord does not always send his children temporal deliverance. 27. qu. Of
Darius joy, v. 23. then was the king exceeding glad. 28. qu. whether the king
did justly in causing Daniels accusers, with their wives and children, to be
cast into the den. 29. qu. Of king Darius decree concerning the worshipping
of Daniels God, the order and parts thereof. 30. qu. Of Daniels prosperous
estate under Darius and Cyrus. 31. qu. Whether this miracle of Daniels
deliverance from the lions were showed at Babylon in Chaldea or in Media.
Questions upon the seventh chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. Of the order observed by Daniel in the setting down of these visions.
2. qu. Of the visions which follow in general. 3. qu. Of visions in general.
4. qu. Of the time when this vision was revealed unto Daniel. 5. qu. Why the
vision of the four Monarchies is again revealed unto Daniel being showed
before to Nebuchadnezzar, c. 2. 6. qu. What manner of vision this was which
Daniel here had, and how it was revealed. 7. qu. What was meant by the four
winds which strove together upon the sea. 8. qu. Of the description of these
beasts in general. 9. qu. Why the kings and kingdoms of the earth are likened
unto beasts. 10. qu. Of the agreement between this vision of the four beasts,
and that of the image showed to Nebuchadnezzar, c. 2. 11. qu. Of the first
beast representing the Chaldean Monarchy. 12. qu. Where the Chaldean Monarchy
here described must take beginning. 13. qu. Of the second beast, and why the
Persian Monarchy is compared to a bear. 14. qu. Why the bear is said to
stand upon the one side. 15. qu. Of the three ribs in his mouth, what they
signify. 16. qu. Who said unto him, Arise and devour, etc. v. 5. 17. qu. Of
the Persian kings with whom the Persian Monarchy begun and ended. 18. qu. Of
the third beast called a leopard, the description of the third Monarchy. 19.
qu. Why the fourth beast has no name. 20. qu. Of the description of the 4.
beast in general. 21. qu. Whether the Roman or Turkish Empire be signified by
this fourth beast. 22. qu. That the kingdom of Syria which was held by
Seleucus and his posterity, was this fourth beast. 23. qu. Of the iron teeth
and other parts of the general description of the fourth beast. 24. qu. Why it
is said to stamp the residue under the feet. 25. qu. Wherein this fourth
beast was unlike the rest. v. 7. 26. qu. Of the ten horns, what is signified
thereby, v. 7. 27. qu. Who is signified by the little horn, ver. 8. 28. qu.
Who these three kings should be, signified by the three horns plucked away.
29. qu. Of other properties of this little horn. 30. qu. Of the description of
the glorious manner of Gods judgment expressed, v. 9. to v. 15. 31. qu.
Whether the final judgment in the end of the world be here described. 32.
qu. v. 9. who is said to be the ancient of days, and how. 33. qu. How God was
seen of Daniel which is invisible. 34. qu. How judgment is said to be set,
seeing God is judge from everlasting. 35. qu. What the fire signifies which
issued from the throne. 36. qu. Of the number of Angels that ministered unto
God, thousand thousands, etc. ver. 10. 37. qu. What books these were which
were opened, v. 10. 38. qu. Of the destruction of the fourth beast. 39. qu.
Why the other beasts had their dominion taken away, and how their lives were
prolonged. 40. qu. v. 13. Why it is said one like the son of man. 41. qu.
How he is said to come in the clouds, and approaches to the ancient of days,
and when. 42. qu. That this kingdom could not be the kingdom of the
Macchabees. 43. qu. That this kingdom is the kingdoms of Christ our Blessed
Lord and Savior. 44. qu. That this kingdom given to the son of man shall
not be in earth, against the Chiliastes. 45. qu. Of the excellency of Christ's
kingdom beyond other kingdoms. 46. qu. How the kingdom of Christ is said to
be everlasting, seeing it shall be delivered up unto God, 1. Cor. 15. 24. 47.
qu. v. 17. Of the rising of the four beasts. 48. qu. Who shall possess the
kingdom of the Saints. 49. qu. Why they are called the most high Saints, v.
18. 50. qu. v. 20. How the horn called before little, is said to be in show,
greater then the rest. 51. qu. How this little horn is said to change laws and
times. 52. qu. What is meant by a time, times, and a part of time, v. 25. 53.
qu. What is meant by the half or dividing of time, v. 25. 54. qu. How this
kingdom is said to be given to the holy people, v. 27. which is said, v. 14. to
be given to the son of man.
Questions upon the 8. chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. The difference between this vision and the former. 2. qu. Of the time
of this vision. 3. qu. What manner of vision this was. 4. qu. How Daniel is
said to be in Sushan, ver. 2. 5. qu. Of the city Sushan, by whom it was
builded, and whence so named. 6. qu. Of the situation of the city Sushan. 7.
qu. Of the river Vlai where Daniel had this vision. 8. qu. Why Daniel names
himself in the first person. 9. qu. Why the kings of Persia are compared to a
ram, v. 3. 10. qu. Who are signified by the two horns, whereof one was
higher then the other. 11. qu. Of the greatness and prosperous success of
this ram. 12. qu. Of the meaning of these words, as I considered. v. 5. 13.
qu. Why the kingdom of the Grecians is resembled to a goat. 14. qu. Of
Alexander the great signified by the horn between the eyes, his birth,
education, exploits, death, and end. 15. qu. Of the victory of Alexander
against Darius, described by the goats ouercomming the ram. 16. qu. Of the
breaking of this great horn, and of the death of Alexander. 17. qu. Of the
four horns which came up in the stead of this great horn. 18. qu. When these
four kingdoms did arise after the great horn was broken. 19. qu. Who was
this little horn, v. 9. 20. qu. Of the outrages committed by Antiochus
Epiphanes signified by this little horn. 21. qu. Of the meaning of these words,
v. 12. the army was given up with the daily sacrifice by iniquity. 22. qu. Of
the meaning of the word, Palmoni, v. 13. 23. qu. What Angel that was, unto whom
one of the Angels spoke. 24. qu. Of the time prescribed, v. 14. of 2300 days,
how it is to be taken. 25. qu. When this term of 2300. began and ended. 26.
qu. When the kingdom of the Greeks so often mentioned in the book of the
Macchabees took beginning. 27. qu. Why the kingdom of the Greeks is counted
from the reign of the Seleucians. 28. qu. of the name Gabriel. 29. qu. v. 16.
Upon these words, make this man to understand the vision, whether Augels can
give us understanding. 30. qu. How Alexander is said to be the first king of
Grecia. 31. qu. of the time when Antiochus Epiphanes should rise up in the
latter end of their kingdom, v. 25. 32. qu. The description of Antiochus and
of his doings. 33. qu. Of some differences in the story of the Macchabees
concerning the death of Antiochus. 34. qu. Of the agreement of other
persecutions of the Church with this description of Antiochus. 35. qu. Why it
is called the vision of the evening and morning, v. 26. 36. qu. Why Daniel is
bidden to seal up the vision. 37. qu. What kings business Daniel did, v. 27.
38. qu. Of the meaning of these words. v. 27. none understood or perceived it.
39. qu. The history of Antiochus Epiphanes reign abridged, for the better
understanding of this vision.
Questions upon the 9. chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. What Assuerus this was whose son Darius is said to be. 2. qu. of the
years of Darius reign, and how this vision is said to be in his first year.
3. qu. Whether in the first year of Darius the Chaldean Monarchy was
dissolved, and the 70. years captivity ended, against the opinion of Joseph.
Scaliger, lib. 6. 4. qu. of the 70. years of captivity in what sense they are
called seven generations, Baruch, 6. 2. 5. qu. When the 70. years of
captivity mentioned v. 2. took their beginning. 6. qu. when the 70. years of
captivity ended. 7. qu. of Daniels prayer, v. 4. to v. 20. 8. qu. How Daniel
prays for the deliverance of the people, seeing it was certainly promised
after the 70. years. 9. qu. Of the properties required in the prayers of the
faithful observed here in Daniels prayer, v. 20. 10. qu. Of the apparition of
the Angel Gabriel, v. 21. 11. qu. How Daniel descer^ed this to be a good Angel.
12. qu. Whether the Angels have bodies. 13. qu. Why the Angel came about the
time of the evening sacrifice, v. 21. 14. qu. Why Daniel is called a man of
desires, v. 23. 15. qu. v. 24. Seventy weeks are determined: How Daniels
prayer is heard, praying for the peoples deliverance. 16. qu. v. 24. How the
seventy weeks must be understood. 17. qu. Why 70. weeks are said to be cut
out or determined. 18. qu. Why this term of 490. years is expressed by
weeks. 19. qu. Why the Angel says, upon thy people, and upon thine holy city.
20. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 24. to finish or rather restrain
wickedness. 21. qu. Of the sealing of sins. 22. qu. What it is to reconcile
iniquity. 23. qu. v. 24. How the Messiah brought everlasting righteousness.
24. qu. Why it is called everlasting righteousness. 25. qu. Whether as Christ's
satisfaction for the punishment of sin is imputed to us by faith, so likewise
his innocence. 26. qu. Whether the justice brought in by Christ, exceed the
justice of Adam. 27. qu. Whether it stands with Gods justice to justify us
by another righteousness, and how that may be. 28. qu. How the vision and
prophecy was to be sealed up. 29. qu. Of the anointing of the holy one, who
is signified thereby. 30. qu. Why Christ is called the holy of holies. 31. qu.
How Christ was anointed. 32. qu. When Christ was anointed. 33. qu. Of the
obscurenes and difficulty of this prophecy. 34. qu. Of the diverse
interpretations of Daniels weeks, with an answer to the cavil of the Jews
concerning the dissension of our interpreters. 35. qu. What Chronology and
computation of time is to be followed in the account of the 70. weeks, which
make 490. years. 36. qu. whether the account of the Olympiake years be a
certain direction for the understanding of Daniels weeks. 37. qu. Of the names
and number of the Persian kings. 38. qu. Of the uncertainty of the years of
the Persian Monarchy and of the Persian kings. 39. qu. That Daniels weeks do
signify a certain definite number of years. 40. qu. That Origens account
cannot stand beginning the 70. weeks at Adam, and ending them at the
destruction of Jerusalem. 41. qu. That the 70. weeks must not begin before the
peoples return out of captivity. 42. qu. That the 70. weeks do not begin
in the reigns of the other kings of Persia after Cyrus. 43. qu. That Daniels
70. weeks must take beginning from the proclamation made by Cyrus for the
return of the people. 44. qu. Under which of the Persian kings Mordecai lived,
and of his age. 45. qu. which of the Persian kings it was that renewed the
decree for the reedifying of the Temple. 46. qu. What Artaxerxes it was in
whose 7. year Ezra was sent, and in whose 20. Nehemiah. 47. qu. That Daniels
70. weeks were determined neither before Christ's passion, nor at the
destruction of the city. 48. qu. That the 70. weeks end not after the
destruction of Jerusalem. 49. qu. That the 70. weeks must end at the passion of
Christ. 50. qu. Of the just and exact computation of years from Cyrus first
unto the passion of Christ. 51. qu. Of the years of the Persian kings in
particular to make up the said sum of (...) 130. years, and first of the
years to the finishing of the Temple. 52. qu. That Xerxes reign was
intermingled with his fathers in the beginning, and with his sons in the end.
53. qu. Of the particular years of the second part of the Persian Monarchy
from the finishing of the Temple to the end thereof. 54. qu. Of the just
computation of the years of the Grecian Monarchy. 55. qu. The several
interpretations of Daniels 70. weeks dispersedly handled before summed
together. 56. qu. Why the 7. weeks are severed from the 62. v. 25. unto the
Messiah shall be 7. weeks and 62. weeks. 57. qu. Whether these 7. weeks must
be ^ted before the 62. weeks or after. 58. qu. When this term of 7. weeks,
that is 49. years began, and when it ended. 59. qu. Whether that place John
2. 20. that the Temple was 46. years in building, have any agreement with
these 7. weeks. 60. qu. Unto Messiah the Prince shall be 7. weeks, v. 25. who
is here understood by the Messiah. 61. qu. The street shall be built again in
a troublesome time, how this was fulfilled. 62. qu. Of the 62. weeks, how they
are to be understood. 63. qu. Shall Messiah be slain, v. 26. who this Messiah
was that should be slain. 64. qu. And he shall have nothing, or rather not for
himself, of the meaning of these words. 65. qu. Of the year of the nativity
of our blessed Savior. 66. qu. Of the computation of years from the creation
to the nativity of our Blessed Savior. 67. qu. In what year of the reign of
Herod our blessed Savior was borne. 68. qu. In what year of his age Christ
was baptized. 69. qu. How many years Christ lived on earth, and in what year
of his life Christ was put to death. 70. qu. Of the number of Pasches which
Christ solemnized in the days of his flesh, whereby the time and years of his
preaching is certainly gathered. 71. qu. At what time of the year Christ was
borne. 72. qu. Of the space and distance of time, that was between Christ's
baptism and his passion. 73. qu. Upon what day of the week Christ suffered,
and whether upon a festival day. 74. qu. Who are meant by the people of the
Prince to come. 75. qu. how long after the Messiah was slain this destruction
happened by Titus. 76. qu. Why mention is made of the destruction of Jerusalem
here, seeing it is without the compass of the 70. weeks. 77. qu. Of the
meaning of these words, v. 26. the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto
the end of the battle it shall be destroyed. 78. qu. That the end of the
state of the Jews not of the Romans is here signified 79. qu. Of the most
grievous calamities that fell upon the Jews in the final destruction of their
city. 80. qu. That all this misery came upon the Jews for putting to death
the Messiah. 81. qu. He shall confirm the covenant with many for one week,
how this one week is to be understood. 82. qu. What is understood by the
covenant. 83. qu. How this covenant was ratified and confirmed. 84. qu. When
this Testament began to be ratified and confirmed by the preaching of Christ.
85. qu. v. 27. In the half of the week he shall cause the sacrifice to cease:
when this half week began. 86. qu. How and when the sacrifices were caused
to cease and were abolished. 87. qu. What is meant by the ouerspreading of
abomination, v. 27. of the best reading thereof. 88. qu. What this
abomination of desolation was. 89. qu. v. 27. Whether the desolation of
Jerusalem here spoken of should be final.
Questions upon the tenth chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. Of the excellency of this vision revealed in this chapter, and the two
next, unto Daniel. 2. qu. How the third year of Cyrus is here to be
understood. 3. qu. Of Daniels understanding of this vision. 4. qu. v. 1. Why
Daniel makes mention of his name Belteshazar. 5. qu. v. 2. Why Daniel was so
long in heaviness. 6. qu. Of the time that Daniel mourned which was three
weeks of days. 7. qu. Of Daniels abstinencie. 8. qu. Of the custom and use of
anointing, which Daniel also forbeareth. 9. qu. Of the river Hiddekel where
Daniel had this vision. 10. qu. Whether Daniel were only in spirit or bodily
present by the river Tigris. 11. qu. Why this vision was showed unto Daniel by
the river Tigris. 12. qu. Whether it were an Angel or Christ which appeared
here unto Daniel. 13. qu. Of the description of the manner how Christ appeared,
and first of his apparel. 14. qu. Of the glorious parts of this heavenly body
which appeared unto Daniel. 15. qu. How Daniel is said to see the vision alone.
16. qu. The causes of Daniels great fear. 17. qu. Whose hand it was that
touched Daniel. 18. qu. Why Daniels prayer being heard at the first, yet the
Angels coming was deferred 21. days, v. 12. 19. qu. What it was that Daniel
prayed for and how he was heard. 20. qu. Who is understood to be the Prince of
Persia. 21. qu. How the Prince of Persia is said to have withstood the Angel.
22. qu. Who this Michael was which helped the Angel. 23. qu. How Michael helped
the other angel. 24. qu. How the angel says he was left with the kings of
Persia. 25. qu. Who it is whom Daniel calls Lord, v. 17. 26. qu. Who it was
that had this communication with Daniel in this vision. 27. qu. Who is meant by
the Prince of Grecia. 28. qu. Of the original of the Grecians here called
Iavan, v. 21. 29. qu. In what sense the Angel says, that none held with him
but Michael their Prince.
Questions upon the 11. chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. Whether this vision in the 11. chapter be diverse from the former
vision in the 10. chapter. 2. qu. v. 1. Who it was that here says, I stood up,
etc. 3. qu. Who it was whom the Angel stood up to strengthen. 4. qu. Why the
Persian Monarchy is so briefly touched, and the Grecians set forth at large.
5. qu. That there were more then three kings of Persia, as may be gathered out
of the Scripture. 6. qu. Who were those four kings of Persia here named. 7.
qu. Of the fourth king of Persia his riches and power. 8. qu. why the Angel
leaves at the fourth king of Persia, seeing there we^e more. 9. qu. A brief
description of the rising and fall of Alexanders kingdom. 10. qu. Of
Alexanders birth and education, acts and life, end and death abridged. 11. qu.
Of the 4. successors of Alexander. 12. qu. How all Alexanders posterity was
rooted out that none of them succeeded in the kingdom. 13. qu. Of the meaning
of these words, v. 4. It shall be for others beside these. 14. qu. Of the petie
divisions of Alexanders kingdom among his several captains before it grew
into four, and of their mutual dissension. 15. qu. why the Angel prosequuteth
the story only of the king of the South and of the North, omitting the rest.
16. qu. Of the kings of Egypt and Syria of whom Daniel prophesies in this
chapter. 17. qu. Of the first Ptolome called here the king of the South. 18.
qu. v. 5. One of his Princes shall prevail, who is meant hereby. 19. qu. That
this kingdom of the North is the same which Ezekiel calls Gog and Magog. 20.
qu. Of the first variance between the king of the South and the king of the
North, and of their joining together again. 21. qu. what king of the South
this was whose daughter came to the king of the North. 22. qu. Of the
translation of the Septuagint, which was procured by this Ptolome Philadelphus.
23. qu. who was the bud of her roots v. 7. and of his exploits. 24. qu. Of the
third battle between the king of the South and the king of the North v. 10.
11. 12. 25. qu. Of the first expedition of Antiochus the great against
Epiphanes king of Egypt. 26. qu. Of the second expedition of Antiochus the
great against Ptolomeus Epiphanes. 27. qu. Of the third expedition of Antiochus
Megas against Epiphanes, v. 17. 28. qu. Of Antiochus expedition against foreign
countries, v. 18. 29. qu. Of the death of Antiochus the great, ver. 19. 30. qu.
Of the acts and end of Seleucus Philopator, the son of Antiochus the great,
ver. 20. 31. qu. whether the rest of this chapter be properly understood of
Antiochus Epiphanes or of Antichrist. 32. qu. Of the first entrance of
Antiochus Epiphanes to the kingdom. 33. qu. Of the first expedition of
Antiochus Epiphanes against Egypt, v. 22. 23. 24. 34. qu. Of the second
expedition of Epiphanes against Egypt, verse. 25. 26. 27. 28. 35. qu. Of the
third expedition of Antiochus Epiphanes against Egypt, v. 29. 30. 36. qu. Of
the meaning of the word Chittim, v. 30. 37. qu. Of the persecution of the
people of God by Antiochus, and the manner thereof, v. 31. 38. qu. What is
understood by the arms, v. 31. 39. qu. Of the defiling of the Sanctuary and
the manner thereof. 40. qu. How Antiochus used as his instruments certain
wicked persons that forsook the law. 41. qu. Of such things as the faithful
people should do and suffer in this persecution. 42. qu. Of the consolation of
the afflicted church of the Jews. 43. qu. Of the pride of Antiochus, and the
exalting of himself against God. 44. qu. Antiochus impiety and inhumanitie
further described out of the 37. v. 45. qu. How Antiochus is said not to have
respect to the desires of women. 46. qu. Of the strange God, that Antiochus
shall set up, v. 38. 47. qu. Of Antiochus politic devises to maintain the
idolatrous service of his new god, v. 39. 48. qu. Of the last expedition of
Antiochus against Egypt, Judea, and other nations, v. 40. 41. 42. 43. 49. qu.
Where the Lybians and Aethiopians inhabited. 50. qu. Of the end of Antiochus,
and such things as immediately went before. 51. qu. Of the sudden and fearful
end of Antiochus.
Questions upon the 12. chapter of Daniel.
1. qu. What time is here meant, and in that time shall Michael stand up, v. 1.
2. qu. who is understood here to be Michael the great Prince. 3. qu. What time
of trouble the Angel here speaks of. 4. qu. What deliverance the Angel
speaks of, and of whom. 5. qu. Whether all the Jews shall be saved before
the coming of Christ. 6. qu. what kind of book Daniel here speaks of. 7.
qu. Why this mystery of resurrection is here plainly revealed to Daniel. 8.
qu. Of the coherence of this comfortable mention made of the resurrection with
the former prophecy. 9. qu. why it is said, many of them which sleep shall
awake, and not all. 10. qu. A description of the resurrection both of good and
bad. 11. qu. Of the great glory which shall be given unto those which instruct
others to salvation, v. 3. 12. qu. How the faithful teachers are said to
justify others. 13. qu. why Daniel is commanded to seal the book, and what
is the meaning thereof. 14. qu. Until the time defined or appointed, v. 4.
what time this was here limited. 15. qu. Of these words, many shall run
thorough, and knowledge shall be increased. 6. qu. what two they were which
Daniel saw by the brinke of the river, v. 5. 17. qu. who it was that enquired
of the man clothed in linen, v. 6. 18. qu. who the man was clothed in linen
of whom the question was asked. 19. qu. what is meant by a time, two times, and
an half, v. 7. 20. qu. Of the meaning of these words, v. 7. when he has made
an end to disperse the hand of the holy people. 21. qu. what it was that
Daniel understood, v. 8. 22. qu. whether Daniel had altogether a repulse in his
demand. 23. qu. Of those words, v. 10. the wicked shall do wickedly, and none
shall have understanding: what wicked he speaks of. 24. qu. what the
abomination of desolation is, mentioned v. 11. 25. qu. The 1290. mentioned v.
11. how to be taken. 26. qu. The term of 1335. days expounded. 27. qu. Of
the last words spoken to Daniels go thy way unto the end, v. 13. 28. qu. If
thou shall rest and stand up in thy let.
The sum of these questions amounts to 593. or thereabout.

A Table of the Controversies.
Places of Controversy.
1. Contr. THe vulgar Latin translation not the best. 2. contr. The history of
Susanna, the song of the three children, and of Bell and the dragon, are no
parts of Daniel, nor of the Canonical Scripture.
Controversies upon the 1. chapter of Daniel.
1. Contr. Whether the changing of the Popes name be grounded upon the example
of Peter. 2. contr. That fasting is not meritorious nor satisfactorie. 3.
contr. That the prescript of fasting days for abstinence, and for forbearing
of certain kinds of meats, is no^ warranted here by Daniels abstinence. 4.
contr. v. 20. What the wise men of the Chaldeans were, and whether the wise men
which came to Christ were kings. 5. contr. v. 20. Of the Magicians among the
Chaldeans, and how that such were always opposite to the true Church of God,
as diverse of the Popes were such.
Controversies upon the 2. chapter of Daniel.
1. Contr. That the Scriptures should be extant in the vulgar and known
tongue. 2. contr. That prayer must only be made unto God. 3. contr. That
prayer is not meritorious, but grounded only upon Gods mercy. 4. contr. That
Matrimony is no Sacrament. 5. contr. That the Saints merit not. 6. contr. v.
21. That the Pope has no power committed unto him to put down kings. 7.
contr. That the Pope can not be Christ's Vicar general in earth. 8. contr. That
the time of Christ's coming to judgment, can not be gathered from Daniels
prophecy, v. 44. 9. contr. v. 45. Whether the virgin Marie be the mountain
out of the which the stone was cut. 10. contr. Whether Christ verily increased
in the gifts and graces of the soul. 11. contr. That the Pope is not to be
reverenced, honored, and worshipped through the world. 12. contr. That it can
not be proved out of Daniels prophecy that the Pope is not Antichrist. 13.
contr. Of the lawfulnes of Magistracy, against the Anabaptists.
Controversies upon the 3. chapter of Daniel.
1. Contr. That an image used for any religious use, and an idol, are all one.
2. contr. Against the adoration of images. 3. contr. Whither images in Churches
may be tolerated, though they be not adored. 4. contr. Of the ways and means
whereby idolatry is promoted. 5. contr. Of the use of Church music, and
musical instruments. 6. contr. The multitude of professors does not argue the
truth of the profession. 7. contr. Of superstitious dedications. 8. contr. That
counsels and general assemblies may err. 9. contr. The fire and sword and
other cruelties, the weapons of idolators and superstitious men. 10. contr.
That these three servants of God were not delivered for their virginity or
abstinencie. 11. contr. Against the Vbiquitaries. 12. contr. That miracles are
not always a note and sure mark of the Church. 13. contr. Whether a contrary
religion may be tolerated in a Commonwealth. 14. contr. That the conversion of
Nebuchadnezzer, does not signify the conversion of the Devil in the end of
the world.
Controversies upon the 4. chapter of Daniel.
1. Contr. That the virgin Marie was not without sin. 2. Contr. Against free
will. 3. Contr. Against the invocation of Saints. 4. Contr. That the Pope is
not the distributer of kingdoms. 5. contr. Against satisfaction by works. 6.
contr. Of the certainty of remission of sins. 7. contr. Which be the good
works of Christians. 8. contr. That Gods providence is not only a bare
prescience or permission. 9. contr. Against the Pope who would be without check
or controlment.
Controversies upon the 5. chapter of Daniel.
1. Contr. That idolaters and worshippers of images make them their gods. 2.
contr. Whether images in Churches may be retained, though they be not
worshipped. 3. contr. That not Protestants, but Papists are the profaners of
holy things. 4. contr. That there are no certain periods of kingdoms.
Controversies upon the 6. chapter of Daniel.
1. Contr. Against canonical and stinted hours of prayer. 2. contr. That it
is no Apostolical tradition to pray toward the East. 3. contr. That the
public profession of our faith is necessary, and it is not sufficient to have
it inwardly in the heart. 4. contr. That it is not lawful worshipping God to
look toward an image. 5. contr. Against the Papists and Vbiquitaries, that
hold a carnal presence in the sacrament. 6. contr. Of the false suggestions of
the Papists against the Protestants. 7. contr. Of the unjust proceeding of the
Romanists in their cruel inquisition, condemning the Protestants, their cause
not being heard. 8. contr. Of the practicing of Popes against Princes. 9.
contr. Whether one is just before God by an inherent justice. 10. contr.
Whether Daniels innocence were the meritorious cause of his deliverance. 11.
contr. That a general faith, called salus implicita, an implicit faith, is not
sufficient.
Controversies upon the 7. chapter of Daniel.
1. Contr. The Church is not discerned by the greatness and largenes thereof. 2.
contr. Whether the Saints shall judge the world. 3. contr. The vulgar Latin
translation not authentical. 4. contr. Of the diverse orders of Angels. 5.
contr. The glorious persons of the Trinity are not to be represented by any
image. 6. contr. Against the Vbiquitaries which hold an omnipresence of Christ's
humanity. 7. contr. That diuturnitie and long continuance without
interruption, is no infallible note of the Church. 8. contr. That the dominion
of the Pope is temporal rather then spiritual. 9. contr. That Antichrist is
already come.
Controversies upon the 8. chapter of Daniel.
1. Contr. Prosperity and external felicity, is no perpetual note of the
Church. 2. contr. That the abomination of desolation spoken of, v. 13. is not
the abolishing of the sacrifice of the Mass. 3. contr. The authority of the
Scripture depends not upon the testimony of the Church. 4. contr. The
description of Antiochus agreeeth to the Pope and Antichrist.
Controversies upon the 9. chapter of Daniel.
1. Contr. That prayer and fasting is not meritorious. 2. cont. God only is to
be inuocated, not Saints or Angels. 3. contr. That Christ is the only
Mediator. 4. contr. Against prayer or invocation of the dead. 5. contr. Of the
name of the Catholic Church, that it is but usurped by the Romanists. 6.
contr. That no man is perfect in this life. 7. contr. That the prayers of the
faithful are not meritorious. 8. contr. That we are not justified by any
inherent righteousness, but imputed only by faith. 9. contr. Whether sin any
way after forgiveness may be said to remain in the faithful. 10. contr. That
charity is not more principal in the matter of justification then faith. 11.
contr. That the Pope does blasphemously usurp the title of Christ, to be
called most holy. 12. contr. Whether the Sacrament of the Altar be most holy.
13. contr. That Christ is Mediator both as God and man. 14. contr. Against the
sacrifice of the Mass. 15. contr. Against the Jews, that the Messiah who was
expected of the Fathers, is already come into the world.
Controversies upon the 10. chapter of Daniel.
1. Contr. Against superstitious fasting. 2. contr. That Paradise was a
terrestrial place. 3. contr. Against the curious distinction of the orders of
Angels.
Controversies upon the 11. chapter of Daniel.
1. Contr. Of the birth and offspring of Antichrist. 2. contr. That Antichrist
shall not be one particular man. 3. contr. That Nero the Emperor shall not be
the great Antichrist. 4. contr. That Antichrist shall be a deceiuer rather then
a victorious conqueror. 5. contr. Of Antichrists miracles. 6. contr. That
Antichrists coming shall not be deferred to the end of the world. 7. contr.
That Antichrists seat shall not be at Jerusalem. 8. contr. That the city of
Rome shall not be utterly destroyed before Antichrist shall come. 9. contr.
That the Papists Antichrist and the Jews Messiah shall come together. 10.
contr. Of the true marks whereby Antichrist may be discerned. 11. contr. How
the description of Antiochus historically does typically decyphre the Pope and
Antichrist. 12. contr. That S. Paul speaks of an apostasy and departure from
the faith, 2. These. 2. 3. 13. contr. Of other notes and marks wherein Antiochus
and Antichrist agree. 14. contr. How the Antichrist of Rome has persecuted
Emperors, Kings, Princes, and learned men for religion. 15. contr. Of the
pride and blasphemies of Antichrist against God. 16. contr. How Antichrist is
said to sit in the Temple of God. 17. contr. Of the prosperity and outward
success of Antichrist. 18. contr. That external happiness is not a sure note
of the Church. 19. contr. why the Lord suffers Antichrist to rage against his
church. 20. contr. That out of this text, v. 36. it cannot be proved that the
Pope is not Antichrist, as Bellarmine intends. 21. contr. How Antichrist
shall forsake his fathers god, v. 31. 22. contr. How the Roman Antichrist
regards not the desire of women. 23. contr. That the Antichrist shall not
care in deed for any god, nor have any sense of religion. 24. contr. How
Antichrist shall bring in a strange god which his fathers never knew, v. 38.
25. contr. Of the theatricall and pompous service with silver and gold, which
Antichrist has found out for his new idol. 26. contr. How Antichrist shall
distribute honors and possessions unto his favorites and that for money. 27.
contr. Of Antichrists insatiable ambition, cruelty, and covetousness. 28.
contr. Of the rage and fury of Antichrist. 29. contr. How Antichrists palace
is planted between two seas. 30. contr. Of the fearful end of diverse
Popes.
Controversies upon the 12. chapter.
1. Contr. Against blasphemous Servetus that made himself Michael. 2. contr.
Whether Henoch and Elias shall stand up with Michael in the last times. 3.
contr. What manner of persecution shall be under Antichrist. 4. contr. Of the
certainty of Election, that none of the elect can finally fall away. 5. contr.
In what sense Moses wishes to be rased out of Gods book, Exodus 32. 33. 6.
contr. That the souls of the faithful departed do not sleep until the
resurrection, but presently enjoy the sight of God. 7. contr. That all men
shall rise again, and not only the faithful, neither shall they die again.
8. contr. That Christ died not in general for all, but only for those that
believe. 9. contr. That the faithful do not justify other by any merit or
satisfaction, but as ministers only of salvation. 10. contr. That the Saints
merits as they are diverse, do not merit diverse degrees of glory. 11. contr.
The Scriptures are not so obscure but all may be admitted to the reading of
them. 12. contr. Bellarmine confuted, who by diverse arguments out of this
chapter, would procue the Pope not to be Antichrist.
The number of these Controversies is an 134.

The Doctrines and moral observations are not summed, as being neither so
many in number, nor of such special note.

This Commentary was finished by Gods gracious assistance, upon the 31. of
December. in the year 1608. anno aetatis Authoris 46.

Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ.

The faults escaped.
The first number shows the page, the second the line.
3. 1. read Iaddua. 3. 4. read, was about an 160. years. 3. 41. read other,
for either. 7. 27. prophetalem. 12. 9. koph. 12. 11. read, unto Jerusalem (not
into, etc. 13. 8. read, it was not a, etc. 17. 1. for Cyrus, read Tyrus. 24.
32. dipnosophist. 24. 37. ghebed for ghebat. 41. 44. the house of his. 43. 34.
read, ye would, 64. 37. read, 3. hundred thousand. 77. 17. read, girded thee.
81. 4. read, ex pacto for ex part. 88. 9. read, infers, therefore, etc. 90.
18. read, in the first occasion, for accusation. 91. 49. read, deliver us or
not, V. 94. 26. read, ouertopped. 98. 57. they for those. 113. 6. read,
occasion of stumbling. 118. 18. read, deliberate, 124. 5. read, not so much in.
131. 31. read, Nimrod. 140. 55. Pint. 143. 39. read, defined for defended. 145.
18. read if, for and if. 150. 54. read obscene, for obscure. 181. 45. for the
holy spirit, r. the law. 184. 22. read, incredible. 184. 31. read, coniunctum.
198. 36. read, their. 210. 30. at that time. 210. 57. read, heard of. 237. 9.
read, grounded. 252. 14. read, they were. 252. 23. read, virgin. 323. 24. read,
70. for 72. 373. 4. Daniel. 384. 24. phrase. 397. 43. read, Angel. 401. 26.
abridged. 423. 25. for both by, read by. 429. 41. r. leeloah, 42. read, it be,
for it might be. 434. 2^. this is, for that is. 448. 3. Exarch. 451. 39.
Pontisicem. 456. 26. for, nay rather that, read that. 459. 17. read, bought.
460. 25. forgeries. 472. 35. read, prophetical. 486. 30. Aretas. 491. 4. for
whence, read hence. 509. 29. for money.

Add this following unto page 87. line 36.
Concerning the controversy of Christ's increasing in the graces of the spirit,
thus much further may be added by way of explanation. 1. Out of Cyril, that
corporale augmentum, etc. the growth of body, and increasing in wisdom,
humanitatis mensurae conueniat, ageeth unto his humane condition: as Christ was
God he increased not. 2. In respect of his hypo^^aticall union, there was no
increase: he was in the very first instant of his conception perfect God and
perfect man, as Heb. 1. 6. when he brings in his first begotten Son into
the world, he says, let all the Angels of God worship him: divine worship was
due unto Christ, at his very first coming into the world. 3. Concerning the
graces which the divine nature conferred upon his humanity, they were either
habitual, infused into the soul of our Savior in the very first union, or
experimental: the first increased not, but were as ample and full in the first
instant of this blessed union, as afterward (for Christ's soul came not into
his body as tabula abrasa, a bare and naked table wherein nothing is written,
as our souls are,) saving that these infused and habitual graces could not
show themselves, till the organicall body was made fit thereunto, as at 12.
years he disputed and apposed the Doctors: these graces increased only per
modum declarationis, by way of declaration, as Cyril says, voluit quasi
paulatim diuinitatis suae gloriam declarare, he would by little and little
manifest the glory of his dietie. 4. Yet the experimental knowledge, which is
gathered by sense and experience, increased in Christ, as Ambrose well
determines, sapientia sensu proficit, quia a sensu sapientia, sensus igitur
proficiebat humanus, wisdom increases by sense, for wisdom comes by the
sense: his humane sense increased, etc. and consequently his experimental
wisdom and knowledge: and that there was an accession of his experimental
knowledge, the Apostle shows, Heb. 2. 18. in that he suffered and was tempted,
he is able to succor them that are tempted.


