Thesaurus Ecclesiae: that is, The treasure of the Church consisting of the
perpetual intercession and most holy prayer of Christ, set forth in the 17.
chapter of the Gospel by S. John:

Which in this treatise is plainly interpreted, with necessary doctrines
enlarged, and fit applications enforced.

1. John, 2. 1, 2. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, etc. Printed
by JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge, 1604.

And are to be sold at the sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard, by Simon
Waterson.

TO THE RIGHT honorable the Lord Thomas Howard, Earl of Suffolck, Baron of
Walden, Knight of the honorable order of the garter, Lord high Chamberlain to
the kings most excellent Majesty, and of his most honorable privy Counsel.
IT is an usual thing (Right honorable) for subjects to imitate their prince,
and for inferiors to conform themselves to the example of great persons: as
Abimeleck said to his soldiers: Iud. ^. 4^.
what ye have seen me do, make have and do the like: for as Ambrose says,
lib. (...)
amplius proficitur exemplo: nec difficile redditur quod iam fact^^ est, and
vtile, quod probatum: men profit much by examples, for neither seems that
hard, which is done before, nor unprofitable that is tried by others:

Thus should we all set before our eyes the example of our master Christ, and
tread in his holy steps: I have given you an example says our blessed
savior John 13. 15. this it is to run after the savor of his ointment,
Cantic. 1. 2.
to follow his sweet example. As Aarons ointment ran down from his head to
the skirtes of his clothing: Psalm 134.
so Christ's holy vestures are from him as our head dispersed among his members:
therefore Christ vouchsafes to call his faithful servants his fellows or
partners. Psalm. 45. 7. because they partake of his goodness, and savor of his
virtues.

Here then is set forth unto us in this treatise the example of Christ
praying: that we should therein be like our heavenly master, to be occupied in
earnest and faithful prayer: wherein in particular diverse profitable points
are to be observed.

I We are taught how necessary a thing it is to be suitors unto God by prayer:
for if Christ prayed, who in respect of himself needed not to pray, but for
our example: who neither wanted any grace to pray for* nor yet had any
imperfection to pray against, if he notwithstanding prayed for us, much more
have we cause to pray for our selves, both to receive graces, which we have
not, and to be released of the evils which we have. Ambrose says well: quid
pro tua salute facere oportet, Lib. 5. in L^^.
quando pro te, Christus in oratione praeuertat? what should we do for our
selves seeing Christ watched for us al night in prayer? (...).
wherefore as the saying is, it is more necessary for us to pray then to breath.

II We learn also by this holy prayer of our savior, which was fulfilled in
every part thereof, how effectual the prayers and tears of the faithful are:
whatsoever they desire (says our savior) shall be given them of my heavenly
father Math. 18. 19. Ad Cel^^tium.
vim faciebat precum tuaru^ fidelis ambitio: the faithful ambition of thy
prayers did as it were force God: says Hierome Alexander said to Antipater,
(...).
that made great complaints of his mother: know thou not that she with one
tear will blot out all thy complaints? much more auaylable with God are the
tears of his servants, which as precious liquor he preserves in his bottles.
Psalm 56. 8.


III In that our Sauio^r prayed often, Luke (...).
and continued in prayer, it teaches, that we also should therein be daily
exercised, and as the Apostle says, 1. These. 5. 17.
pray continually: quia semper accipis semper inuoca: because thou had need
always to receive, (...) de obit. Theodo^ii. Xen. lib. 1. de Cyri. (...).
always pray: Xenophon writes o^ Cyrus, that would neither dine nor supp,
(...) before he had swett; neither should we eat or drink before we had shed
tears unto God.

IV Christ when he prayed, was wholly intent and fixed upon that holy action: so
should our thoughts be settled in prayer, that then most of all men should
follow the wise man's counsel, Prou 4 23.
to keep our heart with all diligence that we show our selves in prayer not
(...) but (...) as Zeno said of his scholars, not bablers of words, but
vtterers of matters: Hierome found this to be his infirmity, that oftentimes
in my prayer says he, aduer Luciferius
aut per porticus deambulo, aut de faenore computo: I think I am walking on
the streates, or accounting my money: so it is an easy matter for the thoughts
to roue in prayer, which we are taught to settle by Christ's example.

V Our blessed savior had therefore free recourse to prayer, because he was of
an holy and innocent life: so if we would have our prayers heard, we must lift
up pure hands as the Apostle says 1. Tim. 2. 8. Basilo says well: that the
presence of an honest life does make our prayers to have a loud sound. (...).


VI Our savior also by his example teaches us for what things we should
cheifely pray: not for temporal, but spiritual blessings: as v. 17. he says
sanctify them with thy truth: 1 King 3.
Solomon, because he asked wisdom rather then honor or riches, pleased god,
and received them all, even those temporal things* which he had not asked:
Hierom says well: auarus sum ad accipienda beneficia, quanto plus bibero, ^d
C^esiphon^.
tanto plus sitio: we should be even covetous of spiritual blessings: and the
more we drink, the more to thirst, for he that craves temporal blessings,
often asks them to his own hurt: as he that is sick of a fever, (...).
as one says, craves for wine.

VII Lastly our Savior prays confidently v. 24. father I will: so has he
taught us to pray without doubting: Mark. 11 3^.
whatsoever you desire believe you shall have it and it shall be done unto you:
we should not be discouraged, though at the first one request be not granted.
Deus differt desiderium, non ausert: God differreth our desire he dissolueth it
not: Bias that heathen philosopher could say, (...).
that a good conscience is without fear: so should our conscience in prayer
be free from fearful doubting.

Thus this example of our Savior as a rich storehouse affords infinite
treasure, and as a bundle of mirrh sends forth a most fragrant smell. This
Christian exercise, is the supporter of princes, the shield of defense for
nobles, the haven of rest for all: This makes honorable persons truly noble
indeed, when they acknowledge him, by whom they are innobled: and indeed the
greater the affairs of state are, wherein your honors are employed, the more
need have your honors of spiritual direction: as Daniel that great Regent
used to pray thrice in the day. Herein his Christian majesty, imitating the
divine and highest majesty may be an example to all both honorable and
inferior subjects, who as he practices in his royal person, (...). 11.
so prescribes to his princely son to pray often, and in what manner, and
for what things to pray. And indeed what can be more honorable then to talk
with the most high? what more comfortable, then for God to speak to our
hearts? for when we draw near unto God by prayer, he draws near unto us,
and as one says: a pure prayer is Gods temple: (...).
luctare ergo cum deo sicut Jacob, vt ipse se gaudeat superati: Lib 1. de
Genes. (...).
strive therefore with God in prayer (as Augustine says) with Jacob, that he
may joy to be overcome.

This treatise I have been bold to present to your honor, and to make you
the honorable patron of these my poor travails: being moved thereunto both
in respect of that duty which I owe in general for your noble affection and
true love to the university of Cambridge whereof I was once a member, and ever
remain a welwiller, and in particular for your honorable favor to a brother
in law of mine, your honors servant: I say no more at this time, then to wish
unto you increase of true honor and love of the truth in earth, and afterward
everlasting honor and an endless reward of your faith in heaven.

Your honors ready to be commanded in the Lord. Andrew Willet.

TO THE CHRIstian Reader.
AS every action of Christ is for our instruction, so especially his earnest
supplications made in the days of his flesh, are for our edification: And as
our blessed savior came into this world anointed to be our king, our prophet,
and priest, so accordingly hereunto all his principal actions were sorted
out: in his holy works and miracles, he showed his divine power as a king, in
his heavenly sermons, he ma^e known his divine wisdom as our prophet: and in
his prayers he testified his divine love as a merciful high priest.

Three of Christ's prayers are especially commended unto us: that at Lazarus
grave, Ioh. 11.
the other in the garden before his passion, Math. 26.
this in the 17. of John, as a preparation thereunto: the first made with
sighs and groans, the second with drops of blood and tears, the third with
great zeal and affection: the first showing commiseration, the second making a
way to our redemption, the third the fruit of his mediation.

In three things this prayer of Christ differs from the requests of his
members: first in respect of the person that prays, secondly in the manner of
the prayer, thirdly in the matter prayed for: the first was with authority, he
prays as our mediator both God and man, the second was with all sanctity,
whereas we can not tell how to pray as we ought. Romans 8. 16. the third with
great efficacy: the force of this prayer continues to the end of the world,
whereas our prayers are weak, and had need often to be iterated and repeated,
and therefore the Apostle bids us pray without ceasing. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.


Three principal benefits are conferred upon us by this prayer 1. our
protection from evil and danger: keep them from evil v. 15. 2. the collation
or bestowing of all spiritual grace; sanctify them with thy truth v. 17. 3.
the impetration or obtaining of our several prayers and requests: Math. 14.
31.
in the first Christ stretches forth his hand as to Peter, to help us that we
sink not: in the second he looks upon us with the eyes of mercy as upon the
same Peter, Luke 22. 61.
to give us his grace: in the third his ears are open to hear us, as they
were at the cry of blind Bartimeus. Mar. 10. 4^.


Solomon having built God an house, 1. King. 8.
did dedicate it by his prayer unto God: here a greater then Solomon, by
prayers better then Salomons, does consecrate unto God an house more glorious
then was Salomons, the spiritual temple of the church. This prayer of our
Savior is the foundation of our prayers, the propp and stay of our requests,
the very life of our supplications unto God: E^^d* 17.
as Aaron and Hurr held up Moses hands, so our feeble hands are hereby
strengthened: it is unto our prayers as the fiery chariot and horse to Elias, 2.
King. 2.
to carry them up into heaven: And as the Eagle bears up her young ones upon
her wings. Deuter. 32. 11. so this prayer of Christ gives wings unto our
prayers: and it is as the censor, Apoc. ^^.
wherein the odors of our prayers are censed up unto god. Therefore when we
address our selves to our prayers let us remember this prayer, as the
Israelites looked up to the brazen serpent in the wilderness, Numb. ^1. 9.
and as Stephen saw Jesus sitting at the right hand of God: Act. 7. 56.
let us lay it up in our heart, as the tables of stone were kept in the arc,
H^b. 9. 14.
let it be as incense to be laid always upon our spiritual offerings, Leuit
1. 15.
and as salt, Leuit. 2. 13.
whereby to season our sacrifices.

Thus this holy prayer of our Savior, if we be in heaviness, it will comfort
us, if in peril, deliver us: if we want any grace it will relieve us: in this
life it will guiavs, and in the next save us: Amen.

The Method or order of the 17. chapter of the page 1. Gospel according to S.
John.
The Chapter contains the prayer of Christ, whereof there are two parts: he
prays for himself, where we have the request it self, father glorify thy
son, v. 1. reasons. 1. a fine, from the end, that thy son may glorify
thee. v. 1. 2. a pari, from the like: as thou have given him power, etc. v. 2.
so give him glory: here the power given unto Christ is described by the end
or use of it, to give eternal life to all them, that thou have given him, v.
2. the matter subject, namely, eternal life, which is set forth by the helping
causes thereunto, the knowledge of God and Christ, v. 3.
3. a causa meritoria, from his desert or merit: I have glorified thee, v. 4
therefore glorify me also. 4. aeb aequo, from the equity: he asks but his
own, that glory which was his before the world was. v. 5.

(...) either then present, namely his Apostles: where is showed why he prays
for them? because they were Gods by election: Thine they were, v. 6. Christ's by
their vocation and obedience they receiud the word. and believed in Christ, v.
7. 8.
justification, in that they were given unto Christ, for whom he prays, and
not for the world. v. 9. 10.

what he prays for the^ for their preservation (...) the ^orld. 1. from their
necessity, because Christ should be no more with them. 2. from the effects,
that they may have peace and vn^^ one with another. v. 11. and true joy in
themseues. v. 13. 3. from the unlike example of Judas, who fell away, and
became the child of perdition. v. 12. 4. from the (...) compassed with many
enemies, the world hated them, v. 14. and therefore he prays, that they may
be kept in the world. v. 15.
their sa^ctification, the request for their sanctification in general, v. 17.
to be sanctified with the truth. in special, to be made fit for their message,
because they were sent into the world, v. 18.
the reason, because for their sakes Christ did sanctify himself, both by his
life and death. v. 19.


which was afterward to come, v. 20. he prays for their sanctification in
their perfect union and love: from the ^ffects, that the world may believe,
etc. v. 21. original cause, their election unto glory, v. 22. end, that they
may be perfect in one, etc. v. 22.
glorification it s^^e, which is described, v. 24 (...) means unto it
knowledge set forth by the co^^rarie, the w^rld knows not god. v. 25. the
cause, I have declared thy name. v. 26.
sense and feeling of Gods love, v. 26.





Certain fruitful Meditations upon the most holy prayer of our Savior Christ,
as it is set forth by S. John, in the 17. chapter of that Gospel, divided into
certain Lectures.
The first Lecture, declaring the order and method of this Chapter, with some
special observations concerning prayer in general.
THe prayer of our blessed Savior Christ Jesus in this Chapter comprehended,
is either concerning his own glorification, from ve. 1. to verse 6. or as
touching the confirmation of his Church, either then present, consisting of his
Apostles, and other Disciples, from v. 6. to v. 20. or which was afterward to
be called by their preaching, from v. 20. to the end.

The sum of Christ's prayer is for his glorification, which is expressed v. 1.
v. 5. The reasons which our Savior uses for this his request, are four, 1. a
fine, from the end, v. 1. Glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify
thee. 2. a pari, from the like, v. 2. As thou have given him power over all
flesh: and as power is given unto him, so also glory belongs unto him. 3. a
causa meritoria, from the meriting or deserving cause, v. 4. I have glorified
thee on earth, and now glorify me: he was worthy of this glory which was due
unto him. 4. ab aequo, from the equity of it: it was his own glory before the
world was.

But before I descend to entreat particularly of this Scripture, or any part
thereof, there are three necessary considerations first to be handled: two of
them concern Christ's prayer in particular: first of the validity and
efficacy thereof; whose force and virtue extends to the worlds end:
secondly, of the quality and difference between Christ's prayer and ours,
between Christ's prayer then in the days of his flesh, and the prayer or
intercession of his Mediatorship now. The other point is, of the use of Prayer
in general, namely of the necessity thereof.

First concerning the force and efficacy of our Lords prayer, Doctr. 1.
it is everlasting, it is not yet either extinct or slaked, but remains
still, and shall till the worlds end: for though there are now sixteen hundred
years well nie, since this prayer was uttered by our Savior, yet the benefit
thereof does extend it self unto this age: for we also, as many as believe in
Christ through the word of the Apostles, are comprehended in this prayer, verse
20.

1 Thus the Apostle testifies, that our Savior offered up in the days of his
flesh, prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears, and was heard,
Hebr. 5. 7. As he was heard in that zealous prayer which he made in the Garden
before his passion, whereof the Apostle there chiefly speaks; so also he was
heard in all other his prayers, John 11. 42. I know thou hear me always:
and especially in this prayer, which he powers forth in the behalf of his
universal Church, then being, or which was to come.

2 If Abels voice spoke after his death: (for by says yet being dead he
speaks, Heb. 11. 5.) much more does the voice of Christ in this prayer yet
speak unto God, which as the Apostle says, speaks better things then the
blood of Abel, Hebr. 12. 24. If Abels voice was heard after his death crying
for vengeance, much more Christ's voice yet sounds in the ears of GOD calling
for mercy. Salomons prayer, which he made at the dedication of the temple, 1.
Kin. 8. did consecrate the temple to that holy use, not during his time, but so
long as the temple stood: for thus he prays, v. 38. What prayer or
supplication soever shall be made of any man, etc. and shall stretch forth his
hands in this house, hear thou in heaven. If Salomons prayer did transfer
the benefit thereof to the succeeding ages, much more available is the power
of Christ.

3 Then like as the Manna was laid up in the Arc, though it was of it self
but as a melting dew, which faded by the heat of the Sun, yet by Gods
blessing endured many hundred years: so the voice of Christ, Plutarc. de
garrulitat.
though it were a transitory sound, yet it has a permanent force. The
Grecians do speak much of a certain place of Olympia, which gives seven
echoes or reflections of one voice, which therefore they call (...), of seven
voices. But we may woorthily admire this prayer of Christ, which gives not
only seven or seventy seven voices, but continually sounds in the ears of God
and reboundeth to us.

4 For the Preacher says, Ecclesiast. 3. 12. I know, that whatsoever God does
shall be for ever: and the Prophet says, Psalm. 119. 89. Thy word endures for
ever in heaven. This prayer therefore proceeding from the son of God, must
needs be of an everlasting force, as the Apostle says. This man, because he
endures ever, has an everlasting priesthood. Hebr. 7. 24. Wherefore his
prayer being an act of his priesthood, is also everlasting.

5 Wherefore, this is much to the comfort of the Church of God, that this holy
prayer of Christ is still in memory with God: that like as they boldly come
into the Princes presence, when their supplication is already offered, and
their suit granted; so have we through the prayer of Christ bold access: his
prayer makes a way for our prayers, even as the arc went before to divide the
waters of Jordan, and the people followed after, Joshua 3. 14. so has Christ
our Arc, Altar, Priest, and all, divided a way for our prayers: he is the
door, and by him also a door is opened to our prayers, as Ambrose well says
upon these words, Reave. 4. 1. I looked, and behold a door was opened in
heaven: In L^c. ca. 11.
apertum est igitur ostium Ioanni precanti, apertum est Paulo: A door is
opened to John praying, a door is opened to Paul.

^ Secondly we are to consider first of the difference between the prayers of
Christ, Doct. 2.
and the prayers of his church: then of the diversity between the prayers of
Christ in the days of his flesh, and now in his glorious majesty.

For the first: Difference betwixt the pr^uer^ of Ch^^st and of his members.
1. Christ's prayer tends wholly to the good of his church; he has no need
to pray for himself, as neither did he offer up sacrifice for himself, as
the high Priest did, both for his own sins, and then for the sins of the
people, Hebr. 7. 27. for even the prayer of Christ for his glorification is for
the church, that they may behold his glory, John 17. 24. but the scope and end
of our prayers is only for the release of our selves.

2. Christ's prayer is perfect, without any doubting or wavering or any
infirmity besides: for God is in him well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. but our prayers
are imperfect: we know not what to pray as we ought, Romans 8. 26.

3. Christ's prayers are meritorious, as every other work of his was: for the
lamb that was killed, is worthy to receive power. Revel. 5. 14. but our
prayers merit not: for when we have done all, we have done nothing, but which
was our duty to do, Luke 17. 10.

4. Christ prays by himself, he needs none other to pray by: but our
prayers cannot be accepted without a mediator: yea the Apostle dare not
presume to offer thanks unto God, but through Jesus Christ, Romans 1. 8.

5. The prayer of Christ is the prayer not of a mortal man, but of one that is
both God and man, who is inferior to his father as he is man, but equal as he
is God: who prays not as an inferior, when he thus says: Father, I will
that they which thou have given me, be with me where I am, verse 24.

6. Our prayers, because they are weak and imperfect, had need often to be
renewed: but this prayer of Christ being once made, has an everlasting force:
as the Apostle speaks of the offering of Christ, with one offering has he
consecrated for ever, them that are sanctified, Hebrews 10. 14.

Now having thus briefly showed how the prayers of the head and members differ,
let us consider likewise of the difference of Christ's prayers: Christ prays
not in heaven now as he did in the earth.
the apostle says, that Christ ever lives to make intercession for us, Hebr.
7. 25. But we must not imagine, that Christ prays now sitting at the right
hand of God, as he did while he lived in earth: with sighs and groans as at
Lazarus grave, John 11. 38. with criee and tears, as in the garden, Math. 26.
39. sometime lifting up his eyes, John 17. 1. falling upon his face, Mark 14.
35. sometime kneeling, Luke 22. 41. We must not think that Christ prays now
after any such manner, by bowi^g the knee, or making entreaty, or offering
supplication to his father, as Augustine well says, that these are the
cogitations of carnal men, to imagine, Tract. 10^. in Ioann^
tanquam, in alio loco patrem, in alio filium patri ast antem, pro nobis verba
facere, That the father is as it were in one place, the son to stand by in an
other speaking for us: and the Apostle, saying that Christ in the days of his
flesh did offer up prayers and supplications with strong cries, Hebrews 7. 5.
shows that this manner of prayer used by Christ then in the days of his
humiliation, does not beseem him now in the time of his exaltation: and our
Savior himself says, At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not
unto you, that I will pray unto the father for you, John 16. 26. that is, in
such manner as he prayed in earth he shall not then need to pray for us.

Wherefore to clear this point: these three ways our Savior is called our
intercessour and mediator: first, because the Lord for Christ's sake, and
together with him does grant us all things, Romans 8. 32. and he has promised,
that whatsoever we ask the father in his name, he will give it us, John ^6. 23.

Secondly, Christ makes intercession for us, non voce, sed miseratione, not by
his voice, but in compassion and mercy, in continual succouring of his
members, and relieuing our necessities: and therefore he is called by the
Apostle, a merciful and a faithful high Priest, Hebr. 2. 17. that is touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, Hebr. 4 15. Wherefore in this sense also,
because he always wills and desires our good, How Christ is the Mediator
of his church
and does send continual succor and relief to his members, he is worthily
called our Mediator: for his will and desires and his fathers are all one; and
in that the Lord God the father of our Lord Jesus performs the will and
desire of his son toward us: as where he prays, John 17. 24. I will that
they which thou have given me be with me, etc. herein does his mediation and
intercession consist.

Thirdly, the Apostle says, He is entered into the heaven to appear in the
sight of God for us, Heb. 9. 14. The very appearing then of Christ in his
humane flesh before God in the heauen^, is his intercession for us: the
presence of his humanity, the exhibiting of his glorious body, How Christ
appe^eth before God for us.
the remembrance of his obedience, the force of his passion, is an effectual
mediation with God the Father for us: there needs no other supplication or
request making. This Daniel saw in vision, one like to the son of man come in
the heavens etc. and they brought him before the ancient of days, Daniel 7.
13. The very approaching of Christ to his father, and exhibiting of his flesh in
his glorious presence, is our sufficient mediation. As the Lord says
concerning the bow in the cloud, that I may see it and remember my covenant,
Genesis 9. 16. so the very seeing of this mighty Angel, which is clothed
with a cloud, and the Rainbowe upon his head, Reu. 10. 1. brings to Gods
remembrance the everlasting Covenant made with us in Christ. To this purpose
Gregory well says, Lib 22. mo^al. cap. 13.
Vnigenito filio Deum ^ro homi^^ interpellare, est apud coaeternum patrem
seipsum hominem demonstrare: For the only begotten son to pray unto God for
man, is to show himself before his eternal father to be man.

This truth then concerning the manner of Christ's mediation reprooueth the
blind superstition of the papists, who have these fond speculatio^s, of Mary
her showing her breasts to her son, and Christ his wounds to his father:
these are their words Securum habes O homo accessum ad Deum, vbi pro te matter
stat ante filium, filius ante patrem, matter ostendit filio pectus and vbera,
filius patri latus and vulnera: nulla poterit esse repulsa, vbi tot sunt
charitatis insigm^: O man, thou have secure access unto God, where the mother
stands before her son for thee, the son before his father, the mother
shows her son her breasts, the son his father his side and wounds, there
can be no repulse, where there are so many signs of love. These sond conceits
and idle imaginations are not beseemi^g the glorious maieshe of Christ: and the
Apostle speaks otherwise, This man after he had offered one offering for
sins, sits for ever at the right hand of God, Hebr. 10. 12. He sits as
partaker of the same maistie, he stands not or kneeleth in token of
subjection or humility.

In the next place the necessity of prayer is to be considered, Doctr. 3.
which our Sau^ our shows, where he says, Matthew. 6. 33. Seek first the
kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all things else shall be
ministered unto you: our principal seeking whereof is, 1. by prayer, as Mat. 7.
7. Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find: seeking there is
asking: this is that vnum necessariu^, that one necessary thing, which Christ
commended in Mary, Luke 10* 42. for she was occupied in hearing Christ, and in
attending upon him: for what in the world can be more necessary, then to
hear God speaking to us in his word, and to speak to him in prayer?

2 David held this exercise so necessary, that in the morning before all other
things he preferred prayer, Psalm. 5. 3. in the morning I will direct me unto
thee, and I will wait: he preferred it before his sleep, Psalm 119. 148.
Mine eyes prevent the night watches: David holds prayer and praising of God
so necessary, that he will not intermit it, though it cost him his life, Daniel
6. 10.

3 What is more necessary for the day of battle, then armor? so is prayer a
principal part of our spiritual armor: as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 6. 13.
Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to resist in the evil day:
and having set forth the diverse parcels of this armor, he adds this, v. 18.
and pray always, with all manner prayer and supplications: what more requisite
for the sick man then medicine? but the prayer of faithful save the sick,
James 5. 15. prayer, it is the haven of the soul, Psalm. 116. 7. Return unto
thy rest O my soul: it is the food of the soul, as Christ said to his
disciples, John 4. 32. I have meat to eat that ye know not of.

4 The reason of this necessity our Savior Christ shows, Matthew. 26. 41.
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: because we are continually
assaulted and tempted of Satan, we have need also continually to arm our
selves with prayer: an other reason Saint Paul gives; 1. Tim. 4. 5. all things
are sanctified by the word of God and prayer: thy meat, drink, labor, riches,
marriage, are polluted, unholy, defiled, without prayer.

5 Wherefore the negligence of this Age is to be condemned that so seldom use
prayer, either privately, or in their families, together with their wives,
children, servants: when they sit down at meat, they give no thanks: being
worse in this respect then the ox and ass, which know their masters cribbe,
Esaias chap. 1. ve. 3. When they go to bed, they do not commend themselves unto
God, neither at their rising praise him for their rest: but they rouse
themselves as swine out of the straw: when they go forth to labor, they
call not upon God for his blessing: but as it is in the psalm: the voice of
joy and mirth is in the habitation of the righteous: Psalm 118. It is known
where faithful men dwell, by their praying and singing of Psalms together:
they that do not so, show that their heart is empty of heavenly thoughts: they
make not their treasury in heaven, seeing their heart is not there: they which
hope to go to heaven yet send their prayers as their agents and forerunners
before them: But as Bernard says, Oration est hominis Deo adhaerentis affectio:
Prayer is the affection or desire of a man, that cleaves unto God. Hierome
thus testifieeth of himself, Post multas lacrymas and caelo inhaerentes: Ad
Eusta^h^^m.
oculos (mihi deus testis est) interesse videbar agminibus angelorum: after
many tears fastening mine eyes in heaven, I seemed to be present among the
companies of Angels.

The second Lecture.
THese things spoke Jesus, Verse. 1. Doct^ 1.
and lift up his eyes to heaven, etc. this gesture of lifting up the eyes in
prayer, was often used by our Savior, as Mark 7. 34. when he healed the
deaf man, he looking up to heaven, The gesture required in prayer.
sighed, John 11. 41. at the raising up of Lazarus, Jesus lift up his eyes, and
said, Father I thank thee: By this holy gesture of our Savior we are taught,
as to lift up the eyes of our body, so to fasten the eyes of our soul, upon
God, and to eleuate the meditations of our hearts, that they wander not,
neither be vainly occupied while we pray.

This is that which Saint Paul says, he would have men lift up pure or holy
hands (...), 1. Tim. 2. 8. that is, being holily and purely affected, to lift
up their hands as also their eyes: and Saint James requires, that the prayer
of a righteous man should be fervent, James 5, 16. the word is (...)*
effectual, that the fear thereof be not abated or slaked with earthly and
worldly thoughts.

Thus prayed David, Psalm 121. I will lift up my eyes unto the hills from
whence comes my help: and not his eyes only were lift up, but his heart:
as he says, Psalm 57. 7. My heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, I will sing
and give praise: Thus prayed Stephen, when he looked steadfastly into heaven,
and saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God, Acts 7. 56. Thus were Saint
Peter's affections ravished, when in his prayer he fell into a trance, and saw
that vision of the four cornerd vessel, etc. Act. 10. 10.

3 For look as the eyes of servants look to the hand of their masters, so
should our eyes wait upon God, Psalm 123. 2. as Peter bids the lame man
look upon him, Acts 3. 5. and he gave heed unto them, trusting to receive
something of them, verse 6. so we must look and wait upon GOD in our prayer,
from whom we expect a blessing; our eyes must be as Doves eyes, Cantic. 4. 1.
that is not unconstant, wandering unsteadfast, but simple, sober, chaste, staid.

4 For the Preacher says, Ecclesiast. 9. 10. Whatsoever thou do, pro omni
facultate fac: Do it with all thy power: therefore when we pray, our eyes, our
hands, our tongue, our heart must all be occupied and attent upon God; and this
it is to love God with all our strength, Luke 10. 27. when we pray unto him,
and worship him with all our inward and outward powers.

5 Wherefore, they which pray with wandering eyes, and wavering thoughts are not
herein like unto our Savior; the wise man says: that the eyes of the fool
are in the corners of the world, Prou. 17. 24. but the eyes of the wise are in
his head, Eccles. 2. 14. that is, fixed and settled to look up unto God: the
wandering of the eyes show an unsteadfast heart and running thoughts: for death
first enters in by the windows, Joel 9. 9. And the eyes which are as the
windows of the body, do first minister occasion of evil. But like as in
other things the husband is a veil of the eyes to the wife, as it was said to
Sara, Genesis 20. 16. that is, the eyes and affection of the wife ought to be
settled upon her husband, and his likewise upon her: so in this spiritual
business of prayer, heaven and heavenly things should be a veil to our eyes
to cover and keep them, from looking toward or attending upon any thing else:
all worldly thoughts and earthly desires should be chased away from our
prayers, as Abraham drove away the birds from his sacrifice, Genesis 15. We all
are subject to this temptation in prayer: I remember Hierome thus complains
of himself: Creberrime in oratione mea, aut per porticus deambulo, aut de
foenore computo: sic^ine putamus orasse Ionam? sic Danielem? Oftentimes in my
prayer me think I am walking in galleries and porches, or casting of an
account and reckoning. Do we think that Jonas prayed so, or Daniel?

Father] God is Christ's Father after a more excellent manner then he is called
our Father: God Christ's father, otherwise then ours.
he is the Son of God by nature, non factus, sed natus, not made the Son of
God, but so bo^ne from all eternity, Prou. 8. 23. I was set up from
everlasting, verse. 25. before the hills, was I begotten. We are the sons of
God facti, non nati; made, not borne: the Angels are the sons of God, so made
by privilege of their creation, Job. 1. 6. cap. 38. 7. and Adam also in the
same sense is called the son of God, Luke 3. 38. being created in the state
of perfection: the faithful are the sons of God, so made by adoption and
grace. Romans 8. 15. We have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry
Abba, Father.

From hence then this doctrine is concluded, Doct. 2.
that Christ praying unto God and calling him Father, (and he is his Father as
he is God) did execute his Mediatorship not only as he was man, but as he was
both God and man.

This Saint Paul testifies 2. Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ, and reconciled
the world to himself. Christ then reconciled the world, wherein consisted the
office and work of the Mediator, not as he was man only, but as God was in
him; that is, as he was God: for God to be in Christ is nothing else, but to
show that Christ is God; as Colos. 2. 9. In him dwells all the fullness of
the Godhead bodily. Likewise Heb. 7. 28. The Law makes men high Priests which
have infirmity, but the word of the oath, etc. makes the Son, which is
consecrated for evermore: if Christ be consecrated a Priest as he is the Son,
then as he is God; for the Son is God.

A further proof and experience hereof, ^ather, I will that they which thou
have given me, be with me where I am, etc. Christ prays not here as an
inferior, but as equal unto God, as whose will is one with Gods: never any
humble suppliant would thus pray, I will this, or I will that. Again another
example we have in the dispensation of the law, which was given by the hand of
a Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. which most interpreters both old and new do understand
of Christ. There are only two of the ancient Writers that I know, Theodoret
and Gennadius, that expound it of Moses, and Master Beza of the New. If Christ
then did in some sort perform the office of a Mediator before his incarnation,
he did it then as God: for whether we say he is called a Mediator only
Prophetice, prophetically; because he was then designed and appointed to be our
Mediator, or that the legal Mediation is one, the Evangelical (which before
his incarnation he entered not into) another; both which I willingly grant, yet
neither of these could be affirmed of Christ, without a necessary relation to
his divine Nature.

Where the Lamb takes the book out of the ri^ht hand of him that sat upon
the throne, which was a work of the Mediator: this Lamb stood as though he
had been killed, (whereby his humility is signified) and he had seven horns
and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God, and he was in the midst of
the throne: by which three circumstances of his power, his authority in
sending the spirit, his sitting in one throne with God, his divine Nature, is
insinuated.

Mediatorship, Saint Paul shows, Gal. 3. 20. For a Mediator is not of one,
but God is one: the Mediator then is not God only, nor man only; but he must
partake of both, and exercise his Mediators office in both.

First then by this doctrine is refuted the There is one God and one Mediator
between God and man, the man Jesus Christ: which words as they urge them, would
as well conclude the Mediator not to be God, as not to exercise his
Mediatorship as God. And whereas the Apostle says, the man Jesus Christ,
though he say not, God and man Jesus Christ; yet this name Jesus, which
signifies a Savior, includes the Godhead also, as the Apostle says, verse.
3. God our Savior.

Secondly, whereas the Arrians objected, that Christ was inferior and less
then God, because he that prays is less then he to whom prayer is made: the
answer is ready; that all the parts of the Mediators office, which do betoken
service or subjection unto God, Christ performed as man: but the power of the
work, perfection, glory, he executed as God: though he prayed as man, he
could not prevail by the merit of his prayer, but as both God and man: and as
Bernard says, ad hunc miseria, ad illum pertinet potentia: to the manhood
belongs the sufferings and sorrows of the Mediator, to the Godhead the honor
and power: and as Augustine, Diuina humanitas, humana diuinitas Mediatrix: his
divine humanity, and humane Divinity is the Mediator.

Thirdly, Pray with confidence.
as Christ in his prayer says Father, so he teaches us to pray, Our Father,
that is, with confidence and full assurance: like as there is no father, which
if his child ask him bread, will give him a stone, Mat. 7. 10. much more will
our heavenly Father give good things to those that ask him. Our Savior
promises, that whatsoever we desire when we pray, if we believe that we shall
have it, it shall be done unto us. Mark. 11. 24. No marvel then, if when we
pray doubtfully and uncertainly, we obtain not our requests. Therefore when we
want any grace, and would have any necessity relieved, let us go with a
cheerful resolution unto God, as the prodigal son did, when he was ready
to die for hunger: I will rise (says he) and go to my father, etc. then shall
we find mercy at our heavenly fathers hand, as he did. He will call for the
robe, for the ring, and shoes, Luke 15. 22. No good thing will he withhold.

The hour is come] Whereby we learn, Doct. 3.
that before God every thing is determined, The appointment of times is from
God.
he has appointed times for every purpose: and as the glorification of Christ,
that is, the manifestation of his glory, was assigned to this hour and time,
which Christ here speaks, which followed immediately upon his passion: so
times are limited of God for the comfort and deliverance of his Church.

So the Preacher says, that there is a time to every purpose, Eccles. 3. 1.
and that God has made every thing beautiful in his time, verse. 11. and God
has put times and seasons in his own power, Act. 1. 7.

Thus our Savior answered his mother, Ioh. 2. 4. Mine hour is not yet come:
the same answer he makes to his kindred, Ioh. 7. 6. My time is not yet come:
and affirmatively, Mat. 26. 45. Behold, the hour is at hand, and the son of
man is given into the hand of sinners.

This is signified by that vision of Ezechiel, 1. 18. he saw wheels full of
eyes^ showing thereby, that the motion and government of the world, and the
course of times, runs not by chance, but is ordered and directed by Gods
al-seeing providence. S. John also saw a mighty Angel, which had a rainebow
about his head, which is Jesus Christ the Angel of the covenant, who swear by
him that lives for evermore, that there should be no more time, Revel. 10. 6.
Who then has the ordering of times, but he that gave a beginning, and sets
an end of time?

O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all.
wherefore, because all wisdom is in God, and no man has instructed him or was
his counselor, Isa. 41. 13. all things must be referred to the providence of
God. unless then that men could find out a wiser then God, or would take upon
them to teach and instruct him* his counsel and advice must stand, his rule
and government, setting and ordering of times must take place.

we may read Act. 17. 18.) are confuted: The first whereof did bring in a
fatal necessity, making all things to depend, not upon the will and
providence of God, but upon a certain connection of causes, to the which the
divine power it self should be subject: Against Astrologers.
like as vain Astrologers and stargazers do attribute all to their
constellations and aspects of stars. But the Scripture teaches us, that the
Lord does in heaven and earth whatsoever it pleases him Psalm. 135. 6. he is
not forced by, or tied to any such fatal conjunction of causes.

The Epicures imputed all to Fortune, so do many carnal men, that cannot look
into Gods providence, as the Preacher speaks in the person of such, Eccle. 9.
10. Time and chance comes to all. Ambrose hereof writes well: Epicurei
putabant nihil Deum curare de nobis, and Aristoteles vsque ad lunam tantum Dei
descendere prouidentiam: sed quis operator negliget operis sui curam? etc. The
Epicures think, that God takes no care of us: and Aristotle, that Gods
providence descends no lower then the Moon: but what workman does cast off
the care of his work? If it be a wrong to rule them, it was a greater to work
them: for not to have made them nulla iniustitia, was no injustice: Non curare
quod feceris summa inclementia: Not to care for that thou hasi made, is great
inclemencie.

Secondly, this doctrine has a special comfort both to Christ's Church in
general, and to every member thereof in particular: We must wait the
acceptable time.
that when the time of mercy and deliverance is fulfilled, they shall surely
see the Lords saving health. Thus the Church of the Jews did find refreshing,
Psalm. 102 13. Thou will arise and have mercy upon Sion, for the appointed time
is come: thus Joseph with patience endured his affliction, until his appointed
time came, and the counsel of the Lord had tried him, Psalm. 10^. 18. Thus
every one, whether afflicted in mind, or humbled in body, ought patiently to
expect the Lords appointed time, to visit them in mercy. How was our Savior
Christ himself turmoyled and tossed in this world? he endured hunger, thirst,
weariness, he was mocked, whipped, tormented, tasted of bitter sorrows of his
soul, and grievous pains in his body, till his time came, that God
manifested his kingdom and glory.

Glorify thy son, that thy son also may glorifi^ thee: The glory of the
Son redoundeth to the glory of the Father. Ioh. 5. 23. He that honors not
the Son, honors not the Father. We learn hereby, that whatsoever gifts we
ask of God, or he in his mercy vouchsafes to us, we should use them to the
honor and glory of God.

Therefore our Savior teaches us to For thine is the glory, Mat. 6. 13. for
we are assured to be heard, when we make the glory of God the end of that
which we ask. Pro. 3. 9. Honor the Lord with thy riches* so every gift beside,
either inward or outward, must be referred to the praise of God.

Thus David shows how he would behave himself in his kingdom, Psalm. I will
walk in the uprightness of my heart in the midst of my house, I will set no
wicked thing before mine eyes: as he received his authority from God, so he
uses it to his glory.

Achitophels counsel and wit was turned to foolishness, because he employed
it evil, in upholding rebellious Absalom against his father.

Like as Manna that angelical food, and was full of worms. Exodus 16. 20. so
God depriueth them of their gifts that do not use them well: as the talent was
taken from the unthrifty and unprofitable servant, that did not employ it to
his masters advantage. Mat. 25. v* 26.

4. For the Lord will not give his glory to another. Isay 42. 8. he will not
suffer that the praise of his gifts should be ascribed to any beside himself:
and therefore was Herod stricken with worms, because he gave not the glory to
God. Act. 12.

5. By this doctrine they are reproved, All gifts must (...) used to Gods glory.
which having received any grace or gift from God, as knowledge, wit strength
of body, riches, honor, do not use them soberly and virtuously to Gods glory:
as rich men become proud of their riches: they that have knowledge, are puffed
up: they which have abundance offend in riot and excess: and this is the next
way to deprive them of that they have. As also, when men ask any thing of God
to a wrong end, they miss of their desires: as S. James says, Ye ask and
have not, because ye ask amiss, that you might consume it on your lusts:
wherefore if we would obtain at Gods hands those things which we want, or
would have increased that we have, we must simply and unfeignedly intend Gods
glory, he will admit no partner, nor divide his glory, or share it with any.
He therefore that makes his gifts common, that is, employing them to any other
end then to Gods honor, does pollute his gifts, as Origene well says:
Consu^tudine scripturae commune dicitur quod immundum est, consequenter quod
sanctum separatu^ est, etc. By the use of Scripture that is said to be common
which is unclean, that is holy which is set apart: that which is holy does
only appertain to God, and has no fellowship with any other. Peccator and
immundus multorum est: But the sinner and unclean person is common to many. He
then which does not apply his gifts only to the praise of God, but makes them
common to serve his own carnal affections, does pollute and defile them.

The third Lecture.
Verse. 2. As thou have given him power over all flesh.
THis is the second reason of our Savior his request for his glorification,
and it is taken a pari from the like: as thou have given him power over all
flesh, so also give him the glory due unto him, which is an adiunct of this
power. Here we have first the power set forth which is given unto Christ, then
the end of his power, to give eternal life; and the means directing to this
end* which is the knowledge of God and his Christ.

First then, this Scripture shows, that all power over all men is given unto
Christ as he is God and man; that unto his kingdom of power, all flesh is
brought in subjection: the very wicked and abiects shall tremble before him and
the mightiest potentates shall stoop unto him. This is testified by our
Savior himself. John 5. 27. The father has given him power to execute
judgment in that he is the son of man. Mat. 28. 18 All power is gi^en unto me
in heaven and earth. Act. 17. 31. He will judge the world by that man whom he
has appointed.

An experience of this great power, we have Act. 9. when Saul breathing out
threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, was cast down to
the ground, as he went to Damascus, and smitten blind: this power here executed
by Jesus himself he also exercises sometime by his Ministers, as the Angels
who smote Herod that killed James the brother of John, Act. 12. and was a
cruel persecutor of Christ's Church* by the Apostles, as Peter by this power
pronounced the sentence of death against Ananias and Sapphira for their
hypocrisy, Act. 5. and Paul smote Elymas the sorcerer with blindness. Act.
1^. 11.

In respect of this great power, our Lord Jesus is said to have a ^od of iron
in his hand, and under the same the people of the world are as a potters
vessel, Psalm. 2. 9. And as he that treads the wine press, with great
facility does press out the grapes: so Christ says by the Prophet, Isay 63.
3. I have trodden the wine press alone, etc. I will tread them in mine anger,
and tread them under foot in my wrath.

The reason of this great power committed unto Christ, the Apostle shows Heb.
1. 2. whom he has made heir of all things, by whom he also made the world^:
wherefore it is just that Christ should inherit that he made, and bear rule
over the works of his own hands, and be Lord over his own creatures: for
Christ God and man being but one person, even his humanity is made partaker of
that power which belongs unto him as God. Again, the Apostle further
alleges out of the 45. Psalm, Thou have loved righteousness and hated
iniquity, wherefore God thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness
above thy fellows. Christ in respect of his perfect obedience and absolute
righteousness, even as he is man, is judged meet and worthy to be exalted above
all creatures, and to have all power committed to him.

The Pope not Christ's Vicar.
and the ministerial head of his universal Church: it is blasphemy to say
that any mortal man can execute this great power of Christ over all flesh:
Christ says all power is given unto me, it is not given to any else, neither
will God give his honor to another: yet the Pope usurps Christ power, to
command Angels, to canonize Saints, to open and shut the kingdom of God to
whom he list; wherein he shows himself to be the prince of pride, and very
Antichrist. S. Paul says, We will not rejoice of things which are not within
our measure, but according to the measure of the line, whereof God has
distributed unto us a measure to attain unto you. 2. Cor. 10. 13. But the
Bishop of Rome does extend him self beyond the line of his measure: he might
content himself with his own Diocese and go no further. Ambrose says: Gratia
Christiana non contenta est eosdem habere limits, Lib. 2. de vocat. gent. cap.
6.
quos Roma, etc. The Christian faith is not contained within the same bounds
that Rome is, etc.

Secondly, seeing all power and judgment is committed to Christ, who is able
alone to take vengeance of his enemies, let carnal and profane men stand in
awe of Christ, take heed how they do blaspheme his name, contemn his word, and
persecute his members: as the Prophet exhorts Kings and Princes, to serve the
Lord in fear, to kiss the son, that is to honor and embrace his name, l^st he
be angry, and ^e perish out of the way, Psalm. 2. 12.

Thirdly, to the faithful servants of Christ this doctrine yields special
comfort: that our Lord and Savior is able to defen^ his Church, to succor his
afflicted members, and to deliver them from everlasting wrath: as it follows
in the same place: If his wrath be suddenly kindled, blassed are all they that
trust in him. Ambrose well says: Veni Domine Jesus, sed non iam in vmbra, sed
in sole iustitiae: si corporis vmbra saluauit, quantum confer poterit
alacritas aperta virtutis? Ser. 19. in. Psalm. 119.
Come Lord Jesus, but not now in the shadow, but in the Sun of
righteousness: if the shadow as it were of his body saved us, how much more
the clear brightness of his power?

That he should give eternal life to all, Doct. 2.
that thou have given him] Besides that general power which is given to Christ
over all flesh, he does exercise a peculiar sovereignty toward his Church, in
conferring everlasting salvation upon his faithful members. ^ternall life
only given to those that are given to Christ.
So that from hence we are taught, that eternal life is only given to those
that are given out of the world to Christ, that is, the elect: so our Savior
says, Ioh. 6. 39. It is the Fathers will that has sent me, that of all which
he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the
last day, Ephesians. 5. 23. He is the Savior of his body: they then which are not
of Christ's body, have no part in him, he is not their Savior, Romans 8. 30.
Whom he predestined, them also he called: whom he called, them also he
justified: whom he justified, he also glorified. None then are brought to
glory, but they which are justified in Christ; none are justified or called in
him, but they which before were predestinate, elected, and chosen of God.

This we see performed in the Apostles You that have followed me in the
regeneration, shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of
Israel, Ioh. 17. 12. Those that thou gave me have I kept, and none of them is
lost, but the child of perdition: who was given unto Christ, and not given;
given, in respect of his outward vocation, not given by eternal election.

Christ herein is worthy of more glory Moab, etc. like as Jacob says to
Laban, These twenty years have I been with thee, thine ewes and goats have
not ^ast their young: whatsoever was torn of beasts I made it good my self*
Genesis 3^. 48. 49. So Christ is a most faithful shepherd, makes good unto his
Father al those sheep which are given unto him: none of them is wanting or
perishes.

To sit at my right hand and my left is not mine to give, but it shall be given
to them, for whom it is prepared of my Father: that is, Christ is not to give
eternal life, but unto those that are thereunto ordained of God, Ephesians. 1. 5.
Who has predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself: no
more are adopted by Christ, then are predestinate of God: election is the
foundation of our vocation and justification by Christ. Like as the Israelites
only passed through the red sea, the Egyptians aduenturing to go the same way
were drowned in the waters: so Christ is a way only to true Israelites, that
is, believers, to pass by unto heaven.

First then their error is here confuted, Christ died not for all.
that hold, that Christ died for all men, for Turks, Jews, unbelievers, for
the reprobate as well as the elect: this is the opinion of the Papists, and
some Lutherans: whereas Christ vouchsafes not to pray for the world, Ioh. 17.
9. much less died he for them: if they have no part in his prayer, neither
have they in his sacrifice. Again, if Christ give eternal life to all those
that are given him, then none of them can perish: ^lection certain.
then is the election of God certain and infall^ble, none can fall away from
it: contrary to the opinion of some, that think the elect of God may become
reprobates, contrary to the Scripture, Ioh. 13. 1. whom Christ loves, he
loves to the end.

Further, we are taught hereby* so many as desire to be made partakers of
everlasting life, to examine themselves, whether they be given unto Christ: for
whosoever is not given unto Christ, has no part in salvation, 2. Corin. 13. 5.
Examine your selves, know you not, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? And to be given unto Christ, is not to be baptized: so was Simon
Magus, and yet Peter said unto him: Thou have no part nor fellowship in this
business, Act. 8. 21. nor yet sometime to pray: so did the Pharisie, and yet
was not justified, Luke 18. nor to be an hearer of the word: so was Herod, and
yet an hypocrite. Mark. 6. 20. Nor yet does it suffice to preach the word: for
so did Judas, and yet was the child of perdition. This it is therefore to be
given unto Christ, to be separate from the world, and to cleave unto Christ by
a lively faith, and to be guided by the spirit of Christ, to be mortified in
the flesh, and sanctified in the spirit, as the Apostle says, Romans 8. 10. If
Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life
for righteousness sake. They therefore which behold Christ by faith, and lead
their life thereafter: who do not only behold as in a mirror the glory of
God, but are changed into the same image, 2. Cor. 3. 18. they are truly given
unto Christ, as the Apostle says of the Macedonians: They gave them selves
first to the Lord, and after to us by the will of God: by their fruitful
works in releeuing the necessity of the Church, they did profess themselves
the faithful servants of Christ, truly given unto him and dedicate to his
service. Origin says well: Quemadmodum in corporalibus naturalis quidam
attractus mest quibusdam ad alia, vt Magneti ad ferrum, bitumini ad ignem, sic
fidei ad diuinam virtutem: In Mat. Homil. 13.
As there is in corporal things a natural attraction, as of the Loadstone to
iron, of brimstone to the fire, so there is of faith to the divine power. Even
so faith draws us, and gives us to Christ, and Christ gives unto us
eternal life.

The fourth Lecture.
Verse. 3. This is life eternal.
THis verse shows the end, which is eternal life; and the way to the end,
the true knowledge of God in Christ: the knowledge of God and of the Mediator
that brings us to God, which is Jesus Christ.

First then we do learn, Doctr. 1.
that there is an everlasting state after this life is ended: set forth by
these two names. First, it is truly called life, being exempt from all trouble,
sorrow, grief, and calamity: so that this which we lead in this world is not
to be called a life, being full of all misery and calamity. Secondly, it is
eternal, without any alteration, end, or change: so is not the state of this
world, which is subject to mutabilitie and mortality.

What things make the life o^ man miserable.
Iniquity, Necessity, Calamity and Mortality: all these the next life shall
free us from. There shall be no iniquity or sin any more, Isa. ^8. 8. That
way shall be called holy, the polluted shall not pas^e by it: there shall be no
necessity, as to sow, to plant, to labor, as it was said to Adam, that he
should eat his bread in the sweat of his brows: ^or they shall then rest
from all their labors, Revel. 14. 13. There shall be no calamity, no
oppression, sorrow, or grief, Isa. 60. 18. Violence shall be no more heard in
the land, Revel. 21. 4. Neither sorrow, neither crying, neither pain shall be
any more. There shall be no mortality or mutabilitie, death or sickness,
Revel. 21. 8. there shall be no more death.

Abraham's bosom (that is in the place of everlasting rest and refreshing)
whether his says (being the child of faithful Abraham) brought him: Lazarus
was there comforted from all the pains and sorrows which he before in his
life endured. Lake 16. 25. Again, Mat. 17. 2. we have an excellent
representation of the blessed estate of the Saints after this life: there our
Savior was transfigured in the presence of his Apostles, and his face did shine
as the Sun. Moses also and Elias talked with him, who were now delivered from
this vale of misery, and were entered into glory: for if Moses face did so
shine when he was yet mortal, that the Isaelites were not able to behold him:
2. Cor. 3. 7. how much more glorious was he now.

This celestial place is that mountain of mirth, and hill of incense, spoken
of in the Canticles 4. 5. and Mons aromatum, the mountain of spices, Cantic.
8. 14. This is indeed that land of Canaan that sloweth with milk and honey:
this is our fathers house, where is bread enough, where with the lost child now
returned, we shall have the best robes given us, and rings put upon our
singers, Luke 15. 22. This is the haven and rest, where the souls of the
righteous after the tempests and storms of the sea of this world do happily
arrive: as it is said in the Psalm, He brings them to the haven, where they
would be, Psalm. 107. 30.

The reasons why God provides for his just thing with God to recompense
tribulation to those that trouble you, and to you that are troubled, rest.
Secondly, from Gods honor, Mat. 22. 32. he is not the God of the dead, but of
the living: seeing then that God is God of the faithful departed, they
therefore are alive unto him, for it were not for the living Gods honor to be
the God of the dead. Thirdly, from the state and condition of the faithful,
which were of all other most miserable, if in this life only we have hope. 1.
Corint. 15. 19. Fourthly, from the privilege of our profession: we are the
holy temples of God which shall not be destroyed. 1. Cor. 3. 17.

Enemies to everlasting life confuted.
The Epicures believed no immortality, nor yet any being of the soul after
death. Of like opinion were the Sadduces among the Jews, and the Atheists
among us. The Pithagoreans did think that the souls did pass out of one
body into another, yea into the bodies of brute beasts, such as they were
like unto in condition of life and manners. The Platonists did hold the
immortality of the soul, but not of the body. The Peripatetickes and Poets
imagined the souls of good men to become stars. None of them believed aright
concerning the immortality both of soul and body, and of eternal life with
God. This knowledge we have from the scriptures, and God revealed these things
to us by his spirit, 1. Corin. 2. 10. that both our bodies and souls shall be
made inheritors of life through Christ, as the Apostle shows: We shall be
eaught up with him in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
17.

B^rnard does very well describe the happy state both of our bodies and souls
in the kingdom of God, agreeable to this doctrine of Paul: first for the soul
he says: whereas there are three faculties thereof, rationalis,
concupiscibilis irascibilis, the reasonable part, the election or will, the
affection: Implebit Deus rationale nostrum luce sapientiae, implebit
concupiscibile nostrum font iustitiae, implebit irascibile nostru^ summa pace
and tranquillitate: He will replenish our reason with the light of wisdom and
knowledge, our elective faculty with justice, that it shall desire nothing but
what is to be desired, our wrathful and boiling affection with peace and
tranquillity. Concerning the body, whereas it consists of four elements:
Habebit terra nostra immortalitem, Our earthly part shall have immortality.
Habebit aqueum nostrum impassibilitatem, Our watrie part sh^l be without
passion: Habebit aereum leuitatem, Our airie part shall have agilitie or
lightness: Habebit igneum nostrum perfectam pul^hri^udinem, Our fiery part
shall have most perfect beauty or glory.

Secondly, the dullness of our affections is here to be quickened, and our
desire to be inflamed toward the attaining of this happy estate, we should be
still groueling upon the earth, but eleuate our hearts to heaven, and to have
our conversation in heaven, from whence we look for our Savior, Phil. 3. 20.
It is recorded by the heathen, that one Cleombrotus reading Plato his book of
the immortality of the soul, was so ravished with the desire thereof, that
presently ^e cast himself into the sea: like master, like scholar; like
teaching, like following. But it may be a shame to us, that having so pure
doctrine revealed concerning true eternity, The desire which we ought to have
to everlasting life.
which they but dreamed of, are not touched with an earnest desire thereof, as
S. Paul was, who desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23.
Wherefore the assurance and hope of everlasting life, ought to be the chief
scope of all our studies, the drift of our desires, the mark to aim at, the
race to run at, the prise to strive for, the haven to sail unto, the pearl to
be purchased, the inheritance to be desired* the country to be traveled unto:
and this is that wherein we ought chiefly to rejoice, that our names are
written in heaven, Luke 10. 20. thy riches, honor, strength, beauty,
wisdom, wife, children, ease, prosperity, are not to be ioyed in, in
comparison of this blessed estate; the which if we earnestly desire now, we
shall undoubtedly possess then through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for
ever.

That they know thee to be the only very God. Our Savior says not, to know
thee only to be very God; for if the father only were God, then the Son and
the holy Ghost should be excluded: but the Father is that only God, and so is
the son and the holy Ghost, they all three are but only one very God: as
where the Apostle calls Jesus Christ the only Lord, Jude 4. neither the
Father nor the holy Ghost are excluded, for they are all the only Lord, though
they be divided in person, yet the unity and essence of the divine nature and
power is not divided.

The knowledge then of God the Father, Doct. 2. Of the necessity of the
knowledge of God.
son and holy Ghost is necessary to salvation: the ignorance whereof is
sufficient to deprive unbelievers of eternal life.



Pharao, who wickedly said: I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go,
Exodus 5. 2. Because he knew not God, the Lord would not vouchsafe to know him,
but gave him over to hardness of heart, and got unto himself great glory in his
destruction and confusion. Thus our Savior also testifies of the Samaritanes,
speaking to the woman of Samaria, John 4. 22. Ye worship that which ye know
not, we worship that which we know, for salvation is of the Jews. Salvation
then is not of them that ignorantly worship they know not what, as the
Athenians did, who erected an altar to the unknown God, and ignorantly
worshipped they knew not whom. Act. 17. 23.

to go unto Noah's Arc, perished in the waters: and as the Dove, if she had not
known the way of return to the Arc when Noah stretched out his hand and
took her in, had likewise miscarried: and as the ox and ass not knowing their
masters crib, are like to want their food; so all they which know not God their
Creator, are in the high way to destruction, and are barred from life.

The reason hereof S. Paul shows, Whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved: but how shall they call upon him on whom they have not
believed; how shall they believe in him on whom they have not heard? They then
that neither believe in God, nor pray unto him, nor worship him, because they
know him not, nor have not heard of him, cannot be saved. Ignorance then and
want of knowledge of God, because it is the fountain of unbelief and
profaneness, does justly exclude from the kingdom of God.

First then if the knowledge of the blessed Trinity be necessary unto
everlasting life, Heretics enemies to the Trinity confuted.
we see in what damnable state all heretics do stand, that believe not aright
in the Trinity, whether they impugn any one of the three glorious persons, as
the Manichees the person of the father, who was the author of the law, which
they refuse and revile him that gave it, making him the author of evil. The
Arrians dishonor the Son, affirming him to be unequal to his Father. The
Macedonians blasphemed the holy Ghost, denying him to be God: or whether they
are adversaries to the whole Trinity, as the Sabellians, which did hold but
one person of the godhead: as the Tritheits that do wickedly teach, that there
are three Gods as well as three persons.

Secondly, Against Atheists.
all Atheists are here condemned, that believe no God at all, such as were
Diagoras and one Theodorus among the heathen. Likewise the Gentiles are
reproved, who worshipped those which were not Gods, Gal. 4. 8. and brought in a
multitude of gods, for they did not acknowledge the only very God, both
worshipping many gods, and those also false gods.

Thirdly, as heresy and profaneness condemns* so also ignorance: for that
whosoever knows not, nor yet believes aright in the Trinity, cannot be
saved: as our Savior Christ says, John. 3. 19. This is the condemnation, that
light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light.
Ignorance dangerous.
Hearken then ye ignorant persons, ye simple men and women, though there were
no other matter against you, your own ignorance and darkness is sufficient to
condemn you: say not, mine innocence shall save me, I do hurt to none, I do
no wrong, I am harmless, etc. For the ignorant person cannot be innocent,
seeing by his ignorance and unbelief he dishonors God: it is in vain to
say. I dishonor not man, when thou do dishonor God. Ambrose says well:
Innocentia and scientia beatum faciunt: Innocence and knowledge make happy:
if either be wanting, there is no true happiness. Wherefore let every one labor
for the knowledge of God: parents instruct your children, masters your
servants, husbands teach your wives; do not nourish your selves in ignorance,
and cast away your souls for want of knowledge.

And whom thou have sent Jesus Christ] It is not sufficient to salvation to
acknowledge God the Creator, Doct. 3. No salvation without faith in Christ.
yea to confess one glorious God, and three persons, unless also we believe
in Jesus Christ God and man, the Mediator between God and man; and so believe
in him, that we live by faith in him.

he that believes not is condemned already, because he believes not in the
name of the only begotten Son of God, Ioh. 3. 18. And again, ye believe in
God, believe also in me, Ioh. 14 1. It is not then enough to believe in God the
Almighty and omnipotent Creator, unless also we believe in Jesus Christ our
merciful Savior. Saint John accordingly says: Every spirit that confesses
not Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh, is not of God, 1. Ioh. 3. 3.

Thou art my Lord and my God: Jesus said to him, Because thou have seen, thou
beleeuest, blessed are they that have not seen and have believed, Ioh. 20. 28.
29. Yea this was the faith of Abraham Ioh. 8. 56. Abraham (says our Savior)
rejoiced to see my day, he saw it and was glad.

perish, if we have not the presence of Christ our Mediator. Moses also said
unto God, when he told them, that he would not go with them, because they were a
stiff-necked people, but he would send only an Angel before them, Exodus 33.
2. 3. If thy presence go not with us, carry us not hence, verse. 15. If then the
presence of the Mediator was necessary to conduct them unto that terrestrial
Canaan, much more to the celestial.

For in Christ only is the Lord appeased This is my well-beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased. Without Christ the^ there is no reconclliation, no peace or
atonement with God. Like as princes offended must be dealt with by Mediators,
as the cities of Tyrus and Sidon desired peace of Herod by the mediation of
Blastus his chamberlain, Act. 12. 20. so God being displeased with us for our
sins, there is no access to be had into his presence without Christ the
Mediator.

First then all heretics are condemned that deny his Godhead: Diverse
heresies against the natures and person of Christ.
the one saying, that Christ is not equal unto God: the other, that he took
beginning from Mary. The Valentinians denied his humanity, saying, he took
nothing of his mother, but passed through her as water through a pipe. The
Eutichians also are of this kind, who confound the natures of Christ, and
affirm in him the divine nature only to remain. Of the second sort are the
Nestorians, who make two persons in Christ, one person of God-Christ, another
of man-Christ, saying: that Marie was the mother of the man-Christ, not of
God-Christ. Of the third rank were the Angelici, so called, because they
worshipped Angels, and made them their Mediators: such are the Papists, that
pray unto Saints, and join them with Christ in the office of the Mediatorship:
all these acknowledge not Jesus Christ truly, whom God has sent.

Secondly, we must know, that it is not sufficient to have a general and
superficial knowledge, but lively and effectual: such as Saint Paul had,
confessing thus of himself, Gal. 2. 20. Thus I live, not I now, but Christ
lives in me: and in that I live now in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son
of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. Such a faith and
knowledge of Christ then is requisite, whereby the soul lives unto God,
working always by love, Gal. 5. 6. For there are two things necessary to
salvation: the inward belief of the heart, and the outward confession and
demonstration of it, as Saint Paul shows, Romans 10. 10. With the heart man
believes unto righteousness, with the mouth man confesses to salvation. De
Isaacho cap. 8.
And Saint Ambrose writes well upon these words, Cant. 8. 6. Set me as a seal
upon thine heart, as a signet upon thine arm: signaculum Christ us in cord vt
semper diligamus, signaculum de brachio, vt semper operemus, luceat imago eius
in confessione nostra, luceat in operibus and factis, vt si fieri possit, tota
eius species exprimatur in nobis, etc. Let Christ be a signet in our heart
always to love him, a bracelet upon the arm always to be working for him:
let his image shine in our faith and confession, let it shine in our works and
actions, that if it be possible, the whole image of Christ may be expressed in
us.

The fifth Lecture.
Verse. 4. I have glorified thee in earth, etc.
THis is the third reason which our Savior uses, for the obtaining of his
glorification: that because he had glorified his Father in earth, and finished
his work, that his father would glorify him again. He reasons from the
desert to the reward, which are relatiues, that is, have respect and mutual
relation the one to the other.

That Christ sought the glory of his father, both himself says it, Ioh. 4.
34. My meat is, that I may do the will of him that sent me, and finish his
work: and his Father from heaven approves the same: for after our Savior had
said: Father, glorify thy name, there came presently a voice from heaven,
saying: I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again, Ioh. 12. 28.
Whereby it is evident, that as God had been glorified by the heavenly sermons
and divine miracles showed by Christ in his life, so also he would set forth
his glory in his blessed death.

From hence then we learn, Doct. 1.
that they which will be assured to receive glory at the hands of God in
heaven, must endeavor to set forth his glory here in earth.

This our Lord promises, Revel. 3. 27. To him that ouercometh, will I grant
to sit with me in my throne, even as I overcame and sit with my Father in his
throne. He that shall set forth the kingdom of Christ in this world in
ouercoming of sin, and subduing his own affections, shall be made partaker
of Christ's kingdom in heaven.

Thus our Savior says to his Apostles, Mat. 19. 28. Verily I say unto you,
that when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his majesty, ye which
followed me in the regeneration, shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the
twelve tribes of Israel. As they in their regeneration expressed the spiritual
kingdom of Christ, so they shall enjoy the fellowship of his everlasting
kingdom. Saint Paul does confirm the same by his own example, 2. Tim. 4. 8.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
from hence forth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness.

For like as they that run in a race contend for the Lord, and run the way
of his commandments, shall receive an incorruptible crown. The great king of
the Persians hearing out of the Chronicles of the faithfulness of Mordecai,
which had revealed the conspiracy of two of the Kings Eunuchs against him,
presently said: What honor and dignity has been given to Mordecai for this?
Esth. 6. 3. He thought it unreasonable that his faithful service should go
unrecompensed. Much more is it just with God to reward the faithful service of
his.

that God the righteous Judge shall give him the crown of righteousness, 2.
Timot. 4. 8. This justice of God is the ground and cause of our reward: which
his justice depends not upon the merit of our works, or worthiness of our
obedience, but upon the free and most gracious promise of God in Christ: which
his most free and merciful promise, to fulfill and accomplish to his servants,
it stands with his stable and inviolable justice.

of all glory, Revel. 4. 11. and might thus plead with his father for his
glorificatio^, because he had glorified him: yet the members cannot challenge
any thing at the hands of God, Man cannot challenge any thing from God by his
merits.
for any worthiness that is in them, but only for their Mediators sake.
Nehemiah thus praying, Remember me, O my God, in goodness, according to all
that I have done for this people: Nehem. 5. 19. requesteth not to be remembered
of God because of his faithfulness, but according to the same: his
faithfulness is the rule or measure, but Gods mercy is the cause: or else
where he confesses, cap. 13. 22. Remember me o God concerning this, and pardon
me according to thy great mercy: but where merit is challe^ged, there is no
mercy but justice showed: so that as Bernard well says, Opera non sunt causa
regnandi, sed via regni: Good works are not the cause of reigning, but the way
to the kingdom.

Secondly we do learn, that whosoever will be assured to receive glory in the
kingdom of God, must seek to glorify him here. He then that dishonors God
in this life, how can he look to receive honor at the hands of God? Consider
this well all ye whom God has honored in this life, with riches, authority,
wit, knowledge, take heed that ye rob not God of his glory, in abusing these
gifts to your own pleasure: as riches to pride and wantonness; authority, to
oppress or do wrong; wit to deceive; knowledge, to maintain error: for they
that thus hide their talent, shall have the reward of the unthrifty servant,
both to lose the talent, and to be cast themselves into utter darkness, Mat.
25. 30. How shall blasphemers that profane Gods name, drunken and gluttonous
persons that make their bellies their gods, proud men that make flesh their
arm, how shall they escape, or with what faces can they appear before the
throne of Christ, who^ they have so much dishonored? Happy then are they
which make Gods glory the end of their life, the scope of all their actions,
as the Apostle says: Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do else, do
all to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10. 30. Then, come death, come sickness, come
hell it self, such a one shall not be dismayed, his faithful service shall not
be forgotten, the remembrance of his obedience, and testimony of his conscience
shall be as the anker-hold of his soul: as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 119.
This I had because I kept thy commandments.

I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. Christ did not only
begin the work committed unto him, but did finish and make an end thereof, as
he him self said upon the cross: Consummatum est, it is finished, John 19. 30.

This Scripture teaches us, Doct. 2. Continuance to the end.
that it is not sufficient to make a good beginning, or to enter into the
profession of Christ's service, but we must continue and proceed therein, and
hold out unto the end. So our Savior He that endures to the end, shall be
saved. Reu. 2. 26. He that overcomes and keeps my works to the end, to him
will I give power over nations. What did Herod to reverence John, and to hear
him gladly, and to do many things, and after to cut off his head, Mark 6. or
the young man to have been trained up in the keeping of the law, and afterward
to depart from Christ for the love he had to his possessions, Mark 10?
Therefore David says, Teach me thy law, and I will keep it to the end, Psalm.
119. 33. He well knew that his constant and enduring service should be
acceptable unto God.

Like as he that runs in a race, unless I have finished my course. 2. Tim.
4. 7. As it auailed not Lots wife to have gone out of Sodom and after to look
back, nor yet the Israelites to have departed out of Egypt, and afterward to
long for the fleshpots again: so they shall never come to Canaan that are
weary of weldoing, and do as it were run themselves out of breath before
they come to the end of their race.

Thou have wrought all our works for us: and* therefore the Church prays,
Psalm. 68. 28. Thy God has appointed thy strength: stablish, O Lord, that thou
have wrought in us. So should we pray unto God to assist us with his grace, and
so uphold us by his spirit, that we fall not. Secondly, we must take heed, that
we rashly enter not into Christ's service, but do beforehand ca^t all the perils
and dangers that may ensue, as he that builds an house will count the cost
that it will stand him in. Luke 14. 28. This is the cause that many making a
show of zeal, having not laid a good foundation, are constrained with shame
to give over. Thirdly, a continual circumspection and watchful care is
necessary, that we walk on by fear, always doubting our own weakness, and
suspecting our strength, as the Apostle says: Let him that stands take heed
lest he fall. 1. Cor. 10. 12.

Wherefore let us endeavor to be like He that is slothful to do his work, is
the brother of a great waster. Ye are wasters the^, not workmen; destroyers,
not repairers; pullers down, not setters up, that give over in your course,
and faint in weldoing.

Verse. 5. And now glorify me thou Father with thine own self, with the
glory which I had with thee before the world was. This is the fourth reason of
our Savior his request for his glorification, and it is taken ab aequo from
the equity thereof, and the right which he had to this glory, it was his own
from all beginning: so that he prays only for the manifestation of that
glory in his whole person of God and man, which was due to his godhead before
the world was.

From hence then this comfortable doctrine is concluded, Doct. 3.
that as this great glory of Christ, being due from al eternity to his godhead,
was decreed to be manifested also in his humane nature: so likewise the glory
of Christ's members, which shall be given unto them in the kingdom of God, was
before ordained and appointed in the counsel of God before all worlds.

This Moses testifies in the Psalm. 90. 2. Before the mountains were made, and
before thou had formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to
everlasting thou art our God. Thus the Apostle witnesses, That we were
predestinate in Christ to be to the praise of his glory. Ephesians. 1. 12.

that as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. Act. 15. 48. S. Paul
also testifies of Clement and other his fellow laborers, that their names
were written in the book of life, Phil. 4. 3.

world compared to a sea of glass, because all things are open before God, and
he from the beginning did foresee and appoint whatsoever shoud fall out in the
world: as all things in a glass are conspicuous and evident. Like as Mat. 20.
2. the husbandman agrees aforehand what to give to the laborers, before yet
they had wrought in the vineyard: so the Lord in Christ appointed salvation to
his elect before they had done either good or evil.

The Apostle shows the reason hereof, That the manifold wisdom of God might
be made known, according to the eternal purpose which he wrought in Christ
Jesus our Lord. As the unspeakable wisdom of God herein appears, so also his
infinite love, in choosing of us before yet we were: and therefore the Apostle
says, He has predestined us through Jesus Christ according to the good
pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace. Ephesians. 16. Gods
wisdom then, and his gracious favor and love are manifest in the decree of
predestination unto glory.

First then, whereas the same glory is before was due to his godhead. Hereby a
certain erroneous opinion of the Papists is confuted, which affirm that
Christ merited his own glorification: for this were to say, that the glory of
the godhead could be merited. And again, all that Christ did he wrought for
us: Christ merited not for himself.
as he prayed not for himself, but for us: as John 11. 41. Father I thank thee
that thou have heard me, I know that thou hear me always, but because of
the people that stand by, I said it. So likewise when a voice was heard from
heaven, (when Christ had said, Father glorify thy name) I have glorified it,
and will glorify it again. Jesus answered, this voice came not because of me,
but for your sakes. John 12. 30. Again our Savior says, For their sakes
sanctify I my self. John 17. 19. His precious death and sacrifice, wherein he
did offer and sanctify himself unto God, was wholly for us. Ambrose says,
Non suae emerendae graetiae, sed nostrae eruditionis causa ieiunauit: He fasted
not to merit grace for himself, but to instruct us. Non sui sed nostri causa
pauper factus: He became poor, not for his own but for our sakes. His birth,
life, death, resurrection, were all for our sakes, not to gain any thing to
himself, for the glory of the godhead was due unto Christ, at the very first
instance of his incarnation: as the Apostle says, when he brings in his
first begotten Son into the world, he says: Let all the Angels of God
worship him, Heb. 1. 6. but the manifestation of this his glory came
afterward. So that where the Scripture says, Revel. 4. 11. Thou art worthy to
receive honor, etc. it is to be understood, not of the purchasing of any honor
which he had not, but of the manifestation thereof: yet to us, and for our
cause, he has worthily and infinitely merited.

Secondly, seeing the Lord has appointed a kingdom of glory for his, this
ought to comfort and establish us against all temptation, as our Savior says:
Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers will to give you a kingdom, Luke
12. And it ought to be our chiefest care to rise up, grow, and increase in the
assurance and undoubted expectation of this heavenly glory: that we may at the
length be persuaded with Saint Paul, that neither life nor death, height nor
depth, things present, or to come, are able to remove us from the love of God
in Christ* Romans 8.

The sixth Lecture.
Verse. 6. I have declared thy name to the men which thou have given me out of
the world.
THe request of our Savior being now made for his glorification, he comes to
make request for his Church: and first for his Apostles and other believers
then being, from verse. 6. to verse. 20. where we have first the preparation to
the prayer, verse. 6. to 9. then the petition it self for his disciples, that
God would keep them in the world from evil, verse. 9. to verse. 20. In the
preparation is set forth the obedience of the Apostles in receiving and
keeping the word of Christ: and the causes thereof: the principal their
election, verse. 6. Thine they were: the isntrumental means, Christ's doctrine
and preaching, I have declared thy name unto them.

The declaring of the name of God is nothing else, but the manifesting of the
will of God, and publishing of his counsel concerning the salvation of the
world by Christ.

First then we are taught here, Doct. 1.
that the word of God is only effectually declared to those that are given
unto Christ out of the world, and are marked unto salvation: others may hear
it, The word of God profitable only to the elect.
but it is not profitable unto them.

1 Thus the Apostle says: If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are
lost, 2. Cor. 4. 3. to them then that are not lost, it cannot be hid.

2 Christ says to his Apostles, Mat. 13 11. It is given to you to know the
secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but unto them it is not given. It appears
then that the Gospel shall be revealed unto, and received by all them to whom
it is given: the rest, (though the word of God be offered unto them) they shall
not have grace to believe it: As the Apostles Paul and Barnabas said to the
Jews, Act. 13. 46. It was necessary that the word of God should first have
been spoken unto you: but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of eternal life, lo we turn to the Gentiles.

3 Like as the Ma^na did not profit those that used it not as God commanded
them; for it stunke, and was full of worms, Exodus 16. 20. and they which
lusted after quails died; the flesh being yet between their teeth, Number. 11.
33. so the word of God profits not those, which thankfully receive it not.

4 The reason the Apostle shows, Heb. 4. 2. The word which they heard
profited not them, because it was not mixed with faith in those that heard it.
Hereof it is, because all men have not faith, 2. These. 3. 2. but only those
that are given unto Christ, to such only is the word of God effectually
taught. Like as the bread of the house is only for the household, as the
prodigal child faith: In my fathers house is bread enough, Luke 15. 17. so the
word of God is ordained for none but those that are of Gods house, that is,
true members of his Church.

5 Hereby then, as by a most sure mark, every man may learn to discern of his
election, The attentive hearing of the word, a mark of our effectual vocation.
if he have a desire too, and a delight in the word of God. For like as a man
is judged to be sick and diseased, when his stomach cannot brook nor digest
wholesome meats: so the soul of that man cannot be sound, to whom the word of
God has no pleasant taste. But when a man can say with the Prophet David, Psalm.
19. 10. Thy word is sweeter to me then the honey or honey comb. By this we may
gather an assured trust, that we are given unto Christ, if we do continue in
having delight still, and finding comfort in the word: for otherwise a sick man
may have some while a relish of his meat, when there is some intermission of
the disease, but it holds not long: so is it with them, that have for a while
some taste of the word of God, and afterward fall away. Ambrose says well upon
those words: In Psalm. 119.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: Osculatur nos verbum Dei,
quando sensum nostrum spiritus cognitionis illuminat: the word of God does
kiss us, when the spirit of knowledge does illuminate our minds.

Thine they are, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy word:] Thine
they are by election, given unto me by their spiritual vocation and calling:
they keep thy word, which is the fruit of their sanctification.

The keeping then of the word of God, Doct. 2.
is the fruit and effect of our election, not the cause or foundation thereof:
therefore we do good works, because we are elected thereunto: we are not
elected because of our good works.

1 This Saint Paul shows, Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us in him, before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in
love: our holiness is an effect and consequent of our election in Christ, not
a precedent cause thereof.

2 This is exemplified in Esau and Jacob Romans 9. 11. Ere the children were
borne, when they had done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God might
remain according to election, not by works, etc. The Apostle directly notes,
that the election of Jacob depended not upon his works, which as yet were not,
but only upon Gods gracious purpose. Saint Paul confesses so of himself,
that he was not called to be an Apostle, or put into Christ's service, for any
thing that God saw to be in him; but the grace of God was exceeding abundant
with faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus, 1. Tim. 1. 14. and I was
received to mercy, verse. 13. And the Apostle ascends to the very first
original and beginning of his calling, Revel. 1. 1. (...), separated (in the
eternal counsel of God) to preach the Gospel.

3 The Prophet Ezechiel does set forth this truth of Gods free and gracious
election by an allegory, of a child, that in the birth was cast forth,
forlorn, and forsaken, the navel not cut, nor yet washed with water, or
swadled in clowts; but it lay wallowing and tumbling in blood: the Lord passed
by, and had compassion upon it, took it as his own: so it grew and became
comely and beautiful, etc. Ezech. verse. 4. 8. What cause was there in this
child, that the Lord should have respect unto it? but only the Lords love and
favor which he had unto it: as it follows, verse. 14. Thy name was spread
abroad among the heathen, because of thy beauty: for it was perfect through my
beauty, which I had set upon thee. Even so in us the Lord saw no cause, why he
should elect us unto life, only through his own mercy he saved us.

4 Saint Paul shows the reason of our free and gracious election, Ephesians. 1.
5. He has predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself,
etc. to the praise of the glory of his grace: that is, now God only has the
glory of our election, when it is imputed wholly to his grace.

5 First then the doctrine of the Papists is confuted, who teach, that men are
elected upon the foresight of their faith and works: which is flat contrary
to the doctrine of the Apostle, Romans 9. 14. It is not in him that wills, nor
in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Thus the Church believed
in Ambrose his time: Dignatione sua olim decreuit Deus peccatores saluos
facere, In 2. Tim. cap. 1.
etc. vt neque merito suo, qui saluantur, neque horum per quos vocantur, etc.
God by his own vouchsafing has long ago decreed to save sinners, etc. so that
not by the merit of those which are saved, nor of them by whom they are called,
but by the grace of God, this gift is conferred.

Secondly, seeing God has showed us so great mercy, as before we were any
thing, to decree us unto salvation: we hereby should be stirred up to walk
worthy of our vocation. Ephesians. 4. 1. and to show our selves thankful unto God
again by living unto his praise.

Verse. 7. Now they know, Doct 3.
that all things which thou have given me, are of thee.] From this verse this
doctrine is gathered, that it is not possible for any to receive the word of
God, unless they be persuaded and assured indeed, that it is the word of God,
and that he which delivers the same, speaks from God. As here this reason
is given, why the Apostles received the word of God, because they knew that
Christ came from God, and that all things which he spoke and did were of God.

1. This the Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 14. 25. speaking of the power of the word
of God: If all prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, the secrets
of his heart are made manifest, and he will fall down and worship, and say
plainly that God is in you indeed. This persuasion of the hearer that God is
in the preacher, does make the word pierce into his heart, that the secrets
thereof are discovered.

2. This appears by that confession of Peter, when Christ had said to the
twelve, will ye also go away? John. 6, 67. Master, says he, to whom shall
we go, thou have the words of eternal life. Peter will not go from Christ,
because he believed, that he was a teacher from God, to show the way to
eternal life. This made Nicodemus come unto Christ, because he knew he was a
teacher come from God. John. 3. 2.

3. Like as the ambassador is reverenced and his message willingly received,
because he comes in the name, and with the authority of the Prince: so says
S. Paul, we are Ambassadors for Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 20. 4. The reason the
Apostle shows, Heb. 4. 12. The word of God is lively and mighty in
operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters thorough to the
dividing of the soul and the spirit: such operation has the word, whereas it
is received and acknowledged for the word of God.

The people are taught, that where the truth is preached, and the word of God
manifestly taught, they should receive it with all reverence as Gods word: as
the Apostle testifies of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. For this cause I
thank my God without ceasing, that when ye received of us the word of the
preaching of God, ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is indeed
the word of God, which also works in you that believe.

The seventh Lecture.
Verse 8. I have given unto them the word which thou gave me.
IN this verse our Savior amplifieth that which in the former verse was more
briefly expressed, declaring the obedience of the Apostles in receiving his
doctrine, and his own faithfulness in giving unto them no other words then
which he had received of his father.

Our Savior then teaches all Ministers byh is example, that they should not
adventure to preach any thing to the people but that which they have received
from God, and are able to warrant by his word.

Thus the Apostle says, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ, 1. Cor. 11.
1. not only for example of life, but also in his doctrine. The Apostle will be
no further followed, then he himself did tread in the steps of Christ. Again
the Apostle says, I certify you brethren that the Gospel which was preached
of me, was not after man. Gal. 1. 1^.

2. Hereof the Apostle gives himself an example, I have received of the Lord
that which I have delivered unto you. Likewise the Prophets preached not to the
people, till the word of God came unto them: as Isay 2. 1. The word that Isaiah
son of Amos saw upon Judah and Jerusalem.

3. Like as when our Savior fed the people in the wilderness, first he
himself brake the loaves, and then gave them to the Disciples, and they to the
multitude, John 6. so the Lord Christ must first break unto us of the bread of
life, before we can break it to you. And like as he that hears speaks
continually, Prou. 21. 28. A man must first hear the cause before he can give
sentence: so must the Ministers first hearken to God to be instructed by his
word, before they deliver any doctrine to the people.

4. For it is required of such as are disposers, dispensers, and stewards of
Gods mysteries, to be faithful, 1. Corin. 4. 2. Like as the ambassador of the
Prince must deliver nothing but by warrant and commission of the Prince: so
must Ministers do being the Lords ambassadors, 2. Cor. 25. 20.

5. They then are reproved by this doctrine, that presume to preach the
doctrines and commandments of men in stead of the word of God: as the
Pharisees in our Savior Christ's time did, Mark 7. 7. and the Pharisees of this
age the papists do, who in most articles of religion, the doctrine of the
Trinity excepted, do set forth humane inventions and traditions.

Secondly the Ministers learn, that they should not rashly utter whatsoever at
the first sight offers it self, or comes suddenly into their mind, but
examine every doctrine how it is agreeable to the word of God: to wait upon
God with the prophet Isay, and to hear from him what we should cry: as
Ambrose says, Cum audisset clama, non prius clamauerat quam audiret quod
clamare deberet, Isay 40. in psalm. 119. sermon. 2. he would not cry before he had
heard what he should cry. Examination of doctrines.
The people of God also are taught to compare with the scriptures every
doctrine which is brought unto the^, as the Berrhaeans did, Act. 17. to receive
the good doctrine as current coin, to refuse the contrary as counterfeit
stuff.

And they have received the^. Doct. 2.
By this readiness in Christ's Disciples to receive his doctrine, Gods word is
cheerfully to be heard.
we are taught with all cheerfulness and alacrity to yield obedience to the
word of God.

1. So the Apostle says, Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously, Col. 3.
16. It can not dwell with us unless we receive it into the houses and
habitations of our hearts. And again, despise not prophesying. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2^,
that is, contemn not, neither neglect the preaching of the word.

2. Thus the Apostle commends the obedience of the Galathians, that they
received him as an Angel of God, Gal. 4. 14. and consequently his doctrine as
angelical. Such were the Disciples of Antioch, When they heard the word they
were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord, Act. 13. 48. the willing then
and cheerful receiving of the word, is a glorifying, a dignifying of it, an
ornament and an honor unto it.

3. Like as he that tastes the honey or co^b, finds a pleasantness and a
delight in it: so the word of God should be sweeter to the spiritual taste,
then the honey or honycomb, Psa. 19. 10. And as the thirsty ground waits for
the rain, and drinks it in gladly: so should the word of God be heard, as
Job says, They waited for me as for the rain, Job 29. 23.

4. Christ therefore is with all forwardnes and earnest desire to be heard,
because he has the words of eternal life, John 6. 68. We willingly hear men
that counsel us for our worldly profit, much more when for our souls health,
and for that the contempt of the Ministers of Christ, redoundeth unto Christ
himself: He that hears you, hears me: he that despises you, despises me,
Luke 10. 16.

There are then three sorts of men, that come far short in the practice of
this doctrine: first, they which are contemners and despisers of Gods word,
that of an obstinate and wilful mind refuse to hear us: such were they that
stopped their ears against Stephen, Act. 7. and that cast off their garments,
and threw dust in the air, while Paul preached, Act. 22. 23. Such are the
obstinate popish Recusants at this day. Secondly, there are others that
prefer their worldly business, as the Gergasenes that because of the loss
of their swine, would have Christ preach no longer among them, Mat. 8. 34. Such
are they that coming to faires and markets will not be spared one half hour
from their worldly traffic to hear the word of God. Thirdly there is another
sort, that come to hear but profit not: such as Ezechiel speaks of, They
hear thy words but do them not. Ezech. 33. 31. Neither do these receive the
words of Christ: for though the word pierces the ear, yet they shut the door
of the heart against it. Wherefore if we will be the true Disciples of Christ, let
us neither obstinately reject his words, nor carnally refuse them, nor
negligently hear them, but willingly receive them: that even as we with a
bodily appetite do take our corporal food, so with a spiritual desire we
receive our heavenly sustena^ce, which does sustain our souls, as the other
strentheneth our bodies: as Ambrose well notes upon those words of our Savior,
Give ye them to eat, lest they faint in the way: Habes Apostoli^um cibum,
manduca illum, and non deficies: You have Apostolic food eat it, and you
shall not faint.

They have known verily or surely (...) that I came out from thee.] Doct 3.
To come out from God is all one with that which follows, to be sent of God,
which Christ utters of himself, as now our Mediator, the Minister and
messenger of God in his humane nature: for as he is God, he was neither sent of
God, nor came out from him into the world. Our knowledge of Christ must be
certain.
We learn here that our knowledge of Christ must not be wavering or
uncertain, but sure and steadfast: the Apostles knew verily, etc.

1. Saint Paul would not have us as children to be carried about with every wind
of doctrine, Ephesians. 4. ^4. but to be rooted and grounded in love. Ephesians. 3. 17.

2. Such constancy was in John Baptist, Who was not as a reed shaken with the
wind, Mat. 11. 7. that is ready to be ouerturned upon every occasion: but he
continued steadfast and unremovable in the confession of Christ even unto
death. Saint Paul was so sure of his doctrine, that if an Angel from heaven
should preach otherwise, he would hold him accu^sed, Gal. 1. 8.

3. We should be in respect of our constant faith as nails surely fastened,
Eccl. 12. 11. and as the pillars of the temple, Revel. 3. 12. that cannot be
removed.

4. For as God is faithful and alters not, and Christ is not yea, and nay,
he changes not, 2. Cor. 1. 18. 19. so the faith of Christ is also certain,
and we ought to be as certain of it.

5. Two sorts of men are here reproved: first, they which suffer themselves to
be seduced and corrupted in religion, and do leave their first faith. Such in
Saint Paul's time were Philetus and Alexander, 1. Timoth. 1. 20. Phygell ^s and
Hermogenes, 2. Timoth. 1. 15. which turned away from Paul and departed from
the faith: such there are in these days, that being unsteadfast in faith, and
unsettled in judgment, are carried headlong as with a whirlewind into the
downfall of dangerous errors and corrupt doctrines, that fall into schism, and
are infected with popish superstition. Secondly, they are here touched, that
although they be not seduced or misled into any other belief, yet are not
resolute and constant in that faith which they profess: but unto many our
redemption by Christ* is as the deliverance and return of the Israelites from
captivity, even as a dream, Psalm. 126. 1* Or the story of the Gospel is
unto many but as a thought or fantasy, or a tale that is told, Psalm. 90. 9.
So I know not how the most of the world are in a dead sleep* they slumber and
dream in Religion, neither being certain of that they have, Against carnal
professors
nor yet resolved against that they have not, and by Gods grace I trust shall
never have. Let us therefore labor to be constant, and settled, and fully
persuaded in matters of faith, as builded upon a rock, that neither the wind
of persecution, waves of temptations, nor the rain of strange doctrines, be
able to remove us from our foundation. Ambrose says well: Similes simus
Nazaraeis, quorum capilli non defluebant, and Christus Nazaraeus erat: Let us
be like the Nazarits, whose hair did not shed, such a Nazarite was Christ:
that we may persevere unto the end, and be as Christ's mother: multi enim
conceperunt Christum, sed non genuerunt: for many have conceived Christ, but
not brought him forth: such are they which fall away from their faith.

And believe that thou have sent me] The Apostles would not so readily have
received Christ's words, Doct. 4.
but that they were persuaded he came from God: so it is necessary, that the
people should know and approve the calling of their teachers and Ministers
before they can subscribe and give consent to their doctrine.

1. So the Apostle alleges out of the Prophet: How beautiful are the feet
of those which bring glad tidings of peace, etc? Romans 10. 15. before the
message be received, the messenger must be approved.

2. This persuasion brought Nicodemus to Christ: We know that thou art a
teacher come from God. And that consession of the Pharisees and Herodians of
Christ was true, though uttered by them in deceit and hypocrisy: We know thou
art true, and teach the way of God truly. Mat. 22. 16. A man must first have
a true calling before he can teach truly.

3. Like as David said of Ahimaaz, that came running to bring him news of
Absaloms overthrow: He is a good man and brings good tidings, 2. Sam. 18. 27.
so must the minister have a good and lawful calling, though he be not always
(as he should be) a good man, before he can be a publisher of the joyful
tidings of the Gospel.

4. Our Savior Christ says: Every plant which my heavenly Father has not
planted shall be rooted out. Such then as are not set of God into his service*
but intrude themselves, can have no prosperous success in their callings.

5. First the Ministers of God are here taught, The Minister must be assured of
his calling.
that they should have assurance in themselves of their calling, and the inward
testimony of their conscience, that they are appointed of God to labor in his
vineyard; which they may know by these two arguments: first, by their gifts:
for they which are deputed to the Lords service, are in some good measure
enabled thereunto: as the Apostle says, 2 Corinthians. 3. 6. God has made us able
Ministers of the new Testament. How Ministers are acertained of their calling.
Secondly, by the employment of their gifts: if they carefully and diligently
use those graces wherewith they are endued, to the edifying of Christ his
Church: as Saint Paul again says: If I do it willingly (that is, preach the
Gospel) I have a reward. Ambrose says: Voluntarius Minister habet praemium,
coactus di^pensat obsequium: the willing Minister has a reward, he that is
forced is only employed and used. So then they which either want gifts to
furnish them, or willingness to provoke them, can never be sure of their
calling, nor secure of any good ensuing effect.

Secondly, the people of God are taught to acknowledge their faithful and
vigilant Pastors to be sent of God, and not to doubt of their lawful calling,
the seal of whose Apostleship and ministry they find in themselves, in the
fruitful and powerful effects of the Gospel, wrought in their hearts by the
spirit of God. Give ye not ear then to the Papists or Schismatickes, that
would persuade you, that ye have neither Ministers, Church, nor Sacraments: For
as Saint Paul says: We need no Epistle of recommendation unto you, etc. you
are our Epistle written in our hearts, which is understood and read of all men,
in that ye are manifest to be the Epistle of Christ ministered by us, etc. The
spiritual comfort, increase of knowledge, edifying in the faith, sanctifying
in good life, which are wrought daily in your hearts (that fear God) by the
preaching of the word, are evident seals and signs of our calling. But they in
whom the word of God works not these effects, as they are enemies to their
own salvation, so they are the cause why the glorious ministry of the
Gospel, is blasphemed and daily traduced, and evil spoken of by the common
adversary.

The eighth Lecture.
NOw follows the request it self, which our Savior makes for his Apostles;
wherein we are to consider, first for whom he prays: secondly, for what.

Our Savior prays for his Apostles, which first he amplifieth a disparatis,
from things diverse or opposite: I pray for them, I pray not for the world,
verse. 10. Secondly, he confirms the same by certain reasons: First, from the
right and property which God has in them: They are thine: and the reason
thereof, because all mine are thine, verse. 11. Secondly, from their fruits and
effects, I am glorified in them. Thirdly, from their present necessity:
because Christ was no more in the world, he commends them to his Father.

Verse. 9. Doct. 1.
I pray for them, I pray not for the world; but for those which thou have given
me.] By this Scripture it is evident, that only they which are given unto
Christ, Christ a Mediator only for the elect.
and elected of God, have part in the mediation and intercession of Christ.

1. So the Apostle says: He is able perfectly to save them that come unto God
by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25. He
makes intercession then only for them, that by him shall be saved.

2. Thus our Savior prayed for Peter that his faith should not fail, Luke 22.
32. Thus he prayed for Lazarus: Father, I thank thee, that thou have heard me,
Ioh. 11 41. Thus still he prays for his own, but for the reprobate world he
no where prays.

3. Like as Zachary saw in that heavenly vision two Olive trees dropping oil
through the pipes into the bowls of the golden candlestick, Zach. 4. 2. 3. so
Christ this Olive tree does not convey his graces unto any by the virtue of his
prayers, which are as the pipes, but to those that belong to the golden
candlestick of his Church. And as the precious ointment upon Aarons head,
ran down upon his beard, and to the borders of his garments, Psalm. 133. 2.
so Christ our head gives influence of grace, and spirit of life only to his
members.

4. For seeing the prayers of Christ are always effectual, and he is always
heard of his Father: I know that thou hear me always, Ioh. 11. 42. It
follows, that the reprobate have no part in Christ's holy prayers, because
they receive no benefit by them. Christ also is the Savior of his body,
Ephesians. 5. 23. he guides it by his grace, and preserves it unto salvation.
They then which are not of his body, have no interest in his death, nor part
in his prayers.

5. First, by this doctrine their error is discovered, which affirm that
Christ died for all men, as well for the reprobate as for the elect; as well
for Judas, as for Peter and Paul: because Saint John says, that Jesus Christ
is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1. Ioh. 2. 2.

But seeing that our Savior vouchsafes not to comprehend the world in his
prayers, much less does he extend unto them the fruit of his death: he would
not offer himself to death for those, for whom he offers not his prayers:
neither can they be admitted to his redemption, that are excluded from his
intercession. And further, There is a world only of the elect and faithful.
whereas Christ is said to take away the sins of the world: here the world
only, that is, the universal company of the elect, which are taken from all
degrees and callings in the world, is to be understood, as where our savior
says, John 14. 31. That the world may know that I love the father: he means
the world of the faithful: for unto the rest of the world Christ does not show
himself. John 14. 22. So Ambrose well says, Est in electis and praescitis
specialis quadam vniuersitas, vt de toto mundo totus mundus liberatus, and de
omnibus hominibus omnes homines assumpti videantur: there is in the elect and
foreknown a special kind of universality, that the whole world out of the
whole world, and all men from all men seem to be taken unto life.

Secondly it may be doubted, whether herein we are bound to follow this form
and president of Christ's prayer, to exclude some out of our prayers, and not to
remember the wicked in our requests unto God. I answer that there is a special
consideration to be had of this prayer which here our Savior makes, which in
all respects cannot be followed of us, nor made a pattern of our prayers: for
here our Savior prays as God and man, having the perfect foresight and
knowledge of every man, and according to that knowledge he directs his
prayers. In this his prayer, as Ambrose says, Lib. 5. in Luc*
Et aduocatus est and iudex, in altero pietatis officium, in altero insigne
potestatis: He is both an advocate and judge; in the one he shows his piety,
in the other his power and majesty. That prayer rather of our Savior is set
forth herein for our imitation, Whether the wicked may be prayed for
which he made upon the cross for his enemies: so we in charity and piety
ought to pray for all: seeing now that gift, (...) the discerning of spirits,
whereof the Apostle speaks 1. Cor. 12. 10. is ceased, by the which S. Peter
could say to Simo Magas, thy money perish with thee. And unless we did see a
man sin a sin unto death that is, to sin against the holy Ghost, for the
which the Apostle would not have us to pray, 1. John 5. 16. which case is very
rare, and hard it is to say, who is guilty of that sin: otherwise then in
these cases, we in Christian charity (which thinks not evil and hops the
best of all) may pray for the conversion of all; yet making a difference,
preferring always the Church of Christ in our prayers.

Thirdly, this doctrine gives unto worldly minded and carnal men a fearful
caveat, Worldlings without the compass of Christ's prayer
that they look unto themselves, and in time turn unto God: for as yet while
they are of the world, that is, profane persons, irreligious, without the fear
of God, they are out of Christ's protection, and barred from his prayers, and
deprived of the virtue and efficacy of his holy mediation. To them therefore
be that saying spoken in the Psalm, Kiss the son lest he be angry* and ye
perish in the way. Psalm. 2. 12. Kiss the son and embrace him by faith, which
is the kisses of his mouth* Cantic. 1. 1. and so by Christ's powerful mediation
and almighty protection, we shall be preserved from perishng.

Verse 9. Doct. 1.
For they are thine, and all mine are thine, and thine are mine. Hence we
learn, that they which are given to Christ belong unto God his Father, and the
whole blessed Trinity takes charge of them, and cares for them.

1. So the Apostle says, Ye are Christ's, and Christ Gods, 1. Cor. 3. 23. Al
then that is Christ's, is also Gods; and as Christ is the head of every
faithful man, so God is Christ's head, 1. Cor. 11. 2.

2. Thus our savior says to his Apostles: The Father himself loves you,
because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God. John 16.
27.

3. Like as the father in the parable says to his son, Thou art ever with
me, and all that I have is thine, Luke 15. 31. So Christ being the heir of
all, whatsoever his father has is his, and whatsoever he has is his fathers.
Like as Jacob says concerning the two sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasses:
They shall be mine, as Reuben and Simeon are mine, Genes. 48. 5. and let my
name be named upon them. v. 16. so all the children of Christ are his fathers.

4. Our savior shows the reason hereof, that they may be one as we are one, I
in them and thou in me, John 17. 22. 23. Because Christ is equal to his
Father, and they are one God, of one power, eternity, wisdom, glory,
therefore all which the son has is the fathers.

5. First by this doctrine the wicked Arrians are confuted, who made the son of
God unequal and unlike unto his father, and their heresy was, that, suit
tempus qua^do non fuit filius, there was a time when the son was not: for if
all the fathers be the sons, and all the sons the fathers, as here our
savior says, there can be no inequality between them; there must be the
same power, wisdom, and everlasting being of them both.

Secondly, the opinion of the Church of Rome is also refelled, which holds
that Christ is not God of himself, Christ God of himself.
as the father is, but that he is God with and of his father, Rhemist. annot.
John 1. sect. 3. We confess indeed that Christ is not (...) son of himfelfe,
but that he is (...) God of himself is consonant to the scriptures. August.
tract. 19. in Ioann.
John 5. 26. As the father has life in himself, so he has given to the son
to have life in himself: if the son has life in himself, then he is God of
himself: Vitam in se habet, vt ipsa vita sibi sit ipse: He has life in
himself, and he himself is life it self to himself. It is a principle in
divinity, that diuina essentia nec gignit nec gignitur, The divine essence
neither begets nor is begotten. It is the person of the son, not the
Godhead, that is begotten of his father from all eternity.

Thirdly, if they only are Gods that are Christ's, their carnal security is
reproved, who flatter themselves that they belong unto God, and hope to be
saved though they believe not in Christ. We see then that it is far otherwise
then some imagine, that every man may be saved by that faith and religion
which he professes, and that controversies about faith are needless and
superfluous. Our Savior says, he that honors not the son, honors not
the father, No access to God without Christ.
John 5. 23. Whosoever then believes not aright in the son, neither cares
to know him, and walk in his ways, has no part in God, neither ca^ enter
into life. It is therefore a vain persuasion which they have of salvation,
that think to come to God without Christ. The heavens cannot be scaled without
a ladder, nor entrance into the house but by the door: Christ is the door and
the ladder. Stephen saw the heavens open, and Jesus standing at the right hand
of God, both together. Con^iteamur ergo Iesum ad dextram, vt coelum nobis
aperiatur, as Ambrose says: De Fide lib. 3 cap. 3.
let us confess Jesus at the right hand of God, that heaven may be opened to
us.

And I am glorifi^d in them.] Doct 3.
This is another reason why Christ prays for his Apostles, because they were
to the praise of Christ, and instruments of his glory. So then they which
intend and seek the honor and glory of Christ, and none other, are
privileged by his holy prayers, and made partakers of his intercession, and
the power and virtue thereof.

1. Hereof it is that our savior teaches us thus to conclude our prayers, For
thine is the glory, Math. 6. 13. whereby we referring all to the glory of
Christ, are assured to be heard in our petitions.

2. Thus the Apostles praying to the honor of Christ, Act. 4. 30. so that thou
stretch forth thine hand, that healing signs and wonders may be done ^y the
name of thy holy son Jesus: found the present effect of their prayers, the
place was shaken where they were assembled together, and they were filled with
the holy Ghost.

3. Like as it is said of the good houswife, Give her of the fruits of her
hands, and let her own works praise her in the gates. Pro. 31. 31. the costly
raiment wherewith others are clothed, redou^deth to the praise of the worker:
so the graces which God bestows upon his faithful servants, are referred to
the praise of the author.

4. This is the cause why God respects not the wicked, He will not give his
glory to another, Isay 42. 8. because they are enemies to Gods glory, and
therefore God will not give unto such the honor of his gifts.

5. This doctrine shows then in what miserable state they stand, All must be
re^erred to Gods glory which we ask in our prayers
that s^eke not Christ's honor, they are out of the protection of Christ's
prayers. All such as blaspheme the name of Christ, and cause the Gospel of
Christ to stink before the world by reason of their evil life that profess
it: be it known unto them that they stand as outlawes before God, and cannot
be assured either of direction to good, or protection from evil from Jesus
Christ. Wherefore let us first make the glory of Christ the scope and end of
all our requests and endeavors, and then we shall be sure that the Lord will
hear us. This then is the cause why many fail of their requests, because they
ask amiss, as James says, Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss,
that ye might consume it upon your lusts. For this reason the Lord says, he
would not hide any thing from Abraham, because he would command his sons and
his household after him to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. We are
therefore assured that if we ask any thing of God with a simple heart,
purposing to refer the same to his glory, that the Lord will deny us
nothing.

The ninth Lecture.
Verse. 11. And now am I no more in the world, but these are in the world, etc.
NOw follows the petition it self, which Christ makes for his Apostles,
that God would keep them: and of this request diverse reasons are given by our
Savior. First, from their present necessity, because Christ was to leave them
concerning his humanity. Secondly, from the end or effect, that they being
thus kept, might be joined together in amity and love: that they may be one,
as we, etc.

First then this truth is here delivered, Doct. 1.
that Christ as touching the presence of his flesh is gone out of the world.
Christ not present now in the world in his flesh.


1. So Saint Peter further witnesses: Whom the heavens must receive till the
time that all things be restored, Act. 3. 21. Christ is not to be expected from
heaven till his second coming to judgment.

2. Stephen saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God, but in heaven: Behold,
I see the heavens open, and the son of man standing at the right hand of God,
Act. 7. 56 Paul also as he went to Damascus heard the voice of Jesus, but
speaking from heaven: for he says: Suddenly there shone a light from heaven
round about me, Act. 22. 6. Paul further says, I saw him, saying unto me,
etc. but he was in a trance in the temple: he saw him only in vision or in
spirit, Act. 22. 17. as Peter saw the four cornered vessel let down from
heaven, Act. 10. 11. For in both places the same word (...), an Ecstasie or
trance, is used.

3. Then like as after Elias was taken into heaven, the Prophets and Disciples
supposed he had been conveyed to some other place, and sought him three days
but were deceived: so they which suppose to find Christ in the earth, are
erroniously seduced.

4. Diverse reasons of Christ's absence in the flesh, The reasons of Christ's
bodily absence.
in the Scriptures are alleged: first, because of the present expediencie for
the Church of God, Ioh. 16. 7. It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I
go not away, the comforter will not come. Secondly, because of the future
utility: I go before to prepare a place for you, Ioh. 14. 2. Thirdly, the
Angels said to the women: Why seek ye the living among the dead? Luke 24. 5.
It was not convenient for our immortal and everliving Savior to be conversant
still among mortal and sinful men, and to co^uerse with those which are dead
in sin.

5. First, the Popish fantasy is here discovered concerning Christ's carnal
presence in the Eucharist. For if the heavens must still receive and contain
him, how can his body be out of heaven, Against the carnal presence in the
Sacrament.
if it be always in heaven? unless they will make Christ to have many
miraculous bodies: for his natural body it cannot be, which is but in one
place at once. The words also of this text are evident, that Christ in his
flesh is no more in the world: so that it is neither visible nor invisible
here: for if either, then it were untrue that Christ says, I am no more in the
world. And therefore Origin soundly writes: Secundum diuinitatis suae naturam
non peregrinatur Christus, sed peregrinatur secundum dispensationem corporis,
etc. sicut homo ergo peregrinatur: Christ is not a stranger or a pilgrim in his
divine nature, but he is a stranger in the dispensation of his body, etc.
therefore as a man he is a pilgrim and a stranger fr^ us.

2. We are taught, that seeing Christ is gone out of the world, we in affection
and desire should follow after him: and as the Apostle says: Seek those
things that are above, Our desires must be in heaven.
where Christ sits at the right hand of God, Coloss. 3. 1. Where a man's
treasure is, there will his heart be, and where the carcass is, thither will
the Eagles be gathered together. If Christ be our treasure, if Christ be our
desire, our affections must be set upon heavenly, not upon earthly things: that
we may say with the Prophet: The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the
remembrance of thee; with my soul have I desired thee in the night, and with my
spirit within me, will I seek thee in the morning, Isa. 26. 8. 9.

I come unto thee] Christ's coming to his Father here, Doct. 2.
is by prayer: Our coming to God is by prayer.
so then by faithful prayer we draw near unto God.

1. So our Savior says: Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there I am in the midst of them, Mat. 18. 20. Christ comes to us in prayer,
and we come unto him: then specially is our conversation in heaven, as the
Apostle says, Phil. 3. 20. when our minds and affections in prayer are set
upon heavenly things.

2. Thus Peter while he prayed fell into a trance, he was rapt in the spirit,
and saw an heavenly vision. Saint Paul was taken up in spirit to the third
heaven, 2. Cor. 12. But these examples may seem to be extraordinary: but that
of Hanna is usual to all the faithful, who is said to pray before the Lord,
1. Sam. 1. 12. And Solomon when he had made an end of that effectual prayer
made at the dedication of the temple, said: These my words which I have prayed
before the Lord, be near unto the Lord our God night and day, 1. King. 8. 59.

3. Like as, when the woman that had the bloody issue, came in the preasse
behind and touched Christ's clothes, and Christ asked who had touched him; that
woman only is said to touch Christ, because she did it in faith, whereas all the
multitude did throng him, and many touched his clothes beside outwardly, Mar.
5. 30. 31. So although in respect of his power he be present to al, yet they
which draw nere unto him in faith, are specially said to come into Gods
presence.

4. Because God is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth, Ioh.
4. 24. they therefore do come unto God, which draw near in spirit. God being a
spirit, is only discerned and appoched unto in spirit: and they only see him,
whose eyes are anointed with the eye-salue, Revel. 3. 18. which is faith.

5. This doctrine reproves two sorts of men: first, profane persons, that
have no care nor desire to enter into Gods presence, which very seldom
remember to pray unto God. When we hear in Scripture that David praised God
seven times a day, Against neglect or discontinuance in prayer.
and Daniel (notwithstanding the great affairs of so large a kingdom) yet
could find time thrice a day to pray unto God, what shall we think of those
men that pray not seven times in so many days; nay, some not thrice in so many
weeks. O good God, how is the Christian exercise of prayer neglected! as
though men neither knew any God to pray unto, nor had any Mediator to pray by.
The Euchites were condemned, because they did nothing but pray: but men now
adays are more to be misliked, because they never pray. If they which call
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, I doubt whether they that call not
upon God, can be saved. How should a man think his labor can prosper, which
begins not with prayer? how should a man's meat do him good, that is not
blessed with prayer? How can a man think, that wife, children, and servants
should do their duties, not being exercised and trained up in prayer?

Secondly, Against hypocritical prayers.
the prayer of hypocrites is condemned, which pray with their lips but draw
not near unto God in their hearts. As the Lord by his Prophet complained of
the old Israelites: This people honors me with their lips, but their heart
is far away from me, Isa. 29. 13. such are the superstitious prayers of
ignorant Papists, praying upon their beads in Latin without understanding:
such are their prayers that have an ordinary stint, morning and evening to
run over, having no devotion or holy feeling at all. Conc. 2 in Psalm. 33.
Augustine says well: Ad Deum acceditur fide sectando, cord inhiando,
charitate currendo: we come unto God following by faith, desiring in heart, and
running in charity: these are the feet which the Preacher bids us to look
unto, when we come into the house of God, Eccl. 4. 17. Doct. 3.


Keep them in thy name, even the^ whom thou have given me, etc.] Then we have
no power of our selves to be kept from evil, but our strength and preservation
must proceed from God. Man has no power of himself to keep himself.


1. So the Prophet says: Thou o Lord, have wrought all our works for us, Isa.
26. 12. Saint Paul says, The Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and
preserve me to his heavenly kingdom. 2. Tim. 4. 18.

2 The Lord says to Abimelech king of Gerar, who had taken Abraham's wife into
his house, I kept thee also that thou should not sin against me, therefore
suffered I not thee to touch her, Genesis 20. 6. Abimelech was not preserved by
his own power from the sin of adultery, but by Gods general grace, which yet
is much different from the grace of renouation and sanctification: for as
Abimelech here, so diverse of the heathen had this general grace of restraint,
whereby they were kept from notorious sins, as of oppression, injustice,
adultery, murder, and such like, though they wanted the true work of
regeneration. David by a greater gift and grace confesses that the Lord kept
him from laying his hand upon the Lords anointed. 1. Sam. 24. 7. 26. 11.

3. For like as Peter had sunk down into the waters, if Christ had not stayed
him with his hand: so the floods of temptation are like to ouerwhelme us, if we
be not vpheld by Gods grace: Our own nature is such a guide and nurse unto us,
as Mephiboseths nurse was to him, that let him fall, as she fledd away, and
thereupon he became lame, 2. Sam. 4. 4. If we stay upon the direction of
nature, we shall be deceived.

4. For seeing all the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart, are only evil
continually, Genes. 6. 5. what help is to be expected from our nature? And
least any man should think, that it is otherwise with us now, then it was with
the old world: the Apostle in himself shows, that we are by nature of the
same mould. I know that in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing,
Romans 7. 18.

5. First then that popish doctrine of free will is here refelled, Against free
will.
who do ascribe unto man by nature great strength to apprehend that is good,
to believe, to do many works morallie good, contrary to the scripture: for
our Savior says: without me ye can do nothing, John. 15. 5.

Secondly, we are taught to depend upon God for his direction in all our
actions, and to give him thanks, that he preserves us from the great offenses
of the world: This was the prayer of the prophet David: te^ch me the way of thy
statutes, direct me in the path of thy commandments, incline my heart unto
thy testimonies, Psalm. 119. 33. 35, 36. all our direction, instruction, and
inclination is from God. Augustine well says, Deus sanctum in me semper opus
spira vt cogitem, compelle vt faciam, suade vt diligam te, confirma vt teneam,
custodi ne perdam: De Ecclesiast. docum. c. 56.
Lord inspire me to think well, compel me to do well, persuade me to love
thee, confirm me to hold thee, keep me not to loose thee.

That they may be one as we are] not that there can be in every respect such
union between the members, Doct. 4.
as there is between Christ and his Father, which is a substantial and
identicall union, but our uniting and knitting is in affection, not in the same
substantial condition. But here is a limitation and qualification of unity,
that it must have relation to God; for peace and unity, unless it be in the
truth, is no true unity.

1. Saint Paul therefore says, The love of Christians must be in the truth.
(...), following the truth in love, Ephesians. 4. 15. and S. John says, whom
(...), I love in the truth, Epist. 2. 1. We must then love in the truth, and
truth it in love: love without truth is erroneous, and truth without love is
not efficacious.

2. Thus Iehu well answered Iehoram, who asked if it were peace: What peace
(says he) while the whoredoms of thy mother Iesabel and her witchcrafts are
in great number, 2. King. 9. 22. There is no peace with the wicked. So
Iehosophat was chastised of God, his ships were broken, because he joined
himself with Ahaziah the idolatrous king of Israel. 2. Chron. 20. 37.

3. The confederacy of the wicked is compared to the mixture of iron and clay,
which cannot be tempered together, Dan. 2. 43. like unto the ropes wherewith
Sampson was bound, which he brake in sunder as burnt towe. Iud. 16. 9.

4. For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Romans 14. 23. therefore the peace
of the wicked being not seasoned with faith, can not be pleasing or acceptable
unto God.

5. Let us therefore love in truth. Nothing ought more to move us to unity,
then that we profess one God, one faith, one baptism. Ephesians. 4. 6. nunquam
vidimus trinitatem litigantem, we never saw the trinity at variance, as
Augustine says: neither ought we, that worship one God, to be at variance
among our selves.

The tenth Lecture.
Verse 12. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name.
THese words show another reason why our savior Christ prays for his
Disciples, that God would finish that work which was begun in them, that as
Christ had hitherto preserved them all, except only Judas, so that God would
keep them to the end. Doct. 1.
They then which are given unto Christ to be kept, They which are once truly
graft into Christ cannot finally fall away.
cannot possibly perish or finally be lost.

1. So the Prophet David says, My shepherd is the living Lord, I shall want
nothing: though I walk through the valley of death, I will fear no evil, for
thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me, Psalm. 23. 1. 4. He
was persuaded that the sheep which were under the conduct and custody of this
shepherd, could not possibly miscarry.

2. Saint Paul was thus persuaded, that nothing could separate him from the
love of God in Christ, Romans 8. 39. and he was fully assured that there was
laid up a crown of righteousness for him. 2. Tim. 4. 8.

3. Like as none of those perished which were saved in the Arc; nor any lost
of all the host of Israel, which were led under Moses through the red sea: so
much more shall they be preserved which are committed to the sole keeping of
Christ.

4. The Apostle gives the reason hereof, Heb. 7. 25. He is able perfectly to
save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for them: Christ then is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13.
8. Therefore seeing Christ never dies, neither of his kingdom is there any
end, his sheep cannot perish, that are under his happy government: his
kingdom is not as the kingdom of earthly Princes, who can no longer care for
their subjects the^ they are in the world: but Christ the King of his Church,
not only when he was in the world, but now and for ever is able to preserve
those that belong unto him.

5. First then this doctrine discovers a popish error, that faith may be
lost, and that they which believed in Christ may fall away and perish, which is
contrary to the Scriptures, Justifying faith cannot be lost.
Ioh. 14. 16. Whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting
life: they that believe aright in Christ cannot be lost. Indeed an unfruitful
faith, and which is in show rather then truth, may be lost; but a right faith
whereby the heart is purified, and the believer justified, cannot fall away:
for then they which are given unto Christ, might belost.

Secondly, though Christ do surrender up his disciples here into his fathers
hand, it thereby is not gathered, as though he were not sufficient to protect
them now: but our Savior here speaks of his visible protection in the world,
in which respect he is gone from us now: but in respect of his divine power,
and euer-during Mediatorship, he is always present, and continually cares for
his Church. As at this present this Church and Commonwealth of England has
most comfortable experience, for whom the Lord has provided a Princely
shepherd to govern his people: that although our nurcing mother be taken from
us, he has sent us a nursing father: a Baruch for a Deborah, a Moses for a
Mirriam, a Josias for an Huldah, which singular mercy we cannot sufficiently
praise the name of God for. Wherefore blessed be God, that of his fatherly and
tender care has so provided for us; and blessed be his anointed, that he may
many years govern the Church and people of God in all piety, peace and
tra^quility.

But the child of perdition] That is Judas, Doct. 2.
which was as Augustine interprets, Perditioni destinatus, ordained to
destruction: this then is an evident and certain truth out of the word of God,
Some rejected from the beginning.
that the wicked and impenitent hypocrites and faithless men, were from the
beginning ordained of God to destruction.

1. This is testified Reu. 17. 8. Whose names are not written in the book of
life from the beginning of the world. If they were not appointed of God unto
life, nor numbered amongst the elect, then it is certain they were rejected of
God, and excluded out of his kingdom from the beginning.

2. Of this decree of perdition and reprobation, the Apostle propounds the
examples of Esau and Pharao, Romans 9. the on was hated, that is, refused of God
before he was yet borne, and left to himself: the others heart according to
his own wicked inclination was hardened, that in his confusion Gods justice
might appear.

3. For like as the Apostle says, In a great house there are vessels of honor
and dishonor, 2 Timothy 2. 19. so is it in this great house of the world: as there
are some appointed to be vessels of everlasting glory, so others are worthily
adjudged to eternal shame and confusion.

4. And the Lord does all this for his own sake: Proverb. ^6. 4. The Lord has
made al things for his own sake, yea the wicked against the day of evil. As
God is glorified in showing mercy to his faithful servants so likewise he is
honored in judging the wicked, careless, and impenitent sinners.

5. First the opinion of those is refuted, which think that no man's end is in
particular appointed of God, but that every man's state and condition depends
upon his own will and choice. Yea some have presumed so far to say, that God
not elected Paul or Peter more then Judas, and so consequently not rejected
Judas more then Paul or Peter: but let them show us if this were so, where
Judas in scripture is called a chosen vessel as Paul is, Act. 9. 15. or Paul
the son of perdition as Judas is.

Secondly, whereas it may be objected, that if God in the beginning have cast
away some, then it is needless for men to endeavor to attain to salvation,
for he whom God has decreed shall be damned cannot possibly be saved. To this
objection I answer: first, that by this reason if it concluded any thing, Gods
prescience and foreknowledge is as well overthrown, as his decree of
predestination: for he foreseeth all things that shall come to pass in the
world, neither ca^ any thing be otherwise disposed, then he has foreseen.
Secondly, if that Gods decree were known in particular, who shall be damned,
who saved, then indeed it were in vain for any man to strive against Gods
decree: but seeing that no man can know his election, The doctrine of
Predestination a spur to godliness.
but by his works and fruits of faith, every man must labor thereby to make
his election sure, as S. Peter exhorts, 2. Pet. 1. 10. God condemns none
but for his sins, the faithful and believers he condemns not, but such as
Judas, hypocrites, and unfaithful men unto Christ. Wherefore seeing there are
some children of perdition, but such as are given over to a reprobate sense,
and are past feeling, and are destitute of the spirit: we therefore so many as
God shall call, should labor for grace, that we may by our faith, virtue,
knowledge, love, conscience, and by other fruitful works be assured that we
belong unto election, and are not of the forlorn sort. And as Saint Paul
says: Will thou be without fear of the power? do well, Romans 13. 3. So he that
will be without fear of everlasting perdition, let him seek to please God,
and walk before him by a lively faith.

That the Scripture might be fulfilled] It is then impossible, Doct. 3.
that the word of God should fail; but whatsoever is declared in the
Scripture, shall most certainly be fulfilled.

1. So our Savior says: It is more easy that heaven and earth should pass
away, The certainty of Gods word.
then that one tittle of the Law should pass away, Luke 16. 17. Yea he says
further: heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away,
Mat. 24. 35.

2. As Mat. 2. 15. that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by
the Prophet: Out of Egypt have I called my son, and verse. 17. Then was that
fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet Jeremy, saying, In Rama was a voice
heard, etc. and in many other places the Apostles show the accomplishment of
the ancient Prophesies in our Savior Christ.

3. Therefore are Gods words compared to silver seven times purified in the
fire, Psalm. 12. that as nothing is lost of pure silver, being now thoroughly
tried, but every part thereof is laid up safely: so the words of God being most
pure, are preserved in heaven: as the Prophet says: Thy word endures for ever
in heaven, Psalm 119. 89.

4. The reason of the steadfastness of the word is taken from the author
thereof, which is God: who it is impossible should lie, Hebr. 6. 18. neither is
there any variableness with God, or mutabilitie, ^a. 5. 17

5. First then this doctrine teaches us, that we should rely upon the credit
of Gods word: that whatsoever we there find to our comfort, edifying or
instruction, we should as steadfastly believe it, as if God spoke unto us from
heaven. And although in particular the promises of God are not made to us, yet
are they most certain: as here is no Scripture rehearsed, wherein Judas was
declared to be a child of perdition; but there is relation to those general
predictions against the wicked. As Psalm. 69. 26. Let them be put out of the
book of life, and let them not come into thy righteousness. Gods
foreknowledge not the cause of men's works.


Secondly, we must not think, that the prediction of the Scripture was the
cause of Judas perdition, as though Gods prescience imposed a necessity upon
men's actions. De Predest. lib. 1. cap. 15.
But as Augustine well says: Des praescientiam non cogere hominem vt talis
scit, qualem praesciuit Deus, sed praescire talem futurum, qualis futurus erat,
quamuis sic non cum fecerit Deus: Gods prescience forces not a man to be such
as he is foreseen, but foreseeth him to be such as he is like to be, though
God made him not such.

Verse. 13. Doct. 4.
And now come I unto thee, and these things speak I in the world, that they
might have my joy fulfilled in them] This is alleged as another reason, why
our Savior makes this prayer in the hearing of his disciples; not for any
necessity which he had, but for the comfort of his disciples that heard him:
for the hearing of Gods word brings true joy and comfort.

1. So our Savior says elsewhere, Gods word works true comfort.
Ioh. 6. 4. These things have I told you, that when the hour shall come, ye
might remember that I told you them: it is a great comfort, when we see things
to fall out according to the word of God.

2. In like manner our Savior having prayed for Lazarus, said: Father, I
thank thee because thou have heard me, I know that thou hear me always,
but because of the people that stand by, I said it, that they may believe that
thou have sent me.

3. Like as Peter, though he had labored all night and caught nothing, yet was
encouraged to let down his nets again, after Christ had bidden him to let
them down to make a draught, because he knew he should not any more labor in
vain, Luke 5. 5. so the Apostles here conceived great joy, being themselves
earewitnesses of Christ's prayer.

4. The reason may be gathered out of our Saviors words, Mat. 24. 25. Behold,
I have told you before: that is, being warned before of dangers, we are better
prepared to bear them when they come, and being before assured of Gods
assistance, we conceive the greater joy in our deliverance.

5. If then the hearing of Christ in his word, The danger of those that are
ignorant of the word.
as the Apostles here heard his voice, do work such great joy and comfort,
judge ye what a great benefit they are deprived of, which are ignorant of the
word, and are not acquainted with Gods promises, neither know the familiar and
earnest prayers and requests which Christ makes unto God for his Church. And
as Saint Paul says: Whatsoever things are written, are written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope, Romans 15. 4. No marvel then if men ignorant of the Scriptures, and not
being acquainted with Christ's comfortable words, are void and destitute of all
true joy and comfort in their afflictions. David says: I remembered thy
judgments of old, O Lord, and received comfort, Psalm. 119. 52. that is, he
found comfort by meditating of the examples of Gods mercy and justice declared
in his word. Their case therefore is much to be pitied, that either wilfully
contemn, or carnally neglect the reading and meditating in Gods word, which is
called by the Apostle, the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6. 7. Like as then a
soldier set in the midst of his enemies, without his sword and other warlike
weapons, is in danger to be devoured and destroyed of them: even so as much
unable is a Christian to stand against the temptations of Satan, being not
armed spiritually with the knowledge of the word: which, as one well says: Si
tribularis, consolatur te, si laetaris, accumulat gauda^; si iracu^dus es,
mitigat te; si paupertate deprimeris, erigit te: If thou art afflicted it does
comfort thee: if thou be merry, it adds to thy joy: if angry, mitigateth
thy mood: if pressed with poverty, does raise thee up.

The eleventh Lecture.
Verse. 14. I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them.
NOw follows another reason of our Saviors prayer for his disciples, taken
from the great perils which they are subject unto, and their enemies which are
set against them, which are the world: that is, the generation of the wicked.
verse. 14. and evil or sin, which is ready to catch hold upon the best in
this life, from the which he desires them to be kept, verse. 15.

In this verse two reasons are given of the hatred of the world* because they
have the word and profess the truth, because in respect of their righteous
life, they show themselves not to be of the world: for these two things the
world cannot abide, Truth and Innocence.

By the world here, neither the whole company of men comprehending both good
and bad, is understood: as it is sometime taken, as Heb. 1. 6. When he brings
in his first begotten Son into the world: nor yet for the number of the
faithful, which are also called the world, Ioh. 1. 29. Behold the lamb of
God, that takes away the sin of the world: but the universal company of
the wicked only is here insinuated. As 1. Ioh. 5. 19. The whole world lies in
wickedness.

We are here then taught, Doct. 1.
that the faithful in this life are hated for the word of God and the truths
sake: The faithful hated in the world.
for nothing is more irksome or unpleasing unto them, then Gods word.

1. As the Prophet Isay speaks of the people of his time: They would not
hear the law of the Lord, which said unto the Seers, see not: and to the
Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things, etc. prophecy errors.

2. Thus Ahab hated Micaiah, because he spoke the truth unto him, and flattered
him not, 1. King. 22. 8. For the same cause did Herodias procure John Baptists
death, because he would not dissemble with her in her sin, Mark. 6. This was
the cause of Saint Paul's trouble at Jerusalem: they objected against him, that
the did teach against the law, and the temple Act. 21. 28.

3. Like as the Philistims striued with Isaacs servants for the wels of water
which they had dug, especially for one well of living or springing water,
Genes. 26. 19. so do the children of the world contend with the faithful about
the waters of life, which issue from the word. Therefore our Savior says: I am
come to put fire on the earth, and what is my desire if it be already kindled?
Luke 12. 49. The word of God is as a fire, that enflameth the wicked, it makes
the^ to rage and fume as though they were mad: as the people that could not
endure to hear Saint Paul, but cast off their clothes, and threw dust in the
air, Act. 22. 23.

4. The reason is evident: Every one that evil does, hates the light, neither
comes to the light, lest his evil deeds should be reproved, Ioh. 3. 20. The
wicked cannot endure to be reproved, and therefore they abhor the word that
discovers them: they are angry with the looking glass that bewrays the
wrinkles and spots of their face: and as mad men that fall upon their
physicians that come to do them good: like as the man that had an evil spirit,
ran upon those that came to adjure him, Act. 19. 16.

5. First we see what we are to judge of those, and what they are to think of
them selves, A dangerous thing to hate the servants of God.
which do hate any for their profession sake, or do repine at Gods ministers
because of their admonitio^s, they are by the sentence of Christ, of the world.
A fearful thing it is when a man spurneth against the admonition of the word,
which is especially the sin of great men. As Asa put the prophet Hanani in
prison, 1. Chro. 16. 10.
because he rebuked him for trusting to the king of Aram; so did not Hezekiah,
who being rebuked by the prophet for his rashness in showing his treasures to
the king of Babels servants, said, the word of God is good which thou have
spoken, 2. Ki. 20. 9. Secondly, they whom God has called to the profession of
his word, must prepare themselves to bear many scoffs, tauntes, and crosses
in the world, and to be hated for Christ's sake. Our Savior was no sooner
baptized and entered into his holy vocation, but presently he is assaulted and
tempted of Satan. Math. 4. The dragon is ready to devour the child as soon
as the mother is delivered of it. Reuelat. 12. 4. And Satan even in our new
birth would devour us, and choke us in the beginning. Origin well notes upon
the 17. of Exodus, that presently after the Israelites had eaten of Manna, and
drunk of the rock, then began the battle with Amalek; and tu ergo, cum
coeperis manducare panem coelestem para te ad bellum: Hom. 11. in Exodus
and thou also, says he, when thou have begun to eat of the bread of
heaven, make thy self ready for war.

Because they are not of the world, Doct. 2.
as I am not of the world. In this world we are all while we here live; but of
the world (if we will be Christ's) we must not be.

1. What it is to be of the world, the Apostle shows: Love not the world, nor
the things of the world: If any man love the world, the love of the father is
not in him, 1. Ioh. 16. To be of the world then, is to love the vanities and
corruptions thereof, to be altogether earthly minded, and addicted, to earthly
things.

2. Lot though he were in Sodom, yet was he not of Sodom, For he was vexed
with the unclean conversation of the wicked, 2. Pet. 2. 7. Nehemiah though he
was in the king of Persia his court, and waited upon his table, yet his heart
was at Jerusalem. Nehem. 2. 3. Daniel though in the land of captivity, yet
opened his window to Jerusalem, Dan. 6. 10.

3. Like as the Dove being sent out of the Arc, finding no rest for the sole
of her foot, returns thither again, Genesis 8. As the marines, though in the
midst of the sea in body, yet in wish and desire are in the haven, Psalm. 107.
30. so though we are in the world, yet our desire and affection must not be
upon it.

4. For the world passes, and the lust thereof, 1. John 2. 17. therefore it is
in vain to settle our desire upon vain and transitory things; and where our
treasure is, there should be our heart: we should seek those things which are
above, because Christ there sits at the right hand of God. Coloss. 3. 1.

5. First though we be not of the world, Against separation from the Church.
yet must we not go otherwise out of the world, then God has appointed: as
they do, which pretending corruptions of the place, where they live, do break
out into schisms, and separate themselves from the fellowship of Christ's
Church: we must not thus go out of the world, but rather leave it by the
sequestring of our desire, the^ separating of our bodies. The Apostle says,
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them
rather, Ephesians. 5. 11. thus shall we not be of the world, though we live in it.
Peter and John refused not to go up to the temple though it were then much
abused and abounded with corruption. Augustine to this point says well, Cont.
Cres^. lib. 3. cap. 35.
Verbo and disciplina Domini emendo quod possum, tolero quod non possum; fugio
paleam, ne hoc sim, non aream, ne nihil sim: I by the word and discipline amend
whom I can, whom I cannot I suffer; I flee the chafe that I be not such, not
the flore lest I be nothing.

Secondly, 3. degrees of worldly men.
if we will assure our selves that we be Christ's, we must be like him: as he is
not of the world, so neither must we: neither to set our desire upon the world:
for if we be risen with Christ, we must seek those things that are above, Col.
3. 1. nor to fashion our selves to the world, Romans 12. 2. as many do which
conform themselves to the custom of the world, nor to war after the flesh
and world, 2. Cor. 10. 3. that is to become patrons and defenders of the
corruptions of the world; for these three to affect and desire, to follow and
be conformable to the world, to patronize and defend it, are though not in the
same measure and degree, the cognizance of corrupt and worldly men.

Verse 15. Doct. 3.
I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou keep
them from evil. It is not then lawful for the servants of God, in regard of
the great miseries and travels of this life, to wish presently to be out of the
world, but rather to pray unto God that they may be kept in the world, and that
their life may be preserved to serve God and live unto his praise.

1. The Church of God thus complains, Thou have abated my strength in the
way, and shortened my days: and I said, O my God, take me not away in the
midst of mine age, Psalm. 102. 23. 24. The faithful desire rather that their
days may be prolonged to Gods pleasure.

2. It was the foolish wish of the murmuring and disobedient Israelites: Would
God we had died in the land of Egypt, or in this wilderness would God we were
dead, Number. 14. 1. Job also herein showed himself impatient: Why died I not in
the birth, why died I not when I came out of the womb, Job 3. 11. Neither was
Elias that great prophet altogether blameles, who being persecuted of Iesabel,
was weary of his life, and desired to die, and said, It is enough O Lord, take
away my soul, for I am no better then my fathers, 1. King. 14. 4.

3. Like as the unprofitable servant is reproved, because he hid his talent in
the earth, and put it not forth to advantage: Math. 25. 25. so they are
unprofitable, which desire their bodies (before their time) to be raked up in
the earth, and not to live to set forth Gods glory. Like as it were a foolish
course, when as house is decayed and droppeth through, to pull it quite down,
and not to seek to repair it rather: so is it with them that would have their
crasie bodies, broken with the cares and troubles of this life, to be wholly
dissolved, rather then to be strengthened with grace against temptation.

4. The reason, why we should not desire to be taken out of this world, but to
be kept from evil in the world, the Prophet shows: I shall not die, but live
and declare the works of the Lord. Psalm. 118 17. Be benificiall to thy
servant, that I may live and keep thy word: Psalm. 119. 17. The desire which
we have unto Gods glory should make us willing to continue in Gods service
among the living.

5. First: Life not corruptly to be desired.
by this doctrine two corrupt affections are discovered: the one, when any man
desires life with a corrupt mind, as that he may live to grow rich, or to
increase in honor, or to be revenged of his enemy, or such like: as Ambrose
notes upon those words: Sermon. 20. in Psalm. 119.
Psalm. 119. 154. Quicken me because of thy word: Alius propter diuitias viuere
cupit, alius propter filios, hic propter verbum viuificari cupit: One desires
to live because of their riches, another because of their children, but the
Prophet only would live for Gods word sake.

The other affection reproved, Against a pre posterous desire of death.
is when one waxes weary of the world, not for any desire he has to God, but
because of his sorrow and trouble, to desire with Saint Paul to be dissolved
and to be with Christ is a good affection: so that our particular in seeking
our own perfection yield to the general in furthering the Churches
consolation, as Saint Paul does moderate his desire, who though it were best of
all for him to be loosed, yet wishes to abide in the slesh for the furtherance
of the Churches joy. Phil. 1. 23. 24.

Likewise we are taught by this rule, when affliction comes, and temptation
assaileth us, to pray rather for strength to resist, then for riddance, not at
all to feel it: Saint Paul praying, that the temptation might depart from him
which he felt in his flesh, was not therein heard, but received this answer,
my grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is made perfect through nesse:
Our Savior prayed for Peter, not that he should not at all be winnowed of
Satan, for how then should he come forth as clean wheat, but that his faith
fail him not, Luke 20. 31. Saint Paul al^o says, that he was delivered from
the mouth of the Lion* from the cruel rage of Nero the persecuting Emperor:
but he was not sure so to be delivered still from external persecution: but he
says confidently: The Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and
preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom, 2. Timoth. 4. 18. He was sure to be
kept from evil, as here our Savior prays for his disciples but not to be
delivered from the troubles of the world: and the same also is the hope and
confidence of every faithful man.

The twelfth Lecture.
Verse. 16. They are not of the world, as I am not of the world.]
THis verse was repeated before verse. 14. that which was there observed shall
not need to be rehearsed again: only this shall be now considered: that the
Scriptures are so tempered, that to our capacity, and for our profit some
special matters and sentences are again remembered.

1. So Saint Paul says: It grieueth me not to write the same things unto you,
and for you it is a sure thing, Philip. 3. 1.

2 Sometime repetitions are used as ornaments and graces to the spiritual
songs, as Psalm. 136. this clause (for his mercy endures for ever) is
repeated in every verse, as the ground of that Psalm, and well setting forth
the heavenly melody thereof. Why the Scripture uses repetitions.
Sometime repetitions are used for the stirring and lifting up of the
affections: as Psalm. 135. verse. 1. Praise the name of the Lord, praise him:
verse. 3. praise the Lord. These exhortations are again uttered, that our
affections should be more vehemently touched with a desite to praise God.
Sometime for doctrine sake, and our better instruction and understanding some
hard matters, and sentences are often opened, and for our better remembrance
iterated: as our Savior repeateth and expounds to his Apostles the parable
of the seed, Mat. 13.

3 Therefore the words of the wise are compared to nails, that are sure
fastened, and driven up to the head, Eccles. 12. 11. So is it, when doctrine is
thoroughly applied: The word of God is as silver seven times purified in the
furnace, Psalm. 12. 7. The foroace is our heart, where the word of God by
fruitful meditation must be tried, till it become silver, and be made
profitable to us. And as the clean beasts did chew the cudde, that is, they
did again eat and minse the meat received: so by often rehearsing and
meditating, the word of (God as our spiritual food) must perfectly be digested.

4. The reason hereof is, our dullness of hearing, and weakness of
understanding, as the Apostle shows to the Hebrews: Whereas concerning the
time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need again that we teach you the first
principles of the word of God. Heb. 5. 12. whom the Prophet compares to
sucking babes, that had need to be taught precept upon precept, line after
line, Isa. 28. 10.

5 First, though the spirit of God, that best knows how to sit our
affections, uses repetitions: Of vain and idle repetitions.
yet this is no warrant for men to use vain tautologies and rehearsals of the
same things, either in prayers or preachings: which are of three sorts; either
of negligence proceeding from loosnesse, when men toss and tumble up and down
the same things often in their indigested prayers. Such were the long and
irksome prayers of the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 14. Either they are for ostentation,
such as were the tedious acclamations of Baals Priests, who did cut also and
launch themselves with knifes* having nothing in their mouths from morning to
noone, but these words: Baal hear us. Such were the tedious Church songs used
in popery, full of long and vain repetitions, and dismembered sentences: which
use (I fear me) is not altogether left in the service and songs of some
Cathedral churches to this day. Some vain rehearsals do show superstition: as
the heathen did think to be heard for their much babbling, Mat. 6. 7. So were
people taught in popery to say over upon their beads so many Pater nosters,
Aue Mary's, so many Creedes, as though the often saying of them had a more
holiness, and added a greater efficacy unto them. Wherefore all these kinds of
fruitless repetitions are held to be vain and not at all grounded upon Christ's
example.

Secondly, we are taught, that where the Spirit of God especially commends
unto us any doctrine or sentence in Scripture, it should so much the more of us
be carefully remembered. Hereof it is, that so often in the Psalms do we find
this word Selah, (...): Of the word Selah used in the Psalms.
which is derived of a word, that signifies to lift up: which was a note of
singular attention to mark what was contained in the verses so marked, and
that the voice should be exalted and lifted up in the singing. Hierome out of
Origin reports diverse acceptions and takings of this word: the Septuagint,
Theodotian and Symmachus, interpret it Diapsalma, the change of the tune or
song: Aquila and the fifth edition, semper, always: the sixth edition, iugiter,
infinem, continually, or to the end. Hierom.
Whereupon Hierome gives this note: Marcella*
Ex quo animaduertimus, hoc verbum docere, Tom. 4.
sempiterna esse quae dicta sunt: whereby we mark, that this word shows,
that the things uttered are eternal, that is, for ever to be remembered. So
should we continually remember the holy instructions so carefully commended in
Scripture: as this here twice beaten upon by Christ, that we should not be of
the world, as Christ is not of the world. That these and the like holy precepts
and counsels, we should, as the wise man says: bind them to the neck, and
write them upon the table of our heart, Prou. 3. 3. that is, keep them most
diligently, as precious and costly jewels.

The thirteenth Lecture.
Verse. 17. Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is the truth.
AS hitherto Christ has prayed for the preservation of his Apostles, so now he
moves his Father by these his heavenly prayers for their sanctification: which
is of two sorts, either general, to be sanctified by the word of God, that is,
made truly obedient to his will, as every faithful man must be: or special,
in making them able and sufficient for their calling, whom now he sent upon his
embassage into the world, ver. 18. Then, the reason and ground of this request
is showed, which is the sanctification of himself, verse. 19.

1 Here then by this Scripture it is evident, Doct. 1.
that our hearts and affections are reformed, sanctified, consecrated unto the
will and service of God, only by the truth revealed in his word. So says the
phet: The word of God only conuerteth.
Wherewith shall a young man redress his way, in taking heed according to thy
word, Psalm. 119. 9. the reforming and redressing of our ways is wrought by the
word of God. The Apostle also says, that the Scriptures are profitable, to
teach, to improve, to correct and instruct in righteousness, 2. Tim. 4. 16.

2. The Prophet David herein shows his own experience: I understood more
then the ancient, because I kept thy precepts* I have not declined from thy
judgments, for thou did teach me, Psalm. 109. verse. 100. 102. Zacheus, by
the voice of Christ was converted, and of a mere worldling made the child of
Abraham, Luke 19. 8. So was the Eunuch converted by the preaching of Philip
Act. 8. and Lydia by hearing of Paul, Act. 16.

3 Neither were the waters of Jordan so wholesome to cure Naamans leprosy, 2.
King. 5. 14. nor the poole of Bethesda to heal the lame, John 5. 3. nor the
lump of figs Hezechiahs sore, 2. King. 20. 7. as the word of God is
sufficient to purge all our spiritual diseases. There is nothing searches,
purges, and purifieth, as Gods word does: Mat. 3 11.
as a fire it consumes the stubble of men's affections: as a sword it cutteth
off the put^ified parts: Col. 4. 6.
as salt it seasoneth that which is otherwise unsavory. Heb. 4. 12.


4 For the proper work of faith is to purify our hearts, Act. 15. 9. which is
as the eye salve of the soul, by the anointing whereof our spiritual
blindness is cured. Reu. 3. 18. which faith is wrought in us by the hearing of
the word of God, Romans 10. 17.

5 First, in that our Savior says: thy word is the truth. We are taught, that
all truth necessary to our sanctification and salvation is contained in the
Scriptures: contrary to the doctrine of the Church of Rome, All truth
necessary to salvation to be found in Scripture.
who hold many traditions necessary to salvation, not expressed nor revealed
in the Scriptures. And lest they might have this evasion, that there is some
part of Gods word unwritten, beside the Scriptures. Our Savior himself
sends us to the Scriptures: Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to
have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me: but ye will not
come unto me, that ye may have life. If the Scriptures then declare Christ, and
Christ gives life: and if in the Scriptures we may find eternal life, what
other doctrine is necessary to salvation, beside the truth revealed in the
Scriptures?

Secondly, if the word of God do sanctify us, then they are unprofitable
hearers, which by the preaching of the word are not sanctified. If salt will
not season a man, what can? If the finger of God, which did write his law in
the tables of stone, cannot write the same in our hearts, then are they harder
then flint or stone. Gods word is as his pen, as Ambrose well says upon these
words, Psa. 45. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer. Vide ne scriba
velociter scribens sit verbum Dei, quod animae vitia procurrat and penetret,
and inscribat dona gratiae: See if the Scribe swiftly writing be not the word
of God, which pierces the soul, and discovers the errors thereof, and
writes there the graces of Gods spirit. If Gods pen then cannot grave his will
in men's hearts, no other writing can do it.

Verse 18. As thou did send me into the world, Doct. 2.
so have I sent them into the world. Now follows the special sanctification
of the Apostles to their office: Christ sends them into the world, and whom
he sends, he furnishes with all graces needful for that function, wherein
they are employed.

1 Therefore the Apostle alleging out of the Psalm says, God sends none but
enabled with gifts.
he has ascended up on high, etc. and has given gifts unto men, etc. he
therefore gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors, some Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 8. 11. God has not only appointed these
callings and offices in his Church, but has also given gifts answerable, to
some Apostolical, to some Prophetical, to other Pastoral and Doctorall gifts.

2 Thus Moses was furnished of God, both with the power of miracles, and the
gift of utterance: I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall
say. Exodus 4. 3 12. Thus Isay his lips were touched with a cole from the altar,
Isa. 6. 6. Our savior Christ in his baptism received the holy Ghost descending
upon him in the likeness of a Dove, Mat. 3. The Apostles, before they were
dispersed in the world to preach the Gospel, were assisted by the holy spirit,
which came upon them in prayer in the likeness of fiery cloven tongues.

3 For to send an unfit messenger, not enabled with gifts, is as if one should
send a lame man of his errant: He that sends a message by a fool (that is,
one that is unwise, and not qualified with gifts) is as he that cutteth off the
legs, Pro. 26. 6. The Prophet Isay compares such messengers to dumb dogs,
that delight in sleeping, Isay 56. 10. A man will not keep a dog to watch his
house, that will not bark at a thief: neither are the blind fit to be
watchmen, as the prophet says in the same place; their watchmen are blind:
no more is it fit that they should be ignorant that watch over other men's
souls, or slothful or negligent that have the charge over others.

4 By this distribution of gifts to his members, our Lord and Savior shows
his great victory and triumph: That being ascended, he has led captivity
captive, and dispoyled his enemies, and divided the spoil among his faithful
servants: so that the diversity of graces and gifts in Christ's Church,
redoundeth to the glory of out victorious Captain. And again, as the Lord
has appointed the end, the gathering together of the Saints, the edification
of his body, Ephesians. 4. 12. so likewise he has ordained the means to that
end, the necessity of gifts working thereunto.

5 First, by this Scripture are reproved all they which intrude and thrust
themselves into the office and calling of Ministers, being not with gifts
thereunto enabled; certainly let such know, that they are not of Gods sending:
they either run then of themselves, not called of God, or sent, as the tares
were sown of the envious man, who enuieth the profit and feeding of Christ's
flock. The people must needs be blind, where their guides are blind, as our
fauiour says: they be blind leaders of the blind, Mat. 15. 13. Ad Furiam.
For as Hierom says, detrimentu^ pecoris, ignominia pastoris: The wants of the
shepherd, are the woes of the flock. The poor flock of Christ pincheth and
smarteth for the ignorance and negligence of their pastors.

Secondly, we are taught to give thanks unto God for those excellent graces
which he bestows upon his Ministers: as this Church of England shines with a
great number of such stars, that I think no Church in the world may be
compared to it. Let us therefore praise God for such, as the churches did for
Paul: They glorified God for me, Gal. 2. 23. and pray earnestly unto God to
increase the number of them that the Lord of the harvest will vouchsafe to send
forth laborers into his harvest, Mat. 9. 38.

Verse 19. Doct. 3.
And for their sakes sanctify I my self, that they also may be sanctified
through the truth. We see then that Christ is the sanctifier of his Church, and
that he has received all graces and riches of the spirit only to enrich us.

1. So the Evangelist says: All gifts derived unto the Church by Christ.
Of his fulness have we all received, and grace for grace. John 1. 16. Christ is
a full vessel, the ouerflowings whereof do fill all his members. The Apostle
also says, Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify it and
clea^se it, Ephesians. 5. 26.

2 Thus was Paul called and sanctified by Christ: Neither received I it of man,
neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, Galat. 1. 12.
Thus the Angel Christ gave unto John a little book which he did eat, and
thereby prophesied, Reu. 10. 11.

3 Christ is the Olive tree that stands before the ruler of the whole earth,
and emptieth it self by the pipes and conduits of his word into the golden
candlestick of his Church, Zach. 4. He is the head, from whence the body
receives life and power, Ephesians. 4. 16.
as the Apostle says: Let us in all things grow up unto him, which is the
head, even Christ, by whom all the body being coupled and knit together,
according to the effectual power, which is in the measure of every part,
receives increase of the body, etc.

4 For without a Mediator no grace is derived from God unto man: like as the
nurse suckleth the child by the mean of her breasts, a part of her self. As
the mind imparteth not her secrets, but the words and voice: so Christ is Gods
eternal word to make known his will; he by his incarnation, as the nurse by her
breasts, does convey unto us heavenly grace. The book of Gods secrets could
not be opened, till the Lion of the tribe of Judah had obtained to open it. Reu.
5. 3. 5.

5 First, in that Christ sanctifies himself, he is manifested to be perfect
God, who has the fountain of grace and life in himself, who needs not by
an other to be sanctified as man does, but the fullness of the Godhead dwells
bodily in him, Col. 2. 9. that is, essentially and substantially: for God
gives him not the spirit by measure, John 3. 34. as to others. Secondly,
Christ had no need of the grace of sanctification for himself, but to
sanctify us. Christ therefore was borne, died, rose again, ascended, not for
himself, but for us: he merited not to himself; (...) merited not for himself.
but all the fruit of his merits redound to us, contrary to the doctrine of
the Church of Rome, who teach that Christ merited for himself. Ambrose touches
this point well: Lib. 5. de fid. cap. 7.
Ad hoc natus est Christus, vt faceret creaturam, nec enim sibi natiuitas sua
proficit, sed nobis; quia non eguit nasci, erat enim in Deo qui processit de
Deo: si ergo natiuitas prima illi non profuit multo minus secunda. Christ was
borne to this end, to make the creatures; for his nativity did not profit
himself, but us; he needed not to have been borne or begotten, for he was in
God that proceeded from God: if then his first nativity did not profit him,
much less his second. As Christ was everlastingly begotten of God, not for
himself, but for the creation of the world; so he was borne in the fullness of
time, not for himself, but for our redemption.

Thirdly* here may every one learn, how to know himself to be a true member
of Christ's body* namely by his sanctification: for as S. Paul says, If the
first fruits be holy, so is the lump; if the root be holy, so are the
branches, Romans 11. If then we be graft into the true vine, the life of the tree
is in us, and the spirit of sanctification does quicken us: and as Christ did
sanctify himself, so are we sanctified by him. He then that has not the
spirit of Christ, whereby he should be sanctified, is not his.

The foureteenth Lecture.
Verse 20. I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in
me.
NOw follows the second part of our Saviors prayer for his Church, namely,
for those which would afterward believe in him unto the worlds end. First it is
showed for whom he prays, ver. 20. then what he prays for: first for their
unity and perfection in this life, from verse. 20. to 24. Secondly, for their
everlasting salvation, from verse. 24. to the end.

First we learn* that to our great comfort the provident care and merciful
love of Christ is extended, Doct. 1.
not unto that age only then present, Christ prays for all believers to the
end of the world.
but to all the company of believers in all ages, so long as the world
endures.

1. So our Savior says. Other sheep I have also, which are not of this fold,
them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one
sheepfold and one shepherd, John 10. 16.

2. Of this sheepfold were the Eunuch, Acts 8. Cornelius, Acts 10. Lydia, Act.
16. that were comprehended under this prayer of Christ, and by the holy virtue
and force thereof converted to the faith, and gathered unto Christ's sheep.

3 For like as the waters of Jordan came not together, till all the people of
Israel were clean gone through, Ios. 3. 17. so the Lord has purposed to
continue the world, and to suspend the dissolution thereof, till the number of
Saints be fulfilled. And as the people both before and following after Christ
riding to Jerusalem, cried, Hosanna, save us Lord. Mat. 21. 9. so both the
faithful people before the incarnation of Christ, and the Church also
succeeding, have their part of salvation in him.

4 For as the Apostle says, speaking by way of comparison of the fathers under
the law: God providing a better thing for us, that they without us should not
be made perfect, Heb. 11. 40. So also God has provided for all believers which
should follow in the world, that without them, no not the faithful which then
lived, could be complete and perfect: seeing we all make but one body in
Christ, which is not full and complete, if any of the parts and members thereof
be wanting.

5 First, this is a great comfort to as many as do believe in Christ, that our
blessed Savior has prayed for them, and they are all comprehended in his
prayer. Let not any man say, would God that I had lived in Christ time, that he
might have laid his hands upon me, and prayed over me: that I might have seen
him, and heard him speak. What would we more? Christ has prayed for us, and
by this his prayer we live and are preserved. Was Thomas only blessed, because
he thrust his hand into Christ's side, and felt the print of the nails? Did not
our Savior pronounce all those also blessed, that have not seen, and yet have
believed, Ioh. 20. 29.

Secondly, we are taught by this example of our Savior, that we should not
only care for the present age, but as much as in us lies provide for
posterity, when we are gone. As the Lord testifies of Abraham: I know he will
command his sons and his housho^d after him, that they keep the way of the
Lord, Genesis 18. 19. he had a care to transmit over to his posterity the true
worship of God. Care of posterity.
So Saint Peter says: I will endeavor always, that ye may be able to have
remembrance of these things after my departure, 2. Pet. 1. 15. So should
Christian Princes and Magistrates, faithful Ministers and godly Parents lay
such a foundation while they live, that their subjects, people, and posterity
may fear God when they are gone. Many parents themselves are well affected to
religion and godliness, but they are careless of their children. Such an one
was Ely, that himself fearing God, had no great care to plant the same in his
children, suffering them to have their own mind. Ambrose says well: I^rsa
partus suos ad sui fingit similitudinem, tu filios instituere tui similes non
potes? The Bear forms her young ones to her own shape, and by licking
brings them to fashion; and can not thou frame thy children to be like unto
thee in good things?

Which shall believe in me through their word] By the word then and preaching
of the Apostles, Doct. 2.
men are brought to faith and belief.

1 Thus the Apostle testifies: Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God, Romans 10. 17. The word of God preached and by attentive hearing received,
is that which ingendreth faith.

2 There was reading of the Scriptures usually upon the Sabbath in Nazareth,
but till Christ preached unto them, and opened the Scripture, they understood
it not: but then hearing him preach: They all bare witness, (and gave consent
to his doctrine) and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his
mouth. The Eunuch did read in the Prophet Isay, but he understood him not,
neither believed, till Philip had expounded the Prophet to him, Act. 8.

3 Like as a medicine helps not, unless there be also a skillful man to
apply the same, and give direction how it should be used, as the Prophet joins
them both together: Is there no balm at Gilead, is there no Physician there?
Ier. 8. 22. it profited not to have precious balm, without a Physician, that
should prescribe the receipt thereof: So the word of God works not that
effect, where by preaching it is not applied. The Samaritans said to the woman:
We believe now, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves,
Ioh. 4. 42. The reading of the Scripture is like the bare and naked report of
the woman; the preaching is as the powerful hearing of Christ himself.

4 For the word of God (the Spirit working by it) does in preaching declare it
self to be mighty in operation, and sharper then a two edged sword, which
enters thoroughly unto the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, the
joints and the marrow, and is a discouerer of the thoughts and intents of the
heart, Heb. 4. 12. This operation t^^ Apostle ascribes to the word preach If
they all prophecy, etc. the secrets of his heart are made manifest, etc. 1.
Cor. 14. 25.

5 First, if the word of the Apostles have this property to beget faith, then
we need not marvel, Faith a rare thing, where is no preaching.
that faith is so rare a thing where there is no preaching: as in many places,
where yet there is a dumb and unpreaching Ministry, or else men's traditions
are preached and urged, and not the word of the Apostles only, as in the
Romish Church. Such doctrines the Apostle says, they have (...), a show of
wisdom: but they are of no value, (...): upon which words Ambrose says:
Religio appellatur, cum sit sacrilegium, quia, quod contra authorem est,
sacrilega me^te inventum est* It is called religion, being a sacrilege: for
whatsoever is against the author, shows a sacrilegious mind of the inuenter.

Secondly, whosoever is a contemner and neglecter of the word of God, cannot
possibly attain unto faith or belief. If any man (as Iehoiakim) deface the
Scriptures, who caused the book to be cut and mangled, and then cast into the
fire, Ier. 36. 23. or stop their ear against it, as the Jews against
Stephen, Act. 7. or prefer worldy matters before it, as the Gergesenes, Mat.
8. 34. they may live long enough before ever they shall meet with faith. For
the wise man says: If thou seek for her as silver, etc. thou shall find the
knowledge of God, Prou. 2. 4. 5. They then which seek not for her, shall not
find her.

That they all may be one, Doct. 3.
as thou o Father in me, and I in thee, etc. that they also may be one in vs]
Our Savior prays here for the union and communion of Saints; their union with
God, their communion among themselves. Whereby this is gathered, that we cannot
be one among our selves, unless we be one with God: they cannot have peace in
the world, that are not at peace with God.

1 Therefore the Angels thus sing in that their heavenly song: Glory to God on
high, peace in earth, Luke 2. 14. The way to obtain peace in earth, is to give
glory to God in heaven.

2 David first reconciled himself to God: I acknowledged my sin unto thee:
then he is assured of the love and favor of his Church: therefore shall every
one that is godly, make his prayer unto thee, Psalm. 32. 5. 6. then the
faithful will be ready for their parts to give thanks unto God for him. The
contrary appears in Cham, who first being cast off from God, and separated
by his sins, which he felt heavier then he could bear, finds no comfort in
earth, he was afraid, lest every one that met him, should kill him, Genesis 4.

3 Christ says: Have salt in your selves, have peace one with another, Mark.
9. 50. We must first be inwardly seasoned with the salt of Gods grace, before
we can have peace without: Gods grace is the salt, peace is the sweet relish
or savor, that follows upon this seasoning. The Prophet David says: They
came about me like Bees, and are quenched as a fire of thorns: but in the name
of God I will destroy them, Psalm. 118. 12. Faith and confidence in the name of
God, does allay strife and contention, as when the sting of the Be is doubled
or pulled forth, or as the crackling fire of thorns is extinct and put out.

4 Our Savior moves us to unity, by his example: because he and his Father
are one: where he speaks not of the essential union and consociation which
he has with God; but of his dispensation and mediation, who as he was man,
cohered and consented with his Father in all things. We therefore should be in
unity, consent and agree together, because Christ our Lord* even as man, is of
one accord and consent with his Father: and the like mind should be in us, that
was in Christ, Phil. 2.

5 If then the union with God, and communion with the Saints do concur
together (for peace with the world follows not peace with God: but the more
we are loved of God, the more the world hates us. But our Savior speaks of
that union and society, which the Church has with it self) they then do
deceive themselves, which think they are at peace with God, and are not in
love and fellowship with the Church of Christ: whether Schismatickes, that
divide themselves from the peace of the Church, or profane persons, that
regard not the fellowship of the Saints: against whom the Apostle speaks: Not
forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves, as the manner of some
is, Heb. 10. 25. Like unto Ismael, whose hand was against every man, and every
man's against him. So some there are that think well of none, nor none think well
of them: but it is a true saying, No^ habet Deum patrem, Augustine.
qui non habet Ecclesiam matrem: He cannot have God to his father, that has
not the Church for his mother. He cannot have unity with God, that regards
not the society of his Church, nor seeks the love thereof.

That the world may believe that thou have sent me. Doct. 4.
The first reason of this petition for unity, is taken from the fruits or
effects, that the world and worldly men may be drawn to confess, seeing the
concord, unity, and sanctity of the servants of Christ, that he is the true
Messiah whom they worship.

1. So our Savior says, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 15.

2. By this reason Moses persuades God not to destroy Israel: Wherefore shall
the Egyptians say, he has brought them out maliciously, for to slay them in
the wilderness? Exodus 32. 12. He feared lest the heathen might have taken
occasion hereby to blaspheme God: for this S. Paul reproves the Jews, because
the name of God was blasphemed of the Gentiles through the^, Rom* 2. 24. They
by their evil conversation made the Gentiles more obstinate.

3. Like as then the outward deliverance of the Israelites was famous among the
heathen, and made them stand in awe: as the idolatrous Priests said to the
Philistims: Wherefore should ye harden your hearts as the Egyptians and Pharao
hardened their hearts? 1. Sam. 6. 7. and as the heathen praised God for the
return of the people from captivity, Psa. 126. 2. So much more occasion of
praise is raised among the nations for the spiritual deliverance of his
Church, and redemption from sin.

4. Two reasons may be yielded hereof why God would have made known to the
world the godly conversation of his Church: Why God would have the holy life of
his faithful known to the world.
one for their conversion, that they which obey not the word, may be won
without the word, by the conversation of your wives, 1. Pet. 3. 1. The other
for their confusion, to be a judgment unto them, that they may be left without
excuse, if by the contemplation of the creatures, much more by the conversation
of the faithful. Romans 1. 20.

5. They therefore are to be reproved, which by their ungodly life do hinder
the belief of the Gentiles: what will Jews and Turks say, when they see or
hear of the malice, drunkenness, extortion, uncleanness, that reigns among
Christians? Can they think that we worship* the true God, or that we are true
worshippers being given over to such great enormities? If a man did but sin
against his brother, or do him wrong, it would ask recompense: but now such
sin against God, causing his name to be evil spoken of. If a man did by his
own sin but slay his own soul, it were an heavy case: but now drawing
other after them by their evil example, or causing them to start aside and go
back, greater must needs be their condemnation. Mat. 18. 6.
Our Savior says, It were better a millstone were hanged about his neck and he
drowned in the sea, then he should offend the little ones, the poor servants of
Christ. The dange^ of giving of^ence.
It were better for the^ to be drowned without recovery, because it is but the
death of the body; whereas now by offenses, they endanger their soul: it were
better for other, because they should have no rub in their way, or block to
stumble at. Origene hereunto agreeably says: Qui scandali conscius est, animam
dabit pro anima eius, quem scandalizauit: He that is guilty of offense, shall
give his soul for his soul whom he has offended: It is good therefore for
every man to take heed of offenses.

The fifteenth Lecture.
Verse 22. The glory which thou gave me have I given them, that they may be
one as we are one.
HEre is another reason of Christ's petition for unity, taken from the very
fountain and original thereof, namely* their election and fore-ordaining unto
glory: for this cause they are glorified in Christ, that they might express
and show forth this godly union and spiritual conjunction.

Hence then we learn, Doct. 1.
that such as are ordained unto life and everlasting glory, are prepared of
God unto good works first, and to the service of love in this life before they
shall be admitted to the next.

1. So the Apostle says: We are elected to walk in good works
As he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should
be holy and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1. 4. And again, Ye are
his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 10. Then both good works were
ordained for the elect, and the elect ordained to walk in good works.

3. The holy Apostle thus testifies of himself: Who shall deliver me from
every evil work, and preserve me to his heavenly kingdom, 2. Tim. 4. 18. He
assures himself that God will give him grace to abstain from evil works,
seeing he had ordained him for his kingdom. Christ concludes Zacheus to be
the son of Abraham, and child of salvation, because he had expressed lively
fruits thereof in his large restitution and bountiful charity. Luke 19. 8.

3. Like as David being deputed and appointed to the kingdom of Israel, does
in the mean time prepare and address himself to walk uprightly, as he
says: I will do wisely in the perfect way til thou come unto me, Pfal. 101.
2. so all they which are ordained to Christ's everlasting kingdom, should walk
in David's steps. As the bride prepares and trimmeth her self for her husband,
though already espoused: so the elected already by Gods gracious election
espoused unto him in Christ, must adorn and trim themselves by holiness and
virtue, that they may be ready to solemnize the everlasting marriage feast in
heaven.

4. For they must first show themselves faithful in little, whom the Lord should
afterward make rulers of much, Mat. 25. 23. They must first show their
faithfulness in seeking Gods glory in earth, before they can receive glory
from God in heaven.

5. First then, seeing glory is first given and decreed to the elect, then
follows their godly unity and fruitful love: and the first is bestowed,
that the second may follow; not this first foreseen, that the other might be
decreed. ^lection not of works but by grace.
We see that election is not grounded upon the foresight of men's works* but
these are fruits and effects of eiection, not causes and beginners of it: as
the Apostle shows, That the purpose of God might remain according to
election, not by works, but by him that calls. Romans 9. 11.

Secondly, we have here a certain rule given us, whereby we may discern our
election, namely, by the fruitful works of unity and charity, which are as
seals and pledges of that glory which is decreed to be given us in Christ.
Thus S. Peter exhorts: Wherefore brethren, give rather diligence to make your
calling and election sure, for if ye do those things, ye shall never fall. 2.
Pet. 1. 10. And S. John says, We know we are translated from death to life,
because we love the brethren. 1. Ioh. 3. 14. There are two books, Two books:
the book of life, the book of a m^ns conscience.
whereby every man shall be judged, the book of life, and the book of every
man's conscience, as S. John testifies: The books were opened, and another
book was opened, which is the book of life, Reu. 20. 12. The book of the
conscience is a true copy of the book of life, here a man shall find how it
is written there. The record of a man's conscience, is a certain and infallible
evidence of the record in heaven. Thus S. Paul found written in the book of
his conscience, that because he had fought a good fight, and kept the faith, he
doubted not but that a crown of righteousness was laid up for him, 2. Tim. 4.
8. Wherefore by the works of grace let us strive to be assured of glory: let
us now ^ay as the Church fertilitatis suae conscia, ^eni frater, exeamus in
agrum: Thus the Church knowing her self to be fruitful: ^s Ambrose well
applies that place, says ^o Christ, Come let us go forth into the field my
brother, Cantic. 7. 11. We must now bring Christ into our field, to show him
our fruits, that he may afterward bring us into his barnes to enjoy his
glory.

Verse 23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.] A
third reason is here contained of Christ's petition for unity in his members:
namely, from the adiunct of perfection: they cannot be made perfect without it,
neither can any man be a complete Christian and true member of Christ, unless
there be a conjunction also with Christ's body. So that to this perfection,
there are three degrees of union expressed: the first of Christ the Mediator
with God his Father: Thou in me: the second of Christ with his Church, I in
them: the third of the members among themselves, That they may be perfect in one.

1 Here then where Christ says, I in the^: we are taught that there is no true
peace, concord, or union, but in Christ. So our Savior says, That in me ye
might have peace, Ioh. 16. 23. and the Apostle: (...), following the truth in
love: there is no sound and true love but in the truth.

2 David fretted in himself, and was disquieted, he could find no rest, nor
peace, till he went into the Sanctuary of God, Psalm. 73. 17. Thus Saint Paul
shows, that while he was under the law, he found nothing but death and
condemnation: But I died, and the same commandment which was ordained unto
life, was found to be unto me to death, Romans 7. 10. But after he was come to
Christ, then he found, that there was no condemnation to them that were in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. It did not help the Apostle, that he was a Pharise, a
circumcised Hebrew, Philip. 3. 5. confederate with the high Priest, Act. 10. 1.
all this he counted as doung in respect of the knowledge of Christ.

3 The peace, friendship, and confederacy of men, is like the tempering of
iron and clay together, that will not be joined. Dan. 2. 43. And like as when a
man leans upon a broken staff, the shiuers thereof will run into his hand,
2. King. 18. 21. such is the peace and love of the world, it in the end turns
to hatred. Such was the friendship between Abimelech and the Sichemites, a
fire went out from the one and consumed the other, Iud. 9. 20.

4 For peace is one of the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5. 22. therefore as a
man cannot gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles, so neither is true
peace to be expected in the world without Christ.

5 First then all external peace, which is not combined and knit together by
Christ, can not hold: such was the league between godly Iehosophat and wicked
Ahab, it brought him into danger of his life, 1. King. 22. 32. as the joining
with Ahaziah the son of Ahab, was the cause of the loss of Iehosophats
ships, 2. Chr. 20. 37.

Secondly, we learn that there can be no true internal peace, but in Christ:
there may be a carnal security, Three kinds of false peace.
such as was in the old world, that gave themselves to eating and drinking,
till the flood came and destroyed them: but this is far from true peace. The
hypocrite also spares no cost nor labor to be reconciled, he will bring
thousands of rams, and rivers of oil, Micah. 6. 6. but he cannot find by his
own works the right way unto peace.

A third sort there is, that have a feeling of this peace for a time, but it
continues not. As Ahab found the wrath of God somewhat appeased toward him,
after he had humbled himself with fasting and sackcloth, 1. King. 21. 27. but
he soon returned to his old sins, and kindled the wrath of God against him
again. The only true peace then with God is wroght by faith in Christ, Romans 5.
^. And the right concord and unity among men is made perfect by the profession
of the truth: as the heart of David and Jonathan were linked together in faith
and in the fear of God. Paulin. Tom. 4.
Hier^m. well says: Vera est illa necessitudo, and Christi glutina copulata,
quam non vtilitas rei familiaris, nec presentia tantum corporum, non subdola
and palpans adulatio, sed Dei timor, and diuinarum Scripturaru^ studia
conciliant: That is true friendship, and joined together in Christ, which not
private profit or the bodily presence, or flattery; but the fear of God, and
the study of Scripture does beget.

And have loved them, Doct. 3.
as thou have loved me] Like as Gods love was manifested to Christ, when the
holy Ghost descended upon him, whereby he was sanctified and replenished in his
humane nature with all heavenly gifts and graces: at what time God proclaimed
from heaven, Gods love best known by the graces of sanctification.
that Christ was his beloved son, Mat. 3. So Gods love is not in any thing
more evident toward his children, then when he endueth them with his holy
Spirit, whereby they are sanctified: and therefore our Savior prays for
their sanctification, that the world may know, that God loves them.

1 Thus the Apostle testifies: The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by
the holy Ghost, which is given us. Romans 5. 5. that is, hereby the love of God
is apparent toward us, because he gives us his spirit, whereby we are
sanctified.

2 Thus was the love of God confirmed toward the holy Apostle, who prayed, that
the temptation of his flesh might depart from him, and received this answer: My
grace is sufficient for thee. 2. Cor. 12. 9. The assistance of Gods grace was a
sure testimony of his love. So the Prophet David prays: Make me to hear joy
and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice: and again,
Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit,
Psalm. 51. 8. 12. He desires none other testimony of Gods love toward him, but
that he may feel the inward comfort of Gods spirit.

3 For Gods love is best known by his best gifts; the best things he reserueth
for those, whom he best loves. Now the graces of regeneration, the spiritual
gifts of faith, hope, and love, are without al comparison the most principal.
As the Apostle says: Desire you the best gifts, and I will yet show you a
more excellent way, 1. Cor. 12. 31. and then in the next chapter he treats of
faith, hope, and love.

4 Like as Joseph sent unto Benjamin more plentiful measses of meat, Genesis 43.
34. and gave him richer gifts, and more costly suits of apparel, then to the
rest of his brethren, Genesis 45. 22. so the Lord bestows the best gifts upon
his own children. As the father caused the fat calfe to be killed for his
returned son, Luke 15. so the fatness of spiritual graces the Lord
vouchsafes unto such, as truly turn unto him.

5 The use of this doctrine is excellent, that we should not grieve to see the
prosperity, ease, and wealth of many worldly men: like as sometime the Prophet
David fretted in himself at that sight, Psalm. 73. 2 But let us consider how
plentifully the Lord does recompense to his children the want of things
temporal, with the eternal graces of the spirit. David prefers the light
of Gods countenance before the abundance of wine, corn, oil, or any other
worldly endowment, Psalm. 4. Augustine says well: Si Deus tanta dat malis,
quanta seruat bonis? If God give such things, as riches, and prosperity to the
wicked, how great gifts has he in store for his? Say not then in thine heart,
why has not God made me rich, honorable, strong, and beautiful? he has given
thee a better portion, the knowledge of his name, an heart to fear him, a
conscience to abstain from evil. Where as thou see a rich man given to
oppression, a profane person, a senseless ignorant man: tell me, would thou
change states with him? I think not: be content then with thy best lot, and
desire still the increase and continuance of spiritual graces.

The sixteenth Lecture.
Verse. 24. Father, I will, etc.
NOw follows the other petition of our Savior for the glorification of his
Church: where we have the request it self, that they may be with Christ: the
end, to behold his glory: the assurance, for thou louedst me before the
foundation of the world.

First, Doct. 1.
we see the efficacy of Christ's prayer, that whatsoever he but wills of God,
as the Mediator of his Church, it is accomplished.

1 Thus the Apostle testifies: The prayer of Christ's mediation.
He is able perfectly to save those, that come unto God by him, because he ever
lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25.

2 Thus our Savior was heard for Lazarus: I know thou hear me always, Ioh.
11. 42. Thus our Savior prayed for Peter, that his faith failed him not, Luke
22. 32. and it was so fulfilled: for though Peter's faith was shaken, yet was it
not overthrown; though it fainted, it failed not.

3 If Moses by the lifting up of his hands ruled the battle between Israel
and Ameleck: if Eliah by his tongue governed the air, that it should not rain,
but according to his word. If Peter's shadow commanded diseases, Act. 5. 15.
how much more effectual is the holy will and desire of Christ.

4 For Christ is the beloved son of God, in whom God is well pleased, Mat. 3.
17. whatsoever Christ therefore wills of his Father, he cannot deny unto
him, for the great love he has toward him.

5 First, to our great comfort we are taught, that seeing the will of Christ is
omnipotent: whatsoever it pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven and earth,
Psalm. 135. 6. and his will toward his church is most kind, loving, merciful,
and bountiful, that nothing can fall our amiss to Gods children; they need
not fear temptation, tribulation, trouble, all shall fall out for the best,
Christ will have it so. Again, so forcible is the mediation of Christ, that
whatsoever we shall ask the father in his name, he will give it us, John 16.
23. No man has any such assurance in his suites and requests which he makes
unto men: wherefore we ought most chearefully to resort to the throne of grace,
where our faithful petitions are never rejected and cast forth. Hierome well
says, Peto vt accipiam, and cum accepero rursus peto, auarius sum ad
accipienda beneficia Dei, nec ille deficit in dando, nec ego satior in
accipiendo, quanto plus bibero, tanto plus sitio: I ask to receive, and when I
have received, I ask again, I am covetous to receive Gods blessings, he fails
not in giving, and I am not filled with receiving, the more I drink, the more
I thirst.

That they which thou have given me, Doct. 2.
be with me where I am. This is a great privilege, that our blessed savior
has appointed us to no other place, The faithful shall be in the same place
with Christ in heaven.
then where he himself is.

1. Thus S. Paul says, We shall meet the Lord in the air, and so shall be
ever with him 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.

2. The Lord said to the convert upon the cross, This da^ shall thou be with
me in Paradise. S. Paul assures himself, that when he should be dissolved, he
should be with Christ. Phil. 1. 23.

3. Like as it is a great honor if the master should set his servant at his
own table: so our Savior says to his Apostles, that they should eat and
drink at his table in his kingdom, Luke 12. 29. Like as Iehu took Iehonadab
up into the chariot with him, 2. King. 10. 15. the like honor Christ
vouchsafes unto his Saints.

4. Our Savior gives this reason* they had contiued with him in his
temptations, Luke 22. 28. And again he says, Where I am, there be my
Ministers also, John 12. 26. They which have been partakers of the afflictions
of Christ, shall also be made partners in his glory.

5. If we desire then to dwell with Christ in the kingdom of heaven, he must
dwell with us in earth: if to be received into his everlasting habitation, then
we must now prepare for him the habitation of our hearts. How can they then be
assured to enjoy Christ's presence in heaven, that delight not to hear him
present now? who by their corrupt communication and profane behauior, do
grieve the spirit of God, and chase away Christ from them. Ambrose says well,
Proiectus est Ada^ e Paradiso, no^ immerito ipse, enim se prius absconderat a
facie Dei: Ada^ was cast out of Paradise, and not without cause, for first he
had hid himself from Gods face: so they which behold not Gods face, nor enjoy
the presence of his spirit here, cannot have the presence of his glory in
heaven,

That they may behold my glory which thou have given me: Doct. 3.
they shall not only be beholders, but partakers also of that great glory.

1. So the Apostle says, We all behold as in a mirror with open face the
glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same image from glory to glory.
2. Cor. 3. 18. This glory seen here as in a glass, shall be seen there with
open face, and so seen as that we shall be changed and transformed into it.

2 Thus Moses and Elias appeared in glory in mount Tabor, where our Savior was
also transfigured, Luke 9. 31. So Stephen beholding the glory of God, and
Jesus standing at the right hand of God, himself also was partaker of that
glory being yet upon the earth, his face was as the face of an Angel, Act. 6.
15.

3. Like as Hezekiah to gratify the king of Babels messenger, who was sent to
congratulate with him for his recovery, did show him in kindness all the
treasure of his house, though this were a simple part of Hezekiah and done
without warrant. But yet like as men exalted to honor and wealth, do delight
to show to their friends their happy estate: so our Savior Christ desires
that his Church should behold his great glory. Like as the church says in the
Canticles, I will lead thee into my mothers house, I will cause thee to drink
spiced wine, Cant. 8. 2. so our blessed savior will bring us into his fathers
house, and show us of his best things.

4. For this glory which Christ has received as our Mediator, he has to this
end received it, to bestow it upon his church John 17. 22. The glory that thou
gave me, I have given them. Christ has not merited or purchased any thing to
himself by his great glory, but whatsoever he wrought for us as our Mediator,
the whole gain and benefit thereof redoundeth to us.

5. But as we hope to behold the glory of Christ in heaven with open face,
They that will see Christ face to face in heaven, must see him by faith here.
so must we now see him by faith: as the Apostle says, We walk by faith, not
by sight, 2. Cor. 5. 7. then we shall walk by sight, not by faith: wherefore
whosoever now sees not Christ by faith, shall not then enjoy his sight and
presence in glory. We must, as Moses, discern the land of promise a far off,
before we can enter into it. They therefore that want the vision of the soul in
this life, cannot have the full contemplatio^ of Christ's glory afterward.
Certain it is, that Christ will reveal himself to all his children before
they go hence, as he was seen and embraced of Simeon before his departure.
Hom. in Mat. 13.
Origene says well, Vt naturalis quidam attractus quibusdam inest, vt magneti
ad ferrum, bitumini ad ignem, sic fidei ad diuina^ virtute^: as some things
have a natural property to draw unto them, as the lode-stone to draw iron,
brimstone to draw fire, so faith has attractiue force to draw divine virtue.
Faith then will draw us to heaven, hope pitcheth her anchor there, Heb. 6. 19.
and will in good time draw us thither. Doct. 4.


For thou louedst me before the foundation of the world. Our Savior speaks
of that glory which the Lord decreed to give unto him before the beginning of
the world: whereby we do learn, that as Christ the head was predestinate unto
glory, so also his members were set apart unto life in the everlasting decree
of God.

1. The Apostle says, Christ how said to be predestinate*
that Christ was determined or predestinate the son of God, as some translate
(...), Romans 1. 4. Saint Peter says to the same purpose, (...), known or
ordained. Augustine thereupon does infer, that Christ was Praeclarissimum
lumen gratiae and praedestinationis: The most manifest light of grace and
predestination. As Christ was predestinate as man unto glory, so are his
members: Who has predestinate us to be adopted thorough Jesus Christ unto
himself, Ephesians. 1. 5.

2. So the Lord says to Jeremy, Before I formed thee in the womb, I knew
thee, Ier. 1. 5. God had known, approved, and chosen the Prophet even before
he was borne.

3. For like as David was anointed and appointed to be King, long before he
entered to his kingdom: and Moses was dessigned to be deliverer of Israel forty
years before he exercised his office: so the elect of God were long ago
ordained to salvation* though the accomplishment thereof they must expect with
patience.

4. And this God did, to the praise of the glory of his name, Ephesians. 1. 6. 6.
^or herein appeared love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, ^. John
4. 10. This is Gods great goodness, that has prepared for us an everlasting
kingdom before as yet we were.

5. Seeing then that God in his gracious decree of election, has sorted out
some to everlasting salvation, we must take heed of 2 gulfs, that we fall not
into them: the one is of superstition, not to think with the Papists, that it
is presumption to be sure of that which God has most surely and certainly
decreed: the other is of presumption, that men without good ground be not too
confident in their hope, thinking to be saved whatsoever they do: but that as
the Apostle says, We work out our salvation with fear and trembling, and
labor to add daily somewhat to our assurance: that as saint Peter says, We
give dili^ence to make our calling and election sure, and seal the same unto
our souls by the fruits thereof. This assurance of salvation is neither
impossible to be had, Assurance of heaven is neither impossible, nor yet easy
to be had.
as the Papist thinks, nor yet easy to be had, as the carnal Protestant
thinks. It may be had, but with much study and faithful endeavor and godly
care, by fear and trembling. Happy are they, which by Gods grace have
attained to this gift and heavenly work, as all we which believe in Christ
shall in good time before we go hence by Gods grace attain unto it: then shall
we with patience run out our course, and nothing can happen so grievous which
this happy assurance of heaven will not make easy unto us. That we may say
with Prophet David: I had fainted, if I had not believed to see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the living, Psalm. 27. 13. Ambrose says well:
Manipulis beatae vitae si quid accidit aduersi, tanquam sterilis auena
al^sconditur, etc. By this bundle of our hope of eternal life, if any thing
fall out crossely, it is hid as wild oats or weeds in an handful of corn:
that like as in a piece of good wheat a few weeds are not seen; no more is
adversity felt, where heaven is hoped for.

The seventeenth Lecture.
Verse 25. O righteous father, the world also has not known thee.
IN these verses following, the means are expressed whereby we may attain
unto everlasting glory, described in the former verse, and they are two: the
knowledge of God, verse. 25. and the lively sense and feeling of Gods love,
verse 26. First, in this verse our Savior shows, that the world is utterly
ignorant of God, and void of true knowledge.

1. As the Evangelist testifies, The blindness and ignorance of the world.
He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him
not, John 1. 10. So the Apostle rehearses out of the Psalm, There is none
that understands, none that seeks after God, Rom 3. 11.

2. Such a worldly man was Pharao, who profanely said: I know not the Lord,
neither will I let Israel go, Exodus 5. 2. Such an ignorant person and
blasphemous wretch was the messenger of the King sent for Elisha: Behold this
evil (says he) comes of the Lord, why should I wait on the Lord any longer.
2. Kin. 6. 33.

3. Like as a fool or idiot knows not the way into the city; such fools
are all wordly men, that know not the way which leads to the celestial
Jerusalem, Eccles. 10. 15. who are herein worse then the ox or ass, which
know their owner and their masters crib, Isay 13. but these have no knowledge
of God, who made them and daily feeds them.

4. The cause of this ignorance of the world, is the hardness of their heart.
Ephesians. 4 18, because through their corrupt and froward affections, they corrupt
that light of nature which they have, Because when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of darkness, Romans 1. 21.

5. We see then what a dangerous thing it is, not to have the knowledge of God,
and to be ignorant of his ways: all such are as yet of the world, and being of
the world are under the regiment and kingdom of Satan: under Christ's
protection they are not, for he prays not for the world, John 17. 9. This
should be a caveat to all those, who, some of contempt, some of negligence,
care not for the knowledge of God or his word. Ambrose well says, Leprae
medicina verbu^ est, Lib. 5 in Luc.
contemptus vtique verbi, lepra mentis est: The word is the medicine for the
leprosy of the soul, the contempt then of the word, makes the soul leprous.
Though a man had no other sins to condemn him (and yet ignorance cannot be
alone, Ignorance a sufficient cause of condemnation.
but has other sins following it) it were a sufficient cause of
condemnation, that he regards not to know God: as the Prophet says* My
people go into captivity, because they have no knowledge, Isay 5. 13.

But I know him, Doct. 2.
and these have known that thou have sent me. Al holy knowledge derived from
Christ.
We know God, because Christ first knows, and by him and from him his members
also know: so that Christ to his church is the fountain and author of all
spiritual knowledge.

1. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten son, which is in
the bosom of the father, he has declared him. John 1. 18.

2. Nicodemus til he came to Christ, was ignorant of the first principles of
Christian religion, he knew not what it was to be born again, John 3. The holy
Apostle could not find out true knowledge at the feet of Gamaliel, nor in the
sect of the Pharisees: he was taught the Gospel by no other means, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ, Galat. 1. 12. neither had Zacheus ever be come the
child of Abraham, if he had not come down from the fig tree and followed
Christ, Luke 19.

3. So that as the Israelites could never have found out the way to the
promised land, through the vast and unknown wilderness, unless Christ had
gone before them in a cloudie pillar by day, and a fiery pillar by night: and
like as Moses could never have described the form and fashion of the
tabernacle, if the Lord had not first showed it him in the mount: so as
impossible it is, without Christ's direction in his word, to find out the way to
eternal life. He is therefore that olive tree, that does convey into the
candlestick of the church, that oil and fatness, whereby the light thereof
is cherished and preserved, Zach. 4.

4. For none in heaven or in earth was found worthy to open the book of Gods
secrets, and to look thereon, but only the lamb, Reu. 5. 3. 9. The book had
remained sealed still, if Christ had not taken the book out of the right hand
of him that sat upon the throne, and opened the seals thereof.

5. First then their blind endeavor is condemned, which by the light of nature
think to find out the truth. The Philosophers among the heathen, A vain labor
to seek for true wisdom without Christ.
and wise among the Gentiles, much busied themselves to find out the truth, but
they labored in vain. The three wisemen that came from the East, did not
content them selves with their humane wisdom and natural experience, but
followed the conduct of the star to seek for Christ. If Saul must have a
prophet to tell him what was become of his fathers asses; to find out heaven,
has much more need of a prophetical light.

Secondly, all carnal and secure persons are admonished, that if they desire
knowledge, they should seek it at Christ's hands in his word: it is no marvel
that so many yet continue in ignorance, seeing they despise the means of
knowledge. Heaven cannot be scaled without Jacobs ladder, the top whereof
rests upon Christ, Genesis 28. Amb. sermon. 14* in Psalm. 1 19.
One well says, Nemini credas tuum, nisi praeeunte lucernae istius luce
processum, sit fides itineris tui praeuia, sit tibi iter scriptura diuina:
Trust no man to direct thee, unless this light go before: let faith be the
foreman in thy journey, and let thy way be by the scripture.

Verse 26. Doct. 3.
And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it.] Here our Savior
promises the perpetual assistance of his spirit, and continual declaration
of his word to his church, God will never leave his Church destitute of his
word.
that as he had preached and declared it, so he would still instruct his
servants, and not leave his church destitute of the ministry of his word.

1. Thus the Lord promises by his prophet: I will make my covenant with them,
says the Lord, my spirit that is upon thee, and the words which I have put in
thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed,
nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed (says the Lord) from henceforth,
even for ever. Isay 59. 21.

2. Thus our Savior leaving the world, ordained his Apostles in his stead, to
be witnesses of him to the ends of the world. Act. 1. 8. The Apostles also
constituted Evangelists, as Timothy, 2. Tim. 1. 6. To second their work, the
Eua^gelists ordained Bishops, Pastors and Elders in every city Tit. 1. 5. to
finish the work of the Gospel.

3. For like as it is not enough to sow the corn, and cast it into the earth,
but it must have both the first and latter rain, Joel 2. 23. so it is
necessary that Apostles and other succeeding Ministers, should water that which
Paul and the other Apostles had planted, 1. Cor. 3. 6. And like as after the
house is builded, it must be continually repaired, lest through the idleness
of the hands the house drop through, Eccl. 10. 18. so after the foundation
laid, and building finished by Christ and his Apostles the chief builders,
others must be raised up to repair the ruins of Gods house.

4. Therefore as Saint Paul says, Christ gave some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers, for the gathering
together of the saints the work of the ministry, the edificatio^ of the body
of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11. So that al these offices are necessary, Prophets to
assist, Apostles and Evangelists to second Prophets, Pastors and teachers to
succeed Evangelists, that all the Saints in all ages may be gathered together,
and the whole body of Christ edified.

5. How much then are we to give thanks unto God, for this his provident care
over his church, never leaving the same destitute of his word, which we see to
the praise of God this day: for God has furnished this Church of England with
such abundance of learned pastors, as I think few churches in the world may
compare with it. So that as Elias ascending, left his spirit doubled upon
Elisha: as Ambrose well notes, Ambros. Epist. 60.
O haereditas preciosa, in qua plus haeredi relinquitur, quam habetur: mirum in
modum plus Helias gratiae dimisit in terris, quam secum portauit ad coelos: A
precious inheritance, wherein more is left to the heir, then was first had;
Elias leaves more grace in earth, then he carried to heaven: so I doubt not but
many faithful servants of God departed this life, have transmitted their
spirit and gifts double upon their posterity. Seeing Christ then has such
care to instruct his flock, as he has declared his word, so does yet and will
further declare: let no man despise this so great riches, but profit more and
more by the ministry of the word, that the oftener it is declared, the
greater may be our increase in faith: that as Gods graces are doubled upon our
teachers, so they may be multiplied also upon the hearers.

That the love wherewith thou have loved them, Doct. 4.
may be in them: that is, they may have a lively sense and feeling of the love
of God: Knowledge without sense and feeling fruitless.
that as they abound in knowledge, so they may also be quickened in the lively
feeling and apprehension of it.

1. This is that which the Apostle says: That ye may be able to comprehend
with all Saints, what is the breadth, length, depth and height* and to know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge. Ephesians. 3. 18. 19.

2 Such sense of the love of Christ the Apostle Paul had, who thus in
particular professes of himself: Christ loved me, and gave himself for me,
Gal. 2. 20. Thus also the prophet David spoke from his inward feeling of Gods
goodness toward him: how dear are thy thoghts toward me, o God, how great is
the sum of them! Psalm. 132. 17.

3. Like as Job says, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now
mine eye sees thee. Job 42. 5. so they which have only a speculatiue knowledge
of God, do hear as with the ear; but they that have an inward feeling and
experience of his love, do see him with the eye: this the prophet David
calls, the taste of the soul: Taste ye and see how gracious the Lord is, Psa.
34* 8. Like as Manna, though pleasant to the sight, yet was more pleasant to
the taste: so is the mercy and love of God more joyous felt and comprehended,
then understood only and apprehended.

4 For we are commanded to love God with all the heart, soul and mind, Mat.
22. 37. God must not only have our mind and understanding, but our heart and
affection: we do not otherwise honor God with all our strength.

5 Hence then we are taught a most nenessarie point of Christian doctrine, that
we should labor to our knowledge to ad affection, to our judgment zeal, to
our understanding conscience and feeling. Many seem to know much, but there is
withal a coldness in their heart. We must not onley understand the word but
joy in it.
Happy it is with those, that when they hear the word, do not only conceive
and understand it as Herod did, Mark. 6. 20. but their hearts are inflamed,
as the two Disciples, while Christ preached unto them, found their hearts burn
within them, Luke 24. The Prophet David says: O how I love thy law! Psalm. 119.
97. Sermon. 20. in Psalm. 119.
whereof Ambrose well says; Diligere amplius est, quam custodire, hoc
necessitatis est and time^s, illud charitatis: To love is more then to keep,
this is of fear and necessity, that proceeds of charity* So o^r obedience
to God should proceed from a willing affection and loving heart. That as God
delights in the faithful, My delight is with the children of men. Pro. 8. 31
so our delight may be in God, that we may say with the prophet, The desire of
our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance Isa. 26. 8. So shall we be
sure, that if we desire his ways now, the Lord will delight in us for ever, and
cause us to enter into his everlasting joy.

FINIS.

