A justification or clearing of the Prince of Orendge against the false
sclaunders, wherewith his ilwillers go about to charge him wrongfully.

Psalm. 17. The malicious person lays wait for the righteous, and seeks
him to put him to death. But the Lord will not leave him up into his hands,
nor account him for an offender, though he be taken for such a one. Psalm. 5.
Thou wylt destroy them that speak lies, The Lord abhors the murderer and
the deceyuer. Lord lead me forth in thy righteousness, because of the^ that
lie in wayt for me. Psalm. xciiij. They imbattell them selves against the soul
of the righteous, and condemn the gyltlesse blood. But the Lord will be my
defense, and my God shall be the rock of my trust. Imprinted at London, by John
Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. Febr. 24. These books are to be sold at his
long shop at the West door of Paul's.

To the Reader.
THe things (among other) that are chiefly to be considered, in this
Justification of a most rightful case and innocent person, against unjust
slau^ders and slaunderers: are the unmeasurable cruelty and intolerable
treachery of the Papists. Who to maynteine the wrongful authority of their
tyrannous kingdom, against God and his Christ, and against the Majesty of
lawful Princes, whom God has advanced to Souereintie for the mayntenaunce of
his true Religion, and for the welfare of the people committed to their charge:
do so stop the ears and blind the eyes of Princes with their horrible
leazynges (where they take place and bear sway): as they another can see the
wrongs done to their subjects by those ministers of Antichrist, nor harken to
their just complayntes, that they might understand them and redress them. For
whereas they themselves having shaken of al obedience toward God and his
Ministers, and confounded the general bonds of natural and common reason, do
both resist all law and lawful Magistrates, and also (as much as in them
lies) enforce men either to most miserable thraldom, (of conscience by
forsaking God and all godliness, and of body by loss of goods, lands,
liberty, wives, children, life, and good name) or to some means to withstand
so extreme wretchedness whereunto they drive them by streyning them beyond all
ability of humane patience: yet most slanderously they bear the states and
potentates of the world on hand, that those most innocent and giltlesse
persons, (which stand in nothing but only that which their Prince has both
granted and sworn that it should be lawful for them to do, and in such wise
as he by like grant and oath has given them leave and commandment to do, as
appears most evidently by his solemn Protestation and vow made at the time
of his joyful entry, when he was first admitted to the superiority of those
countries, at the earnest request and intreataunce of the late Emperor
Charles his father, who made the like solemn oath Protestation and vow before
him and with him:) are the authors, practizers and workers, of all disorders,
confusions, mutinies, vprores, trubbles, rebellions, and treazons: only because
that after suffrance of their excessive torments, and the thrustyng of the^ out
of their native countries: they give them not leave to tread the^ utterly under
foot as mire, or rather to rid the^ quite and clean out of the world, with the
Gospel and Religion of Christ. Which thing they could not do, if the Princes
who^ the Romish Antichrist holds yet captive in the prison of superstitious
ignorance, would vout safe but only to stand as indifferent Judges, and to
make that simple account of them, which even common reazon would they should,
that is to wit, as of their subjects. For no rightuous Judge condemns
without heering the allegatio^s of both parties, another does any rightful
Prince permit his subjects to revenge their own wrongs, and much less to
oppress, devour, and eat up one an other. Therefore when the hearts of the
Souereine liege Lords are so shet up, and their minds so alienated
aforeha^d, by the sinister persuasions of cankerharted Papists and sly
Sycophantes, which care not whose house be on fire so they may warm themselves
by the coals of it, as no truth can have entrance into their ears or access
into their presence: needs must the people go to wrecke to the prejudice of
the Prince, and the people being so wronged ca^ not but seek to justify the
right and truth of their case, by all good and reasonable means, to the church
of God, and unto all such as are not so wholly carried away with blind and
fantastical affection, but that they have some ability to discern right and
equity: as may appear by the treatise here insewyng. For here is nothing
said or intended to the defense, maintenance or allowyng of any disobedience,
disorder, or unlawful behavior of the subject toward his Prince: but to
show most humbly and dewtifully both to Prince and subject, the intolerable
inco^ueniences that grow by neglecting the mutual regard that each of them
ought to have of other, and by the permittyng of Papists to intrude themselves
into such state of credit and authority, as they may be able to enforce a
Government to the vpholdyng of their own kingdom.

And forasmuch as in this treatise there is mention made of a Joyful Entrey:
it is necessary to know what the same was. Therefore it is to be understood,
that when soever any souereine Lord entered into the possession of dominion
over the Low Countries, whither it were by name of Earl, Duke, or any other
title of superiority: by succession, election, or otherwise: he first took a
sacred and solemn oath, to mainteyne the Laws, Statutes, Customs, Liberties,
and Privileges of those Countries, and not to procure, cause, suffer, or
permit the infrindging, breaking, abrogating, disanulling, impeaching, or
altering of them or any of them, or the bringing in, setting up, or
stablishing of any new, without the consent, counsel, advice, and agreement of
the states of the same Country, to the benefit and commodity of the people:
before the which oath he^ was in no wise allowed or acknowledged as Lord
there. By reason whereof, Charles the Emperor, and his son Philippe now king
of Spain, to stablishe the continewaunce of their possession in those
Countries, as their predecessors had always done at their first Entryes: did
lately make solemn and faithful promis, Protestation, vow, and oath, as well
for their heirs and successors as for themselves, that besides their
maynteinyng of the common weal, peace, rest, quietness, tranquillity, and
security of those Countries: they and every of them should and would keep,
observe, and perform all the ancient customs, Laws, Statutes, Liberties,
and Privileges of the same inviolable, and not bring in any new customs or
orders, or suffer any to be brought in: nor set any Gouerner, Magistrate or
Officer over them or in authority among them, being not the same Countreyman
borne and having lands goods or possessions there: nor call any assembly of
the States, nor cause any leuying of money or men of war: no nor any coining
of money to be made there, without the consent and advice of the States of the
same Country. And for the more confirmation and assurance thereof: after the
rehearsal of the particular points and Articles of the said Entry, (which
are many) they added in effect this conclusion following: That if they, their
heirs, or successors shall by them selves, or by any other, either wholly or
partly, do, or cause to be done, any thing contrary or prejudicial to the
premises, after what sort soever it be: they consent, agree, and grant to
their Prelates, Barons, Knights, Towns, Cities, Liberties, and al other their
subjects, that then and from thencefoorth they shall not do to the^, their
heirs or successors any kind of seruis, nor owe them any duty of allegea^ce,
nor obey the^ in any matters wherein they shall have need of them, or which
they shall desire or require at their hands, unless that upon reconciliation,
satisfaction, and attoneme^t, they be by the states of the same Countries
accepted new again. And to the same intent they decreed and ordained, that all
officers appointed or placed contrary to the faithful purport and true meaning
of this their said Entry, should be dischargcd and displaced: and likewise
that what soever thing were or should be done or attempted in prejudice or
impeachment of the premises, should be esteemed as void and of none effect.
In witness and everlasting confirmation whereof, the said Emperor and the
Prince his son did set their hands and seals to the said oath in writing,
at Louane the fifth day of July. 1549. And this is it that is called the joyful
entry. Whereby, and by many presidentes of their stories, (which make mention
how the people of those Countries have refuzed, renounced, rejected, removed,
and depozed diverse of their Lords and sovereigns for their misgouernment, and
for infrindging their said oath: and in their places elected, appointed, set
up, and established others, of whose Justice they had better opinion and
likelihood: which thing notwithstanding they have not used to do, but upon
most urgent and extreme necessity, after long sufferance and seking of
redress by all reasonable means with most duetifull iutreatance, submission,
supplication, and humility:) It may plainly appear, that the state of the
low Countries is not an absolute Monarchy or heritable kingdom, after the
manner of this Realm, and of France, and such other like: but a State with
condition, terminable, and not to continue any longer than the Lord whom they
do so accept, upon hope of his good government, does continue in reignyng and
rulyng according to his oath taken at his entry. Which if he violate, then are
they by the same his oath discharged of their subjection and obedience to him,
and have full authority and free liberty both to resist him and his Officers,
and also to chooze and take to them any other head or Sovereign that will be
more friendly and beneficial to their Country, as appears by that solemn
and autentike deed of Duke John, dated at Louane the fourth of May. 1420. and
by diverse other Records to the same effect. Whereupon it follows, that this
Justification of the Prince of Orendge, and of such as take his part, and of
the case wherein they stand, is most just and rightful even in these
respects, though there were no further proofs, wberof notwithstanding there
are very many in this treatise following. Thus I commyt thee to God, who give
thee the spirit of judgment, to discern according to truth, that thou be not
lead into error, to allow the thing that is evil, or to condemn the thing
that is good.

A Justification of the Prince of Orendge, against his sclaunderers.
SUch as have experience of the affairs of states and commonweals, are well
able to discern them that seek to trouble the trauquilitie and quiet of the
public weal, through ambition and desire of private commodity, and do take
all manner of strange and unaccustomed kind of dealyngs, which me^ of power,
credit, and authority do use, to be sure and infallible tokens of like
driftes. And therefore to show who have bin the chief ringleaders and
authors of the troubles that have happened in the low Country: the only
thing to be considered, is, who they were that had cause to desire innovation
in that Country, for any commodity or profit which they looked for, and were
the first beginners and putters thereof in execution.

For the doing whereof, in my opinion it is necessary to set down the state of
the said low Country, in such wise as it was before the late troubles, and
after the wars, which as well the late right high and cenoumed Emperor
Charles, as the king of Spain, Princes of the same low Country, and
sovereign Lords of the subjects there, maynteyned in manner continually by
the space of ten years together, against the French king. Which state was
such, that although in the mean season the people were in some unquietness,
by reason of the Inquisition and Injunctions that were observed iu diverse
Provinces in the case of Religion, which unquietness augmented daily more and
more through the increase of the Religion, and through the rigor of the
Injunctions It appears by the Injunctions put forth in the years, 1521.
1526. 1529. 1531. 40. 44. 46. 50. 56. and others.
(which grew so extreme, and so far out of all square, as it was a wonder
that they were suffered and borne withal so long time, and so patiently in so
freee a Country,) as shall be declared hereafter: yet notwithstanding it was
evidently seen, that in all other respects the subjects were ready, not
only to yield al due obedience, but also to spend their bodies and goods for
his majesty's sake.

For the Nobility behaved them selves with incredible courage and
forewardnesse in the said wars, and the States of the Country did freely and
of their own accord give an incredible mass of money toward the charges
thereof, amountinge fully to the sum of forty millions of Florens: and that
so wyllyngly, as there was never any sign of ini^ikyng perceived for the
matter: by reason whereof it might well have been thought, that the Country was
so affectioned toward his majesty, as they would not have spared any thing
for the mayntenaunce of his state and honor against his enemies. And therefore
his majesty might easily thereby assure him self thereof against all forreyne
powers.

And for as much as it is a natural thing, that all great services and well
dooinges should engender trust: it could not be, but that the said country,
(namely the Noble men in consideration that by their peril, bloodshed, and
prowess his majesty had achieved so many honorable victories, and the
commons, for that he had dispatched so long and tedious a war with so great
honor, by their succor, aid, and a^istaunce,) must needs be in great hope
that his majesty would have regard of their so great duetifulnesse and notable
service, when so ever occasion were offered. By means whereof a man might also
have openly warranted the Country from al inward troubles and commotions.

For when the subject can look for nothing but well at his Princes hand, he
continues the more wyllyngly and earnestly in his obedience. So that
co^sideryng how the state of the Country flourished by the intercourse of al
kinds of trafique and marchaundise, and of all other things dependyng
thereupon: although it were sore nipped by the former wars, and ouercharged,
and in manner oppressed with tallages, impostes, and exactions laid upon them
by reason of the said sums of money, which they had granted to be leuyed for
the charge of the said wars: yet is it most apparent, yt being sure from
enemies with out, and united with their Prince within, and maintained with
privileges and ordinances according to the time, it would not only have bin
refreshed and set clear, and discharged of all dettes, but also have atteined
to yt top of all worldly felicity within few years.

By means whereof his Majesty coming to be renowned and feared of
strangers: and to be reverenced and loved of his subjects, might have bin
taken for the greatest king and happiest Prince of his time. In so much as it
must needs be confessed, that they which have bin the hinderers of this
prosperity and happy state, by breakyng the said union, and by turnyng away
the said affection, have committed so great an offense to the damage of his
Majesty and of the common weal, that they deserve to be punished and
chastised to the example of others. And I believe, that all such as see the
country at this present, how it is brought from so apparaunt felicity to
extreme wretchedness, bondage, and misery, wil^e of mine opinion, and judge
as I do. And we William of Nassaw Prince of Ore^dge being taken for the It
appears by the writ of Su^mones dated the xix. of January and by the
Proclamation the 24. of the same month inserted in (...) end hereof.
author of this alteration, by the Attorney general, according to the letters
pate^tes of summons and citation, refuse not the said punishment, in case that
the suggestion of the said Attorney be true. Who to pretend some cause and
occasion that might have provoked us thereto, and having not any likelyhode
that we would enterprise it without cause: alleges that our ambition and
inordinate desire of authority was the cause of it. Whereupon it follows
that the final cause of our doings and atte^ptes should be honor, desire of
dealings and extraordinary authority.

But to bereue the Attorney of that ground, whereupon he prete^deth to build
his accusation: it might suffice for such as are acquaynted with our person, to
allege mine own natural disposition, which is nothing inclined to such
desires: and for other men, to allege the portion of worldly substance,
wherewith God of his grace has indewed us by good government and order, where
through we might rather hope for aduaunceme^t and authority, then by any other
kind of dealings. For all men must needs grant, that to get us home to our
own house and to live privately, was a much better mean to gather treasure
and riches, whereby to get, preserve, and maintain authority: than to spend
wastefully in the Court in hope thereof by usurping superiority upon us. For
they that have any understanding at all of our dealings, do know very well
that I never passed for any superiority. And in as much as the country is so
affectionate to his majesty, as is said before, there is nothing more unlikely
tha^ to charge us with intent of usurpation, above the authority of him and of
the country.

Specially seeing I was always of opinion, that his Majesty should rather
keep still his subjects in the said love and good will, by mitigating of his
Edictes, than turn them away from it, by proceedyng with new devises of
rigor: which is the only point and mean whereby it might have been pretended,
that we would have atteyned to the foresaid attempt. For it cannot be denied,
but that love and good will are the means whereby a Prince may maintain his
authority and keep his country. And therefore it must needs be confessed,
that in being of that opinion, we sought the preservation of his Majesty, and
not the vsurpyng of authority over h^n. Now the^ whereas others were of
opinion that it was more expedient that his state should be maintained by
rigor: it follows of necessity that I was of contrary opinion unto them,
only as touching the mean of the maynteinyng thereof, but not as touching the
maintenance and preservation it self, which thing experience shows to be
impossible to be done by rigor, so long as the foresaid countries continue in
this apparaunt prosperity, wherein my desire was that they should have been
maintained, under his Majesty's jurisdiction: which thing was (next Gods
service) the only cause that I allowed not y^ rigor of the foresaid
Inquisitio^ and Ed^tes.

Whereof all our other doings also will bear record, in that they be alienated
or rather clean contrary to all ambition. For even before that time, I had
given over my room which I had in the Counsel of Estate, and the office of
Lord Treasurer It appears by the commissio^s dispatched thereupon and sent
back again. An. 1558.
apparent places to win the attendance and suit of all the states, yea and to
bring as it were the ouerrulyng of all affairs to my hands, if I had listed,
and whereof other men had so good skill to make their own gain. But God be
thanked, I was so far of from such meaning, that when I saw I could not do
his Majesty good service in those offices as I would ^aine have done, by
reason of the practices of other me^ that let me: I surrendered the^ both
into his hands. And yet notwithstanding, like as his Majesty after our said
demeanor, and upon the surrender of our co^missions, left not to call us often
times to counsel: so we on our part have discharged our selves as much as is
possible, in cou^sellyng him what we thought best for his service, and for the
benefit of the country. And it was a great hartbreaking to us, to see that a
two or three persons should so overthrow his Majesty's good meaning.

Nevertheless whereas his Majesty haning known the sincerity of my dealyngs,
and my forewardnesse in his service of all that time, and being then in Zeland
on his way toward Spain, ^treated me very earnestly to take upon me again
the state of a Counselor: I after much excusing of my self, obeyed him.
Howbeit when I saw afterward, that things kept on their wo^ted trade, and went
far otherwise than his Majesty had put me in hope of: I sewed to be put of
again about a ij. years after. It appears by letters sent to the king the
23. of July. 1561.
And for as much as I saw them indeuer by all means to bring the country to
bondage, (which some me^ term full obedience) as shall be showed hereafter:
because I would have no occasion to deal with that point, which seemed to tend
wholly to the hinderaunce of his Majesty and of the common weal: I made the
more earnest suit and intreataunce to be discharged of my government, that I
might withdraw my self, and intend wholly to mine own private affairs, and
not be blamed for the inconnenie^ces that were like to ensue thereof. To the
which end It appears by letters sent to the king the 11. of March 1562. and
the 29. of July. 1563.
I made diverse suits, as well to his Majesty, as also to the Regent, yea even
more then once after the putting up of the petition of the Confederates, which
is so greatly It appears by letters sent to the king the 20. of April, and
the. 27. of May. 1566.
defamed by our adversaries.

And surely if I had been any thing suspected of ambition, it is not likely
that his Majesty would have refused to remove me: at lest wise he would not so
often have expressly commanded and instantly requested me, to be contented to
It appears by the kings letters dated the 2^. of Sept. (...). and the 6. of
I^ne. (...). and the 31. of July. 1566.
continue in office still. For it is a plain case, that such as are douted to
be ambitious, ought to be removed from all authority and government. And
therefore his majesty's causing of me to continue in the said rowmes and
offices, is a plain proof directly against the allegation of the foresaid
Attorney general, that neither before nor after his majesty's departing from
these low Countries, I was never suspected of any ambitious desire of vsurpyng
authority over him or his countries. Nay rather it appears sufficiently
thereby, that I desired nothing so much, as to be discharged of al
administration and authority.

And if a man consider how that after The vsurpa tion of the Cardinal of
Granuil.
the kings departure, the managyng of all affairs was in the hands of the
Cardinal Granuil, and how ielous the Cardinal was of his own estate: (insomuch
as it was his common fashion to cause all such to be quyte banished and shet
out from all authority and medlyng in matters of state, as seemed in any wise
able to hinder the increase and continuance of his superiority: as for
example, in the time of the late renowned Emperor Charles, he persuaded his
Majesty to admit no Lords of great valor to the affairs of the Empire, nor
any such as might deface or diminish his authority: after the which manner (to
come to particularities) he dealt with the Lord Ferdinando Gonzaga Governor of
Millaine, and with Reinart a Counsaylour here: insomuch that while the Cardinal
had the orderyng of the affairs of Italy, the said Lord Ferdinando was feign
to give over his government there, and even unto his dying day, to follow the
suite of a certain criminal action, commenced against him by the Cardinals
means, thereby to get the Spaniardes the full superiority of that country,
like as they had of al other the kings dominions in Italy: And the said
Reynart is constreyned to leave his house, wife, children, and goods here in
the low country, and to get him into Spain, where he is like to end his
days as an exiled and banished man:) he shall not find it any thing likely,
that if I had gone about to usurp authority above the king by my government,
(which thing I could not have done without diminishyng of the Cardinals
authority) I should have bin held still in the said offices: but rather
co^trarywise after the examples before mentioned, I should have bin driven to
leave them unrequested, or at leastwise I should have had leave to depart from
them upon my first suit, and much rather upon mine often renuyng of my suits
afterward.

But the Cardinal knowing my nature to be utterly void of al ambition, and
that in very deed I counted not to have any dealinges at al, and much less
any great and extraordinary dealings, whereby I might have seemed to ouermatch
him in authority: was well willing to seek means to keep me still in office,
thereby to bleare the eyes of the people, of whom he knew him self to be sore
hated, and by ours and other men's means to make his own doings to seem
better then they were, after the example of Dennis the Tyra^t of S^ilie, who
intertayned such men of his counsel, as the people had good opinion of, not
to the intent to use their advice, (as he bare them in hand) but only to make a
countenance that he used it.

And after the departure of the said Cardinal, when occasion was offered me
to have bewrayed mine am^ion, if any had bin in me: it was never sen^ that I
took any thing at all upon me above others, were it never so little: but that I
yielded the Duches of Parma, the^ Gouernesse, the authority that belonged unto
her, and which the said Cardinal had usurped from her, making her (as he had
done the rest of the Co^sayle) but as a cloak and shadow to shroude his own
doings: insomuch that the Duchess did afterward openly declare and confess,
that she understood more of the affairs of the Country, within a few
months after the Cardinals going away, than she had done of all the time
that he was about her.

And when as afterward at the first troubles she was minded to have forsaken
the town of Brusselles, and to have withdrawn her self to Mons, leauyng all
things to their own sway, whereby she should have ministered occasion to such as
had lysted, to incroche upon her authority: We with others made great suite
and supplication unto her, requestyng and beseechyng her, that she would not
do so great wrong to her self, nor so great dishonor and ^yaltie to the kings
majesty* Which dealyng of ours showed well, that our deeds and thoughts have
been clean contrary to ambition, whereof I am wrongfully accused at this
present. And surely if I had had any intent to usurp the authority to my
self alone: a more fit and convenient occasion or mean could not have been
offered me, than to see the Regent accomplish her purpose. But because my
meaning was clean contrary, I hindered it to the uttermost of my power, as is
said asore.

Also, when as it was infourmed his majesty, that it was expedient for his
service, that the Counsel of the low Country should be augmented with
Lords and men of learning, further authorized in some points, for preuentyng
of all confusion and disorder, that they might be the better able to go through
with a number of matters, and specially also to the end that the decrees and
determinations of the same might be observed and take effect with the greater
authority and regard, and al occasion be taken away from every man to usurp
any authority or jurisdiction, or to seek his own commodity, to the loss of
the common Weal: I being required by the Duches to name some persons meet to
be preferred to that place, did shyfte my hands of it, because I would ge^e
no occasion of mistrust, that I would put in any man that were at my de^otion,
or with whom I had had familiarity: and I referred the whole to the kings
majesty, without making of any countenance of myndyng mine own peculiar
profit.

Whereupon it may be inferred, that we be not only wrongfully, but also
without all likelihood of truth accused of practicing to usurp against his
majesty, through ambition and desire of government and superiority, and for
the same purpose to have troubled the peace and tranquillity of that country,
to the which we be in manner as much beholden, as to our own native soil:
yea, and that without having any regard to our own loss and hynderance, which
we should needs openly incur by reason of the po^o^s that we have in the same
Country, if it should be in any trouble, insomuch as our welfare, hynderance,
or damage are inseparable from that Country.

For whereas the nature of ambitious folks is to desire to reign aloue, with
foredetermination to exclude al others: I contrariwise have not only given ^y
consent, that the Counsel should be ^reased, and the authority co^municate^
to many: but also have offered to depart out of it, to give room to others,
where of the Regent and they that are of the said Counsel can be witnesses.

Therefore it is meet to seek more apparaunt causes of the troubles some
where else, and for the accomplishment thereof, to consider, that the said
countries were very ielous for the preservation of the^ liberties and
fraunchises which they had as well by virtue of couenauntes made with their
Princes, as by force of privilege obtained by them, and specially of the
Emperors of old time, for fear least they might be deprived of the^ by
bringyng in of strangers, and namely of the Spanyardes, because The practices
of the Cardinal.
the forenamed Cardinal had said, that the king should never keep well those
Countries, unless he maintained a power of Spanyardes there, and caused the Pope
to assoyle him of the oath that he made to them at their receiuyng of him, and
conquered them new again, so as he might abolish all the said couenau^ts and
privileges, and rule them as he listed: which thing he said could not be
brought to pass, without ye cuttyng of, of iiij. or five of the chief princes
heads.

By reason whereof all innouations became so much the more suspicious and
odious, the rather because that in the time of the last wars, the extreme
rigor of the Inquisition and Injunctions had bin meetly well moderated and
bridled, and liberty procured by the brynging in of the Almayn soldiers
(wherewith they were enforced to strengthen the^ selves) to make Sermons openly
among them as well in Cities as in Towns, and secretly also among others in
many ^o places, besides that the doctrine which is contrary ^o the doctrine of
Rome, was received already in all the Countries thereaboutes: by means whereof
the state of Religion was so advanced from time to time by the space of so
many years together in that country so well peopled and haunted on all sides,
that in the end men abhorred the very name of the said Inquisition and
Injunctions, Horrible persecutions.
whereby an exceedyng multitude of folk, that is to wit, above fifty
thousand persons had bin most cruelly executed and put to death, and the ^ke
number bin or^en to forsake their goods, pare^tes, friends and kinsfolk, and
to live continually in miserable exile, only (as was s^ne and perceived every
day more evidently tha^ other) because they would not swerve from Gods
commandments, and follow men's inventions.

Which thing only did breed an alteration, but also so great a hartburnyng
against the Inquisition and Iniu^ctions in diverse respects, that in many
places the officers durst not proceed any more to the execution of them, but
by night and by stelth, and that not without peril and danger of truble. And
they themselves ca^ witness, whither they had not much ado oftentimes to save
their lives from the rage of the commons, moved to displeasure at the pitiful
beholding of so horrible executions.

Whereby all they that had experience in ma^ters of state, foresawe that that
only point woold be an occasion of great trubles, if it were not wisely
prevented in time.

The which inconvenience and diverse others the Lady The Queen of Hungary.
Mary gouernesse of that Country feary^g even in her time, went in propre
person to Awspurg in the year. 1550, unto Charles y^ late Emperor of most
happy memory, to assuage and mitigate the rigor of the Injunctions It
appears by the Proclamation set forth in April. 1550.
that were the^ a setting forth, and to procure the holdyng back of the
Inquisition from the City of Andwerp and the Country of Brabant, and from
other places that had not yet bin subject to it: Which thing she obtained at
his majesty's hand. It appee^th by the Iniunction set forth in Septe^. 1550.
Nevertheless the fore said Cardinal wi^ his creatures and Inquisitors,
ceased not their persecutions and practizes, whereat the people did greatly
murmur and grudge.

Yea and they practiced a great point of suttel^ie: for in the beginning of the
kings Majesty's reign which was the year 1555. they got out letters of
commission in his name to assiste the Inquisitors. It appears by the
Commission set forth. 1555. and by the letters of reuocatio^ granted
afterward*
And although they were revoked incontinently after, as soon as his Majesty
was infor^ed of the things that were a^edged against the Inquisition: yet did
it cause a great hartburning among the people when they saw their manner of
dealyng. And therefore at his Majesty's departing, they had their eye upon him
that should be appointed general governor of the Country: and that so much
ye more, because the states in general had much (...) at that time ^o obtain
at his Majesty's had, that the Spanish soldiers wherewith the Cardinal minded
to fortify himself, should be withdrawn out of the Country.

Which thing the Cardinal also (the^ Bishop of Arras) foreseeing at length,
notwithstanding that he intended in effect to have the government of the
country alone. Yet did so much that the title and name of Rege^t or Gouernesse
was given to the Duchess of Parma, (who at that time had no ^perience of the
affairs and dispositions of the low countries, (...) she had continewed
always in Italy, and therefore should be feign to refer hirselfe to that
which he should persuade her): and to countenance his doyngs the better, he had
caused the king before his departure, to ordeine a counsel of estate, wherein
certain of the chief Knights of the order were appointed deputies, and among
the rest we also, notwithstanding our refuzall, as is said before. For the
Cardinal perceiuyng himself to be counted an enemy to all liberties
frau^chizes and privileges that might hinder his procedings, and to be the
chief Author, Ringleader and furtherer of the Inquisition and of the execution
of the Co^missions: knew very well that the people of those Countries woold not
have suffered his Go^ernement without setting of themselves against it even at
the first.

Now then whereas the rest and tranquillity of the Country was vphild under
this shadow countenance and covert, that the affairs were managed by the
authority of the said Rege^t, and by the advice of the said Counsel of estate:
this vizor was anon after plucked of and laid bare by the Cardinals own
ambition and vnaduized dealyng: For within a while after the kings departure,
he began to deal with all matters of i^portaunce alone by himself, or with
some one or two that hung upon his sleeue, without making the Regent privy to
them as he ought to have done, and without communicatyng or propou^dyng of them
to the Counsel of estate: saying openly to the deputies of the Provinces and
Cities, that it behooved them to repair to him and to none other, if they woold
come to a good end and have ready dispatch of their matters: and yet
nevertheless bearyng the Lords of the Counsel in hand, that they should
answer all alike for the inconveniences if any happened: Which thing seemed
very strange and unreasonable to some of the Counsel, who also aduertized the
king thereof by their letters according as he had left order that they should
do in such caces.

And they certified his mai^stie therwithall, how that of a Bishop he was
become a Cardinal, and one Viglius a Pries^, one of the chief about him was
made President, and the report went, that there should be new Bishoprikes and
incorporations of Abbeys and Prelacies, It appears by the Bulls of Paul the
4. and P^s the fourth.
and an executyng of the determinations of the Council of Trent, (things
agreed upon by his Mai^stie before his departure by the connsayle of the two
aforesaid, and of three or four others that went about to satisfy their own
ambition and (...) thereby) wherethrough the people was sore vexed and
disqu^ted, insomuch as there was no member nor degree of the^, which fealt not
it self greatly touched with it. For the Lords and Noble men were of
Innouatio^s ^ade by the ^ardinall.
opinion, that this authority of the Cardinal and his new bringyng in of
Bishops, which should rely altogether upon him, tended to their depressing,
to the puttyng of the government and rule of the Country into the hands of
the Churchmen, and to the depriuyng, not only of al other men, but also of the
kings majesty, to whom the said Churchmen could find in their hearts, another
to yield nor to owe any obedience at al: And that the Abbyes, Prelacies,
Couents, Incorporation of Abbyes.
and Colleges should serve but to enrich the said Bishops with their spoils,
specially by incorporatyng the Abbeyes and Prelacies, whereby they should
bereue them of all election and hope of attaynment to their accustomed
dignities. And the p^ple were of opinion, that that was the high way to
infrindge all their libertis, fraunchises, and privileges and to bring in the
Inquisition, and to renew the rigor of the Iniu^ctions, and finally to bring
them in bondage to the clergy. Which things were ye very causes and welsprings
of all the distrustes, troubles, and mischiefs that insued afterward, (in as
much as some would have put the things in execution, which those good
Counsaylers had persuaded his majesty to do, who ought of right to be blamed
and rebuked for their so dooyng) whereof they go about to clear the Cardinal,
and to charge us therewith, without any color or likelihood at al.

And although it appear in histories that alterations, troubles, and
rebellio^s have happened upon less occasions: yet notwithstandy^g, that
Country was so entirely affectioned toward their sovereign Lord and prince,
as those causes had not yet taken their ordinary and accustomed effects,
because it was hoped, that the States of the Country being commended to his
Majesty by their (...) and service done in the former wars, might turn his
mind, so as he would rather apply his determinations to the time, and stop all
new devices, yea, and the proceedings of the Bishops, and the Inquisition, and
the rigorous Injunctions at the request of so loyal and faithful a people,
according to their treaties and privileges: than to further so unmeasurable
alterations, at the pleasure of a stranger, and of certain vnknownen persons,
against the opportunity of the time, the privileges of the Countries, his own
promises, and in effect even nature it self: specially considering that the
troubles in France were styrred up at the same time, by occasion of Ordinances
and Edictes tendyng to like effect, howebeit, that the Realm of France is not
so frequented, and on al parts so enclosed and environed with Countries that
follow the Religion, contrary to the Romish Religion, as the said low
Countries are.

And their hope was, that he would do it so much the rather, because the said
innouations began also to be misliked of strangers, namely of the Archbishops
and Bishops of the Empire, whose jurisdiction within their own dioces, was
impeached by the foresaid erection of the new Bishoprikes: and that his
Majesty would reap none other profit by them, than to bestow his authority
upon such as made open profession, that they would never think them selves
beholden to him for it.

In respect of which reasons and other like, which every man did set before
him, according to the capacity of his wit, and specially upon hope, which the
said Countries, as well generally as particularly conceived of his majesty's
goodness, for as much as he no less than his predecessors, had always dealt
reasonably with them by Justice, and according to the customs of their
countries, and that wherein soever they found them selves grieved, they had bin
wont to open it unto his majesty, by way of request and complaynt: their
desire was to take the same way now also, and thereby to advertise his
majesty of the said innouations and inconuenicnces that were like to ensue, if
they were not remedied out of hand: in consideration whereof, as well on the
behalf of the Regent, as of the Lords assembled in counsel, (whom the
Cardinal bare in hand (as is said before) that they should be burdened with
all inco^ueniences that might ensue, as well as he) the Baron of Mountignie, a
knight of the Order was In August. 1562.
sent to his Majesty in post, with all speed that might be, with charge and
instructions to show the state and necessity of the Countries, and their
general mislikyng of the said innouations, which made the Noble men and states
of the Country to surcease all further and particular pursuit of the matter,
in hope that his Majesty would upon such declaration, take order for some
amends, or at leastwise for some mitigation of those points, wherewith they
found them selves distressed and grieved: the rather, in as much as for the
staying of the incorporation of the Prelacies and Abbeys then vacant in
Brabant, the Prelates and other Noble men of the Country, (like as they of
Andwerp also had done) had sent their In February. 1562.
deputies before to In May. 1562.
stop the Inquisition, and the bringyng in of the new Bishop: which thing
held the Country for a time in suspense without any commotion or trouble,
upon hope that by those deputies of theirs, they should obtain some such good
redress and composition, as the state of the case required.

But yet notwithstanding the state Assemblyes at Sermons and to here
preachyngs.
of Religion went foreward still on all sides, in so much that in some places,
men began to preach, not only secretly, (which thing could never yet be let
by any rigor) but also openly: namely at Ualenciennes, Tournay, and diverse
other places, the occasions whereof were given, or at leastwise increased, by the
liberty of the Religion agreed upon in France, for to their seemyng, they had
deserved no less at the hands of their king and prince, than the Frenchmen
had at theirs, and in as much as they had in many respects bin dealt withal
after the same manner that the Fre^chme^ had bin, they thought also yt they
deserved to obtain liberty of conscience, as well as they. And it was evident
to be seen, that (in as much as those low countries were environed with others
that followed euerycho^e the contrary religion, and that their mayntenaunce
stood upon the intercourse of marchaundise, and upon the recourse and traffic
of their neighbors thither:) it was impossible for them to observe che
ancient ordinances and laws of Religion any more, by which laws although
men had gone about to root up al Religion quite and clean, yet
notwithstanding it was found by experience, that it grew and increased even in
the greatest rigor of all, and therefore that it is utterly impossible to
enforce or constrayne Religion or conscience, at leastwise any furtherforth
than to a kind of dissimulation.

Notwithstanding all this, the Cardinal continued his bringyng in of the said
Bishops, and his inuestyng of them, incrochyng to him self the Archbishoprike
of Mechline (by virtue whereof he intended to sit as Metropolitan and Primate
of those Countries, and to devour the Abbey of afflighem, which is the richest
in all Braband, next to the Abbey of Saint Amand, which he had seized into his
possession already) and partyng the residue among so unfit and unmeet persons,
that men mocked at them openly. And although those inuestitures were made in
some Cities without any open withstandyng, yet was it easy to be perceived,
that many folk misliked of it, and some also did set themselves even openly
against it, namely they of Andwerpe, of Grooning, of Leedward, of Deuenter, and
of Ruermond.

And it was easy to see whereto these doyngs tended, in as much as the Cardinal
(who ouerruled all the Counsaylers, yea and the Regent her self, and had so
absolute power and authority) was become the head of all those Bishops, who by
reason of their unfitness and lack of experience, should hang all upon him, by
means whereof he took more upon him tha^ ever any prince of the Country had
done. And to maintain, stablishe, increase, and augmente his authority by
forcible means, he had set forewarde the Inquisition and the Injunctions
aforesaid. And to pleasure me withal, he had at his commandment, the geuyng,
distributyng, and bestowing of all the kings offices, Benefices, and Fees, and
likewise of the Regentes, also over and besides the helps that he had of his
own and of his said Bishops. So that in conclusion he had opened himself the
right way to get and maintain superiority over the king and his Countries.
And moreover, to be aduertized trewly of things that were done every where,
and to hold in with the Kings and Princes that were next neighbors: he had as
it were in his hand and at his beck, all the kings Ambassadors, Agentes, and
deputies, and among others, his own brother also, who did set the affairs of
France in such a broyle, that for the benefit and quietness of the same
realm, the queen there did make very earnest request to the kings Majesty to
take him thence.

Therefore whosoever looks well to these things, shall eazly be able to judge
who it was that took upon him authority above the kings Majesty: namely
whither it was we which used not any of the foresaid means, (but utterly
misliked all innouations: and had once before refuzed to be of the Counsel and
given over the office of thief treazurer, desiryng nothing so much as to have
bin spared afterward again from Counsel in matters of estate and from office
of government, and specially from that Counsel): or the Cardinal which bare
all the sway, and by his innouatio^s and extraordinary dealings, showed him
self to have the said authority, with intent to stablishe and maintain
himself in the same by their means, yea and in far greater tha^ ever any
Prince of the Country had.

Surely I am of opinion, that such as consider well the things aforesaid and
judge of thein without affection, shall find as little reason why me^ should go
about to accuze us in this behalf, as why they should excuze the said
Cardinal.

But when as the deputies of the Prelates had by means of rewards and
pensions obtained, that the Incorporation of the Abbyes should not go foreward:
and when as the men of Andwerp had obtained that no man should molest them with
the Inquisition, and that they should be winked at concerning the bryngyng in
of the new Bishop: for a^uch as the said Lord of Mou^tignie was returned
without sufficient resolution for the remedying of other inconveniences, so as
there was smalf hope that matters should be redressed, in as much as by means
of the said Pensio^s the doings of the Bishops (whose only labor was to bring
in the Inquisition) was furthered, and it was practiced to disappoint the me^
of Andwerp of the benefit of winkyng at them, and to bring them in subjection
to the Cardinal, and under the Archbyshopricke of Mechlyne: y^ Regent thought
it good by the advice of her Counsel, to inform the king once ageine of the
state of the Country, and specially of Uale^cien and Turnay, where it seemed
utterly impossible to keep y^ people from the exercize of the Religion,
without a continual garrison. Whereupon her highness sent a Counselor of hirs
named The year 1564.
Armenteros to his Majesty, so that in conclusion it was fully resolved by
him, that the Cardinal the apparent author of all the alterations and
discontentementes, should get him out of the Country: which thing did give
the people some contentation and hope of amendment of their state.

But forasmuch as the Cardinals creatures continewed still their innouations,
and managed all affairs in his absence after the same manner that he him self
had observed: the former disorders returned by and by again. And it was
impossible to remedy them, because of the disagreeme^t that was between the
three cheef Counsels, that is to wit, the Counsel of the States, the private
Counsel, and the Counsel of the Erchequer, which were all three ouerruled in
effect by the Cardinal and his creatures, but yet in such wise as they could
never come to agreement among themselves. Wherein a man may note the notable
leawdnesse and wiliness of the Cardinal, who to keep the rest of the said
Counsel of the estates from doing such seruis to the king as they woold have
done, had utterly excluded them from all entrance and intermedlyng with
checkermatters and matters of Law, and from all such orders as were taken in
government or otherwise, knowing well that without the intelligence of the^,
it was impossible for them to consult and determine well of most matters of
importance all which drift tended to the reteyning and stablishyng of his own
authority. And yet for all that, he laboreth to accuze us and others of high
treazon, because that for the better seruis of the king, we desired to have the
secrets of the said Courts communicated to the Counsel of the estates, as a
needful thing for the discharge of our dewtyes, whereas in the mean season,
he himself, and after him the President Uiglius ouerruled all the said three
Cou^selles, as though that of right all authority had belonged to him and his,
and that on the contrary part it had bin a heinous crime and offense for other
men to require any part of the same authority to be conveyed over, not unto us
which do offer to depart from the same Counsel, but to ye whole cheef counsel
together. Such is ye sincerity whereby they proceed at this present in ye low
country, for the preser^atio^ of the kings authority as they bear men in
hand.

For as much therefore as the affairs of the Country were so disseuered, as it
was not possible for the Lords of the cheef Counsel (whom they went about to
burden with all the inco^ueniences, that might happen) to prene^t and redress
the same inco^^niences and thereby to set foreward the seruis of his Majesty,
for want of authority and conference with the other counsels: and forasmuch as
the people saw that the new Bishops, by reason of their unfitness and their
disordered life and behavior, (which was so great that y^ Regent was feign to
call the^ before her and to rebuke them,) could not serve to do any good to the
Country, and that ye pride, the threatenings, and the other manner of dealings
used by them and their followers, bewrayed that it was decreed at It appears
by the foresaid Bulls of the Popes and the Decree of the seven Cardinals.
Rome that every Bishop should have ix. prebe^des affectioned to help foreward
the Inquisition, whereof two should be Inquisitors themselves, by reason
whereof they should serve to none other purpoze, but to set foreward and
stablish the Inquisition: To ye end they might by his Majesty's good means The
County of Egmo^ds journey into Spain.
encounter the mischeeues that were like to spryng of the things aforesaid the
Counsel thought it good to In the beginning of the year. 1565.
send unto his Majesty the Prince of Gawre Earl of Egmond: who at his return
gave great hope and likelyhode of some am^ment and redress of matters, as in
respect of mitigatyng the Injunctions and of abolishyng the Inquisition, upon
the performaunce or not performaunce whereof it was to be seen openly both in
deed and by experience, (as well by the example of France (as has bin said
before) as otherwize,) that the co^motion or appeasement of the people depe^ded,
and therefore that all that ever insewed afterward was to be imputed unto the^,
and not to any ambition of ours as they pretended. In the S^mer. 1565.
For to the purpose above mentioned there met together iij. Bishops, three
Divines, three professers of the Civil law, and three other of the Canon law:
whose advice being taken concerning the foresaid mitigation, was sent to the
kings Majesty: but by the instigation of the Cardinal and others that were
continewally ticklyng him in the ear, he had no regard of it (notwith standing
that it was still ouerrigorous,) nor yet to the former informations, but The
kings resolution. t It appears by the extractes of the kings letters sent
abroad by the Regetes letters dated the 18. Dece^b. 1565 both the which are
inserted in the end.
commanded expressly in the end of the. 1565. year, t that without any further
replying, they should proceed to the bryngyng in of the new Bishops who were
not as yet installed, and to the publication of the Decrees of the Counsel of
Trent, and to give the Inquisitors the authority that belonged to them by the
Civil and Canon law, and moreover to execute the Injunctions in very deed
with all rigor immediately upon the receipt of his letter.

Hereof were diverse Copies and extractes sent abroad byandby to all Cities, and
they were enjoined and charged to conform themselves to his ma^iesties
resolution and commandment, which was the second and cheef cause of all the
alterations, mischeeues and inconveniences that followed afterward, the very
fountain whereof was not any ambition of ours, but the ambition of the
Cardinal and the distrust that he had caused among the people by his foresaid
innouations, as appears evidently by that which has bin said, and is
confirmed by the It appears by the reports and requests exhibited in Court.
complaints made afterward by the Cities of Graband and the members of
Fla^nders and other places, matched with the confederacy that was made anon
after between certain Lords and Gentlemen, against the Inquisition and the
rigor of the foresaid Injunctions.

Wherefore it has no likelyhode of Words taken out of the Summons.
truth that the Attorney General alleges, namely that we should have bin
the cause of the said confederacy, by perswadyng certain persons that the
king meant to bring in the Spanishe Inquisitio^, as though the manner and form
of the Inquisition, rather than the effect and execution of it should cause men
to make insurrection. Which is a thing so (...) the more against reason, for
as much as it is not the quality of death that puts me^ in fear and causes
them to make mutinies, insurrections, and vprores, but the very terror of
death it self: specially in this present case, where by the addyng of this word
Spanish, another the quality nor the kind of punishment is pu^ishment, but
only the generalname of Inquisition is restrained to the particular name of
Spanish: which is no sufficient cause to make men to ry^e and to rebel.
Howbeit, that to speak more pe^emptorily, I say plainly, it lay neither in me
nor in any others* to make men believe that his Majesty intended to bring in
the Spanishe Inquisition, for as much as there had never bin any m^tion made of
tha^ Inquisition before: and that afterward the form of the ^quisition that
was to be set forth, was she wed expressly by the kings (...), in manner
hereafter written, whereby they be readily convinced, which (...) that the
people were (...) up and moved to (...) by mean^s of this The Inquisition was
the fou^tayn of all the alterations in the low Country.
word Spanish.

For as much then as the Inquisition (...) and declared by his (...) sai^e
letters, was the cause of the po^ples displeasure, and that there was no
further hope of remedy to be looked for: it follows, that all the things that
insued afterward, are to be wyted upon it, and not upon any other thing, and
consequently that it is not true, that I by my like inductio^s and perswasio^s,
had caused many of his majesty's subjects to rise and to rebel against him, or
that I had so seduced, corrupted, and provoked a great part of the Nobility
aforehande, that they made leagues, conspiracies, and coniurations, and had
sworn to defend and fortify them selves thereby against his Majesty and his
ordinances that had bin kept and observed at all times before, and that to the
same end there had bin certain meetings kept in my houses, as well at Breda,
as at Brusselles, by means whereof I should have bin the chief head, author,
furtherer, favorer, and barbro ^gher of Rebels, Conspiters, Coniurators,
privy practisers, and troublers of the comino^ weal and quietness.

For there appears not any rebellion or commotion made against his majesty,
whereof we should be bound to answer. And as for the said co^federacy, it
came not by our occasion, but by reason of the distresses that were caused by
the said Inquisition and Injunctions, and by infrindgyng the promises made the
years. 1550. 1555. 1562. 1565. and at other times, as has bin showed
heretofore: and therefore the troublyng of the common Weal, and the dist^rbing
of the peace of the Country, are to be imputed to them selves and to the
Cardinals ambition, and not to so fond persuasions and impressio^s, as the
term of Spanish Inquisition, and such like. For no less fond is that
allegatio^, than were ye words of him, Viglius.
who thought to stay all innouations, by saying that the king meant not to
stablish an Inquisition, but only a visitation: as who should say, men
respected more the word than the deed, and were more hasty to make
insurrection for the terms of Inquisition and Spanish, than for the rigor and
cruelty that they had seen and were afraid of by the execution of the
Injunctions.

And therefore I say, that the said confederacy and complaints, and all the ^est
of the things that insued, did but only show the effect of that which we
had told the Lady Regent asorehand, in open counsel, that we feared would come
to pass: that is to wit, that his majesty's said resolution would cause some
great alteration, specially by reason of the hope that a number had conceived
upon the return and report of the said Lord the County of Egmond. It
appears by two letters sent in the beginning of the year 1566.
And whereas I wrote the same thing in effect to her highness afterward: she
confessed to us by her answer, that she perceived clearly how the said
resolution was the cause of all the troubles: and therefore (as is said) the
said confederacy being made without my knowledge or advice, ought not to be
imputed thereunto. For when I was advertised of it within a while after, (as it
were a fifteen days or theraboutes) before the confederats were mar^es, I
protested openly and ^atly, that I liked not of it, ne thought it to be the
right means to maynteyne the quietness and tranquillity of the common Weal.

It is very true that I esteemed it not as a rebellion, con^piracie, or
coniuration, because the confederates stood st^dfastly upon this point, that
they meant not to do or attempt any thing against the welfare of his Majesty
and of his Country, It appea^eth by the ^xpresse ^ordes of ^he confederacy
sig^ed with their hands.
wherein they were of the same opinion that we be, confirmed by common
experience, which was, that the Inquisition and rigor of the Injunctions
could never come to good, in so much that by the examples which we had seen
before in Almain, France, Ingland, and Scotland, we were driven to confess that
the kings resolution in that behalf, could not but bring great waste,
desolation, and destruction to those Countries, without any furtheraunce of his
proceedings: whereas on the contrary part it was to be seen, that the Countries
which have the liberty of Religion, or at leastwise of conscience, and where
the Inquisition and the rigor of the Injunctions is not put in execution,
continue in rest and quiet: which is an evident proof, that to live without
the Inquisition in liberty of conscience, is an other manner of thing, tha^ to
live loosely, lawlesly, and without order, as some have falsely and
sclaunderously reported: for otherwise the princes of Germany, which set as
much store by the rest and quietness of their Countries, as the kings
majesty does, would in no wise abide it, specially if they mistrusted that any
disobedience would ensue of it.

And was so much the more confirmed in this opinion, because the confederates
showed not them selves stubborn, ne meant to obtain their request by force,
but only sued that It appears by the request of the confederates and the
answer thereto, which are both inserted hereafter.
his majesty (who (said they) was abused by certain persons, which under the
color and pretense of Religion, went about to satisfy their own ambition and
covetousness) would vouchsafe to take intelligence of their complaint and
suit, and thereupon follow the advice of his counsel, offryng them selves to be
ruled and lead accordingly as the same being duly informed, should decree
concerning the matter of Religion. So that when they were once up in this
rebellion, conspiracy, or coniuration, he ought to have inclined to their
petition, and to have regard of their supplications, either in that they
required to have their Noble me^ heard, or for that all co^federacies*
generally without exception, do stand in their own conceyt, wherein I confess
I liked none of both his majesty's doings. For in my judgment, a Prince may be
a^sed: and therefore it is good reason that the subject, vassal, or what soever
he is that is indomaged, should have leave to utter his grief. And Emperors
and kings have bin commended in that they have ^uffered them selves to be
rebuked by prinate persons, for not seemyng to give ear to their requests and
complaints, as he was which suffered one to say to him in open str^ate, If thou
list not to hear our suites, list not to be our Emperor: and as an other was,
who being a king and sovereign Lord, did notwithstanding suffer an old woman
to appeal from him, because (as she said) he gave no ^are to her matter.

And seeing that in these low Countries, in cases of importances, whereupon
both honor and goods depend, whether it be publicly or privately, me^ have
bin wont to refer them selves to the states, who have b^ of that authority,
that in all times, yea and even in the time of Charles late the Emperor of
happy memory, they have oftentimes assembled by reason of occurrents of like
or less importance, yea, and even in the case of Religion, and an Edict by
their advice, in the year. 1531. which was then published, as appears by the
style and process thereof: let us not think it unlawful for us to require the
same thing now which we see to have bin done and used in like cases
heretofore. And many good co^federacies and holy leagues are found to have bin
made heretofore, (as for example, the confederacies of the Machabees and other
doings) and that men may make them still to the honor of God and to the
prosperity of their kings and countries: So that in my judgment, there can
no rebellion be inferred upon the points aforesaid.

For as touching that the co^federats did promise and swear to maintain,
help and defend one an other against the Inquisition and Injunctions: seeing
that that promise might have bin made to cease by the means aforesaid, and
they offered in effect by their petition to go from it, because it seemed to
be against the kings commodity, and to obey what soever should be ordained by
the advice of the States: it seems against reason, that whereas hunters and
others that deal with the tamyng of unreasonable beasts, do endeavor to put
away their fierceness, moodinesse, and wyldnesse, by diligence, company, and
cherishing, rather than by cudgelling, whippyng, and roughness, the king
should by the froward instigations of the Cardinal and his hangers on, use
rigor and roughness toward so loyal subjects and faithful vassals,
rather than meeldnesse and cleme^cie, to keep them at his accustomed devotion
by surceassing (at leastwise for a time) the execution of the said Inquisition
and Iniunctio^, which (to all men's seemyngs) could not be set foreward nor
continewed in that time, without apparent damage, hurt, and prejudice to his
Majesty and Countries, specially seeing that the former wars had already as
good as suspended and assuaged the rigor of them as is said before, whereby it
was come to some discontinewation, and the variances and alteratio^s which had
risen up since that time every where, seemed not to suffer that it should by
any means be renewed and set up again.

And it should seem that the Regent also was of the same mind: who before the
coming of the confederates, said that she had considered aforehand of the
mitigation of the It appears by the purposed conceit of a new Edict.
Injunctions. And she had already on the kings behalf declared the Country,
of It appears by the agreement made the 24 of March. 1566. by the common
Register of 1565. called the Register of Braband.
Braband to be exempted from the Inquisition, in so much that another at the
first nor at the last (at leastwise until the time of my departure) she made
not any countenance of accountyng the said confederacy or the supplication
presented upon the same, for any rebellion. Which thing I thought good to
show, not of purpose to enter into any form of Protestation in respect o^ ^he
confederacy, which touches not me (as appears by that which is said:) but
only to show that there was no reason why I alone should take the confederates
for rebels, and so seclude them from their accustomed resortyng to my houses,
in the which I am sure, that to my knowledge, there has not any assembly bin
made, against the welfare honor, and prosperity of the Kings Majesty.

And again seeing that the Lady Regent tendered the confederates so far by
the kings commandment and by the advice of all his Counsel, as to promis
the^ by letters signed with her own hand and sealed with her scale, It
appears by her letters of assurance dated the 25. of August. 1566. hereafter
in serted.
that they should not be blamed for the same co^federacie or for any thing
that insewed thereupon: there was no reason that I should deal otherwise with
them, or make any other account of them, than she had done. And if any man will
say she did it to an other end, only to bring them a sleep and to serve her
own turn by them against those that had ouershote the^s^iues to far in the
breakyng down of images: it makes nothing at all against our intention.

For although it may be inferred there upon, that our meening extended not so
farreforth: yet notwithstanding we agree fully with the opinion of the king and
of the Regent, in the point of keepyng company with them, and in suffering them
to haunt and frequent our howses. And therefore in so doing we have not let
or hindered, but rather furthered his Majesty's good proceedings and seruis:
or else at least wise we have bin deceived by the foresaid declaration of his
Majesty and of the Lady Rege^t, which is a sufficient excuce for us against
all pretended favoring and furtheryng of the co^federates, for as much as they
another be nor were rebels, or at leastwise were not so counted and taken to be
by the kings Majesty and the Lady Regent, and by all others in general. For
it is to be noted that a general error or mistakyng, especially where it is
caused by the king or prince himself has the force of Law and right.

To the co^formation whereof his majesty wrate unto us with his own hand in
the month of August, It appears by the kings letters of the first of
August. 1566. the translation whero^ is inserted hereafter.
so that after that the said confederacy and the putting up of their suit came
to his knowledge, he was very well contented with our seruis, and misliked not
of any thing that had passed willing us not to think the contrary, but that he
did repose his whole trust in us, and believed not the things wherewith some
malicious persons charged us, in saying that we did our dewty very ill, and
many such other words.

And surely considering the case as it ought to be, his Majesty had no cause
((...) r^spect of any thing that is said) to judge otherwise thereof, for
as much as before the said confederacy, I had sufficiently declared that my
opinion was, that the Inquisition and the rigor of the Injunctions could not
be put in execution, without truble and inconue^e^ce, and thereupon made sure
It appears by letters sent to the king, the. 14. of June. 1566.
to be discharged of ^ine offices and government, whereby his Matestie was
sufficiently certified, that I took not any like confederacy to be a
rebellion, and my keepyng still of mine offices and government confirmed
sufficiently (at leastwise by secrecy) that I continewed in the same opinion
and in the things that depend thereupon.

And therefore there is no likelihode why The words of the Summons or Citation.
they should go about to new christen us by the names of head author, favorer,
furtherer, and harbrower of rebeis since it appears not that we have received,
favored, proo^ded for, or authorized any men as rebels. Another can it be found
that we have taken any of the confederats, or any other such like into our
peculiar protection and safekeepyng: and yet not withstanding they go about to
accuse me thereof also, whereby men may perceine what just dealyng is used now
a days in the low countries, seeing that for ca^ses so apparauntly without all
ground or likelihode of truth, they have not only seized upon my goods and
possessions, but also partly co^fiscated them and put them to sale, extendyng
execution upon the^ against all order of right. Whereby they show evidently that
they be fully minded to practice all manner of violence, and in effect to
minister extreme wrong instead of full right, under the cloak and covert of
Justice, without regard of any manner of Justification or defense.

To the which effect they accuse us also for that some of the co^federates had
entered into arms, in diverse places: not considering that we be not bound to
answer for other men's doyngs, nor ought to be charged though some of the
confederates perchance became rebels afterward, for as much as they were none
such nor so taken to be at the ^yme that they haunted and frequented our
houses, and that whatso^uer was done in that behalf, was done not only with
out our advice, but also to our unutterable greef, and far of from us, for at
that time I was in Holland, where and not in any other place, I must needs have
leuyed men of war, if I had bin minded to usurp authority against his
Majesty, because the towns and fortresses there were at my commandment.

But mine intent has bin nothing else, but to pacify the said countries and
the Provinces of Zeland and Utreight being all under my government, and to
keep them in obedience to the kings Majesty, according to my Commission and
the Lady Regentes express commandment given unto me. So that, I have
indeuered to the uttermost of my power, to acquit my self well and faithfully
of that charge, as the Presidentes, Counselors, States, Officers, and
Magistrates of the Cities of the same Countries can well witness: and they are
able to say whither I did ever minister any speech unto the^, otherwise than to
incorage the^ in their obedience loyalty, and seruis toward his Majesty,
like as I have done in all other places where I had any office or authority.

Which thing appears openly by this, that notwithstanding all these broils,
I have by Gods grace used such forecast, as no place, town, or fortress of
our government has bin destroyed, sacked, or turned away from their dew
obedience to the kings Majesty or the Regent.

Out of the same forge comes this forgerie also, which is put into the
Citation of the County of Hoochestraten, wrongfully slaundered to have bin a
furtherer of our ambitious practices: name ly that we should have hild many
suspicious communications and priny packynges at Hoochestraten, and that at
Deuremond we should have determined with the foresaid County of Egmond, and
with the County of Horn, and with the said County of Hoochestraten, to enter
into arms against his Majesty, and to keep him from coming into the low
country, by force. For I report me to the Lords that were at Hoochestraten
when I was there, whither there were any other talk than of making good
cheer, and of visityng one an other, and of feasting certain strange Lords
as friends and alyes meetyng together: so as it ca^ never be auowed that any
thing was concluded there, that was worthy to be suspected, or any
disloyalty practiced against his Majesty.

Also it shall never be found true, yt we practiced either at Deuremond, or any
where else, to stop his majesty's coming by force, or otherwise. For although
we were advertised that all our doings were misconstrued to his Majesty, to
turn away the good will that he bare toward us: in so much that there came to
our hands the copies of certain letters written by the Lord Frauntes of Alua,
his Majesty's Ambassador in France, to the Lady Regent, It appears by his
two letters sent in the month of August. 1566.
the contents whereof were, that the three within noted, (which were the
County of Egmond, the County of Horn, and We) should be punished in time
and place according to their deserts, until the which time he would that
men should make good countenance toward us: and that in effect these letters
blamed us for all the euylles that had happened in the said low Countries,
auowyng the same thing to have bin the principal cause of the foresaid meting
at Deuremond: yet notwithstanding we trusting altogether to our own innoce^cie,
The interuiew at Deuremo^d.
did not forbear to communicate the contents of the said letters to the Lady
Regent, and to ask her directly what was meant by them. There were certain
other points treated of, which concerned them that were there, and their
doings, whereof I take it that the said two Lords being then prisoners, have
made sufficient declaration. In respect whereof, and because they perteyne not
to the present matter, and for that it is to be presumed, that in this case men
should hold them selves satisfied (at leastwise on our behalf) for as much as
in the writ whereby we be (...), there is no mention made of the foresaid two
asse^blyes: I will make no f^rther discourse thereof.

Only this I add, that he which had foreseen the outrages and violence used
at this time in the low countries, and had done his duty and endeavor to stop
them, according to covenants with the Duchy of Braband, and according to his
own oath and bond: should peradventure not be thought worthy of blame for any
other rebellion: considering that if he had minded any such thing, he could
have found no means to do it, than our adversaries ween, were it not that
the opinion which we have conceived of the kings goodness, (who
notwithstanding does waste, destroy, an^ spoil the Country so well
affectioned to his majesty's service, at the only pleasure of the Cardinal of
Granuill) had not turned me away from all such thoughts.

And therefore to come to other points The words of the Summons.
of our Summons, and nainely to that which imports that we should have aided
and counseled the Lord of Brederode, (chief of the rebels, as is there
pretended) to fortify his city of Uiane, against the kings majesty: I
confess, that coming to Uiane certain years before these alterations, and
being told by the said Lord of Brederode, that his late Lord and Father had
enjoined and commanded him by his last will and testament, to go foreward
with the fortifying The fortifying of the Town of Vianen.
of the said Town, and of his house, lately begone, desiryng me to give him
mine advice for the fortifying thereof: I confess (say I) that I did so:
whereupon it may well be inferred, that I gave the said Lord counsel to
perform the last will of his said Lord and father deceased: but not that I
aided or counseled any captain of Rebels to fortify the city against the
kings majesty. By reason whereof, and for as much as it is no treazon for a
man to give his advice upon the fortifying of a place: it appearcth plainly,
that those accusations tend but only to the defacyng of the truth, and to the
oppressing of innocence.

And that so much the more, because that in the low Countries it has at all
times bin lawful for Gentlemen of ability and living, to furnish and fortifye
their places whereof it has bin seen, that many both of old time and ever
since, have bin fortified by virtue of the same liberty, not only upon the
Frontiers, but also eue^ in the mids and in the very heart of the Country,
which fortifying was so much the more lawful for the said Lord Brederode to
make, because he held and possessed the said town of Uiane with all right of
sovereignty. And although his predecessors had bin in controversy at the law
upon that point of long time before: yet notwithstanding he had continued still
in possession and seizure of the said royalties.

And if a man look more near into the advice: he shall find that it is
against all reason and equity, to ground any crime of treason thereuppon,
because it was not given upon the principal point, that is to wit, whether
the fortification should be made or no, whereof the Lord of Brederode made no
doubt nor scruple at al: but only upon the manner and form of the
fortificatio^. Which not withstandyng could not have bin followed, unless the
point going before, were fully concluded and agreed upon, whereto none but the
only Lord of Brederode should be bound to answer. And it makes not to the
matter, that the fortification was put in execution after the commotions. For
seeing that the advice was given before: respect ought to be had to the same
time.

Whereas it is avouched that we should have suffered the said Lord of Brederode to
levy men of war in the city of Antwerp in the open fight and knowledge of al
men, contrary to the express order then newly taken and proclaimed, and to
ship them to the town of Uiauen, with all manner of munitions of war. This
shall serve for answer, that although my coming to the city of And werpe
was only to keep it in quiet and in obedience to the kings majesty, which
thing may appear by the Regents letters It appears by her letters dated the.
12. of July. 1566.
sent both to me and to the Magistrate of the town, yea and eue^ by the
confession of the Attorney general contained in the said Summons: yet
notwithstanding as soon as I understood of the said leuying, and of the place
where it was done: I declared it to the magistrate, and to the Markgraue, who
is the chief Officer of the Town, and unto whom it belonged to look to those
and such other accidents, and I commanded him (according to the tharge that
the Regent had given me by her letter directed to me in that behalf) that he
should apprehend and attach the parties that did it. Whereupon the Markgraue
departing from me, and findyng the parties at a Table together, which were
reported to be the makers of the said Musters: instead of executing my
commandment, sat down with the^, and afterward reported to me that he
could not find them: by means whereof they had opportunity to get them secretly
away.

It was very true, that long time before Artilery given to the Lord of
Brederode.
these alterations, I presented the Lord of Brederode with three pieces of
great Ordinance, which I caused to be shot new again afterward at Utreight (a
Town of the kings majesty's) in the open sight of all men, and sent them to
the said Lord, howbeit long time before the said mustryng, when he was yet in
the kings majesty's seruis, and had the charge of certain Ordinance, under
him. So that it is no less against reason to blame us for geuyng and
presentyng the said artilerie, than to blame them that preferred the said Lord
of Brederode to the said Lieutenantship of the Ordinance, specially seeing that
the same Lord of Brederode being assured by the Regent (authorized by the kings
majesty, as is said before) that none of the things aforepassed should be laid
to his charge, had not any reason to fortify him self, against the king.
Another was there any likelihood of cause why we should refuse the performance
and delivery of the said gift, which we had promised him before, and which he
knew to be ready and appointed before hand for him, and to be as near Uiane as
vtreyght.

Therefore to come to ye pithe of ye said The words contained in the Summons.
Summons, the effect whereof was that I should forbid certain of the kings
majesty's places and cities, to receive his garrisons, and among other places,
in Zeland, whether it is expressly said, that we sent men to take it, thereby
to shut the king out, and to stop his majesty's passage by sea: I do not
think that ever I used any such speech as might minister occasion to devise
that accusation, or to cause it to be surmised, that if our part had had
sufficient proof of it, they should have bin driven to have specifyed the time
and place, seeing that all accusers are bound of right to such specification.
Yet notwithstanding for as much as Zeland is named among others, I wyllyngly
grant, that knowing and having oftentimes infourmed the Counsel of the
importance of that Country, and being advertised that All this appears by
many letters sent in March. an. 1567.
there was a drift in practicing against it, I sent the Lord Bouxtel thither,
to the end that no men of war should be received there, without mine
appointment, according to the ordinary manner and custom, which is, that no
such thing may be done in those countries, but by the commandment of the
Governor of them. And I confess also that having received advertisement from
the Captain of Zeburge which is a Fortres in the I Will of Walcheren, a part of
Zeland aforesaid, which was all under my government) that two hundred soldiers
were arrived there, sent from the Regent, to enter into the said Fortress, and
that he could not receive them, as well for fear of some mutiny of his own
men, which were unpaid, and would not abide that others stronger than the^
selves should so openly step in among them: as also because of the strey^nesse
of the place, and for scarsitie of victuals: I sent him word again, that I
thought his reasons very good, and that he should not receive any soldiers
there, without further commiss^on from the Regent, and from us as Governor
there. Of the which distresses the Regent being likewise advertised by the
Captayn, became of the same opinion that I was of: and sendyng money to pay the
soldiers, took order that of the two hundred, no more but fifty should be
received, which entered in anon after, by our commandment to the Captain by
our letters.

Now when report was made to the Regent how I had commanded the said Lord of
Bouxtell to receive no garrison into the I Will, no not even though it were sent
from her highness: I intended to have excused my self by my letters: howbeit
that at that time such order had not bin expedient, because that as then I was
at Antwerp and her highness at Brussels, who in like caces concerning my
government, had not bin wont to do any thing without making of me privy to it
before, and therefore I assured my self that she would not send any garrison
into the I Will, without making me of counsel therewith, seeing she might do it
without let or delay: Whereas on the contrary part, under pretense of the said
garrison, the fortress might be surprised, (as has bin seen to have happened
diverse times unto others) for the which I might afterward have bin driven and
constreined to answer, by much more apparaunt reasons than are now made to
accuze me withal. In so much that for the more assurance of the said fortress
and country, I had good reason to forbid the said Captain and all others,
(yea and that even by special and express commandment) to receive any
garrison, because the fortress was sufficiently provided for already, and the
want of vittels should be increaced by the over increacing of the garrison.

By reason whereof, and for as much as the other places and Cities of the
Country have always offered to spend their bodies and goods in his Majesty's
seruis, and have certified him that they needed no garrison, by sendyng their
deputies to the Gouernesse for the same purpoze: there was no likelihode at all
that I should by that means surprise the said Country, and by that shift
shet out the kings Majesty, and cut of his passage by sea, seeing that the
very deed it self has bewrayed and showed the contrary.

For at such time as certain Barks laden with men whom I had put out of And
werp by open Proclamation for the better assurance of the rest and quietness
of the town, came before the I Will: the inhabitauntes did set themselves at
defense, and woold not suffer them to take la^d, so that being feign to take
ship and return back again, they were afterward disco^fited upon the river
about Andwerp, for want of vittels armor and other needful things,
notwithstanding that they had caused it to be bruted that they would go to the
aid of the Lord of Br^rode. Which thing caused great uproar and hurlyburly in
the Town, where both the Lord of Hoochestrate and I, were often in danger of
our lives, (by reason of the Magistrates cowardlinesse in that he durst not
show himself, which gave great occasion of the uproar, to the breach of ye
peace there stablished) because it was thought that we let the succors that
some intended to have ministered unto them, (together with the outrages that
leawd folks attempted to practice,) howbeit that in the end through Gods
goodness we appeazed all without any bludshed. Which dealyng of ours argues
us to have bin far of from sending those me^ into Zeland to surprise the
Country, in as much as all our doings tended to the contrary. For had that bin
our purpoze, we should not have commanded the Capteyne and the men of that
Country to receive no me^ of war, but contrariwise to have received them and
taken them in: and it appeered so much the more, in that we offered the men of
Andwerp, to go out of the Town and to disco^fite the assembly our selves,
with such company as was there which thing was misliked of for fear of
commotio^, which discovered it self after the said discomfiture as has bin
said before.

Now then seeing there was no lookyng for his Majesty's coming by sea: there
was not any likelyhod that by the taking of Zeland we meant to stop his passage
and to shet him out of it, which thing (co^sideryng how the towns and
fortresses were at his Majesty's devotion) it was not possible for us to do by
sending me^ without head, without captain, without authority, without
express commandment from us, and which could not be received there because
of our order taken to the contrary: but in that case we should have bin there
personally in the Country, whereby I should have given some cause for men to
think, that folk would every where have stooped to me as to their governor,
and have yielded me their accustomed obedience, as they had done in all other
Cities and holds of our government: for that had bin a more apparent and sure
means, than to send thither a sort of rascal fellows, unarmed ungoverned,
and unguided (for whom we should at leastwise have provided in a case, being so
well able to do it by means of the town of And werp as every man knows) and
which were afterward dispatched in manner without any resistance or defense, in
so much that no man having any experience of the wars, would have trusted to
them in an exployt of importance, and much less I, who had far better means
to assure me of the Country, if I had minded it, as I did not. And therefore I
mar uell that men of skill and wisdom will use such allegations, whereof they
not only another have nor ever shalhaue any proof, but also which have not in
them any show of likelyhode.

Wherefore to come to the point of the The accusation concerning And^erpe.
said Summons, which avouches that being in Antwerp to appeaze the trubbles
and vprores of the people, we suffered and granted the exercize of all sects
to go at liberty in the town indifferently: it is to be considered that
before I took my charge upon me, I declared op^nly in full Counsel of the
states, that it lay not in me nor was mine intent to take upon me to
suppress the preaching (which was then ched with the exercize of the Religion
as a necessary appurtnaunce of the same) which charge (as I took it) I have
performed with unspeakable travel, thought and care, by the advice of the me^ of
law of the city, and of the faculties of the merchants, all the which
confessed It appears by their own report made the 4. of Sept. 1566.
that by my means and order they accounted them selves assured of the
quietness of the Town, thankyng us for it with all their hearts.

Which thing falls out in effect to be confirmed approved and confessed by
the Regent also, who having co^itted the keepyng of the city in quietness, to
the County of Hoochestraten, in our absence, while we were pacifying the
Countries of Holland Zeland and Utreyght, enjoined and appointed him expressly
It appears by her letters of the. 4. 5. and 8. of October. 1566.
to follow the steps that I had gone before him. Which thing nevertheless
they do now go about to deface, chaungyng the things that were openly allowed,
into the crime of high treason, against all likelyhode of truth. For I granted
not any Religion one or other in the town, but only suffered and bare with
such as had bego^ to preach openly before my coming thither, according to my
declaration heretofore blamed. For although y^ Rege^t showed sufficiently that
she hild with all Religions which agreed not with the Romish Religion, and
esteemed of them all alike, as namely with the Anabaptists, against whom I was
desirous to have ^ade public defense if her highness had liked it: yet did I
put all such to silence, as did put the^ selves forth to begin any
preachynges after my coming thither.

Moreover the preachings that were made without the town, were not received
into the town by us: but when I was called to the Court, without having
obtained that some other body might be substituted in my sted to look to the
quietness of the town, or that I might send a Lieutenant thither,
(notwithstanding that I did expressy require it): in the mean while some fell
to pullyng down, destroying, and breakyng a sunder of images every where, and
they that preached erst without the town, began to get them Churches, yea even
by authority of the magistrate. And (after the composition made between the
Regent authorized by the king, and the contederates) It appee^eth by the
agreement made the 23 of August. 1566.
when as in the end they were contented to have left up their Churches
again, and to have continewed their preachynges in their accustomed places
without the town according to the compositio^: the Magistrate thought it It
appears by their own report made the 24. of August. 1566.
more expedient for many considerations, to grant and assign them places
within the Town. By means whereof, when the parties were once agreed, I could
do no less by virtue of my Commission, but follow the composition.

For in as much as I was sent to keep the town in quiet, and in loyalty to the
king: it was our dewty to frame our selves to that which we saw they had
settled in unity and quiet, specially considering the weyghtinesse of the
reasons that had moved the townsmen to consent to the things aforesaid,
(whereof I did the^ aduertize as well the king as the Regent,) It appears by
their letters sent in September. 1566.
besides that it was not possible to keep the peace without sufferyng of the
said preachynges and the exercizyng of the Religion out of hand, the necessity
of which exercize offered it self welneere hourly by reason of the multitudes
that followed the Sermons, which were said to be suffered every where, in
so much that they were used openly in Churches, which was the cause that the
Magistrate thought it good and needful to suffer, not only the exercize, but
also the erection of Churches. And that so much the rather, byeause winter was
at hand, by reason whereof, otherwise an other second invasion was to be
feared, wherein the other churches were like to have bin taken: and therefore the
Magistrate was not only willing but also desirous to further the said Churches:
whereunto because we saw that all others had no less good will tha^ he: we
thought it stood not in any wise with our duty, to hinder the thing that
might assure us of the execution of our charge.

The same may also ser^e us for answer, in respect of their co^sistories, in as
much as both before our coming, yea and eue^ before there was any public
preaching, the Protestants kept their Consistories, (for in deed they had their
consistories every where eue^ in all rymes) and also because that although we
never consented unto them, yet we never saw any likelihood of trouble to insewe
by means of them. It is very true, that to let the assemblyng of the common
people upon every occasion, I affirmed and thought good, that some should be
appointed to deal in the name of all the rest, because I saw no way else to
perform my charge, and to mainte^e and preserve the peace, and to avoid all
confusion and disorder.

Again, I could not perceive that any inconvenience or danger should follow of
their buildyng of Churches (as some surmized,) seeing that a Church could cause
no more evil than a house or any other place? and that for as much as I was
sent to keep the city in peace and tranquillity, it behooved me for the
avoiding of all inconveniences, rather to disappoynt the occasions and
purposings of attaynyng thereunto, than to stir up and provoke the parties by
impeachyng the erection of a Church, or by any such other mean, and so to give
occasion of other troubles, which it should have bin impossible to have
ouerruled afterward, without doy^g directly against our Commission, and without
setting of all things in a broyle.

Also this may serve partly for a solution to the last part of the foresaid
Suminons, which conteyneth that I should suffer the leuying, taxing, and
gatheryng of money to be employed afterward upon the reteynyng of soldiers and
men of war. For I know of none other leuyinges, taxations, and gatheryngs,
than only such as were made before my coming, for the relief of the poor,
and the maintenance of the Ministers, and af^erwarde for the buildyng of the
Churches. And it shall never be found that any collection was made to my
benefit, or employed upon the leuying of soldiers, or upon the intertaynment
of men on mine own behalf, by reason whereof I should have apparent occasion to
suffer the said taxations and collections.

Moreover, my refuzing of the fifty thousand Florens that were offered me from
the accountantes by the Sates of Holland, for the good ser^is that I had done
to the king and the Country during the troubles, by appeasing the vprores
there, does (as I think) sufficiently show, that it was not mine intent to
suffer any such collections, taxations and leuyings, which it was not otherwise
possible to let in Cities of traffike, as in Antwerp, where there was in manner
nothing else but gatheryng of money for diverse purposes.

For as much therefore as I have most evidently (as I hope) showed that no evil
or inordinate affection of mine, upon any ambitious desire to usurp above the
authority of the king, (whereof all our countenances, sayings, and doings
have bin clear, yea and clean contrary to it) has bin the cause of any
trouble, as whereby we could not have hoped for any benefit, so that I was not
the cause of any innovation, that might set the people in any broyle or
unquietness: but that on the contrary part, the said Cardinal of Granuill,
was the cause of all the said innouations and of all the mislikyng that was
engendered afterward between the king and the people, by his usurping of
extraordinary authority above all the Counsels, yea and even above the Regent,
in hope to mainteyne, augment, and increase the same his authority by
institutyng of new Bishops, by confirming of the Inquisition, and by renewyng
of the Injunctions, to satisfi^ his own ambition and covetousness, which
carried him away so headlo^g at other times also, that he did set dissension and
mi^iking between great Potentates, yea and even between the late right high
and happy Princes. Charles the Emperor, and his brother Ferdinand and his
sons: I think that such as are of judgment, and have experience in matters,
will not stick either to acquit me of the mischiefs and inconveniences that
have happened in the said countries, and of the alteration of the appara^
felicity thereof, into extreme bon^age, penury, and wretchedness: or to
charge the said Cardinal with them, whom men go about to set up again in
authority, by the overthrow and destruction of the country, in recompense not
of any good seruis of his, (for the which, had he done never so many and so
great good turns, he and his had sufficiently cut out their own shares
already, without leauyng any part to the discretion of the kings majesty) but
of the mischiefs and inconveniences abouesaid, and to give him opportunity to
work mo: whereas al our seuices done to the great damage and hindera^ce both of
us and of our auncetours, of whom some have dyed in his seruis, and even at the
fe^te of his Imperial majesty, are forgotten, and we spoiled, not only of our
goods, by trifling, false, and surmised causes, reasons, and allegations, and
by such kind of proceedings as are utterly against all right, law, and custom,
(as has bin showed heretofore, and by It appeaeth by the lisproofe and
^uoydance ^ent to the ^ttorney ^enerall, and ^o the Duke ^f Alua, the (...) of
March ^568.
an other writing of ours:) but also of our honor and our child, which are
things dearer to us than our life: all which is to the prejudice, not only of
us, but also of the kings majesty, of whose covenants, bonds, oaths, and
promises there is no regard at all had, which is so unorderly, unreasonable,
and spiteful a kind of dealing, as it can not be avoided, but that it must one
day breed some inconvenience, which I beseech God, that the kings majesty
being enlightened with his divine brightness and light, may turn away and
prevent, and rightly take intelligence of the doings of his good servants and
faithful subjects, which are now wrongfully selaundered, persecuted, and
afflicted: so as the world may know that the things which have passed,
proceeded not of his majesty's own nature, but of the misreportes, tales, and
sclaunders of such as have disguised the truth, and concealed it from him, even
to this ho^re.

The Summons or Citation sent out against the Prince of Orendge.
Nouemb. 1.
PHilip by the grace of God, king of Castile, Lions, Arragon, and Navarre* etc.
To our chief Hussher or Serieant at Arms, upon this required, Greeting. We
are informed by our well-beloved and faithful Counselor and Attorney general,
that the Lord William of Nassaw Prince of Ore^dge, having received both of our
late Lord and Father the right noble Emperor Charles the fifth, (to whom God
grant rest) and also of us since our coming to our state, many honors and
promotions, as our choozing of him to be a brother of our own Order, our naming
and admitting of him to be of our counsel of estate, and our preferryng of him
to diverse goodly Rooms, Charges, and Offices: as namely to the government of
Burgundy, Holland, Zeland, and Utreight, together with the Lieutenantship of
our Ordinance, besides a number of other notable rewards, whereby he might see
the great trust and estimation that I always had of him, in respect whereof he
should do the more amiss, in behauing him self otherwise than becomes a good
subject. Yet notwithstanding, having sinall regard of his own honor, and to
the oaths of faithfulness and loyalty, which he had given to us as to his
sovereign Lord, and in respect of the said Order, and of the said Rooms and
Offices, has made him self the head author, furtherer, fauorer, and harbrower
of Rebels, Conspirators, Coniurators, mutiners, privy practizers, and
disturbers of the common welfare and quietness. For as it were immediately
after our departure out of that Country, toward our Realm of Spain, he and
certain others practiced to take upon them and to usurp the whole orderyng
and gouernyng of our Countries thereawayes. And for the accomplishment thereof,
he wrought and conveyed many secret and pernicious practices, wherein he
ouershot him self ^o far, as to determyne to enter into arms against us,
and to exclude us out of those Countries, which thing he has not failed to do
so far as he was able, by vsyng all kind of curti^ie ^yly toward our good
subjects, to withdraw them from the louyngnesse and loyalty which they have
always showed to us and our predecessors. Yea, and which is so much the more
detestable and horrible, under the cloak and pretense of Religion, and through
false persuasion, that our intent should be (which was never so) to bring the
Spanish Inquisition into those our Countries, in so much that by his like
inductions and impressions, many of our subjects have rizen up and rebelled
against us, and specially the said prince has seduced, corrupted, and stirred
up a great part of the noble men, and ge^tleme^, so as they have made leagues,
conspiracies, and coniurations, and sworn to defend and strengthen themselves
thereby against us and against our ordinances which have bin always kept and
observed in those Countries. And for the same purpose he has made assemblyes
in his own houses, as well at Breda, as in this our city of Brusselles, yea
and afterward received the Rebels into his protection and safeguard, with
promise of his assistence. Whereupon they have put them selves in Arms against
us in diverse places of the country. Also the said Prince has cou^seled and
aided the Lord of Brederode cheef Captain of the Rebels, to fortify his
town of Uiane against us, and suffered him to leuye men of war in our City
of And werp in the open sight and knowledge of all men, contrary to the orders
then newly taken and proclaimed, and to ship them to the said town of Uiane
with all manner of warrelike munitions, moreover furnishyng the said Lord of
Brederode with certain pieces of artillery, besides that he forbade certain
towns and places to receive any garrisons from us, and among others, our
country of Zeland, unto the which he sent men of purpoze to surprise it, and
by that means to shet us out, and to stop our passage by sea. Furthermore
where as the said Prince was sent to our City of. Andwerp to pacify the
trubbles and commotio^s of the people: he of his own private authority and
besides his commission, has permitted and granted the exercize of all sects
indifferently in the City, and given the sectaries leave to erect many Temples
and Consistories, according whereunto they were erected in deed, whereof have
insewed the inco^uenie^ces and dangers which every man knows of. Also he has
suffered leuyinges, taxations, and collections of money to be made, which
afterward were employed about the payment and wagyng of men of war. Many
other things has he done during his abode there, which our Attorney shall
declare more at large, and make apparent in dew time and place, if need be. Al
which things tend to his foresaid drift, that by that means he might usurp
upon our subjects, and take upon him the authority that belongs allonly
unto us, which is appara^tly high trazo^ not to be borne with nor to be winked
at, but worthy of punishment and correction to the example of others, if it be
as our said Attorney says, who requires that it may pleaze us to grant him
convenient provision according to the crime, with clauze of authority against
the said prince of Ore^dge. Therefore be it known to you, that we having
considered the things aforesaid, do command and authorize you by these
presents, that at the request of our said Counseler and Attorney general,
you put forth your self, and (with such aid and assistaunce as you shall
think meet,) attache and apprehende by the body the said Prince of Ore^dge
wheresoever ye shall find him in our said Countries here, and him lead and
convey under good and sure guard, to the prisons of our Court in our said City
of Brussels, there to appear before our right dear and trusty Cousin, Knight
of our order Governor and Capteyne general for us of our said Countries the
Duke of Alua, Marquis of Coria etc. appointed purpozely by us for the same
matter, and to receive punishment and correction for his said crimes and
co^spiracies, according to the desert of them, as shall be found meet by reason
and equity in that case. And that if you cannot take or apprehend him, ye
su^mon him and cite him by public proclamation and cry, under peine of
perpetual banishment and forfeyture of his goods, to appear personally
within (...). fifteenes then next insewyng (whereof you shall assign him the
first fifteen for the first day, the second fifteen for the second day, and
the third for the last and peremptory day of law without lookyng for any more)
before our said Cousin the Duke of Alua, in our said Town of Brusselles, or in
such other place as he shall then be within our low Countries, to answer to
such points and articles as our said Attorney general shall take and chooze
against him, concerning the foresaid matters and others, that by keepyng of the
day he may set them down and debate them more at large according to his
Commission, and proceed further therein, and see what is to be done according
to reason. And you shall signify to the said Prince, that if he come not at
the first, second, or third and last fifteen days: Justice shall proceed
against him in his absence, as is convenient in such caces. And whatsoever you
shall have done in that behalf, we will have you to certify our said Cousin
the Duke of Alua thereof sufficiently at the said day: to whom we give
commission and special charge for the causes before said, that upon the heeryng
of the parties, he do and minister, good, short, rightful, and reasonable
Justice, as becomes in such caces. And if the Prince of Orendge be stubborn
and make default: we will that he proceed to ye pronouncyng of the said
banishment, and to the proclayming of the said forfeyture, and to the executyng
of all such other things as he shall see meet to be done, by right and reason
in that case. And so to do, we give you full power and authority and special
commission. Chargyng and commaundyng all our Justices Officers and subjects to
obey you in doing hereof, and to attend diligently upon you, and to give you
counsel aid and comfort, and prizonroome also if need be and that you
require it. For so is our pleasure. And because the said Prince of Orendge (as
we here say) has gotten him self away out of our cou^tveys: our will is in
that ^ace, that the summo^s and citatio^ which you shall make by Proclamation
and open cry within the bars of our Court at Brusselles, and your setting up
of the Copyes of this our presents together with your said doings, and your
castyng of them in at the outtermost part of the Prince of Orendges houses
within our countries, and your stickyng up of like Copyes upon the doors and
Iawmes of the cheef church there, to the intent he may not be able to pretend
ignorance, shall be of as good force, value, and power, as if it had bin done to
the said Prince of Ore^dgis own person, and for such have we authorized and do
authorize the said Summons and Citatio^ by these presents. But for as much as
other men have commission to deal with the taking of the Inventory of the
said Princes goods, meddle not you with them. Given in our said City of
Brussels, the xix. day of January, the year of grace 1567: and the year of
our reign, over Spain, Sicile, etc. the xiij: and over Naples, the xv. It was
subscribed thus: By the king. And under written thus, Mesdach. And sealed with
a Seal of red wax upon a half labell.

A Copy of the Serieant at Arms doings. No. 1*

BY vertew of the letters patentes of personal Summo^s whereof the Copy is set
word for word here before, I Frau^cis Knibber ordinary Serieant at arms to
the privy and the great Counsels, have this present xxiiij. day of January the
year 1567. at the request and instance of the kings Majesty's Counselor and
Attorney general the obteiner of the^, came into the Listes of the Court at
Brusselles at eleven of the clock in the forenoone, where having caused the
Trump^s to be sounded I have with loud voice and open cry red the said letters
patentes, and by the vertew of the same, summoned and cited William of Nassawe
Prince of Orendge on the kings Majesty's behalf, to come and appear
personally, from fifteen days to fifteen days in. times, whereof the first
fiftene shall be the ix. day of February, the second fifteen shall be the xxv. of
the same month, and the third and last fifteen which is the peremptory day
of law without lookyng for any mo, shall be the eleventh day of March followyng.
And this to be done before the high and mighty Duke of Al^a, (Marquis of Coria
etc. Knight of the order, and Governor and Captain general for the kings
Majesty in his low countries) in the said City of Brusselles, or in any such
other place as my Lord the said Duke shall then be: upon Pain of perpetual
bannishement and forfeyture of all goods belonging to the said Prince of
Ore^dge: there to answer to such points and Articles as the said Attorney
general shall list to take and chooze against him, and moreover, as is
reherced more at large in the said letters patentes. Done under my sign
manuell the day, month, and year above written. Underneath was written thus:
Conferred and found to agree, by me. And it was signed thus. Knibber.

An abstract of the last Letters and writings sent by the king to the Lady No.
2.
Regent, together with the last dispatch concerning the case of Religion.
FIrst as touching the Injunctions and decrees as well old as new which concern
the case of Religion, his majesty understanding in what state Religion stood
in those quarters, thought it not expedient to make any change or alteration
of them, but that as well the Injunctions of the late Emperors Majesty, as
his own Majesty's Injunctions should be put in execution: for he saw that the
cause of all the mischief that had happened, and the cause of the increacyng
and spreadyng of it so far, had bin the negligence, cowardlynesse, and
dissimulation of the Judges. And therefore if there were any of them that either
durst not or would not execute their office for fear of su^me hurlyburly: they
should aduertize his Majesty, that he might provide others of more courage and
better zele toward the execution of things, whereof there ought to be no want
in that Country where there is such store of Catholics, and so many desi^ous
to do God and his Majesty seruis: by the doing whereof and the executyng of
the Injunctions, there was good hope that ye hurt which was done there, would
better and sooner be remedied, than by any other way.

Secondly, as touching the Inquisitors of the faith, his Majesty charge her
highness to bear such an eue^ hand, as they might be favored in the execution
of their Commission, as the thing that was expedient for the benefit and
vpholdyng of the Religion: for it was his Majesty's mind that the Inquisition
should be executed by the Inquisitors as it had bin thitherto, and as belonged
to them by the laws of God and man: affirmyng that it was no new thing, for
as much as it had bin used co^tinewally, as well in the time of the late
Emperor, as in his own time, and the inco^ueniences that were to be feared
were much apparanter, nearer, and greater, where the Inquisitors were not
suffered to provide for things according to their office, nor aided in their
doings. And for (...) as her highness knew what that meant, his Majesty
charged her to do what she could in that behalf, (for it was very requisite
that she should so do) and not to consent that any other thing should be
treated of in that behalf, because her highness knew how near it touched his
heart, and what pleasure and contentation it would be unto him.

Thirdly, his Majesty took order with her highness, that since the holy
Council of Trent was already published, so as there remained now no more to
do, but the puttyng thereof in execution, which was a thing that belonged to
the Bishops: her highness should give them all the furtherance and help that
she possibly could, that it might take effect as it ought to do. Also he
would that the Decr^es of the Council of Trent that concerned the reformation
of the lives and manners of the Clergy, should be put in execution: chargyng as
well her highness, as all his Officers, to favor and further them by all
requisite means: and that if need should require any further provision to be
made on his majesty's behalf, she should cause it to be dispatched out of
hand, that even where the men of the Church would not obey the reformation
that was to be made by the bishops, there they might be framed and made
conformable by the Decrees of the said Council of Trent.

And finally he affirmed that the things which his majesty had written to her
highness, as has bin said heretofore, concerned the prosperity of Religion,
and of the countries there, which would be nothing worth, without that Order,
for that was the only way to keep them in justice, peace, and tranquillity.
And seeing that her highness knew what commodity it brought: he desired her
eftsoons to follow that way whereby the foresaid things might take effect,
for it was the thing whereby his majesty should receyne most contentment, as
well at the hands of her highness, as of the Lords that were about her: to
whom he would have her to give the same charge, to the end they should employ
them selves thereunto, as his majesty hops that they will, without fail,
because they be sure that he will like well of it, besides that they shall
therein do the duty of such personages as they be, and accordingly as they
be bound to do in respect of their seruis toward God and his majesty, and in
respect both of the benefit of the whole Country there, and of their own
peculiar welfare.

Margaret by the grace of God, Duchess of Parma and Pleasance. etc. No. 2.
Regent and Gouernesse. etc.
RIght dear and well-beloved, although that even from the first beginning of
the reign of my Lord the king, over these Countries, as well by the reuiuyng
and publishyng of the Injunctions and Decrees concerning Religion, made by my
late Lord of noble memory the Emperor Charles (whom God has received into his
glory) and now ratified and confirmed by the kings majesty, as by the things
that he has written unto you since, specially from his last departure out of
these countries into his realms of Spain, you might always well perceive his
good zeal and most holy affection in mainteinyng our (...) true faith and
Catholic Religion, and for the rootyng out of all s^ctes and herefies in these
Countries here: yet notwithstanding for as much as it has pleazed his
majesty for certain occasions, to revive his most holy intent by his late
letters: we by express commandment from him, have thought it good to imparte
unto you what he has written unto us, the effect whereof is this: that his
majesty coveting nothing more than the maintenance of the said Religion, and
of his good subjects hereawayes in good quietness, peace, unity, and
concord: and to preserve the^ from the inconveniences that have bin seen to
happen in many parts of Christendom through the change of the said Religion:
purpozeth and intends that the Injunctions and ordinances made as well by the
late Emperors Majesty, as also by him self, shall be thoroughly kept and
observed, and likewise that men shall most straytly keep the Decrees of the
holy Council of Trent, and the provincial Councelles, specially in respect of
the reformation of the Clergy, without gaynsaying of any thing, to the end
that heresies may be punished, and manners also corrected, and men may yield
all favor and assistence to the Inquisitors of the faith in the executing of
their office, and that the Inquisition may be put in ure as it has bin
hitherto, and as it ought to be by the law of God and man, which thing his
Majesty commands expressly by his said letters. Wherefore according to this
his majesty's writing again, to the intent to obey the same in a thing so holy
and so worthy to be favored, I could not forbear to write thus much (...) you,
praying and beseching you, and on his majesty's behalf expressly commanding
you to rule and behave your selves herein according to his appointment, without
withsta^dyng of it in any point or article, yea and to give intelligence thereof
to the Officers and ^en of Law of the chief towns of the country and Duchy
of Braba^d, that they also may rule the^ selves according hereunto, without
dissembling or winkyng at things, under the penalties contained in the said
Injunctions. And that ye may the better intend unto it, you shall appoy^ and
ordeyne a Counselor of your College, (who notwithstanding may be changed at
every half year, to the intent that no one man be ouerburthened continually)
to do nothing else but to have an eye to the Country of Braband, for the
keepyng of the Decrees of the said most holy Council, and to ad^ertize you
from time to time of all occurrents* that ye may provide for them according to
his Majesty's meaning. And to the intent we may continually know the state of
religion, in the points above mentioned: we desire and command you, as
before, to write unto us particularly of the success of things from three
months to three months, and to repair to us (if there happen any hard
point) or to such as are of his majesty's privy counsel, that report thereof
may be made unto us, for the which purpose we likewise will appoint some
Cou^seller to take peculiar charge thereof, and to be answerable to you, or to
him whom you shall assign. And to the end that in all the things abouesayd, ye
may the better perceive his majesty's express will: we have caused the points
of his letters and other writings that concern this matter, to be annexed to
this letter, that ye may rule and guide your selves according to the form and
tenor of them, without making any default. And thus right dear and well-beloved,
our Lord have you in his holy keeping. Written at Brussels the (...). day of
December. 1565. H. V. It was subscribed thus: Margaret. And somewhat lower it
was signed thus: Of Ouerloepe. Again upon the back i^ was indorsed thus: To
our right de^ and well-beloved the Chauncelor and men of the kings Counsel in
Brabant.

A Supplication of the Noble men of the low Country, presented No. 3.
to the Lady Regent the Duchess of Parma and Pleasance, the fifth of April.
1566. before Easter.
MAdame, it is well enough known, that the people of the low Country have
always and yet are still greatly renowined throughout all Christendom for
their great faythfulnesse toward their natural Lords and Princes, wherein
the Nobility and Gentlemen have always gone foremost, as they that never
spared either body or goods, in the mayntenance and increasement of their
Princes states. And in the saine manner we his ma^sties most humble subjects
are minded to continue still, from well to better, so as we be ready night and
day to do him humble seruis both with our bodies and our goods. And for as
much as we see in what plight things stand at this present, we have chozen
rather to hazard the bryngyng of some mislikyng and displeasure upon our own
heads, than to conceal such things from your highness, as might hereafter
turn to the prejudice of the kings majesty, and therwithal disturb the peace
and quietness of the Country. Hopyng that the event will show in time, that
of all the seruises which we either have done, or shall do to his majesty
hereafter, this is worthy to be taken for one of the noblest, and to best
purpoze: in respect whereof we be thoroughly persuaded, that your highness can
not but take it in good worth. Therefore Madam, although we doubt not but that
all that ever his majesty has decreed both heretofore, and now newly again at
this present, concer^yng the Inquisition, and the straight obsernyng of the
Injunctions in the case of Religion, have some good ground and just title,
namely for the continuyng of the things which the late Emperor of noble
memory Charles, had upon very good meaning determined and stablished: yet
notwithstanding, seeing that the diversity of times brings diversity of
remedies with them, and the said Injunctions have already given occasion of
many griefs and inconveniences now many years since, for all the executyng of
them with extreme rigor. Surely his Majesty's last resolution whereby he not
only forbyddeth the mitigatyng of the Injunctions any whyt at all, but also
commands expressly that the Inquisition should proceed, and the Injunctions
be executed with all rigor: does give us sufficient cause of just fear that
thereby not only the inconveniences will be greatly augmented: but also there
will in the end ensue some general commotion and insurrection, tendyng to the
miserable ruin of the whole Country, according as the manifest tokens of
m^tinie among the people, (which appears already euerywhere) do show us
openly to the eye.

Wherefore considering the appara^ce and greatness of the dangers that manace
us, we have hoped hitherto, that either the Lords or else the states of the
Country would have aduertized your highness thereof one time or other, that
you might have remedyed it by remouyng the cause and ground of the mischeef.
But when we saw that they did not put forth themselves to do it, by reason of
sum occasions to us unknown, and that in the mean while the mischeef
increaced from day to day, so as it was like to come to a general insurrection
and ceuolt: we have thought it our dewtie to wayt no longer time, but rather
according to the oath of our faith and allegeau^ce, matched with good meening
and zeal toward his Mai^stie and the country, to put forth our selves
foremost in doing our needful indeuer, and that so much the more frankly, as
we have more cause to hope that his Majesty will take our aduertizement in
very good part, for as much as the matter touches us much nearer than any
others, as them that lie more open to the inconveniences and calamities that
are customably wont to spryng of like accidents, because the most part of us
have our houses and possessions situa^e in the open fields, ready for all men
to pray upon: and also forasmuch as if we should follow the rigor of the said
Iniunctio^s, in such wise as his Majesty commands us expressly to proceed,
their should not generally be any man among us, no nor in all the Countries
heeraboutes, of whatsoever calling state or degree he were, which should not
roune in danger of loss both of body and goods, and be subject to the
slander of him that would be his enemy who to have a share of his goods so
forfeyted, might accuse him under pretense of the said Injunctions, wherein
there was none other refuge left for the defe^dant, but only if the officer
listed to wink at him, at whose courtesy both his life and his goods did
wholly stand. In consideration where of, we have the more cause to beseech your
highness most humbly, (and so do we in deed by this our Supplication) to
voutsafe to take some order in the case, and (because it is a matter of great
importance) to send a fit and convenient person to the Kings Majesty with all
speed possible, to aduertize him thereof, and to beseech him most humbly on our
behalf, that it may pleaze him to provide remedy in that behalf as well for
hereafter as for the present time. And that for as much as that cannot be done
by sufferyng the said Injunctions to stand in force, because they be the very
welspring and root from whence all the said inconveniences spryng it may
pleaze him to give ear to the abolishyng of them: which he shall find to be
necessary for the turnyng away of the universal ruin and destruction of all
his countries here.

And to the intent his Majesty may have no cause to think, that we which have
none other meenyng than to yield him most humble seruis, would take upon us to
bridle him and to bynd him to the stake at our pleasure, as we dout not but our
adversaries will ince^se him to our disadvantage: it may please him to make
other ordinances by the advice and consent of all the States assembled
generally together, to provide for the things abouesaid, by sum other means
more fit and convenient, and without any evident danger.

Also we most humbly beseech your highness, that in the mean seazon while his
Majesty may take intelligence of our inst request, and determine thereof
according to his good and rightful pleasure, you will provide for the said
dangers by a general surceassing, as well of the Inquisition as of all
execution of the said Iniu^ctions, until his Majesty have taken other order in
the matter.

And we protest expressly, that (as much as in us lay) we have discharged our
dewries by this present aduertizement: so that we do now vnburthe^ our selves
of it before God and me^: declaryng plainly, that if any iuconuenience,
disorder, sedition, revolt, or sheadyng of blud insew thereof herafter for want
of redress in time, we cannot be blamed of the co^cealyng of so apparent a
mischeef. Wherein we take God, the king, your highness, the Lords of the
Counsel, and our own consciences to witness, that our proceedyng therein
has bin as becomes the kings good and trusty servants, and faithful
subjects, without passing the bounds of our dewty in any point in respect
whereof also, we beseech your highness so much the more insta^tly, to voutsafe
to give ear to it, before any further harm insew thereof. So shall you do
well.

The Answer and Replication made to the said Supplication in the Counsel of
the States by the Lady Regent, was as follows.
Her highness hauying considered No. 3.
the petitions and demau^des contained in the said Supplication, is fully
determined to send it to the kings Majesty and to offer it unto him with all
kind of dewtifulnesse that she ca^ deuize to serve her, to move and incline
his Majesty to co^descend to their requests before showed: tellyng the^ that
there was no cause for them to hope otherwise, than for all things meet and
agreeable to his native and accustomed goodness for the furtheraunce whereof,
her highness by the aid and advice of the Rulers of the Provinces, the
Knights of the Order, and the Lords of the Counsel, had taken peynes to
deuize and pen a moderation of the said Injunctions in the case of Religion,
before the coming of their informatio^s, to be presented to his majesty.
Which moderation her highness hoped should be such, as should be able to
content every man with reason. And for as much as her authority (as the
playntifs themselves might well understand and perceive) stretched not so far
as to surceasse the Inquisitio^ and Edictes as they required: and again it was
not meet to leave the country lawless in the behalf of Religion: her
highness hoped that the playntifes would hold themselves contented with her
sendyng to the kings Majesty: promising to take such order in the mean while
till his answer were returned, that as well the Inquisitors themselves where
any were already, as also their officers should in that respect proceed
discretly and modestly in their Commissions, so as men should have no cause to
complain of the^. And her highness trusted that the plaintifs also would behave
themselves in such sort, as they should have no need to deal otherwize: for
she hoped to behave her self so well and dewtifully toward ye kings
Majesty, as he should be contented to discharge all others of the Inquisition
where it was, as may be perceived by his exemptyng of Braba^d from it at the
suit of the cheef Cities thereof. And her highness intended to prefer all
good means to his Majesty so much the more freely, to the end and effect
aforesaid: because she did surely beleue^, that the playntifes had no
determinate purpoze or intent, to alter any thing of the ancient Religion,
which had bin observed in those Countries, but rather minded to keep and
maynteine it to the uttermost of their power. Done by her highness at
Brusselles the xvi. of April. 1565. before Easter, under signed. Margaret.

The Letters of assurance given No. 4.
to the Confederates.
MArgaret by the grace of God Duches of Parma and Pleasance, Rege^t and
Gouernesse here in these Countries for my Lord the king to all such as shall
see these presents, greetyng. Whereas a great number of the Gentlemen of this
Country together, did put up a certain Supplication unto us in the month of
April last past, the effect whereof was that it might pleaze the kings
Majesty to abrogate and abolish the Inquisition and Edictes, as well old as
new, (which they said were ouerrigorous and therefore could not be put in
execution) and in sted of the^ to make others by the general advise and
consent of the states of the said Country, beseechyng us to send the same
Supplication to his Majesty, that he might provide for it: whereupon we hild
many great consultatio^s with the governors of the Countries, the Knights of
the Order, the Counsel of estate, and his Majesty's privy Counsel: after we
had preferred ye whole unto him, together with our advice therein. For as much as
we saw that the said Gentlemen might perchance have some scruple or dout,
that y^ king would take in ill part their said Supplication together with the
confederacy which they had made thereupon among themselves, and all that had
insewed thereupon: which misdoutyng might cause some greater mischeef in those
countries: We thought it good by the advice aforesaid, and upon deliberation as
is mentioned before, to sew to the kings Majesty, that it might pleaze him
likewize to give them letters of assurance, that they should not be charged
with any thing hereafter, that had bin do by the occasion thereof. Whereupon his
Majesty has certified us of his good pleazure and meenyng, according whereto
we tenderyng the benefit, rest, and tranquillity of the said Countries, and to
maintain the said Gentlemen in such wise as they may the more willyngly yield
their obedience and seruis to his Majesty, accordingly as they be bound as well
by nature as by oath, and as they themselves have always offered: we (I say) at
their request and information, by the power and authority which we have under
his Majesty, as Regent and Gouernesse general of these his Countries, and by
the advice of the foresaid Gouerners, Knights of the Order, and Lords of the
Counsel of state being with us, have for their said assurance given them a
Charter signed with our hand in manner and form followyng.

HEr highness. etc.

We do you to understand, that all things before mentioned considered, and by
the kings majesty's consent and good will, and by the power and commandment
which we have from him, we in the name and by the power aforesaid have
promised, and by these presents do promis, that another his Majesty nor we,
will blame or charge the said Gentlemen for the foresaid Supplication or the
confederacy made thereupon, or for any thing that has insued of them unto this
present, so their oath and faythfulnesse which they have given and plighted
unto us, as well for them selves as for the confederates, be conformable to the
points and articles above specified, and whereunto they have bound them selves.
Therefore on the kings majesty's behalf, we will and command all Governors,
Knights of the Order, Lords of the Counsel of Estate, the Chief, the
President, and the Lords of the privy Counsel, and all other his majesty's
Justices and Officers, to whom this case perteyneth, to maintain this present
assurance, and to cause it to be mainteyned, in^iolably and continually,
causing, suffering, and permitting the said Suppliants to use and enjoy it
fully, quietly, and perpetually, without causing, procuring, or dooyng, and
without suffering to be caused, procured, or done, presently, or in time to
come, directly or indirectly, any trouble or impeachment to the contrary, and
also without attempting any thing against the said Suppliants, in any manner of
wise, for any cause above specified. For so is it the kings majesty's pleasure
and ours. In witness whereof we have signed these presents with our name, and
set thereto our seal. Given in the City of Brusselles the. xxv. day of
August. 1566. Signed upon the foldyng on the right side of it thus: Margaret.
And on the left side of the same foldyng, was written thus: By the express
appointment of her highness. And vndersigned: Of Ouerloepe. These letters were
sealed with her highness own Seal, in red wax, upon a double Labell.

The copy of a letter written by the king with his own hand, unto the Prince
of Orendge, translated out of Spanish into French.
WIth great good will have I received your letters, one the (...). of May, and
afterward an other the. (...). of June. You might have understood by that
which I wrote to my sister, how small cause you have to think the thing that
you writ to me in your letter of May, or rather that you ought to think the
clean contrary. And surely you should be much ouerseene, if you should think
that I trusted you not in all things, or that if any body had gone about to
make me conceive amiss of your duetifulnes toward me, I would have bin so
light of credit, as to believe it, having had so great experience of your
loyalty and good seruis. Therefore you may forbear your mistrust in that
behalf, and refer your self to the letters which you have written
heretofore in that matter, and to your own doyngs, and not to the things that
may have bin put into your head, by some that perchance are enemies both to my
service, and to your welfare. As touching the leave that you sue for, to give
up your Offices: I am sorry that your private affairs are in such state as you
speak of: howebeit seeing that the state of those Countries is so tickle as it
is, I can not forbear to tell you, that it is no reason that such personages as
you be, in whom I trust, and upon whom I rest, should now abandon them,
specially since I am so far of from them: but rather it were more reason that
such as are at home in their houses, should come running out at such a time
of need and put to their helping hand as they be bound to do, and as you have
done at this present in going to And werpe, whereof I like very well, assuring
my self that you will do there what soever is most expedient for my seruis,
and for the peace and tranquillity both of the City and of the Country, and
also for the redress of such disorders as are there, according to the trust
that I have in you: and so to do I give you express charge and commission,
knowing that you will not show your self otherwise toward me, than you have
bin of all your life long. And to the end you may see how freely I deal with
you, I can not spare to tell you how it is much spoken of here, that your
brother is a medler in the things that are done there, as you be. For as much
therefore as I can not but greatly mislike of it, I charge you to look to the
redress thereof, that he proc^ede no further, and that you do it out of
hand. And if you think it convenient, to put him from you for certain days,
do so. From the wood of Segouia, the first of August. 1566. vndersigned,
Philip. Indorsed: To the prince of Orendge. And sealed with the kings own
seal.

A Letter of the kings Ambassador No. 6.
in France, to the Regent.
MAdame, although I wrote to you at large a fifteen days ago, and also by the
Post that came out of Spain, as he passed this way a six and twenty days
since: yet notwithstanding for as much^ as yesterday I received aduertisementes
from out of Spain, I purpozed to give your highness intelligence of them
incontinently, and to send you the copies of the two letters that were written
unto me, whereby you may see many such points, as I am sure you will very well
like of, and also understand the good order which the kings Majesty has
taken, and the great preparation that he makes daily, as well to withstand the
Turks power, if it should adventure to arrive upon those Coasts, and to
profer any attempt, as also to bring all his subjects to the obedience of God
and of him self. Also your highness shall understand, how well your manner of
dealyng is liked of, which you have used since the stir that has happened
in the country where you be: and that the last point concerning intelligences
and strong places, is found very good, and to very great purpoze above all the
rest. In so much that now by that means the kings majesty makes full account
to bring his matters about with small pain and resistance, contrary to the
doubt which he had of it at the beginning: specially for as much as the
strangers meddle not oner far, and also by reason of the continual wisdom
and cunnyng handlyng of things, where with your highness has begone to
order the whole matter. For I am well able to assure you, Madame, that his
Majesty attributes the preservation of his low countries unto you, next after
God: who of his grace will bring to pass, that this inconvenience which is
befallen, shall t^rne so greatly to his benefit and commodity, as he shall see
them brought wholly under his obedience, and to such state, government, and
rule, as his predecessors could never attain unto, and which he him self had
so long desired and labored for, together with this occasion which no good
servant of his will counsel him to looze, whereby he is in forewardnesse to
subdue the one sort, and to ryd his hands of the other, as he him self shall
find best, and perceive to be most expedient for the incounteryng of things
hereafter, to the benefit of his affairs in the said Countries. And for as
much Madame as the point which to my seeming is of greatest importance and of
most necessity as now in this case, is to make those vizored servant (whom
you note of) more and more careless, and out of mistrust: your highness (by
your favor) must not think amiss of me for that I have often warned you,
and now again do put you in mind, to dally with them for the present time,
and to feed them so far forth, as to hold talk with them ofttymes your self,
or to cause them to be talked with by persons appointed for the nonce, which
must feed the^ with ye great opinion and good liking that the kings majesty
has of their doyngs, and with the good will which he bears them, yea even so
far forth as to assure them that he believes, and says, that they have done
him so notable seruis, as he thinks him self beholden to them for that his
low Countries are still under his obedience, and that but for their presence
and wisdom they had either bin a pray to strangers, or else bin bathed in the
blud of their own people. For although madame, such speches be but (...) and
feigned iu very deed, yet do the time and occasion require, that such
artificial talk should be used for the seruis of his majesty. And I believe
your highness shall see by experience, that they will serve to good purpoze
for the holdyng of them in, or at leastwise for to hold the fast, as we have
perceived already, not only in them, but also in the two that are gone to his
majesty, who have bin so cunnyngly and skilfully handled, and have had so good
countenance and intertaynment given them, that they swear^ by nothing else but
by the faith that they owe to their master.

And on the otherside, there is so good order taken, and such fetches practiced
in their houses at home, that according to the means that your highness
cou^seleth, they can another do nor say any thing, whereof good intelligence is
not given back again. Besides this, it is determined to hold them a good
while at the Court, and not to suffer them to depart thence, no more than they
have suffered the Lord of Ibermount, who thought he should have retunred out of
hand. But I must tell you Madame, that the greatest inconvenience which I know
to be in this case at this preset, is that they which are of greatest power and
credit about the king, (that is to wit the Duke and the This Duke is the Duke
of Alua: and the Prince is the prince Deboly Ruygomes.
Prince) agree well upon the punishment, but not upon the mean how to punish
them. For the one urges the kings going thither as much as he can, and the
other on the contrary part lets and hinders it, and propou^deth other new
means. As for me, I have always bin of opinion, yt in such caces the kings
presence would stand in great stead: and that above all things, diligence and
speedy dispatch is needful, and would greatly advantage the matter, and that
in suddein diseazes it behooves to use speedy, yea and eue^ violent remedies:
which is the opinion, wherein the kings Majesty as I am informed (only by
one little soul) does now dwell fully settled and resolved: in so much that the
same day that he arrived last at Madrid after his sickness, he swear in the
presence of the said Lords, how he knew well that in the things which he had
to do in his low Countries, his going should be, not only to his own
reputation, but also to the seruis of God: and therefore that it touched him so
near, as he would rather hazard all the rest of his dominions, than fail to
punish such Rebellion to the example and open sight of all Christendom. And
for the same cause his Majesty determined resolutely in the same place, to
depart out of Spain as soon as he possibly might, and to carry with him the
Prince his son, and the Queen, (who notwithstanding (as it was thought)
might have passed thorough France,) leauyng his suster the Rege^t of the
country and his two nephews the Emperors sons with her, howbeit that the
Emperor was minded afterward to take home the elder of the^: and that the duke
should go his way certain days before to refresh the garrisons of Italy, and
to fetch thence the best and auncientest Capteines and soldiers, and in their
places to put those who^ he should carry with him out of Spain: and that anon
after, his Majesty shall go into Italy and speak with some of the Princes and
pote^tates of that country, and talk mouth to mouth with the Pope, Abouchera.
and afterward with the Emperor (if it may be) to link in together with them
in counsel and force: and he has already desired two regimentes of soldiers
at the Emperors hands. Which there is no dout but he shall obtain,
notwithstanding that he cannot as yet give him reso^te answer, by reason of
the war that he has with y^ Turk. This dove, as soon as he has set
convenient order in his affairs, his majesty determines to tarry in the
French County, and from thence to come down into the low countries with such
force as shall be needful, according to the behaueour of his subjects there, and
according to the countenance that they shall show, of humbling them selves, or
of making resistance, that he may make them to obey him, and God first of all.
Furthermore madame, me thinks I should not forget to tell you, how the
County Palatine, and the Lantgraue of Hessia, and the other Lutheran Princes
have sent two ambassadors hither, which bear the name of Doctors, whereof the
one is called Iunius, and the other David. They came hither a month or five
weeks ago, under color to demand certain money, which the said Princes had
lent the Hugonots, during the troubles of the Realm, and therewithal to
commend the professors of their godly Religion to the French king: but in very
deed (as far as I can learn) to make practices with the said Hugonots, and
to give new occasions of attemptes against the Catholic state of the kings
majesty's Country. And for as much as I perceived by good ground, and in very
truth, that some of the kings and Queens Counsel, yea even of the greatest
and oldest sort, (how Catholic so ever they pretended to be) were minded to
serve their own turns by occasion of this Ambassade, by entryng into league
with those Princes, and so to strengthen themselves in their confederacy and
alyance, I was in some unquietness for certain days, how to find means to
break that brood. But the Cardinal came to the Town in very good season,
who in very deed does a whole world of good turns here, and would do many ^o
if he were able. I visited him and had long discourse with him about the
weightynes of this case, and the great inconveniences that it drew with it to
the ruin of the Catholics of this Realm: and I aggrauated it in such wise
unto him, as I made it seem to tend, not only to the harm of the king my
master, but also to the harm of his own Prince. By means whereof I gave him
a color to attach the said Iunius as a subject borne in the low country, so
as he went hence the next morning to a house of the Queens called Monceaulx,
where the Court lay. And when he came there, he sped him so well, that
immediately the king and the Queen dispatched a writ to ye Marshal of their
house, to put the said Luthera^ Ambassadors in prison who were as then in the
town, and to seize their letters, reme^braunces, and Instructions. Which thing
had bin put in execution, but that during the contention that happened while
the Marshal was about to have led them to prison, a certain Counseler being
the^ in the town, aduized him to surceasse the execution of the writ, until
there came a new commandment. Nevertheless, I know that although there was
means made afterward to salve that sore: yet y^ Ambassadors thought
themselves to have received such a despite, and their Masters such an
injury: as I am sure that thereby the practice that was a brewyng is so broken
of, as it cannot be knit together again. Specially for as much as they
perceived themselves to be misused new again, in that in sted of amends for
the said wrong, they were very ill entreated at the Court, when they came to
have audience: and afterward mocked for their labor, by means whereof they
thought that the king and the Queen and their Counsel had small likyng of
them: a thing that cannot but turn to the great furtheraunce of the kings
Majesty's affairs, and bereue them more and more of their fre^des and
alyances. As for the Lady that you wot of, I take her to be one of the deepest
dissemblers in the world: and the more I have to deal with her, the more am I
confirmed in yt opinion which I have often aduertized your highness of:
namely, that there is no trust, no assurednes, no frendshyp, no steadfastness
in her, I have talked with her many times of the matter that you know of, which
concerns the kings Majesty, and I have told her meetly plainly enough how
greatly she is bound thereto, for the releef that she has received by it in
her great need, and I do daily still use all the means that I can deuize, to
make her to discover matters according to his majesty's meenyng and yours. But
I can get nothing at her hand but words: and I am as near my purpoze as I was
at the first day nevertheless I am fully determined to urge her in such wise
at my next cominyng to have audience, as she shall be driven to lay her self
open. She sendes me often the little black man that I have written of so
oftentyines to your highness, who has bin diverse times in Spain since the
Lord of S. Suppli^ was Ambassador there. But howsoever the said Lady think
that by his means she makes me believe what she lists, and wringeth out many
secrets from me. I will another let her know what I intend, nor draw them from
their opinion, but contrariwise pretend to speak freely to the^. And by this
means I perceive I give them now and then good glikes and to very good effect,
and that I suck more out of them than they do out of me. At leastwise I will by
Gods help take such order henceforth, as they shall never make their bragges
that they have couzined a Spanyard. I received this aduertizement by a post
that went from Madrid with the Lord of S. Supplice, whom the said Lady did send
now alate to the kings Majesty, and left him as Bayone the first of this
Month to return into France. One sent me word that he had had such talk
with her as was behoful, and such as I gave instructions of, which I am sure
will do good: nevertheless he learned not so much news as he looked for, and
as their intent was that sent him. The Duke had told him a ^awe days before,
that he intended to write to me: but because the post saw him marvelous sad
for his sons marriage, at his com^yng away he durst not speak to him of it.
The death of Sultan Solomon is not yet known in Spain. But as soon as
tydinges commes thither of it, I am sure I shall have adu^rtizement from
thence, whereby I shall perceive, whither that upon these news there follow
any alteration of purpoze in the points abouesayd: whereof I will not fail to
certify your highness out of hand, wh^. (...).

The Princes answer to the Attourneyes Summons or Citation.
Master Attorney, I have received a Copy of the Summons No. 7.
that you have caused to be executed and published against me by open
Proclamation and Edict. And for as much as I find my self greatly grieved with
the accusations therein contained, as a nobleman of my calling ought to do: I
covet nothing so much (which thing I hope also to make apparent) as to answer
dewly and truly thereunto as becomes me. For it is no part of my meening, to
leave any suspicion in the hearts of the ignorant, that I have not dealt
honorably and accordyngly as I am bound to the king, or that I have leudly and
vndew^ully behaved my self in the Commissions, rooms, and offices, which it
has pleazed his Majesty to bestow upon me heertofore, or otherwise. But I
hope to show by this discourse and by the laying together of my defenses, that
the good, long continewed, and faithful services, charges, and damages, which
I have sustained in them by reason of the^, do far surmount my duties and
rewards. And therefore I have good cause and reason to desire to enter into
this reckenyng, no less than he that hops and looks for an amendment of
his state, by the closing up and determinyng of his account. But for as much as
the thing that we most desire and chiefeliest intend, is commonly last in
execution, if we proceed duly and orderly as we should do: in so much that
the Physician or Surgeon goes not about to cure the diseaze, or to heal the
wound, how grievous or dangerous soever it be, till he have first purged the
humors, and searched the bottom thereof: neither does the Mason build a
house, without laying of a sure foundation before: I am enforced and compelled
by the manner of your Summons, to defer the alleging and setting down of my
defense, until your accusations be laid forth before a competent and fit
Judge, in place unsuspected, where a man may hope that the things which shall be
spoken, shall be regarded as they ought to be, and that the Judge will proceed
indifferently to acquitment or condemnation, according as the case shall
require and deserve. In the mean while I must comfort my self with the
examples (whereof stories are full) of such as in recompense of their
mainteynyng and increasing of the honor, Countries, and dominions of their
Princes, kings and sovereign Lords, with the hazard of their own lives, and
the expense of their goods, have not only bin shamefully cited and cried out
upon, but also received bodyly punishment, and bin made a public example, by
being murdered, executed, banished, or driven away, whereas in the mean
while, the rewards and recompenses of their services have bin given before
their faces to them that least deserved them. Which dealing is so much the
less strange in these days, for as much as the innocentest person that is,
may not ouely be brought in suspicion, but also in hatred, and made abhorred
of the world, only by causing him to be taken and reputed for an heretic by
some suborned person. For be he once brought to that point. he shall not only
find him self defeated of all his good doings, services, and deserts: but
also being bereft and deprived of all good likyng, he shall become suspected
and accusable of Rebellion, Commotion, Sedition, and generally of all kinds of
crimes and faults that can be comprised under the name of treason.

And for as much as it is an odious thing, as ye world goes now adays, to
accuse me^ of prete^sed heresy, to the intent they may punish it without
incurryng the indignation and turnyng away of men's hearts, which they would
feign hold in bondage: it stands them in hand to cover it with the cloak of
treazon, whereof who soever is accused, shall in vain go about to purge and
clear him self, before one to whom he perceyueth him self to be suspected of
heresy. For in as much as treazon is not the final cause, for which he is
pursued, arrested, apprehended, and accuzed: though he make his innocence
appear by never so due proof: yet can he not hope for any acquitment or
deliverance, but must be condemned under title and pretense of treazon: or else
(be his innocence too too apparent) he must look for ^ perpetual and
miserable deteynyng in law by delay of proceedyng: which thing ought to excuze
me sufficiently for not appearing before the Duke of (...) Governor and
Capteyne general of the low countries: Besides that your (...) which you have
sued out, is for in ^any reas^ns utterly without right, and such as I am not
bound to obey. For ^esides that the officer of Arms ^ath not given any
intelligence, warnyng, or ^clyng of his doing unto me, who upon aduertizement
given to my Lady the Duchess of Parma then Regent, did withdraw my self
(...) into this ^y County of Nass^* for certain urgent affairs of (...)
(...)* (according also as I certifyed his (...) long ago that I was minded to
do) and (...) of purpoze to flee away, or to (...) (...) head, as your Writ
conteyneth* the terms, respites, and distances were (...) short, as it was
impossible for me to be aduertized of the proclaymyng of (...) in Brusselles,
and to make my appearance there within the compass of them, and much less in
any places further of, ^ther the Duke of Alua might (...) in the mean while.
For seeing that every term and day of respit had his ^ffect: it is well known
that respect ought to be had to each of them severally, and not to ^em all three
jointly and continuingly together. And therefore to set ter^s (...) of ^eene
days a ^eece, for such a (...) as is between this and Brusselles: is nothing
else but to set out E^es* Summons, and Citations that are impossible to be
obeyed. Again, by the hndlyng up of your said respites, and by your taking
of three for one: I find that notwithstanding the great importance of the
case, and the state and calling of my person, your meaning is to proceed
against me by one only Summons, contrary to all order of justice: specially
seeing that in like caces, the proceedyng is speedy enough accor^ing to right,
when there is no more done, but the keeping of the accustomed order: which is,
that there should be no proceedyng to the peremptory day, before there have
(...) three several (...) sued out, with six days distance at the least
between Summons and Summons, and that the Judge being ^ely ^ed of the places
and hauntes where the party absent that is to be summoned abides, do appoint
the respites according to the farrenes of yt distance that he has to come.
Which thing since your Summons does not, it follows of necessity, that it is
of no value, nor any Summons at all. Of like ^ffect are all your Judicial
acts unduly and vncompete^tly done, so much the more, because your pre^ed
Citation and (...) can take no place or effect, in as much as they be done
against such a one as dwells out of the kings territory and jurisdiction,
within the bounds of the Empire, and is a member and state of the same: (the
privilege and authority whereof is s^che,) that if any withdraw^ them selves
out of it, (...) may of right be required to be sent back again, but it is
not lawful to call them out of the Empire by any Citation, or by any pre^sed
Summons, Iniunction, or Proclamation. Which thing has bin of such estimation
in (...) past, that chiefly by reason thereof, the sentence that was given by
the ^rour Henry, against Robert (...) (...) Sicilie was reuersed and (...)* the
rather because the said king (...) stood in doubt of the Emper^ (...)
accompanied with a puissant ar^y, as the duke of Alua is at this prese^ wit^ an
army of Spaniardes, bearing such good will to me as all the world ^weth. And
therefore it ought to (...) for the bewraying of the (...) of your said
Citation and Summons, specially seeing that the Duke is notoriously known to be
a more vncompetent Judge in respect of me, than the said Emperor was in
respect of the king of Sicilie: Considering that such as are knights of the
Order, can not by the Laws, Ordinances, and Constitutions thereof, be otherwise
s^moned than before the chief of the same Order, and their brethren, no not
^uen for the woorst, heynousest, and shamefullest matters that they can commyt.
Nay, there can not any man proceed to the apprehending, attaching, and
deteynyng of those knights, unless it be decreed by the advice of six of
their brethren at the least: and in such case they must be put by and by in the
custody of their own. College, and of the friendly company of their own
Order, and not be rigorously dealt withal, as our Cosins and brethren of the
same Order already apprehended, are used: which thing does also confir^e the
insufficiency of the Writ that you have sued out, and specially of the
rigorous clause of bo^yly attachment put thereinto. For seeing that man is
naturally given to (...) him self: it is not likely that we will be made to
appear among (...) men, and before such Judges, as we mistrust, and specially
to yield our selves into such prizons as are far more streyt and rigorous,
than we of duty are bound unto, or than of right belongs unto us. For of
right the Prizon should serve but only to keep the prizoner forthcommyng, and
not to (...) him from all company, (...), co^nsel, and advice: without the
which it is impossible that any case of importance should be well and duly
pleaded and defended: the which nevertheless I understand in very deed to
have bin used and to be used still toward our said Cosins and brethren of the
Order, who^ we see also to have bin fetched out of the County of Braband,
notwithstanding the express Covenants, Laws, and Conditions, whereby the same
country is bound to the obedience of the kings majesty. And I see that the
lik^ is come to pass in the person of mine own son the County of Bure,
without any regard had of his young age, and apparent innocence: which
ser^eth me for a warnyng, that the Duke of Alua means not to stand to any
couenauntes, bonds, laws, rightes, or customs, and therefore that it should
be impossible for me to obtain any discharge at his hand, though I made mine
innocence to appear never so sufficiently by like allegations.

Wherefore, and forasmuch as both by right of law, and by force of covenant,
brought in at joy full enteraunce, conteinyng the laws whereby the Duchy of
Braband (...) obedience, we which have alway^s had our dwelling place in the
^ame Duchy, have good ground to withhold and suspend all obedience which we owe
to the king, until his Majesty being better informed, have amended the things
that have bin done and attempted contrary to the said joyful entrance and in
prejudice thereof: I thought it good to aduertize you and to tell you plainly by
these prese^tes, that in respect of the reasons before alleged, we take your
said Summons and Citation for noue and of no value. Expr^y protestyng the like,
of all that shall be done and decreed by virtue and confequence of the same,
specially because of the apparaunt insufficiency of the Duke of Alua, to whom
the Commission of this case is directed in respect of his Gouernershyp and
Capteinship general over the low Countries: which protestation our will is to
have to serve for our excuze, and consequently also for our refusal in respect
of him, and so far forth as is needful besides, because we find in very
deed and by experience, that we cannot hope to obtain of him, the right which
our case shall deserve, by reason of the causes aforesaid. And we offer to
present our selves before the Emperor, the Electors, the Princes, the States,
and other the Lords of the Empire, or any other meet and unsuspected Judges,
to have the examining and deciding of our case, according to the desert of it
openly and without partiality or affection. Protestyng yet once again, yt all
is nothing, which is or shall be done, said, ordained, judged, or decreed to our
prejudice, by the said Duke of Alua, suspected and refuzed as an incompetent
Judge as is said before, or by any that shall be put in Commission for him and in
his stead. And for as much as all this serves to none other end, but to do you
to understand the said declarations, offers, and protestations: that by you and
others such regard may be had of them as is meet: I will pray to the Creator
to have you Master Attorney in his holy keepyng. Written at Dillenbourch the
third of March. 1568. Undersigned, William of Nassaw. The superscription of
it was, To Master Attorney General.

An answer sent to the Duke of Alua by the Prince of Orendge, upon the
Citation or Summons.
SIr, for as much as my doyngs No. 7.
may be a sufficient testimony, that from my youth up I have desired nothing
more, than to employ my self in the seruis, first of the late Emperor of
noble memory, and afterward of the king my Master: I have hoped that his
majesty (being aduertized from me, (like as my Lady of Parma then Regent, was
also) that I was come into this my county of Nassaw for certain very urgent
affairs of mine) would in respect of my faythfulnes, and good will, not have
ceased to have showed me so much favor, as to commau^de me wherein soever I
could have done him seruis, which I offered him continewally by my said letters
of aduertizeme^t or at leastwise that I should have understood at your hand,
that the kings Majesty was minded to have me to leave mine own affairs
here, and to return immediately thither, as well as you gave intelligence of
his majesty's mind to all other Lords, states, and Cities. But as I was still
waiting with great longyng, for his Majesty's commandments: I was aduertized
that process was gone out against me, to seize upon my Lordshyps, Lands, and
goods: and (which woors is) by Proclamation under the name of the Attorney
general, full of false and intolerable slanders: and afterward by the
apprehendyng of my son, whom I had left at Louane that he might be the better
able to serve the king and the common weal hereafter. Whereat I wondered very
much, and me thought it was right strange, that they should proceed in such
sort against a man of my calling, forgettyng so soon the great and noble
services, done as well by my predecessors and by my self, and in these last
trubbles by name. Wherefore where as I have reasons and allegations well framed
to Justify my case with all, and to clear and declare mine innocence, and
the wrong that is done me in this behalf, which I reserve till fit time and
place may serve: I thought it enough at this time to answer the Attorney
general with speed, and to lay open and to show to him the insuffi^iencie of
his Summons by other reasons which I had against the same, before the expiring
of the over hasty term that is prefixed unto me, to the end that men should
not think I felt my self gilty in any thing, or that I ^eene not to pursew my
right, so far forth as I shall find it expedient by reason. And thereof Sir,
I thought good to aduertize you also, by sendyng you Copic of the letter that I
wrate to master Attorney together with this letter, to the intent there may
be no more proceedyng or dealyng against me or mine through ignorance,
furtherforth than may be justified hereafter by order of law, whereto I hope I
shall one day have my recours. And to the end that this may not serve to any
other effect, I pray God Sir, to give unto you health and whatsoever is for
your salvation, and unto me, that my Prince may once truly understand the
sincerity of my dealings. From Dillenbourch, this third of March. 1568. The
subscription of it was, Your brother of the Order, William of Nassaw. The
superscription was, To my Lord the Duke of Aluaze grace.

The Copy of an other Letter written by the foresaid Frauncis of Alua
Ambassador for the king of Spain in France, to the Duchess of Parma. etc.
Regent: besides that which is inserted heertofore in the page. 106. No. 6.
MAdame, the aduertizeme^t which your highness has given me of the affairs
where you are, has confirmed the opinion which I have always had: namely that
this stir was never made without the knowledge and supporta^ce of the
greatest, and specially of the three He meeneth the Prince of Orendge, the
County of Egmond, and the County of Horn.
which make so fair countenance. For as your highness has considered with
great care and discretion: you must also believe that all the mischief
spryngeth of them three. I have not failed to aduertize the kings Majesty of
all things, and specially of that matter. And I am sure that whereas your
highness has informed his Majesty of them, you shall not need to handle
them as they should be, and according to your own information: for they may be
well assured, that they shall be the first whom his Majesty will deal with: not
to show them favor, for they be not worthy of it: but to punish and correct
them as their rebellion deserves. Therefore your hyghnes shall not need to
give them any evil countenance, or to make any show of misliking, for fear
of marring the matter: But you must hold them still in hope that the kings
Majesty takes them for his faithful servants: and that will stand us in
great stead. For, by causing them to believe so, you shall overtake them the
eassyer. But when the time comes, you shall talk to them in an other manner of
language. And your highness must assure your self, that if your will be good
to make them receive the payment that they have deserved: his Majesty will be no
less willing to do what soever is needful in that behalf.

Also Madame, to aduertize you in what assurance we be of succor in France,
according to the instructions that you gave me: I must be feign to tell your
highness, that we have promises enough made us, but I fear me they will stand
us in no great stead, and in the end all will turn to bare words, because they
have not their own wills, nor are able to help us as they promise, by reason
that the Hugonotes heerawayes are strong and do make head. I will not fail to
do what may be done, and to aduertize your highness thereof upon all
occasions. But in any wise I beseech you to behave your self very cunnyngly
toward the three persons whom I have named unto you. And so etc.

From Paris the xxix. of August, 1566.
Letters of the Prince of Orendgis to the Regent.
MAdame, I have received the letters These are the letters with the kings
resolu tion sent abrod by the Regent, the 18. of December. 1565. No. 2. fo. 77.
which it has pleased your highness to write unto me, together with the
Counselles letters, concerning my government: whereby I understand the kings
majesty's intent, consistyng in three points, which he commands me very
expressly to cause to be executed in all places of my gouernmente. Now
although Madame, that mine advice is not asked in the matter being of so great
weight and importance: yet notwithstanding as a faithful servant and subject
to his majesty, being moved with a zealous desire to satisfy the duty of my
calling and oath, I could not forbear to say mine opinion freely and frankly,
choozing rather to adventure the gainyng of displeazure at the present for mine
aduertisementes and informations, than to be noted and blamed hereafter as an
unfaithful, negligent, and careless Governor, for my wi^king and silence, to
the defamation and desolation of the Country.

First, as touching the puttyng of the The Council of Trent
Council in execution, although there were some mislikyng and grudging at it at
the beginning: yet notwithstanding, in as much as some qualifications have bin
added to it afterward, I be^eue there will be little sticking in that behalf.
And as for the reformation of the Clergy, and other Ecclesiastical ordinances:
seeing they belong not to my vocation, I refer them to such as have the charge
of them, intendyng to satisfy the kings majesty's commandment, as need
shall require.

As touching the second point, which The Inquisition.
conteyneth that the Gouerners, Counselors, and other Officers should favor
the Iuquisitours to the uttermost of their power, and maynteyne them in the
authority that belongs to them by the law of God and man, and which they
have inioyed unto this day.

It may please your highness to remember, that the complaints, strifes, and
quarrels that have been moved through the whole Country here for the
stablishyng of Bishops, have risen upon nothing else, but for fear least some
form of Inquisition should be brought in under that pretense. So odious and
yrksome is, not on^ye the execution, but also the very name of it.

Besides this, it may please your highness to understand, (for it is clear and
manifestly known to the most part of the kings majesty's subjects, and
specially to al men of any good countenance and calling hereawayes) that both
the Emperors majesty Mary Queen of Hungary.
and also Queen Mary, have oftentimes assured the inhabitants, as well by
word as by writing, that the Inquisitio^ should not be brought into the low
Countries: but that they should be mainteyned and ruled as they had bin of all
ancient time before. Yea and even the kings majesty that now is, to the intent
to put that imagination out of the peoples heads, has ofttymes made the like
assurance him self.

And undoubtedly Madame, the said assurances and promises have kept his
majesty's subjects and other dwellers here from falling into any alteration,
and caused many men of good wealth and countenance to forbear the alienating
of their goods, and the seeking of any other places where they might live
without fear of any Inquisition. And so consequently they have bin a mean to
maintain the union, tranquillity, trade of Merchandise, and supply of the most
part of the treasures for the maintenance of the wars: whereas else the
Country being made bare both of inhabitants, men, and money, had bin
abandoned as a pray to whosoever had listed to lay hold of it.

As touching the third point, whereby his majesty wylleth and commands
expressly, The Injunctions, Proclamations, Decrees, or Edictes.
that the Injunctions or Edictes made as well by the Emperor, as by him self,
should in all points and articles be kept, followed, and executed, with all
rigor, and without any qualification or winkyng at them.

Madame, (to my seemyng) that likewise is a very hard point, because the
Injunctions are many and diverse, and have been limited, qualified, and
restrained now and then heretofore, and not pursued with rigor: in so much
that they were not so sharp even in the time of the universal misery, as they
be now, another were our people so much inclyned to innovation, as they be now
by the instigation and practizes of our neighbors.

Wherefore, to use more extremity presently, and all at one instant to renew the
Inquisition more vehemently, and to proceed on to execution with all
severity: surely Madame, I can not see how the kings majesty shall wyn
aught else by it, than to put him self to pain, and the Country to trouble,
with the loss of his good subjects hearts, by making every man mistrust, that
his majesty intends to go an other way to work than he has always
assured them of and pretended, and to hazard the puttyng of all things into
his neyghbors hands, as well by vnpeoplyng of the Countr^y by such as will
forsake it, as by reason of the small trust that can be repozed in them that
shall remain, and al without any profit or redress of Religion.

To avoid tediousness, I omyt the alledgyng of many inconveniences in this
behalf, because I know that both his majesty and your highness have bin
aduertized of them at large already. Moreover, (I speak it under correction)
me thynkes the time is very unfit to stir the brains and humors of the
people, which is too much disquieted and troubled already with the present
scarsitie and dearth of corn. It were much better (in mine opinion) to
defer and let all alone, until his majesty's coming, who is said to be in
preparyng him self hytherwarde. And I would to God he were so steaded, as he
might be here with speed, to the intent that by his presence such order might
be taken, as should be expedient for the service of God and his majesty, and
for the rest and quietness of his Countries and subjects here. For in caces
of trouble, things would be remedyed more readyly by his presence than
otherwise.

Howbeit, if his majesty and your highness be still at one stay, and fully
bent to have all the said points followed to the full: for as much as I see
clearly and before mine eyes, that it ca^ not be now executed without great
hazard of the ruin of the whole Country, (which it may be that his majesty
would have regard of, if he were here:) If it be so that your highness will
not defer the Inquisition till then, but will needs persist in the present
executyng thereof: I had lever that his majesty should put some other in my
place, that can better skyll of the peoples humors, and is better able than I
to keep them in peace and quietness: than to incur the shame that may
light upon me and mine, if any inconvenience should fall upon the Country,
under my government, and during my charge.

And his majesty and your highness may well assure your selves, that I say
not this because I am loath to follow his commandments, or desirous to live
otherwise than as a good Christian: for my former doings can well bear
witness thereof, and I hope his majesty has well perceived by experience,
that I have never spared either body or goods to do him service, wherein my
desire is to continue still all my life long. Besides this, if the affairs of
the Country should go otherwise than well, I would (for my duetyes sake to
his majesty and my native soil) I would (I say) adventure not only all the
goods that I have in the world, but also mine own person, my wife, and my
children, whom even nature wylleth me to preserve and keep. Wherefore I
beseech you, let it please your highness to have regard of it according to
your tried and accustomed discretion, and to take this mine information in good
part, as proceedyng from one that speaks of earnest affection and good will,
to do his majesty seruis, and to prevent all inconveniences* whereof I take
God to witness, whom (having commended my self most humbly to the good grace
of your highness) I beseech to give you long and good life in health.

From Brusselles, the. xxiiij. day of Ianuarye. 1565. according to the
Computation of Braband. According to the computatio^ of the Empire, it is. 1566.

The Regentes answer to the Princes Letter.
MY good cousin, I have received your two Letters of the xvi. e. of this
present No. 8.
month, by the one of which you excuse your self of your not coming hither
as you would have done. And by the other you put me in mind of the
declarations which you have made to me at other times, concerning the
inconveniences that might rise of the three points which my Lord the king has
commanded, which I remember very well. And since that time (as I am informed)
the discontentement and grudging of the people is growe^ in such wise, as I am
done to understand by diverse aduertizementes coming to me daily from good
places, that the said inconveniences are tootoo apparent, and eue^ at the point
to show themselves to open sight. Which thing caused me to think it meet and
expedient, to assemble the Gouerners, (as I have done) to be here upon Monday
or Tewsday next at the furthest, that by their help I may consult of such
things as shall be most expedient for the preuentyng of the said inconveniences,
or for the good service of the king, for the peace and tranquillity of his
countries, and for the safety of his vassals, subjects and inhabitants. And I
know your affection and zeal toward his Majesty's affairs and in the
behalf of the Country to be such, as I assure my self that you will not
fail (all other matters set aside and omitted) to be here at the same time:
which I pray you heartily good Cousin to do, for to that end does this letter
purposely come unto you. And I pray the Creator to grant you the thing that
you would most desire of him. From Brussels the xix. day of March. 1565.
Accorling to the o^mon rec^ening, it ^as. 1566.
It was underwritten. Your good Cousin: and signed, Margaret: and further
countersigned, Berty. And the superscription was, To my good Cousin the Prince
of Orendge, Cou^tie of Nassaw, Knight of the Order, and Gouerner of the Cou^tie
of Burgon, and of the Countries of Holland, Zeland, and Vtreyght.

Extractes of certain points co^prized No. 9.
in the Injunctions, and ordinances set forth in the low Countries in the case
of Religion. And first of the general Iniunction or Edict made and decreed by
the Emperor Charles, the. xxij. of September, the year. 1540. which was made
after the pattern of an other as rigorous as that, which came forth in the
year. 1531.
FOr as much as in consideration
aforesaid, we be desirous to the uttermost of our power, to pluck up,
abolish, and root out the said condemned and disallowed sects, errors, and
heresies, and to keep our subjects in the fear of God, and in the true
obedience of our said holy Catholic faith, and likewise in awe of our mother
holy Church: we upon great and substantial deliberation with our Counsel, and
by the advice of our right dear and well-beloved sister the Queen Dowager of
Hungary and Beam. etc. Rege^t and Gouernesse of our Countries here, and also
by the advice of our cheef Cou^selers, have of our own will and certain
knowledge ordained and decreed, and do ordeyne and decree for an everlasting
Statute and Law, as follows.

First, that no person of what state, degree, or calling so^uer he be, shall
have, sell, give, carry, read, preach, teach, maynteine, talk of, nor dispute
of, either secretly or openly, the doctrines, writings, or books that are
made or shall be made by Martin Luther, Ioh. Wickliffe, John Husse, Marcil of
Padua, Oecolampadius, Vlrichus Zuinglius, Philip Melancthon, Frauncis Lambert,
John Pomerane, Otto Brunfelsius, Iustus Jonas, John Puper, and Gorcian, or by
any other authors of their sect, or by any other heretics and (...): or the
errors disallowed by the Church, or the doctrine of their adherentes,
favorers, and accomplices: no nor even the new Testame^ts Printed by Adrian of
Bergues, Christopher of R^mo^d, and John Zell, [nor these Latin books
followyng, videl.] The phrases of holy Scripture, The Interpretation of the
Chaldey names, Vadians Abridgement of Topographie, The Paralippomenon or
Chronicles of things worthy of rememberance, The story of the original of the
Garmanes, The Co^me^taries upon the Poetry of Pythagoras, Walcurioze
Commentaries upon Aristotle's Phisikes, The works of Eobanus Hessus, Griphies
Prayers upon the Lords Prayer, The Method upon the cheef places of Scripture,
The Cathechizin of Erasmus Sarcerius, The same man's Scholies upon the Gospels
of Matthew Mark and Luke, The same ma^s Postilles upon all the Sondayes
Gospelles through the whole year, Also of the manner of learning Divinity, Of
the framyng of a man's life, and of the reformation of manners. Christopher
Hegendorphius exhortation, The same man's instruction of Christen youth, with an
exposition of the Lords Prayer, Philip (...) abridgement of Chronicles both in
Latin and in Duche, Sebastian Munsters Annotations upon Saint Mathewes
Gospel, and the Enterludes played not long ago in our City of Gaunt by the
nineten places of Rhetoric, upon this question, what is the greatest
comfort to a man that is at the point to dye: nor any other books written or
printed within these xviij. years last past, without declaryng of the author,
printer, time, and place nor likewise the new Testament, the Gospels, the
Epistles, the Prophesies, or any other books in French or Duche containing
Prefaces, Prologes, Appostils, or glozes, sauoryng of doctrines disallowed,
repugnant, or contrary to our holy Catholic faith, or to the Sacraments, or
to the commandments of God or of the Church.

Also that no man shall peynt or cause to be peynted or portrayed, or hold,
have, or keep any Images, portraitures, or pictures, to the reproach or
disgracyng of the virgin Marie, or of the saints that are canonized by the
church: nor also break, deface, or pull down the Images made or hereafter to
be made in the honor or rememberance of them: and that if any body have any
such books peyntyngs in his hands or keepyng, he burn them incontinently.

Upon pain (in case that any be found to have done against any of the points
above declared,) to be executed, that is to say, the me^ by the sword, and the
women That is to wit, by burning of them quick.
by the pit so they do not maintein and defend their errors: but if they stand
in those errors and heresies, then they shall be executed by the fire: and in
all caces their goods shall be confiscate to our behofe.

And we will and declare, that from the day wherein the said heretics shall be
fallen into their errors, they shall be unable to dispoze of their go^des: and
all alienatio^s, gifts, co^ueyances, sales, settyngs over, Testamentes, and
last bequestes by will, made by them after such times, shall be as nothing and of
none effect.

Furthermore we obtain and decree it for a perpetual statute and law, as
before, that no man shall presume to hold or suffer in his house or else where,
any co^enticles or meetings, or to talk or dispute of holy Scripture,
(specially in matters hard and doutfull) or to read the same holy Scripture to
others, or to preach it: unless they be Divines allowed by some famous
University, or admitted thereto by the ordinary of the place: under like
penalty.

Also that no man shall Print or cause to be Printed, or otherwise put forth any
book, that treats or makes mention of the holy Scripture, or that in any
wise touches our holy faith and the constitutio^s of the Church: unless it be
first ouerseene by the ordinary of the place, and that he have gotten our
grant and license to Print it: under like penalty.

Moreover we ordeine and decree, that no man of what state or calling so ever
he be, shall presume to lodge, receive, in^ine, or favor any heretics, or
Anabaptists, and that all such as shall have lodged, received, interteined, or
favored them, knowing them to be such* shall come and bewray and accuze them to
the officer of the place (if it be a privileged place): or else (if it be not)
to the cheef officer of the good town next to the place where they dwell:
under pain of being punished as heretics.

And because we be desirous to come to the knowledge of the said heresies,
errors, and abuses: we inact and decree, that the accuzers and bewrayers of
them shall have the one moitie of their goods that are so bewrayed and accuzed
before their misusage do appear, and they dewly convicted thereof:
condicionally that the said goods pass not the sum of one hundred pounds
Flemishe of the great: for if they pass that sum, then shall they have but
the tenth penny of that which the said goods amount unto above it, the costs
and charges in the law first deducted.

And to ye end that our Justices and Officers which shall have apprehended the
said Heretics or Anabaptists, may not have occasion to bear with them,
their accomplices and fautors, or to punish them less than they deserve, under
pretense that the punishementes may seem to great and rigorous, and to have
bin set but only for the terror of offe^ders, as we see it comes oftentimes
to pass. We will and command that whosoever violateth this our ordinance, by
keepyng, printyng, sellyng, distributyng, or setting forth any books,
writings, or images, that are heretical or offe^siue, or otherwise against
the points above declared, or any of the^: shall be punished and corrected
indifferently by the peynes before me^cioned. Forbiddyng all our Judges,
Officers, and Justices, to alter, qualify, or change the same punishments in
any manner of wise: and [chargyng them] only to denounce the said penalties and
punishments upon them, as soon as they shall perceive them to have violated
any of the said points: under penalty to be deprived of their rooms and
offices, and to be denounced unable to bear any Office for ever after, and
moreover to be corrected for it at our pleasure. And we command all our
Officers to aduertize us or our said sister the Queen, when our Judges,
Headborowes, Alderme^, or any others having the examination of such offenders,
do make nyce to follow this our decree, and to denounce the said penalties:
that we may proceed against the^ by the self same punishments.

Furthermore we decree, that if any man chance to know any place where any
heretic or Anabaptist does secretly lurk: he shall be bound to bewray it to
the officer of that place, upon pain to be taken for a fa^rer, harbrowgher,
and adh^ent of the heresy wherewith the person so hidden is infected, and to
be punished with the same pain that the hidden person should be punished
withal, if he were caught.

And because that heretofore when some Heretics or Anabaptists being
appeached and cited, have gotten them selves out of the Country, and shrunk
a^de or hid them selves in some secret place* there could be no proceedyng
against the^ by any other convenient punishment tha^ only by banishment: and
that such heeryng that their compli^es and adherentes were dead or executed, so
as it was not possible for ye officer to prove sufficiently that they were
rebaptized or heretics, did upon hope and confidence thereof some forth daily,
and make suit to get leave to pu^ge them selves, or to get some other benefit
of law: w^he thing ministered (...) of delay of Justice, and made the heretics
and Anabaptists bold to return into our countries, and there to sow abroad
their errors and false doctrines, to the great pe^ill, offense, and prejudice
of our said countries and subjects: We myndyng to provide for it, do forbid
the cheef Justices of our high Courts, and the Presidents of our provincial
Counselles, to give, grant, or cause to be sealed to such as are suspected and
appeached for (...) or Anabaptists, and ha^yng bin once cyted by order of law,
appear not, but suffer themselves to be banished through their own
wilfulness,) any protection of law to stand to their purgation, or otherwize
to frequent our said countries. And we denounce, that such fugitives and
banishe^d ^olke shall be taken for convicted, and that process shall go out
against them under the peynes aforesaid.

Besides this, we forbid all men of
what state or condition so ever they be, (under pain of being taken for
favorers of heretics,) to offer unto us or our counselors, having power to
pardon, any Supplication for the said fugitives, banished men, rebaptized, or
otherwise defamed, or having bin noted of the said disallowed sects, to (...)
grace for their mis^sages, errors, and heresies: for we will not that any grace
shall be granted them, upon pain of being disabled for ever, to have or
execute any charge or office in our Countries, and moreover to be punished at
our pleasure. Likewise also we forbid all Advocates, Proc^ors, Clerks,
Apprentizes, and Sollicitors, to indite, write, or prefer any such
Supplications under like pain.

All which points and articles we
will and command to be kept and observed inuiolably for ever, according to
their form and tenor. And to the end that every man may have knowledge
thereof, we will you to proclayme all these things incontinently and without
delay, in the places where Proclamations are wont to be made: and that you
proceed and cause others to proceed against such as withstand or disobey,
with all rigorous execution of the penalties before declared, and without any
favor, dissembling, or winkyng at them: notwithstanding any replication or
appeal, made or to be made, or any Privileges, Ordinances, Statuts Customs,
or vsages to the contrary: al which, our will and pleasure is to have to take
no place in this behalf: but of our own ^ayne knowledge, authority, and full
power, we have disanulled them, and do disanul them by these presents.

And for the performance of that which
is said, and of the things dependyng thereupon, we give unto you our
Justices, Officers, and men of Law, to who^ this case belongs, full power,
authority, and special Commission: commaundyng and charging every man to obey
you, and to attend diligently upon you, in the doing thereof: For so is our
pleasure.

Secondly, of the perpetual Decree No. 9.
and Edict, ordained and set forth the. 29. day of April. 1550. after the
making of other rigorous Decrees, in the years. 1544. and. 1546.
FIrst, that no person of what estate
or condition soever he be, shall print, write, copy out, wittingly have under
him, receive, bear about, keep, conceal, hold under him, sell, ^wy, give,
distribute, sow abroad, or let fall in Churches, streets, or other places, any
books or writyngs compyled by Martin Luther, John Oecolampadius, Vlrichus
Zuinglius, Martin Bucer, John Calvin, or other heretics and authors of their
sects, or of other wicked and false sects, disallowed by the holy Church, or
of their accomplices, adherents, and favorers, which are gone astray from our
holy Catholic faith, more largely specified in a certain Declaration, and In
that they forbid in manner al Bibles and Testamentes, saving the Latin ones: and
therein are contained an infinite number of books, and among other, the books
of Melancthon, Carolostadius, Coruine, Sarcer, Lambert, Bullinger, Agrippa,
Wick^e, Husse, Pomerane, Jonas, Pupper, Brentius, Spangenberg, (...), Epin,
Martyr, Vrbane, Musculus, and Bucer.
Register joined herunto, newly made at our commandment, by the Chauncelour
and the Students of the university of our City of Louane, dated the xxvi. of
March last, which we auow our selves to have authorized, and do authorize it:
willing and commaundyng that it be followed, maynteyned, and published with
these our present Letters: and also that no other books made or printed, or
that shall be made or printed hereafter, (be suffered) without declaryng the
author, Printer, time, and place.

Nor also paynt, or cause to be painted, sell, or set to sale, have, hold, or
keep any Images, Pictures, or figures reprochful to the virgin Mary, or to the
Saints that are Canonized by the holy Church, or to the state of the Clevgie:
nor break, deface, or pull down the Images and Pictures that are made in the
honor of them.

Nor in their houses or else where hold or suffer to be held, any secret
conuenticles or undue assemblies, nor come in place where the said heretics
and seducers do secretly and privily sow and teach their errors, rebaptize,
and make many conspiracies against holy Church and the common weal.

Furthermore, we for^ all men, as well lay folk as others, to talk or to
reazon, openly or secretly, of the holy scripture, specially in great and
doubtful matters: or to read or teach the holy Scripture to others: unless
they be Divines brought up in Divinity, and allowed by some famous
Uniuersitis, or admitted thereto by the Ordinarye of the place: or finally to
preach, defend, allege, or mainteyn openly or secretly, any doctrine of the
said Authors.

Upon pain (in case that any be found to have incountred or done against
any of the points above mentioned) of being punished as seditious persons and
distrublers of the state and common weal, and to be executed for such: that
is to wit, the men by the sword, and the women by the pyt, so they do not
uphold and defend their errors: but if they stand in their errors, opinions,
and heresies, then they shall be executed by the fire, and in all caces their
goods shall be seized, confiscate, and forfeyted to our behoof, and they shall
not be able to dispoze of their goods from the day that they shall have done
against our ordinance, statute, and prohibition, or bin falue into the said
errors. And all alienations, gifts, conueyances, sales, settinges over,
Testamentes, and last wills, made or passed by them after the said day, shall be
as none, and nothing worth, and of none effect nor force.

Further, we decree, and prohibit every person (of what state or calling so
ever he be) to presume to harbor, receive into his house, interteyne, furnishe,
or succor with any victuals, money, apparel, or other necessaries, or to
relieve with his goods, or otherwise wittingly to favor any that has bin
counted or suspected for an heretic: and that al such as shall lodge, harbor,
receive, or keep company with them (knowing them to be such) shall be bound to
bewray and declare them to the Inquisitor, or to the Officer of the place, if
the place be privileged, or if it be not, to the chief Officer of the good
town that is next the place where they dwell: under pain (if they make
default) to be punished as favorers of the said heretics.

Item, we will, ordeyne, and decree, that no man of what state or calling so
ever he be, shall be admitted or received into any town or village of our
Countries hereawayes, to dwell there, unless he bring a Certificat of his
conversation from the Curate of the place where he dwelt last: which Certificat
he shall be bound to exhibit and deliver into the hands of the chief Officer
of the Town or village where he intends to live: under pain, that they
which bring not such certificat, shall not be admitted to dwell there, but
shall be taken for suspected. And we command our Officers to lay diligently for
informations against them, and to proceed therein as shall be expedient. And it
shall not be lawful for our said Officers to give any respite or protection to
such persons.

Also we will that all our Justices, officers, and men of Law, together with
our vassalles and subjects, Lords temporal, and high Justices, shall upon
pain of forfeytyng of their Offices, Jurisdictions, and high Iusticeships, or
other penalty, at our pleazure, according as the case shall require: be bound
to inquire diligently of them, and to proceed, or cause their under Officers
to proceed against all such persons, of what state or calling so ever they
be, specially in the point of incounteryng of our said ordinance, and in
matters falling within the compass of their examination, and dependyng upon
their temporal jurisdiction. And further that at the request and desire of the
Inquisitors of the faith, and of the Bishops ordinary Judges, (being minded to
proceed together or as they chance to meet, against any man, because the thing
concerns the Ecclesiastical crime of heresy) they shall minister and give
them all the aid, favor, and assistence that they can, for the executyng and
performyng of their charges, and also for the appreh^nding, imprisonyng, and
safekeeping of such as they find to be infected, according to the Which was
very large and marvelous ^gorous.
instructions that the Inquisitors have of us, and the commission that we have
caused to be granted unto them to the same end. The which Officers, Justices,
and vassals, we co^ma^nd to minister the said aid and assistence without any
delay or lingryng, under pretense of any suit hangyng, prevention, or other
occasion what soever: Chargyng our Attorneys general, and their deputies, to
proceed against such as are negligent, and to procure sentence against them,
to the end they may be deprived of their rooms, offices, and authority of
jurisdiction, and have such other punishment as shall be found requisite according
to the state of the case.

Item, that whosoever knows or understands of any that is infected of
heresy, shall be bound to bewray, discover, and name him incontinently without
delay, and to give knowledge of him to the Inquisitors, or to the officers of
the Bishops, and in their absence to the pastors and Curates of the Churches,
that they may aduertize their superiors thereof.

Again, if any man be found to have done against our ordinances and
prohibitions, showing him self to be infected, or a fa^orer of heretics, or a
dooer of any act against our said ordinances and prohibitions, specially
tendyng to offense, commotion of the people, or sedition: (We will) that all
such as have knowledge or understanding of them, shall be bound to aduertize
our Attorneys thereof incontinently, or their substitutes and Deputies, or the
Officers of the place where such infected persons the favorers of them, or
offen^ers dwell. Likewise, if they perceive where any such heretics abide and
hyde them selves, they shall be bound to bewray them to the Officer of the place,
upon (as is ^ayd before) to be taken for fa^orers, re^eyuers, and adherentes of
their heresy, and to be punished with the same punishment that the heretic or
offender should be, if he were taken.

In the same Decree, among other things,
are rehearsed and repeated the words and substance of the seven po^ntes and
articles of the Decree going before, marked at the beginning with such a Cross.

Thirdly the general and perpetual No. 9.
Decree and Edict made and proclaimed the XXV. of September. 1550. and renewed
and confirmed by the king in the years. 1556. 60. 64. etc.
FUrthermore we prohibit all men both lay folks and others, to talk All the
Injunctions or Edictes made for here^e, are found together in the book of the
statutes of the Low Countries, printed at Gaunt.
or dispute of holy Scripture, openly or privily, specially in matters hard and
doutfull: or to read, teach, declare, or expound the same Scripture to other
men unless they be Divines, and graduates and allowed in Divinity or in the
Canon law by some famous Uni^ersitie, or be admitted thereto by the ordinary of
the place. Provided always, yt this shall not be meant of such as talk or
co^ferre simply and sincerely together of the holy Scripture, alledgyng the
expositio^s of the holy and allowed Doctors thereupon: but of such as mainteyne
and teach propositions and doctrines that are false and leawd and manifestly
taken for heresies, contrary to the ordinance of our mother the holy Church, of
purpose to seduce others by teaching them things forbidden. And [we prohibit
them] also to preach, defend, say, or uphold, openly or secretly, any doctrine
of the authors before named.

Under pain, that if any be found to have incountred or done against any of
the points before declared, they shall be punished as seditious persons and
disturbers of our state, and of the quiet of the common weal, and so executed,
that is to wit, the men by the sword, and the women by the Pit, so they do
not maynteine and defend their errors: but if they stand in their opinions,
errors, and heresies then they shall be executed by fire: and in all caces their
goods shall be seized, confiscate, and forfeyted to our behofe.

And whereas by our late decrees in our former Injunctions, we have ordained
that from the day wherein they shall have done against them or fallen into the
said errors, they shall be unable to dispoze of their goods, and that all
alienations, gifts, co^ueyances, sales, settings over, Testaments and last
wills made and passed by them after the said day, shall stand void and be of
no force or effect: we do you to understand, that our meening was not (as some
have listed to say and brute abrod) by any means to impeache the subjects of
our Countries in their lawful traffike and bargayning with strangers, so as
they might not freely dispoze of their goods, according to the law written, and
according to the customs of the place respectively: but only to pr^ue^t such
as would do it fraudulently, to eschew the penalties of our Statutes, and
thereby discharge themselves of the fear which they ought to have of the
punishment for their misdealyng or doing against them. And therefore our intent
is only to provide for Gods service, their own welfare, and the health of
their souls, that they might not be sed^ced, nor directly or indirectly drawn
or led into any wicked and disallowed errors: wherein we show the office of a
good Prince.

Also we decree and prohibit furthermore, that no person of what state or
calling soever he be, shall presume to lodge to receive into his house, to
intertein to furnish or serve with vittelles, necessaries or money, or
otherwise to help with his goods, or willingly to favor any that have bin
taken or notoriosly suspected for (...): and that all such as shall lodge,
receive, or intertei^e the^, (knowing that them to be such, and that they go
about to seduce or infect themselves or others openly or privily) shall be bound
to bewray and prefer them to the Ecclesiastical Judges, or to the Officer of
the place (if it be privileged), or else to the chief officer of the good town
next the place where they dwell: upon pain (for so making default) to be
punished as favorers of heretics. Provided always that this prohibition
shall not touch any Inkeepers, or any other me^ that receive and lodge such as
come into our said countries for traffike or other buzinesse of their own, of
what country so ever they be: Saving that such strangers must not encounter
this our Decree, but behave the^ selves so as they give no offense: and if they
do, then if their hosts do not bewray them and accuze them, as is said before:
we decree and denounce that they shall fall into the penalties above mentioned.

Also for as much as many of our countries being suspected of heresy, and
specially of Anabaptistrie, do change their dwellynges, to infect the simple
people in places where their disposition is unknown: we to provide therefore,
do^ will, ordeyne, and decree, that no person of the inhabitants of our low
countries, of what state, quality, or condition soever he be, shall be admitted
or received into any town or village of those countries to dwell there, unless
he bring a certificat from the Curate of the place where he dwelt before, which
Certificat he shall be bound to exhibit and deliver into the hands of the chief
officer of the town or village where he intends to dwell, upon pain, that
they which bring not such Certificat, shall not be admitted to abide there. And
we charge our officers to seek diligent informatio^ against them, and to
proceed as shall be expedient: and it shall not be lawful for our said officers,
or for the peculiar Lords, or for their officers, to give license or pasport
to any such persons. And as touching merchant strangers and others that list
to come into our said low countries, our meaning is, not to compel the^ to
bring such Certificat with the^, or to exhibit it, saving that they must live
there according to our said ordinances, and behave themselves without giuyng
cause of offense, as is said before.

Also we will that al our Justices, officers, and men of law, and al our vassals
and subjects, Lords temporal and high Justices shall (upon forfeyture of their
offices, iu^dictions, and Justice ships, or upon other penalty, at our
pleasure, according to ye state of the case) be bound to make diligent search,
and to proceed, or to cause their officers to proceed, to the verifying of ye
matters aforesaid against al persons, of what state or calling soever they be,
specially in the things that concern the incounteryng of our said ordinances,
and in the caces that belong to their examination, and depend upon their
temporal jurisdiction.

Moreover, when the Ecclesiastical Judges mean to proceed against any man,
because he is faulty iu the ecclesiastical crime of heresy: they shall
require of the officers of our chief Courts or prouincial Councels, to have
some one of their company or other assistent appointed the^ to be at the
informations and procedings which they intend to prefer against such as are
suspected. And we will, co^ma^nd, and inioyne al our officers, Justices, and
vassals, to yield and to give to the said Judges, and their fellow
Commisioners, all the help, favor, furtherance, and assistence that they
can, for the executyng and performing of their charge, and also in the
apprehendyng imprisonyng, and keepyng of such as they shall find infected,
without delay or impediment under pretense of any suit hanging, preue^tion or
other occasion whatsoever under pain to be corrected at our pleazure. And we
command our Attourneyes general and theirdeputies, to proceed against such
as are negligent, and to procure sentence upon them, to the end they may be
deprived of their rooms and offices, and of the privileges of their
jurisdictions, and receive such other punishments* as shall be found meet
according as the case requires.

Ite^, that all such as know or understand of any that are infected with
heresy, shall be bound to bewray, utter, name, and give knowledge of them
immediately without delay, to the ecclesiastical judges, the Bishops officers,
and others to whom the matter belongs. Also that if any man be found to have
don against our decrees and prohibitio^s, showing himself to be infected or a
fauorer of heretics, or to have done any act against our ordinances and
commandments, specially tending to offense, co^motion of the people, or
sedition: they that know the^ or understand of the^, shall be bound to give
intelligence of the^ out of hand to our Attourneys, or to their deputies and
under officers, or to the officers of y^ place, where such infected persons
offenders or favorers of them do well, and that under pain of being punished at
our pleasure.

Likewise if they know ye place where any such heretic lies hid, they shall be
bound to bewray him to the officer of yt same place upon pain to be taken (as
is said before) for favorers, receivers, and adherentes of the heresy, and to
be punished with the same punishment that the heretic or offender should be,
if he were apprehended.

And to the end that the said Justices, and officers which shall have aprehe^ded
such heretics, Anabaptists, and tra^sgressors of oursaid ordinances and
co^mau^deme^ts, may have no occasion to bear with the^, their accomplices, and
favorers, under pretense yt the punishments may seem to great and rigorous,
and set out but only to terrify offe^ders and evil doers: nor also to punish
them less grievously tha^ they have deserved, as has bin found to have bin
done oftentimes heertofore: we will that such as shall wittingly have done
against this ordinance, by keeping to the^ selves, or by printyng, sellyng,
distributyng, or puttyng forth any books, writings, or pictures that are
heretical and offe^siue, or otherwise against the points heertotore declared or
any of the^: shall be really punished, corrected and chastized with the
punishme^tes above mentioned.

Prohibityng all Judges, Justices, and officers, together with our vassals and
subjects, Lords temporal having, authority of Justice, and their officers,
to alter, mitigate, or change the said punishments, in any wise and
co^mau^ding the^ that as soon as any wtstandyng appears, they utter and
denounce the said punishment simply according to this decree: upon pain to be
rigorously punished, unless that for some great and notable consideratio^s, ye
judges find some hardness in the case about the preeize execution of the
punishment that is appointed by our said decrees against the tra^sgressour: in
which case, notwithstanding, they shall not of their own authority proceed
to any qualification, but be bound to carry or se^d the same crime in all
process faithfully, folded up and sealed, to the cheef or provincial Counsel,
under the Jurisdiction whereof they shall resort together to be there looked
upon, ouersene, and cou^seled, whither there be fall any alteration or
mitigatio^ of the said penalties, or no. And if any of our said Counselles
find that any alteration or mitigation is requisite by good Justice and
according to right and reason, wherewith we charge their consciences: In such
case they may be well aduized thereof, and put it in writing, and se^d it whole
back again to the said Justices and officers to dispatch and determine y^
case according thereunto. Nevertheless we charge and command the^ expressly, yea
and even upon pain to be corrected and punished at our pleasure, that they
cause not such co^sultatio^ to be had, without great and apparent cause: but
that they deal (as far as they can, even to the uttermost) according to the
tenor of this present d^ret.

In the same Edict, among other things, were inserted word for word, the
three first points or Articles contained in the former Edict, and marked there
at their begynnynges with a dubble Cross.
.

Likewise there were rehearsed and repeated
the words and substance of all the points and Articles noted and marked in
the said Edict of. 1540, with a single (...), saving that which has a
star added to the Cross thus. *


The Articles of Agreement made with the noblemen that were the Confederates
by the Rege^t in the kings name the xxiij. day of August, and afterward put at
large into her letters of Assurance set down heretofore page 99. where the
beginning of it is touched also.
Her highness caused the ge^tleme^ that No. 4.
had put up the supplication unto her, to return to the xx. of August to
receive answer to their demaundes during which time it fell out so well, that
she received letters from the kings majesty whereby she was the better
enabled to give them certain and absolute answer.

And first of all she declares, that his majesty having regard of y^ things
that her highness has showed unto him, is contented upon the advice of his
lords, y^ knights of the Order, and others as well of his Counsels of estate, as
of his privy Counsel, that the Inquisition whereof they complain, shall
cease.

Secondly his majesty co^senteth that a new Edict should be made, but he was
not resolved whether it should be done by mean of the states in general, or
no. Nevertheless her highness hoped, that she should shortly have his full
resolution therein, according as his majesty had written to her. And she would
willingly do her indeuer still at al times, that his majesty might vout^afe to
co^descend to y^ things aforesaid, as he had done by his letters again.

And as touching the assurance whereof they made mention in their last suit: her
highness was determined to give it them, so far forth as lay in her: And as
now she was able to put the^ out of all doubt, for as much as his majesty
had consented hereunto, and given her authority concerning the manner and form
of it, as she should find it convenient. Wherefore she said and declared unto
them, that his majesty abhorryng nothing more than rigor, and being desirous
by his accustomed cleme^cie to put them all out of suspicion, which might
think that he was misinformed of the^, and to discharge the^ of ye mistrust
which had caused those troubles, was contented that her highness should for
the pacifying of al inco^ueniences, make the^ al kynds of letters that might
serve to that purpoze, and in such form as she should perceive to be most
for their safety, for what soever was past: Co^ditionally that henceforth they
behaved themselves like good and loyal vassals and subjects toward his
majesty. which thing her highness hops that they will not fail to do, as
becomes them, like as she was ready to accept their presentment.

And now, for as much as they have full and whole satisfaction made unto them:
her highness will not refuze ye offer that they had made diverse times,
concerning their employing of the^ selves in the seruis of his majesty and of
her highness, for the benefit, rest, and tranquillity of ye country, whereto
the duty of faithfulness and of nature binds the^. According whereunto she
intends that they shall give her their faith, first that they shall another do
nor procure directly nor indirectly, any thing against his majesty, his states
countries, and subjects, but that they shall employ the^ selves wholly to al
manner of things that good and loyal vassals and subjects ought to perform
toward their sovereign Lord and natural prince.

In doing whereof they shall to the uttermost of their power, saythfully help to
stay the present troubles, co^motions, and vprores, and to restrain the
insurrection of the people: that the sacking, pilling, and pulling down of
churches, chapels, cloisters, and religious houses may cease in all places: yea
and they shall help to punish such as have committed such sacriledges,
outrages, and abominations: and see that no wrong be done to any
ecclesiastical persons, ministe^s of Justice, Gentlemen, or any other of the
kings subjects and vassalles.

Ite^, they shall earnestly endeavor, that y^ weapons which y^ people have taken
in hand (where through so many mischefes have bin committed, and may be
committed hereafter) may be laid away inco^tine^tly. Also they shall do the best
they can by all good seruis, to prohibit preaching in places where none has bin
before: and to prohibit al force, and cause of offense, and public disorder
where preaching is used already Moreover, they shall indenor and put to their
help, according as they are bound by oath and fealty toward his majesty, to
the expulsing and repressyng of al strangers that are enemies and rebels to his
majesty and the Country.

Finally they shall do their endeavor, according to the credit which they have
among such as are now rizen up for religion or otherwise, to cause them to
submyt them selves to the things that his majesty shall decre by the general
advice of his estates, for the furtherance of religion, and the quietness and
tranquillity of the same. Given at Brusselles, the. 23. of August. 1566.
Undersigned: Margaret.

A copy of the letter which the No. 4.
Confederates sent back in answer to the Regent.
WE Lewis County of Nassaw, Eustace of Fiennes Lord of Esquerds, Charles of
Revel, Lord of Andrignyes, Barnard of Merode Lord of Rumen, Charles of Vander
Noot Lord of Risoire, George of Mountegnie Lord of Noyelles, Martin of Sarclas
Lord of Tilly, Philip Vander Meeren Lord of Sterbek, Philip of Marbais lord of
Louuerual, John of Mountegny lord of Vilers, Charles of Lieuin Lord of Famars,
Francis of Haefte^, and John Savage Lord of Escaubecke, as well in our own
names, as deputies and co^mitties for all the rest of the Lords and gentlemen
confederates, that did put up the supplication to the kings majesty in the
month of April last, concerning the Inquisition and Injunctions for heresy:
Forasmuch as this day we have received certain letters patents from the right
high and excellent princess ye duchess of Parma and Pleasa^ce, Rege^t and
Gouernesse for ye king in these countries here, authorized thereunto by the
king our souerein Lord and natural prince, in manner and form following, that
is to say, Margaret by the grace of God Duchess of Parma and Pleasance, Rege^t
etc. as in ye letters of assurance above rehearsed: We do you to understand,
that according to the same letters of assurance, we have promised and do promis
solemly by our faith and in the word of Gentlemen, and as true and loyal
vassals and subjects of his majesty, That we will observe, maintain, and
fulfill, all manner of points and articles aforesaid: and as well on our own
behalf as on the behalf and in the name of all ye rest whose deputies we be,
and whose power, co^missio^, authority, and co^mau^de^e^t we have, we give and
will give our words, that both we and the rest of our confederates shall keep,
maintain, and perform the same: in respect whereof we hold our former
co^federacie as void, broken, and undone, so far forth and so long as the
foresaid assurance promised by her highness in the kings majesty's name, shall
hold. In witness whereof we have signed these prese^ts with our names. Made at
Brussels the xxv. day of August. 1566. Signed underneath thus: Jews of Nassaw.
Eustace of Fie^nes, Bernard of Merode, C. of Vander Noot, Charles of Revel,
George of Mou^tegny, Philip vander Meeren, Philip of Marbais lord of Louerual,
I. Mou^tegny Lord of Vilers, Charles Lieuen Lord of Famars, John Savage, Mart.
Tserclas, and Frau^cis of Haefte^. And upon the backeside was written. This
present XXV. of August. 1566. the deputies and co^mitties for the Lords and
ge^tleme^ co^federate, named in the said writing (saving the L. Lilly and
Frau^cis of Haeften which were absent) took their solemn and requisite oath
as well for themselves as for and on the behalf of the rest of yt co^federates,
to maintain observe and perform, all and every point and article contained in
the said writing, in the hands of ye most honorable the princes of Orendge and
Gawre, the Cou^ty of Horn, the Lord of Hachicourt, and the Cou^seller of
Assouleuille assigned thereto by her highness. Subscribed thus: In my presence.
And signed: Of Onerloepe. Beneath that was written again: The. 27 day of the
said month of August, the said year. 1566. the said lord of Lilly and Francis
of Haeften, after the readyng of the said writing unto them, have also set to
their names and seals, and taken the oath abouesayd in the hands of the most
honorable the prince of Bawre, the Cou^ties of Manusfeld, and of Horn, the
Lord of Hachicourt, and the Counselor of Assouleuille assigned thereto by her
highness, as is said before. Subscribed: In my presence also. And signed: Of
Ouerloepe.

A copy of the Letter closed by the Regent, and sent hereupon to the
Counselors and towns of the low Countries.
MArgaret by the grace of God Duchess No. 4.
of Parma and Pleasance. etc. Regent and gouernesse. etc.
Right dear and well-beloved,
I will not omit to let you understand how my Lord the king aduertiseth us by
his letter of the. 13. of the last month, of his resolution concerning the
things wherein I asked his counsel and aduicc in the month of May last. Whereof
his majesty could not give answer any sooner, because (...) tarried for the
coming of the Marquis of Berghes, and the Baron of Mountegny sent unto him by
us, upon whose report all the chief handling of the matter consisted. And truly
as touching the Inquisition, his majesty taking regard to the things which I
informed him of by the advice of the knights of the Order, and of the
cou^sellers both of estate, and of the priny counsel, being with us, is
contented that it shall cease. Likewise also aes touching the Injunctions in
the case of heresy: he is contented that new shall be made, so as respect be
had to the maintenance of the holy ca^ faith and of his ^sties authority. But
he is not yet resolved whether that shall be done by the states generally, or
otherwise. And therefore I have written very earnestly unto him again, and I
look shortly for his maiestyes good will and pleasure in that behalf.

Moreover, whereas I informed his majesty of the dout which the Ge^tleme^ that
preferred the Supplication to us in April last, to the end before said, did
east, lest his majesty should mislike of their suit, and of the confedoracie
that they made among them selves for the same, which dowt might have caused
distrust, and co^seque^tly the trouble and unquietness of the Country: his
majesty intendyng to deal according co his accustomed clemency, and abhorryng
all rigor as much as may be, is contented that (if we see that his so doing may
cause al unquietness to cease, as we be promised that it shall) we shall make
requisite assurance, in such manner and form as we perceive to be expedient.
Which thing is don, so as nothing shall be imputed to to the^ by his majesty nor
by us, for aught that is past: co^dicional ly that they behave themselves
he^ceforth lik good and loyal subjects and vassals of his majesty: whereupon
al their co^federacies must be void, broken of, and undone, so long as the
things that I have promised the^ in the kings name do hold and stand firm as
you may see by the acts passed thereupon.

And we advertise you further, that the kings majesty intends and purposes
to mainteyne the true ancient Catholic Religion: and that his governors,
cou^sellers, officers, and magistrates ^al do their endeavor to the full, that
there may no inconvenience happen in the mean while, till he come hither to
take order: which thing he promises to do shortly, if he ca^ by any means*
possble.

Of al which things as seruyng to the pacification and quieting of these
present troubles, as well in Religion as in the common weal: W* thought good to
advertise you, that ye might endeavor your selves so much the more to do your
duties as becomes his majesty's true and faithful subjects, and also follow
his holy and good meaning, in resistyng the froward and seditious disturbers of
the common weal, in maintenance of the Catholic faith, and in his majesty's
seruis, to the quietness and tranqui^tie of the Country and your selves. And
so right dear and well-beloved, our Lord have you in his holy keepyng.

From Brusselles, the. xxv. day of August. 1566.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. Februar. 24. 1575.


