A TRVE DISCOVRSE OF THE ASSAVLT COMMITTED UPON THE PERson of the most noble
Prince, William Prince of Orange, County of Nassau, Marquess de la Vere etc.
by John Iauregui Spaniarde.

With the true Copies of the writings, Examinations, Depositions, and Letters
of sundry offenders in that vile and devilish attempt.

Faithfullye translated out of the french Copy printed at Antwerp by
Christopher Plantin. Anno. 1582.

CERVA CHARISSIMA ET GRATISSIMVS HINNVLVS PRO: 5


Imprinted at London for Thomas Charde and William Broom.

To the Reader, Grace and Peace from God. etc.
THou have here (good Christian Reader) a true narration, of that horrible
fact, committed against that godly and great person, my Lord the Prince of
Orange, together with the writings, depositions, examinations and letters of
sundry heinous offe^ders in this wicked and cruel deed: some of which are
already executed, thanks be to God for such Justice; the other, howsoever
they are escaped, as yet free from the punishment of men, have, without
unfeigned repentance, greater judgments laid up in store for them, with the
Lord, who will plentifully punish such treacherous and traitorous dealing.
Concerning the credit and truth of this discourse, it is so plain and
sufficient, that neither all the Spaniardes in the world, nor all their
favorites whatsoever or wheresoever, shall be able justly any manner of way, to
impugn or disgrace the same. The blow was given the greater is the sin, and
the good Prince grieuouslie wounded, the more is the pity, if the Lord had
otherwise seen it good. A Spaniarde was the first broacher of it, by
publishing that horrible proscription which by the Princes Apology is fully
answered, both to the great shame and discredit of some, and also to the
wonderful glory and commendation of that good Prince. And as a Spaniarde
devised it, I mean the death of the party, which also I pray GOD they may
long want, and the church enioie his life, for the furtherance of Gods glory in
the same.
and a Spaniarde performed it, sundry of that proud and cruel nation, being
combined and comperted in it, as some of their own confessions, yielded before
Gods Magistrates, do plainly witness it, whereby they have bewraied their
mischievous minds, though (thanks be to God for it) they have hitherto missed
of their purpose: so I must needs say, that if any should be so shameless
as to deny it, or so beastly as to blanch it, or justify it (as I fear me
some, and that no small some are) I would no more contend with such, than with
those, that would deny the Sun to shine at noone days. If there be none
such amongste us, then there is no hurt done. But if they be here, or else
where in the world (as France, Scotland, and Flaunders, now at the last, have
yielded us some fearful examples) and it is to be thought, that we have too
too many, of that same Jesuitical sect, who blush not, both to reason too and
fro, concerning such questions, and to labor the attempting thereof (as we
have had of late proof sufficient) and that not to the maiming of mean men,
but to the hurting of the highest (whom I beseech God in mercy long to
preserve) then I would have such to know and understand that to them it is that
I speak, not in heat against their persons, or to aggrauate their offenses
which are so grievous, as no weight of words, cann^^ make them more heinous,
but in the sincere zeal (...) God in the dutiful reverence of her Majesty,
in sound affection to the common wealth and country, and in love unfeigned
toward them, wishing from my heart their hearty conversion, if they
appertain to God, or else their utter and speedy confusion (specially if
they be such as the Lord has sealed up against the day of his wrath) for
their stubbornness in heresies, touching matters of faith, and their practices
against the best in matters of estate: but enough of this matter at this time.
The principal point, that I would have the godly reader (of what state or
condition soever he be) to regard in this narration is, to labor to make it
profitable to himself, that as generally it may instruct all, not to believe
every flying tale, but to let go running rumors and reports, and withal
earnestly to pray to God for all his children (my meaning is while they are
alive) that be so overtaken, and namely for this good Prince his faithful
servant, that according to Gods good pleasure, he and they all whatsoever in
the like dangers, may recover their wounds, and learn more Christian care and
godly wisdom in time hereafter to come: so particularly, it may teach every
one, even the hihhest fitst, and namely this, whom it does most chiefly
concern, that seeing that for their well doing, the enemies mean such
mischiefs against them, they may carefully look unto themselves, that they be
not surprised with such popish practices, being always very circumspect whom
they admit to their presence and speech, and so prevent such fearful
dangers: and the lowest next, to pray to the Lord, as for themselves, that
they be not intrapped, so chiefly for these that be their superiors (because if
the head or principal members be stricken, the whole body is in danger of
death and destruction) that they may live long and govern also, in truth,
peace and godliness, without any such wicked attempt, to be either devised or
performed against them or any of them: which God grant, as to all nations
professing his word and truth, so particularly to the nation and country of
England, even for his crucified Christ's sake: that so the land may florishe,
by the long life and prosperous reign, of these that be in authority, and
the Church increase, by the pure doctrine of the Gospel already established,
and by the planting of Gods holy Discipline. So be it.

A brief discourse of the assault committed upon the person of the most noble
Prince, WILLIAM Prince of Orange, County of Nassau, Marquis de la Vere etc. By
John Iauregui a Spaniard.
MY Lord the Prince of Orange, after he had heard the sermon in the Church on
Sunday the xviij. day of March 1582. repaired to his house, in the place where
sometime the Castle of Antwerpe stood, accompanied with many Lords and
Gentlemen, of whom some dined with him. Immediately after he had dined openly
(as he was wont) in the great Hall of the said house, my Lords the Counties de
Laual, de Hohenlo, my Lords his children, and two of his nephews, children of
my Lord the County John of Nassau, the Lords of Boniuet, des Pruneaux, and
other gentlemen accompanying him The dinner was passed and spent with many
honest communications and speeches, amongst all others, was some speech had of
the cruelties committed by the Spaniardes in these low Countries. A little
after dinner, the said Prince repaired into his withdrawing chamber, intending
to go into his bed Chamber with the said Lords and gentlemen, and as he
passed by, showed them a piece of tapistrie, wherein were liuelye set forth the
Spanish soldiers. At the said instant, a young man of low stature shot at the
said Prince with a dagge, charged with one only pellet, the shot whereof hit him
under the right ear, and passed through the pallet of his mouth and came forth
at his left cheek, near unto his upper iaw bone: the said Lord (as since he
has said many times) did not know what it was, but thought that some part of
the house had fallen, for he felt not himself to be stricken: notwithstanding
his sight was a little while dazeled. Immediatelye some of the Lords and
gentlemen then next at hand, stroke the said young man twice or thrice into the
body with their swords, and so the said Princes guard drawing nigh, made an
end of him with their Haulberds. In the mean time the said Prince being
advertised what had happened, and the rather by feeling the fire that had taken
hold of his hair, and hearing ye noise about the murderer, cried out, kill him
not, I forgive him my death: and so turning to sundry French Lords, said unto
them: O how faithful a servant does his highness lose and so was straight
led between two (that held him up by the arms) into his chamber: for he
could go, and fell not with the blow. The brute hereof went presentlye over
all the town, which brought most men into a maze, by reason of so sudden and
unlooked for a matter, and that in ye person of such a one, as among all men was
holden and reputed for a deliverer of the Country, further, because the
murderer was presently dead, all men judged that the way to verify and
justify the fact, was quite shut up. Many and diverse were the speeches
hereof: some through suspicion accusing others, and few hitting upon the truth
and attributing the least to them who were the very authors indeed: so as if
such a deed had been committed in many towns where the people have the
bridle at liberty, and may at their pleasure run from place to place, it had
been likely that some great mischief and inconvenience might have ensued: But
in the town of Antwerp (such is the order and obedience that all men do yield
to their Magistrates, Coronels and Captayns) immediately all the citizens
withdrew themselves to their Ensigns each one in his quarter, and the chains
being drawn, and the body of the guard filled, there was no way left for any
to depart from his guard but the Captains. My Lord the Duke of Brabant was
speedily advertised of this mishappe, and being at the first certifyed of no
other tha^ death, he was greatly astonished, and sighing very deeply,
complained to himself of the extreme loss which thereby he sustained:
repeating oftentimes, that if the king his own father had been alive again,
he could not have been more sorry for his death, than for the death of the said
Prince: where on the other side the Prince bewailed him no less, rehearsing
oftentimes these words: Alas poor Prince, alas poor Prince, what pains must
thou yet take? Whiles most part of his servants that were present, as also
those which at the brute of the news were come in, employed themselves about
the said L Princes person, his son the Earl Maurice, notwithstanding his
heavy mourning, departed not from the dead corpse which he caused to be
searched: and first they light upon the dag which was fallen out of his hand,
that caused them to think that he had no means to use a dagger, which they
found naked in his breeches. In the mean season the Earl of Hohenlo, for
fear of further inconvenience, causing the said Princes guard and diverse
Gentlemen to follow him, seized upon the doors of the house, so to keep all
such as were not very well known, from coming in or going forth. The dead
corpse being further searched, they found about him certain papers and
Pamphlets which were delivered to the said Earl Maurice, the which at that
instant finding one of the servants of my Lord his father showed him the said
Papers, and weeping said, behold what ye wicked wretch had about him: who
answered him, my Lord be not discomforted, God is mighty and able to preserve
my Lord your father, but keep these papers well, for we are greatly troubled
about discovering somewhat of this cursed wretch: for otherwise in this Town
we shall incur great peril. To the which he did reply, alas I am afraid least
here be some other villain that may take them from me, this young Lord being
the rather moved to say so, because there went a speech through the Hall,
given forth by some, that those which had killed the murderer, were partakers
of the fact, and that me^ might be assured of it, so that the danger began
to fall likewise upon the best friends of the said Lord Prince, and upon his
household. Upon this talk of the said young Earl, the said servant took him
under his Cloak, and said unto him, my Lord go with me, and I will lay your
Papers in safety, which he did, bringing him into the roof of the house,
where committing the said papers to safe custody, he perceived that they were
written in Spanish, wherefore he said to the Earl, My Lord, there is no danger
to be feared on your part, return and cause further search to be made: as
for me. I go to my Lord: which was done. Then the said servant began to
certify every one, that it was a Spaniarde, and that men should leave the
missconceiued suspicion which they had. A while after returned the said young
Earl, bringing mo Papers, Crosses, and an Agnus Dei, with a green wax Candle,
and two pieces of skin, like unto a beauers: which occasioned many to be of
opinion that he had about him some Toades and enchantments. The said servant
began to read the first Papers: which he found to be, partlye prayers, and
partly vows, and then he brake the cover of a packet of letters, and found
that it was written in Spanish, by one Spaniard to another, of the which he
did certify every man, but would not open the rest alone A little after came
the Lord de S. Aldegonde, who had already been with his highness, and being
returned, said to the same servant, we must take advise what is to be done,
for there is great trouble in ye Town: whereunto he answered, my Lord, if it
please you, let us withdraw our selves for a while to communicate thereof, I
think you shall find counsel ready: and then they went by themselves
because of the great preasse of people that was about them, and the said Lord
did open the rest of the said packet, in which were found two letters of
exchange, the one of 2000. crowns, and the other of 877. with letters of
advice, all in Spanish, and by Spaniards: the books were of services to be
performed at certain set hours: also one Jesuits Catechism and a pair of
tables written from one end to ye other. Then praising God, that had given
the^ such light of ye matter, ye Lord de S. Aldegonde, resolved to go straight
to ye Town house, and passing by ye Guard, to assure the^ that it was done be
Spaniards, which he did hope to verify: and would carry with him ye writing
tables and the most part of the writings: appointing others to go to his
highness with the other part, to advertise him, and not to depart from his
person: which was done. In passing by, ye said Lord of Saint Aldegonde went
also in to his highness, and showed him the said Papers. In ye mean time was
ye first dressing. And the Prince was laid in his bed, and afterward such as
were next about him and most skillful, began to conceive some spark of hope,
by reason he had his sight and spoke well, especially because his understanding
and judgment was very certain, also that being forbidden much speech, he
wrote steadfast and quick. While these things were in doing, there came in one
of the Captains of the town, named Lion Petit, demanding whether he were
alive or dead, who, when the said servant requested him to let the said L.
Prince take his rest for that time, affirming that he hoped of his recovery,
answered that the people would never be content unless he assured them that
he had seen him: Whereupon he was caused to enter in: then after some
speeches, demanding what it pleased the L. Prince to command him, he said:
Commend me heartily to the people, and will them not to trouble themselves, and
if it please God to take me to him self, that they obey and faithfully serve
this prince, for I know none in the world better or more meet for them. His
highness having seen the letters of Exchange and other the writings brought
unto him, commended them to Martini the Recorder of the town, who then was with
him, to carry them to the Magistrate of the town, and to examine those to whom
the letters of Exchange were directed: In the mean time having assembled the
counsel of Estate, he dispatched a Commission directed unto the general
Estates, the counsel of Estate, the Magistrate of the town, the Coronells,
Captains, and Wardens of occupations, with all diligence to proceed,
commanding all men under pain of death to declare what they knew concerning
the said Murderer. Now had the Magistrate in the mean time (who already had
begun to proceed herein, and by the said papers and writing tables had found
that the Murderer was of ye house of a Spaniard, named Jasper d'Anastro) taken
order that all that were in the said house should be committed to prison, which
was done. But they found that the said Anastro himself departed the tuesday
before toward Bruges The^ were the Coronels and Captains advertised by the
Magistrate, also all the Inhabitants by their Governors, that all this web
was wouen by the Spaniards: whereupon the whole town grew to quietness,
remainyng nevertheless in arms, for the assistance of justice. At the first
examination of Antony Venero they could not find any great matter, but this
only, that they knew the Murderers person: Howbeit for that he confessed
that the same day Mass had been celebrated secretly in the said Anastro his
house, at all adventures upon suspicion they apprehended one Antony Timmerman,
of the order of the white Friars. Nevertheless it was decreed, that the
Murderers body should be set upon a scaffold in the town to show it to the
people, to the end to know it, which thing was done: but so soon as he was
seen in the great market place, every one knew it presently to be the body of
John Iauregui a Spaniard, the servant of Jasper Anastro: yea the said Venero
seeing him dead, knew him. The next morning the xix. of March, as all the gates
of the town of Antwerp were diligently kept, in the morning the Post of Bruges
arrived, who having showed his letters to the Guard of the River gate, there
were found letters of the said Anastro directed to Venero, which were carried to
his highness and to the Magistrate of the town. Further, the Magistrate
appointed, that the same day the Murderers body should be quartered, and his
head set upon the Bulwark toward Ril, and his quarters upon the four
principal gates, which was done. The next day his highness and the Counsel
of estate decreed, that throughout all the Churches there should be
extraordinary prayers unto God for the health of the said L. Prince. Also by
the Magistrate of the town his apointment, the next Wednesday being the 21. of
the said Month, was by trumpet proclaimed throughout the town a general
fast, with common prayers: also commandment was given that every man should
that day leave all work, to the end to attend fasting and prayer. Annastro
his letters were showed to Venero, who seeing him self thereby confounded and
convicted, and being, as by his confession it appears, admonished by one of
the Coronels and others, required paper and ink, and with his own hand wrote
and signed his second confession. The Prince thinking the hour of his decease
to draw near, dispatched the L. S. Aldegonde with letters directed to the
general estates, wherein, as his last counsel, he wished them to persist in
his highness obedience declaring unto them that he judged him to be the only
Prince that was most fit for them, according to the tenure whereof, the said
Lords sent their Deputies to his highness, to advertise him of their
faithful affection. Upon wednesday following was ye fast with extraordinary
prayers celebrated, and that with such multitude and concourse of people, in
all the Churches of both languages, as time out of mind the like numbers of
people have not been seen in the Churches of Antwerp, neither so many weeping
eyes. Howbeit for that the Physicians and Surgeons began to conceive some hope
of the recovery of the said Prince, the prayers were partly mixed with
thanks giuings for this good beginning, with humble supplication, that it
might please God to accomplish his health. Now began the said L. Princes
person to draw to amendment, and daily did his highness carefully visit him,
who seemed, and in deed did ^ake great care for him, as likewise the L. Prince
did for him, upon every occasion commending his service. On the other side,
the Magistrate was as diligent in proceeding against the offenders: so as
finally he atteyned to the truth of the whole matter, as it will appear in the
depositions of the said offenders. But the L. Prince hearing that they purposed
to proceed to definitive sentence, did by writing expreslye command the L. of
S. Aldegonde, to request the Magistrate to punish them with the easiest death
that might be: which was done: for by the Magistrates sentence the wednesday
28. of the said month they were set at a stake upon a scaffold in the midst
of the great market, over against the town house, and by the hangman
strangled, their bodies quartered, and hanged over the chief gates of the
town, and their heads pitched upon two of the great bulwarks which
heretofore were part of the castle. Antony Timmerman the white Friar the same
day exhibited his second confession, wherein he acknowledged that he had been
of opinion that the said Iaregui might with a safe conscience execute the said
enterprise: but that now being better instructed by such good admonitions as
had been given him, he confessed that he had erred, and therefore besought the
Lords of Justice not to forget his said protestation, if ever this process
were published.

Within few days after the said execution, his highness received from sundry
places letters which the Prince of Parma had written to the towns, wherein he
endeavored to persuade them to withdraw them selves from his obedience, laying
his foundation upon the death of the said L. Prince, whereupon the said
towns besought his highness of counsel. These were the towns: Brussels,
Gaunt, Bridges, Malines, Ipres, Audernarde, Dunkirk, Berghe and sundry others.
Finally the town of Antwerpe also received the like letters. Annastro also
sent letters to the town of Gaunt, tending to the same end, which Venero his
deposition does contain: so that he wrote to all places where he had any
access. All the said letters, as well from the Prince of Parma as from
Annastro were grounded upon the assurance which they had conceived of the death
of the said L. Prince, whom God has hitherto nevertheless preserved, and will
still of his mercy keep and preserve, if he please.

Hereafter follow:
The copies of the writings found about the murderer. The depositions of the
Offenders. The letters of Annastro and the Prince of Parma.
The copies of the Writings found about the Murderer.
IESV CHRISTO NVESTRO Sen^or, y la Virge^ sancta a Maria nuestra Sen^ora sean
en mi ayuda en esta resolucio^ hecha para su sanctissimo seruicio.
QVE su Magistad tiene dada esta orden por el amor que tiene a estos Flamencos,
y por librarlos de las oppressions en que estan.

Si esto se haze, recibira el Sen^or a este pueblo en misericordia, y hara con
el las capitulaciones en toda ventaja d'ellos.

Offrescer les he, que dentro de ocho dias que se haga, los vendra a tomar a
misericordia, mediante que al que hiziere este hecho, le traten bien que sera
ganancia della villa hazerlo assi, y perdonarle la vida, pues la ha empleada
tan en seruicio de Dios, y de su Yglesia, y de su Rey, y en hon^ ra de toda su
nation: y el que me regalare y tratare bien, se lo pagara su Magestad su muy
cumplidamente. Persuaderlos que se suffran, y tengan paciencia quatra o seys
dias, hasta que se le pass la alteracion, que despues todo se hara tan a
contento de la Villa, como nunca ellos pudieren dessear. Yo ruego a estos
sen^ores, que miren lo que hazen en tratarme bien porque en hazar lo que he
hecho, todas las naciones lo attribuyran a virtud, y nobleza de my nation. Y
pues a qui son todos tan virtuosos, tengan attencion a tratarme bien, hasta
tomar mis confessiones muy d'espacio, y por su orden. Y sobre todo, yo me
encomiendo en la misericordia de Dios.

JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD, and the holy Virgin S. Marie our Lady, assist me in
this my determination, which I have undertaken for his most holy service.
HIs Royal Majesty has set down this order for the love he bears to
these Flemings, and to deliver them from the oppressions wherein they are.

This being accomplished, the Lord will receive these people to mercy, and he
will grant them articles tending to their uttermost advantage.

I will promise them, that within eighte days after the deed, they shall be
received into favor, conditionally, that they do well entreat him that shall
have done this deed. That the town shall reap commodity by so doing, also to
pardon him his life, considering he has so employed it in the service of God,
of the Church, and of his King, and to the honor of his whole nation: and his
Majesty will most liberally reward any that shall furnishe him of things
requisite, and well entreat him.

They must be persuaded patiently to bear for four or six days, until
this alteration be over: which being paste, all things shall be ordered to as
great contentation of the Town, as themselves could ever wish.

I beseech these Lords well to weigh what they do in well using of me:
because that, accomplishing this deed that I have done, all nations will
attribute it to the virtue and nobility of my Country.

In so much therefore, as all men here be so virtuous, they must determine,
well to entreat me, yea, so far forth, as at leisure, and as order
requires, to take my confessions. And above all things, I commend me to the
mercy of God.

JESUS MARIA.
AVos Redemptory Saluado del mundo, Criador del cielo y de la tierra, Sen^or
Dios Jesus Christo, siendo seruido concederme esta victoria a mi todo misero,
muy infelice peccador, y vuestro sieruo, por a quellas preciosissimas cinco
llagas y la preciosissima corona de spinas y los vnestros preciosissimos
grandissimos trabaios, angustias, arrastradas, bofetadas, maldezires: e hiel y
vinagre sobre aquello beuistes, vos todo poderoso Sen^or Dios Jesus Christo
Redemptor y Saluador del mundo, Criador del cielo y de la tierra, todo por
saluar a los peccadores del mundo, y a mi todo muy infelice peccador: y como a
talos supplico muy humilmente seays seruido concederme esta victoria contra
este Pagano, Violador de vuestro Templo diuino, Ruina de vnestra religion,
sancta catholica y Romana y el que es occasion de tanto dessassossrego a la
vuestra Christiandad, y pestilencia que no attiende sino en sustentar maldades,
vellaquerias y ruynas. O todo poderoso Senor Dios Jesus Christo Redemptor y
Saluador del mundo, Criador del cielo y de la tierra a vos os supplico muy
humilmente seays seruido no permitir que este maluado use de mas ruinas, y
conceder a mi muy indigno peccador la gracia, animo y valor, paraque despues de
las vuestras preciosissimas manos pueda ser acabado por mi. De manera que
ninguno de quien yo voy vencerle, despues de vos Sen^or Dios Jesus Christo
Redemptor y Saluador del mundo, Criador del cielo y de la tierra pueda aver
poder contra mi. Pero despues siendo vos altissimo Sen^or Dios Jesus Christo
Rede^ptor y Saluador del mundo Criador del cielo y de la tierra siendo seruido
de que yo dexe aqui esta miserable vida, soy muy contento se a assi, y siempre
como vos Sen^or Dios Dios fueredes seruido. Y assi os suplico de todo coracon
todo poderoso Sen^or Dios Jesus Christo, por a quella vuestra preciosissima
passion seays seruido concederme constancia y paciencia, paraque yo misero muy
infelice peccador pueda sobrelleuar y suffrir qualquier genero de pena que me
dieren, que a todo (como soy obligado) prestare muy humilde cora on, siendo vos
todo poderoso Redemptor y Saluador del mundo Criador del cielo y de la tierra
seruido.

JESUS MARIA.
TO thee Redeemer and Savior of the world, creator of heaven and earth, Lord
God, Jesus Christ: If it please thee to grant this victory unto me most
miserable wretched sinner, and thy servant, for the love of thy five most
precious wounds, and thy most precious crown of thorns, and thy most
precious grievous labors, anguishes, torments, stripes, and injuries, and the
gall and vinegar, which besides all this thou did drink, even thou the
almighty Lord God, Jesus Christ, the redeemer and savior of the world, the
creator of heaven and earth, and al to save the sinners of this world, and
among the rest, me, the most unhappy sinner: and as such a one I do most
humbly beseech thee, that it may please thee, to grant me this victory
against this heathen, defiler of thy holy Temple, and subuerter of thy holy
catholic Roman religion, who is the cause of so many disquiets throughout thy
Christendom, and such a pestilence, as is busied only in upholding
wickedness, villainies, and desolations. O most mighty Lord God Jesus Christ,
redeemer and savior of the world, creator of heaven and earth, I do most
humbly beseech thee, that it may please thee no longer to suffer this wretch
to work farther desolations: Farther, that thou will grant unto me an
unworthy sinner such favor, courage and valiancie, as by thy most precious
hands I may accomplish this thing, in such wise, as none of those that do
belong to him, whom, (with thy help, Lord God, Jesus Christ redeemer and
savior of the world, creator of heaven and earth) I purpose to overcome, may
have any power against me. Howbeit in as much as thou art the Supreme Lord God
Jesus Christ, redeemer and savior of the world, creator of heaven and earth,
if it please thee, that I leave this miserable life, I am well content, that it
be so, and ever Lord God, thy will be done. Thus most mighty Lord God, Jesus
Christ, I beseech thee with my whole heart, for the love of thy most precious
passion, that it may please thee to grant me constancy and patience, that I
most miserable sinner may bear and endure whatsoever kind of torments may
be laid upon me, whereunto I will have, as I ought, a most humble heart: if so
it seem good unto thee O most mighty redeemer and savior of the world,
creator of heaven and earth.

AVos Sen^or Dios Jesus Christo Redemptor y Saluador del mundo, Criador del
Cielo y de la tierra, os offrezco siendo os seruido librarme con vida, despues
de hauer effectuado mi desseo, un velo muy rico: y a vos Nuestra Sen^ora de
Regona vna corona, vna ropa, vna lampara: y a vos Nuestra Sen^ora de Arenzasu
vna corona: y a vos Nuestra Sen^ora de Guadalupe vna Corona: a vos Sen^or Dios
Jesus Christo.

Nuestra Sen^ora de Monserrate: al sancto Crucifixo de Burgos, nuestra Sen^ora
del pilar de aragoca.

TO thee Lord God, Jesus Christ, Redeemer and Savior of the world, creator
of heaven and earth, if it please thee to deliver me with life, I do promise
(after the finishing of my pretense,) a very rich veil: Also to thee our Lady
of Regona, a crown, a gown, and a Lamp: To thee our Lady of Arancazu one
crown: and to thee our Lady of Guadalupe, one crown: and to thee our Lord God
Jesus Christ. Also to our Lady of Montferrat: to the holy Crucifixe of Burges:
to our Lady of the Pillar of Saragosse.

AVos Sen^or Dios Jesus Christo Redemptor y Saluador del mundo, os offrezco
siendo seruido librarme con vida d'este effecto qua traygo enter manos vna ropa
muy rica: y a vos Nuestra Senora de Vegonbaan vna corona: y vna ropa, y vna
lampara: y a vos Nuestra Se^nora de Aranzacu vna corona: y a vos Nuestra
Se^nora de Guadalupe vna corona: y a vos Se^nor Dios Jesus Christo del Crucifixo
de Burgos cabal offrezco vna rica ropa, y offrezco yr en Roma a vna semana
continuando.

The Copy of that which was written in the sixth and seventh pages of John
Iaureguyes writing Tables.
TO the Lord God Jesus Christ, redeemer and savior of the world, I do
promise, if it please thee to deliver me with life out of this enterprise
which I have taken in hand, one very rich gown: To thee our Lady of Vegondaan
one crown, one gown, and one lamp: to thee our Lady of Arancazu one crown:
and to thee our Lady of Guadalupa one crown: and to thee Lord God Jesus
Christ of the Crucifixe of Burges, I do vow one gown richly furnished: and
do farther vow to go to Rome within one week.

AL Angel san Gabriel me encomiendo con todo mi spiritu y coracon, paraque
agora y sie^pre me sea mi intercessor a nuestro Sen^or Jesus Christo, y a su
hijo preciosissimo, y a la Virgen sancta Maria, y a todos los Sanctos y Sanctas
de la corte del cielo de guardarme y encaminarme y tenerme de su be^dita mano
sin que yo sea muerto subitamente, y me de gracia paraque pueda conseguyr el
buen zelo que tengo de salir con aquel effecto. Yen memoria desto prometo de
ayunar toda vna semana entera (despues de ver me libre desto) a pan y agua, y
de rezar, etc.

In the tenth Page.
I Do with my whole mind and heart, commend me to the Angel Saint
Gabriel, to the end, that now and ever he may be my mediator to our Lord
Jesus Christ and to his most precious son, and to the Virgin Mary, and to all
he Saints and she Saints of the heavenly Court, that he will keep and
conduct me, and with his blessed hand uphold me from sudden death, and to
grant me grace to attain to the effect of my good zeal. In remembrance
whereof I do promise, that if I escape free from this deed, I will for one
whole week fast bread and water, and pray.

DE ayunar todos los Viernes a intercession de la passion de nuestro Se^nor
Jesus Christo, y todos los Sabados a invocation de nuestra Senora la Virgen
Maria, paraque yo sea guardado deste transito, y me encamine a dar fin a este
effecto.

In the fourteenth Page.
TO fast every Friday in co^memoration of the passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and every Saturday for the invocation of our Lady the virgin Marie,
to the end I may be preserved from this peril, and that she may guide me to
the end of this enterprise.

Hecho en la carcel desta villa de Anueres a veinte de Marco, del anno 1582. En
presentia del S. Malgraue, Godefrido Mo^tens, Iacomo zuerio, y Ludouico
Blomarte Esclauines d'ella.
ANtonio de venero preso, hijode Iu^ Espan^ol nascido de Bilbao en Biscaia, de
edad de dies y nueue a ve^nte annos teniendo los libros de Gasper d' Annastro,
mercade^ Espanol, dize aver morado con e^ dicho Anastro mas de dos annos.

Preguntado s' y no save quien ha escrito un papel o bilete muestrado a el
declarante hallado sobre el muerto, el qual el domingo passado ha tirado con un
pistolete la persona de su Excellentia, el Principe d' Orange, commencando el
dicho billete: Nuestro Se^nor Jesus Christo, etc. Dize ser escrito por mano de
Iuan de Iaureguy.

Preguntado quien es el dicho Iua^ de Iaureguy? Dize ser Espan^ol de Bilbao en
Biscaya, sobrino de Pedro d' Orosco, mercader Espa^nol en Brujas, el qual Iuan
vino morar con el dicho Anastro cerca el mez de Iulio passado, auiendo mie^tres
escrito y copiado las cartas del dicho Anastro y lo que le mando.

Siendo al declarante muestrado el muerto y preg', si aquel es Iuan de Iaureguy
sobredicho? Dize que si, y que el auiendo el dicho Domingo oydo la missa salio
de casa cerca las onze horas antes de comer, y auia entrado y salido la casa
tres o quatro vezes.

Preguntado quien auia dictado al dicho Iuan el dicho billette? Dize que esta
cierto que se lo deue de aver dictado el dicho Anastro, por que el no tenia
Iuyzio para hazerlo de si.

Seyendo preguntado si no conoscia el pistolete, que le fue mostrado, con el
qual es herido su Excellentia por el dicho Iaureguy? Dize aver visto el mismo
pistolete o semejante a el, passado seis mezes en casa del dicho Anastro, y que
dicho Anastro ha embiado otros tres como ellos en Espa^na, el vno a Don
Fernando de Arieta, y el otro a Don Diego d' Alua, y el tercero a Pedro Lopes
d' Arieta, sin que sabe quien los pueda aver fecho, quanto costaron, o quien
les pago, sea el dicho Anastro o su caxero.

Preguntado donde vienne, y quien ha hecho la vela de cera verde en que esta
abaxo imprimido el senal de la crux, que el dicho Iaureguy tenis sobre su
cuerpo nudo con vna medailla del Saluador y la Imagen de Nuestra Sennora Maria
todo muestrado a el declarante? Dize que es vna de las velas que se da a algun
passagero visitando el Monasterio en Burgos en Espana, adonde esta el
Crucifixo, y la Imagen esta hecha de los Jesuits en Madrid: pero no save como
el dicho Iaureguy ha cobrado lo sobredicho.

Preguntado que fueron las postreras palabras que el dicho Iuan ha tenido co^
el declarante? Dize que la postrera vez que le hablo dixo que estaua muy bien
determinado para executar y accomplir su empresa, pues que se auia confessado,
y que por esso seria bueno que el declarante te saluasse, sobre que el
declarante le respondio que no^ sauia adonde yr, o saluar se: por estar cargado
de los libros y papeles del dicho Anastro su amo, y que por esso quedaria cereo
dellos como le auia prometido.

Preguntado a quien el dicho Iaureguy se auia confessado? Dize a cierto frail
llamado Padre Antonio.

Preguutado si el dicho Padre Antonio non ha sauido d'estu empresa, quando, y
porquien? Dize que el declarante no ha comunicado dello con el padre Antonio,
ny ha ouydo que ninguno en publico, ny secreto aya comunicado con el saluo que
el dicho Iuan de Iaureguy le dixo que se auia confessado con el dicho Padre
Antonio, y tratado d'esto negocio, y que eran en el Anastro, Iaureguy, y el
declarante, y que le auia absuelto dello.

Preguntado si no save si el dico Gaspar de Annastro o otro vuiesse semejante
empresa sobre la persona de la Sereniss. Reyna de Inglaterra, o sobre la del
Sereniss. Ducque de Anjou? Dize que piensa que non.

Preguntado si conosce la carta escrita en Dunquercque a xvj. de Marco, donde
la sobrescription y tenor le fue preleydo? Dize que si, y ser escrita por las
proprias manos del dicho Anastro: y ta^bien la otra carta serrada en ella es
suya, y por el escrita.

Preguntado si la carta escrita en Greuelingues a xvij. d'este mez de Marco
estat tambien escrita por el dicho Gaspar Anastro? Dize que si, y todo esso
para que se effectuasse esta empresa como paresce por el contenido d'ellas.

Preguntado si el dicho Iaureguy no tenia alguncauallo presto, o otro remedio
para saluar se despues de aver cometido el delito? Dize, que no: pero que
estaua determinado de morir auiendo hecho el dicho efeto, y que era tan
induzido del dicho Annastro para hazer dicho efeto, que parescia, que era
encantando, y que yua muy alegremente, para hazerlo fuera la caza del dicho
Anastro, despues que auia oydo la missa, y auiendo almorzando bibido un golpe
de Bastardo.

Preguntado quien era el hombre a cauallo teniendo de diestro otto cauallo
ensilado paseando se al tiempo del dicho efetto delante la corte de su Excel.
Dize dello no saber nada, y que libramente declarara lo que dello supiera, pues
que tiene declarado lo que mas importa, y sennaladame^te no sabe d'ello cosa
alguna.

Seyendo propuesto al dicho declarante que ouiese de nombrar y mostrar todos
los que conoscia, o sabia que podrian aver sabido de la dicha empresa. Dize que
persona del mundo, ny de dentro ny de fuera d'esta villa sabe hablar de la
dicha empressa, mas que dicho declarante, y el dicho Iaureguy y Gaspar d'
Annastro y Iuan de Ysunca, y su hijo Pedro de Ysunca.

Done in the Prison of this town of Antwerpe the 20. of March 1582. in the
presence of my Lord the Marcgraue, Godfrey Montens, James Zuerius and Jews
Blommart, shirifes of the said town.
ANthony de Venero prisoner, the son of John, a Spaniard born in Bilbao in
Biscay, of the age of ninetene or twenty years, keeper of the book of accounts
of Jasper of Annastro a merchant and Spaniard borne, says, that he has dwelt
with the said Annastro above two years.

Being asked whether he knew who writ a certain paper or remembrance which
was there showed to the said Anthony, which bill was found about the dead
body of him who the Sunday before had discharged a dagge against the person of
his excellency, the Prince of Orange, which bill began, Our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. He says that I. Iaureguy writ it with his own hand.

Being demanded what that John Iaureguy is? He says he is a Spaniard of
Bilbao in Biscay, the coosin of Peter of Orosco merchant and Spaniard borne,
remaining at Bruges, which John came about the month of July last past, to
dwell wc the said Annastro, where hitherto he has bin employed in copying the
letters of the said Annastro, and in whatsoever else he commanded him.

The dead corpse being showed to the said deponent, and he asked whether it were
the aforesaid John Iaureguy? He says yea, and that the said John having the
Sunday before heard Mass, departed out of the house about eleven of the clock
before noone, after he had three or four times gone out and in at the said
house.

Being demanded who penned the said bill for the said John: he says that the
said bill should surely be, of the penning of the said Annastro, because the
said John was not of understanding sufficient to have done it.

Being demanded whether he knew not the dagge which was showed him, and
wherewith the said Iaureguy wounded his excellency: He says that he has
seen the same dagge or the like of it above six months since in the house
of the said Annastro, who sent three others like the same into Spain. One to
Don Ferdinand of Arieta, an other to Don Diego of Alua and the third to Peter
Lopes of Arieta: but he knows not who made them, how much they cost, either
who paid for them, whether the said Annastro or his pursebearer.

Being demanded, from whence came or who made the green wax candel, upon the
nether end whereof the sign of the Cross was painted, which the said
Iaureguy bare upon his naked body together with a quoine of the Savior, and
the image of our Lady Marie, all which was showed to the said deponent, he
says that it is one of the candels which usually are given to pilgrims when
they visit the monastery where the crucifixe of Burgos in Spain does stand:
and that the Jesuits made the image at Madrill but of whom the said Iaureguy
had the^ he wotteth not.

Being demanded what were the last words that the said John used unto the said
deponent: He says that the last time he spoke with him he said unto him,
that he was fully determined to execute and accomplish his enterprise,
considering he was already shriuen, wherefore it were good that the said
deponent saved him self. Whereunto the said deponent answered, that he wist
not whether to go or where to save him self, for that he stood charged with
his said master Annastros books and writings, and therefore that according to
his promise he would remain with them.

Being demanded to whom the said Iaureguy was shriuen, he says to a certain
Monk named father Antony.

Being demanded whether the said father Anthony knew of their enterprise, when
or by whom: he says that he this deponent never conferred with the said father
Antonie, neither knew that any other conferred with him either secretly nor
openly, except that the said John Iaureguy told him that he had confessed him
self to the said father Anthony, and had conferred with him of this matter,
whereunto Annastro, Iaureguy and he she deponent were privy, and that he had
absolved him.

Being demanded whether he knew, whether the said Jasper Annastro or any
other had framed the like practice against the person of the most noble Queen
of England, or against the most noble Duke of Anjou? says that he thinks no.

Being demanded whether he knew the letter written from Dunkirke the 16. of
March the superscription and tenure whereof were red unto him, says, yea, and
that Annastro wrote it with his own hand. Also that the other letter enclosed
therein, is of the same sort, and likewise written by him.

Being demanded whether the letter written from Graueling the 17. of this
month of March were wrote by the said Annastro, he says yea, and that all was
done for the attayning to the execution of this enterprise, as is evident by
the contents of the same.

Being demanded whether the said Iaureguy had any house ready, or any other
mean to save him self after the execution of this trespass, he says, no:
but that he was fully resolved to die after he had brought this offense to
pass: for the said Annastro had so persuaded him to do this deed, that he
seemed even bewitched: in such wise as after he had heard mass, and broken
his fast, having drunk a good cup of Bastard he departed very cheerfully
out of the house of the said Annastro.

Being demanded what he was who being on horseback and leading a spare horse
sadled walked up and down before his excellencies Court at the same time that
this deed was done: he says, that he knew nothing thereof: also that freely
he would show whatsoever he knew, considering that he has already declared
unto them matters of greater importance: and that hereof especially he is
ignorant.

The said Venero being willed to name and reveal all those whom he knew or
thought to be privy to any thing concerning the said enterprise: he says
that neither one nor other, neither in the town nor other where, are able to
speak any thing of his enterprise, but him self, this deponent, Iaureguy,
Jasper of Annastro, John of Hu^ca, and his son Peter of Hunca.

La Deposition de Antonio Venero: la quelle de son propre mouuement il a
faicte, and voluntairement escript and soussignee de sa propre main.
YO Antonio de Venero, vezino de Bilbao, hijo de Iuan de Venero, de edad de
diez y nueue a veynte annos poco mas o menos, assistente en la casay negocios
del Gaspar de Annastro vezino de Vitoria, desde veynte dias del mes de Enero
del anno de 1580. hasta treze de Marco de 1582. declaro lo seguiente que me ha
accontescido con el dicho Gaspar de Annastro, siendo pregunt ado dello del
senor Mulgraue, Burgomaestre, y Esclaunineo desta villa de Anberes, diziendo la
verdad sobre iuramenta, y sobre mi alma y mi co^scientia, promettienno dezir
toda la verdad sin encubrir cosa alguna, por auerme prometiendo los dichos
sennores Malgraue, Burgomaestre, y Esclauines a intercession del sennior
Esteuan Roquen Coronel de la dicha villa de Anberes, de diziendo todo lo que me
consta, de darme muerte honrosa, y a medita de mi desseo y contentamiento, y
Saserd^te para confessarme y comulgarme por lo que roca a la honra de mi
linnage. E yo el dic ho Antonio de Venero confiando en la palabra y nobleza de
los dichos sennores de que assi lo cumpliran, digo lo seguiente.

PRIMERAMENTE, es, que Iuan do Ysunca vezino de victoria, proueedor de fue de
las armadas en estos estados, escriuio al dicho Annastro vna carta de Lisbona,
aura diez meses poco mas menos, en que le pedia diuersos menages, sin aerle
escripto hastae entonces, diziendole que teria por cosa nueua el aver carta
suya, mas que lo hazia por estar en Lisbona, supplicandole le embiase lo que
pedia. Y el dicho Gasper de Annastro le respondio con palabras cortesanas,
escusando se de no embiar selos, auiendolo hecho por no auerle embiado dineros,
y por verse a la sazon rico, y sin gana de fiarle lo que le pedia. Y el dicho
Iuan de Ysunca respondio a estio, rogandole se los embiasse, porque le hazian
mucha falta, hallandose en Lisbona por conseruar su autoridad, atento que
entendia que su Magestad le queria dar un cargo muy honroso, y que lo hiziesse,
porque le co^muni^ carta un negocio de gra^dissima importancia, y que
redondaria en gran bien, honor, y beneficio suyo. Otra vez le respondio con
nueuas escusas, y d'estilo cortesano, y en effecto jamas le embio dichos
menajes: pero le escriuio que que negocio podia ser el que lo cometia, y de
tanta importancia, y que se lo auisasse. Estas des cartas arriba vi yo el dicho
Antonio de Venero, y despues vino la respuesta d'esta carta, en que el dicho
Iuan de Ysunca declaro el negocio, y leyo la carta: y de entonces aca me ordeno
a mi el dicho Antonio de Venero que no le abriesse ninguna carta que vtniesse
cerrada a la corte saena. Y en este tiempo, que pudieron ser cinco o seys
meses, poco mas o menos, anduuieron los dichos Iuan de Ysunca y Gaspar de
Annastro en demandas y respuestas, escriutendose cartas vnos a otros con mucho
secreto, y el dicho Gaspar de Annastro le respondia en su camara siempre de su
mano, cerrando las cartas con lacre, y lo mas disfracado que podia. En todo
este tiempo estuue yo el dicho Antonio de Venero innocente de tal caso, echando
imaginacion que le trataua casamiento con la hija de Iuan Ruyz de Vergara,
hermano de Francisco Ruyz de Vergara, que ha viuido en Anberes, por auerselo
escripto al dicho Gaspar de Annastro donna Maria de Ysunca su madre, y que como
sabian estaua rico, y era de los masqualificados de dicha Vitoria, se ladarian
con muchos ducados. Y como digo yo el dicho Antonio de Venero entendi que estos
serian los secretos y que tardaeuan en resoluerse, porque pediria el dicho
Annastro aun mas dote de lo que offrescian, por gozar con mas larguesa desu
grauedad. Despues parece ser que se perdieron dos naos Flamencas que yuan a
Laredo, y que fue robada en Plemua la nao de Philipe Dorio que yua tambien a
Biscaya. En las quales dichas tres naos tuuo muy gruessas perdidas, de que el
se vio con gra^dissimo trabajo y descontento de espiritu, sin saber que hazerse
para poder passar adelante con su honor. En este instante esciruio el dicho
Iuan de Ysunca al dicho Gaspar de An^astro, sin saberlo yo tampoco, yera que
hiziesse matar a su Excellencia el Principe d'Orange, y que lo tenta tratado
co^ su Magestad en grandissimo secreto, sin que nadie lo supiesse, sino enter
los dos: y auia hecho hazer a su Magestad vna capitulacion firmado de su mano,
en que leprometia, despues de sabido la nueua cierta dela muerte de su
Excelle^tia, ochen^ ta mil duchados en dinero, o el valor d'ellos en renta, y
un habito de Sanctiago, y que esto estaua por escrito, y que aun haria otras
muchas cosas, de darle cargos honrosos: porque auia dicho y assegurado el dicho
Iuan de Ysunca a su Magestad, que el dicho Annastr era un hombre de muy claero
entendimiento, y de muchas pre^das. En este instante ami el dicho Antonio de
Venero no me consta que este negocio lo supiesse persona nascida: antes me
asseguro al parecer mio, que por ningunae cosa del mundo se descubriera el
dicho Gaspar de Annastro de n^nguna nation estrangera para tal caso. Y puesto
caso que en Anberes no ay Espan^oles a quien poderlo descubrir, torno a dezir,
que verdaderame^te me paerece que no lo dixo a persona ninguna, y esto affirmo
assi por poder penetrar de otra cesa. A^ra tra^este tiempo, aura como un mes,
tuuo recelos de otra desgracia nueuamente, de que deuian de ester attaiados de
hazie^do de mercaderes, co^ quien el tenta muy gruessointeresse, de qui antidad
de nueue mil quinientas libras de gruesso, poco mas o menos de mercaderias qu'
el le au^a emb^ado, y cangazonesque auiae hecho para embiar a ellos, por cuenta
de algunos, Ingleses de Londres, y par letras de ca^bio que auiae acceptado y
pagaedo llanamente por ellos. Y viendose in ta^tos trabaios, y que d'este
vltimo el no tenia culpa alguna, pues si a el le hazias hancoroto con tanta
summa, el no lo podia remediar en ninguna manera, de se ausentar tambien. Y en
este instante me llamo a su camara a mi el dicho Antonio de Venero, y
encargandome mucho el secreto, y llorando muchas lagrimas, me dixo la
substancia declarada, y de lo tratado con el dicho Iuan de Ysunca, y me mostro
algunas cartas de las qu'l dicho Iuan de Ysunca le auia escripto, en que le
hazia buenas todas las promessas suso decluradas, y las cartas venian escriptas
diebolica e ingenio same^te sin firma, y el dicho Iuan de Ysunca paresce ser
que dio cuenta del negocio en Espa^na a un hijo suyo que estaua en Madrid,
llamado Pedro de Ysunca Le Queytio, y este mismo tambien le escriuia por muy
buen termino, assegurandole la misma substancia con muchas prendas, y
firmandose en la firma Apodaca. Estas cartas quemo en el aposento despues de
auerme mostrado (como digo) la substancia d'ellas. Y en esto comenso a
discurrir con migo, dizendo, que no queria verse a resistir tantas affrentas,
como se le aparetauan, y que se queria encomendar a Dios de todo coracon, y
matar el mismo a su Excellencia el Principe de Ora^ge: y que si le acauassen,
por cierto que el queria quador alli, por que era meior morir, que no viuir
(siendo el quien era) en affrenta, de que le dixiessen por el en la bolsa de
Anberes, mirad aquel hombre que a hecho bancaroto, y que llegandolas cosas a
este termino ninguno, consideraria a que no era la culpa suya: sino echarle
mucha culpa quando no la tuuiesse, y que deuia muchos dineros en Anberes a los
principales, y que tenian mando en la tierra, y le perseguirian cruelmente, y
que assi determinaua de morir, y que y a sabia que lleuaua la muerte tragada:
pero que conesto se encabriria, y queno se attribuyria a dar nombre de
ba^caroto a su desgracia. Todo lo dezia llorando. E yo viendole tan de
sconsolado, lloraua mucho mas, y le rogue, que por amor de Dios no buscasse con
sus manos la muerte, y que tuuiesse patiencia de las cosas que Dios hazia, y
que pues no era suya la culpa, resistiesse al trabaio que le sobreuenia,
mostrando rostro a sus acrecdores, y la razon en la mano, que le destruyan
Pedro Nunnez de Arbulu, y Pedro de cubiaur, y que con esto se suffriesie. El me
respondia, que no ternia rostro para mirar a nadie, y que assi estaua en su
proposito, e yo se lo contradezia mucho, diziendo otra vez, que lo encomendasse
todo a Dios y aguardasse a la desgracia. En estas platicas (que eran vndia de
labor a la tarde, despues de la bolsa) entro en su aposento Andres de la Maca
que viue en casa, innocente de todo, y assi se quedo esto assi sin hoblar mas
d'ello a quello noche por respecto della venida del dicho Andres de la Maca.
Otro dia a la mannana (estando en su camara) me embio a llamar, y dixo, Pues
como os va, Antonio hermano? y le respondi, que con mucha tristeza: y me
comenco tratar otar vez de lo passado, y que si el no mataua a su Excelle^cia,
no sabia a quien encome^dar se, si yo no fuesse prouar laventura con Iua^ de
Iaureguy, vezmo de Bilbao, cryado suyo, que ayudaua a escriuir en el co^tador,
porque le parescia moc^ determinado para qualqui era cosa, y pobre, E yo el
dicho Antonio de Venero le respo^di, que seria gra^dissimo cargo de
consciencia, que el dicho Anastro diesse occasion que muriesse el dicho Iuan de
Iaureguy mala muerte, p^rque (como querian tanto a su Excellencia en toda la
tierra.) quando lo acabasse de hazer, le harian piecas. El dezia, que no, sino
prenderle, y saber del a que fin lo auia hecho, y que en esto se passarian ocho
dias, despues que el vuiesse hecho el effecto, y que para esto podia partir el
dicho Annastro de Anberes quatro dias antes que el lo hiziesse, y yria a Cales,
y de alla despacharia un correo a Rauayn, que es Pedro de Ysunca, Le queytio,
hijo de Iuan de Ysunca, en que auisasse a su Magestad, que auia salido para tal
effecto, y que quedaua concertado, y que de Cales yria al ca^po del principe de
Parma. Y qua^do supiesse la nueua de la muerte, embiaria aca desde el ca^po vna
Tro^peta, pidie^do saluassen al dicho Iuan de Iau. la vida, y que el mesmo
Gaspar de Anastro e screuiria sobre el negoci^, declarandose a algunos amigos
de la Villa pidiando la vida del dicho, y embia^do firmas en blanco del
Principe de Parma, paraque estos sennores padiessen lo que quisiessen en su
vo^taeja de la religio^-frera, y todo lo demas, y que con este auria paz
despues de (...) el Principe de Orange. En esto entro a lacramara un muchacho
Flamenco del dicho Gaspar de Annastro, que le lleuo consigo, llamado Iuanico, y
le dixo, que llamasse a Iuan de Iaureguy el qual est aua escriuiendo en el
contador y vino, y qua^do entro, me dixo a mi que me saliesse del aposento, y
quedo con el en el aposento platicando. Y de alli un rato me llamo a mi, y dixo
que Iaureguy queria hazer aquello por amor d'el, y porsu honra, y que le auia
mostrado un pun^al con que lo auia de matar, estando en la tabla, o en
conuersaecion, y meterle elpun^al por detras de la oreja, y passarle, y que e^
Iaureguy lo queria hazer de buena gana: a mi me dexo que que me parescia, y le
respondi, que mirasse por lo que tecaua a la consciencia, y que si tal fuesse,
padeceria^ much as muertes los Espannoles que estaua^ en Anberes, de pesar de
ver muerto, al Principe si le matassen, y que yo me queriayr de la tierra por
no peligrar de la vida: y me dixo, que no tuuiesse miedo, que como el Iaureguy
dixisse la verdad claramente, no tocaria^ en la casa, ni haria^ cosa ninguna.
En esto aconsejo ad Iaureguy que por amor de su ho^ra y d'el, que quedasse
resuelto el hecho, y que aquel mismo dia fuesse a espiar como comia su
Excelle^cia, y assi lo hizo tres o quatro vezes: y de zia, que tenia gran
espera^ca de hazerlo, y aqui tenia gra^des platicas co^ el Iaureguy, como
persona que auia de acometer tal cosa. Y pe^sando mas en ello, a la postre
estuuiero^ en duda, de si seria con pu^nal, o pistolete. Y el Iaureguy dezia
que nunca auia tir ado pistolete, ni sabia como tirarlc^y le dixo, que lo
fuesse a prouar en alguna part co^ algun amigo, dizie^do que el dicho Iaureguy
fuesse Flamenco, y que no ha blasse otra le^gua: y le dixo, de si, como lo
hizo, Anda^do en esto, llego cartade Londres, en que dezia^, que Pedro de
cubiaur era ausentado, y con esta occasion le to mo gra^ gana de yrse, y se de
spedio en la bolsa de algunos, y se fue arrebatadame^te. El Martes, o Miercoles
despediendose de todos los de casa innocente mente para boluer luego (saluo del
dicho Iuan Iaureguy, y de mi el dicho Antonio de Venero) y me escriuio desde
Bruias dos cartas, la vna general, y la otra d'este negocio: de que la general
mostre a Mortin de Varron, Pedro de la Pe^na, Antonio Spinola, y a algunos
otros, y despues la queme, y di la otra carta al dicho Iaureguy, y la leyo,
porque dezia le parescia fuesse co^ pistolete, y el otro dixo que estaua bien,
y que assi lo haria y lo dezia con mocha alegria, y quemo tambien la otra
carta, y me dixo, que se queria co^fessar, y se sue fuera de casa a hazarlo,
sin que yo preguntasse al dicho Iaureguy con quien, y me dixo se auia
confessado y comulgado, y despues estaua ya presto para hazarlo quando el qui
siesse, sin aguardar a nada. Y assi este Domingo passado, diez y ocho d'este
oyo Missa en casa como a las onze horas, y despues se fue, e hizo lo que parece
ser, que cierto aun yo lo no se. Y para de scargo de mi conscientia digo que no
me consta que tenga ninguno otro culpa en este negocio: y que assilos que mas
estan presos deuen ser sueltos y libres, por hallar los yo innocents. Y si a
mi el dicho Antonio de Venero (por aver descubierto mi coracon, y dicho quanto
he podido y se me ha accordado) quisieren V. S. hazer misericordia de saluarle
la vida (pues el que hizo el mal es muerto, e yo no fuy auctor d'ello) lo
reconoscere toda mi vida.

El dicho Gaspar de Annastro nos prometio al dicho Iuan de Iaureguy, y a mi el
dicho Antonio de Venero, que si a quello se hazia, nos ternia por proprios
hijos, y que no auria cosa partida, sino que su hazienda seria nuestra propria:
y otras palabras desta manera. Y el dicho Iaureguy dixo, que no queria ninguna
cosa, y que lo hazia por amor d'el, y por aver comida su pan, e yo le quite el
sombrero temblando, y dandole a entender como temia de la muerte, y el me
asseguraua que no me tocarian en un pelo de la cabeca.

Soubsigne. Godofridus Montens. Zuerius. Blomart. Antonio de Venero.
Siendo esta confession preleyda al dicho declarante fuera de la carcel debaxo
del cielo, ha persistidio en ella, liendo assi verdad en presentia de los
Esclauines aqui abaxo firmado fecho a xxvj. de Marco. 1582.

Zuerius. Blomart.



The deposition of Anthony Venero, which of his own motion he made and
willingly writ and subscribed with his own hand.
I Anthony of Venero, borne in Bilbao, the son of John of Venero of the age
of 19. or 20. years little more or less, assistant in the house and affairs
of Iaspar of Annastro borne in Victoria, from the 20. day of January, 1580.
unto the xiij. of March 1582. do as follows declare, what happened unto me with
the said Jasper of Annastro, being thereof examined by my Lords the Marcgraue,
Borowmaisters and Shirifes of this town of Antwerpe, and do promise upon my
oathe, soul and conscience, to show the whole truth thereof: not to cloak or
conceal any thing, whereupon the said Lords, the Marcgraue, Borowmaisters
and Shirifes, have by the entreaty of the Lord Steven Racquet Coronel of the
said town of Antwerpe, promised me, that confessing whatsoever I do know,
they will grant me an honorable death, agreeable to my desire and contentation,
with a Priest also to confess me and to confer withal, because it
concerns the honor of my stock: I Anthony of Venero reposing my self upon
the word and nobility of the said Lords, touching the accomplishment thereof,
do say as follows.

First that John of Ysunca borne in Victoria, aforetime Commissioner ever the
furniture of the armies in these parts, writ a letter to Jasper of Annastro
of Lisbone, about ten months since, wherein he requested of him certain
goods, whereof he had never before written unto him: he said it would be
news to him to see any of his letters, and that he did this, that so he might
be at Lisbone requesting him to send him that which he demanded. Hereunto the
said Jasper of Annastro aunswerrd in friendly words, excusing himself for
not sending them, as well upon that he had not sent money, as because he found
not him self of wealth sufficient, and so could not trust forth that which he
demanded. Whereto John of Ysunca answered, requesting him to send the said
moueables, for that at Lisbone he stood in great need of them for the
conservation of his authority, considering that his Majesty would commit
unto him a very honorable office: and that therefore he would do it: for he
would communicate unto him a matter of very great importance, which would
redou^d to his great benefit and honor. To the which the said Annastro
replied again with new excuses and courtesies, but in deed sent him not the
said moueables, only he desired to understand what matter of so great
importance it might be that he would communicate unto him, whereof he desired
him to advertise him. These two letters aforesaid did I ye said Anthony of
Venero see, afterward came the answer of this letter wherein the said I. of Y
sunca opened the matter, and when Annastro had red the said letter, he
commanded me Anthony of Venero aforesaid from thenceforth not to open any
letter coming sealed after the manner of the Court: from that time, which might
be about 5. or 6. months since, the said John of Ysunca and Jasper of
Annastro have prosecuted their purposes and answers, each writing to other
very secretly, and the said Jasper of Annastro still answering his letters
with his own hand, in his chamber closing his letters with hard wax the
most closliest that might be. All this while was I Anthony of Venero ignorant
of this fact, imagining that it was some marriage matter with the daughter of
John Ruiz of Vergara the brother of Fraunces Ruiz of Vergara, who had dwelt in
this town of Antwerpe, and the rather because her mother the Lady Marie of
Ysunca had written to the said Jasper of Annastro, also that knowing him to
be wealthy and of the best qualetied in Victoria they would bestow her upon
him with some good number of Ducats. And as I say, Anthony of Venero supposed
these to be the secrets, and gessed that they deferred the final resolution,
because the said Anastro required for her dowry and to the maintenance of her
port, more than they did offer: It afterward (as I remember) fell so out, that
two Flemish vessels sailing toward Laredo were drowned, also that at Plemue the
bark of Philip Dorio which was bound to Biscay was robbed, in which three
vessels he lost much, whereby he grew into great care and anguish of mind, as
one ignorant how to behave him self to save his credit, at which instant the
said John of Ysunca writ to the said Jasper of Annastro unwitting to me: the
effect whereof was, that he should procure the slaughter of ye Prince of
Orange, his excellency: whereof he had dealt with his Majesty very secretly,
in such wise, as none but they two were acquainted therewith: also that he had
procured his Majesty to set down a certain capitulation which also he had
signed with his own hand, wherein his said Majesty promised upon the
certain news of his excellencies death, to give to the said Annastro 80000.
Ducats in silver or the value thereof in lands, together with a commandership
of S. James. That this was set down in writing, also that he would bestow on
him great benefittes with sundry honorable offices: for the said John of
Ysunca had told and assured his Majesty that the said Annastro was a man of
very good capacity, and greats wealth. All this while, I Anthony of Venero
do not think that any one was able to speak thereof, but rather in my
opinion I durst assure my self that in any wise the said Annastro would not
make any of whatsoever nation or condition, privy thereunto: so that as in
Antwerpe there be no Spaniards able to detect him, so do I again affirm, that
certainly I think he disclosed it to none: which I do the rather verify,
because I can not other wise think. Now shortly after this, and as it were a
month since he had some inckling of an other new mischance, namely of two
Merchants, that were about to break, by whom he was in hazard of 9500. lb.
sterling, or thereabout, for certain merchandise that he had sent them, and
other goods upon accounts of sundry English men of London: as also by reason
of certain bills of exchange which he had accepted and faithfully paid to
their uses: whereby seeing him self entangled in so many troubles, also, that
of this last loss he was in no default, and not knowing any remedy, but by
absenting himself, considering they had played bankerupte with so great
sums of his: he caused me Anthony of Venero to be called into his Chamber,
and charging me very sore to be secreate, with tears running down his
cheeks, he declared unto me the substance of the aforesaid treaty with John
of Ysunca, showing me certain of those Letters, which the said John of
Ysunca had written unto him, wherein he assured him of all the promises above
specified, which letters were written diuelishly and subtly without any
subscriptio^: and it seemed, that the said John of Ysunca, has imparted this
matter to a son of his, who remained at Madril^ called Peter of Ysunca le
Queytio, who also writ to him in very good speeches, assuring him of the
substance of all the premises diversely naming himself in the subscription
Apodaca. These Letters, having as I said, showed me the substance of them,
did he burn in his Chamber: and therevppon entered into discourse with me,
saying, that he neither would ne could digest so many shames as were provided
for him: therefore that commending himself to almighty God with all his
heart, he would with his own hands slay my Lord ye Prince of Orange his
excellency, and that in case he were slain about the execution thereof, yet in
truth he had rather perish in ye place, as coveting rather to die than to live
so dishonorably, that it should be said of him in the Burse at Antwerpe, see,
yonder man is become bankerupt: which, if it should so fall out, no man
would judge where the fault is, but would rather impute it unto him, though
he were not faulty. Also, that he ought much money in Antwerpe, even to the
best, and to such as there bare authority, who would with rigor proceed
against him, and therefore that he determined to die, yea, and that already he
had digested death, but that by this means he should cover and get glory to
his bankeruptship and discredit. All this spoke he with tears: whereupon I
seeing him so discomforted, wept much faster, and besought him for Gods love
not to seek his death by his own hands, but to be patient in Gods doings: and
seeing the fault was not in himself, to withstand such adversities as might
happen in showing a good face to his creditours, and to let them know the
reasons, how Peter Nuns of Arbule, and Peter of cubiaur undid him, and that
he should repose himself upon this, whereto he answered, that he had not
the face to look upon any man, and therefore that he was determined to
persiste in his purpose: wherein I contraried him stiffely, sundry times
willing him to refer al to God, and to attend better hap. Upon this
communicatio^ (which passed in an evening upon a working day after Burse time)
Andrew de la Maca, who notwtstanding he remains in ye same house, is innocent
of al, came into his chamber, so that by reason of the said Andrews coming
in, we brake off talk for that night. The next morning the said Anastro being
in his chamber, sent for me, and said: Now, brother Anthony how do you? I
answered, but heauely: herevppon he began again to reenter into the former
matter, saying, that if he himself should not slaye his excellency, he wist
not to whom to commit the doing thereof, except peradventure to his man John
Iaureguy, borne in Bilbao, who help to write in the Counting house, because he
seemed a stayed and resolute young man to any intent whatsoever, and poor
withal. Then I Antony of Venero answered, that it would be a great burden to
his conscience, if the said Annastro should procure the said Iaureguy any
vile death: for seeing his excellency was so well beloved throughout the whole
town, he could no sooner have done the deed, but he should be hewn in
pieces. Nay, said Annastro, but they will rather apprehend him, to the end to
learn for what purpose he did it, so as 7. or 8. days after the deed, would
be spent before any execution, and that therefore the said Annastro might
depart from Antwerpe, four days before the deed, and so go to Calais, from
whence he might dispatch a Post to Apodaca, who is Peter of Ysunca le Queytio,
the son of John Ysunca, to the end to give his Majesty to understand, that
he was departed from the purpose agreede upon, then that from Calais he would
go to the Prince of Parma his Camp, and thence having news of the slaughter,
he would send a trumpet to beg the life of the said John of Iaureguy: Also,
that Jasper of Annastro himself would write concerning that matter, and open
himself unto sundry his friends in the town, requiring the life of the said
Iaureguy, and sending blanckes signed by the Prince of Parma, to the end these
Lords might ask what they list for their own advantage concerning ye
Religious Vreed and all other matters, also that there withal after the prince
of Orenges death they should enjoy and assured peace. Herevpo^ a Flemish boy
belonging to the said Annastro named Ioa^nico, whom he has taken with him,
came into the Chamber, whom he commanded to call John Iaureguy who was writing
in the Counting house, when he was come he caused me to depart out of the
Chamber, the^ having a while talked with him, he called me again, and showed me
that Iaureguy for his sake and Honor would do it, also that he had showed him a
dagger wherewith he should kill him either at the Table or in any other
company by thrusting in the Dagger and wounding him behind the ear: that
Iaureguy would do this with a very good will, whereupon he asked my opinion: I
answered that he should look well unto it, because it touched his conscience:
further, because that if this matter were brought to pass, they would slaie
all the Spaniards in Antwerpe for sorrow of the Princes death, and that
therefore I had rather forsake the town tha^ venture my life. But he willed me
not to fear, saying that although Iaureguy should openly confess the truth,
yet would no man meddle with his house, neither would there be any further
pursuit: and therefore he counseled the said Iaureguy in that matter to
continue steadfast for the love of his honor and himself: also the same day to
go to epsy in what manner his excellency did eat, which he did three or
four times, so that he said he was in good hope to bring his purpose to
pass. After this he used much speech with the said Iaureguy, as with the man
who should commit such a heinous fact. Finally, having better considered of the
matter, they began to doubt whether it were better to be done with a Dagger or
with a Dagge: for Iaureguy said, that he never shot in Dagge, neither knew
how to discharge it, the other willed him to repair to some friend of his to
try it, and to counterfeite himself to be a Fleming, and not to use any
other language, whereto he granted, and did so. During these practices there
came letters from London, importing, that Peter of cubiaur had absented
himself, upon which occasion he thought best to depart, so as having
dispatched some at the Burse, suddenly upon a Tewsday or Wednesday, having
taken his leave of all the household, he went his way, seming as if he would
shortly come again, except to the said John of Iaureguy and me Antony of
Venero, and from Bruges he writ me two Letters, the one general, the other
concerning this matter: The general Letter I showed to Martin of Varion, Peter
de la Penna, Anthony Spinula, and some others and so burned it. The other I
delivered to Iaureguy who read it, because therein he said that he thought the
Dagge rediest: the other said that he could well do it so, the which he spoke
very cheerfully and the^ burned this letter also, and told me that he would
be shriuen, and so went forth of the doors, neither did I ever ask him to
what Confessor he would go. Afterward he told me that he was shriuen and
house led, and that now he was ready upon any opportunity without any let
to execute his purpose. Thus, upon this last Sunday, the 18. of this month,
about eleven of the clock he heard Mass in the house and so departed, and did
that which seems to be done, not that I do certainly know it as yet:
wherefore for the discharge of my conscience I do say, that I cannot perceive
any other to be guilty of this deed, and therefore that the others who are
apprehended, ought to be released and delivered, because in my conscience they
be innocent. Now therefore, if your Lordships would grant to me Anthony of
Venero pardon, and to save my life, as having opened the very botome of my
heart, and said all that I know, besides that, he who committed the
mischief, is dead already, I should be bound to you all my life long.

Moreover, the said Jasper of Annastro promised unto us the said John of
Iaureguy, and me Antony of Venero, that this being accomplished, he would
account us as his own natural children: also, that nothing should be parted
between us, but that all should be our own proper goods, and such like
speeches. The said Iaureguy answered, that he would have nothing, but that
that which he did, he did for his love, and because he had eaten his bread:
and I quaking, put off my hatte, giving him to understand how sore I feared
death, whereupon he assured me that no man would once touch any hair of my head.

This confession being red unto the said deponente without the prison upon
the Bridge openly, he persisted in the same his confession, confirming it to
be the truth.

Given the 26. of March 1582. in the presence of the vndernamed Zuerius
Blomart.




An other Examination taken the 24 of the same Month of March 1582.
SEyendo el dicho Antonio de Venero (puesto sobreiel atormentando) preguntado
quien podrian mas hauer sabido d'esta empresa? Dize ningunos otros, que los por
el aqui delante nombrados.

Preguntado si d'esta impresa no han sabido Andres de la Maca Pedro d' Orosco,
Pedro de la Pen^a, o Valentin de Meurs? Dize que no.

Pregu^tado si no se acuerdaque (esta^do a la mensa del dicho An^astro su amo
se platico y disputosi era licito dematara su Excel. por zelo de la fee) el
Clerigo Antonio Timmerman entonces declaro: que se podria hazer sin pecado?
Dize que d'ello no sa acuerda.

Preguntado si no sabia quien era el que estaua a Canallo iunto al Castillo
quando el dicho efeto era complido? Dize que no.

Yera dicho Examination firmada por los dichos Sennores Esclauines

I. Zuerius. L. Blomaert.



THe said Antony of Venero being upon the rack examined what other persons
might have had intelligence of this enterprise, says, no other than those
whom he has aforenamed.

Being demanded whether Andrew della Massa, Peter of Orosco, Peter della
Penna, or Valentine de Meurs knew nothing of the said enterprice, he says,
No.

Being demanded whether he remembers not that when some speech and argument
passed at the said Annastro his Masters table, whether for zeal of religion
it were lawful to slay his excellency, the Monk Antony Timmerman did then
affirm, that it might lawfully be done without sin. He says that he
remembers it not.

Being demanded whether he knows not who he was that was on horseback
before the Castle when the deed was executed? he says, No.

This examination was conferred before the said Lords Shirifes,

John Zuerius, and Jews Bloemart.



The Examination of Antony Timmerman, taken in the presence of the Lords, the
Markgraue, Godfrey Montens, M. James Zuerius, and Lewis Bloemart, Shirifes of
the town of Antwerpe the 18. 19. and 23. day of March. 1582.
ANtony Timmerman born in Dunkirke of the age of one and thirty years,
sometimes Monk of the order of the white Friars, having his Chamber in the
long Newstreete at the golden Horse.

Being demanded what acquaintance he has in the house of Jasper Annastro,
says that diverse times he has said Mass in the house of the said Annastro,
also that he has sent others thither for the same purpose, and that therefore
he had his finding as Chapleine to the Spanish Nation, and that the said
Annastro paid him.

Being demanded what private communication he has had with one John Iaureguy
a Spaniard of Biscay in the house of the said Annastro, says, that the said
Iaureguy upon Friday last came to him to shrift, desiring also to receive the
Sacrament at his hand, which he ministered unto him, for the which the said
party gave him two double Pistolets of gold, desiring the said Confessor to
pray for him. Also that according to the description of his stature and apparel
that he ware, it seems to be the same person, who upon Sundaye at noone
discharged a Dagge against his excellencies person.

Being demanded, what the said Iaureguy gave him to understand concerning
this deed, either in his confession, or before or after the same: also whether
he did not show him what he was promised for the performance of that Act,
says, that the said Iaureguy did confess unto him, that the said Jasper of
Annastro would him self have done it, if he could not have persuaded him
thereto: saying moreover that he would execute the said deed the same
Fridaye at dinner, and that only for the glory of God, and because his father
being an old man should be relieved.

Being demanded, whether he told not the said confessor in what place he was
purposed to do this deed, and with what weapons: says, that he told him that
he purposed to do it at the table as he thought, but showed him not with what
weapons.

Being demanded, whether the said confessor did finally absolve the said
Iauregui, so as he might execute his pretended deed, which afterward he
committed against the person of his excellency: Confesses that he absolved
the said Iauregui in this manner: That if he did not execute it for lucre of
money, but only for the glory of God and of a zeal to the Catholic Roman
Religion, that then it was lawful for him to do it, giving him thereupon
absolution, having nevertheless before represented to his view all such
dangers as might spring forth of the said deed.

Being demanded, whether he enquired of Iareguy if any other were able to
utter the pretense of the execution of the said deed: says, that he showed
him that no man was able to say any thing thereof, but only the said Jasper
Annastro, Antony of Venero, and an other man a Spanyard, whom he named not,
either by name or surname: but that ye said Confessor gesseth that it was a
young man, whom he had often seen about the same time coming and going to
the same house: the said young man being reasonable tall of stature, with a
black bearde cut after the Spanishe manner, of a brown pale color, long and
leave visaged, about 24. or 25. years of age, as it seemed, wearing
ordinarily a Spanish Cassock of a gray russet, and a black cloak.

Being demanded, what speech passed between the said Confessor and the said
Jasper of Annastro, touching this deed committed against his Excellency,
says, that the said Annastro never spoke any thing thereof, either in
Shrifte, or otherwise.

Being demanded, whether the said Iaureguy showed him not, that Valentine de
Meurs, Anthony Waechmans, and Anna Haecht, servants in the said Annastroes
house, knew nothing of the practice or effect of the said deed attempted
against his excellency, says, that the persons aforenamed, knew nothing
thereof as the said Iaureguy told him, and declared in his confession.

Being demanded, whether the said Annastro, Iaureguy or Antony of Venero, said
not unto him, that the King had by John of Ysunca made great promises to the
said Annastro, for the performing of the deed against his Excellency, says,
that he never knew or heard that of any body.

Being demanded, whether he yt said confessor has not aforetime been in the
house of the said Annastro, when sitting at the table, he was demanded,
whether it were lawful for any manne without offense, to slaye his
excellency: what aunsweare was made thereto, when it was, and who were there
present, declares, that the said Annastro has sundry times moved that
question to him: and namely at the table in dinner time, or so soon as the
Table was taken up, either the first or second Saturday before Candlemasse,
and that there were then present Andrew de la Maca, Antony of Venero, and
Valentine de Meurs: and that he this Confessor answered, that no particular or
private person might do it, but that it pertained only to the Justice.
Whereto the said Annastro (as he remembers) replied, that the King being a
public person might command an other to do it: whereupon this Confessor
said, that it was not lawful for any man with money to buy an others life. He
declared farther, that about fourteen days since, he the said Confessor
being at the Table, or else soon after they were risen, heard the said
Annastro use these or such like words: Valla me dios no at en esta tierra
Flamenco que se atreua a este Principe de Oranges? whereto he the said
Confessor replied, saying: Los Flamencos no son tan furiosos como vos otros,
where the said Maca was not then present, but was departed into Holland.

This Confession being read before the said Confessor upon the Bridge of the
Borow, under the open eleme^t, he being loosed and undone, he persisted in the
same in the presence of the Shirifes this 26. of March 1582.

Subscribed Zuerius, and L. Bloemart.

Here ensue the Copies of the Letters, written by the said Annastro, and the
Prince of Parma, etc.
Sennor Hermanno.
DE Brujas os escreui air, y aura dos horas que llegue aqui, y no he podido
hallar a Pedro de Cubiaur, ni saber d'el, mas de que un maestro dize, que passo
de Doura a Cales ocho dias a un hombre casi de sus sennas. Yo passo de mala
gana a Cales, por el tiempo que pierdo en boluer a casa: y a demas esto, el
viento es contrario, y no podre partir oy, pero sera mannana Sabado plazie^do a
Dios, Al sennor Antonio Espin. nola beso las manos, y que tengo gana deboluerme
Al sennor Andres de la Maca beso ta^bien las manos. Yo os encomiendo que
tengays cuenta de lo que haz que hazer hasta que yo buelua: de papeles y
assignaciones como de lo demas, que yo me dare lapriessa que pudiere. Pagareys
luego a Hernando de Nagera las 402. libras que Baltasar de Burgos escriuio se
le diessen, porque de Cales le tengo de escreuir que estan pagadas, embialde
quita^ca dello. A Valentin me encomiendo, y a Iaureguy dezid que os ayude en lo
de la escritura, y nuestro Sennor, etc.

En Dunquerch. 16. de Marco. 1582. El subscripto era Vuestro hermano Annastro

El sobrescripto era. Al Sennor Antonio de Venero mi hermano Anuers.
Al port 4. Florins, dando lo a las ocho horas de la manana et lunes que es
19. de Marco.



Annastros Letters written from Dunkirke.
GOOD brother, yesterday I wrote unto you from Bruges, and I arrived here two
hours since, but cannot yet find M. Peter of Cubiaur, either hear any other
news of him: but that a master of a ship showed me, that about eight days
since there was one like him that passed from Dover to Callis. Very unwilling I
am to go to Callis least losing my time I shall not come soon enough home.
Besides the wind being contrary I cannot depart this day, but to morrow being
Saturday, if it please God I shall. I humbly greet master Anthony Spinula and
am very desirous to return home. I also humbly greet Andrew Massa. I pray you
set to your hand to any thing that is to be done before my return, as well for
writings and assignations, as for any other matter. For my part I will make as
much have as I may. You shall presently pay Ferdinand of Nagera the 402. pounds
that Baltassar of Burgos has written to be delivered him: for from Callais I
will write that they be paid. And send him the acquaintance. I commend me to
Valentine, and will Iaureguy to help you in your writings. Our Lord, etc.

At Dunkirck this 16. of March 1582. The subscription was. Your brother
Annastro.

The superscription was. To my brother Anthony of Venero. At Antwerpe.
To the Post. 4. Florins so that he deliver them upon Monday at 8. a clock in
the morning, which shall be the 19. of March.



SENNOR.
PARA pagar a Baltasar de Burgos las quatro cientas y dos libras, no hallo otro
remedio, por la breuedad d'el tiempo sino dezir a Hernando de Nagera que tenia
yo orden del dico Burgos: para que se diessen a el dichas quatrocientas y dos
libras, y que se las querays pagar luego, y que Valentin se las de, y quital de
luego dos quitancas vna copia de otra, en que diga que se las days por orden de
Baltasar de Burgos, y que se obliga a hazer las buenas al dicho Baltasar de
Bura gos, y d'esta manera el dicho Burgos se podra valor dellas con su
commodidad. Hazelde luego a la hora que esta recibays, antes que se haga el
empleo: porque de otra manera no veo orden de que vengan a mannos d'el dicho. Y
assi os ruego mucho que esto se haga luego el mismo Lunes. Dira Nagera, que no
tiene auiso: direysle vos, que es hombre trabaioso, y que no quereys aguardar a
esso, porque yo os lo ordine assi, y Burgos esta desproueydo de dineros. En el
empleo me parece bien lo que ay le escreui de Brujas, que se haga de la
mercaderia que pide Diego Carreno, prouando la primero algunas vezes, y al
tiempo del effecto ponerse vna medida, y dos rodondas: y d'esta manera compara
con mas seguridad, y menos ambarac^: y para aquel vestido tomarle la medida por
detras. Esto tengo por mejor que lo otro, y de menos embaraco, y mas seguro: y
ta^bien puede ponerse lo otro, para en caso de necessidad. Pensad en ello, y
mirad qua^to va en que el empleo seacierte Hazed cuenta, que yo me detendre en
Cales el Sabado por todo el dia, para escreuit a Apodaca, y despachar le
correo, y despues he menester tres dias para assentar mi cuenta con aquel
hombre, y dezirle lo que conuiene, porque vaya todo per orde^: y despues se
podra hazer quando el corredo quisiere, y dezilde que le de Dios buena dicha, y
que consideres bien lo mucho que importa que el empleo sea bueno.

En la margen est aua escripto.

Otra vez torno a dez ir lo de Nagera, porque Baltasar de Burgos esta falto de
dineros, y embialde luego la vna cedula del dicho Nagera, y por esto doy esta
ventaja de 13 libras. A Valentin y Iaureguy me en comiendo mucho.



El sobre scripto era: Para Antonio de Venero.
SIr I ca^ find by reason of the shortness of the time no other remedy how
to pay Baltassar of Burgos the 402. pounds, but to show Ferdinande of Nagera,
that I had commission from the said Burgos to deliver him the said. 402.
pounds, and that you will presently pay him: and let Valentine pay him the
money, taking of him two acquittaunces, the one copied out of the other, wherein
he must confess that you do deliver the same unto him by the appointment of
Baltassar of Burgos, then bind him to make them good to the said Baltassar of
Burgos, and so may Burgos help himself to his own commodity. Do this
immediately, and even so soon as you have received these presents, before the
matter be performed, for I see no other means how they may come to his hands,
wherefore I pray you heartelye let this be done this present Monday. Nagera
will say that he has no such warrant: then shall you answer him that the man
is troublesome, and that you will not stay for that, seeing I have so commanded
you, and that Burgos is destitute of money. ^^der this, (...) of mer^^andise he
^neth the ^stol, pou^ and two ^^llets, ^ervvith (...) L. Prince ^oulde be
(...).
It seems good to me the exploit and matter were performed, in such sort as
yesterday I wrote from Bruges, and that with such Merchaundise as Diego Carreno
requires, having first tried it sundry times: and at the time of the
execution thereof to give it a good measure, and two rounds: and in this wise it
may be the more surely bought, and performed with less hinderaunce. As for the
garment, you must take measure behind. I think this a better way than the
other, of less hinderaunce, and most safe. Also for further assurance, the
other (...) Dagger.
may be added for necessities sake. Consider hereof and mark of what
importance the execution of this exploit is. Make your account that I will
stay at Callais all Saterdaye, there to write to Apodaca, and to dispatch the
post. And afterward I shall need three days to make up my account with this
man: Tell him also what is needful to be done, that all things may proceed
orderlye, after which the matter may be dispatched, when the He means
Iaureguy.
Courtier will, and tell him also that I pray God grant him good success, and
that I would have him mark how necessary it is that this exploit be
performed.

In the Margent was written.

Once again I speak to you of Nagera. For Baltasar of Burgos needs money:
send therefore to him immediately one of Nagera his Letters: for this I give
him the interest of 13. lib. 4. s. I commend me heartelye to Valentine and to
Iauregui.



The superscription was. For Antonie of Venero.
Other Letters of the said Annastro. Sennor hermano
DE Bruias y de Dunquerch os escreui, yo me detuue en Dunquerch dos dias, bien
desgustado, por ser el tiempo ta^ fuerte y contrario que non pude passar: y
assi me a concesejo el gouernador de Dunquerch que passasse portierra, y que
era mejor: y assi me robo el un passa port de Grauelinguas, y aqui, dos horas
ha, en esta villa de Grauelingas, y mannana me ire por agua a Cales, a lo que
entiendo, porque de aqui a Cales por tierra esta todo ll^no de Franceses, que
roban los que passam, y mas hara^, siendos Espa^noles. Ha me dicho un tal
Quadra que esta aqui, que Pedro de cubiaur estuuo aqui quatro dias ha, y que
entendio que era y do a Cales, podra serque alli le hallare, enter ta^to
hazelos lo meior que pudieredes. Y esse empleo de las mercaderias se puede
hazer a cada hora, y sea tan bueno que los duonnos no se quexen. No tengo mas
que escriuir, Nuestro Se^nor, etc. En comiendome a Valentin y Iaureguy. Al
se^nor Marca beso las manos, y Nuestro Se^nor, etc. En Grauelingas 17. de Marco
1582. Harta ventura ha sido aner escapado en el camino, legu^ andan los
Franceses. Yo sere alla lo mas presto que pudiere, que ya queria ser buelto.

El subscripto Era. Vestro buen hermano Annastro.

Other Letters of the said Annastro.
MY Lord and brother I writ unto you from Bruges and Dunkirke. Two days I
abode at Dunkirke though far against my mind, because the weather was so
rough and contrary that I could not pass: wherefore the governor of Dunkirke
counseled me to go by land (as the better way) and so he made me a pasport
for Graueling, whether I came two hours since, from whence I will to morrow
depart by water; (as I think) to Callais, for that between this and Callais
the ways be pestered with French men that do rob the passengers, whereunto
they would be more ready if they should meet with any Spaniards. A certain
Quadra that is here told me that Peter of Cubiaur, (...) was taken four
days ago, and that he heard that he was gone to Callais, it may be that I
may find him there. In the mean time do the best you can concerning the
exploit of merchaundise, it may be done at al times, and let it be so well
done, that the masters find no fault. I have no more to write. But our Lord,
etc. commend me to Valentine and Iauregui. I humbly salute the Lord Massa. Our
Lord, etc. From Graueling this 17 of March 1582. It was a great chance that I
escaped all the way, the French do so range up and down. I will be there so
soon as I may, for I would with a good will be at home already.

The subscription was, Your good brother Annastro. After the which was written,
Give this Post whose name is Coppenhaghen that which is written upon the
Letter, for guiding me hither.



His excellencies letters written with his own hand.
MY L. of Aldegond, I hear that to morrow the ij. prisoners, his co^plices
that shot at me, shall be executed. For my own part I do willingly forgive
them whatsoever they may have offended against me: and if peradventure they
have deserved some sore and sharp punishment, yet be a mean to my Lords the
Magistrates not to suffer them to abide any great torment. But rather if they
have so deserved, to content themselves with some speedy death. Hereupon I
bid you good night.

Your very good friend to do you service, William of Nassau.

Done in the prison of the town of Antwerp in the presence of my Lords,
Lescou^tet, M. James Zuerius, and Lewis Bloemart Shirifes, the 28. of March.
1582.
Master Anthony Timmerman prisoner, ready to receive his death whereunto he
was yesterdaye before noone condemned in the Vierschale by the Borrowmaisters
and Shirifes of this town, says and declares in form following.

First, he says, that having better called that which was spoken at the table
in the house of Jasper of Annastro, when the said deponent dined there, the
said Annastro propounded and argued: Whether by virtue of the proscription
which the King of Spain has published, any man may lawfullye slaie his
excellencies person, in truth he cannot say whether Andrew Nassa were present
or not, either this speech passed about the end or after dinner, adding
moreover, that he is well assured and certain, that Valentine of Meurs sat at
the Table that dinner, but was then gone away. Moreover the said condemned
person acknowledges his great oversight and error which he held, in thinking
that by virtue of the said proscription it was lawful to slay his
excellencies person: Being therefore now better informed by learned men
concerning the said opinion, and having further considered of the matter, he
does by this present revoke the same. Wherefore he requesteth the Lords
Magistrates of this Town to pardon him his said offense also to add this to
his former confession, and if the other be published, to publish this withal,
to the end no man think that he dyed in so wicked an opinion.

Subscribed. Zuerius.

The Prince of Parma his Letters. Alexander Prince of Parma and Plaisance,
Lieuetenaunt, Governor, and Captain General.
RIght dear and well-beloved, would to God you knew as well as the inhabitants
of these parts, with what zeal and affection I have always proceeded and
procured the weal, quiet and tra^quilitie of these countries generally,
whereof I seek no greter nor more evident testimony, tha^ the pains that I
have taken, the duties which I have yielded, and the perils and dangers which
I have incurred in seeking to restore the whole to her ancient brightness and
felicity, wherewith these Provinces were wont to flourish. According whereunto,
God having used the death of the Prince of Orange, (the one and only
instrument and Author of so many miseries and calamities which you have
endured) as a mean to open the way unto you, I hope he has likewise taken
from before your eyes the veil, which stopped and kept you from knowing, or
more nearly considering the sleightes, suttleties, and inventions, wherewith
the said Prince nourished your mistrusts, and through his own covetousness
and ambition continued your miseries, yea so far forth, that to the same
end he sought to bring you into the subjection and intolerable yoke of those,
from whom in former worlds you have received such domages and enmities. Thus
much I thought good to write unto you, to the end to advertise and assure you,
that in case you will prevail in this occasion and commodity which God does
offer unto you, you shall not find any man in this world that will aid and
assiste you with more sincerity, readiness and affection, tha^ I will:
offering unto you to the same effect whatsoever I may by virtue of the
authority and special power unto me given by his Majesty, of whom I am well
assured that you shall reap no less grace and favor, neither any worse
entertainment, than those have tried, who trusting wholly in the natural
clemency wherewith he is endued, have willingly cast themselves into the
arms of his royal courtesy and gentleness. Whereupon I will expecte your
answer, which I pray God may be such as I desire for your own benefit and
quietness, also that it may be so speedily, that his Majesty may have
occasion to desiste from such preparation as he makes for the atteyning to
this end, by some other means peradventure more violent and unprofitable to
your selves. Thus right dear and well-beloved, God have you in his holy and
worthy keeping.

From Tournay this 25. of March 1582. Subscribed, Alexander: And somewhat lower
F. Garnier.
The Superscription was,

To our right dear and well-beloved, the Markgraue, Amptman, Borowmaisters,
Shirifes, Counsel, and Rent masters of the Town of Antwerp.

The like letters, mutatis mutandis, were dispatched to the Inhabitants of
Bruxelles, Gaunt, Bruges, Ypres, etc.



Annastro his Letters written from Tournay. Muy mag. Sennor.
PVes ha querido No. Sor. que el Principe de Orange aya acabado sus dias, se ha
de creer que es para aver misericordia de estas tierras que estauan affligidas,
y yo estoy aggradado de aver sido occasion instrumento de sa muerte, por el
seruicio que deuo a mi Rey, y por la quietud y reposo que desseo a los estados:
y quando mi criado no fuera sufficie^te para hazer loque hizo, yo tenia
determinae ^o de matarle por mi mano, por saccat esta tierrae ^l trauajo en que
estaua. He querido escriuira v.m. y al Sr. su hermano esta carta para assegurar
los que pueden confiar en la misericordia que su Mag. y su Alteza del Principe
de Parma dessea hazer conlos de essa villa, sin accordar se de las faltas
passadas: si no con animo de perdonar las todas, y que todos puedan viuir
pacificamente. Y pues que v. m. tiene mano para poder dar a entender a essos S.
Ses. del magistrado esta buena voluntad, y tomar buen consejo en esse negocio,
assegurando los que en lo que yo pudiere fauorescer los lo hare de muy buena
gana. Y si quisierem empleara v.m. en ello, y al So. Laurentio su hermano. y
lleguarse por aca, yo les embiare passa port de su Alteza assegurando los. Y
saldre fiador por la seguridad de sui personas, y respondan me de la voluntad
que en esto tienen, y no se ofresce otra cosa por agora N. Sor.

de Tournay a 25. de marco, 1582. Besa las manos a vos. mes. Gaspar de Annastro.

Noble Lords,
Since it has pleased God to end the Prince of Orange his days, you are to
believe it to be, to the end to show mercy to these Countries which were
afflicted, and I rejoice that I was the occasion and instrument of his death,
both for the duty I owe to my King, and for the rest and tranquillity of
these estates. For if my servant had not been sufficient to do that which is
done, my self was resolved with my own hand to have slain him, so to deliver
this country out of the trouble it was in. This Letter I thought good to write
to you, and to my L. your brother, to the end to assure you that you may
suerlie repose your selves in the mercy which his Majesty and, the P. of
Parma his Highness desire to show to this town: as not to think upon any
former faults, otherwise than fully to pardon them, so as, all men may live
peaceably. Further, since it lies in you to give the Lords and Magistrates to
understand of this good will, also to take good advice concerning this
affair, assuring the^, that in what I may I will most willingly pleasure
them. If in this matter they will use you and your brother Laurence as
messengers hither, I will send you a passeport from his Highness with all
sufficient assurance, and will my self remain pledge for the surety of your
persons. Let me understand your wills herein. Thus not having any other
thing at this present, our Lord etc.

From Tournay this 25. of March. 1582. Subscribed, I humbly salute your
Lordships, Jasper of Annastro.

The Superscription was this, To the noble Lords Denis de Meurs, and Laurence
de Meurs. At Gant.
FINIS.


AT LONDON, Printed for Thomas Charde and William Broom. Anno 1582.


