A SERMON PREACHED IN the Collegiat Church of S. PETER in WESTMINSTER, The
sixth of April. 1628. Before the Right Honorable the Lords of the higher House
of PARLIAMENT. By JOHN, Lord Bishop of LINCOLN, and Deane of the said
Collegiat Church.

Set forth by their Lordships Appointment.

LONDON Printed by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. ANNO
1628.

Right Honorable:
I May say of our Exercise in particular, what St. Paul does of the Gospel in
general, that it is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Hebr. 13. 8.
verse. Mortification, as it is a most necessary praeparation for our Affairs
temporal, so in a more especial manner for our Actions spiritual; The most
vigorous, and lively of all the which, is this great Action now in hand, the
due receiving of the blessed Sacrament. Being therefore to speak, not before
such as be 1. Cor 3. ^.
Babes in Christ, and are to be Catechized in the Foundation, but before the
4. Reg. 2. 12
Horsemen, and Chariots of Israel, to be minded only of their Praeparation to
this Sacrament, I shall preach unto you Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and
to day, and for ever, in a plain Sermon of Spiritual Fast, and Mortification.
And my Text is,

Galat. 6. part of the 14. verse. But God forbid that I should glory, save in
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me,
and I unto the world.
THis Text generally points out two parts: Affectum, and Effectum, a kind of
Affection, and a kind of Effect, or Operation produced by the same. The
Affection is in the first part of my Text, God forbid that I should glory, but
in the Cross of Christ. The effect, or Operation produced by this Affection,
in the latter part, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world. Now the first part is far easier to be carried away then the second.
Caietan ^orum.
Facile est gloriari in cruce Christi, sed non sic, non cum hoc effectu, says
Caietan. It is no difficult matter to be Owners of this V^^am qu^ (...) sermo,
tam caut^ and sollicitus affectus Ambros. lib de fug^^^let (...).
Affect^o^, but the main point is to become Partakers of the Operation. In the
Affection we are to observe two parts, Actum, and Obiectum, the Act, and the
Object. The Act, is an Act of ioying, but somewhat more then ordinary; And
therefore termed in this place Acquiescere, adque non sine animi exultatione.
Beza in loc. Non modo aequo animo and moderato, sed etiam magna laetitia
perfusus. Idem in epist ad Rom c. 5.
(...), a kind of Rejoicing, or Glorying, That I should glory. This Act
being in it self (as the Act of every Affection is) but one, and that pure,
and indifferent, not (...)* Aristot. Ethic lib. 2* c 5
laudable, or blame worthy, is colored notwithstanding, and diuersified with a
double Object. The first Object makes it a black, and a forbidden Act, and
that is, carnal respects, in the very Gal. 6. 13.
immediate words before, and yet shut out of this Text by S. Paul, in this word
Absit; God forbids that Glorying. Some Apostles there be that glory in your
Flesh, but God forbid that I should so glory. The second Object makes it a
fair, and a bidden Act, which is Crux Christi, The Cross of Christ. For
although Regenerate men are not blown up with every idle blast of vanity, yet
are they not deuoide of natural Affections. Leguntur tamen plurimae illius ad
Paulum epistolae, tum in alijs, tum praecip^^ in Bibliotheca Eccles Cathedral*
Sarisbur.
Seneca was no disciple of S. Paul in that point. For although S. Paul makes a
statute in this place against glorying, and rejoicing, yet is it not altogether
absolute, and Categoricall, but with a saving, and Prouiso, for the right
Object. God forbid that I should glory, saving in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And this is the Affection. The Effect of this Affection, is a double
Mortification. The first is of all the vanities of the world to a regenerate
man, who glorying in nothing but the Cross of Christ, looks upon all these
with an eye of Abhorration, like so many Carcasses, or crucified bodies; Mundus
crucifixus, The world is crucified unto me. The second Mortification is of a
regenerate man unto all the vanities of the world; The which smelling him up
and down, as a Bear does a Carcass, in all the Faculties of his soul, and
praesenting Objects for his Senses, and Fantasies for his Understanding, to
awake, and allure him, find in him no stirring, or motion at all, as being dead
to all these Entisements of the world, and at last, spurns him away, as a
Crucified Carcass, Et ego mundo, and I unto the world. God forbid, etc.

NOw of the Affection in general, the Act of the Affection in particular,
which was a Rejoicing, and the forbidden Objects of this Act, both Moral,
those of the Gentiles, Riches, Glory, Greatness; and Ceremonial, those of the
Jews, variety of Types, and multitude of Proselytes I have spoken heretofore
in At White Hall, upon Good Friday, primo Caroli Regis.
another place. Now we are come into the House, where the Text dwells. The
Object bidden, and commanded, the Cross of Christ, and the Effects produced by
this Object, a double mortification, of the world unto a Regenerate man, which
is Mundus crucifixus, and of a Regenerate man unto the world, which is Paulus
crucifixus. Of the which I must crave your honorable patience to speak
plainly, and simply, as the subject requires. Considering that, as Luther
writes, upon this place, (...)
Multum interest inter Theologum gloriae, and Theologum crucis, There is a
great deal of difference between an Orator in the Court, and a Preacher of
Mortification. And (...) (...) (...)
S. Luke in the 24. of the Acts, frames one style for S. Paul, then under the
Cross, and another for Tertullus, an eloquent Towne-Clerke. Nay S. Paul
himself tells us plainly, 1. Cor. 1. 17. that this (...), this quaintness of
speech does quite euacuate the Cross of Christ. And God forbid, I should
rejoice, but in the Cross of Christ.

The Cross.
IT were but lost labor to expound this Text, as (...) Luthe^^^* Selne^^^^^m*
and ^l^^ Lutheranos (...)um Vide etiam Athanasium (...) Bul^^^ (...)
Some late writers seem to do, Who making these false Apostles to embrace the
Ceremonial Law, that thereby they might obtain a Toleration in Religion,
which Augustus, Tiberius, and Caius had given unto the Jews, and not to mere
Christians, would expound this Text of our sufferings for Christ; Whereas the
words themselves do fasten the sense on Christ's sufferings for us, not Crux
propter Christum, as that 2. Cor. 12. 10, but Crux Christi, not our Crosses for
Christ, but Christ's Cross for us, the Cross of Christ. And so do all the
ancient Fathers expound it. Morte Christise gloriari inquit, says Lib. ad
Reginam de recta fide.
S. Cyrill. He professes to boast only in the death of Christ, (...), says
Chrysostom (...)
S. Chrysostom. that Christ suffered for me. Non in propria iustitia, vel
doctrina, sed in Fide Crucis, says In locu^*
S. Hierom. God forbid, that S. Paul should boast in his own learning, in his
own righteousness, in his own crosses, but only, and wholly in the Faith of
the Cross of Christ. For, vbi Philosophus erubuit, ibi Apostolus the saurum
inuenit, says Sermon. 20. de verbis Apostol^*
S. Augustine, where the Philosopher found his blushing, there the Apostle has
pitched his boasting; Lomb. in loc.
Grandi ludibrio impijs, grandi mysterio pijs, says Lombard, On that great
scorn of the Pagan, and excessive Comfort of the devout Christian, the Cross
of Christ. But in the Cross of Christ.

ANd indeed what is there, that can swell a man up, that is not to be found
in this one Object? First, Knowledge (...), is of a puffing disposition, the 1.
Cor. 8. 1. and the Philosophers were Animalia gloriae, certain creatures all
made of Glory, says Hier. Epist. consolat. ad Iu^ianum.
S. Hierom. Ista liberalium Artium consectatio sibi placentes facit, says
Epist. 88.
Seneca, these studies in the liberal Arts make men esteem of themselves
very liberally. Nullus animae suauior cibus, says Lactant. de orig. Erroris,
l. 2. ^. 3.
Lactantius, It is a luscious kind of meat, and feeds very high. Should a man
therefore boast in this? Behold, as ^^^. quaest. Tus^. 5.
Tully thought all the humane Sciences might be found in Homer, Scalig. in sua
poetica.
Scaliger in Virgil, and Sphynx Philosoph. c. 25.
Theodorus Gaza in the works of Plutarque: so (...) All the treasures of
divine wisdom are laid up in Christ, Colos. 2. 3. And S. Paul could find
null^m Scibile, nothing fit to be known; beside the Cross of Solent Impe^ia
^^ ou^bu^ leones gignere. Vitu^s rebus so^enne secundis. Claud. Pan. 2. ad
S^ili^. g Plau^* i^ St^cho Act. 2. ^cen* 2.
Christ, 1. Cor. 2. 2. Again, Greatness, and Prosperity is another leaven, and
of a Auaritia, and Arrogantia p^^cip^^ va^idiorum vi(...). Tac. Hist. ^^. 1.
Solent Imperia ex o^ibus leones g^gner^. Vitiu^ rebus solenne secundis. Claud.
Pan. 2. ad Stil^c.
boasting nature. Decet res secundas superbia, says the Plaut. in St^cho Act.
2. Scen. 2.
Comic. It does not vnbecome fortunate men to swell a little. And behold if
Greatness be cause of boasting, the Cross of Christ has made us all that
believe therein, (...), great enough, even so many Kings, Apoc. 1. 6. Again,
Pleasure, as (...) Athen^^. (...)* ^. 4*
Plato writes in his Philaebus, is (...), a greater boaster then any of the
rest; And behold in the Cross of Christ, is that Pleasure, which eye has not
seen, care has not heard, nor has entered into the heart of man. 1. Cor. 2.
9. Lastly, the Nod of a great man has his leaven also, and puffs a man up.
Libertis, atque Ianitoribus eius innotescere pro magnifico habebatur, as
Ta(...). An^alium.
He said of Sejanus, to be known to his Footmen, and Chamber-keepers makes a
man look somewhat the bigger; And behold, as Vide Chrysostom* (...); Athanas* seu
Bulgar* Quis enim seruus cum sit, no^ gloriae du^erit her^ in se ben^uolentiam*
S. Chrysostom. Athanasius, and all the Greek Fathers expound this place, in the
Cross of Christ, we have the greatest Favorite that ever was, doing grace,
and honor to the unworthiest of his Servants. There thou may behold him
with the eye of Faith, pouring out his Blood to redeem thee, spreading out his
Arms to embrace thee, bowing down his Head to kiss thee, and yielding up the
Ghost to save thee: And therefore, Absit gloriari, God forbid, we should
rejoice, but in the Cross of Christ.

WEre I now in the Chair, as I am in the Pulpit, and to expound this Text
literally, I would say, that by the Cross of Christ in this place, is to be
understood Synecdochically, the All-sufficient, Expiatory, and Satisfactory
Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, which is Lombard: l. 4. did. 1.
Res Sacramenti, the very matter, and kernel of this blessed Sacrament: And
that at the Judgment Seat of Almighty God, which, without the Merits of our
Savior, is like the Tribunal of Lucius Cassius, Tac^t* Annal. l. 1^.
Scopulus reorum, A rock to splinter in pieces all that come nigh it, we have
nothing to stand upon, and to offer unto God to save our selves, besides this
one, and only Propitiation. That it is false, he had any help from Man, or
Angel, in his satisfying, either for all Actual sins, as some of the Sicut
Corpus Christi in alta^^ pro debit^ Originali s^^^l oblatum in Cruce, sic
^ffertur ^ugiter pro nostris quotidianis del^ct^^. Tho. ^pus^. ^8. de ^^^r. Alt
c. 1. ^onau. ^. Sent. ^ 20. q. ^. Homo potest satisfacere pro suo Actuali
pe^cato* sed non pro Originali Altis^^od. in 3. did. ^^.
Schoolmen are not ashamed to auerre, or for sins after Baptism, as Pas^io
Christi pro Originali peccato and Actual^b^^ Baptismum antecedentibus,
satisfecisse ^ed in M^ss^ offertur pro peccatis Baptismum, and primam
Iustificat^onem s^quentibus* C^th^r. in Opusc.
Catharinus, or for the punishment for sin, as Lib. 4 de poenit.
Bellarmine, or by way of Configuration, Part. 3. ^. 49. artic. 3.
as Aquinas, or by way of Congruity, as In 4. Sent. did. 15.
Durand, or by way of Concurrence, and supply, as In 4. Sent. d 16 q. 2.
Biel, or by way of Conformity only, as the Sess. 14. c. 8.
Council of Trent, or indeed by any way at all, that can be invented by man,
or Devil. Torcular calcauisolus, I have trodden this wine press alone, Esaias
63. 3. Alone; that is, as Symmachus translates it, and Just: Martyr in his
Dialogue against Tryphon reads it, (...) vnus, and solissimus, I my self, and
no more. And therefore as Alexander said of his Father Philip, that he had
conquered all Greece himself, Plutarch. in Vita Alex.
(...), etc. and would leave nothing for his endeavors: So in this great
buisinesse of satisfying for sin, Christ has done all himself; He has
satisfied for all Sins, August. lib 1. de remiss. pe^^. and mer* c. 13.
Original, and Actual; He has satisfied for all the parts of Sin, Exempto
reatu exim^tur poena. Tertul lib. de Baptism.
the guilt, and the punishment. There is nothing left for us to do, nothing
for us to suffer, nor consequently to rejoice of, as proceeding from our
selves, God forbid, that we should rejoice, but in the Cross of Christ.

NOr is this Cross, and Passion of our Savior so dear, and precious in
regard of Gods Acceptance only, like brasse-money, that goes cur^ant by
composition, which is a doctrine of the Sed solum potuit ess^ sa(...)onem
(...). Du(...). 4. (...).
Schoolmen to cry up their own Copper, and Tinkerly Merits to an Acceptance
also, but like the gold of Ophir, has in it self an intrinsecall, and indeed
an inaestimable value, sufficient to satisfy the Justice of God, Vsque ad
vltimum quadrantem, even as far, as the uttermost farthing. And this
intrinsecall value, which we call Merit, does accrue thereunto out of 4.
several considerations* of the Power, the Willingness, the Office, and the
Application of this most precious Sacrifice, offered for us, upon the Cross,
and offered unto us in the Supper. The which four Improuements of this Ransom
for sin are pointed at, in the four Attributes of this Cross in my Text.
First, the Power, in that it is called, Crux Domini, the Cross of a Christi
passio relata ad diuinitatem, consequitur ex ea in^i^it^ virtutem. Thom part ^.
q. 22. art. 3.
Lord, a name of Power, and so able to save us. Secondly, the Willingness, in
that it is called, Crux Jesus, the Cross of Jesus, a name of Mel in ore, melos
in aure iubilus in cord. Bern. Sermon 1^, (...) Can(...)
love and sweetness, and so willing to save us. Thirdly, the Office, in that
it is called, Crux Christi, the Cross of Christ; Nomen Officij (as Part. ^ q.
^.
Aquinas terms it) a name of Office, and Appointment, and so ordained to save
us. Lastly, the Application, in this word, (...) in that they are said to be
ours, which brings all three home to our Souls, and Consciences, and so fits
them to save Us. This Cross were not a sufficient Ransom in it self, were it
not for this Power, and Divine Nature, Crux Domini, that it is the Cross of
the Lord; Nor this Power sufficient in it self, were it not for this (...)ten.
d. ^^ art. 13.
Willingness in both natures to be our Savior, Crux Jesus, the Cross of our
Savior; Nor this Power, and Willingness sufficient for this Sacrifice, were
it not the Sacrifice of the Messiah, Crux Christi, the Cross of him that was
anointed, and appointed to save us; Nor all this peradventure sufficient to
save, had he Quod videtur tame^ Piscator innuere in Epist. ad Philipp. c. 2.
merited for himself, and not for us, as our Lord, our Jesus, and our Christ,
The Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. And yet, God be praised therefore, this
great Prince lost nothing in Majesty, by his condescending thus to his basest
people, but in very deed encreast in Glory. For whereas before in Psalm. 75. 1.
Jury only was God known, and his Name great, but in Israel, now his Romans 10.
18
sound is gone unto all parts, and his words unto the ends of the World. And
what Iam facit ipse deos mittitque ad Sydedera numen Maius, and Augusto crescit
sub Principe Coelum. Manil. Astron. lib. 4.
Manilius the Poet says merrily of Augustus, who began to fill his imaginary
Heaven with his (...), and imaginary Consecration, that, Augusto crescit sub
Principe caelum, the Heavens began to grow wider in the reign of Augustus, we
may most truly say of Christ our Savior, Christo crescit sub Principe caelum.
there has been much more Elbow-roome in Heaven, since our Lord vouchsafed to
converse here on Earth, And therefore God forbid, we should rejoice, but in
the Cross of our Lord. And so much of the first general part of this Text,
the Affection, consisting of an Act, which was a Rejoicing, and an Object, the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. I come now to the second part, the Effect, or
Operation produced by the same, which is a double Mortification, or
Crucifixion, of the World to a Regenerate man, of a Regenerate man, unto the
World, Whereby the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World.

THE world crucified? Why the world is Dei statua, a great statue, and a lively
pourtraiture of God himself, as the Apud F^^^num.
Platonists call it. It is Dei Scriptura, the first Bible that God made for the
institution of Man, says Clem. Alex. Strom. 5*
Clem: Alexandrinus. It is yet (if it be well studied) one of the best
furnished Libraryes a Man can find, if we may believe Vide Sphyng. phil p. 37.
S. Anthony, and In eius vi^a*
S. Bernard: And to be crucified, is to become (...), Deuteronomy. 21. 23. most
execrable, most abominable. Most execrable, I say, Not as though the Soul
could not go to Heaven before burial, as the vide Cornel. a Lapide, in 21.
Deuter
Rabbis thought, or for the great despite done to Gods image thereby, as (...)
T^sta^us, or because it leads to Atheism, and a certain belief of the
mortality of the Soul, as some (...)
Late writers, but because that Law was not wholly political, but in part (...)
ceremonial, praefiguring Christ, who by his Cross, and death for our sins
made all other Crucifixions odious, and execrable. Why therefore should the
World, which seemed unto God to be so very good, Gene. 1. 31. be now unto me
as a Carcass crucified? I must distinguish, as S. Augustine does upon the
143. Psalm, Audi in Euangelio mundum, and mundum, remember you have read in
the Gospel of a World, and a World, Mundum, quem fecit Deus, Mun^um, que^ regit
Diabolus, there is a World created by God, and a World managed by the Devil.
(...), He does not mean here the Heavens, or the Earth, says S. Chrysostom;
nor the World indeed, but the things of the world, Glory, Port, Riches,
Greatness, (...)
(...), all that make a shining, and glittering in the world. These are all but
so many Carcasses, and a very abomination to a truly regenerate man; Mundus
crucifixus, The World is crucified unto me. Again, a regenerate man is, Natum
ex Deo, A thing borne of God, 1. Ioh. 5. 4. and we are all in Christ 1. Pet.
2. 9.
Reges, and Sacerdotes, so many Kings, and Priests, as I said before, and shall
such be said to be Carrions, or crucified? I answer with Saint Greg. Moral.
lib. 5. ca. 5.
Gregory, Viuebat, sed iam non mundi vita, quia dicebat, viuo ego, iam non ego;
S. Paul was no Carrion, but alive indeed, when he spoke these words, but yet
not to the humor of this praesent World, because he professes openly, I
live, and yet not I. Gal. 2. 19. That is, what life you see in me, sithence
that happy hour I first applied to my soul, the passion of my Savior, is all
for Christ, and nothing for the world; For, as the World is crucified unto me:
so am I unto the World. And now methinkes, upon the perusal of what has been
said, and the consideration of all these Crosses, Christ crucified, Paul
crucified, and the World crucified, we have a Map of the siege of Jerusalem,
where (as Ooseph de ^xcid. l. 5. c. ^8.
Josephus tells us) there were so many Crosses set up by Titus, that (...),
there wanted Earth to bear the Crosses, and Crosses to bear the crucified
Carcasses. But the Cross of Christ (the former influence from the Deity
considered) is so powerful in operation, that it kills on either side, the
regenerate man on the one, and the unregenerate world on the other. And it must
be so; For as he said in Tacitas. ^^stor. lib. 1.
Tacitus, Frustra moritur Nero, si Otho viuit, In vain should the regenerate
man be purged from sins, if the world were let alone, to draw him to more
sins; And therefore, they are both dead one to another, Dum nihil concupiscit
Apostolus mundi, nihil agnoscit Mundus Apostoli, says S. In loc.
Ambrose, while the Regenerate man affects nothing that is the Worlds, nor the
world approues of any thing in the Regenerate man. d Sicut sunt duo mortui, ex
quibus nullus tangit, vel diligit alterum, says Remigius. They stand not like
those wretches tormented by Mezentius, Virgil. A^neid 7.
Qui mortua viuis Corpora composuit, one dead, and the other alive, but like
Eteocles, and Polynices after the combat, Starius.
Duo corpora in vno Conduntur busto, Like two dead Carcasses in one Beer,
whereof the one neither sees, nor regards the other. And for any further
commerce, or trading with the vanities of the World, f mutuo transfiguntur, and
inuicem moriuntur, Tertul. aduers. Marc. l. 5. Non secundum substantiam* sed
secundum quod est peccati. Caiet.
as Tertullian does elegantly expound this Text, they are dead, and crucified,
the one to the other, The world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

But this Doctrine, as it is very hard to be put in practice, so is it not
easy to be understood, how this Iudic. 16. 29
Sampson should kill more at his Death, then he did in his Life; how this
Scaeuola should strike harder with his scortched (as Senec. ^^ Epist.
Seneca speaks) then ever he did with his armed hand; how the Cross, and
Passion of our Savior Christ should crucify together with it self S. Paul,
and the World. I would to God, I were as able to show it Vtinam hac morte ego
frequenter ^^^am, vt ^^^^^m laque^s mortis. Bern. Sermon. 52. in Canti^.
by my life and conversation (which I confess I ought to do) as I shall
easily declare it by a plain Expression. As our sins brought Christ, so
Christ brought our sins (which Rom ^. ^. Man, bec^^se ^^ sti^^es t^ vt, as
close as our manhood. (...). Oecumen.
S Paul calls our Old man) to the Cross; which Old man of ours (...) was there
crucified with Christ, Romans 6. 6. Yet not, as he was a Man, but as he was Old,
Tertul. lib. de r^surrect. Christ's.
per emendationem vitae, non per interitum Substantiae. His Oldnes was there
crucified, but his Substance was not abolished, as Tertullian speaks. ^^^tan.
in (...)
Vetustas defectus est ab antiquo pecca^o Adami, says a Schooleman, this
Oldnes of his was a body of sin derived from the fall of Adam, and now so
crucified with Christ, and so nayl'd to his Cross, that, if we be Christ's,
it can neither arraigne us, nor reign in us; Not reign in us in this life,
nor arraigne us in that to come. As S. Creditur a pijs. Cyprian. Sermon de
Resurrect.
Cyprian therefore speaks of an odd opinion in his time, Sanguinem Christi in
cruce suspensi in caluariam Adae defluxisse, That the blood of Christ, when he
hung on the Cross, did drop, and distill on the skul of Adam, which Lib. 2.
contr. Marc. c. 4. Hic homine^* primum s^^ce* prim^^ esse sepultum, Hic patitur
Christus.
Tertullian, and many of the ancient Orig tract* 35 in Matthew. ven^t ad me
trad^^^o tal^. Chrysostom. Hom. 85 in Io. (...) etc. Epiph. hae^. 46. contr
^atianos* Amb^* in Luc. Au^. Sermon. 71. Audite aliu^ ^^cramentum, Fratres
charis^imi. (...) Non^us.
Fathers suppose to be buried just under the Cross: so is it most certain,
that from the death, and passion of Christ, there distilleth such a virtue upon
all the Sons of Adam, that believe in him, as at the first, giving Sin a
deadly wound, does bereave it of all power to reign in them, and causes them,
by such spaces and degrees, as (...) quod non sit mortuus, experimur. Infoelix
ego. Sed fixus est. Ca^e^an.
must be allowed this flesh, and blood, wherein we live, to die unto sin,
and live unto righteousness, but both in Christ; For as a graft taken from the
old, and grafted in a new stock lives no longer by any life of his own, but
by that of his stock: Even so we complantati, Romans 6. 5. taken out of the
Nunc quidem non resurrectione tota, sed quantum ad vitam iusticiae resurgendum.
Sadolet. (...) Romans
corruptions of Adam, and ingrafted in Christ's death, and passion, can no
longer live the life of the world, but the life of Christ, and must now look
upon the world, but as the world looked upon Christ, and will look upon us, if
we shall follow his steps, to wit, as upon so many abominable, and crucified
Carcasses; For by the Cross of Christ, the world is crucified unto us, and we
unto the world. And having spoken thus much of both these Crucified Bodies in
the general, I will now sever them a little to their particulars, and begin
with the Cross of the left hand, Mundus crucifixus; The world is crucified
unto me.

BY the world therefore in this place, we must understand the (...). Athanas.
vain pomp, and glory of the world, to the which we have long ago renounced
in Baptism, and are by and by to renounce in the Supper Sacramentally, and
cannot but renounce again and again really, and formally, as often as we apply
unto our Souls either in Sacrament, or out of Sacrament, the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And to these we must renounce, not as to things dead only,
and so not to be regarded, but as to things put to an ignominious death, as
Non solum mortuus, sed and crucifixus, quod est ignominiosum genus mortis.
Born. Sermon. 1. de Quadrag. Non mortuus, sed turpiss^me mortuus. Luther ^n loc.
S. Bernard does press it, and so to be loathed, and abhorred, as all nations
use to do the Carcasses of Malefactors mangled, and crucified, The World is
crucified unto me. As therefore the World used our Savior, when he was on his
Cross, with sleights, and neglects, and turnings of the head, as it were,
another way, which makes him to cry out, Have ye no regard, O ye that pass
by? Lament. 1. 12. So must we, if we begin to breath the life of
righteousness, when the world fawnes upon us, with Honors, Riches,
Greatness, Favors, or frowns upon us, with Hatred, Malice, Persecutions,
Oppressions, and the like, turn our head aside another way, with a godly kind
of pride (as Epist. ad Francis Pic. extat apud Mor^^, in operibus Anglican.
Picus Mirandula was wont to call it) and no more regard her, then a Carcass
crucified, The world is crucified unto me. And yet I must conceive with all
reverence of higher powers, whom Sed and mihi famulo Creatoris mu^dus
crucifixus est* sed non Deus mundi, Et ego munde, non tamen Deo mundi; Mundum
enim quantum ad conuersationem e^^s posuit* Tertul. aduersus* Marc. l ^.
God has placed for the government of this world* They are no part of the Old
man, that was Crucified with Christ. Nor must I contemn the blessings of God,
nor hold them abominable, that have, and enjoy them; I know, that (as Sermon.
110. de Tempore.
S. Augustine observes) Lazarus, a poor beggar is placed in Heaven, in the
bosom of Abraham, that rich Patriarch. I must not undervalue the kiss of Genesis
45. 2.
Joseph, nor slight the Hester. 5. 2.
bending of the golden Scepter, I may indeed, vti mundo, sed non diligere
mundum* says S. August. in Joh: 1. epist. 2. ^5
Augustine, I may use the world, as a way to Christ, but I may not dote upon
the world to divert me from Christ. For if any of all these should hinder the
framing of the New man, begun in my Soul by the blood of Christ, they
forthwith become no other unto me, then Tiberius, Caius, and Claudius,
Emperors, that were dead long before, were unto Tacitus, when he wrote his
Histories, Tacit: Histor. lib. 1.
nec beneficio, nec iniuria cogniti, little regarded for frown, or favor; For
in this case, Mundus crucifixus, The world is crucified to me. But shall I not
call my judgment into quaestion, and be conceived a Maynteyner of Paradoxes;

Horat. Epist. lib. ep. 1.
Nil intra est oleum, nil extra est in nuce duri. If I esteem so meanly of
the things of this world? you shall indeed amongst the Children of the World.
And therefore, as Luther. in loc.
Luther writes upon this place, Penes pios est iudicium rectum, No man can ride
as a Judge in his own County; It is not the man of the world, but the
Credamus illi fra^res, homo erat, ambo gaudiae nouerat; A^t tamen, Nonest
ga^dere impijs. August. in Ps. 96.
man of God, that can judge of the world, It is the 1. Cor. 2. 15.
Spiritual man, that judges all things. That is, the man, that is dead in the
flesh, and quickened in the spirit; And so (this Text being the Anuill that all
the old Hermites did still beat upon) In Vitas Patrum. l. q. ^ ^6.
Moses a religious Abbot answered a Nouice, that desired to learn of him, how
he might understand this hard Text, and frame his Notions to conceive of the
World, as of a Carcass crucified, that he must first imagine himself 3. years
in his grave, and then reflect upon the glory of the World. And S. In eius vita
Anthony to another, that ask't him the same quaestion, made the like answer,
Cogita honorem saeculi, tanquam absens de saeculo, look upon the glory of the
World, as though you were already departed from the World, that is, if you
desire to esteem of the World as crucified unto you, you must first esteem of
your self, as crucified unto the World, which is the second kind of
Mortification, and the last part of my Text, The World is crucified unto me,
and I unto the World.

NOw as Valentinus (in Tacitus) being a (...) 4. ^^^stor.
in great peril of life, and hearing of the taking, and ruining of his
Country, received the message as most welcome, tanquam solatium mortis, as a
fit praeparatiue for his own ruin also: So our Apostle S. Paul observing in
this place, that by the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, the world already is
dead unto a regenerate man, takes it, as a fit praeparatiue for a regenerate
man to die likewise unto the world, that as the world seems unto him, he may
also seem unto the world, but as a Carrion, or a thing Crucified, The world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world. And this is true, and perfect
mortification. For although sometimes the frowning world might seem unto a
Courtier of some sour, and discontented humors abominable, and crucified,
yet if his Mill (for so Saint Cor sicut Molendinum, vel ociter vo^uitur, e^
(...) respuit, sed quicquia (...) B^r. l. Med. (...)
Bernard calls the Fantasy) be still grinding of thoughts, if his tongue
be wagging against the State, if his Non turbe maximae s^bi as^antis (...)
gerit mortu^^. Aug. lie salutar. do^^^ 16. Sic adulantes, vt vituperantes audit
mortuus. Bern. Sermon 72. in Cantic. (...) (...) Ho^. 12. in 1. Co^.
ear be open to the applause of the people, if the eye of the Soul, that
looks upon things a great way off (a Philosopher would call it Hope) be ever
wandering, and rolling, this is but a poor Mortification; For the World
peradventure may be dead unto the Man, but surely the Non salutationibus pote^
tium de^^^^atur mortuus Aug (...) salutur doc. c. 1^ Si mortuus v^^^m non
vide^, vi^^s tamen mortuum videt Claud. Altis. in loc.
Man is not dead, but sleeps. Whereas Paulus crucifixus, a regenerate Man
truly dead unto sin, and alive only to righteousness, when the world
fawnes, he sees her not, when she frowns, he regards her not, when the flesh
moves, he (...). Chrysostom.
feels it not, when the Devil tempts, he listens not; And the reason is
plain, says Saint Gregor. Moral. 5. c* 3.
Gregory, Quia mortuus est, quia crucifixus est, because he is past all sense,
and motion in this kind, Crucifixus mundo, he is crucified unto the world.
Some Examen de los Ing(...).
Spanish Writers speak of a Man, that was so overcome with Melancholy, that
he conceived himself quite dead, and refused all food, and nourishment, as a
thing unnecessary for a dead man, until the Physician dressing up some in
Graue-cloathes, and causing them to eat before him, brought him first to a
belief, that dead men could eat, and consequently to eat himself also. I am
now in a Theme, which the World accounts very Melancholy; And therefore until
some worldling shall bring unto me a dead man, that can find in his heart to
kill, hate, oppress, revenge, swear, blaspheme, sooth, flatter, follow all
the enticements of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, I will easier believe,
him, that does these things, to be yet no regenerate man, then that a
regenerate man can do these things; For as Operum. ^om* 4 lib* de ^alutaribus
(...) cap. 16
S. Augustine says very well; Mortuus nec facere potest ista, nec pati, Dead
men are neither active, nor passive in this kind, and a Regenerate man is not
only Mortuus, dead, but Crucifixus Mundo, crucified unto the world. And if you
mark it well, you shall find that the World accounts little better of them,
then as of so many Carrions, and dead Carcasses. Saint Paul was esteemed of,
but as filth, and offscouring, 1. Cor. 4. 13. The rest of the Apostles, but as
stulta mundi, the Toms of the world, 1. Cor. 1. 27. And in the succeeding Ages
Epist 6.
S. Ambrose tells us in one of his Epistles, that when Paulinus a Noble young
man, and a Senator of Rome, renounced the world, to come unto Christ, there was
a greater hubbub, and admiration in the City, then if a Mule had cast a foale;
Ex illa familia, illa prosapia, illa indole, What a Gallant of that House, that
Descent, those excellent parts, to think of Mortification? Fieri hoc non
potest, God forbid, it may not be, it is only for such melancholy, and
forlorn wretches, as are weary of themselves, and ready to throw into Natures
face, that Praesent of life, which she bestowed upon them, as In Epist.
Seneca speaks. And S. Nullae aliae Romanae (...) Fabulam praebuere nisi
Paula* et (...) Lacerant Sanctum propos^^^* Hie^o^.
Hierome living in the very next age after, says, that there was no
Table-talke in all Rome, for many years together, but of those Ladies of high
Descent, Paula, and Melania, who forsaking their great pomp, and huge Estates,
durst offer to follow this Cross of Christ. Nay, it seems, himself had his
share in this Obloquie, when Ead. Epist.
He gives God most humble thanks, Quod dignus sit, quem mundus oderit, that
he was also thought worthy to be hated of the world, to be accounted
Crucifixus mundo, as crucified unto the world. And yet are not the regenerate a
whit the worse for this base esteem the world has of them, being now past the
spite of the world. For the world deals with them, but as Tacitus. (...)
Annual. 14*
Nero did with Sylla, and Plautus, who would have them put from the
Councell-Table, some three days after they were dead, Grauioribus ludibrijs,
quam malis, some what to their scorn, but little to their loss, as Tacitus
observes. In the mean time, right dear in the sight of the Lord are these
deaths of his Saints; For he is as jealous of his Church, as that impatient
Lover was of his Mistress, Auson. E. p^^r. 66.
Quinetia^ exopto, zelus quia iunctus amori est, vt videare alijs faeda
'decoramihi. He would have it just as it is; That his Church should appear
Cantic. 1. 5.
Nigra, sed formosa, Black, and yet fair; glorified unto Him, and crucified
unto the world, Crucifixus mundo, Crucified unto the world. And so much of my
Text.

NOw for Application, if you desire to know what interest you have in the
blessed Sacrament, which you are to receive this day, and how far you may boast
of the Sacrifice of Christ, there repraesented, and exhibited unto you, if the
Arminians will give me leave to draw so near to a certainety of Salvation, I
will tell you in a word: Look how much we are dead unto Sin, and crucified
unto the world; so much, and no more may we rejoice, in the Grace of this
Sacrament, that is in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; Where there is much
dying to sin, the Cross has effectuated much, where a little, all that
little, where nothing, there is as yet (I speak it with horror, and yet it is
Gods truth) no cause of rejoicing, in the Cross of Christ. If it please you to
descend to your own bosoms, there is no one Case of Conscience more easy to
be decided; It is hard indeed to say of a dead Man, what he can do, but no
Child, but will tell you, what he cannot do. First, (...), says Apud Oecumen^ in
loc:
Photius the Greek Scholiast, A dead Man cannot sin; And therefore if you
drink iniquity, like water, and commit sin with greedines, (for the
regenerate themselves have their sins of infirmity because Nondum mortuus, sed
fixus est noster vetus hom^^^ est, imp^^^us ab operib^s vetusta-^^ris. Cai^t:
in ^^ ad Romans
Crucified sins, as well as Crucified Men, must have a time to die) but if
you commit sins (I say) with a stiff, and a strong hand, then surely, there
is much life in your old Man, and you are not yet crucified unto the world.
Secondly, Chrysostom; in loc. vt ^^ (...) C^^us apud (...) in vita ^^mp^^.
(...), says St. Ch^ysostome, A dead man cannot bite. And therefore how ever
you may be obnoxious to sins of infirmity, if you be addicted to Mortuus
(...) succenditur. C^ss^^^: lib 4. cap. 24. Homo mortuus in Sepulchro ^^^^
detrahit, nominem ^a^^^tatur, ne^^^ vtolentus existit, (...) opp^^mit non
invid. ^^onis, ^^^ insul^at ^^alis etc. (...) 10. Nullius (...) Prosper.
biting Sins, Oppression, Cruelty, and Revenge, which are Honey to this corrupt
nature of ours, you are not as you should be, but as yet far enough from
being Crucified unto the world. Thirdly, Mortuus adulantes non audit, says Sic
adula^^tes mortuus, vt detrahentes audit, immo nec audit, quia mortu^^ est.
Bern* Sermon. 71* in Quadrag.
Saint Bernard, A dead Man cares little for the Music of Flatterers. And
therefore if we do not refuse to hear the voice of those Charmers, charm they
never so wisely, we are still alive, and not crucified unto the World.
Fourthly, and lastly, Mortuus c^riositate non raptatur, says Saint Aug. de
salutar. d^c. ^* 16.
Augustine, A dead Man troubles not his Head with impertinent Curiosities. And
therefore if people (whom it no way concerns) do busy themselves in those
high matters of Church, and Commonwealth, whereof they understand very little,
(I pray God Saint Augustine has not touched herein the fault of our times) and
will not rest contented, in point of Religion, with the plain knowledge of
Christ crucified, then surely they are not, as yet, themselves Crucifixi mundo,
Crucified unto the world.

I Know this Text is accounted by the Fathers, Vellet^ cu^ Pa^lo posse dicere
per quem (...) etc Hom. 55. in Matt.
S. Chrysostom, L. de do^^. Sp^^^^*
S. Augustine, In 3. cap. ^ob lib. 6. Mor.
S. Gregory, and Sermon. 72. ^^ Cantic. and 1 ^^ quadrag.
S. Bernard, the hardest for practice in all the Bible, and that there is not
one of all these holy men, but is forced to say, Vellem cum Paulo dicere, that
he desires from the bottom of his heart, he were once able to conclude with
S. Paul, that the world were crucified unto him, and he^ unto the world. And
yet must not we, poor Sinners as we are, despair to attain in some Crucis
finis duplex est. Impossibilis in hac vita, Mori peccato, Possibilis, and
modificans priore^, non seruire pec^^^. Caiet. in 6. ^d Romans
proportion, and measure to this Spiritual mortification. It was not unknown
to the very Heathens* for Plato in Macrobius speaks of two Deaths, whereof
Nature brings the one, and Virtue the other. And Macrob l. 1 de somnio
Scipionis. Plato ^uas mortes hommisnouit, quarum vn^ natura, alter^ virtutes
praestant.
Seneca in his 71. Epistle could break forth into that divine Exclamation,
Quando co^ting^t co^temnere vtramque fortunam? quando continget omnibus
oppressis Affectibus, and sub arbitrium adductis, hanc vocem emit^ere, Vici?
Que^ vicerim, ^uaeris? Non Persas, nec ex^rema Medo^^m, nec siquid vltra Dacas
bellicosum iacet sed Auaritiam, sed Ambitione, sed metu^ Mortis, qui victores
^^ntiu^ Vicit.
When shall I see the day, when all my Affections reduced under reason, I may
pronounce this happy word, Vici, I have overcome them. But how ever between
Sin, and Philosophy impar congressus, the combat must needs be unequal,
yet this Monster may be easily tamed, if it meet with a Christian; Because by
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, our sin imputed unto our Savior, has
been so vanquished, and crushed in him our Head, that the corruption thereof
is soon abolished in us his Members. Only let us Hebr. 12* ^^.
Lift up our hands, which hang down, and strengthen our feeble knees to buckle
with it; And let us not fear the great looks thereof, for it is nothing near
that strength now, that it was of, when it flew upon Adam; The Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, whereof we partake in the worthy receiving of this
Sacrament, has given it that blow, that it shall never be able to claw off. It
is a true observation, which Tac^^^* Histor* lib* ^*
Vespasian's Captains made of the Soldiers of Vitellius, Quanquam atrociter
loquuntur, minor est tamen apud victos animus, Soldiers once beaten, talk
they never so big, do quayle in their Courage. Now if we cannot kill the
Adversary outright, let us begin to crucify him; Let us nail his Feet,
that is, purge away our wicked Imperat peccatum voluntati nostr^, tanquam
Appar^tor^ suo. Sad^let* in c. ^* ad Romans
Affections* If we cannot do that, let us nail his (...) ^ru^^fixus est, non
est su^ ^uris, vt eat, quo v^lit. Iust^^* in loc:
Hands, that is, forbear to break into outrageous Actions; If we cannot do
so much, yet at the least, let us tie him with ropes unto the cross, that is,
believe with a steadfast Faith, that all those suggestions of the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, which we are notable to resist of our selves, are
already vanquished by the Cross of Christ. If we can do nothing at all, yet
if by means of a true, though weak Faith, we can let fall but one little
drop of the blood of Christ upon our sin, it is enough to put it to a
consumption by and by, and hereafter to poison, and kill it. For as (...)
Historians write of an Herb in Pe^^, whereof the flower is poison, and the
leaf an Antidote: So the blood of Christ caries in one and the same vein
poison, and an Antidote; It is a poison to sin, and an Antidote to the
Regenerate. I will therefore conclude all with the Exhortation of S. Chrysostom.
hom. 55. in Matthew. Tom. operum 2. crucifigamur mundo, nihil commune habeamu^
cum Terra, sed tota men's nostra amore ^^perioris pa^^e, gloria be^itudinis
ardeat etc.
Chrysostom in his 55. Homily, upon S. Matthew, Vos moneo, and multo ante,
quam vos, meipsum, Crucifigamur mundo, etc. I admonish you all, and my self,
as standing in more necessity thereof then any of you all, Let us become
mortified unto sin, and crucified unto the World, and that by the virtue of
this Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the World is crucified unto us,
and we unto the World.

ANd as this Exhortation is Panis quotidianus, a doctrine for every day, and
for every occasion: so is it most properly to be pressed upon devout souls,
that praepare themselves for the receiving of the Sacrament. For what is it,
that is here given, and exhibited unto us? (for notwitstanding, the slanders of
some, that say the contrary, all the Reformed Church does allow of these
words, given, and exhibited) why the Body, and Blood, that is, Crux Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, The Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ* the first part of my
Text. And what is expected, and exacted from us? you know it very well; sorrow,
and repentance for our sins past, and a steadfast purpose, and resolution for
amendment of life; the latter part of my Text, That the world should be
crucified unto us, and we unto the world: So have you this Sermon, as a
paraphrase upon the Sacrament, and the Sacrament as a Text, and an Abridgement
of the Sermon. And therefore, let Christ be never so bountiful in the
Institution, and the Church never so faithful in the Administration of the
Sacrament, yet surely, here is unto me no Crux Domini nostri Jesus Chrsti, no
real participation of the Body, and Blood of Christ, without Mundus
Crucifixus, and Mundo Crucifixus, without feeling in my soul by repentance for
my sins* that, in some small degree of Sanctification at the least, The world
is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

I Shall make this plain by an homely similitude; In worldly, and ordinary
repasts, how does a man know, that he has eaten worthily, that is, profitably?
He cannot know it, till afterward, by finding himself stronger, and abler for
his bodily, and worldly operations: And so this food in the Sacrament, vitae
aeternae substantiam administrat, says Saint Ambr. l de (...) qu^ ^n^t^antur
myster. c. 8* (...). Ign^t. Ep. ^d Eph^s. (...). Damasc. l* 4. c. 14. (...). In
Orat. D Basilij ante ^uchar.
Ambrose, It begets strength for spiritual, and Heavenly Operations; If
therefore we shall have eaten worthily, we shall find it afterward; For then
we shall thrive, and prosper accordingly; then the life of the spirit, will
begin to point and put forth in all our Actions, and Consultations, so as in
some measure, or other, instantly thereupon, The world will seem to be
crucified unto us, and we unto the world.

TO conclude, with knocking a little at our own doors, and touching upon the
Consciences of this noble Auditory; If, after the receiving of this Blessed
Food, we shall feel in our souls a zeal, and Resolution, to direct all our
future Consultations to the Glory of God, and the Advancement of his Religion;
If we shall leave those sinister, and by-respects, of Hopes, Hatred, Fear,
and Flattery, that have swayed but too much in Assemblies of this Nature; If
we shall readily give unto Caesar, the things, that are Caesar's, and withal
unto God the things, that are Gods; In a word, if we shall give no other
Counsel to our gracious King, then we are ready to answer for, we care not
how soon, to our great God, then surely we may lawfully rejoice in this
blessed Sacrament, that is, in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; Because by
such Resolutions it will plainly appear, that in some measure of Grace, The
world is crucified unto us, and we unto the world.

LAstly, this Sacrament is Signum Charitatis, and vinculum vnionis, a badge of
our Charity, and a bond of that unity, which Deus, and qui Deo proximus, God
himself, and that great Sovereignty next under God, has recommended unto us.
The Damasc. l. 4. cap 14 (...) etc.
Bread, an union of many Grains; The Wine, an union of many Grapes; The
Guests, an union of many Souls, do require in all worthy Receivers an union,
and communion of thoughts, and intentions in all sacred, and holy purposes. If
therefore you shall march on in your great Counsels, as the Israelites are
said to have done in Mizpah, as one Man, Judges 20. 1. verse, That is, in a
blessed union of the Body with the Head, and all the Members one with another,
then may you conceive in your Souls a great quantity of Assurance, that what
you receive under these Elements, of Bread, and Wine, is no less, then as
Part. secu^^da Exam. Trident. cap. de instit. Sacram* Coena.
Chemnitius calls it, Thesaurus omnium beneficiorum Christi, An hidden
treasure of all the Graces, and Blessings in Christ, called here in my Text,
Crux Domini nostri Jesus Christi, The Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; because
by that union, and Communion in holy Intentions, and Resolutions, it shall
appear unto the world, and to your own Consciences, greater witnesses to you,
then a world of worlds, That the world is crucified unto you, and you unto the
world. Which God grant, for Jesus Christ his sake, etc.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by John Bill, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
1628.


