A declaration and publication of the most worthy Prince of Orange, contaynyng
the cause of his necessary defense against the Duke of Alba.

Translated out of French into English, and compared by other copies in diverse
languages.

PSALM. XCIIII. They gather them together against the soul of the righteous,
and condemn the innocent blood. But the Lord is my refuge and my God is the
rock of mine hope. And he will recompense them their wickedness, and destroy
them in their own malice: yea, the Lord our God shall destroy them.

Imprinted at London by John Day, beneath S. Martins over Aldersgate.

We William by the grace of God Prince of Orange, Earl of Nassaw,
Catsenellebogen, Vianen, Dietz, Bueren, and Leerdam, Baron of Breda. etc. After
all due and friendly commendations, give to weete to all those that shall see
or read this present declaration. ()
ALlthough that (to our seming) it be not necessary to declare here at large
the occasyon that moves us with our Allies and confederates, to use this begone
and enterprised defense, (not for any great pleasure that we take therein, but
rather through immovable reasons and constraintes) against the unreasonable
and horrible practices, (the like not heretofore heard of, practiced, or
executed of the Duke of Alba, his adherents, and blood thirsty rabble in the in
the low Country. Nothing doubtyng but that all good and godly me^, will hold
us for more tha^ excused, knowing our nature so inclined to peace, and
therewith the faithful and diligent duties which we used, during the time of
tumult and sedition: employing body, goods, and honor, to the profit of his
Majesty and Country. Seeing also the confiscations, prizes, and withholding of
our country, subjects, and goods, the blasphemous Proclamations, and injuries
against all right and reason offered unto our person: And also that this our so
just and reasonable defense, (which with Gods furtherance we hope to go through
with) tends to none other end, but first and chiefly to the aduau^cing of the
honor of God and his word, to the profit of his Majesty, country, and
subjects, and likewise of the Emperial Majesty our sovereign Lord and his well
beloved son: which in time to come (as true successors of the said country)
pretend right thereto: likewise the rooting out of the great (not ever tofore
heard of, and more than barbarous) fury and rage of the Duke of Alba and his
adhere^ts, which they have of long time used and put in effect.

Nevertheless we have thought good, publicly to declare by these presents, the
unavoidable occasions, by which we with our Allies and friends, have been
constrained and enforced to take in hand this our defense: principally to put
away all suspicion of rebellion, which we have fled, and mortally hated all the
days of our life.

First we are not ignorant, that it is manifest to all the world, how and after
what manner, (through the practices and fetches of the Cardinal of Granuelle,
with other covetous and blood thirstye (which under the color and cloak of
the religion, pretended catholic) sought none other thing but the diminishing
of the honor of God, the aucthority of the king, and the weal of the Commons,
and loving nothing more than their proper and particular profit, the undoing
and destruction of other good men, where through the intolerable Inquisition,
has been put forth, with the unmerciful Placcards of the execution thereof:
notwithstanding that we and other our brethren went about by all means to
dissuade them from it, seeing and considering the great evils and inconveniences
that already sprang thereof, and the great likelyhoode of more to ensue, they
nothing regarding our humble suits therein: such I say (not long since) have
brought and thrust in the said Inquisition into this low country. Whereby is
come to pass, that under color of the said Inquisition, the Inquisitors and
dissembling hipocrites, have with all outrages proceeded against such poor
innoce^ts and faithful people, as desire to live according to the pure
doctrine of the Gospel. First by confiscation of their goods both moveable
and immovable, tha^ by banishment, torment and tortures, by fire, water,
gibbet, by prisons and otherwise, dispatching them in corners, by means as well
unlawful as lawful.

All which tyrannies and persecutions until this present, are nothing assuaged
or diinished, but rather since the unhappy entry of the said Duke of Alba into
the said low Countries, from day to day are increased and augmented: so that
daily they invent now torments and executions against ye poor people, yea
such as not only Christians, but the very Turks and Sarazens would have pity
and compassyon of. I will not for shame rehearse the unspeakable iniuryes and
villainies that are daily committed by the soldiors of the said Duke of Alba, so
that there is no good man, but had rather choose to die, than to see such
cruelty and tyranny executed, both upon him and his, before his face.

And seeing that such crueltyes and tyrannies used by the said Duke of Alba
and his adherentes, covetous and bloodthirsty persons, do wholly repugne the
co^tractes, letters sealed, and promises made between his said royal Majesty,
and those of the low Country, yea against the very oath that his Majesty swear
and promised: whereby we may see and clearly perceive, that the said Duke of
Alba abuses the charge that he has obtained of his said Majesty, only for
his own avarice and desire of blood, to the damage and hindrance of his said
Majesty, and the destruction and ruin of his faithful subjects, chiefly with
this horrible fury and tyranny that he uses toward those poor people, (no
dout) against the kings will, who (according to his accustomed clemency and
gentleness) never minded any such thing: This to prevent, there is none other
mean to wythstand the said crueltyes, (considering also that the passage or
access to his Majesty is shut up from us,) but this our present and
unavoidable defense.

For although that heretofore the Duchess of Parma. etc. at that time
Gouernesse for his Majesty in the low countries, has expressly permitted and
agreed to the preaching of the word of God, (to the end to avoid such imminent
perils and dangers, as at that time threatened the said country,) with promise
that none should attempt any evil against such as had heard the said preaching,
or hereafter would hear them: which at commandment of her highness we caused
to be published through all the Countries under our government, binding us and
our person, that the aforesaid should been inuiolably observed toward the
subjects of his said Majesty.

All this notwithstanding, the said Duke of Alba and his adherentes have
constrained diverse of the Uassals and Subjects of his Majesty to anoyd the
country, and that for none other cause, but for that they have been at such
Sermons, and have showed themselves affectionate to that which they found
agreeable to the word of God.

And after they had brought it in, with impertinent Citations, and against all
right and justice, without observing of order, custom or use of process, they
have proceeded against them by confiscation and violating of their goods, as
well moveable as immovable, and all under coulor of Justice.

And the troth is, that for religions sake diverse notable, honorable, and good
men as well by fire, swoorde, as other horrible means, without cause and
reason, yea horribly and tyrannously, both publicklye and privily, have been
executed, some in dark prisons, other through other fortures and horrible
pains and torments, after they had suffered diverse unspeakable tira^nies
have lost their lives innocently and without cause, yea even to this day such
execrable and horrible executions are put in ure, to the utter destruction of
the whole country, but especally of the poor Christians oppressed, of which
there are many in that country.

And to this effect, it is not long since thorowout the whole low country, at
one present time, in one night, thorough all the towns, a great number of them
that they suspected of such religion, were taken prisoners, contrary to all
priuilegies, laws, contractes, and freedoms, which his Majesty him self (as
is aforesaid) had agreed and given them, yea such as he both swear and promised
unto them.

Also how they violently proceed to the prejudice and interest of the said
priuilegies, contracts, and freedoms, to the confiscation of goods moveable
and immovable, using and entreating the poor prisoners at their pleasure, and
scratching unto them selves the goods of those, that wrongfully and against
all right and justice have been driven away, condemned, and slain, and by this
means have brought the before said country (who notwythstanding, the better to
show their humble obedience toward his majesty, as to their sovereign Prince
and Lord used no kind of resistance) into extreme bondage and unspeakable
misery and danger. And if their wicked purpose, greedy covetousness, and
bloudthirstines be not prevented, it is like to fall into greater. Without
consideration of the great faythfulnes yt his low country showed in
contributing so often, so lovingly, so willingly, as well to his Majesty, as to
his well-beloved father Charles of most worthy memory, so many notable gifts,
as amount to many millions of florins, and infinite sums, and especially in
these last wars, when so willingly they gave about fourtye millions of florins.
And that of late they have offered to his said Majesty three millions of
florins, to obtain leave to preach the word of God, and to exercise the same,
according to the writing of the Prophets and Apostels.

And although that heretofore by the aduertising and soliciting of the Lady
Gouernesse aforesaid, he promised, at the request presented in the behalf of all the lords and Gentlemen, touching the abolishing of the Inquisition and
Placartes of execution that they should not doubt them: nevertheless it is
manifest, that under this present tyrannous rule of the Duke of Alba, to the
detriment and mockery of his Majesty's promise, diverse notable personages,
trusting to the said promise, as well of his majesty, as of her hyghnes the
Gouernesse, have been taken and thrown in dark dungeons, whose goods (with
also the goods of those that fled) were without exception of religion,
contrary to all justice, customs, Statutes, laws and ordinances, taken away
and conficate. So that it seems that in the end none shall be exempt, of
what religion soever they be, so they have any thing to lose.

And notwithstanding that we for our own person, during the time of our
Government, yea ever since we came to ma^s state, have desired nothing so much
as the stablishing and increasing of the authority, power and force of his
Majesty, the maintenance of peace, quietness and tranquillity, as well of the
country, as of the Subjects, likewise that all mischief, do^mage and
interest, to our power, and as much as in us lies, might be far removed
from the^: as heretofore, not sparing our goods, yea with great danger of our
life (be it spoken without brag) we have effectually declared.

Yet now without any regard hereto, we (as well as other faultles both of high
and low degree) by an vnorderlye citacion, and blasphemous proclamation, under
color as though we had attempted the superiority of the kings Majesty of
Spain, and as committing Crimen rebellionis, without any sufficient president,
or reasonable sentence, by violence are deprived of all our country and
subjects, goods moveable and immovable: which to this day they keep
violently from us, against al humain or divine right.

And it is marvelous, with what boldness our adversaries dare propose, that we
have attempted any thing against the authority of the kings Majesty, and
gone about to take possession of his country, when without any farther excuse,
the contrary is manifest, by our wylling resignation of our charge and
government of the countries of Holland, Seland, and Utreght, also the giving
over of the principal towns and Fortresses in those parts: and to avoid all
suspicion, we went not secretly away in to Germany, but publicly in the sight
of all men.

Which we would not have done, if our mind, intent, or enterprise, had been
inclined to rebellion (as our adversaries for cloak of their horrible tyranny,
wrongfully lay to our charge) And we could be well pleased; yea we most humblye
desire, that the principal Captains, Officers, and Iusticers of such Towns,
Fortresses, and Castles as were then, (according to our government) under our
charge, (that the truth may the better be known) may be diligently examined,
if they were ever required by us, to yield or give up any town, Fortress, or
Castle to our particular profit. Of which points as of all other affairs of
the low country, ye shall find more ample declaration in our justification now
of late set-forth by us.

But if we, which have done so good and faithful service to his Majesty,
neither sparing body nor goods (without brag be it spoken) yea being at this
present ready with all our heart to do much more, be now recompensed with such
blasphemous accusations (against God and all Justice) and further our
adversaries assail us by so many sinister practices, let all good men weighe
by themselves, how intolerable it is to us to bear.

With all which tyra^nyes aforesaid, and innumerable other violences, our
adversaries with their adherents are not satisfied: but more manifestly to show
their rage and cruelty, have not long since taken out of the Town of Louain,
our well-beloved son, the Earl of Bueren (where we had placed him to continue
in study, that he might hereafter be better able to serve his Majesty) with
intent to carry him into Spain, as in deed they have done.

Besides that the Duke of Alba, not long since, more clearly to show his
bloudthyrsty tyranny, has taken and cruelly put to death above three score
Gentlemen and Noblemen, with other notable and rich personages and Burgeses of
the town of Bruxelles, with an infinite number in other Towns, whose goods
he has confiscate and taken away, against all right and Justice. Whereby it is
to be presumed, that he goes about to destroy and deface all the the
Nobility, yea the Egle it self.

Yet all this could not satisfy the^, but that the two Earls of Egmont and of
Horn of famous memory, notwithstanding their faithful service heretofore, in
so many wars, to the most mighty Emperor Charles of worthy memory, yea and
also to his Majesty of Spain, so many years, with so great charge, in such
danger of body (as all the world knows) without being heard, without any
form of accustomed process used in such case, (not only against all Gods and
man's law, but also against all Statutes of the Empire) has truelly put them to
death by the sword: and that with such great dishonor and shame, not only of ye
Lords justified, but also of their notable friends and parents, as to set up
their heads for a spectacle to all the world upon staves and forkes.

Further immediately after the said execution, they took a fresh, more then ij.
hundredth persons prisoners.

Which tyranny and incredible persecucution and fury of the Duke of Alba, has
driven all men into such fear, that now of late an infinite number, of both
religions, are withdrawn and fled away, for fear of this general tyranny
without exception of Religion.

And the said Duke of Alba makes his vaunt openly, to pursue and seek out to
the uttermost of his power, yea (...) their beds, not only us, but also all
those which (by Gods divine providence) are escaped his tyranny, as it
appears daily by examples before our eyes.

And forasmuch as hereby, the intent and enterprise of the Duke, with his
covetous and bloudthirsty adherentes, does manifestly appear to tend not only
to the depriuyng of us, and all other good men, from such te^porall goods as
God has given us, but the utter destruction of our bodies and goods, yea to
the final overthrow of the true doctrine of the Gospel and confirmation of
their horrible and Idolatrous Popery: and so to deprive us of spiritual
gifts, which are to be preferred before all worldly gifts. Nether is there any
hope yt his Majesty, (according to his natural cleme^cy and gentleness) will
have regard unto it, considering that our adversaries, through their accustomed
subtilities, have not been ashamed to moan his Majesty against his own only
son, yea so far as to commit him to prison: and likewise that our
complayntes and supplications are not delivered to his Majesty as they ought,
neither is there any audience given unto us. (...) constraigned and enforced
with also our Allies, Lords and friends, for the maintenance and defense of
our selves and the low Countries, but chiefly for the Imperial Majesty our
Sovereign Lord, and his well-beloved son, pretending right and interest thereto
in time to come, and finally for the profit of all the Empire, as also of the
pity and compassion, which we have on the co^playntes that we have received
of some of his Majesty's good subjects, to take in hand in the name of God this
defense, against the fury and rage of the Duke of Alba and his adherentes, as
the only and extreme mean, seeing that no fair means will serve. And would
have wished (if it had been possible) not to have taken this way, as may
plainly appear by our too too long patience without further proof.

By which aforesaid defense, we call God to record, that we pretend none other
thing, but only the increasing of the glory of God, the bringing in again of
his word, and the aduaunceme^t of the same, and that his Majesty, with his
Country and subjects may be brought to their (...), and that hereafter all
good and due obedience may be yielded to him and his true successors in all
things: to the end that having removed the great tyranny of the Duke of Alba
and his adhere^tes, and delivered the said Country from foraine soldiers,
they may be governed according to their privileges, contracts, ordinances and
Statuts, yea such as his Majesty him self has sworn and promised unto the^.
And that these poor Christians which are driven away, persecuted and
emprisoned, may return to their wives and children, and enjoy again such
goods and moueables, as have been violently taken away from them by force. And
that our person (which they go about by day, by night, secretly and openly to
entrap, yea eue^ in our bed) may be in sufficient assurance, and our goods
duly restored.

And if herein we may obtain sufficient assurance (as is said) we do declare
and offer by these presents, not only to leave of this our defense which we
have taken in hand, but further we protest to the whole world, that our intent
was never other, but to procure the advancement of the honor of God and the
kings Majesty, the profit and weal of the Country, with the augmentyng and
increasing thereof.

Wherefore, we hope that all those that have Germans hearts as well high as
low, that love honor and virtue, and contrariwise hate all tyranny and
shedding of innocent blood, especially of those that are of our true Christian
religion, and desire to confess the same both with heart and mouth, that
undoubtedly they will detest this horrible and unspeakable tyranny, yea so
cruel as the like was never heard of in any Christian country. Chiefly
considering the great danger and peril (without God of his great merry
prevent it) into the which the whole Empire may undoubtedly fall, that not
only they will not be easly persuaded to defend and continue this horrible
tyranny with ye oppression and extirpacion of our christian religion, and
extreme persecution of body and life, honor and goods of so many good,
faithful and innocent people, yea such as thirst for the word of God, but
that rather they will esteem this our unavoidable and enforced defense, for
none other but (...) enterprised upon great and weighty occasions. And
therefore our duetye is (as being a member borne yea of the Empire, and of ^^y
that we ought to have of poor desolate and persecuted Christians) to counsel
succor, and assist as much as in us lies, first that this horrible and
unspeakable tyranny, be diligently and earnestly abolished and driven away,
and that the poor Christians (which are vanished and wrongfully persecuted)
may be defended and maintained, and not so oppressed, persecuted, martyred, and
so miserably and diversely murdered and flaine as they are at this present,
some by fire, and some by water, and all for confession of the true and
Christian Religion.

Thus doing each man shall do the praise worthy work of a Christian, and a
work agreeable to God, as tending to the advancement of his word, the
comfort, profit, and wealth of so many good Christians as are grievously
persecuted, oppressed, and imprisoned, and likewise to the whole Empire of
Germanye a good continual and durable peace.

Wherein we offer our selves, with like wise our Allies, Lords, and friends to
(...) compence each man after his estate, and according to our power, and
likewise to acknowledge it all the days of our life.

The Lord God everlasting according to his good pleasure, direct and govern
these affairs as his own, and bring them to good and happy end. So that our
good king may (as we hope in time he shall) spy out and perceive the unfaithful
and dangerous practices and fetches that these authors of persecution and
tyranny do use: and likewise what good will we have always borne to his
majesty and at this prelent do.

Given the xx. of July. 1568

