TETRASTYLON PAPISTICVM, That is, THE FOUR PRINCIPAL PILLARS of Papistrie, the
first containing their raylings, slanders, forgeries, untruths: the second
their blasphemies, flat contradictions to scripture, heresies, absurdities: the
third their loose arguments, weak solutions, subtle distinctions: the fourth
and last the repugnant opinions of New Papists With the old; of the new one
with another; of the same writers with themselves: yea of Popish religion with
and in it self.

Compiled as a necessary supplement or fit appertinance to the Authors former
work, entitled Synopsis Papismi: To the glory of God for the dissuading of
light-minded men from trusting to the sandy foundation of popery, and to
exhort good Christians steadfastly to hold the rockie foundation of faith in
the Gospel.

Epist. Iud. ver. 9. 10. Michael the Archangel, when he strove against the
devil, did not blame him with cursed speaking, but said, the Lord rebuke thee.
But these speak evil of those things they know not, and whatsoever things
they know naturally, as beasts which are without reason, in those things they
corrupt themselves. Haeretici cum peruersitatis suae rationem reddere non
possunt, ad maledicta conuertuntur: Heretics, when they can render no reason
of their wilfulness, fall to flat railing. Printed by Robert Robinson for
Thomas Man dwelling in Pater noster row at the sign of the Talbot. 1593.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Puckering Knight, Lord Keeper of the broad
Seal of England, and of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.
I Have not, neither can forget (Right Honorable) your courteous acceptance of
that simple gift, which not long since I presumed to present your Honor
withal. Since that time I confess my self a debtor to your Lordship: and
therefore have strained my self for kindness received to show at the least
thankfulness again, and to recompense the meannes of that gift by an other
of that sort. Iubemur (says one) colligere fragmenta Barnard. Cant. ser. 5.
ne pereant, id est, ne minima beneficia obliuisci: We are bidden to gather up
the very fragmentes and crummes, that is, not to forget the least benefits.
First then J will declare the contents of this present treatise: Secondly, the
reasons that moved me thereunto: Lastly, why I would have it pass under your
honors name.

First of all therefore, as in my former book I have gathered together into one
sum (the Lord by the gracious assistance of his spirit directing me) the
whole doctrine of the Church of Rome, and opinions of Papists: in that work
but plainly and nakedly offering to the Readers view, the substance of the
controversies, and state of the questions between us: So further I thought it
not amiss, to bring to light, and to show as in the face of the Sun, the
manifold absurdities, inconveniences, shifts, subtilties, blasphemies, which
our adversaries in defense of their errors are constrained to use in oppugning
the truth. This I have accordingly performed, I trust, in this work, that
the weakness of their cause, the beggerie of their Religion, the vanity of
their Councels, and deceit of their hearts might appear and be made known
to all the world.

This book I have entitled, the PILLARS OF PAPISTRIE: which is built upon
lies and untruths, faced out with railing, and bitter speech, propped up with
blasphemies, and patched together with dissonant and contrary opinions among
them selves. The proof of these particulars follows at large discoursed in
this treatise. First, as touching their lying and untruths, I could have wished
that they had embraced his wise counsel, that says: Aut cauenda sunt mendacia
recte agendo, aut confitenda paenitendo, non autem cum abundent infoeliciter
viuendo, augenda sunt and docendo. August. lib. 2. de mendac. cap. 21. But they
are so far from correcting by repentance, that which they have offended in
practice, that they are not only become liemakers, but lie-maisters, not
practisers of this craft, but teachers and defenders. Concerning their railing
speech, it is all the Rhetorike they use: Such are no better then sheep-biters,
and meacockes among the^, that have not filed and whetted their toongs to smite
and wound us withal. But here I say unto the^, as Augustine did to the
heretic Pascentius: Literae tuae nec ad reddenda conuitia me provocant, Epist.
177.
nec a reddendis literis me reuocare potuerunt: So neither shall their railing
writings provoke us likewise to pass the bonds of modesty, and to pay them
home in the same kind, neither yet cause us to cease from answering their
follies.

Now as for their blasphemies, it would offend a chaste and a Christian ear,
to hear what horrible and ungodly sayings do pass from them: in the second
pillar of this book we have set down a whole kenning of them. But as
Augustine says to some, who the more readily to descrie heretics, them
selves also fell into blasphemy: tolerabilius in suis foueis delight scerent
vulpes, qua^ De mendacio. lib. 2. cap. 9.
propter illas capiendas in blasphemiae foueam caderent venatores: The Foxes
might more safely lurk in their holes, then the huntsmen, to take them, should
fall into the pit of blasphemy. So though we were the foxes, and they the
huntsmen, it is no good way for the huntsmen to snare themselves, to entangle
the foxes. But we in deed are the huntsmen, and they the foxes, as it is said,
take us These foxes, these little foxes, that destroy the vines. Cantic. 2. 15.

Concerning the dissensions and divisions among papists, it is no strange
thing, as he says: Omnia vitia erroresque mortaliu^ August. in Math. ser. 11.
diuisi sunt inter se and contrarij: apud Idolorum cultores diuisi sunt
spiritus Iunonis and spiritus Herculis; Paganus and Iudaeus hosts sunt
Christi, sed diuisi inter se; Arrianus and Photinianus haeretici, and diuisi
inter se; sic Donatistae, sic Maximinianistae. All vices and errors among men
are divided and contrary to themselves: among the Idolatrous Heathen, the
spirit of Juno and Hercules are divided; the Paganes and Jews enemies to
Christ, and yet divided: the Arrians likewise and Photmians, the Donatistes and
Maximinianistes: ad also the Scotistes and Thomistes among the Papists divided
between them selves, yet Ambo pertinent ad regnum diaboli, Both do belong to
the reign or kingdom of the Devil.

Now the reasons that have moved me principally to enterprise this business,
were these. First in respect of those country men of ours, which have suffered
themselves a long time to be seduced and deceived with false opinions, and a
vain show of holiness, being as it were made drunk with the whore of Babylons
intoxicate cup: that they now at the length seeing the nakedness and beggerie
of popish religion, would take heed to themselves in time, and think it
enough, yea and too much, to have sipped of that poisoned cup, lest drinking
more deeply thereof, they afterward be constrained to draw out the dregs,
and to be partakers of their plagues: of them we say with Augustine, Licet non
timentur vt perdant, non Epist. 105.
negligendi sunt tamen, vt pereant: Though we fear them not to hurt us, yet
they must not be neglected and suffered to be lost.

As for their ringleaders, and sect-maisters, our counsel also to them is,
that they would learn at the length to give place to the truth: Augustine
said of some Heretics: Puto, quod ipse diabolus, Epist. 167.
si authoritate iudicis, quem ipse elegerat, toties vinceretur, no^ esset tam
impudens, vt in ea causa persisteret. I think if the devil had been so often
overcome before a Judge of his own choosing, he would not be so impudent as
to persist still in an evil cause. But our adversaries have been often
vanquished even by their own judges, the testimonies of ancient writers and
consent of antiquity, and yet for all this will not yield. Well, as one says,
Non oramus vt moriantur inimici, sed vt corrigantur, sic mortui erunt inimici,
iam enim correcti non amplius erunt inimici: We desire not, that our enemies
were dead, but amended, and so our enemies should be dead, for being once
amended and corrected, they would no longer be our enemies.

There are other also of our countrymen, who (though not so far gone as the
other, yet) are not sufficiently grounded in knowledge, or settled in judgment
to be able to discern between the truth and error: Qui breuia non valent
intelligere, prolixa non amant August. Epist. 101.
legere, Who can neither understand brief matters, nor will abide to read
long: for their sakes also have I compiled this treatise, neither very long to
work unwillingness, nor yet too short, to hinder understanding. But even as
they, which Aug. solis loq. ca. 14.
have tender etes, do not first behold the sun, but the fire or the stars,
or some such like, and then turn them to look upon the sun: so must we
deal with these men, Gradibus perducendi adsu^ma sunt: By degrees they must be
brought to understand the higher points: For their cause chiefly have I
undertaken this labor, that they which are not able to conceive the chief
matters in question, yet may safely take knowledge of the nakedness and
poorness of our adversaries cause.

Concerning my self also, some what there was, which in this respect induced
me to sei hand to this plough: for as he says, Vt discamus August. ad Dulcit.
qu. 4.
inuitare nos debet suauitas veritatis, vt doceamus cogere debet necessitas
charitatis: As the pleasantnes of the truth does entise us to learn, so the
bond of charity should urge us to teach. And the rather considering that now
is the time or not far off, wherein the fall of Babylon is to be expected
and looked for, according to the prophecy in the Revelation: Every Cap. 18.
man, that bears hatred to the scarlet and bloodthirstie whore, ought to
show his readiness in defacing and pulling down the Kingdom of Antichrist.
As Christian Kings and Princes then by their sacred authority have begun
for their part to lay Babylon wast, so is it our part to discover her nakedness:
they are the Lords Captains to slay the enemy, we his watch men to descrie
the enemies coming: They with battle, canons and engines, do batter the
walls, we come with ropes of argument and persuasion to pull down the
towers: 2. Sam. 17. 23.
They fight with Saul's sword, and put on his kingly armor, we must assault
Goliath with David's sling and stones out of the brook. The text says, they shall
make the whore desolate and naked, eat Apo. 17. 16
her flesh and consume her with fire. It is our part to strip her, and make her
naked, and show her filthiness: by the word of God to descrie their corruptions:
Then comes the Christian magistrate, and eats her flesh and burns it with
fire, that is, draws out the sword of Justice after them. Now in the last
place unto your honor I briefly direct my speech, unto whom I do consecrate,
and deuote these labors of mine, as a sign of my thankefulnes, and a pledge
of further duty to your honor: as also unto one, who him self is able to
judge of these matters: neither is it the least part of your honors study and
care to be thoroughly acquainted with the controversies of Religion: as it is
most meet honorable personages should be. Themistocles (as Augustine
reports it) did not care, that he was counted somewhat rude, because he could
not sing to the pipe at feasts: interrogatus, quid sciret, respondit,
rempublicam ex paruamagna^ facere: It was enough for him to know how to enlarge
the commonwealth, of a little one to make it greater: so may I say it belongs
chiefly to Christian Magistrates, scire Religionem ex paruamagnam facere, to
know how to enlarge and propagate Religion, and to cause the Gospel to
flourish.

The Lord has advanced you to this seat of honor: for promotion, (as the
Psalmist says) neither comes from the East, nor Psalm. 71. ver. 6. 7.
from the West: but it is the Lord that sets up one and pulls down
another. The chief husbandman has planted you as part of an hedge to keep
his vineyard: your honor now is in place to profit the Church of God greatly,
in aduauncing of learning, in helping to furnish the Lords harvest with plenty
of laborers, in encouraging the workmen of Gods house, whose bands do hang
down, and their knees wax feeble. There are many in this land, who would
gladly be set a work, and can not: whose outward wantes do slake their
inward desire: for that old saying is most true, (...): there is no such
heavy clogge, as poverty is: And the Poet spoke by good experience:

haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi.
You (Right Honorable) with the rest, as one well says, pugnatis contra
visibiles inimicos, nos pro vobis contra inuisibiles: your honors by sage
counsel and advise, fight against our visible enemies, but we fight for your
by our study and prayers against the spiritual and invisible: Let therefore
the soldiers of this spiritual warfare be encouraged still, cherished and
made strong, to fight their battles lustely. The Lord has now made your
honor a captain to lead his soldiers into battle, and to set them in array:
Augustine writes well upon those words: Proverb. 31. 19. She puts her
hands to the Aug de tempor. ser. 217. (...)*
wherue, and her hands handle the spindle: opus tuum in fuso sit, non in colo,
in colo enim est, quod facturus es, in fuso, quod fecisti: Let thy work be in
the spindle not in the distaffe: that is in the distaffe, which thou may do
hereafter, that is in the spindle which thou have already done. So when God
bestows upon a man, honor, riches, authority: omnia is it a in colo sunt,
transeant ad fusum, These things are yet upon the distaffe, let them be spunne
out, and turned upon the spindle. But your work, I trust, Right Honorable, is
already in Fuso, not in Colo: and we hope, that unto your good beginnings,
you will add also good proceedings: and the Lord both unto your good
proceeding, and virtuous beginning, shall give an happy end. In te nu^c puta
cunctorum ora and oculos conuersos, and ad spectaculum vitae tuae totam
consedisse Angliam: Al men's eyes are upon your Honor, and have as it were set
led themselves to behold your doings: God grant (and we trust) that all things
shall be answearable to their expectation. Lastly, the Lord prosper your godly
enterprises, and give a blessing to your holy Counsels, even the blessing of
Caleb: That as Caleb drove the Anakims great Giantes by strong hand out of
Hebron, so at the length, by your prudent and godly counsel, with the
assistance of the rest of the Honorable Lords of the Counsel and Nobility,
under the leading of our happy Joshua, and gracious Sovereign, the Romish
Anakims, traitorous Jesuits and Seminaries, with other rebellious and hollow
hearted Cananites, may be weeded out of the Lords field in England: that you
with faithful Caleb and Joshua, may also have an everlasting inheritance, in
the heavenly Canaan, through the only merits of Jesus Christ: to whom be
praise for ever.

Tui honoris studiosissimus, ANDREAS WILLET.

The preface to the Christian Reader.
IT is the common and usual practice of wrangling and cauilling spirits, who
to prevent other men's accusations, do themselves first begin to accuse and
challenge others of the same crimes, which they are guilty of: Thus Satan the
accuser of the brethren, sometime dealt with Job, Job. 1
saying unto God, that if he would but stretch forth his hand a little, and
touch all he had, he would not spare to blaspheme God to his face, whereas
nothing is more common with that old Serpent, then to curse and blaspheme God.
Thus our adversaries of the Popish religion (which indeed is no religion, but
mere superstition) have subtillie sought to undermine us, crying out against
us, that we are liars, Idolaters, blasphemers, and such like, which are titles
and epithetes fitter and more proper to themselves. They charge us with
railing: Harding Confut. apolog. cap. 16. diuis. 2. with lying: Defens. apolog.
page 597. with corrupting and altering of scripture: Rhemist. 2. Corinthians. 2.
sect. 8. with fables. Rhemist. 1. Timoth. 1. sect. 4. with execrations and
blasphemies: Iud. 3. with heresies, Bellarm. de notis eccles. lib. 4. cap. 9.
They object against us the weakness of our proofs, and arguments: Harding.
defeus. apolog. p. 625. often innouating and changing of Religion. Rhemist. 2. Corinthians. 2. v. 8. Divisions and dissensions among ourselves: Harding. defens.
apolog. p. 239. Yea that we may see how true their other accusations are, they
are not ashamed to charge us with Idolatry, and worshipping of Idols, Rhemist.
1. Corinthians. 10. sect. 9. Wherefore that it may appear to the world, how
unjustly they have accused us, and how subtly they would unburden and
exonerate themselves of those crimes which are theirs and not ours, to this
end I have undertaken this labor in this treatise, to detect and bewray their
guiltines in this behalf, that we may be purged from their slanders, and our
cause justified, and that the shame and blame may fall upon them, that have
deserved it.

As for us, we rail not, neither use reuiling speech, yet sometime we tell
them roundly their own, and this may be done without railing: unless they
will say Christ rayled, when he told the Jews, that they had made his fathers
house a den of thieves. But their railing, and venomous darts, which they
shoot at us, are notoriously known and cannot be hide. It is the grace of
popish writers both old and new, to stuff their books full with cursing and
railing: Stapleton, that blacke-mouthed Sophister of Louaine, has of late set
forth a book against D. Whitakers, wherein beside the badnesse of his cause,
he has disgraced his profession, with bitter and filthy terms, calling that
learned and godly man, Rusticum, fatuum, asinum, asininum professorem,
morionem, stolidum: Fool, clown, ass, doit: yea he is so impudent, that he
spares not to revile the dead, Lib. 1. cap. ^. sect. 8.
most shamefully calling Calvin, that worthy Minister of the Gospel, Egregium
Nebulonem, a notable knave: I think Stapletons own friends and patrones here
in England, will blush and be ashamed of him, when they find such stuff in his
book.

Neither does Stapleton thus take on in his mood, as carried away with some
intemperate heat, but being in his wits (if in his right wits) and well
advised, and of purpose he falls into this cogging vain: giving M. Whitakers
warning thereof aforehande, age Whitakare ^t ad patientiam te compone: willing
him to take patiently, what Admonit. ad Whi^^^.
he says. Indeed M. Stapleton your counsel is good, for shoot out your
venomous darts as long, as ye will, we care not, we have a sense for them,
and a buckler to latch the^, as Augustine says very well: Quaeso mi frater,
quasi has diaboli sagittas, ad petram, quae est De ^alu^^. docum, c. 12.
Christus, allidens, sum scutum fidei. I give thee counsel (my brother) to
rebound these arrows of Satan, upon the rock, which is Christ, taking the
shield of faith: And such patience is in this case necessary for M. Whitakers,
and the rest of us protestants, as the same father speaks of else where:
Quemadmodum parents a filis vel pueris, De ser in monto ca. (...).
vel phreneticis multa patiuntur, donec infantia, vel aegritude transeat, ita
Christianus ab impijs tanquam phreneticis multa pati debet: Like as parents De
ser in monto. cap. 34.
do suffer many things at their sons hands, while they are children or
phrentick, til their childishnes or frenzy be past: thus Christians must
patiently bear many things of the wicked, as of men taken with frenzy. Such
intemperate and railing speeches then of Papists, we attribute either to their
childish ignorance or phrentike malitiousnes.

Concerning the other accusations, of heresy, blasphemy, lying, corruption of
scriptures and such other, it shall appear, I trust, in this discourse, that
they are the men, and none other, that are faulty herein. As for fables, they
do us great wrong to cast them upon us: their own legend of lies and infinite
fabulous stories, do plaintie tell us, that popery is fuller of fables, then
the heresies of the Valentinians or the Manichees. Their other charge
concerning iunouation and dissension is returned upon themselves: for who
knows not, that the Jesuits of these days, have innouated and changed in
the most points, the old popish profession, and have cast it into a new
mould, and brought in a new form of Pope catholic doctrine: But we in
substance retain the same Religion, which at the first reviving of the Gospel
was maintained 40. years ago by the Protestants. As for dissensions in
fundamental points and articles concerning faith, we have none. In other
matters, there have been some contentions among us, more we grant then needed,
and more hotely pursued of some then was requisite: yet they are neither in
weight so great, or in number so many, nor so egerly prosecuted, as dissentions
among papists have been, for anno. 1509. we read that the Franciscane
friars pursued the poor Dominicks to death: and the contention began about the
conception of the Virgin Marie. Fox. page 802. Such rigor and fiercenes has
not yet been seen among protestants, neither I trust, shall.

But in saying that Protestants are Idolaters, they make too lewd a lie, for it
is well known unto the^, that we have no Images or Idols of brass, wood,
stone, silver, at all in our Churches, as they have nor any pictures, carved,
painted or graven, set up to be worshipped: If two men should be set before
us: the one lifts up his, eyes to heaven, and calls upon the name of God,
having no similitude or resemblance before him, the other prays before a
stock or stone Image: is any man so senseles, as to say the other is an
Idolater, rather then this? But thus blind and sottish are the papists in
their judgment. Take heed ye English pope catholics, do ye not see, how
your ghostly fathers go about to make fools of you?

Now then, to the intent our adversaries slanderous mouths should be stopped,
and their falsehoode descried, I have given a several taste in this work, in
every kind of their fraudulent dealing with us, and of their unseemly
behavior, and ungodly shifts, which they use in oppugning of the truth, and
defense of their bad cause. The whole book I have divided into 4. parts,
showing the four principal pillars of papistrie, and every pillar contains
diverse parts beside, as it is set forth in the title of this book: I trust,
throughout this treatise, that our adversaries shall not justly challenge me
for dealing untruly or deceiptfullie with them, seeing I have set down their
sayings and opinions, as I find them, quoting the places, and citing the
authors, whence I have them: so that I doubt not to say with Augustine, Ego
omnia, quod bona fide coram deo dixerim, sine vllo studio contentionis, sine
aliqua dubitatione veritatis, sine aliquo praeiudicio diligentioris tractatus
exposui: I trust I may say, with a good Lib. 2. de genes cap. 29.
conscience before God, that I have set down all things without desire of
contention, or doubting of the truth, and without preiudicing other men's more
exact labors herein. If sometime I shall seem to speak somewhat roundly or
sharply, I hope the discreet reader will judge it to be done, not without
cause, and to say, as that good father in the like case: Noui fratrem meum, si
quid in disputatione August. epist. 14*
pro side sua dixit ferue^tius, non illa contumacia, sed fiducia dicenda est: I
know if our brother be sometime seruent and hot, in the defense of says,
that it proceeds not of contumacie, but his full resolution in the truth.

Concerning our adversaries, I would have them think, that I have undertaken
these labors for their good, if they could so construe it, that seeing now the
nakedness of their cause, they may at the length be better advised: We have not
cast off all love and care of our enemies: We say of them, as Augustine did
sometime of Pelagius the heretic, Nos non solum diligimus, sed dileximus eos,
sed aliter Aepist. 1^6.
vunc diligimus, aliter aliquando dileximus, tunc, quia nobis rectae fidei
videbantur, nunc vt ab errore liberentur: We both love them now, and loved
them before, but otherwise now then before, then we loved them, because we
thought they were of a right faith, but now we love the^, to the end they might
be delivered from error. Now unto my brethren of the same faith and religion,
thus much I say, that whatsoever blasphemies, heresies, absurdities, they read
here to be affirmed and maintained by papists, they would take no offense
thereby, nor seem to stumble thereat: Sed facite inde quod fecit dominus, Aug.
tract* in Ioh. 6.
cum illi obtulerunt amarum potum, gustauit, and respuit, sic vos audite and
abijcite: But do ye as Christ did, when they offered him vinegar to drink, he
tasted and refused it, so give you the hearing and reading of these things, but
in judgment cast them away, and reject them.

Thus I have, by the Lords assistance finished my task, and ended my travel
for this time: I will now sit me down a while and rest my weary pen, and
give place to others. This I have done, partly to discharge my duty to God,
and debt to his Church; partly to provoke others by this example to put forth
their talent: who for skill are more able, for their leisure more fit, for
outward helps have better encouragement, and in respect of their reward are
more bound: I would we might now at the length spare our selves at home, and
forbear to provoke one another by writing, and join our strength against the
common adversary. If our wits want whetting, our pens exercise, our bodies
labor, our adversaries abroad can and may afford us work enough: we need not
hew one at another. Let us do as Moses did, slay the Egyptian, it is not
seemly for one Hebrew to strive with another. The timber, that must make the
house, should be prepared and hewn in the field, Proverb. 24. 27. when it
comes to be set together, not so much as the noise of an hammer should be
heard, as we read of Salomons temple: so we should labor to hew and cut off
popish superstition and corruption of manners as in the field abroad, but we
ought to build peaceably, and without noise among our selves. One says well,
Omnia alia bona, aurum, argentum, diuitiae diuidi possunt; non potest diuidi
(pacem meam do vobis:) Al other goods, gold, silver, riches, may be divided;
this inheritance only cannot be divided, my peace I leave with you. And
therefore, says he, Christus noluit fires iudex ad diuisionem: Christ refused
to be a judge or deuider of the inheritance. God grant, that we may at the
length, learn, as careful children, or faithful stewardes, to keep whole
Christ's inheritance lent unto us, that rich patrimony of brotherly love and
peace: that we may one yield to another in the truth, every one to studi^ to
amend what is amiss, and all join together to seek Gods glory.

Thus shall we be sure to embrace and enjoy peace: for what else is the cause
of contention among us: Nisi (as one says) quia displicet mortalibus angelica
illa partitio, qua gloria deo, pax hominibus nuntiatur: quonam Bernard. epist.
127.
modo stabit pax hominum coram deo, si deo apud homines non potest tuta esse
sua gloria? Because mortal men like not that Angelical partition, when they
pronounced glory unto God, and peace in earth: for how can the peace of men
stand in force before God, when Gods glory is not kept safe and sound amongst
men? This then is the way to procure peace, and to nourish it, to remove and
avoid dissension, every one in his several place and calling to labor to
amend what is amiss, to restore what is decayed, to supply what is wanting,
and to redress what is out of order, and so to seek chiefly to advance Gods
glory. Thus shall we have peace at home, and peace abroad, our dissensions
shall slack within, and by our peace our strength and courage shall increase
against our enemies without. We shall run upon them, as one man: ten shall
chase an hundred, and an hundred a thousand. Thus the Gospel by Gods grace
shall still flourish in this land, superstition shall decrease and wear away,
and popery shall be weeded and rooted out, which God grant for his well-beloved
and only begotten Sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be praise for
ever,

Amen.
The first Pillar of Popery, consisting of intemperate railing, with shameful
slanders and untruths.
WHat our purpose is in this treatise following, we have already partly
declared in the preface: that our intent is not in this enterprise so much to
charge our adversaries with such matter, as may be justly objected against
them, as to discharge our selves of such unjust crimes, as they do burden us
withal: not to accuse, but to excuse: not to fight but to fense: not to dare
them with our darts, but to arm our selves against their venomous arrows,
which they shoot at us. Whereas therefore they every where almost in their
books and pamphlets, do lay sore unto our charge, that we are raylers,
reuilers, liars, blasphemers, heretics, cauillers, sophisters, divided into
many sects and schisms, disagreeing amongst our selves: our best and sa^est
way to free and deliver both us and our cause from these so unjust, untrue and
uncharitable accusations, is to return them upon them selves, to whom they do
more properly belong: and to cloth them with their own liuerie, which will sit
more comely, without pleate or wrinkle upon their back*

First of al therefore according to that order which we have set down, we will
try and examine the modesty, sobriety and te^p^rance of their spirit,
wherewith they are enflamed against us. First of their reuiling and bitter
speech: then of their malicious slanders against us, and our cause: thirdly of
their for geries: fourthly of the manifold untruths, which in plain english
are no better then lies, which they are not ashamed in heaps to utter. First
then concerning their contumelious and reproachful speeches, and their adders
tongues which they smite and sting us withal: I would we might say unto them,
as Agustine sometime did unto Vincentius, a young De animae origin. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
malapart springal, that unseemly taunted that reverend father in his
writings: Si quid inter disputandum (says Augustine) quod ad meam contumeliam
redundat expressit, non eum conuitiantis voluntate crediderim, se^ di^ersa
sentientis necessitate fecisse: vbi enim hominis erga me animus ignotus est et
incertus, melius arbitror meliora sentire, quam inexplorata culpare: If any
thing fall out in disputation, which may redound unto my reproach, I think that
he did it not so much with a mind to revile me, as being enforced by
diversity of opinion: for where a ^^ns mind is unto me uncertain and
unknown, I hold it better to think the best, then to blame what I know not*
So if our adversaries, were carried away only in the heat of their cause, and
with a blind zeal of superstition, when they spit such venomous words at us,
and had not an especial purpose as we have but too much experience, in so
doing to malign the truth, and disgrace the professors thereof, we should be
able better to brook their speeches, and to bear their outrages, then now,
knowing the contrary, we either can or will. This then is that, that
sometimes thrusts us forward, when we see not so much our persons to be
stricken and gaulled with their tongues, as the truth to be wounded through our
sides, to speak home unto them and to tell them their own, not reuiling but
reproouing, not taunting but telling them their fault and folly. Cresconius an
Archdonatist, does roundly take up Augustine, because he used these words
against them: Sicut nonpotest Satanas Satanam excludere, etc. As Satan (says
he) can not drive out Satan, 2. Tim. 2. contra Crescon. lib. 3. cap. 78.
so the error of the Manichees cannot overthrow the error of the Donatists.
Augustine answers very well: Quasi (inquit) Petilianum Satan^ comparauerim,
ac non errorem potius: Apostolicaenim mansuetudo, cum quibus modeste
agipraecepit, eos ipsos docet a diabolo captiuatos: nec tamen quam commendauit,
amisit lenitatem, quiaeam* quam docebat tac^re noluit, veritatem: As though
(says he) I compared Petilian himself to Satan, and not his error rather:
for so the Apostle does say, that even they, whom notwithstanding he wishes to
be gently dealt withal, were captiued and snared of the Devil: neither did he
in so saying, offend against that lenity, which he commends, while he
utters the truth, which was not to be concealed. Thus Augustine defends
himself, by S. Paul's example, and shows though it be not lawful to speak
evil or to revile, yet freely to open our mouths, and to cry out against the
enemies of the truth, it is not forbidden. Bernard a later writer, and one of
their Catholic Doctors, used the like liberty of speech in his days, and
thought he offended not: As inueying against the Clergy of his time, he
says. Ministri sunt Christi, et seruiunt sermon. sup. Cantic. 33.
Antichristo: They are the Ministers of Christ, and yet serve Antichrist: yea
of the Bishops themselves and the chief of the Clergy, he doubts not to
say, having first rehearsed those words of Christ to his Sermon. ad pastor* in
Synod.
Apostles. Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil? Sic facit
Jesus hodie, eligens sibi multos diabolos episcopos: Even so does Jesus says
he now a days, choosing many Devils to be Bishops. He stays not here, but
climeth up even unto the popes chair. Tristes vidimus, tristes eloquimur
honorem ecclesiae, Honorij tempore non minime laesum: We have seen it with
Epist. 45.
grief, and we speak it with grief, that in pope Honorius time, the honor of
the Church, was not a little endamaged. And in an other place finding fault with
the Cardinals of Rome: that they had fetched Eugenius out of his cloister, and
of an Abbot, made him a Pope: he taunteth them in these words: Ascendit
Jericho* incidit in latrones: He is gone up from Epist. 147.
Jerusalem to Jericho, he is fallen among thieves: thus comparing Rome to
Jericho, and the Cardinals to thieves. If Bernard then a Doctor of their own,
could assume unto himself such liberty of speech as to term evil Ministers,
the servant of Antichrist, Bishops devils, Cardinals thieves, in hatred and
detestation of the corruptions of those times: I think we may be excused, if
for love and zeal of the truth, we deal plainly many times with our
adversaries, and do not slatter them a whit: though I think few or none of us
have used like freenes of speech, as either Augustine against the Heretics of
that age, or Bernard^ against the corruptions of his time. Therefore to
conclude this point, we say, as not long Harding. defens. apolog page 52.
since a darling of their own said, yet with better right and more truly, I
am sure then he: Now the law of upright dealing specially in Gods cause so
requiring, ye must pardon us, if as among husbandmen, we call a rake a rake, a
spade a spade, a mattocke a mattocke: so among divines, we call heresy
heresy, and likewise falsehood, lying, slaundering, craft, hypocrisy,
blasphemy, every such crime by his proper name without all glosing.

But leaving off here in this place further to make apology, or to seek
defense in this point for our selves, which were a needelesse and superfluous
labor, the writings of our learned and godly brethren are abroad to be seen
and read: I trust they shall be found neither to sauoure of so envious a
spirit, nor to be mixed with such intemperate and undigested humors, as our
adversaries writings are sawsed and powdered withal. We will now proceed,
(not further keeping the Reader in suspense) to collect some flowers of popish
eloquence and Rhetorike, which their books are beawtified, and adorned withal.

First we will be so bold as walk into our country man M. Hardings Garden,
and there a little refresh our selves with the pleasant sent of his sweet
smelling herbs. And here in the very entrance, I find a nosegay already
gathered to my hand by that skillful and cunning gardener, not Preface in
defens. apol.
in name but in deed, B. Jewel: let us take up this posey, and smell a little
thereon: M. Harding therefore writing against B. Jewel cloyeth and
ouerchargeth him with these and such like sweet speeches. Who ever heard such
an impudent man? a most impudent liar, awicked slaunderer: and all because he
said with Laurentius Valla a Canon of Rome, that Pope Celesti^^s was a
Nestorian Heretic.

Again, who ever saw so impudent a man, what shall I say to this fellow? fiefor
shame man, a minister of fables, a minister of lies? foolish ignorance,
shameless malice, so ignorant, so witless, lewd wretches, Jewish, Heat
henish, shameless, blasphemous villains, false ministers, false harlots, ye
lie falsely, yea ye lie for advantage, ye are impudent liers, lewd liers,
heaps of lies, nothing but lies, and al is lies. But what is the cause think
you, that this meek spirited man should be so disquieted and make such
outcryes against liers? forsooth because Master Jewel, in one place leaves
out (enim) in a another place (hoc) in an other place, the Printer set down
schemate, for schismate and such like: is not here great cause think you, to
make a man thus to take on and to run out of his wits?

Is not this asweete nosegay (think you) and is it not compounded of choice
flowers? the sent is so strong to my smell, that I cannot choose but Epist. 57.
stop my nose: Nisi, as Bernard says, omniu^ passim naribus iniecto foetore,
solus dissimule^ pestem, nec audeo manum contra pessimum putorem propria manu
munire: Unless, as he says, the stincke smelling strong in every man's nose I
only should dissemble the matter and not dare to sense my nose with mine own
hand against the contagious smell. But let us have patience a little, and pass
along, to see what store of such sweet smelling flowers. M. Hardinges garden
will afoord us.

Page 40. Thus your vain boast in wickedness wrought by the power of Satan
Defens. Eccl. Angl. 3.
is put to silence, because M. Jewel says, that many kings and princes are
fallen away from the Sea of Rome, and have joined them selves to the church of
God.

Page 42 This is his heat henish heart, what could Purphurie, or Julius, or
Celsus say more? because M. Jewel had said, that men even by light of nature,
though thereby alone they cannot be led to the perfection of faith, yet may
somewhat discern what is likely or unlikely in religion, according to S. Paul
Romans 1. 20. The invisible things of God, his everlasting power and Godhead are
seen by the creation of the world.

Page 85 We take you to be mad: would God you were not worse then mad: were you
mad, you should be tied up: Else were you suffered to go abroad, for fear
folk^ would fly from you, and then should you do little hurt.

Page 145 How say you sir Minister Bishop, ought the minister to be lawfully
called?

Page 146 Touching the exercise of your ministry, you do all things without
order: unless ye mean such order, as Thieves observe among them selves in
distribution of their robberies.

Page 153 If he were, so folish to think so, yet you M. Jewel in that behalf
should not bear the babble with him: speaking of Nilus a Greek writer, a
learned man and a reverent Bishop.

Page 162. You show your self to be a man of evil disposition, no man ever
said it, but Illyricus or bawdy Bale: Namely that pope Zosimus corrupted the
council of Nice, the truth where of notwithstanding is proved by B. Jewel out
of the Aphricane council. cap. 101. 102. 103. Council. Carthag. 6. cap. 4.
Council. Florentin. sess. 20.

Page 164. You are errant slanderous liers: how seems not this wicked
generation to spring of the devil: because M. Jewel says, by the testimony of
Alphons. de castro, Sabellic, Platina, and others, that pope Liberius was an
Arian heretic.

Page 189. This sir defender learned in the school of Satan, and now lies
bound in Satan fatters.

Page 201. Their Bishops for custody of their chastity after their former old
yokefellowes decease, solace them selves with new strumpets.

Page 209. Of what small substance this reason is, the veriest Cobblers of all
their Ministers, if they can read any english beside their communion book,
may easily perceive. B. Jewel tells Harding, he might have remembered, that
not long since Julius the 2. of a wherrislaue was made Pope: but we have no
cobblers in the ministry.

Page 290. Mauger the malice of the devil and of all the sacramentaries, the
old truth shall prevail: he means the conversion and transsubstantiating
Tunstall to have come in twelve hundred years after the gospel: as in that
place it is manifestly proved.

Page 297. Now sir, I report me to every man that has sense, whether I may
not lawfully give you the Menti, as for manners sake I may use the Italian
term, and challenge you in plain terms of a lie, for uttering this untruth:
and yet there is no untruth uttered: see the place.

Page 313. It liked your filthy spirit, with vile words, to bring that holy
mystery into contempt: wherein you do the Devil author of all heresies, the
greatest service that may be devised: because with Origin he had affirmed that
the bread in the sacrament, as touching the material substance thereof goes
into the belly, and is cast into the privy.

Page 342. The things, which it likes your Sathanical spirit, with
blasphemous words to dishonor: he means the sacrament, which indeed is by
them most of all abused and dishonored.

Page 359. He calls us cursed Chananites.

Page 187. Ye falsely and wickedly lead the people, ye are Apostataes, ye are
heretics ye are impudent and rebellious children.

Page 404. These defenders in conditions be like such honest women, as commonly
we call Scoldes.

Page 409. Lo a grievous and an heavy case, that the world calls you wicked
and ungodly men: I wis, they be too blame for it, and so be they that call
them thieves, which come to be promoted to Tibor^e.

Page 446. Your impudency of lying has no measure nor end.

Page 459. The fiendes of hell were not yet let loose, that begat Lutheranes,
Zuinglians Caluinistes: and here of we understand the youth of your Church,
which is no other but the malignant Church, and Synagogue of Satan.

Page 465. Though the defender fear not to be accounted a liar, yet should he
be loath to be accountedan dishonest man, yea and specially a fool.

Page 502. We reckon not, what Luther says, what Zuinglius, what Calvin, what
Antichrist, what Satan says.

Page 506. If this defender were compared to a mad dog, some perhaps

Page 510. He calls us light preachers, wicked vowbreakers, lewd leacherous
lurdens, detestable blasphemers: such is your deuilish rabble, says he: This
is M. Hardinges eloquence.

Page 524. O thou captain liar: O most worthy not the reward of a whetstone,
but the judgment of a backbiter, of a slaunderer, of a cursed speaker, of the
accuser of the brethren, of a blasphemer. Can thou persuade thy self to get
credit by lying, to seem sober by railing, honest by villainy, charitable by
slaundering? And all this stir is, because we charge them with burning of
scriptures: which their ungodly practices here in England, do notoriously show
to be true.

Page 549. He shows himself a fool, a slaunderer, an vnlearnedman.

Page 576. Here pricketh forth this hasty defender, as peart as a pearemonger,

Page 602. Ye cannot abide salt water, oil, the cross: And no marvel: No more
can not the devil, who possesses you, and rides you.

Page 607. It should have become Scoggin, Patch, ^^lle, Harry Pattenson, or
Will Summer, to have told this tale much better then your superintendentship's:
And if ye would needs have played the part your selves, it had been more
convenient to have done it upon the stage, under a vices coat, then in a
book, etc.

And all this, because their practices in seducing the people of God, are
compared to Ieroboams, who entised the people from the true worship of God at
Jerusalem, by setting up two Golden calves.

Page 616. When were ever such thieves in the Church of God as ye are?

Ibid. If all iffes were true, then if heaven fell, we should catch larkes. And
if a bridge were made between Dover and Caleis, we might go to Boleine a foot,
as William Summer once told King Henry the eight. Because M. Jewel had said,
if the Church of Rome can not err, the good luck thereof is far greater
then these men's policy: for such is their doctrine and life, that for all
them the Church may not only err, but be utterly spoiled.

Page 617. By your Apostacy ye have done more wickedly, then if ye committed

Page 648. Sirs, would ye have the common people to come to the general Whom
mean ye, I pray you? Tinkers and Tapsters, Fiddlers and Pipers, such as your
ministers be? Alas poor souls, what should they do there? for there is no
Yet in your late Trident chap. the^ was such tinking of other men's kettles, and
tippling of their cups, that 2. adulterous popish Bishops came to and
shameful end* whereof one was slain with a borespeare, being found with an
other man's wife: the other was hanged in a grin laid for him in his mus^ where
he was wont to creep in at a win dowe. Fox. page 2107.
tinking nor tippling, nor fidling, nor piping: there they may shut up both
budgets and mouths. But here M. Harding need not thus to have vpbraided our
ministers with such scoffing and iesterlike terms: if he had remembered (as M.
Jewel tells him) what Alphons. de Castro reports of the popes, Constat
plures Papas adeo esse illiteratos, vt grammaticam penit us ignorent, That
many of them were so unlearned, that they were ignorant of their grammar.

Page 680. As I cannot well take an hair from your lying beard, so wish I that
I could pluck malice from your blasphemous heart.

Neither does M. Harding here content him self, thus spitefully to have
entreated the living: calling our Ministers Cobblers, Tapsters, Tinkers:
Ministers wives, sober and grave matrons with him no better then strumpets: But
he does most unhonestly snatch and carpe at the dead, and revile Gods Saints,
terming the book of Acts and Monumentes, a huge dunghill of p. 33
judgment out of his hand, and gives sentence of condemnation against us. The
authors and professors of them be dead and rotten in hell fire, with weeping
and grinning of teeth: the like judgment look ye and your fellows to have if
ye repent not. And in another place: After ye have fried and boiled (says p.
26 page 63^.
he) in rancour and malice against the Church, ye are like to leap into the
furnace of hell: Thus we hear M. Hardinges sugared eloquence: Judge now (good
Christian Reader) whether this man have not been well trained up in Satan's
school, as he slanderously says of us.

These and such like are M. Hardinges flowers, who list to take a further view
of them, shall find them to be collected as into one bundle by B. Jewel:
where these pleasant sorts shall be offered to his smell: Your deuilish spite,
your deuilish wickedness, your deuilish villainy, Satan is your
schoolmaster, your father the devil: your new Church set up by Satan, you
are the school of Satan, children of the devil. A page, a slave, a clawbacke
of the devil, your reprobate congregation, your confused tents of Satan, the
nouice of the devil. Satan's brood, Satan holds you captive, ye are fast
bound in Satan's fetters, loose apostates, profane hel-houndes, your
blasphemies and Sathanismes, Caluinistes, Sathanistes: your wicked Chams brood,
your damnable side, your deuilish rabble, your congregation of reprobates, your
Turkish doctrine. As crafty knaves in a comedy, they are Apes, they are
Asses, with such like, Jewel. prefat. defens. Apolog.

But least we should think, that M. Harding only has profited in this black
and popish Rhetorike, let us see also the modesty of other men's spirits, out
of that school. We shall easily find that they are all one woman's children,
and have had all one school master, their style and speech is so alike. Fox.
p. 883. 40.


Bonauenture, a friar of Loraine disputing with Wolfgangus, used these as his
best arguments: Thou heretic, Judas, Beelzebub.

Bellarmine, the mildest and most modest child of that crew, yet sometime
Praefat. in 2. controu. de Christo
shows the badge of his profession: Ab alio spiritu Caluinus agitur (says
he) vt se Valentino opponat, sic inter se daemonibus colludentibus: Calvin
being moved of an other spirit, does set him self against Ualentinus, the
Tritheist, who affirmed that there were 3. gods: one devil thus mocking with
another. Is not here (think you) a gentle reward for Calvin, for opposing him
self against that vile heretic, and maintaining the doctrine of the
Trinity? Is not this to blaspheme the spirit of God, speaking and writing in
Calvin in the defense of the truth?

But what say ye to our Rhemistes, those jolly Jesuits? if any man be desi
rous to know their pregnant wits, and eloquent tongues, thus they write:

Annot. in Act. 8. sect. 10. Simon Magus that sorcerer had more true knowledge
of religion, then the protestants have: he blasphemed not, as they blaspheme.

They call us Miscreantes. Iam. 5. sect. 5. and compare us to the impious Cham.
Galath. 2. sect. 8. to Cain, Balaam and Core. Iud. v. 11.

Yea with a foul black mouth, they are not ashamed to call Calvin, Beza,
Verone, reprobates. Romans 11. ver. 33.

Thus at the burning of M. ^rith, that worthy servant of God and blessed D.
Cook most uncharitably admonished the people, that they should pray no more
for him, then they would for a dog. Fox. page 1036

Now comes in railing Cochleus, and fills up the measure of this I say
therefore John Hus is neither to be counted holy nor blessed, but rather wicked
and eternally wretched: in so much that in the day of judgment, it shall be
more easy, not only with the Infidel Paganes, Turks, Tartarians, and Jews,
but also with the most sinful Sod^mites, and the abominable Persians, which
most filthilie do lie with their daughters, sisters, or mothers: yea also with
most irapious Cain killer of his own brother, with Thyestes killer of his own
mother, and the Lestrygones, and other Anthropophagi which devour man's flesh
yea more easy with those most infamous murderers of infantes, Pharao and
Herod, then with him. Cochle. lib. 2. histor Hussitar. translated by M. Fox.
page 6^1.

I marvel at my heart, that they without horror of conscience could thus speak
or write of the servants of God, or that the earth did not open under them to
swallow up such blasphemers. We need not now think it strange that the
Rhemistes charge us with blasphemy, Reuelat. 13. sect. ^. And Harding with
sin against the holy ghost, because we speak against the pope: This fellow
goes further, making the holy servant of God worse then Caine, the^ Pharao,
then infidels, or paganes: I pray God it be not laid to their charge: yet they
stay not here, neither are content thus to revile our persons, which might
better be borne at their hands, but they open their mouth eue^ against heaven,
and spare not to blaspheme the truth, which we profess. The holy communion,
which we observe according to Christ's (...)
institution, Harding spitefully calls a lean and carrien banquet. page ^20

The Rhemistes say, that Caluins supper with his bread and wine, which is (...)
not his supper but Christ's, is like at length to come to the sacrifice of
C^^es and Bacchus. John. 4. sect. 4.

And yet more wickedly they say, that our communion is the very table and (...)
cup of devils, wherein the devil is properly served. 1 Corinthians. 10. sect. 9.
But alas seely men, we pity their case: They speak evil (as Saint Jude says)
of things they know not. If they understood (what these holy mysteries were)
they would, I think be more sparing in blaspheming. We will not requite them
again with evil speech, Michaell durst not do it to the devil, but the Lord
rebuke them and amend them.

Now in the last place I will adioine certain flowers of stout sturdye
Stapletons eloquence, collected out of his late book set forth against our
worthy and learned country man D. Whitakers, that it may appear what spirit
they are of, that with such bitter speech and vile terms do taunt and revile
the professors of the Gospel.

To omit how odiously and proudly he charge him with ignorance and want of
learning: calling him every where, Doctorem indoctum, unlearned Doctor, and
professorem indignum, unworthy professor, not worthy to be admitted to the
least degree in schools. lib. 1. cap. 2. sect 4. Whitakerus quonis tyrone
ineptior: more foolish then any boy scholar or new beginner lib. 2, cap. 1.
sect. 3. yea he blusheth not to call him scriptore^ barbaru^, a barbarous
writer. To let pass these and such like arrogant challenges, which are common
with all papists who boast of them selves, as of the only learned and eloquent
men, but alas, poor souls, it seems they dwell by evil neighbors, when
they are feign to praise them selves. But as for M. Stapleton, he is fowlie
ouerseene, in charging so worthy a man with want of learning, whose books he
is scarce worthy in respect of true learning to carry after him. And if the
question be of eloquence, this Louanian Doctors writing is but a kind of
barking in respect of the others, either for smoothness of style, or good
phrase of speech.

But to let pass these, as the most mild and courteous terms he has, this
eloquent Louanian professor thus sets upon that reverent and learned man,
thus saying unto him, Minister Sathanae effectus, professor per^^^^^, magister
mendax and impudentissimus: Thou art become a minister of Satan, a faithless
or forsworn professor, a lying and most impudent teacher. ^* ^. monit ad
Whitaker. professor asinine, Asse-head professor, lib. 1. cap. 1. sect. 12. He
lies for the whet-stone, Facis mendacium cote dignum, cap. 2. sect. 6.
absurditas Asinina aduersarij, His asinine absurdity. lib. 1. cap. 7. sect. 3.
Ineptissimus disputator, Most foolish disputer: ibi. sect. 9. Fatuus rusticus,
A clownish or rusticall fool. cap. 12. sect. 4. Stultissimus, A very fool.
ibid. Sophista impudens, An impudent sophister. lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 10.
Barbara impudentia, His barbarous impudency. cap. 7. sect. 6. He plays the
sycophant. cap. 8. sect. 4. Stultissime sophista, Most foolish sophister. cap.
9. sect. 1. Disputator absurdissime. Most absurd disputer. Ibi. sect. 8.
Mentiendi consuetudo in naturam tibi versa, Your custom of lying is become
your very nature. cap. 10. sect. 1. What could be said more of the Devil?
Hebitudinis tuae et tarditatis, etc. Your dullness and blockishnesse, etc.
sect. 10. Mentiendi libido vel necessitas. He has either pleasure or
necessity to lie, sect. 13. Mendacium rotundum. He makes a round lie. sect.
16. Crassa ignorantia, Gross ignorance. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 3. Mendacium
ridiculum and morione dignum, A ridiculous lie and fit for a fool, lib. 3.
cap. 13. sect. 1. Mendaciu^ nobile, A noble lie. cap. 14. sect. 5 mendacium
splendidum: sect. 8. A notable or lewd lie. Mendacium stupidu^. A blockish lie.
cap. 16. sect. 7. Crassa stupiditas, Gross blockishnes, ibi. Stul^itia and
hebetudo prorsus asinina, Asinine foolishness and dullness, cap. 19. sect. 11.
These and an hundred such like proper Rhetorical speeches our good countri-man
has sent us from Louaine, to show how he has profited in popish eloquence:
and to make up our mouths, after he has long dallied in words, in good sober
sadness, he speaks thus friendly unto us: Omniu^ quidem haereticoru^ and
caecitas magna est, and pertinacia singularis, sed vestra hodie Whitachere, tua
inquam, tuorumque con^enarum haereticorum tum caecitas tum pertinacia long
maxima est, In all heretics, there is both great blindness and singular
obstinacy, but thy blindness Whitakers, and wilfulnes, with the rest of thy
fellow-heretikes, passes all. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 5. We are much beholding
to you, good countriman, Father, Thomas Stapleton, that worthy Louanian
professor, (for we will give you your titles) though that worthy man, be but
plain whitakers with you, that you can find in your heart to give us the upper
hand in blindness and wilfulnes, of all heritikes that ever were: But cursed and
confounded be all such heretics, as are more wilfullye blind and obstinate
against the truth then papists be.

This doubtie Doctor, sturdie Stapleton, charge, as we have seen, this
godly learned man, with four especial crimes, ignorance, folly, impudency,
lying. But you M. Stapleton therein show your self neither so deep a clarke,
nor so wise a man, or of so sober a spirit as you would be taken for. As for
the first, his, which you call ignorance, shall be able by Gods grace to match
and ouermatch your Louania^ learning or sophistry rather. The folishnes of the
Gospel, and simplicity of the truth in him shall not give place to your humane
and serpentine wisdom. In deed he is too modest, too mild and humble a man
to deal with so proud, vainglorious, and spiteful boasters. A wrangling
Sophister were fitter to answer your intemperat and immodest railing, than so
grave and reverend a Divine. But as for lying, take it to your selves, both it
and the father thereof. There shall be more truth found in few of his lines,
than many of your leaves: and more good divinity in one page, than is in your
whole book. And have you been these four years in hatching so goodly a bird,
and bringing forth a Cockatrice egg? Surely you have spent your time well.
And be these the fruits of your studies? Well, ex vnguibus Leonem: by such
fruits we know what the tree is; what need other arguments? your usual and
customarie railing bewraieth your malicious spirit. And tell me you wretched
miserable men, which have nothing more common in your mouths, than to call us
asses, doults, fools, how can you escape that heavy sentence of our Savior
which says, that who so calls his brother fool, is in danger of hell fire:
Math. 5. But it is no new thing for Heretics to rail and revile: it has
ever been their custom and guise: The Pelagians called Augustine, Cultorem
daemonum, a worshipper of devils: August. cont. Julian. lib. 3. cap. 18. The
Donatists accused Cecilian a Catholic Bishop, of sin against the holy
Ghost: August contra Crescon. lib. 4. cap. 17. So it is true as Maxentius
says: Haeretici, cum peruersitatis suae non possunt reddere rationem, ad
maledicta conuertuntur: Heretics, when they find them selves not able to
yield a reason of their wilfulnes; then they fall to plain railing. Such
plenty of scoffs and taunts, of cursings and reuilings, is an evident sign
of an evil cause, and bewraieth a cankred stomach. We will not answer them in
the same kind; for our cause is better, and our malice and hatred much less.
It grieueth not us to be evil spoken of without cause. We are sorry for them:
they hurt not us, but blemish their own credit before men, and make their
account more heavy before God. I will shut up this place with that good saying
of Bernard, Bonum mihi si me dignetur Deus vti pro Clypeo, libens excipio in me
detrahentium linguas maledicas, vt no^ ad ipsum peruenia^t: It is good for me,
if God vouchsafe De co^^^^ derat. li. 2.
to use me in steed of a buckler, I willingly do latch in my self the darts
of slanderous tongues, that they light not upon him.

Popish slanders and false accusations. Part. 2.
NOw in the next place, having tasted sufficiently of the first dish of their
bitter and sower taunts and reproaches, which we have had but a cold welcome
unto; let us take an assay of the next: And that, I fear me, we shall find not
much plesanter Yet because we will not be unmannerly ghestes, we will taste
of every dish. Our adversaries therefore are not contended to load us with
bitter and unsavory words; but they do also charge us with fained and devised
things, accusing us falsely, and imposing upon us strange and unknown
articles: Their accusations then and false challenges, are either general
against our whole Church, or particular, directed and leauelled against some
special men, and both kinds concerning either the doctrine or manners of our
Church: of these in order, and first of their accusations in general, and
vain surmises of our doctrine: and here I will especially follow our
Rhemistes, as before we made bold with master Harding, who in this case are
very plentiful.

They charge us to say; That the Church consists only of the elect: Annot.
Math. 3. Sect. 7. and Math. 22. Sect. 2. Whereas we affirm, that the visible
Church upon earth has both good and bad in it: but the invisible Church we
hold to consist of the elect only.

Annot. Math. 19. Sect. 11* that we should say; God can do no more

Annot. Math. 23. Sect. 6. That we teach; It is enough to have only Galath 5.
6.

That we say, the Church has failed many hundred years, til Luther Calvin.
Annot. Math. 28. Sect. 2. Whereas we believe, that the Church has always
continued, and shall continue till the end of the world.

That we hold, that it is sufficient to be baptized with the Holy Ghost,
Annot. Mark. 1. Sect. 5. But we grant that baptism with water is necessary,
if it may be had acording to Christ's institution: Otherwise in those that are
prevented by death, we affirm, that the lack of water cannot deprive them of
their inheritance.

That we say, all things are easy in Scripture, Annot. Luke 6. Sect. 1.

That we affirm, the Church may fail in faith. Annot. Luk 18. Sect. 8. Fulk.
ibid.

That we pretend, that God draws us against our will, and without any John. 6.
2. God of unwilling makes us willing, by changing our will to embrace Christ
gladly, and otherwise we teach not.

That we affirm the Holy Ghost to be none other, but the gift of Annot. Act.
8. Sect. 7. But none of us says so: It is a mere slander.

That we allow no fasting, but moral temperance, and spiritual fasting Act.
13. Sect. 5. Whereas we do acknowledge a Christian use of fasting and
abstinence from all meats and drinks, for the taming of the flesh, and making
us more fit to pray: not an abstinence from flesh only, as they do
superstitiously imagine.

That we should say, that the preaching of the law, and judgment Act. 24.
Sect. 2. Whereas we hold the preaching of the law to be necessary to bring
men to repentance: But justification by keeping the law, which they teach, we
utterly condemn.

That we would have all men to be present, and give voice in Councels. Act.
19. Sect. 5. We say not so, for that were impossible: But we hold against our
adversaries, that as well the learned and discreet amongst the lay men, as the
Clergy, ought to be admitted to consult of religion: And that not only
Bishops, but other Pastors also and Ministers ought to have deciding voices in
Councels.

That we condemn good works as sinful, Pharisaicall, hypocritical. Romans
2. Sect. 3. Whereas we acknowledge them to be the good gifts of God, the fruits
of justification, the way wherein all Christians must walk to salvation, We
only exclude them from being any cause of our justification before God.

Annot. Romans 2. Sect. 4. That we affirm that God justifies man, that This is
a great slander: For we think and say; that God of a wicked man, by his
grace and mercy, does make him just in deed, by the justice of Christ,
neither calling, no^ accounting him just that continues wicked, as he was
before, but giving him also the spirit of sanctification, whereby after he is
made just by grace, he does the works of justice, and keeps Gods
commandments, though not perfectly in this life. Fulk. ibid.

That we gather of those terms, used by the Apostle Romans 4. covered. v. 7.
not imputed. v. 8. That the sins of men be never truly forgiven, but hidden
only. Annot. Romans 4. Sect. 7. We say, that our sins are truly forgiven us
for Christ's sake, and our conscience freely discharged of them, Christ having
satisfied the justice of God perfitly for them.

That we teach, that the Sacraments of the Church give not grace and justice
of faith: but that they be notes, marks and badges only of our remission of
sins. Romans 4. Sect. 8. We say not, that they are only marks and badges, but
as the Apostle says, seals of God to assure our faith of justification by
remission of sins: And yet it follows not, that the sacraments should give
or confer grace.

That to establish our fiction of confidence (as they not without Annot. Romans
4. Sect. 9. Whereas we affirm, that we are justified by none other faith, but
that which is declared in those Articles, not by a bare knowledge or belief of
them, that they are true, which the devil has and many reprobates: but by
steadfast believing of them, with a sure trust and confidence in Christ, whereby
we are made partakers of his precious merits, and assured of the remission of
our sins.

That we should say, Man has no more free will, than a piece of clay: Romans 9.
Sect. 7. Whereas we only say, that our free will has no power or strength at
all, to will, or do the thing that is good, without the grace of God.

That we say, the faithful be sure they shall never sin: Romans 8. Sect. 9.

That where the Apostle says, It is better to marry than to burn; that to
burn, is nothing else but to be tempted, because they would easily pick
quarrels to marry: 1. Corinthians. 7. Sect. 8. We do not so think, that to
burn, is only to be tempted, but to be so continually inflamed with lust,
that the will does consent and desire quenching, Fulk. ibid.

That we will not have men work well in respect of reward at Corinth. 9.
Sect. 7. We say not so; but that men ought not to work well only as
hirelings, for hope of reward, but chiefly and principally, of loving
obedience and duty, as of children to their father.

That we seem by abandoning other names of the Communion (saving Corinth. 11.
Sect. 8. We retain other names of this Sacrament beside, as the Communion,
the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, the Eucharist, and such like:
and it is but a vain conceit, that we incline it to have it at night, when
they see our usual and daily practice to the contrary.

They say, we profess, that we make no consecration, benediction, or
sanctification of the bread and wine at all in the Sacrament, but let the bread
and wine stand aloof: and that we occupy Christ's words, by way of report
only and narration: applying them not at all to the Elements proposed to be
occupied: 1. Corinthians. 11. Sect. 9. All this is utterly false, for we profess,
that by praise and thanksgiving for the death of Christ, and by prayer unto
God, that we may be partakers of the body and blood of Christ, we consecrate,
bless and sanctify the bread and wine, to be the holy and blessed Sacraments
of the body and blood of Christ. And we do also apply the words of
institution to the Elements, (though not after their Magical fantasy) praying
thus: That we receiving the secreatures of bread and wine, according to
Christ's holy iustitution, (which is rehearsed out of the Gospel) in
remembrance of his passion, may be partakers of his most blessed body and
blood. This is (who sees not) a manifest applying of the words to the matter
proposed to be occupied.

That we would make the simple believe, that no punishment of a 2. Corinthians. 2.
Sect. 2. This is a malicious slander. We affirm in deed, that no punishment
laid upon any man's person, either by himself, or by the Church, is any
satisfaction to the justice of God for our sins, because Christ only was
able and has made such satisfaction: yet temporal punishment for
chastisement, ecclesiastical discipline for satisfaction of the Church, and
amendment of open offenders are necessary by the ordinance of Gods word, and
in our Church are practiced: Fulk. ibid.

They say, that Luther, Calvin, and such wicked Libertines, as it pleases
Annotat. 2. Corinthians. 7. Sect. 3. We speak only against the Popish heresy of
penance, or sorrow to be satisfactorie for sin, and not against such sorrow
which works true repentance, and true contrition for all their sins past.

That we refuse all man's attestation and approbation, and will be Galath. 2.
Sect. 4. But we affirm no such thing, neither do we refuse to be tried by
men judging according to the Scriptures. The approbation of the Scriptures by
the Church we allow: but we count it a great absurdity, that the authority
of the Scripture should depend upon the Churches approbation and trial,
which is the thing in question between us.

That we teach, that the charge of the Apostles was so distinct, that peace,
and orders sake, were limited to every one, Galath. 2. Sect. 6. But we teach
contrariwise, That every one of the Apostles had as large and as general
authority, as the other: and that any of the Apostles by their commission,
might lawfully have preached at Rome, as well as Peter or Paul. But after this
distinction was made by God, it was not lawful for the Apostles to leave or
forsake their special charges, and to intrude them selves into another limits,
as Saint Paul says: we do not stretch our selves beyond our measure. 2. Corinthians. 10. 14.

That we have no other arguments against the real presence of Christ Aristotle
and his like, concerning quantity, accidents, place, position, dimensions,
sight, taste, and other straites of reason, to the which they bring Christ's
mysteries, Coloss. 2. 1. We have other arguments out of holy Scripture, and
the ancient writers: Neither have we any arguments out of Philosophy, but
such as are grounded upon the Scriptures, which teach the perfect humanity of
Christ, and all essential properties of a true and natural body.

They say, we apply that text of Saint Paul: He that will not labor, 2.
Thessal. 3. 2. against the vacant life of the Clergy. Annot. in hunc locum.
But we require no such thing, as to labor with the hands, of such of the
Clergy, as labor in study and teaching. Against the idle life of Monks,
Nuns, Friars, and the rest of that crew, as also against idle Mass Priests
this text is strong.

That we hold nothing to be necessary to salvation but the Scriptures. 2.
Timoth. 3. Sect. 3. We hold no such thing: for so we should exclude Christ him
self, as unnecessary to salvation. But we affirm, that the Scripture
contains all things necessary to be learned to salvation, and this is the
true state of the question.

That we plainly deny Melchisedech to have been a Priest. Hebr. 7. Sect. 8.
Here without shame they slander us. This we never denied, neither by Gods
grace will ever: though we affirm, that his Priesthood consisted not in
offering of bread and wine: neither does the Apostle, or any text of Scripture
so teach.

They charge us with this heresy: That Christ was not the first man that Hebr.
10. Sect. 1. They belie us, to say we hold, that Christ was not the first man
that entered into heaven, with his body or whole humanity, as the text is.
Hebr. 10. 20. And that dedicated and prepared away for all his members to enter
into heaven, both with their bodies, and their souls: by vortue of whose
death, all the faithful from the beginning were received into heavenly rest in
their souls.

That we will have no difference between the laity and the Clergy, 1. Pet.
5. Sect. 2. It is false, which here they object against us. We only mislike
their Popish difference, who do in such sort set apart their Clergy from the
rest of the people, as though they only were the Lords lot and inheritance,
the rest excluded.

That we say, the Scriptures be so easy, that they may be not only safely 2.
Pet. 3. Sect. 1. All these are great untruths. In deed we do hold, that the
people may safely be admitted to the reading of the Scriptures, though we deny
not, but that there are certain places therein hard to be understood: yet we
give them not liberty to expound scripture, as themselves lists, not staying
for the judgment of their pastors: For we plainly protest, that whosoever
despises the ordinary Ministry of the word, which God has established in
his Church, for the direction of us in the truth, shall never attain unto true
knowledge. As for the expositions of the fathers, we are so far from rejecting
them, where they interpret according to the sense of the Scriptures, that they
do in a manner anow all our interpretations, which you mislike.

That we affirm, that we neither keep, neither possibly can keep 1. John.
2. Sect. 7. We say not so, but that we can not keep them in such perfection,
as the justice of God requires, though by his grace we doubt not, but we are
enabled in such measure to keep them, as his mercy in Christ accepts, Fulk.
ibid.

Thus we see with how many slanders our countrymen of Rhemes do unkindly
charge and load us withal: neither are these all: more, who pleases may
collect out of that black book of theirs. The want of the rest, which I have
not here set down, I will supply out of another countreymans book of ours, to
whom we are much beholding for afoording of Harding.
us such plenty of so good stuff. First, P. 146. He thus friendly says unto
us, If you do not allow every man, yea, and every woman to be a Priest, why
drive ye not some of your fellows to recant, that so have preached? Why allow
ye the books of your new Evangelists that so have written? An odious
untruth: for touching the Ministry of the Church, we have none that either
have preached so, or written so, Jewel. defens. Apolog. page 146.

That we say, all things necessary to salvation are expressed in the page
240. But so we say not: We hold that all things necessary are either in the
Scriptures expressed, or therein contained, by necessary collection and
diduction to be drawn from the same.

That we, which say we can by no means fulfill the law of God, do page 368.
We make not God unjust or impotent, but we confess our selves to be sinners.
Neither is the question here, what God is able to do, but what he has
promised: for howsoever God be able, by his abounding grace, to make us perfect
in this life, and altogether void of sin, as we shall be in the life to
come: yet his power is not contrary to his will revealed in his word, which
says, that all men have sinned, Romans 3. 23. And as many as are of the works
of the law, are under the curse, Galath. 3. 10.

That we tell Christian men, they may work as much as they will, page. 371.
Untruth, for we say with Saint Paul, your works shall not be in vain in
the Lord. Although we do exclude them from being any cause, or mean of our
salvation, and that by the warrant of the Scriptures, Roman. 3. 28. Ephesian.
2. 10. and in other places.

That we profess, that the faith of the Catholic Church may fail page 493.
We speak not of the universal Catholic Church, but of the Church of Rome,
or of any other particular Church, which may fail in faith, as we see the
Churches of Corinth and Galatia are now thoroughly departed from the faith,
and are wholly subject to the Turk.

That we animate temporal Magistrates, by the pretensed example David and
Solomon, to intermeddle with Bishops offices, page 689. Untruth, it is not our
doctrine: But they rather embolden the Pope to meddle with Princes offices. And
Bellarmine a great Champion of theirs does free us from this slander, who
confesses of us, that we hold Regimen ecclesiasticum spirituale esse, and
distinctum a politico: That the Ecclesiastical regiment is spiritual, and a
thing distinct from the political, or temporal.

That we teach, that the Lords supper is very bakers bread, and page 320.
But we never so irreverently called that holy Sacrament. It is your self
(master Harding) that does so vilely disgrace this holy Mystery, calling it
A piece of bread not worth a point: a lean and carrien banquet; a toye. We
call it the Sacrament of thanksgiving, the Sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ, with other names fit for so great mysteries. Neither do we make
them bare figures and signs, but as the Apostle says, seals of the
righteousness of faith. Romans 4. 11.

Now, having seen thus far, with what false opinions they charge our Church
generally, in respect of our doctrine, let us take some trial also of their
just and true dealing with us, in matters belonging to manners. And here I do
not think but we shall find them halting, as before.

First, Harding charge us with continual aduoutrie and incest, calling their
filthy yokefellowes, page 439. Yea, he says, that our Gospel has no
substance, beside carnal liberty and licentious living, page 289. And that
thorough our evil teaching, the world grows more to be dissolute and
wicked, page 382. But if master Harding had remembered the dissolutenes, and
licentiousnes of life that is at Rome: He could not without blushing have
charged us with incest, aduowtries, and all Carnal liberty. He had forgotten
belike that old English proverb, He that goes once to Rome, sees a wicked
man: he that goes twice, learneth to know him: he that goes thrice,
brings him home with him, Fox page 843.

The Rhemistes do accuse the Protestants (whom they call heretics) 1. Timoth.
3. 6. But, as for that uncharitable name of heretics, we shall show anon,
that it is more proper unto them, than unto us. And never any heresy admitted
more unworthy persons to the Clergy, than Papistrie has done: not only into
the inferior places, but even into their chief Bishops see: for as Alphons.
testifies, whom we cited before, Many of their Popes did not know so much
as their Grammar.

Harding charge the Protestants in diverse Countries to have attempted Were
the hundred thousand Boures in Germany (says he) consumed by the sword of
the Nobility there for their obedience? P. 441. So he slaundereth Luther
also, that he stirred up Thomas Munzer in Thuringia, who was the Rebels
preacher, page 447. Thus the Rhemistes deal with Calvin, calling him one of
the principal Rebels of this time, and most falsely give out of the
Protestants, that their Consistories are shoppes of rebellion.

Thus also they report of Wickliffe, that he should teach, that Princes are
not to be obeyed being in deadly sin. Annotation. 1. Peter. 2. Sect. 8.

All these are malicious slanders devised against us. First the boures of
Germany were most of them adversaries to Luther, and understood no part of
the Gospel, but conspired together, as they said, only against the cruelty
of their Lords, as they had two and twenty years before in the conspiracy
called (Liga Sotularia,) Anno 1503. fifteen years before Doctor Luther began
to preach, which was Anno 1518. Jewel. page 441. Secondly, Luther was so
far from stirring up Thomas Munzer, that he called him the preacher of
Satan, Sleidan. li. 5. Thirdly, Neither did Wickliffe teach any such thing,
for he him self was obedient both to Edward the third, and to Richard the
second; both which princes, as we know, were guilty of some notorious
sins. Fourthly, you rather show your selves the rebels of this age, who
make no conscience in moving the subjects to rise up and conspire against their
natural Sovereigns. And England knows by experience, that your Seminaries
of Rome and Rhemes, are the shops of rebellion, which have forged so many
conspiracies against our Sovereign, but all hitherto in vain, the Lord be
thanked, and we trust in God shall be so still: ye might therefore have been
ashamed, to have cast us in the teeth with that, which your own consciences
may accuse your selves of.

Thus much of the slanders in general, which they belch out against our whole
Church: now we will a little touch those Popish forgeries, which they have in
their idle and fantastical brain, devised against some particular men
amongst us, sorted out from among the rest.

And first of all, they lay load upon poor Wickliffe, charging him with
Rhemist. Romans 13. Sect. 4. 1. Peter 2. Sect. 8. which we have showed before to
be a great untruth.

That Wickliffe did condemn degrees of schools, and titles of Doctors
Rhemist. Math. 23. Sect. 4. This is a mere slander of Wickliffe: Fulk. ibid.

That he should say, that God ought to obey the devil, Bellarmine, Praefat.
in controuers. and adds for the proof hereof, that this his heresy was
condemned in the Council of Constance. Sess. 8. We take this to be a mere
slander as the rest: for there is no such thing found objected against
Wickliffe, neither in those 18 articles exhibited against him in the
convocation of certe^n Bishops at Lambeth, Fox P. 432: nor yet amongst those 9
articles, which were condemned as heretical: nor those 23 which were condemned
as erroneous, Fox P. 435. Yet concerning this matter, three scholars of the
said Wickliffe, that followed not long after, showed their opinion, namely,
Nicholas Herford, Phillip Repingdon, John Ayshton. And thus they say, that God
ought not to obey the devil in his own person, or essence, nor with the
obedience of necessity: for so to affirm, say they, it is heresy, Fox P.
438. And again they granted, that they meant an obedience of ^oue, because
God loved the devil, and punished him as he ought, P. 439. The phrase and
manner of speech is somewhat strange: but who sees not, that their meaning is
sound and good. First, that God not in his own person, but in his creatures
yields obedience to the devil: that is, sometime gives him power over his
creatures. Secondly, yet not of necessity, for God, can when it pleases him,
tie Satan short* and exempt his creatures from his power. Thirdly, that God
loves him as his creature, and so he does also the wicked, suffering the Sun
to shine upon them, Mat. 5. Fourthly, that the Lord in his justice is to punish
the devil, and so does: they are reserved in everlasting chains of darkness,
Iud. 6.

In this sort also they dealt with John Husse, devising strange Articles
Gregory, when they alleged his authority against him, was but a rime^:
wherein John Husse himself answered, that they did him great injury, for so
much, as he always esteemed and reputed S. Gregory for a most holy Doctor of
the Church: Fox page 606.

Thus it was falsely objected against the same John Husse in the Council
Constance, where he was most unjustly condemned: that he said, there should be
a fourth person in divinity, and that a Doctor heard him to speak the same.
John Husse desired the Doctor might be named, which not obtaining, he thus
cries out: O miserable and wretched man that I am, which am forced and
compelled to bear such blasphemy and slander: Fox P. 622.

This was, as we see, the guise of the old Papists, thus without all fear,
to slander the children of God, whose offspring, I mean the Papists of latter
time, do tread in the same their fathers steps.

So was M. Tindall that faithful servant of God abused by them, upon Fox P.
1247. Artic. 3. Whereas he meant, and so spoke, that by nature it is
impossible, no otherwise than the Apostle says; That the wisdom of the flesh
is not subject to the law of God, neither in deed can be.

That he should say, every man is lord of another man's goods: as though P.
1248. Articl. 18. Tindals words be these: If thy brother or neighbor need,
and thou have to help him and yet show no mercy, but withdrawest thine
hands from him, thou robbest him of his own.

That he should say, the woorst Turk has as much right to my P. 1248.
Articl. 20. Tyndall says and writes thus: If thy neighbors which thou
know be served, and thou have yet superfluity, to the very Infidels we
are detters, if they need, as far forth as we maintain them not against
Christ. Lo, here is no mention made of any Turk: and expressly he says, that
our neighbors, and so our own family is to be preferred: the rest to have of
the remainder and superfluity. Is not this great heresy think you?

That Christ took away all laws, and makes us free and at liberty, P. 1251.
Articl. 5. Tyndall says thus: He has not delivered us from the Law, but from
the power and violence of the Law: but for all that, he has not taken away
from the powers and officers their right, sword, and authority to punish the
evil.

That he should affirm, that by works we decaie from the faith: P. 1252.
Articl. 16. But Tyndall faith, By trusting in works, we decay from the faith.

That keeping of virginity and chastity of Religion, is a devilish thing, P.
1253. Articl. 20. Tyndall has not the chastity of Religion, but of the
Religious, meaning Monks and Friars: upon whom the yoke of single life was
imposed, and violently enforced, which S. Paul himself calls a doctrine of
devils.

That he should say, if we believe that God has promised everlasting P. 1255.
Articl. 6. But Tyndall thus writes: when with a perfect courage we put all our
trust in God, and in his promises, it is impossible we should perish, for he
has promised us everlasting life. He speaks not of a general belief only,
but of an assured trust and confidence in God.

That he should hold, that the Gospel makes all true Christian men P. 1257.
But Tyndall thus, By the rule of charity, and not of office and duty, every
Christian man is bound one to help another. Thus deceitfully they clip and
mangle the good man's words, to make him to speak what they list themselves.

And as we see their falsehood in collecting these articles, the like craft
Tyndall, they falsify 29. articles out of his book called the wicked Mammon:
25 out of the book entitled the Obedience of a Christian man: 37 out of his
book called the Revelation of Antichrist: 41 out of his book named the Sum
of the Scripture, consul Fox. a P. 1247. ad P. 1257. The number in all is 132
articles, some forged, some wrested, some mangled, none sincerely alleged,
which they object against him.

Now let us see how they deal with Martin Luther: ^urely after the Harding
charge him to have written against the power of lawful Magistrates. Luthers
words (says he) be these, Inter Christianos nullus neque potest neque debet
esse magistratus: Among Christian men, none can, nor ought to be a magistrate,
Defens. Apol. P. 446. Luther speaks not these words of the outward Civil
government, but only of our inward band, and obedience toward God: And in
this respect, there is no king, nor prince indeed, nor may be any. In this
sense, S. Paul says, There is no Jew, there is no Gentile, there is no Lord,
there is no servant, there is no man, there is no woman, for all you are one in
Christ Jesus, Galath. 3. They might therefore as well have charged S. Paul to
have written against civil governors, as Luther. But what his opinion was of
the authority of the civil Magistrate, may appear, where he writes thus unto
the rebels in Garmanie, being in the field against their Lords: Ye take the
sword and withstand the magistrate, whom God has appointed, is not this rashly
to abuse the name of God, John Sleidan, lib. 5.

Our Rhemistes charge Luther, that upon these words of our Savior, Resist not
evil, Math. 5. 39. He should hold that Christians might not resist the Turk,
annot. Math. 5. sect. 9. This is a slander of Luther, he did write only,
that Christians should not hope to have victory against the Turks* before the
Church were reformed.

That Luther teaches, that only infidelity is sin: Annot. Mat. 7. sect. 5.
Luther

That Luther and Calvin do teach, that God was the author of the traitorous
Judas: Act. 2. sect. 9. They never so taught, but speak only, as the
scripture does, That Christ was delivered up, according to the determinate
Counsel Act. 2. 23.
and foreknowledge of God.

That Luther and Calvin attempted to cast out devils, and sped much like,
Scena did, Act. 19. sect. 9. This is a great slander invented of them by a
lying spirit: yet it is most credibly reported of Luther, that God by his hand
wrought a miraculous work upon a young man, that had given himself body and
soul to the devil, see the story, Foxpag. 864.

Against Melancthon they object, that he avouched 3. sacraments: Baptism,
Harding defens. apolog. 162. Melancthon only says thus, That he can well call
Orders a sacrament, so that it be known from baptism, and the supper: which
in proper speech, and verily be called sacraments, In apolog confess August.

So another Sorbonist disputing with Friderike Danuile Martyr, belyed
Melancthon, that in his book of common places, he should call auricular
confession, Euangelicum secretum, A secret of the gospel, Fox page 921.
Whereas Melancthon says clean contrary in that book, calling it a snare of
the conscience, and against the Gospel.

But above all other, they have a great spite at Calvin: Harding accuses
Defens. apolog. page 185. But Calvin teaches clean contrary: Sic est exigua
nostra fides, (says he) etc. So small is our faith, that unless it be borne up
of every side, and by all means be held up, it wauereth, and is like to fall:
By which words he shows, that we have great need of such remedies, because
of the weakness of our faith: much less, are they superfluous: thus M. Harding
by his leave is proved a liar.

The Rhemistes charge Calvin with this heresy, that God is the author Mat.
13. sect. 2. Neither Calvin, nor any of us say so, but we say and hold as
Augustine does, that God hardens the wicked, not as an evil author, but as a
righteous judge, not by a bare permission or suffering, as the papists teach,
but by withdrawing, and withholding his grace, and delivering the^ to the
deceit of satan, as a just punishment of their sins, thus Augustine at large
Cont. Julian. lib. 5. cap. 3. Thus also S. Paul affirms of the Idolatrous
Gentiles, That God gave the^ over to their hart^ lust. To. 1. 24. Fulk ibid.

That Calvin holds the second person to be God, not as of God the Calvin
teaches, that Christ is God, of God the father in respect of his person, as
the son; yet very God of himself, in respect of his divine nature and
essence, and of one and the same Godhead with his father, which is not
multiplied by communication of generation, but is one and most singular in all
the three persons. And this is sound and Catholic doctrine.

That Calvin teaches, that Christian men's children be so holy, that Corinth.
7. sect. 11. Rhemist. A false slander, for Calvin contrariwise does reason
against the Anabaptists out of S. Paul's words, that because they are holy,
they are to be baptized.

That Calvin and Luther, and their followers, refuse to put their preaching
Galath. sect. 3. It is false, they never refused, neither do we, to put our
doctrine to the conference of lawful Councels, but have often desired, that
such a general council by consent of Christian princes might be gathered: we
only refuse to be tried by popish councels, such as the late Chapter of Trent
was, where the pope is both the party accused, and the Judge.

That Calvin exhorts all men to have respect to S. Paul's Apostleship, S.
Peter's: as though the preaching, authority and Apostleship of both, were not
alike true, and all of one holy spirit, whether they preached to Jews or
Gentiles, Galath. 2. sect. 6. See what sophistical cauilling here is: Calvin
makes no difference of the truth of doctrine, or Apostolic authority, which
was the same whether in Paul or in Peter: but bids us to keep the
difference of primacie and distinction of provinces made between them by the
holy ghost, that Paul should be the chief Apostle of the Gentiles, and Peter
of the circumcision, Calu. lib. 4. Instit. 6. 14.

Bellarmine seems to charge Calvin yet further, that he should Christum in
cruce desperasse, et esse damnatum: That Christ did despair upon the cross,
and was damned, lib. 4. De Christi anima. cap. 8. This is a grievous slander:
Calvin only says, that it was necessary, that Christ should not only
suffer in body, but even abide the wrath of God in his soul for the sins of
the world, which enforced him, and not his bodily pain, to cry out upon the
cross, that he was forsaken of his father. This is neither heresy nor
blasphemy: but sound doctrine and agreeable to scripture.

Our Rhemistes also in diverse places have a ^^ing at that reverend and learned
pastor M. Beza, and finding no just matter to vpbraid him withal, they thus
fondly pick quarrels against him.

Hear (say they) what a principal sectmaster, with his blasphemous mouth or
pen utters, saying: In the very best times, such was partly the ambition
of Bishops, partly their ignorance and foolishness, that the very blind may
easily perceive, Satan verily to have been president of their assemblies. And
in the margent they note Beza^ blasphemy against the first general Councels,
Rhemist. act. 15. sec. 10. In this place Beza speaks not one word against the
first general councels, but against the assemblies of proud and unlearned
lightheaded Bishops of Greece, which lived in those best times, whereof it is
manifest by the Church stories, that many of them were heretical and
blasphemous. It is a loose argument: Beza says, there were wicked Bishops in
the best times, Ergo he blasphemeth against the first general councels.

That Beza says Melchisedeches priesthood was wholly spiritual, Annot.
Melchisedeches priesthood was only spiritual, as the spiritual priesthood
of the faithful is: but that Melchisedeches priesthood was figurative, having
a spiritual relation to Christ's eternal priesthood, Fulk. ibid.

But no marvel if they make not dainty to slander the ministers of the
gospel, when they dare open their lying mouths against christian princes, and
offer violence to the Lords anointed: As Bellarmine most slanderously gives
out of our gracious Sovereign: I am reipsa Caluinistis in Angliamulier quaedam
summus Pontifex est: And now in truth, a certain woman in England takes
upon her to be chief Bishop of the Caluinistes. Bellarm. de notis Ecclesiae.
lib. 4. cap. 9. A foul and a disdainefull slander: Whereas our prince does
not usurp upon the office of Bishops and ministers: but as all godly princes
have done, as David, Hesekiah, and others: she thinks that it belongs to
her princely charge, to have a care of Religion, and to look to the house of
God. Beside these slanders, which they have raised concerning the opinions and
doctrine of our Church, they have devised and forged lies also concerning other
matters.

Staphylus and furious Surius say, that Luther learned his divinity of the Fox
page 1257.

Bellarmine reports out of railing Cochleus, that Luther died suddenly:
Bellarm. lib. 4. De notis eccl. cap. 17. And he makes himself pretty sport in
telling a lying tale out of the same Cochleus: how Luthers body being clapped in
lead, in the midst of winter, in the frost and cold, suddenly began so to
stincke, that the very smell pierced the lead, and whereas they were purposed
to convey his corpse to Wittemberge to be buried, they A great untruth, for
Luthers body lies buried at Wittemberge in the Chapel of the Castle there.
were constrained to leave it by the way. lib. 4. De notis eccles. cap. 14.
They may be ashamed to forge such shameful lies, for neither was Luthers death
sudden: who had an old infirmity hanging upon him, being accustomed to be
much troubled with oppression of humors in the orifice or opening of his
stomach. Neither died he the same night, but the next morning between 8. and
9. of the clock: Reported by Melancthon, who better was acquainted both with
Luthers life and death, then any papist of them all. Luther made a most
comfortable end, and made a most sweet prayer before his death, which is rare,
I think, with the popish sort, consul. Fox Page 864.

The rest, which they report of his body is as true, as that which they fained
Bucer, that he should deny at his death, that Christ our Messiah was come, Fox
Page 1257. colum. 2. whose manner of death D. Redman that preached at his
funeral and many other English men knew to be contrary, to their ungodly
reports.

Of like credit is that foul sorgerie of M. Caluins departure, as Bellarmine,
Calvin calling upon the devil, blaspheming and swearing gave up the ghost,
and that he accursed the day and hour, when ever he began to apply him self
to study and writing, Bellarm. lib. 4. De notis eccles. cap. 8. Whose ears
now would not tingle, to hear these malicious and deuilish reports of so
godly a man? as though M. Beza, who was an eiewitnesse both of his life and
death, and has penned the story thereof, could not better testify for this
matter, then they, which have al by hearesaie. Well, M. Calvin lived well, and
died the Lords servant: whatsoever these blacke-mouthed, and cankred-harted
papists say to the contrary: It were better for them rather to make Balaams
wish, that they also may die the death of the righteous, then thus to blaspheme
Gods Saints.

As though we were ignorant of their popish custom and practice in Horsey that
wicked Chauncelour, had with his own hands murdered Rich. Hun in the prison,
was it not given out, that he had hanged him self? Fox page 867.

How cruelly was the congregation at Paris persecuted, and most Ann. 1558. The
priests and friars in their railing sermons persuaded the people, that the
Lutheranes assembled together to make a banquet in the night, and there putting
out the candles, they went together, Jacke with ^ill, as they said, after a
filthy and beastly manner. Other Sorbonistes accused them, that they maintained,
there was no God: and denied the divinity and humanity of Christ, the
immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the dead, and briefly all the
articles of true religion, Fox page 927. with such like malicious misreportes
and slanders, the ancient Church in the primitive time was slaundered, who
were accused of incest, conspiracy, sacrificing of infantes, putting out of
candels and filthy whoredom, with such like, Fox page 36.

Therefore it need not seem strange unto us, that the enemies of the Church,
do in these days also whet and sharpen their tongues against the professors
of the truth: especially, seeing that they, which do even now scourge and
afflict us with their scorpion tongues, are not ashamed to speak broadly, yea
and untruly of the primitive Church: for these are the Rhemistes own words:
In the primitive Church, when Infidels dwelt among the Christians, and
oftentimes came to their public preachinges, it was both unprofitable and
ridiculous to hear a number talking, teaching, singing psalms, one in this
language, an other in that, all at once, like a black Sauntes. Annot. 1. Corinthians. 14. sect. 5. Although there were some disorder among the Corinthians,
yet it is lewdly done generally to charge the whole primitive Church: And
(think ye) these men have not a very reverent opinion of the labors of the
Apostles, that compare the public exercises of the Corinthians, who were a
Church planted and founded by S. Paul, to a black Sauntes?

Bark on now ye papists, and seeing you spare neither Apostle, pastor, nor
minister, neither primitive and ancient, nor present and now being Church, say
on still as ye do, that the protestants tend every day more and more, to
Atheism, and Antichristianisme, Rhemist. 2. Thessa. 2. sect. 14. That the
protestants have forsaken Christ, the protestants are become Jews, the
protestants will be circumcised according to Moses law, the protestants
require to have the paschal Lamb, the protestants tell the people there is no
hell at all: the protestants at their next proceeding will utterly deny God,
Har ding, praefat. ad defens. apolog. ex Iuello. Well ye slanderous mouthed
hypocrites, if Ieremies saying were not verified upon you, Thou have a whores
forehead, thou would not be ashamed. 3. 3. ye might well blushe, and show al
your blood in your face, when you invent such unchristian slanders against us,
which the world cries shame upon, and your own consciences accuse ye of. We
have no other shield to hold up against these injuries of yours, but the
prophet David's, saying with his words in the person of our Church: As he loved
cursing, so let it come unto him: and as he loved not blessing, so shall it be
far from him: as he clothed him self with cursing like a raiment, so shall
it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones. Let it be
unto him as a garment to cover him, and for a girdle, wherewith he shall always
be girded. Let this be the reward of mine adversary from God: and of them,
that speak evil against my soul. Psalm. 109 verse. 17. 18. 19. 20.

Hear ye also what Bernard says: Gladius anceps lingua detractoris: Nec vero
huiusmodi linguam ipso mucrone, quo dominicum latus confossum est, crudeliorem
dicere verearis: haec enim non iam examine Christi corpus fodit, sed facit
examine fodiendo: A slauderous tongue is a two edged sword: And such a tongue,
we need not doubt to call more cruel, then the spears point that peirced our
Lords side: for this does not pierce or wound the dead body of Christ, but
slays and wounds it to death: sermon. de triplici custodia. Thus ye
papists, show your selves greater enemies to Christ, in slaundering his
Church, then if ye had thrust his body through that hanged upon the cross:
for then his body was first dead before it was pierced: But you do rent and
wound the lively body of Christ now which is his Church: I pray God, give you
grace, if ye belong unto him, to repent you of this wickedness. And thus much
also concerning the slanders and malicious reports given out by papists
against our Church.

The 3. part of the manifold untruths, forgeries, and bold denials of
papists; of manifest untruths Part. 3.
IT follows now in the third place, having already sufficiently discoursed
of their personal slanders, which they vomit and spue up either against our
Church in general, or against some particular members thereof: that now we lay
open to the world, their untruths and lies, which in heaps are coined and
forged out of their shoppes, that whereas they accuse us of lying, saying most
scornefully, That lies are as common with heretics, as lice with beggars.
Harding, it may evidently appear to the world, whether Defens apolog 597.
of twain be the great liars: And first of their forgeries. Never any
Heretics were more cunning, or had better dexterity, in forging of writings,
and foisting books of their own devising and making, under the name of other
authors.

First the Canons of the Apostles, as they call them, which are fathered John
is numbered among the books of the new testament, which is confessed by all to
have been penned by the Evangelist, after the death of all, or most of the
Apostles: How could then these Canons (as they affirm,) be devised and
published by the Apostles them selves assembled together? Again, those Canons
of the Apostles, do reckon 3. books of the Macchabees amongst the canonical
scripture: But the papists them selves receive but two: if then they were
persuaded them selves, that they were the very Canons of the Apostles, how
durst they disagree from them in opinion? Plura apud Whitacher. controu. 1* de
scriptur. cap. 4.

The constitutions also of the Apostles, the collection whereof is ascribed to
Clemens, seems to be but a forged book: containing many things false and
frivolous: as lib. 6. cap. 14. He brings in James the brother of John,
writing and speaking with the rest of the Apostles, many years after his
death. Lib. 6. cap. 7. he calls Philip, spoken of Act. 8. an Apostle: but
lib. 8. cap. 52. he makes him but a Deacon.

Of the like credit are the counterfeit writings which pass under the name
of Abdias, Ignatius, Hippolytus, Policarpus, as it may appear by the homely
stuff contained in them. Abdias prescribes a most superstitious

The same Abdias is also contrary to himself, for he affirms that Paul
suffered 2. years after Peter: And says further that Paul, after Peter was
crucified, remained in his custody at Rome mentioned in the Acts of the
Apostles, which was, as Hierome says, the 3. or 4. year of Nero: so that by
this account, there must be 10. years space between the suffering of Paul
and Peter, for it is confessed by all writers, that Paul suffered the 14. that
is the last year of Nero.

Ignatius says in his epistle to the Philippians, that if any man shall fast on

Of the like authority is Policarpus epistle ad Philippen: which is gathered
Clemens.

Hippolytus book is too full of fables, then to be thought to be that ancient
John the Evangelist shall come with Henoch and Helias, before the coming of
Antichrist: that Antichrist shall bring devils with him in the shape of Angels,
and command them to carry him up to heaven, with other such stuff.

Now comes in that unclean dunghill of decretals, which are falsely
attributed to those good Bishops of Rome, that suffered in the great
persecutions in the primitive age of the Church, for the testimony of Jesus:
As we may strongly conjecture by the matter and substance of those decretals.

The epistle fathered upon Alexander does evidently appear to Traianus and
Helianus were Consuls. But there was never any Helianus Consul with Traianus,
Fulk. 1. Tim. 4. 13.

Euaristus Bishop of Rome is said to have decreed, that no priest whereof they
should have their titles: And this constitution seems rather to take his
beginning at the Council of Chalcedone, where it was enacted, that no priest,
no entitled should be ordained: neither is there any mention made in that
place of any former decree provided by Euaristus, Fox page 39.

To Zepherinus be 2. epistles ascribed, one written to the Bishops of

Calixtus Bishop of Rome and martyr, has 2. epistles decretall appointed
Nouatus was the first author of this error, woe followed in Cornelius time,
after Calixtus: how then is it like that Calixtus could confute him? And again
concerning actions and accusations, Plura Fox page 58.
it is not like that the time of so grievous persecution would serve them to
commense any law against their Bishops.

Vrbanus follows, to whom also is ascribed an epistle decretall (coming

But it is not like that in those heavy times of persecution, the Church was
so greatly enriched (the constitution for tithes and oblations being not yet
ordained) and when as men sought generally rather to spoil and take from the
Church, then to give unto it, that there needed such strait provision for
disposing of Church goods.

Pontianus, who succeeded Urbanus, and was banished for the name of That God
has priests so familiar with him, that by them he accepts the offeringes
and oblations of other, and forgiueth their sins and reconcileth them unto
him. What could be said more of Christ, whom the Scripture makes our only
mediator and advocate?

The decretall epistles of Fabianus Bishop of Rome, are even as good Augustine,
living after this Fabian, almost 200. years, writes thus of this matter,
Omnibus diebus dominicis communicandum suadeo and hortor: Upon every Lords day
I do persuade and exhort all men to communicate: De eccles. dogmatib. cap. 54.
How then is it like that Fabian decreed the contrary of many years before?
Also it is to be seen, that the most part of the third Epistle stands word
for word in the epistle of Sixtus the third, who followed almost 200. years
after him: Beside the unseemly doctrine contained in the end of the epistles,
where he contrary to the tenor of the Gospel applies remission of sins
(only due to the blood of Christ) unto the offerings of bread and wine by men
and women every Sunday in the Church.

Cornelius succeeded next to Fabianus, who is slaundered with 2. epistles
decretall, which are apparent to be none of his, both by the style, which
Hierome reports of him, that he was a very eloquent man) and partly also by
the matter: for in the first he writes to all Ministers and brethren of the
Church concerning the lifting up of the bodies and bones of Peter and Paul, De
catechumenis, and transposed to Vaticanu^. In the second writing to Ruffus a
Bishop of the east, he decrees that no cause of Priests or Ministers be
handled in any strange or foreign Court without his precinct, except only in
the court of Rome by appellation. Who sees not now by this little, that these
epistles were rather forged by the ambitious latter Bishops of Rome, who
labored altogether to advance the dignity of their Sea, then by Cornelius,
whom the troubles of the Church would not suffer to think of any such matter?
And it is very like, that he would have interserted some word of comfort and
consolation fit for those times, and made some mention of the great stirs
between him and Nouatus: whereof there is not one word, in these decretals.

Unto Lucius Bishop of Rome is referred by Gratian, distinct. 81. Ministri,

Upon Stephanus Bishop, are also fathered certain epistles decretall, epistle,
he says thus: Which thing is forbidden both by laws ecclesiastical, and also
secular. But what secular laws could be in that time in favor of Bishops, as
that no accusation should be laid against them, till they were restored to
their estate? when as the Judges were all then heathen, and their laws tending
to the destruction of the Christians and their faith. Again in the 5. canon of
the said epistle, he entreats very solemnlie of the difference between
Primates, Metropolitans and Archbishops, which distinction, of titles and
degrees rather sauouring of ambition, then of persecution may verily give us
to suppose, that these epistles were not written by that Stephanus. Fox page 67.

Of the same stamp are the epistles ascribed to Caius Marcellinus, Eusebius,
Milciades, Bishops of Rome.

Caius in his epistle decretal, wills and commands all difficult questions
Caius, when as above an hundred year after, ann. 420. in the 6. Council of
Carthage, where Augustine was present, this privilege was denied to the sea of
Rome, and the contrary concluded, that no appeals should be made thither
from foreign countries, Plura apud Fox page 96. col. 2.

The epistle of Marcellinus, to get more authority with the reader, is admixed
S. Paul's epistle to the Ephesians word for word. And how is it like that
Marcellinus, which died in the 20. year of Dioclesian, could write of
consubstantialitie of the divine persons, when that controversy and term of
consubstantialitie was not heard of in the Church, before the Nicene Council,
which was 23. years after him? Fox ibid.

Eusebius in his decretall epistle writes thus, In sede apostolica extra
maculam semper catholica seruata est religio: That is, in the Apostolic Sea,
always the catholic religion has been preserved without any spotte or
blemish. And yet his late predecessor Marcellinus, within his time and
remembrance, did fall grievously in sacrificing to Idols, though afterward he
repented thereof, and was condemned for the same, and expulsed the city by the
Council of 300. Bishops. How then could Eusebius (this fault and error of his
predecessor being so fresh in memory) so report of the Apostolic Sea, that
it was never stained with any blemish in the faith? therefore it is apparent,
that it was none of his doing.

The decretall epistle also of Milciades, bewrays it self to be
counterfeite:

Thus I hope, it is a clear case to any man, that is not wilfully blind,
that those decretall epistles, are but forged and bastard writings, and those
holy Bishops and Martyrs to be falsely reputed the authors thereof: considering
that the matter therein contained neither seems to be agreeable to those
times, nor yet besitting the gravity of their person: Beside these
counterfeite decretals of the Bishops of Rome, they have also many other of the
like invention.

In the decrees of Gratian, Distinction. 10. Quoniam, Is set forth under
Ciprians Ciprianus Iuliano imperatori, Ciprian to Julian the Emperor: wherein
it is affirmed, that the imperial dignity is subject to the papal dignity,
as the inferior to the superior. But Ciprian lived not in lulian the Apostata
his time, not by 200. years: wherefore this is a lying gloss.

Siluesters constitution, whom I should before have recyted amongst That the
Corporal, whereupon our Lords body lies upon the altar, must be pure and
plain linen, seems also to come out of the same forge, for the papists
practice is contrary: they lay it upon a guilt patten, and they have a
certain poke for reservation, lyned indeed with linen, but the outside is
silk, gold, silver and pearls.

Dionisius book de Eccles. Hierarchia, which commonly is thrust upon Dionisius
Areopagita, who was converted by S. Paul, is worthily suspected not to be of
that authors doing, for his writings could not have been unknown to
Eusebius, Hierome, Gennadius, who continued the catalogue of the principal
writers of the Church for 500. years after Christ. And Dionisius Bishop of
Corinth, who lived in the reign of Commodus, about ann. 185. writing of
Dionisius Areopagita, declares how he was first converted to the faith by S.
Paul, as it is in the Acts of the Apostles, and afterward was made Bishop of
Athens: But of his book de Hierarch, he has not one word, Eusebius. li. 4. ca.
23. Gulielmus Gracinus did read in his open lecture in the Church of S. Paul's,
this book de eccl. Hierarch: who at the first entrance vehemently inueighed
against those that held opinion, that Dionisius Areopag. was not author of that
book: but after a few weeks, being better advised, he altered his mind,
and protested openly, that in his judgment, Dionisius Areopag. mentioned in
the Acts, was not author of that book, Ex Erasm. ad Parisiens.

Historia passionis of S. Andrew and S. Martialis epist. ad Burdegalens. 24 25
are but counterfeite fables, Fulk. Hebr. 10. sect. 9.

No better is that pamphlet, which goes under Linus name, entitled De
Petripassione. Which if it were true that is there reported: Peter was most
justly condemned, for entysing and leading away women from their husbands: Beza
annot. John 21. v. 19. against the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles.

The Liturgy of S. James, is but a late devised toye, for Balsamon patriarch
Antioch says, that the Liturgy of S. James was not extant in his time, but
utterly worn away. Fulke annot. 1. Corinthians. 11. sect. 10.

No marvel then, if these good fellows make it not dayntie to belie the
ancient Bishops and Martyrs, with fantastical and forged pamphlets, seeing
that they presume without blushing, to utter their forgeries, both of the
Apostles themselves and under their names: not much unlike to the old
heretics the Manichees, and others, that scattered abroad heretical devises
under the Apostles names, as the Apocalypse of S. Paul, whereof S. Augustine
makes mention, Tract. in Iohann. 98. Another book of S. Thomas the Apostle,
Augustine epist. 38. Certain Epistles fathered upon the Apostles, August. in
Psalm. 47. Yea they contained not them selves here, but in their foolish
conceyte devised fables more ancient then the floode, as the book of Henoch:
whereof Augustine speaks, de ciuitat. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 38. And yet were
more impudent: for they alleged an Epistle, which they say was of Christ's
own writing: August. cont. Faust. lib. 28. cap. 4. I would now our adversaries
did not give us occasion, by these imaginary and decoytfull writings of
theirs, which they would notwithstanding to be reputed as sound and
substantial, to compare them in this respect, to those heretics of elder time.

Let us now see what other fantasies they have, which do mask under the name
of later writers.

In the Liturgy (that bears the name of Chrysostom) which the papists
Chrysostomes Mass, as it is set forth by Cla^dius du Sanctis, there is a
prayer for Pope Nicholas, and the Emperor Alexius, whereof the one was near
500. years, the other 700 years after Chrysostom: Judge therefore (Christian
reader) whether it be likely to be Chrysostomes.

The Liturgy bearing the name of Basil* shows it self to be none
doxologie, that is, praise to the holy Ghost, with the prepositio^ (...) which
Basil does so earnestly maintain to be derived from the Apostles tradition, de
Spirit. sanct. cap. 27. 28.

There are 4. books interserted among Cirils commentaries upon John, which
were composed by Iodocus Clictouaeus, to supply so many books of Cirils
wanting: yet are they commonly alleged by our adversaries in Cirils name.

Paulinus Bishop of Nola his epistles forged: For epistle 1^. he writes That
it has such an incorruptible virtue, that it susteyneth no diminishing, but
continues, as though it had never been touched, men daily taking part of it.
Which is so gross a fable that the Censors appointed according to the Council
of Trent, in their Ind. expurgat. commanded it to be put out.

How many books are foysted into Augustines works, it were to long to
rehearse: for as he in number of his works exceeded any one of the ancient
doctors of the Church beside, which are reckoned to 232, books, beside his
homilies, and epistles, which were more then as many again: So foolish men
have presumed to be most bold with his writings, defiling his learned works
with ridiculous additions of their own. All I cannot, neither is it needful in
this place to recite: only for some trial of the matter, I will set down
these few.

The questions, Veteris and noui testamenti, are none of Augustines, for quest.
21. it is affirmed that Melchisedech was the holy ghost, which opinion is
heresy with Augustine: and in his book de haeresib. he numbreth the
Melchisedechians amongst other heretics. Therefore Augustine is not the
author: and this Bellarm. confesses, De sacrament. lib. 2. cap. 10. yet is the
authority of this book urged by our Rhemistes as sound: Annot. 1. Corinthians.
sec. 5.

Saint Augustine not the author of the sermon. de sanctis, for the author of
Isidorus, who lived about 200 years after Augustine.

August. ser. 91. and 251. none of Augustines: the author says that the
Augustines age.

The book de visitatione infirmorum, none of his: Erasmus says it is the
Augustine.

The 215. sermon. de tempore, the treatise de rectitud. Cathol. conuersat. none
Augustines. Fulk. annot. Galath. 4. sect. 2.

The book de dogmatib. ecclesiastic. none of Augustines, for the author of
Augustine could never have been a Bishop, for he had two co^cubines. And many
other beside these are found to be counterfeit books, as he that will take the
pains to peruse Erasmus censures upon Augustines works, shall easily find.

The last forgery, which I will charge our adversaries withal in this place,
Constantine, upon the which the Bishop of Rome does ground his supreme
dominion and right over all the political government of the west parts. The
which said donation is but a forged and devised deed, or instrument of their
own.

For the donation says that Constantine was baptized at Rome of Siluester, and
the 4. day after his baptism, this patrimony was given before his battle
against Maximinus and Li^inius. Here are many untruths couched together. 1.
Because the truth of the story of Constantines baptism is otherwise reported
by Eusebius, Hierom, Ruffin, Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomen, that Constantine was
baptized at Nicomedia, not at Rome, and by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, not by
Siluester, and not before that battle, but in the xxxi. year of his reign,
a little before his death. 2. whereas the said donation gives jurisdiction to
the Bishop of Rome over the 4. patriarchall seas of Antioch, Alexandria,
Constantinople, Jerusalem: how could this be done before his battle with
Maximinus, when as the city of Constantinople was not yet begun? So this
forged donation, neither agrees with itself, nor with others. Plura apud Fox.
page 105.

All this notwithstanding, which we have not barely and nakedlie affirmed, but
I trust, sufficiently proved, and to the indifferent Reader by more then
probable arguments demonstrated, that our adversaries have used much deceit,
in conueying false and forged writings, under ancient authors names, yet they
will needs bear the world in hand, that there is no such matter, but that
they are those authors proper and peculiar works. Whereupon they are boulde in
every controversy, as they have occasion, to press us with their light and
vain authorities:

As the constitut. of Clemens, alleged by the Rhom. annot. Luke 4. sec. 1.
Ignatius, Math. 4. sec. 2. and 1. Peter. 2. sect. 6. Hippolytus. Math. 24. sec.
5. Policarpus. Act. 6. sec. 1. Decret. Alexandri. 1. Timoth. 4. sec. 13.
Milc^adi Fabian. Act. 8. sect. 6. Dionisi. Areop. ibid. S. Andrew, S. Martial.
Hebr. 10. sect. 11. Leiturg. Jacob. Basil. Chrysostom. 1. Corinthians. 11. sect. 10.
Iodoc. Clicton. for Cirill. John. 11. sect. 1. Paulinus. John. 19. sect. 2.

August. sermon. de sanct. Act. 1. sect. 7. de rectit^d. cathol. conuers. de
visitation. infirmor. sermon. de tempor. Galath. 4. sect. 2. de ecclesiastic.
dogmatib. 1. Corinthians. 11. sect. 7.

Thus we see both the great boldness of our adversaries, in urging such
authorities which they know to be counterfeit, as also the apparent weakness
of their cause, that are constrained to use such beggarly shifts. But let
them use and urge these straggling runnagate and fatherless books never so
much, we will still hold us to this point, wherein they shall never be able
to disprove us, that they do deceive them selves, and abuse the world, in
making men to believe that they are the fathers own writings. We say
therefore of these, and of all such other books, as Augustine did of that,
which went in Henoehs name: Libriisti ob nimiam antiquitatem reijciuntur: These
books are too old to be true: De ciuitat. dei. lib. 18. cap. 38. And
concerning some of them, as those which are fathered upon the Apostles, and
them that followed in the next age, as Augustine says of the epistle, which
the Manichees ascribed to Christ: Si aliqua huiusmodi epistola fuit, ab eis
proferri potuit, qui illi adhaerebant: So if they wrote any such books, it is
like they would have brought them to light, that were the Apostles scholars,
cont. Faust. lib. 22. cap. 79. And of them all, and the rest of that sort, we
pronounce this sentence with the same father: Quae proferuntur ab errantibus
sub nomine ipsorum, quia non sunt ipsorum, improbantur, nec acceptantur ab
ecclesia: Those books which are brought forth under the name (of the Apostles,
and other ancient writers) because they are not theirs, are rejected, and not
received, or acknowledged of the Church, in Psalm. 130.

Thus having in part declared (so much as I thought necessary for the matter in
hand) how deceitfully our adversaries have dealt with the world, giving them,
Quid pro quo, as we say, one thing for an other, in falsely entituling their
frivolous pamphletes, with grave and good authors names: I will spend a little
time, before I leave this place, to show how they have not only thrust upon
those ancient doctors and fathers false writings, but have also falsified
their good works, by putting in, and putting out, by clipping, changing and
altering, lines, words, sentences: And no marvel then, if by such cunning
(rather cousoning sleightes) they make those good authors to speak what they
list them selves.

Ann. 420. There was a council held in Africa, by 217. Bishops, Augustine
was present: unto this council sent Zosimus then Bishop of Rome certaime
messengers with four requests or demaundes, whereof this was one: that it
might be lawful for Bishops or Priests to appeal from the sentence of their
Metropolitanes, and also of the council, to the sea of Rome, alleging for him
self certain words, as he pretended, taken out of the Nicene council.
Hereupon the council sent their Legates to Cirillus patriarch of Alexandria,
for the ancient copies in Greek of the Nicene council: wherein they found no
such canon as was pretended: but the contrary, how the decrees of the Nicene
council had committed all and singular persons Ecclesiastical, unto the
charge of their Metropolitanes. Thus then, to begin this game withal, the
Bishops of Rome them selves are proved to be forgers and falsifiers of
ancient writings. Plura apud Fox. page 10.

Canisius reporting Augustines words, for the continual succession of Peter,
alleges only the former part of the sentence: Cathedra quid tibi fecit
Ecclesiae Romanae, in qua Petrus sedit, and in qua hodie Anastasius sedet? What
has the sea of the Church of Rome offended thee, wherein Peter sometime sat,
and Anastasius now sits? but he craftily leaves out that which follows:
Vel ecclesiae Hierosolymitanae, in qua Iacobus sedit, and in qua hodie Johannes
sedet? Or what has the sea of Jerusalem offended thee, wherein James sometime
sat, and John now sits? these words he cunningly suppresseth, because they
made little for him. Canis. oper. catechistic. cap. de praecept. eccles. artic.
9.

Christoforson translating Eusebius story into latin, where Nouatus swear to
me by the body and bloods of the Lord Jesus, that thou will not leave me and
go to Cornelius, and he refused to distribute unto them, till that, they
swearing unto him, in stead of Amen, to be said at the receiving of bread,
should answer, I will not return to Cornelius. Christoforson, I say coming
to these words, craftily leaves out the name of bread: because the author
so calls it in plain terms after consecration. Christofor. lib. 6. cap. 43.

The Rhemist. 1. Corinthians. 10. sec. 8. speaking of their popish sacrifice Ciril.
Alexand, in council. Ephesin. Anathem. 11. where he should call it: The
quickening holy sacrifice, the unbloody host and victime. But this is a false
forgerie, for there is no such word found there. Likewise in the same place
they quote Tertullian de coron. militis. Chrisost. homil. 41. in 1. Corinthians.
Ciprian. epist. 66. August. Enchirid. 109. That the Mass is a propitiatory
sacrifice for the living and dead, which is found to be a great untruth: for
those authors in some of these places speak of prayer for the dead, but of any
such propitiatory sacrifice not one word. Fulk. ibid.

Gregor. Nyssen. oration cap. 37. is made to speak much of the transmutation
Nicephorus writes, that many things were foisted into him by heretics Niceph.
lib. 11. cap. 19.

The words of Ciprian de vnitat. Eccles. are falsified by Pammelius, for
Ciprian writes thus: Uerilie the rest of the Apostles were the same thing that
Peter was, endued with equal fellowship, both of honor and power, but the
beginning proceeds from one, that the church may be declared to be one. But
the Rhemistes according to their corrupt edition, read thus: But the beginning
proceeds from one, the primacie is given to Peter, that the Church of Christ
may be showed to be one, and one Chair. Fulk. John. 21. sect. 4.

In like sort have the papists corrected, as they say, but in deed corrupted
Bertram amongst the rest, who is a great enemy to their popish opinion of
transubstantiation. They mean to deal with him, as with other ancient
writers, In whom, say they, we bear very many errors, and extenuate them,
excuse them, and very oftentimes by devising some pretty shift we do deny
them, and do feign some commodious sense unto them, when they are opposed
against Index expurgat. p. 11.
us, This is the judgment of the university of Doway, in their own words
approved by the Censors according to the Council of Trent. And thus they
meant to have filed, nay rather defiled althe ancient writings, where they
seemed to contradict them, as it appears in their Index expurgatorius, lately
printed to their perpetual shame, which they purposed to keep in secret: He
that will resort to that book, shall not want proof of their Popish
falsifying of writers.

And it were to be wished, that they would have stayed here, (though this be
shameful enough, only to have defaced the writings of men: but when they
take upon them to correct and amend the sacred Scriptures, which are the Lords
own writings, who will not cry out against so great impiety?

As Dan 11. 37. Where the text according to the Hebrew is: He shall not regard
the Gods of his fathers, nor the desires of women. Bellarm. reads clean
contrary, taking upon him to correct the text, Erit in concupiscentijs
mulierum, He shall be given to the pleasures of women.

Whereas S. Paul says, Tit. 3. 10. Reject him that is an heretic after once
or twice admonition: Bellarm. denies the text, and says it should rather be
thus read, after once admontion, De laicis cap. 22.

Likewise where the true reading is agreeable to the original, Galath. 2. 9.
James, Cephas, and John: Bellarmne, not well content that James should be named
before Peter, says the more ancient reading is thus, Peter, James, and John.
De Roman. pontif. lib. 1. cap. 18.

Judith cap. 5. ver. 18. The text says, That the Temple of the Jews had been
cast down to the ground: Bellarmne, to make his opinion stand, that the
story of Judith fell out before the captivity, says flatly that these words
are supposititia, are foysted into the text. And this book of Judith, though
it be not with us, yet is Scripture with them. Bellar. lib. 1. de verb. dei 12.

Leuit. 18. 16. Whereas the text is plain, Thou shall not discover the Illud
praeceptum vitio scriptorum superadditum, That this precept was put into the
text through the default or oversight of the writer. Johan. Mayor. in 4.
sentent. distinct. 40. qu. 3.

And as they are not ashamed thus boldly and wickedly to defaulke and clippe
from the Scriptures, so an otherwhile, they will be so saucie as to add
thereunto, and put to of their own.

Thus Pope Sixtus the 4. added this clause to the salutation of Marie, Aue
Marie: hayle Marie full of grace, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou
amongst women, then follows that blasphemous addition, Et benedicta sit Anna
matter tua, de qua sine macula tua pro cessit caro virginea, And blessed is Anna
thy mother, of whom thy Virgins flesh has proceeded without blot of original
sin, Fox 800. col. 2.

So in the Idolatrous canon of the Mass, they have thrust in ( Enim) into HOc
enim est corpus meum, For this is my body: that they might have five
consecratorie words, as they call them, whereas the Gospel affoordeth them but
four.

Likewise in the same canon: the Gospel says, who the same night Who the next
day before he suffered.

The like liberty also and boldness Hosius an other Arch-papist uses
sanctificatione^, reads, satisfactionem: where S. Paul says, Exhibeamus
membra Hosius in confess. cathol. fidei de sacram. poenitent.
nostra seruire iustitiae in sanctificationem, Let us give our members to serve
righteousness unto sanctification, Romans 6. 19. He says altering the text,
unto satisfaction.

So also Stapleton, an english papist, and reader now of Popish divinity at
Louaine, to prove that we are bound to receive, whatsoever the S. Paul,
Galat. 1. 8. 9. Alleging it thus, Si angelus de coelo euangelizaret
praeterquam quod ab ecclesia accepimus, etc. If an angel should euangelize or
preach otherwise, then we have received of the Church, or then the Masters of
the Church have preached to us, let him be accursed, Lib. 2. defens. authorit.
eccles. cap. 7. sect. 8. Whereas S. Paul makes no mention at all of the
Church, or Church-maisters.

Thus we see, what great liberty the Papists take unto themselves, in John
5. 46. Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me. Christ say they,
would not so speak of Moses: for he says, that all that went before him,
were thieves. John 10. But Christ in that place speaks of hirelings only, he
condemns not faithful shepherds that went before him, August. lib. 16. cont.
Faust. That also seems (they say) to be thrust in, Math. 5. That Christ
says, He came to fulfill the law, when as he neither observed their
ceremonies, nor offered sacrifice according to the law. To this Augustine
answers: That these were but figures, Quarum figurarum veritas Christus. Of
which figures Christ was the truth: he therefore fulfilled the law, in that he
was the very body and substance of the types and figures of the law, cont.
Faust. lib. 18. cap. 17. That place also they would have to be forged, Math.
8. Many shall come from the east, and sit down with Abraham, etc. Because say
they Luke has it not. Augustine answers, that the Evangelists are not
contrary one to the other, if one set down that which the other has omitted.
cont. Faust. lib. 33. I pray ye now, how far are they from the practice of
these heretics, which do take upon them to amend and correct the text of
scripture, by putting in and pulling out, adding and detracting: which our
aduersasaries (as I have showed) are in some measure guilty of? We proceed
now to that which follows.

The bold and shameless denials of Papists of manifest truths, Part. 4.
AS we have already received some taste of our adversaries railinges,
slanders, forgeries: so we will now be so bold as to reach our hands to this
fourth dish of their first course, which is their too free denial of apparent
truths, and too forward affirming of open and manifest untruths: for the
first, we find plentiful store, in our countriman M. Hardinges garden, that
we need seek no further.

First, it was never said, nor thought by the Catholics (says he) that all
defens. apolog. page 57. And yet Cardinal Cusanus writes thus: Veritas
adhaeret cathedrae: The truth cleaves fast to the popes chair. Ad Bohem.
epist. 2. The Canonistes say: Constat ecclesiam ideo esse vnam, quia in
universally ecclesia vnum est caput supremum, scilicet papa: It is plain that
therefore the Church is one, because in the whole universal Church, there is
but one supreme head, and that is the pope. ex Iuello page 61. What do these
else affirm, but that althe popish religion depends of the unity of their
head, which is the pope?

That the pope should succeed Christ in his whole substance, that is, his
Hard. page 106. defen. apolog. Yet these words were spoken, and allowed in the
council of Laterane held under pope Julius: Tibi data est omnis potestas in
coelo and interra: Unto you is given al power in heaven and earth. And
Panormitane is suffered to say, Papa potest omnia, quae Deus potest: The pope
is able to do whatsoever God is able to do, Panor. de elect. ca. licet.

He denies that there is any such Canon to be found in the council of
Distinct. 99. primae.
they are the very words of the council, as they are cited by Gratiane.
Vniuersalis autem, ne Romanus pontifex appelletur: Let not the Bishop of Rome
him self be called the universal Bishop.

He denies that pope Zosimus to maintain the supremacy of his sea, 4.
corrupted the Nicene council. Never did any honest man say it from the
beginning of the world: No man ever said it but Illyricus and Bale. page 162.
Whereas the story is plain, for the council of Carthage sent to the Bishops
of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antiochia, and received authentical copies from
them in Greek of the Nicene council: the popes only copy was found to
disagree from the rest. It is therefore easy to see, by whom the Canons of the
council were corrupted, and to what purpose. In the council of Florence, Marcus
the Archbishop of Ephesus said, in the name of the rest of the Bishops of the
Greek Church, who were above 17. in number: Nonne vides, reverend pater,
summum pontificem Zosimum, falsu^ decretum ad tantum Conciliu^ pro re tam magna
misisse? Do you not see, reverend father, that pope Zosimus the high Bishop
sent unto so worthy a council, for a matter of so great weight, a false decree?
council, Flore^t. sess. 20. How dare then M. Harding affirm, that never any
honest man said it?

We deny utterly, that any man after that he has received holy orders Hard.
page 203. yet S. Hierome says of his time: Quasi non hodie quoque plurimi
sacerdotes habeant matrimonia: As though now a days very many priests are not
married: Aduers. Iouinian. lib. 1. And Damasus testifies, Complures
inueniuntur, qui de sacerdotib* nati Apostolicae sedi praefuerunt: Many are
found that being priests sons ruled the Apostolic sea of Rome: as pope
Syluerius, pope Deusdedit, pope Distinct. 37. legunt.
Adriane 2. pope John 15. and diverse other, ex Gratian. M. Harding therefore
has faced us out here in denying so evident a truth.

We say plainly that S. Augustine affirms purgatory, and that it cannot
Hard. page 354. And yet Augustine writes thus, speaking of purgatory: Tale
aliquid etia^ post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est, and vtrum ita sit,
quaeri potest: Some such thing to be after this life it is not incredible, and
whether it be so or no, it may be a question, ad Dulcitium quaest. 1. Let any
indifferent man now judge whether Augustine doubts of purgatory or not.

That fornication was never allowed in the catholic Church, (he means Hard.
page 7. defens. apolog. Neither have the Canonistes ever taught the people,
that simple fornication is no sin. page 411. For trial of this matter, let us
hear what their canonistes say: Etsi notoria sit fornicatio presbyteroru^,
tamen non propter ea^ abstinendum est ab officijs illorum: Although the
fornication of priests be notorious, yet may no man therefore refrain from
their service. distinct. 32. Nullus Johan. Andre^. M. Harding himself calls
the open Stews in Rome, a necessary evil, forauoiding of other disorders that
would be greater. Again, Qui non habet vxorem, loco illius concubinam habere
licet: It is lawful for him that has no wife, in stead of her to have a
concubine. distinct. 34. 15. qui. An other says, Si clericus amplectitur
mul^erem, laicus interpretabitur, quod causa benedicendi eam hoc faciat: If a
priest embrace a woman, a lay man must judge, that he does it with intent to
bless her. 11. quaest. 3. absit in glossa: By this it may appear, what
account the Church of Rome in time past has made of fornication, and whether
it were tolerated amongst them or not.

Harding says, that the whores in Rome have not free liberty of dwelling page
423. All these are descried to be manifest lies and untruths: for the
Cardinals gave clean An* 1538.
contrary information to Pope Paul the third: Meretrices in hac vrbe, vt
matronae incedunt, mula vehuntur, habitant insignes aedes: the courtizans of
this city go like honest matrones, being carried upon Mules and dwell in the
fairest houses, ex Iuello defens. Apol. 426. Thus we see what credit is to be
given to master Harding, and what small conscience he makes of a li^.

Master Harding impudently denies, and so do other Papists, that a Joan was
ever Pope of Rome, and that there is no such image representing a woman in
travail, nor no such chair for proof of the Popes humanity at his creation,
neither that the Popes in their procession refrain to go that way, where the
said Pope Ioane in the midst of a solemn procession fell in travel, P. 428.
Yet the story is reported by Marianus Scotus that lived an. 1028. Sigibert.
Gemblacens. that lived ann. 1100. Martinus Polonus, the Popes Penitentiarie,
who wrote ann. 1320. witnesses of great antiquity. B. Iuell reckons up 16.
authors beside, that report the same thing, and none of them all Lutherans.
That there is such an image representing such a fact, and that the Pope of
purpose refraineth that way, it is testified by Theodoricus Niemus the Popes
Secretary. And concerning the holow chair of Porphyrie stone, which is kept
for such an use, Sabellicus does report Enead. 9. li. 1. plura apud Iuell. P.
433. Now who is more like to be the lier, M. Harding, a new vpstart writer, or
these so many ancient witnesses, I think, it is not hard to judge.

He denies the story of John Diazius death, how having bin a doctor of
Sorbona in Paris, and afterward converted to the Gospel, was most traitorously
slain by his own brothers Alphonsus Diazius man at Nuburg in Germany: how he
was sent up by his master with a carpenters axe to kill him, and so he did, his
master Alphonsus waiting below, and the quarrel was, because good John Diazius
would not return to Popery again: this is the truth of the story, as it is
faithfully reported by John Sleidan, li. 17. Yet M. Harding says, we ^el many
lies at once, P. 435. what now, will not these good fellows deny?

That the Pope ever commanded any such service to be done unto him, Harding
Page 463. yet in the Popes own book of Ceremonies, ca. 8. it is found thus
written: The Emperor comes to the popes horse, and in honor of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whose person in earth the Pope bears: he holds the stirrup till
the Pope be mounted, and afterward he takes the bridle and leads forth his
horse. This is the Popes own prescription in his book of Ceremonies. And
therefore Pope Hadrian. 2. was angry with the Emperor Frederike, for holding
his stirrup on the wrong side, Gregor. Haimburgens. in appellat. Sigismund. It
seems therefore, that the Pope looked for this service of duty.

It is denied that the Pope put in arms Henricus. 5. against Henry the Hard.
469. Yet is it reported by an author of good credit, Paschalis Papa, Principes
contra Henricum 4. concitauit, imo eius proprium filium: Pope Paschalis raised
up the Nobility against Henry the fourth, yea his own son, Gregor.
Haimburgens.

He denies, that ever any of them taught, that Gods sayings and precepts Rome
ratify them, page 487. Yet are they the very words of Siluester Prierias,
master of the Popes palace: A doctrina Romanae ecclesiae, and Romani
Pontificis sacra scriptura robur trahit and authoritatem: The holy Scripture
takes strength and authority of the doctrine of the Roman Church, and of the
Bishop of Rome: Siluest. Prier. contr. Lutherum.

He says, it is a slander, that any of them should call the Scriptures page
535. Whereas it is certain, they be their own words: One calls the
Scripture, mortuum atramentum, dead ink. Lodouic. in Council. Trident. Another
says: Scriptura est res inanimis and muta, The Scripture is a dead and dumb
thing, Episcop. Pictauiens. Another calls them Euangelium nigrum, the black
Gospel, Eckius consul. Iuell. defens. Apolog. page 535.

It is denied, that there is any such Canon in the old Roman Council, ^5 16
that no man should come to service said by a Priest well known to keep a
Concubine. It is also false and slanderous, that Concubines are let out to
ferme to Priests, Harding, page 559. Yet for the one, the words of the decree
stand thus, Nullus audiat Missam presbyteri quem scit Concubinam indubitanter
habere, Let no man hear the Mass of that Priest, whom he undoubtedly
knows to keep a Concubine, Distinct. 32. Nullus. And for the other, it is
certain, that the Bishop of Argentine has a Florence by the year of every
Priest, that keeps a Concubine, and if she bear a Child, he has four,
Ex Iuell. page 559. apolog. defens.

These apparent untruths, and impudent denials, I thought good for example to
note out of our countri-mans works. Who list to know more of his honest
dealing, if he will resort to Bishop Jewels learned treatises, shall find his
desire satisfied both in this, and in all other matters, which he can require.
And concerning M. Hardings great licentiousness in auouching falshods, the
said reverend father thus writes of him: Note that master Harding in his 3.
articles of answer to master Iuell, has published 69 Untruths in one book.
threescore and nine great untruths, Defens. Apolog. page 597. in Margin.

Judge now (good Christian reader) considering how easy and usual a thing it
is with our adversaries to deny whatsoever truth, never so manifest which they
are pressed withal, if it may not be more truly said of them, that their
religion stands only upon destructions and negatiues, 1. Pet. 5. verse. 31.
Rh^m.
then of us, whom the Rhemistes falsely accuse hereof. In deed, we affirm
and avouch boldly, that which is true, and deny and destroy heresy and
falsehood. But, I trust, they cannot, neither shall ever prove against us, that
we have denied or gainsaid manifest truths, as they have done.

Unto these strange denyals of open and evident truths, join also, if you
please, their bold and strange affirmations of untruths.

That their doctrine of transubstantiation is no less ancient than the
Harding, page 290. Whereas it is confessed by Gabriel Biel, a doctor of their
own; that how the body of Christ should be in the Sacrament, whether by
changing of somewhat into it, or Christ's body begin to be there together with
the bread, Manentib. substantia and accidentib. panis, The substance and
accidents of the bread remaining still, non inuenitur (says he) expressum in
canone Bibliae, It is not found in the Canon of the Bible. Gabriel. in canon.
lect. 40. and D. Tonstall says, liberum fuit ante Concilium Lateranum, before
the Council of Laterane it was left at liberty, namely, concerning the manner
of the presence of Christ's body, for every man to think as he would, de
Eucharist. lib. 1. page 46. And yet master Harding will needs bear us in
hand, that it is as ancient as the Gospel.

It has been an order from the beginning received, and hitherto continued,
Hard. page 382. Whereas they them selves know the contrary. In Augustines
time, such a tongue was used as the people understood: Loquendi (says he)
omnino nulla est causa, si quod loquimur, non intelligunt, propter quos vt
intelligant, loquimur, There is no cause why we should speak at all, if they
understand not what we say, for whose sake we speak, that they might
understand us, August. de doctrine. Christian. lib. 4. cap. 16.

He says, Constantine gave place to Siluester Bishop of Rome, when he page
453. Whereas it is certain, that Siluester was dead long before Constantine
was christened, consul. Iuell. ibid.

That England received the true faith from S. Gregory Bishop of Rome,
Augustine his Legate, Hard. page 539. But it is manifest out of histories, that
the faith of Christ had been planted in this land 400. years before the
coming of Augustine, as Origin testifies, Terra Britanniae consensit in
religionem Christi: The land of Britannie has consented to Christ's religion,
in Esech. homil. 4. who lived not much less than 400 year before Gregory's
time.

No marvel, if they affirm and maintain many things contrary to the course
of all true histories: for they dare be as bold with Scripture.

Harding says, that Christ never said to any of the Apostles, as unto Peter,
feed ye, page 118. When Christ said as much in effect notwithstanding to the
rest: Receive ye the Holy Ghost. And Christ said unto all, Go and teach all
nations, Math. 28. If Peter then had no more the Holy ghost than the rest: if
he had no more authority to preach to the whole world than the rest: it
belonged no more to Peter to feed the Lords flock than to the rest: for what
is it to feed, but to preach? what is it to feed, but to receive the gifts of
the Holy Ghost, to teach and instruct?

It is in vain for you to say, that the Church of Rome has erred, when Hard.
page 485. But where ever, I pray you, did the Holy Ghost make any such promise?
if in that place, as you bear us in hand, where Christ says: I prayed for
thee Peter, that thy faith should not fail: S. Augustine may answer you,
Nunquid pro Petro rogabat, pro Iohanne and Iacobo non rogabat? did Christ pray
for Peter, and did he not pray for John and James also? in quaestion* nou.
Testament. quaest. 75. And it is beside a seely and childish argument, Christ
prayed for Peter, that his faith should not fail, Ergo the Church of Rome
cannot err. Here then is another bold and true affirmation, without Scripture
grounded upon Scripture.

But what say ye to father Robert Bellarmine, he lasheth out lustelye,
Habemus (says he) in testamento veteri, Heliam and Helisaeum, ac filios
Prophetarum sine vxoribus in hoc mundo vixisse: We have in the old testament,
that Helias and Helisaeus, and the sons of the Prophets lived in this world
without wives, de Monachis, lib. 1. cap. 5. The text is flat contrary, which
affirms, that the sons of the Prophets were married, 2. King. 4. 1. And one
of the wives of the sons of the Prophets, cried unto Elisha, saying, thy
servant my husband, etc. Whether now is it more reasonable, that we should
believe the Scripture, or Ballarmine?

But concerning the errors and untruths, which they hold and affirm directly
opposite to scripture, we have ordained another place, (which follows in the
next Pillar of Papistrie) more fully to handle them.

I will of purpose pass over many other untruths and lies, which our Fox.
page 865.
adversaries without shame have forged: as how Cardinal Campeius said openly
to the Magistrates of Strausburgh, that the Greeks do not give liberty to
this day make no vow of chastity, Fox. P. 187. artic. 17. Likewise to let
Luther saying, that he offered money to Luther to come up to Rome, whereas it is
certain, that there were 300 crowns given to ruffians and catchpoles to
murder Luther, P. 1287. But I will not rub this sore too long: that which I
have already said, may serve as a taste and trial of their lying spirit.

Unto these untruths and lies, may be added also the fables and devised tales,
which go for current among Papists, which are not the least proppes and stays
of Popish superstition.

Of this kind is that fabulous story, that the wise men which came from
Persia, whose names were, (as the tale goes) Gaspar, Mel^htor, Baltasar, whose
bodies were translated to Cullen, and there remain. Here are many untruths,
and vnlikelihoodes in this short tale. First, there was never but one King of
Persia at once. Secondly, though the Magi or wise men were of great account
with the Kings of Persia, yet were not the Kings called Magi. Thirdly, they
returned Eastward, from whence they came: how then could their bodies be
transported so many hundred, nay thousand miles? Fourthly, If their bodies lie
buried at Cullen, how can they be at Millaine too? for they also lay as good
claim to them. Yet for all this, the Rhemistes tell us in good sooth, that it
is a true story, Annot. Math. 2. Sect. 4.

The like fiction they have of Gregory Thaumaturgus, who removed a Rhemistes,
Math. 17. Sect. 6.

Such another proper tale: how Christ came in a Pilgrims weed to Gregory's
Rhemist. Heb. 13. Sect. 2. which fiction, that Christ in his humanity should
be seen upon earth, is contrary to the Scriptures, which testify, that The
heavens must contain him til his coming again, Act. 3. 21. Many such fables
went for good payment amongst the Papists in times past in the days of
ignorance: but since that by the springing of the Gospel greater light is come
into the world: they themselves begin to reject diverse of their Legend
stories, which were not called in question before.

Bellarmine confesses* that the stories which are reported out of Abdias, vt
plurimum non sunt prorsus indubitatae, for the most part may be doubted of. The
stories also of S. George, S. Christopher, and S. Katherin, he judges to be
Apocryphal, and worthy of small credit: though he would have their persons
still kept in memory, Bellarmine, li. 1. de sanctor. beatitud. 20.

The tale, how thorough the prayers of S. Gregory, the soul of Traian
Bellarmine* de Purgator. lib. 2. 8.

Yet our countri-man master Harding is somewhat strait laced, in justifying all
the Legend stories, which were wont to be read in their Churches, and saying
that we belie them, page 571. Yet Polidore Uirgil says, Multorum diuorum
vitas recitant, licet parum ad fidem scriptas, They read many Saints lives,
though not written according to the truth: And Lodouicus Viues, Legenda aurea
plenissima est impudentissimis mendacijs: Their golden Legend, as they call it,
is full of most impudent lies, Consul. Iuell. Defens. Apolog. page 571.

Thus much of our adversaries shameless rejecting of truths, and of their
bold bolstring out of untruths, as also of their fables and lies: which
things if they shall persist still to avouch, I will say with Bernard: Iustius
o^ loquens talia fustibus tunderetur, quam rationib. refelleretur: He that
speaks such vain things, deserves rather to be beaten with clubbes, than to
be confuted by arguments, Epist. 191. And as Augustine says: writing against
Petilian the Donatist. Quemadmodum, si mihi diceres, quod ego Petilianus sum,
non inuenirem, quomodo te refellerem, nisi aut iocantem riderem, aut
insanientem dolerem, hoc mihi nunc faciendum esse video: Even as if thou
should say unto me, that I am Petilian, I could not tell how to refell
thee, but either in laughing at thy folly, or mourning for thy madness: So
must I be feign to do now, contra Petilian, lib. 2. cap. 38. And so must we
be feign to do, when we see our adversaries to pass the bounds of modesty,
and to violate the law of reason, in making true false, and false true, in
calling white black, and black white, we must needs do one of these two,
either to scorn their folly, or to bewail their blindness and ignorance,
and hardness of heart. And thus have we the first Pillar of Popery,
consisting of railing, slanders, forgeries, untruths and fables.

The second Pillar of Papistrie, consisting of Blasphemies, opinions contrary
to Scripture, Heresies, ridiculous and absurd positions.
The first part of Popish blasphemies.
THE Rhemistes do lay great blasphemies to our charge, writing in these words:
No heretics ever liker Antichrist than these in our days, specially in
blasphemies against Gods Church, sacraments, Saints, and all sacred things,
Apocal. 1^. Sect. 2. But I trust in God, for all their great words, that they
shall never prove one blasphemy against us. No be it known unto them, that we
maintain no blasphemies: they mistake the matter, they are themselves
blasphemers, which do belch out blasphemies against God, and his Church, the
Scriptures, and against all holy things. This then must be the issue, whether
of us be these notorious blasphemers, they or we* thus therefore begins our
plea.

First we will set down their beadrol of blasphemies, which they have uttered
concerning the Scriptures.

Lodouicus a Canon of Laterane in Rome, pronounced in the late Chapter Trent:
Scriptura est quasi mortuum atramentum, The Scripture is as it were dead Ink.

The Bishop of Poiters in the same Chapter, Scriptura est res inanimis and
muta, The Scripture is a dead and dumb thing, Iuell. page 521. defens. Apol.

Albertus Pigghius, sunt scripturae muti Iudices, The Scriptures are dumb
Controu. 3. de Eccles.

Eckius calls the scriptures, Euangelium nigrum, and theologiam
atramentariam,

Pigghius again says: they are as a nose of wax, Nasus Cereus, to be drawn
every way, Hierarch. lib. 3. cap. 3.

Hosius speaking of David's Psalms, when it was objected that David Quidni
scriberet, scribimus indocti doctique poemata passim, No great matter if he
writ them: for as Horace says: we write ballades every body, both learned
and unlearned, tagg and ragg, Hosius. li. 2. cont. Brentium. Thus he makes the
holy Prophet David but a writer of ballades.

Siluester Prierias contr. Luther. thus writes: Indulgentiae authoritate
scripturae non innotuere nobis, sed authoritate Romanae Ecclesiae, Romanorumque
Pontificum, quae mayor est: Pardons are not known to us by the authority of
the Scriptures, but by the authority of the Church and Bishops of Rome.

Apostoli quaedam scripserunt, non vt scripta illa praeessent fidei, and
religioni nostrae, sed potius vt subessent: The Apostles wrote certain things,
not that their writings should be above our faith and religion, but rather,
that they should be under, Albert. Pigghius, Hierarch. lib. 1. cap. 2.

Gratian is not ashamed to say, that the Canons of the Councels are of
distinct. 20. can. decretales. And Gregory. 1. epist. 24. says, he does
reverence the 4 general Councels, as the 4 Evangelists.

Yea, our Rhemists are not ashamed to protest, that whatsoever the pastors 1.
Thessal. 2. v. 12. So says another, Determinatio ecclesiae appellatur
Euangelium: The determination of the Church is called the Gospel, Johannes
Maria, Uerractus editus. an. 1561. And Hosius, quod ecclesia docet, expressum
Dei verbum est: whatsoever the Church teaches (meaning the Church of Rome) it
is the express word of God, lib. de express. verb. Dei. p. 97. Thus they make
the decrees and ordinances of men, equal to Gods word, nay above it, vt
supra, loc. 8.

It was objected against certain good Christians, by D. Benet Chauncellor
Fitziames bishop of London, that upon a certain night, they did read certain
Chapters of the Evangelists in English, containing in them diverse erroneous,
and damnable opinions and conclusions of heresy, Fox. page 804. Here behold,
with Papists the Scripture contains heresy.

Eckius thus said before the Emperor at the city of Worms, turning Luther:
if he may once get this advantage, to be convinced by the Scriptures, we shall
have nothing certain and established in Christendom, Fox. P. 851. Lo, the
Scriptures with Papists breeds uncertainty of matters.

An. 1553 the Kings Lieuetenant at Lions uttered these horrible blasphemies
Lodouicus Marsacus; martyr: of the 4 Evangelists, but two were pure, Matthew
and John; the other two Mark and Luke were but gathered out of the other. The
Epistles of S. Paul, further says he, but that the Doctors of the Church had
authorized them, he would otherwise esteem them no better than the fables of
Aesop: ex Crisp. pantat. Fox. page 908. So also said Hermannus a blasphemous
Papist, that the Scripture should be of no more credit than Aesops fables,
without the approbatio^ of the Church: Which his saying is defended by Hosius,
lib. 3. de authoritat. scriptur. to be godly spoken.

The said Lieuetenant, to a maiden speaking somewhat of the law, uttered
Cursed be the God of that law, ibid. Fox. page Blasph.
908. What more vile blasphemy could any of the devilish sect of the Manichees
have spued out?

The Bishop of Cauaillon in France, examining certain Christians of Merindoll,
was angry with them, when they made mention of some demonstration Blasph.
to be made out of the word of God: and in a fury cursed, and gave him to the
devil that first invented that mean, Fox. page 949. And yet Christ for the
trial of truth, bids us search the scriptures, Ioh. 5. No mar uei then, if
these fellows curse men, seeing they spare not Christ himself.

A certain blind Popish Doctor reasoning with master Tindall, We were better
to be without Gods law, than the Popes, page 1076. Blasph.


Lodouicus the Prothonotarie, stepped up in the Council of Basil, and There
was no argument to be gathered of the Acts of the Apostles, whose Blasph.
examples were more to be marvelled at, than followed, Fox. page 678. Lo here a
great blasphemy, Scripture is not to be followed.

Andradius thus irreverently writes of the Scriptures, to say no more: Neque
in ipsis libris, quib sacra mysteria conscripta sunt, quippiam inest
diuinitatis, quae nos ad credendum, quae illis continentur, aliqua religione
constringat: In those books wherein the holy mysteries are written, there is
not one jot of divinity, which by any force of religion can tie or bind us to
believe what is there contained: in 3. lib. defens. council. Tridentin: A most
impious and ungodly speech: for where is there else any true divinity to be
found, but in those holy writings?

Cardinal Cusanus, scripturae, says he, adaptatae sunt ad tempus, and vary
intelliguntur, ita vt vno tempore secundum currentem vniuersalem ritum,
exponantur: mutato ritu, iterum sententia mutetur: The scriptures are applied
to the time, and may have sundry understandings: so that at one time they may
be expounded one way, according to the universal current order of the (Church)
and the same rite or order being broken, they may have another meaning, Cusan.
ad Bohem. epist. 2. What heretic could have said more than this, that the
scriptures are mutable and changeable?

Our Rhemistes also show great boldness, in giving their rash censures of if the
Evangelists and other writers of holy Scripture, had not used all humane
diligence to search out the truth of matters, the Holy Ghost would not have
assisted them, Act. 15. Sect. 10. And yet it is certain, that S. Paul had the
Gospel by revelation, without the help at all of humane diligence, for he
communicated not with flesh and blood, Galath. 1. v. 16.

Again, they say, that S. Paul for fear of missing the line of truth, Peter
and the rest, Romans 12. Sect. 1. What is blasphemy, if this be not, to say,
that the Apostle, who was persuaded he had the Spirit of God, 1. Corinthians. 7.
40. was afeard to miss the line of truth? how can this be, unless it be
imagined, that the Holy ghost was not sufficient to keep him in the right line
of truth? In deed he went up to confer with the Apostles, not to receive
any further direction from them, for they did communicate nothing with him,
Galath. 2. 6. but that they might give testimony of their consent in doctrine
with him, to stop the slanderous mouths of false brethren, who reported the
contrary.

And now, to fill up the measure of their blasphemies, let us hear, what O
quantum nobis profuit fabula ista de Christo, O what advantage (says he) has
this fable of Christ brought us? ex Iuello. defens. Apolog. P. 273. Thus by
these few examples, we may see, what blasphemous opinions many of the Papists
(for we do not in this case charge them all) do hold concerning the scriptures:
Some making humane ordinances equal unto them in authority, some preferring
them before scripture: others calling them heretical books, uncertain,
mutable, mute and dumb Judges, and not to be followed in all things, with such
like blasphemies: and these matters, not to be affirmed only by some of the
lay-sort, but by their divines, yea doctors, yea Bishops, yea, and Cardinals
too, and not by one or two singular men, but by a whole college, as the
Rhemistes, yea, by the Pope himself, as we have seen, whom they prefer
even before Councels, and in whose breast, they say, all knowledge is locked up.
Now in the next place we will collect such Blasphem. concerning the Pope.
blasphemies as are common amongst them, concerning the said ghostly father of
theirs the Pope of Rome.

The Pope under Christ and in steed of Christ is the head of the Church,
vicegerent Bridegroom, Hard. page 99. If the pope then be the head, then is the
Church his body: and so in deed Pope Athanasius calls populos mundi, parts
corporis sui, The people of the world the parts or members of his body,
Iuell. page 657. But Paul makes the Church the body only of Christ, Ephesians. 4.
12. And as the Church Catholic cannot be the body of any other but Christ, so
no man can be the head thereof but Christ.

Another says, Christus and Papa faciunt* vnum consistorium, and excepto
peccato, potest papa quasi omnia facere, quaepotest Deus: Christ and the pope
make but one Court or Consistory, and sin only excepted, the Pope in a manner
can do al things that God can do, Pan ormitan. de election. Cap. Licet. Abb.

The Pope has the heavenly disposition of things, and therefore may cap.
Quando de transl. Episc. tit. 7.

Again, Papa, nec deus est, nec homo: The Pope is neither God nor man. dominus
deus noster Papa, Our lord god the Pope, Christoph. Marcell. said in the
Council of Laterane, Tu es alter deus interris, Thou art another God upon
earth. And in the late Tridentine chapter, they call the Pope terrenum deum, an
earthly God, ex citation. Iuell. page 593.

In the late Council of Laterane, one Simon Begnius B. of Modrusia, thus Leo,
Ecce venit Leo de tribu Judah, Radix David: te Leo beatissime Saluatorem
expectauimus, Behold the Lion is come of the tribe of Judah, the root of
David, O most blessed Leo, we have looked for thee to be our savior, Council.
Lateran. sess. 6. page 601.

In the late Chapter of Trent. Cornelius the B* of Bitonto said thus, Papa lux
venit in mundum, and dilexerunt homines tenebras magis, quam lucem: the Pope
being the light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more than
light.

The Pope suffered the Ambassadors of Sicilia to lie prostrate on the Qui
tollis peccata mundi, miserere nostri, Thou that take away the sins of the
world, have mercy upon us, Paul. Aemilius, li. 7. ex Iuello. What horrible and
insufferable blasphemies are these, to attribute to the Pope, that which is
proper only to Christ? And how intolerable is the pride of this man of sin,
to suffer such things by his flatterers and claw-backes, ever to be given unto
him?

That the Pope is the heart of the Church in quickening the same spiritually,
ex epistol. Johan. Huss. Fox. page 628.

That he is able to make new articles, and abolish the old, Friars of
Antwerp. ex Fox. page 929. col. 1.

The Canonistes say, Papa potest dispensare contra ius diuinum, The Pope 16. q.
1. Quicunque, in glossa.

Papa potest dispensare contra ius naturae, The Pope may dispense against 15.
q. 6. authoritate in gloss.

Papa potest dispensare contra Apostolum, distinct. 32. lector. The Pope may

Papa potest dispensare contranouum Testamentum, the pope may dispense Papa
potect dispensare de omnib praeceptis veteris and noui Testamenti: the pope may
dispense with all the precepts both of the old and new Testament, vt citatur a
Iuell. page 59. defens. apolog.

That power which Christ had only in habitu, when he was here upon actu, that
is, the universal jurisdiction both of spiritual and temporal things: ex
citation. Fox. page 791.

Mayor honos debetur Papae, quam angelis, Greater honor is due to the Antoninus.

If Prelates be called and counted of Constantinus for gods, I then being
Decretal. de transl. episcop. cap. Quanto.

Lastly, if the Pope do lead innumerable souls by flocks into hell, yet no man
must presume to rebuke his faults in this world, did. 40. ca. si Papa.

Thus have we the opinion of the popish Canonists of their high Bishop. He is
the light of the world, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, a God upon earth, higher
than the Angels, able to dispense with the law of nature, and the law of God:
yea, in earth above all gods. What horrible and filthy blasphemies are these?
Never did Antiochus, Nero, or Caligula, or who else commanded themselves to be
worshipped for gods upon earth, ever arrogate so much unto themselves. What
need we now look further for Antichrist? He does evidently reveal him
self: for here we have the adversary, that exalts himself against all
that is called God, and that sits in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God, as S. Paul prophesies of him, 2. Thessal. 2. 4. Let us see
further, what other blasphemies we can find amongst them?

That the virgin Marie was conceived without original sin, contrary Paul,
who says, that God has concluded al under sin, Romans 11 32. Romans 3. 23. all
have sinned: that she has no need of remission of sins: that she was not
justified by Christ, being just from her beginning: neither that she gave God
thanks for expiation of her sins, or prayed at any time for remission of her
sins: Franciscan friars, Fox. P. 801. These grievous blasphemies are confuted
by the virgin Mary's own mouth: My soul rejoices in God my Savior: Christ
therefore was her savior: who was so called in no other sense, but because he
should save his people from their sins, Math. 1.

Cardinal Caietanus disputing against Luther, affirmed that says was not Fox.
P. 845. A blasphemous untruth, contrary to scripture: For without faith it is
impossible to please God. Hebr. 11. 6. Without the which no service of ours can
be accepted before him.

That we need not now to go to Jesus Christ, to have him an intercessor, D.
Benet master of the Sorbonistes, disputing with Frauncis Rebezies Martyr, ex
Crispin. lib. 6. Fox 921.

In the town of Perth in Scotland, Friar Spense in his sermon affirmed, ex
regist. Scotiae. Fox page 1267. Thus Christ, we see, is displaced, and thrust
out of doors, as whose mediation is not necessary, and the idolatrous
invocation of Saints brought in instead thereof.

That there are some men in this life so just, that they need no repentance,
Luke 15. sect. 1. for so they expound that place, ver. 7. of men that continue
just and godly, and are not penitent for their sins.

An other calls marriage a profanation of holy orders. Greg. Martin.
discover. cap 15. sect. 11. Contrary to the Apostle, who says, that marriage
is honorable amongst all men, Heb. 13.

Our hearts and inward repentance are open to the Angels and other Rhemist.
Luke 15. sect. 2. And thus they blasphemouslie rob God of his honor, in
attributing that to creatures, which is peculiar to his Majesty: namely to be
a searcher and knower of our hearts, 1. King. 8. 39.

That we may believe in Saints, and that it is true of them, as saint Paul
says, How can they call on him, on whom they have not believed? Romans 10. 14.
So we cannot pray to any Saint in heaven, unless we believe, and trust that
they can help us, Rhemist. Romans 10. sect. 4. A blasphemy contrary to
Scripture, which says: ye believe in God, believe also in me, John 14. 1. God
only and his Christ is to be believed upon.

That we need not marvel, if the image of our Lady and the like do Rhemist.
John 14. sect. 3. A monstrous blasphemy, that images work stranger miracles
then Christ himself.

Catharinus a great papist says, that the commandment in the lawagainst ex
Bellarm. de imaginib. sanctor. lib. 2. cap. 7.

That there is a religious worship properly due unto Images, yea as Et non
solum vt vicem gerunt exemplaris, And not only, as they represent an other
thing. Bellarm. de imaginib. sanctor. lib. 2. cap. 21. Lo then by these popish
doctrine, Images are to be worshipped with divine and religious worship, which
the Angels themselves refuse, and is only due unto God. Reuelat. 22. 9.

That every popish priest is after the order of Melchisedech, and that Rhemist.
Heb. 7. sect. 8. That the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross was not after the
order of Melchisedech, but after the order of Aaron: Heskius lib. 1. cap. 13.
What intolerable blasphemy is this, to affirm that every vile massing priest
is after the order of Melchisedech, and to deny that Christ upon the cross,
was in that act a priest of Melchisedechs order? And thus shall every one of
their shauelings be more properly a priest, then Christ.

In the idolatrous service of their Mass, they utter blasphemies in We
beseech thee (says the priest) receive this oblation, and yet they affirm,
that it is the very body and blood of Christ: here then the priest is made a
mediator for Christ. And again, Command thou these to be brought by the
hands of the holy Angel into heaven. But if it be the body of Christ, what
need it be carried by an Angel? Let the Priest bow him self to the host,
saying, I worship thee, I glorify thee. Lo here they worship a piece of
bread: In canon. Missae. And to conclude, they doubt not to say, that sacerdos
est creator creatoris sui: That the priest does make his maker, Iewelrespons.
ad articul. p. 615.

It is not a sufficient satisfaction to believe that Christ has abundantly
Council. Tridentin. sess. 14. can. 13. A blasphemous assertion, that Christ's
satisfaction is not sufficient for us.

Men can not be saved, though they be predestinate, unless they Rhemist.
Act. 27. sect. 3. By this speech, they seem to insinuate, that a man
predestinate of God, may miss of salvation: which is a blasphemous thought,
for Gods eternal decree changes not.

The Rhemistes alleadg this saying of Hierome, They follow the lamb, whither
soever he goes, if the lamb be in every place, then they that be with the
lamb, must be every where, you see, say they, how that blessed father refuted
the Caluinistes before they were borne: Rhemist. Apocalypse. 6. sect. 1. Are not
now the papists I pray you become vibiquitaries them selves? nay worse then
vbiquitaries, enclyning to the opinion of the omnipresence, not only of the
humanity of Christ, but even of the saints: which is a great blasphemy.

That confidence and assurance, that faithful men have of their salvation,
Rhemist. Romans 8. sect. 9. A fond special faith and fiction. Romans 4. sect. 9.
yea they most wickedly say, that it is not fides Apostolorum, but fides
demoniorum, not the faith of the Apostles, but the faith of Devils. 1. Corinthians.
9. 9. yet this assurance and persuasion of salvation is grounded upon the
Scriptures: as where Saint Paul says, I am persuaded, or I am sure, that
neither death nor life, etc. shall be able to remove us from the love of God,
Romans 8. ver. 38. 39. And S. Peter, That we should make our election and
calling sure. 2. Pet. 1. 10.

A dead faith is a true faith, and the same which is called the catholic
James. 2. sect. 11. So by this reason, the faith of devils and justifying faith
shall be all one in substance, for that dead faith, as the apostle shows, the
devils them selves may have, for they believe and tremble. James. 2. 19.

The certainty of remission of sins with a sure confidence and trust in
Coun. Trident. sess. 6. cap. 9. It appears by this, that they understand not,
what this sure trust and confidence means, when so unadvisedly and grossly
they affirm it to be found amongst wicked men. None can be affured of
remission of finnes, but there follows peace of conscience with God: And this
peace none can have but they which are justified by faith, Romans 5. 1. and none
are so justified but the righteous and faithful.

That the decree and sentence which was pronounced by the high priests Hosius
cont. Brentiu^. lib. 2. And that it might and was truly pronouncod by Caiphas,
that Christ was worthy of death: And thus wickedlie they take part with Annas
and Caiphas against Christ. Some other papists say, that they erred not in the
sentence given against Christ: for he was in deed guilty of death, having
taken our sins upon him, but the error was in the manner of their proceeding,
which was done tumultuonsly and by suborning of false witnesses: And this
(says Bellarmin their great doctor) is Probabilis sente^tia, a very probable
opinion, de concilior. authoritat. lib. 2. page 8. Yea they speak yet more
plainly: Iudaei mortaliter peccassent, nisi Christum crucifixissent: the Jews
had sinned mortally, if they had not crucified Christ. distinct. 13. Ite^, in
margin.

An other says: Petrus non fide^ Christi, sed Christum salua fide negauit:
Peter Copus. dialog. 1. page 51. Is not here good popish divinity, that Christ
may be denied, without denial of the faith?

The Rhemistes affirm, that Christ did penance by fasting, solitarines, Mark.
^ sect. 6. This is great blasphemy, for Christ was free from sin, and
therefore needed no repentance.

That Lazarus and Abraham were both in hell, and not in the kingdom Rhemist.
Luke 16. sect. 1. A blaspemie contrary to scripture, which says, that the
rich man only was in hell. ver. 23. and not that Lazarus was in hell. 6^


They deny that Christ is (...), that is, God of himself. Rhemist. John. 10.
sect. 3. Whereas the scripture speaks plainly, that, as the father has life
in himself, so likewise has he given to the son, to have life in himself.
John. 5. 26. what is it to have life in himself, but to be God in himself?

The sufferings and passions of the Saints, dedicated and sanctified in the
members thereof: and are the accomplishment of the wantes of Christ's passions.
Rhemist. Coloss. 1. sect. 4. An horrible blasphemy against the merit and
satisfaction of Christ's death, as though it were not sufficient in it self to
satisfy for all his members, but his wantes must be supplied by the
satisfaction of others, contrary to the scripture, which says: that Christ by
him self has purged our sins. Heb. 1. 3. therefore not by any other, but
sufficiently in his own person.

Bellarmine says, Non dubitantur multi esse fideles, qui nondum iustificati
nec redempti sunt: It is not to be doubted, but that there are many faithful
men, which are not yet justified or redeemed: de Miss. lib. 2. cap. 22. resp.
ad 4. object. yea he says most blasphemously: Hominem cum vera fide damnari:
That a man having a true faith, may for all that be condemned: De baptism. lib.
1. cap. 14. Great blasphemies contrary to scripture, being justified by faith
(says S. Paul) we are at peace with God. Romans 5. 1. And we are saved by faith.
Ephesians. 2. 10. If then faith brings peace of conscience and salvation, how
then is it possible that with this faith men notwithstanding should be
condemned?

That we are not formaliter, that is formallie justified by the righteousness
Bellarm. lib. 1. de baptis. cap. 21. resp. ad argum. 4. yet S. Paul says, that
Christ is our wisdom and righteousness. 1. Cor. 1. 30. his righteousness, is
our righteousness, what is this else but the very form, substance and matter
of our righteousness?

And again says he, sacrificium crucis non efficienter iustificat: Christ's
de Miss. lib. 2. cap. 4. Thus Christ's death is neither formal nor efficient
cause of our justification with papists. I pray you then what is it? But the
Apostle, I am sure says otherwise: That Christ has reconciled us in the body
of his flesh: Col. 1. 21. 22. he then that reconcileth, ransometh or redeemeth
us, what is he else but an agent efficient, and working cause of our redemption
and reconciliation?

Bellarmine also says: Accedente dei gratia vere possumus aliquo modo ex
proprijs, and ad aequalitatem, ac per hoo just and ex condigno satisfacere: By
the grace of God, we may make satisfaction truly in some sort, of our own,
and to a full equality, yea justly and condignly, de poenitent. lib. 4. cap.
7. A most horrible blasphemy, that man may satisfy God by his own proper
works, fully, according to the exact rule of justice, Job says contrary, That
man can not answer God one thing of a thousand. Job 9. 3. Neither is this
blasphemy much qualified, by saying, that we may satisfy by grace: For these
two, Gods grace, and our satisfactorie works cannot stand together, as S. Paul
shows: If it be of grace, it is no more of works, for then grace were no
more grace: but if it be of works, it is no more of grace, for then work were
no more work. Romans 11. 6. Our salvation then can not be of grace and works
together, for the one excludes the other. And I pray you to what purpose died
Christ, if men receive grace so fully to satiefie for them selves? If
righteousness be by the law (says the Apostle) Christ died without cause,
Galath. 2. 21. And eue^ this righteousness of the Law was also of the grace and
gift of God, for the Law is holy, just and good, Romans 7. 12. And every good
gift is of God, Iam. 1. 17. Wherefore to say, that a man by working well even
of the grace and the gift of God, is justified, is to make the death of Christ
needelesse and in vain. What greater blasphemy then, can be uttered by any
heretics in the world, then this?

Now in the last place comes in wicked blasphemous friar Tecell, the Sleidan.
lib. 13.

Unto these blasphemies before rehearsed, we may adioyne such like popish
stuff, out of their Lady Psalter, which was compiled by no small person among
them, but even by that Seraphicall doctor of theirs Bonauenture a Cardinal of
Rome, who lived Ann. 1170. and was Canonized for a Saint, by Pope Sixtus, the
4. ann. 1482. In this blasphemous Psalter, such psalms as the prophet David
endited to the honor of God, are applied by the foresaid Doctor to the praise
of his Lady. And therefore he in diverse psalms in steed of the name of the
Lord, has put in the name of our Lady. Some few examples it shall not be
amiss to see.

Psalm. 4. Benedicta sis domina in aeternum, and maiestas tua in seculum,
glorificate eam omnes gentes: Blessed be thou o Lady for ever, and thy
majesty for ever and ever, glorify her all nations of the earth.

7 Domina mea in te speraui, de inimicis meis libera medomina: O my Lady

11 Misericordia illius nostrorum aufer at multitudinem peccatorum: Her

13 Vsquequo domina obliuis^eris me, and non liberas me in die tribulationis?
How

25 Ad te domina leuau^ animam, non praeualeant aduersum me laquei mortis,
ductrix mea esto ad patriam: To thee o Lady, do I life up my soul, let not
the snares of death prevail against me, be thou my guide unto my heavenly
country.

26 Iudica me domina: Judge me o Lady.

31 In te domina sperdui, non confundar in aeternum: in manus tuas domina
commendo spiritum meum. In thee o Lady do I put my trust, let me not be
confounded for ever: into thy hands (o Lady) I commend my spirit.

91 Qui habitat in ad^utorio matris dei, in protectione ipsius commorabitur:
dwell in the shadow of her protection.

110 Dominus dixit dominae nostrae, Sede matter mea a dextris meis: The

119 Miserationib. tuis plena est terra: The whole earth is full of thy

127 Nisi domina aedific^uerit domum cordis nostri, non permanebit aedificium
eius: Except our Lady shall build the house of our heart, the building
thereof shall not continue.

Exulta totum genus humanum, quia talem dedit mediatricem Dominus Deus tuus:
Rejoice, o all mankind, because the Lord thy God has given unto thee such a
mediatrix.

Obenedicta, in manib. tuis reposita est nostra salus: O thou blessed, in thy

In nomine tuo omne genu flectatur coelestium, etc. In thy name let every

Quemadmodum infans sine nutrice non potest viuere, ita nec sine domina nostra
posses habere salutem: Like as the infant can not live without a nurse, so
neither can thou have salvation without our Lady.

Many such like blasphemies are contained in that Idolatrous and blasphemous
psalter: for what greater blasphemy can there be, then to ascribe unto a
creature the titles, and honor due and proper unto God only? As that she is
our mediatrix, takes away our sins, edifieth our hearts, fills all the earth
with her mercies, sits at the right hand of God, that we are to trust in
her, that she is to be glorified, and all things to bow the knee unto her:
How far are they now from making a God of their Lady? And thus they do
most presumptuously rob God of his honor, who will not give his glory to
another.

Great store of such like blasphemies are every where to be found in popish
treatises: my purpose is not to bring them al into the readers view, it were
too long a piece of work, and I think, needelesse: neither do I in this
book promise or profess so much: but my intendment is only in every place
to give the Christian Reader a taste, of the bitter and sower fruits of
popery. By this black, beadrol of blasphemies here rehearsed, it is no hard
matter to guess, of what spirit they are, from whom they proceed, and what
manner of religion that is, which is fraught with such stuff. No man (says S.
Paul) speaking by the spirit of God calls Jesus execrable. 1. Corinthians. 12. 3.
If they therefore had the spirit of God, as they boast, they would not in such
sort as they do, with such vile terms deprave the holy scriptures: nor so
extenuate the precious death of Christ, adding other helps, and supplies
thereunto, nor so defile that only propitiatory sacrifice, which was once
offered upon the cross, by foisting an other in the place thereof, namely that
abominable Idol of the mass, which they most blasphemously affirm to be the
proper act of Christ's priesthood, yea more proper, then the offering up of him
self upon the cross. Do not these grievous blasphemies now, which they utter,
rebound upon Christ, and tend to his dishonor? What then is this else, but to
call Jesus execrable? Go to then ye papists: I will say unto you, as Augustine
sometime requited Julian the pelagian heretic: Nunc ergo, ne tui stomac hi
follis indigesta maledictorum cruditate rumpatur, in hunc euome, si audes,
calu^niosas tuas vanitates, cont. Julian. lib. 2. Now therefore, lest this
filthy windbagge of thy stomach should burst with the raw and undigested
humor of such wicked speech, empty now thy stomach, and vomit thy deceitful
and perverse vanities upon him if thou dare. Ifye will not cease thus to cast
up and bewray your blasphemous thoughts, know ye, that ye blaspheme not man,
but ye have opened your mouth against Jesus himself. And let this suffice for
this part.

Popish assertions flat contrary to scripture.
THe Rhemistes reprove Calvin, for affirming, Christian Annot. Romans 5. sect.
8. Whereas notwithstanding the Apostle himself calls them holy. 1. Corinthians.
7. verse. 14. Not, that they are not guilty of original sin, but because
they are comprised in Gods covenant, and have right to be baptized.

Nothing done by concupiscence without the consent of will, can make Romans 7.
sect. 9. flat opposite to S. Paul. I do not the good thing, which I would, but
the evil, which I would not, that do I, Romans 7. verse. 9. And in the 17. verse.
Now then, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. Here S.
Paul calls the motions or desire of the flesh, yea without consent of his
will, evil, and gives it the name of sin. How then does not that, which is
evil and sinful, make us guilty before God, and defile the operations of the
spirit?

Christians in their lives must seek the straight way, but in religion the
Rhemist. Luke 13. 3. A corrupt gloss contrary to scripture, for it is the
straight way that leads to life, whether in life or religion: the broad
common way leads to destruction. Math. 7. 13.

That John's baptism had not any spiritual grace, Rhemist. John. 3. sect. 2.
But the scripture testifies that it had remission of sins joined unto it.
Mat. 3. 4. which is a spiritual grace.

That S. Paul was to be consecrated, ordered, and admitted by men. Rhemist.
Act. 13. sect. 4. S. Faule witnesses of himself the contrary, Paul an
Apostle, not of men, neither by men, but (immediately) by Jesus Christ Galath.
1. 1. and verse 16. he says, he did not immediately (being now called and
appointed of Christ) communicate with flesh and blood.

Faith, which justifies, is not the efficient, or instrumental cause of
salvation. Rhemist. Galath. 6. sect. 4. But the contrary is proved out of
scripture, 2. Corinthians. 5. 7. We walk by faith, and not by sight. As the eye
then is the instrument, whereby we behold things present, so is faith the
organon or instrument of the soul, whereby we apprehend things absent and
invisible. That also is an evident place to this purpose Ephesians. 2. 10. By grace
are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves, for it is the gift of
God: and not of works. What else can be the meaning of this place, but that we
are saved by grace, apprehended by faith? So that grace is the efficient cause,
faith the instrumental: And least that any man should say, that faith saves
us, as other virtues wrought in us by grace, not by an apprehension of grace,
but as a meritorious cause, as the Rhemistes affirm: the Apostle adds, that
faith is the gift of God, and therefore meriteth not: and he excludes works,
even works of grace, ordained for us to walk in, from being any cause of
Justification before God. And so faith also is excluded as it is an act or
work of the understanding only, and has place only in the matter of
salvation in respect of the apprehensiue faculty and power thereof.

Whereas the Apostle says, the gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6. 23. The
sequel of speech required, that as he said, Death or damnation is the stipend
of sin, so life everlasting is the stipend of justice, and so it is. Rhemist.
Romans 6. sect. 8. What can be more contrary to the Apostle then this? Life
everlasting, says he, is the gift of God: Nay, say they, it is as properly
the stipend of righteousness, as damnation is the stipend of sin: but the
Apostles declination from that sequel shows the contrary.

Christ's pains were of no account of their own nature compared with Rhemist.
Romans 8. sect. 5. A monsterous blasphemy, and contrary to scripture, for if
there were no comparison between Christ's sufferinges and the glory, which he
has purchased for us by them, then his sufferinges were no satisfaction to
Gods Justice: Wherefore his passion being the passion of the son of God, was
both a full satisfaction and a worthy desert of that glory, which he has
obtained for us: Thou art worthy to take the book and to open the seals
thereof, because thou was killed, Reuelat. 5. sect. 9. Christ therefore in
respect of his passion did fully deserve all that glory, which he has
obtained for us: but there is no desert, where there is not a proportion
between the labor and the reward: yet we affirm not, that Christ merited
for him self, for his own glorification was due unto him, before the world
was. John 17. 5.

That our afflictions are meritorious of heaven, Romans 8. 18. Saint Paul

They deny, that the Jews did receive the truth or substance of Christ
Rhemist. 1. Corinthians. 10. sect. 2. and yet the Apostle says plainly, That they
did all eat the same spiritual meat, and all drink the same spiritual
drink, for they drank of the spiritual rock which followed them, and the
rock was Christ. ibid. Does not the Apostle now say here, that they did drink
the same spiritual drink with us? for Christ was their spiritual drink, and
so is he ours.

That where the Apostle says: This is not to eat the Lords supper. 1. Corinthians. 11. 20. He means not the Sacrament, which Christ instituted at
supper, but the feasts of love which were used in the primitive Church:
Rhemist. ibid.

And yet it is most manifest by the circumstance of the place, that S. Paul
reprooueth them for the abuses in the Lords supper, and therefore puts them
in mind of the institution of Christ, verse 23. which had been a matter
impertinent, if he in so saying (the Lords supper) had not meant the Sacrament.

That the force and efficacy of common prayer depends not upon the peoples
understanding, hearing or knowledge: and that the infant, idiote, and unlearned
man takes no less fruit of divine office, than any other, Rhemist. 14. sect.
10. And therefore it is not repugnant to saint Paul to pray in the latin (
that is an unknown) tongue, ibid. sect. 15. Yet in truth, S. Paul flatly
condemns the using of an unknown tongue, in public prayers, and
thanksgiving: He, that occupies the room of the unlearned, can not say
Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he knows not what thou say, for
thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified: And it
follows verse 19. I had rather in the Church speak five words with mine
understanding, that I might instruct others, then ten thousand words in a
strange tongue. What could have been spoken more plainly against the use of
an unknown and vnedifying tongue in the Church?

That man has a proper freedom and motion in his thoughts, and doings, 1. Corinthians. 3. sect. 2* Rhemist. that man was never without free will, but it is
made only more free by grace, Rhemist. John 8. sect. 2. That the Gentiles do
believe by their free will, Act. 13. 2. All this is flat opposite to scripture,
Which says, we are not able to think a good thought of our selves, 2. Corinthians. 3. 5. And that God works in us both the will and the deed: Philipp.
2. 13.

That we are not formally made just by the righteousness of Christ Council.
Trident. sess. 6. can. 10. Rhemist. Romans 2. sect. 4. yea they condemn it as
heretical to say, that a man has no justice of his own (to be justified by)
but the justice only of Christ, Rhemist. Philip. 3. sect. 3. And yet S. Paul
says thus in plain terms, That I might be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the law, but that, which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness, which is of God through faith. Philip. 2. 9.
Here the Apostle refuses his own inherent righteousness, and cleaves only
to the imputative justice of Christ, to be justified by: though we deny not
an inherent righteousness in the faithful, but imperfect, not a means of
their justification before God, but the fruits thereof: and is no other, but
that which we call Sanctification.

They do set up Idols or images to be adored, and attribute unto them
Children keep your selves from Idols, 1. John. 5. 4. They do usually answer,
that the Apostle speaks of heathenish Idolles, not of theirs, which are
Images, not Idols. Answ. The scripture indifferently uses both the greek word
(...) which is translated simulachrum, an Idol, and the other word (...)
Imago, an image, Romans 1. 23. So that both Idolles and Images, are by the
Scripture condemned.

The Apostle says, that Christ has appeared but once to put away Hebr 9. 26.
and that he has but offered one sacrifice for sins, 10. 12. Yet they doubt
not to say, that Christ is daily offered in sacrifice, in their Mass:
contrary to the scripture, which says, He need not to offer himself often.
Heb. 9. 25.

That all sins whatsoever may be remitted by penance, even apostasy,
Rhemist. Heb. 10. sect. 11. And yet our Savior Christ says, that blasphemy
against the holy Ghost shall Mat. 12 32
never be forgiven.

S. John says, hereby shall ye know the spirit of God: every spirit, that
confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: 1. John 4. 2.
Here the Apostle gives a general note for all times, to discern false
doctrine by: But the Rhemistes contrariwise affirm: That this mark will not
serve for all times, nor in case of other false doctrines, but that it was then
a necessary note, Rhemist. in hunc locum.

That it is possible to keep the law and commandementes of God in this life,
Rhemist. Romans 8 sect. 4. But our Savior teaches us to say, we are
unprofitable servants, when we have done all that is commanded us. Luke, 17.
10.

They minister the Sacrament only in one kind to the people, wherein Paul
also rehearsing the institution, says, 1. Corinthians. 11. 25. After the same
manner also he took the cup: Where it is to be noted, that S. Paul writes
to the whole Church of the Corinthians both the pastors and the people,
prescribing an uniform order for them all in receiving the Lords supper.

That there remains in the children of God an awe and fear of God, Rhemist.
1. John 4. sect. 6. But the Apostle says, There is no fear in love, but
perfect love thrusts out fear, and makes us to have confidence in the day
of judgment. 1. John 4. ver. 17. 18. Where love is then, there remains no
hellish fear: where confidence is, there can be no mistrust, but such a fear
as is joined with love and hope.

That it is not unlawful by Moses law, for the uncle or Auntes husband
Bellarm. de matrim. cap. 27. Yet it is by name prohibited that the Nephew
should marry his Aunt, the sister of his father or of his mother, Leuit. 18.
12. 13. The like reason is of both.

The Scripture says, that Christ is the rock, 1. Corinthians. 10. 4. and that 1. Corinthians. 3. 11. yet they say, that Peter is the rock, and that Christ founded
and built his Church upon Peter, Rhemist. Math. 16. sect. 8.

The scripture says, that of the day and hour of Christ's coming to
judgment, no man knows, neither the Angels of heaven, nor the Son of man, as
he is man, Mark. 13. 32. But the papists are bold to assign the very day of
his coming, just 45. days after the death of their Antichrist, who shall
reign, as they imagine, 3 years and a half before the coming of Christ,
Bellarm. de Romans pontific. lib. 3. cap. 9. And thus blasphemously they take
upon them to know more then either the Angels know, or Christ himself as he is
man.

The scripture says, when we have done all that is commanded us, we Luke 17.
10. Yet Bellarmine clean contrary, and that most blasphemouslie affirms:
Possumus facere plusquam debemus, si consideremus legem nobis a deo impositam,
and proinde possumus facere plus, quam reuera facere teneamur, lib. 2. de
Monachis cap. 13. We may, or are able to do more then we ought, if we
consider the law imposed upon us from God, and therefore we may do more then
indeed we are bound to do: A great blasphemy joined with a notorious
untruth.

They deny that the sacraments are seals of the promises of God, Bellarm. de
sacram. lib. 1. cap. 17. And yet S. Paul doubts not to call circumcision,
which was a sacrament of the law, the seal of the righteousness of faith: Romans
4. 11.

Whereas Christ in the institution of the sacrament, said, after the giving
Take ye, eat ye, but after he had given the cup, he said, Drink ye all of
this, Math. 26. 26. 27: They nothing doubt to affirm, but that Christ said as
well, after the delivering of the bread, Eat ye all of this: which they have
(say they) by Apostolic tradition: as he said, after the cup delivered, Drink
ye all of this. And contrariwise they also affirm, that Christ said only
once, Hoc facite, do this, and that was after he had given the bread: whereas
S. Paul notwithstanding rehearsing the institution of Christ, does twice
repeat these words, Hoc facite, both after the bread, and after the cup, as
having been twice used of Christ in the institution. 1. Corinthians. 1^. 24. 25.
Bellarm. de sacram. Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 25. And thus they will make Christ
to speak that, which the scripture says not he spoke, only following blind
tradition: and they will deny Christ to have uttered that which the Apostle
notwithstanding witnesses, was spoken by him.

That all Christians are not priests alike before God, but some more Rhemist.
Apocal. 1. sect. 5. Whereas the scripture speaks indifferently of all the
faithful: He has made us Kings and priests to God his Father, Apocal. 1. 6.
For although there be a difference of orders amongst men, some are teachers,
some to be taught, some pastors, some sheep: yet this word (...) sacrificers
or priests, is indifferently given to al Christians, and in this sense, none
before God are more properly priests, then others, but all alike, and Christ
Jesus an high priest for us all.

In the Idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass, they affirm and practice many Heb.
7. 23. 24. Yet the papists affirm that all their massing priests are of
Melchisedeckes order: and so contrary to the scriptures, they bring in a
multitude of priests into the Gospel, as there was in the law.

2 The scripture says, Where the remission of these things is, there is no
more offering for sin: Heb. 10. 18. But they teach, that their Mass is a
sacrifice propitiatory both for the quick and the dead: as though remission
of sins were not already obtained by the oblation of Christ.

3. Also the scripture says, Without shedding of blood is no remission. Heb.
9. 22. how then can their sacrifice give remission of sins, as they affirm,
where there is no effusion or shedding of blood? for they call it the unbloody
sacrifice* Bellarm. de miss. lib. 1. cap. 25.

Their doctrine and superstitious use of private masses, where the priest We
that are many are one bread, and one body, in as much as we are all partakers
of one bread* 1. Corinthians. 11. 17. There ought to be therefore many at the
communion, which are made partakers of one bread.

They affirm that it is a necessary thing to receive the communion fasting:
Bellarm. de miss. lib. 2. cap. 14. But the Apostle sees no such necessity in
it, giving liberty unto those, that can not endure to fast, to eat at home
before. 1. Cor. 11. 34. yet abstinence for them that are able, is convenient.

That it is lawful for the parties married to be dismissed each from other,
Bellarm. de matrim. lib. 1. cap. 14. yet our Savior Christ's words are plain
to the contrary, Whosoever does put away his wife, except it be for
fornication, causes her to commit adultery. Math. 5. 32.

That the coupling in marriage, of a faithful party with an infidel, is
illicitum, but irritum, is not only unlawful to be made, but being made is
void, Bellarm. de matrim. lib. 1. cap. 23. S. Paul teaches the contrary, The
woman, that has to her husband an infidel, if he consent to dwell with her,
let her not put him away. 1. Corinthians. 7. 13. The marriage therefore of such is
not in respect of the unbelievers infidelity, if there be no other cause,
actually void. Though we grant and acknowledge also with S. Paul, that it is
not lawful for the faithful to match in marriage with an infidel. 2. Cor. 6. 14.

That it is not against the law of nature, for a man to marry his brothers
Caietan. and Bellar. Bellar. de matrim. lib. 1. cap. 27. But John Baptist the
best expounder of the law, openly reproved Herod, saying, It is not lawful
for thee to have thy brothers wife, Math. 14. Mar. 6. It is a general
reproof, without any exception or limitation at al.

That we are not justified only by faith: yea they say that works are
Rhemist. Iam. 2. sect. 7. Flat contrary to the doctrine of the Apostle:
Therefore we hold that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the
law. Romans 3. 28. Works are so far from being more principal then faith, that
they have not to do at all, in the matter of justification, before God.

That some sins are venial and pardonable of their own nature, and not
Rhemist. Romans 1. sect. 11. Whereas the Apostle says, that the stipend of sin
is death, speaking generally of all sin, Romans 6. 23. yet both great and small
sins are not only pardonable, but indeed clearly remitted and pardoned by
grace in Christ unto the faithful and believers which repent, and study to
amend.

The law by Christ, say they, is Ministratio vitae effecta, is made the
ministration Andrad. lib. 5. And they call it verbum fidei, the word of faith.
Trident. Council. sess. 6. cap. 7. But S. Paul calls it a killing letter and
ministry of comdemnation. 2. Corinthians. 3. 6. 9. And that it serves but as a
schoolemaister to bring us to Christ, Galath. 3. 24. And he says flatly, that
the law is not of faith. Galath. 3. 12. How then dare they call it the word of
faith? unless they list to play with an aequinocation of the word contrary
to the Apostles meaning.

But it were too long to rehe arse all their opinions, which they maintain
Gabriel Biel confesses of transubstantiation: Non inuenitur in canone bibliae
expressum: It is not found expressed in the canon of the bible, In canon. lect.
40. Likewise Siluester Prierias, Indulgentiae authoritate scripturae non
innotuere nobis: Pardons or indulge^ces are not known unto us by authority of
scripture. lib. cont. Luth.

Bellarmine also grants, that single life is not imposed upon ministers by
the word of God, there being no precept, neither in the old or new testament
that forbids ministers to marry: Declericis. lib. cap. 18. Again in an
other case he confesses, that Matrimoniu^ inter fidelem and infidele^, non est
iure diuino irritum: That marriage between a believer and an infidel is not
void orfrustrate by the law of God: and yet the papists generally hold the
contrary, De matrimon. lib. 1. cap. 23. And many other such like opinions they
have, which in their judgment are not found in scripture, but as we think, and
are able to prove, are contrary to scripture: in so much, that it is a common
saying of their schoole-diuines: Thus would I say, and thus would I hold being
in schools: but yet, (be it spoken here amongst our selves) It cannot be so
proved by the holy scriptures: Ex Paralipom. Abbat. Vrspergens. Bellarmine also
concerning the adoration of Images, says, that in a sermon before the people
it is not safe to affirm, that images are to be adored, Cultulatreiae, with
religious worship: de sanctor. imaginib. lib. 2. cap. 22. and yet he grants
that concerning the matter it self, it may be admitted, that images after a
sort and improperlie may have that kind of worship. cap. 23. Is not this now
an holy religion, that in corners and secretly whispereth one thing as in the
care, and publikelie maintains and teaches an other?

I conclude then this place with that saying of Bernard, as he said of certain
superstitious orders of monks: An regula non concordat euangelio, vel
apostolo? alioquiregula iam non est regula, quia non recta: Does not your rule
agree with the gospel, or the Apostle? then is it no rule because it is not
right. Apolog. Bernard. so may I say of this popish religion, ifit agree not to
the gospel: Non est religio, quia nonrecta, It is no religion, because it is
not right. But if they shall say unto us that their profession is agreeable to
the word of God, not that, which we have written, but to the unwritten word,
which are their traditions: I will shape them an answer again out of
Bernardes words: Qui vos audit (inquit Christus) me audit, ac si diceret,
Iudicium meum inter obedientes, and contemnentes, non de mea secreta
traditione, sed de vestra publica praedicatione pendebit: He that hears you,
(says Christ) hears me, as if he should have said: I will judge between
obedient hearers, and contemners, not by my secret tradition, but by your
public preaching. Epist. 77. How is it the^, that our adversaries do fly
from the writings and preachinges of the Apostles, to secret and uncertain
traditions, which (they imagine) were given by Christ? And here shall be an
end also of this part.

Heresies maintained and defended by papists.
Our purpose is here, as in the rest, to clear and discharge both our selves
and our cause, of and from those foul and false accusations of heresy, which
our adversaries do blaspheme us withal. The Rhemistes most wickedly match
Caluinistes and Anabaptists together. 1. Tim. 1. sect. 4. they maliciously call
the sects of protestants the idolatry of this time, Romans 1. sect. 10.
Whereas it is well known to all the world, that we worship no images or Idols,
as they do, yea most wretchedlie they say, we pass all heretics that ever
were. Hebr. 13. sect. 3. Bellarmine obiecteth 20. several heresies against us,
Lib. 4. de notis eccles. cap. 9.

We will then this do: first examine those points particularly, which they
object for heresy: and this being done, we will afterward requite them with as
many heretical opinions, as they have invented against us, but more justly,
and with a great deal more truth.

The first heresy, which the Jesuit obiecteth against us, is of the
Simonions, Eunomiani. The Simonians held opinion, that they were saved only by
the grace of Simon their sectmaister, whom they made their Christ and savior.
The Eunomiani taught that no sins could hurt them if they had faith: Such
also, says he, are the heretics of this time, that would be justified only
by faith. We answer, who sees not with what impudency, these things are
objected against us? The Simonians said, they were saved by the grace of Simon:
we by the grace of Christ: is it all one with papists to be saved by Simons
grace, and by the grace of Christ? their heresy therefore was condemned, not
because they ascribed all to grace, but in that blasphemously they set up Simon
to be their savior. The Eunomians were such enemies to good works, as
Augustine testifies, that they affirmed: Quod nihil homini obesset quorumlibet
perpetratio peccatorum: That the committing of the most heinous sins could
not hurt a man, Here Is. 54. But God be thanked, we are not enemies to good
works: for we hold them to be necessary, and without them it is impossible to
be saved: for a lively faith cannot be void of good works: yet by them we are
not justified before God, neither in part, nor in whole. And if therefore they
condemn us as heretics, because we affirm justification by faith only, let
Augustine also go in the number of heretics: Nostra fides (inquit) iustos ab
iniustis non operum, sed ipsa fidei lege discernit. cont. 2. epist. Pelagian.
lib. 3. cap. 6. The righteous are discerned from the unrighteous by the law of
faith, not of works. Abraham non merito sui, tanquam ex operib. sed Dei gratia
fide iustificatus est: Abraham was not justified by any merit of his own, as
by his works, but by the grace of God through faith. lib. 2. exposition. in
Roman. cap. 20. 21.

Florinus the heretic affirmed, that God was the author of sin: this
Bellarmine charge Calvin withal, because he writes thus, that they, which
contemn the word of God, Their own wickedness is the cause thereof: Sed in
hanc prauitatem a Deo addicti sunt: But they are adjudged, or addicted unto
this wickedness by the appointment of God. Ans. 1. Augustine reports not this
to have been the heresy of Florinus, but another, that he should hold: Deu^
malasnaturas creasse: That God had created things evil by nature: Haeres. 66.
2. We affirm also with Calvin, that men fall into sin not by Gods bare
sufferance or permission only, but by the just decree and judgment of God: and
so the scripture says, that God hardened Pharao his heart: Deus indurauit cor
Pharaonis per iustu^ iudicium, and ipse Pharaoper liberum arbitrium: God
hardened Pharaos heart by his just judgment, and Pharao hardened it himself by
his own free will unto evil* de great. and liber. arbtr. cap. 23. And in another
place treating of those words of David concerning Shemei, the Lord has bid
him curse David: 2. Sam. 16. 10. he writes thus: Non iubendo dixit, vbi
obedientia laudaretur, sed quod eius voluntate^ proprio suo vitio mala^, in hoc
peccatum iudicio suo iusto and occulto inclinauit: Not that God commanded him
to curse, for then his obedience were to be commended but because God by his
secret and just judgment, did lead his inclined will (being evil of it self)
unto this sin: If Calvin now be counted an heretic for so saying, let the
scripture be blamed, that teaches him so to speak: and let Augustine also
take part with him.

Thirdly he obiecteth the heresy, which is ascribed to Origin, that Adam
Calvin affirms (says he:) Per peccatum hominis obliterata^ esse coelestem
imaginem: That by the sin of man, the heavenly image was blotted out. Ans. 1.
Calvin says not, that the image of God was altogether lost and perished in
man, but that it was corrupted only and depraved: as S. Paul says, Berenewed
in the spirit of your minds, Ephesians. 4. 23. showing that the very purest part
of our nature was corrupted. 2. Augustine goes further then Calvin: Natura
tota fuit per liberum arbitrium vitiata: Nature was wholly corrupted by man's
free will, tract. in Johan. 87. Homo non peccauit in part aliqua sed tota, qua
conditus est, natura deliquit: Man offended not in any one part, but in his
whole nature, wherein he was created, he sinned: Vitiato ergo libero arbitrio
totus homo vitiatus est: Free will being therefore corrupted, man wholly, or in
every part became corrupt. Hypog. lib. sen. articul. 3.

Fourthly Bellarmine obiecteth the heresy of the Pepuzianes, who do permit
Luther teaches (says he) that a woman or a boy may as well absolve in the
sacrament of penance as a Bishop or a priest. And now in England says he, a
certain woman is the Caluinistes chief bishop: speaking thus in contempt of
our gracious Sovereign.

Ans. 1. Luther is belied by the Jesuit, he says only, that where a priest
cannot be had, there a Christian man or woman may stand in as good steed: but
he makes no mention of boys. Fox page 1281. articul. 13. condemned by Leo the
x. By this we may see what small credit is to be given unto the Jesuit, in
citing and quoting the opinions or sayings of protestants. 2. We acknowledge no
sacrament of penance, and therefore whatsoever Luther thought of that
sacrament, it is no matter to us. But the other is a foul lie, and a
monsterous slander uttered of our Prince: for her Majesty does not take upon
her any part of the pastoral office of Bishops or other ministers: She neither
handles the word nor sacraments, nor exercises ecclesiastical discipline,
nor ordains ministers, neither does any thing else properly incident to the
office of ecclesiastical persons. The Church of England does give unto her
that lawful power, that Christian princes always had: as to ordain and
constitute ecclesiastical laws, to see that ecclesiastical persons do
faithfully execute their office and charge, and to provide for the increase and
establishment of true religion.

3. They might here have remembered them selves, how that sometime indeed, a
woman was their chief Bishop, Dame Ione by name, that sat 2. years in the
popes chair at Rome, though for shame, and yet with out shame they deny so
manifest and plain a story. 4. yea they them selves are the heretics, that
allow women to execute the office of Ministers: for in a case of necessity, as
they call it, they hold it lawful for lay men, and women, yea heretics and
infidels to baptize, and consequently in Baptism Council. Florea.
to give remission of sins: wherein they go further then ever Luther did,
who allows Christians only and faithful men or women to supply the want
and absence of the priest or minister, not heretics or infidels: the Jesuit
therefore might here have plucked himself by the nose, who so affirms, and
not have twitted, or cast an other in the teeth with that heresy, which he
himself mayntayneth: Bellarm. de baptis. lib. 1. cap. 7.

In the fifth place he obiecteth the heresy of Proclus, who affirmed, that

Ans. First that sin reigns in the faithful that are regenerate we, utterly
deny, being so taught by S. Paul, Romans 6. 12. Secondly that sin
notwithstanding remains in the regenerate, and that the concupiscence or lust
of the flesh even in them is sin, we learn out of the same Apostle, who
doubts not to call Lust sin: I knew not sin, but by the law: and
presently he shows, what sin he speaks of, I had not known lust, except
the law had said, thou shall not lust, Romans 7. 7. likewise ver. 14. 17. 20. of
the same chapter, he gives it the name of sin. So Augustine calls
concupiscence, Per peccatum accidens malum, an evil brought in by sin:
Hypognost. articul. 4. And again, Aduersus libidinem si certas, malum est:
this is a sign that concupiscence is evil, because we strive against it,
cont. Julian. lib. 3. chap. 21. To affirm then, that concupiscence is sin,
and properly evil of it self, is by Saint Paul's rule no heresy.

In the next place, he compares us to the Nouatians, who denied

Answ. First the Nouatians denied recovery or forgiveness of sins, to those
that fell after baptism: But we affirm no such thing, holding no sin to be
irremissible, but blasphemy against the spirit, according to the scripture:
and that it is never too late for men, while they live here upon earth, to
repent them of their sin, and return unto God: all this we grant, and yet
acknowledge no sacrament of penance.

Secondly, if we are therefore heretics because we refuse the popish
sacraments of confirmation and penance, receiving only two, the sacraments of
Baptism and the Lords supper: let Augustine bear us company, who
acknowledges no more, Dormiente Adam fit Eua de latere, sic de Christi latere
effluebant aqua and sanguis, sacramenta, quib* firmatur ecclesia. While Adam
slept Eua was made out of his side, so out of Christ's side issued water and
blood, the sacraments, whereby the Church is established.

In the 7. place Bellarmine obiecteth the heresy of the Sabellianes, which
Michael Seruetus, says he. Answ. True it is, that this impious wretch Seruetns
for this, and such like heresies, was worthily put to death at Geneua. Is it
not then great impudency, for the Jesuit to vpbrayde us with those heresies,
which he himself knows, are condemned by us, and judged worthy of death? So
diverse amongst them, have been discried of heresy, yea diverse of their
pope-holy fathers: Marcellinus sacrificed to Idols, Liberius subscribed to the
Arians: Honorius 2. was a Monothelite: Siluester the 2. a Magitian, and
Necromancer: Johannes the 22. affirmed, that the souls of the dead see not God
before the resurrection. These and diverse heresies have been found, even in
the popes chair: Would they now think them selves well dealt withal, if we
should charge their whole Church, with these heresies, that have been
maintained by some amongst them? yet this hard measure they offer us, in
blaming our whole Church for Seruetus heresy and such other.

Eightlie, the Jesuit charge us, with the damnable heresies of the
Manichees. Augustine confesses: Liberum arbitrium non est idoneum, quae ad
Deum pertinent sine Deo aut inchoare aut peragere, cont. Pelag. hypognost.
articul. 3. Man's free will is not fit in divine matters to begin or finish any
thing without God. Secondly, says the Jesuit, the Manichees did accuse the
fathers and patriarchs of the old testament: so says he, does Calvin and the
rest. Ans. The Manichees did not only condemn the patriarchs, but rejected
also the old testament: But we both receive the law and the prophets, as the
oracles of God: neither dowe condemn those holy persons, as wicked men, though
we excuse not all their infirmities: but say with Augustine: Sic itaque regis
David legimus peccata, sed legimus etiam recte facta, cont. Faust. lib. 22.
cap. 66. As we read of David's sins, so we also read of his well doing: and
again, Nos scripturas sanctas, non hominum peccata defendimus: We maintain
and defend the holy scriptures, and not the sins of men, cont. Faust. lib.
22. cap. 45. We answer them further, as Augustine does the Manichees: Be it,
says he, that the patriarchs and prophets were such evil men as the Manichees
slander them to be: Etiam sic non dico electis eoru^, sed ipso etiam deo
illorum demonstrarentur meliores: Yet in that case being, we can easily show,
that they are much better, not only the^ their chief doctors and ringleaders,
whom they call elect, but then their God, whom they imagine to be polluted and
defiled, with mixing him self with the kingdom of darkness, etc. Ibid. cap.
98. So we say to our adversaries: that if we should yield, that the patriarchs
had greater infirmities, then in deed they had, yet confessing that their
souls after death were presently received up to heaven, we should more honor
them, then the papists, who, howsoever they magnify their holy and virtuous
lives, yet allow them no place in heaven till the coming of Christ, but thrust
them down into a place of darkness, which they affirm to be a part and
member of hell. Wherein they do offer the vilest disgrace, to those holy men,
that can be.

Ninthly, Bellarmine accuses us of Donatisme: The Donatists denied, That it
should be holy and without blame, as Saint Paul says: Ephesians. 5. 25. 27. And
Augustine being taught by the Apostle says: Illa Columba, vnica, pudica,
casta, sine macula and ruga, non intelligitur nisi in bonis, justice, sanctis:
That Dove, which is but one, chaste, undefiled, unspotted, without wrinkle, is
not understood but of the good, righteous, holy, De baptism. lib. 6. cap. 3.
Bernard also says: Sponsa est ecclesia electorum, congregatio iustorum: The
spouse is the Church of the elect and the congregation of the just. Cantic. 68.
Yet neither Augustine, nor Bernard were for so saying counted Donatistes.

10 Bellarmine lays Arrianisme to our charge, because they in no wise
Augustine was an Arrian, who writteth thus of a certain book that treated of
saint Thomas: Cui scripturae licet non credere, non est enim in catholico
canone: Which book, it is lawful for us not to believe, because it is not in
the catholic Canon of the scripture. Therefore we are not bound to believe
more, then is contained in scripture, and so consequently no unwritten, and
uncertain traditions.

Our kind countrymen of Rhemes, do charge us with a deeper point of
Arrianisme, because we affirm that Christ was our priest and mediator both as
God and man: for this were, say they, to make Christ his fathers priest, and
not his son, and so inferior unto him, Heb. 5. sect. 4.

Answ. In the office of the priesthood of Christ. 2. things must be
considered, a ministry, and authority: the ministerial part of his
priesthood, as his obedience, his sufferinges and sacrifice, Christ executed as
he was man: but the authority of reconciling us to God, he wrought both as God
and man: So saint Paut says, that Christ through his eternal spirit offered
himself, Heb. 9. 14. Therefore not as man only. And Augustine, Diuina
humanitas, and humana diuinitas mediatrix: The divine humanity, and humane
divinity is our me diatrix: Homil. de ouib. cap. 12. Bernard also though a
writer in a corrupt time, might easily have resolved them in this point, Sicut
mediator noster duas naturas humanitatem scilicet and diuinitatem coniunxit in
vnapersona, ita singula eius opera, ad hanc sieve illam necesse est pertinere
naturam: quicquid ergo miseriae passus est, ex homine contraxit, quicquid
potenter operatus est a patre habuit: As our mediator has joined two natures,
the humanity and divinity in one person, so all his works must necessarily
be referred to either one of them: whatsoever he suffered in weakness he took
of his manhood, what soever he wrought in power, he received of his father,
Sermon. de verb. sapient.

11 Bellarmine thrusts upon us as an heresy, that opinion of Aerius,

Ans. We deny not, but that diverse of the ancient writers did incline too
much this way, to maintain and commend prayer for the dead: yea, and
Augustine seems somewhat to be infected with this error, though sometime
his speech sounds to the contrary, as where he says, Pompa funeris, agmina
exequiarum, viuorum sunt qualiacunque solatia, non adiutoria mortuorum:
impleant ergo homines ista erga suos postremi muneris officia: The pomp of
funerals, the rites and solemnities of burial, are comfortes of the living, no
help to the dead: let men therefore perform this last duty to their
friends, De verb. Apost. sermon. 34. But prayer and supplication pertains to
the rite of burial: ergo, it avails not the dead. And if the honest burial
of our friends be the last duty we owe unto them, the duty of praying for
them afterward is cut off. But whatsoever some ancient writers thought of this
point, we do rather credit the Apostles words, who says, That every man
shall receive according to the things done in his body, 2. Corinthians. 5. 10.
Therefore it is in vain to pray for the dead, seeing they cannot undo that
which was done in their flesh, or do what was left undone. If Aerius then held
no worse opinion than this, we see no cause, why they should condemn him
for an heretic.

12 Now follow the heresies of Iouinian, which the Jesuit with open

The first of Iouinians heresies was this: He affirmed, that a man once endued
with faith, can no more sin: And so Calvin (says he) affirms, that faith
once had cannot be lost.

Ans. First, who sees not the Jesuits bad dealing: as though it were all one
to say, The faithful cannot sin, (which Iouiuian affirmed, but we
instantly deny) and to hold, that the faithful cannot loose their faith.

Secondly, that true faith, whereby we are justified, once graft in a
faithful man's heart, cannot be lost, and utterly extinguished, though it may
sometime be hid, and lie as it were a sleep. We learn out of the Scripture,
The gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11. 29. Whom Christ
loves, he loves to the end, John. 13. 1. Augustine also says, Horum fides,
quae per dilectionem operatur, profecto, aut omnino non deficit, aut siqui
sunt, quorum deficit, reparatur, antequam vita ista siniatur: Their faith,
which works by love, either fails not at all, or if it do, it is repaired
before their life be ended, de correption. and great. cap. 7. Bernard also
says, Iustus quis est? nisi qui amanti se deo, vicem rependit amoris; quod non
fit, nisi reuelante spiritu per fidem homini aeternum Dei propositum super sua
salute futura: Who is a just man? but he, who seeing God to love him, loves
again; which cannot be, but by the spirit revealing by faith unto a man the
eternal purpose of God concerning his salvation to come, epist. 108. By faith
then a man comes to know his election: but his election cannot change,
therefore neither can that faith in him be lost, by mean whereof he knows
his election. The second heresy of Iouinian was, that he affirmed fasting not
to be meritorious. Ans. A monstrous heresy sure: let Augustine then the
heretic speak, Dona sua coronat Deus, non merita tua: God crowns his own
gifts, and not thy merits: De great. and liber. arbitr. cap. 6. And again,
Itaque vita bona Dei gratia est, and vita aeterna, quae vitae bonae redditur,
dei gratia est, A good life is the gift of God, and life eternal the reward of
a good life, is the gift also of God, ibid. ca. 8. If life aeternall then be a
gift of favor, it is not of det, Romans 4. 4. Where then is there any place for
merit?

The third heresy of Iouinian, that he should make the married state equal
with virginity, which he charge us withal. Ans. True and undefiled
virginity we prefer always as the more noble and excellent gift in them to
whom it is given. But we doubt not to say, that marriage is better in those
that cannot contain. And generally, we dare prefer the honest marriage of
Christians, before the proud and fained virginity of many Monastical
votaries: As Augustine says, Melius est humile coniugium, quam superba
virginitas: Lowly and humble marriage is better than proud and hautie
virginity, Psalm. 99.

The fourth heresy of Iouinian was, that Marie in the birth of Christ lost her
virginity: of this heresy the Jesuit accuses Bucer, because he says, that
Christ did open in the birth the womb of his mother.

Ans. First, the Jesuit here plays false play: for it is not all one, to
say, Marie lost her virginity, and that holy ba^e opened her womb: the one
Bucer affirms, the other he never thought. Secondly, and is this (I pray you)
such an heretical point in Popish divinity, that Christ opened his mothers
womb? whereas they are the flat words of the Evangelist, Luke. 2. 23. where
he shows, how Jesus was brought to Jerusalem to be presented unto the Lord,
as it is written in the law of the Lord, Every man child, that first opens
the womb, shall be called holy unto the Lord: But how could this accordingly
be verified of Christ, if he had not opened the womb? Hierome also so writes,
clausas portas vuluae virginalis aperuit, Christ opened the closed passages of
the virgins womb* And Augustine seems so to say, speaking in the person of
Christ, Ego viam meo itineri praeparaui: and again, Transitu meo illius non
est corrupta virginitas: I prepared or made a way for my passage, and by my
passing thorough, her virginity was not corrupted, de 5. heresib. cap. 5.
There was therefore a way made and prepared, and as it were laid open for
Christ to pass thorough, which was no more an hinderance or loss to Mary's
virginity, than that she went with child, and bare Christ in her womb, till
her months were expired: and thus much for Iouinians heresies.

13 Bellarmine charge us with four heresies of Uigilantius, as he terms
Vigilantius was an heretic, nor his opinions heresies, nor yet condemned of
the fathers. Hierome in deed was much offended with him, between whom there
was great contention: but Augustine does not count him among the number of
heretics.

1 The first paradox, or singular opinion of Vigilantius was, that the relics
of Saints were not to be reverenced or worshipped. Ans. If this be heresy,
Augustine also was an heretic: Nec tamen nos martyrib. (says he) templa,
sacerdotia sacra aut sacrificia constituimus: quoniam non ipsi, sed Deus eorum,
Deus nobis est, honoramus sane memorias eorum, tanquam sanctorum hominum:
Neither do we set up temples, priests, or erect sacrifices to Martyrs,
because, not they, but their God, is also our God: we do honor the remembrance
of them, as of holy men, De ciuit. Dei, lib. 8. 27.

2 The second opinion of Vigilantius objected against us, is* that Saints are
not to be inuocated, or called upon in prayer. Ans. This heresy is confirmed
by the Scripture: Call upon me, in the day of trouble (says the Lord) Psalm.
50. 15. God only, and no other, is to be called upon. Let Augustine also go
for an heretic, if this be heresy: Vni Deo, and martyrum and nostro
sacrificium immolamus, ad quod sacrificium sicut homines Dei, quimundum in eius
confessione vicerunt suo loco and ordine nominantur, non tamen a sacerdote
inuocantur: We do immolate or offer sacrifice unto one only God, both of the
Martyrs and ours, in the which sacrifice, they as holy men of God, that by
their faithful confession overcame the world, are named in their place and
order; but they are not by the Priest or Minister prayed unto, de ciuitat. Dei.
lib. 22. cap. 20. And what sacrifice Augustine means, he shows else where,
writing thus: Sipro suis peccatis humilitatis, and miserationis, and orationis
sacrificium vere immolare non negligunt Deo suo, tales imperatores Christianos
dicimus ^oelices: If they do not neglect truly to immolate or offer unto their
God, the sacrifice of humility, sorrow, and prayer, such Christian Emperors
we count happy, De ciuitate Dei, lib. 5. 24. Prayer then is the proper
sacrifice of Christians, wherein it is not lawful (as he says) to call upon
Martyrs.

3 Vigilantius third heresy was, says the Jesuit, that it was lawful for
Ecclesiastical persons to marry, and to have wives. Ans. A sore heresy,
whereas the Jesuit confesses else where, that there is no precept to be found,
either in the old or new Testament, that forbids the marriage of Ministers,
De clericis, lib. cap. 18. How then call they that heresy, which is not
contrary to the word of God, nor condemned by the same? Augustine also holds
this perilous heresy, quaest. 127. ex vtroque mixtim, or who so was the author
of those questions: Sanctus Petrus vxorem habuisse cognoscitur, vt primatum
acciperet inter Apostolos, non ei obstitit generatio filiorum: Hinc Apostolus
eum, qui vxorem habeat, si in caeteris seruet mandata, sacerdotem fieri debere
and posse ostendit: S. Peter is known to have had a wife, and the begetting of
children was no hinderance to his primacie among the Apostles (a primacie of
order he means,) Whereby the Apostle shows, that lie which has a wife, if
in other things he keep Gods commandments, may and ought nevertheless to be
made a Priest or Minister.

4 Vigilantius fourth heresy, as it pleases Bellarmine to call it, was, that
it profited not a man to leave all his riches, and to betake himself to a
religious, that is, a Monastical life: and the same, says he, is defended by
us. Ans. Is not this a great heresy? As though it were an evil thing to be
rich, or riches might not be well used. S. Paul bids not rich men cast away
their riches; but that they do good, and be rich in good works, 1. Timoth. 6.
18. So says Augustine, Diuitiae seculares, si desunt, non per opera mala
quaerantur in mundo: si autem adsunt, per opera bona seruentur in coelo:
Worldly riches, if they be wanting, do not seek them by evil doing, in the
world: and if thou have them, by good works, lay them up in store in heaven,
epistol. 1. epistolar. 21. And again, speaking of Lazarus he says, Non est in
hoc Lazaro meritum paupertatis, sedpietatis: There was not in Lazarus any
merit or worth of poverty, but of godliness, in Psalm. 51.

14 In the next place, the Jesuit labors by his cunning to entangle
Pelagians, but he speedeth no better here, than he did in the rest.

The first Pelagian heresy is, they denied that there remained any original
sin in the faithful. Of this heresy, the Jesuit falsely accuses Bucer,
Zwinglius, and Calvin. Ans. First, the Papists themselves rather are guilty
of this heresy, who affirm, that concupiscence in the regenerate is no sin,
nor against the commandment, Rhemist. annot. Romans 6. 8 What is this else, but
to take away original sin clean? which if it be at all, must of necessity
be sin. Secondly, Bellarmine did not here remember that old saying, Mendacem
oportet esse memorem: a liar had need to have a good memory: for a little
before, Haeres. 5. he accuses the Protestants, as if they should affirm, that
sin, even in the regenerate, reigns, and is alive: but here he casts upon
us the clean contrary opinion, that we should hold, no original sin at
all to remain in the faithful. See, so well the Jesuit agrees with himself.
Thirdly, Our opinion then concerning original sin is this: that it neither
rules in the regenerate, nor yet is clean extinguished; but as Augustine
confesses, Concupiscentia Lex peccati cum paruulis nascitur, in paruulis
baptizatis a reatu soluitur, ad agonem relinquitur: Concupiscence the law of
sin comes with children into the world, the guilt thereof is loosed in
baptism, but yet it remains still, that we may have somewhat to strive
against.

The second heresy of the Pelagians was, that every sin was mortal and
worthy of death, which the Jesuit also says is affirmed by us.

Ans. First, Augustine, in none of his large and learned treatises, which he
wrote against the Pelagians (with whose heresies he was as well acquainted as
either Hierome, or any else) does charge them with this opinion. Secondly, And
no marvel; for if this were a point of Pelagianisme, he was a Pelagian
himself, who thus writes, Inexcusabilis est omnis peccator, vel reatu
originis, vel additamento propriae voluntatis, sieve qui nouit, sieve qui
ignorant: Quia and ipsa ignorantia, in ijs, qui intelligere noluerunt, sine
dubitatione peccatum est, in ijs, qui non potuerunt, paena peccati: Every
sinner is left without excuse, either by the guilt of original sin, or by
default of his own will: whether he that sins of knowledge or of
ignorance: for ignorance it self, in those, which refuse to understand, is
sin without doubt, in those that can not, the punishment of sin. Ergo in
vtrisque, (says he) non est iusta excusatio, sed iusta damnatio: Therefore in
both, there is no just excuse, but just damnation, Epistol. 105.

Here Augustine is of opinion, that even the least sins, those which proceed
of ignorance, are in themselves mortal, if God should deal with us in the
rigor of his justice: As the Scripture testifies, The wages of sin is
death, Romans 6. 23. which words are generally pronounced of all sin: Can it
then be heresy in us, to affirm by the word of God, that all sin is
mortal?

15 Bellarmine accuses Beza of Nestorianisme: that he should affirm,
Nestorians.

Ans. Whatsoever Beza has thought or write in times past, as that there are
two hypostaticall ^nions in Christ; one of his divine and humane nature: the
other of his soul and body, it is not now material, as Saint Paul says,
what they were in times past, it makes no matter to me, Galath. 2. 6. Beza
holds now no other opinion of the person of Christ, than the Church of God
ever held: for these are his own words: Fatemur, inquit, personam filij ab
ipso momento, quo caro ipsius concepta fuit, vnitam fuisse humanae naturae
inseparabiliter, ita vt non sint duo filij Dei, sed vnus sit proprie Dei
filius, Jesus Christus, verus Deus, verus homo: We confess, that the person
of the son, from the very first moment of the conception of his flesh, was
so inseperablie united unto the humane nature, that there are not now two
sons of God, but one only son of God properly, Jesus Christ very God, and
very man, lib. confession, articul. de Jesus Christo, cap. 22. This is sound
and Catholic doctrine: and the same is the confession of Augustine: Fatemur
Christum carnem, animam quoque humanam verbo vnigenito coaptasse, quod esset
vna persona, vt Christus est verbum and homo, sed and ipse homo anima and caro:
We do confess, that Christ has so joined his humane flesh and soul to the
only begotten word, to make one person, that the same Christ should be both
the word and man, but man consisting both of soul and body: de Trinita.
Unitat. cap 7. This then is our belief, that there are two natures in Christ,
the divine, and humane: but both these do concur to make one person.

16 The sixteenth heresy, which he obiecteth, is al one with the twentieth:

17 The Eutychians were condemned for heretics, because they taught,
Bellarmine) is Swinckfeldius, and* Brentius, who affirms, that the humanity
of Christ is every where. Ans. First, what have we to do with the
Swinckfeldians, or the vbiquitaries? it is nothing to the Protestants, what
they hold. The Papists come nearer the vbiquitaries, than protestants: for it
is their common opinion, that the body of Christ in one moment may be in a
thousand places at once, and more, if it happen at one time the Mass to be
celebrated in so many places: I pray you, how can this be, unless you say
with the Lutherans and vbiquitaries, that Christ's body is every where?
Secondly, concerning this matter, our opinion is this, that it is a blasphemous
assertion, to say in the abstract, Humanitas Christi est vbique, The humanity
of Christ is every where: but yet it is true in the concrete, in concreto,
Christus homo est vbique: The man Christ is every where; so that we neither
destroy the natures by confounding them, nor dissolve Christ by separating and
disioyning them.

18 Xenaias the Persian, first openly taught, that the images of Christ and
Bellarmine. Ans. First, it is not true, that Xenaias first published this
doctrine: the Apostles were long before him, who warn us to take heed of
idolatry, which is worshipping of images, Paul. Romans 1. 23. 1. John. 5. 21.
Augustine also maintains this doctrine, Illud (inquit) quod sedere pater
dicitur, non flexis poplitibus fieri putandum est: t^l^ enim simulachrum D^o
nefas est Christiano in templo collocare: Whereas God the father is said to
sit, we must not think it is by bowing of his knees: for it is a heinous
sin to erect such an image unto God in the temple of Christians, De fid. and
Symbol. cap. 7. Yet such images of God the father are every where to be seen
in Popish Churches. And again he says, Nobis vnus colendus and dilig^^dus
Deus praecipitur, qui fecit haec omnia, quorum illi simulachra venerantur, vel
tanquam Deos, vel tanquam signa and imagines Deorum: We are commanded to
worship one only God, which made all these things: the pictures or
portraitures whereof they worship either as Gods, or as the images or
resemblances of God, De doctrine. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 7. Images then are not
to be worshipped, no not in the remembrance of God. What is become now, I pray
you, of Xenaias heresy?

19 The Jesuit here has found out a new heresy of the Lampetiani, Luther
hold and the rest.

Ans. Is not this now a damnable heresy? As though it were not lawful for
those which have rashly vowed, and above their strength, even by the rules of
the Gospel, to be sorry for their rashness: and feeling their own weakness, to
desire to be loosed from their vow, and to take heed, that they do no more
presume beyond their strength: As if a man has foolishly vowed to live a
single life, and afterward is inflamed with lust, and sees he cannot contain,
the Apostle gives him leave to marry, To avoid fornication, let every man
have his wife, 1. Corin. 7. 2. He speaks of all, that cannot otherwise avoid
fornication, have they vowed, or not vowed. Augustine gives his sentence of
the vows of fasting, saying thus: ^eiunia legitima in necessitate soluta, non
faciunt reos, si stomachi fuerit causa, ^ut infirmitatis febrium: Lawful
fastes being broken for necessity, as if the stomach be weak, or the party
sick, do not make men guilty of offense, ex veteri Testament. quest. 61. If
the vow of fasting may be broken, because of the weakness of the stomach: why
not the vow of continency also for the frailty of the flesh? Yea, Augustine
dissuaded Bonifacius a secular lord, who had vowed and purposed with himself
to become a Monk, Cupiebas te in ocium sanctum confer, and in ea vita
viuere, in qua serui Dei Monachi viuunt, vt autem non faceres, quid te
reuocauit, nisi quia considerasti ostendentibus nobis, quantum prodesset
Christi Ecclesiis, quod agebas? you were desirous to have given your self to
that holy vacant life of Monks: from so doing what else withdrewe you, but that
you considered, as I showed you, how much your service did profit the Churches
of Christ? epist. 70.

This Boniface did fight in defense of the faith against the barbarous
infidels: See then, S. Augustine takes it to be no fault to dissuade a man
from perfourming that, which he had vowed with him self. Hear also what a
later writer says, whom the Papists challenge wholly to be theirs: Bernard.
Non arbitror Deum, says he, exigere quodcunque sibi promissum bonum, si pro
eo aliquid melius fuerit persolutum: I do not think that God will exact every
thing vowed or promised unto him, if in steed thereof we perform somewhat
that is better, epist. 57. But the married estate is better than the single
life to him that cannot contain: wherefore such an one does not evil, if
after his vow he marry. Again, Id promittere nos in nostra professione non
credimus, quod certum est non posse tener^, lib. de dispens. We do not take
upon our selves to promise that, when we enter into our profession, which it is
certain cannot be kept. Wherefore, men ought not to make absolute vows of
single life, but so far as they shall be able to contain. Necessitas, (also
says he) non habet legem, and ob hoc exeusat dispensationem: Necessity has
no law, and therefore excuses a dispensation or loosing of the vow, ibid. Let
these men go for heretics together with us, if it be heresy to say, that rash
vows upon necessity may be broken or dispensed withal.

20 Two other heresies remain: the first, which is the sixteenth in

Ans. First, we do not say, that the Eucharist is a bare sign of the body of
Christ, but that Christ is verily present with all the benefits of his death
to the faithful, and worthy receiver. Secondly, yet we utterly deny, that
the same flesh which Christ took of his mother, which hanged upon the cross,
and where withal he ascended up into heaven, is now really, substantially,
and carnally present in the sacrament at all, much less that it remains
there afterward. Neither for so holding ought we to be counted heretics: for
Christ says, my words are spirit and life, the flesh profits nothing,
John. 6. Upon the which words Augustine thus writes, Spiritualiter (inquit)
intelligite, quod loquutus sum: Non hoc corpus, quod videtis, manducaturi
estis, and bibituri illum sanguinem, quem fusuri sunt, qui me crucisigent:
sacramentum vobis aliquod commendau^, spiritualiter intellectum viuificabit
vos: You must spiritually understand, that which I say: You shall not ^ate
this body which you see, nor drink my blood, which they shall shed, that shall
crucify me, I have commended unto you a certain sacrament, it being
spiritually understood, shall quicken you, in Psalm. 98. So Bernard says,
writing of the Eucharist, Cibu^ iste non est ventris, sed mentis, non vadit in
secessum, sed tendit in excelsum: This is not the food of the belly, but of
the mind: it goes not into the draught, but tends to heaven: Sermon. de
coenadomint. But if the flesh of Christ were verily eaten, as other material
meats are, it must needs go into the belly, and so into the draught, which
as the Scripture says, is the purging of all meats, Mark. 7. 19. Again he
says, Christum habemus, non quomodo Angeli in praesentia maiestatis, non
quomodo Apostoli in visione humanitatis, sed quomodo eum etiam nunc habet
ecclesia in fide and sacramentis: We have Christ, not as the Angels have him,
in the presence of his majesty, not as the Apostles in the sight of his
humanity, but as the Church now has him in faith and the sacraments, Sermon. in
fest. Martin. The presence of Christ then in the sacrament is no otherwise,
than by faith: therefore he is not carnally present* for faith is not of
things present, but hoped for, Heb. 11. 1. Thus are we with other ancient
fathers without cause, by the newfangled Papists, condemned as heretics.
Their mouths we cannot stop, yet proves they never shall have any against
us.

Thus, as we see, the Jesuit has almost run himself out of breath, in
following us with open cry of heresy: might and maine has he labored to
charge us with twenty heresies: but he has told as many untruths, and
lies. Let any indifferent man now consider, how the Jesuit has paltred with
us.

First, he obiecteth those heresies, which we our selves condemn, and that
they know, as the heresies of Seruet. haeres. 7. and of Swinkfeld. haeres. 15.

Secondly, he forces those heresies upon us, which do with better right rec
oil upon themselves, as haeres. 14. and 17.

Thirdly, he slaundereth us with those opinions which we hold not, as Luther,
haeres. 4. Calvin and Bucer, haeres. 14. Beza, haeres. 15.

Fourthly, he calls those heresies, which we doubt not to defend, as
Catholic opinions, howsoever they displeased some of the old writers: Such is
that of Aerius, that prayer is not to be made for the dead, haeres. 11. And
that of Vigilantius, that the relics of Saints are not to be adored, nor
themselves to be prayed unto, haeres. 13. All the rest for the most part, which
the Jesuit calls heresies, are by Augustine defended and maintained in his
works: As therefore Hierome said to Augustine, epist. 11. inter epist. Aug. Si
me reprehendis errantem, patere me quaeso, quasi errare cum talibus. If you
reprehend me for my error, give me leave to err with such notable men: After
he had alleged diverse ancient writers of his opinion: So if we were in some
error, as we are not, neither shall the Jesuit ever prove it against us,
he might somewhat bear with us, because we err and are deceived with
Augustine. Although in deed, as Augustine answers Hierome: Puto, quia cum
his errare nec te ipse patieris: I think you would not willingly your self
err, no not with these worthy men, epist. 19. So neither will we with
Augustine, Hierome, or any other willingly (by Gods grace) maintain any error,
much less heresy.

Thus, I trust, we have for this time, and for our purposed brevity,
sufficiently answered the Jesuit: he has hitherto but spent his breath, and
laid his nets in vain. The pit of heresy, which they dug for us, them
selves (as it shall now appear) are fallen into: We will therefore, seeing
the Jesuit has first provoked us to this cumbate, a little requite his
kindness, and bestow upon him and his fellows a full scoace of heresies, not
devised or imagined by us, but such as were condemned by the fathers of the
Church for heresies, and are now either in part, or in whole maintained by the
Church of Rome. And herein I will rather follow Augustine, than either
Epiphanius, or Philoster, to whom the Jesuit seems to be more addicted: for
Augustine has written more exactly, and with better judgment of this argument
than either of them. And of Philoster, Augustine gives this censure, Multas
haereses commemorat, qu^ mihi appellandae haereses non videntur: he reckons
up many heresies, which seem to me not worthy the name of heresy, haeres.
80. But now to the purpose.

First, Marcelline the companion of Carp^crates that monstrous heretic, Paul,
and offered incense unto them, August. haeres. 7. So it was concluded in the
second Nicene Council, that the image of God is to be adored with the same
worship that is due unto God, which idolatrous decree is defended by Thom.
Aquinas, Bonauenture, Caietanus. Bellarmine also allows censing and burning
of odors before images, lib. 1. de sanctor. beatitud. cap. 13. which is a part
of divine worship: for therefore Hesekiah brake down the brazen serpent,
because the people burned incense unto it, 2. King. 18. 4.

Secondly, the heretics called Heracleonitae, did after a new sort purge
haeres. 16. So the Papists have excogitate a sacrament of extreme unction,
wherein they anoint their sick with oil for remission of their sins, their
eyes, their nostrels, ears, mouth, hands, reins and feet: of this popish
custom of aneeling, see the Rhemist. annot. Galath. 4. Sect. 2. Iam. 5. Sect.
14.

Thirdly, the heretics called Caiani, did highly extol Judas, as a divine
August. haeres. 18. So some of the Papists have written, Iudaei mortaliter
peccassent, nisi Christum crucifixissent: the Jews had sinned mortally, if
they had not crucified Christ, distinct. 13. look before Blas. 59.

4 The heretics called Taciani, did co^demn marriages, and made no better person
into their order, haeres. 24. That the Papists are not far off from this
heresy, it appears both by their doctrine and practice: First, for their
doctrine, thus they write, That the order of the Priesthood is profaned by
marriage, Greg. Martin, discou. cap. 15. Sect. 11. Whereas the Apostle says,
Marriage is honorable amongst all men, Heb. 13. The Rhemistes also are not a
whit ashamed to say; that the marriage of Priests is the woorst sort of
incontinencie, Annot. 1. Cor. 7. Sect. 8. Pope Siricius, epist. ad Himerium.
Taraconens. applies that saying in the Scripture against marriage: Qui in
carne sunt, Deo placere non possunt: They that are in the flesh, cannot please
God. Now, as their doctrine is, so is their practice: whereby they do not only
make fornication equal to marriage, but even prefer it. It was one of the
greeuances of the Germans, exhibited to Cardinal Campeius: that the Bishops
and their Officials, did not only suffer Priests for their money to have
Concubines, but compelled continent and chaste Priests to pay their tribute to
the Bishop, and so it might be lawful for them to live chaste, or keep
Concubines, Fox, page 862. But honest marriage in Ministers, they punished with
death: as anno 1525. Petr. Sponglerus was condemned to die for no other cause,
but that he had married a wife, ex Oecolampad. Thus it is manifest, both by
the doctrine and practice of the Church of Rome, that they do not only with
these heretics, match fornication, and honest marriage together, but give it
the preferment before marriage.

5 The Cataphriges did make or mingle their Eucharist with the blood haeres.
26. The Papists much like unto them, have showed the people in the sacrament
the blood of Duckes and Pigeons, making the people believe, that it was the
blood of Christ: as here in England, the blood of Hales, which men from all
parts of the land came in pilgrimage unto many years, taking it to be the
blood of Christ, was in the end found to be but the blood of a Drake, and
openly showed at Paul's cross by the Bishop of Rochester, the King himself
being present, Fox. 1188.

6 The Pepuzians allow women to be priests, haeres. 27. So the Papists vide
supra, haeres. object. 4.

7 The Catharistes did so name them selves, as being pure and clean, haeres.
38. Such are the Papists, which affirm, that some are so just in this life,
that they need no repentance, Rhemist. annot. Luke 15. 1. That just men in
this life may keep the law of God, and by their justice be free from the
curse thereof, Galat. 3. Sect. 4. That habitual concupiscence without consent of
will, is not properly forbidden in the law, neither does make us guilty before
God, Romans 7. Sect. 5. 10. Do not these men now in effect say, that they are
pure and clean in this life?

8 The heretics ( Angelici) were so called because they worshipped haeres. 39.
which sect Epiphanius (says Augustine) thought to be worn out and
extinguished. But if Epiphanius were now alive, he should see this heresy
revived by the Papists: for they do maintain the worship and adoration of
Angels, Rhemist. Apocal. 3. Sect. 6. and Annot. in cap. 19. 22.

9 The heretics called Apostolici, did not receive into their communion
haeres. 46.

10 The Hierachites did receive only Monks and Nuns to their haeres. 47.
Papistrie sauoureth strongly of these heresies: for professed Monks are with
them the deuoutest men, how impure soever their life be: in so much, that the
profession of Monkerie has obtained amongst them the name of religion: the
rest that live in the world, they call seculares and mundanos, secular men, and
of the world. The Rhemistes affirm, that Monks come nearest to the imitation
of Christ, 1. Thessal. cap. 1. v. 6. That married priests cannot conveniently
be occupied about prayer, or the Sacraments, but ought to abstain from all
matrimonial acts, 1. Corinthians. 7. v. 5. and 1. Timoth. 5. v. 5. contrary to
the Council of Gangra, cap. 4. where it was decreed, that if any man make
difference of a married priest, and by occasion thereof refrain from his
oblation, should be accursed. Lastly, the Apostolici, would in no wise suffer
those, which had vowed single life, afterward to marry, though they found
themselves unable to keep their vow, Epiphan. haeres. 61. So the Rhemistes
allow virgins after their vow upon no occasion to marry, Annot. 1. Corinthians. 7.
v. 28.

11 The Euchites did nothing else but pray, and held, that it was not lawful
haeres. 57. The Papists incline to both those heresies: for first, what else do
their Monks and Nuns, but mumble upon their beads a certain stint of prayers
in the Latin tongue, which most of them understand not, at all times and
hours almost both of day and night: as they have their Nocturns, and Primes,
their morning, evening, midnight service: their third, sixth, and ninth hours,
Rhemist. annot. act. 10. sect. 6. Secondly, we see, that most of the
Cell-birds, both cocks and hens, Monks and Nuns, I would say, do live
idly: and they bear them out in it: for religious men (say our Rhemistes)
such as they count their Masse-munging Monks to be, are not bound to work,
annot, 2 Thessalonians. 3. Sect. 2.

12 There is another heresy, says Augustine, or sect, that walks with
Moses, put off thy shoes, haeres. 68. So among the Papists, there are sects
of sryers, that go barefoote, as their friars Flagellantes, and Franciscans.

13 The Priscillianistes did make the Apocrypha, that is, books not Haeres.
70. So do the papists: the books of Tobie, Judith, the Machabees, and others,
which are not found in the Canon of the Hebrew, they make them books of
Canonical scripture, and part of the word of God: yea their blind and
uncertain traditions, they are not ashamed to call the word of God unwritten.
And yet further, whatsoever, say they, the Pastors of the Church do teach
beside scripture, in the unity of the Church, is to be taken for the word of
God, Rhemist. annot. 1 Thessalonians. 2 sect. 2.

14 There were certain heretics that held, that by Christ's descending
Haeres. 79. This heresy, I see not how the papists can shift off from them
selves, who do all generally understand that place of Saint Peter. 1. Epistle
3. verse 19. of Christ's descending into hell. Where the Apostle speaks of
the incredulous and disobedient persons of the old world, who perished in the
waters, and afterward remained in prison, only eight persons being saved in
the arc. If Christ then should deliver all these incredulous persons, how can
they avoid this heresy, that Hell was in a manner emptied by the descension
of Christ?

15 The Coluthians affirmed, Deu^ non facere mala, that no evil was wrought Ego
Deus creans mala, I am the God that creates evil: Shall there be evil in a
city, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3. 6. August. haeres. 65. This
heresy the papists are not free from, who affirm that Christ's death was not
Gods act otherwise then by permission in respect of the malice of the Jews,
Act. 4. sect. 2. Whereas the Act. 4. v. (...)
scripture says, it was done by Gods hand and counsel, which is more then
permission: and so indeed God did not only permit, but use the malice of the
Jews most holily and most justly to bring his purpose to effect. The Rhemistes
also affirm, that sin stands not with Gods will, intention nor honor,
Annot. Romans 3. v. 4. True it is, that sin is against the revealed will of God
in his word, but nothing can come to pass against the secret will and
determination of God: Neither is God the author of sin, which proceeds from
man's own corruption, but as it is a demonstration of his justice in the
punishment thereof, as Augustine says: Creat Deus mala poenas iustissimas
irrogando. God creates evil, by inflicting of most just punishment, Haeres.
66. The papists then, which deny that evil any way comes from God, incline
to this heresy of the Coluthians.

16 An Arch-heretike called Marcus, did hold, that Christ did not verily
Haeres. 14. The Apollinaristes also affirmed, that Christ took humane flesh
without a soul. August. Haeres. 55. I pray you how far are the papists from
this heresy? who affirm, that Christ suffered not in soul: Nay the Rhemists
hold it to be a blasphemous assertion so to say, Annot. Hebr. 5. ver. 7. What
is it else, but either with Marcus to say, that Christ suffered but in show,
and that he felt nothing in soul, when he cried out upon the Cross, my God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? (for if there were no such matter indeed,
Christ must have uttered these words only in outward show and pretense) Or
else they must fall into the Apollinaristes heresy: for why did Christ take
upon him our flesh and soul, but to redeem man that was lost, both in body
and soul? And therefore he must needs have suffered both in body and soul:
for if there were no use of the humane soul in the work of our redemption,
you might as well say with the Apollinaristes, that Christ had no soul at all:
Thus Augustine reasons: si totus homo perijt, totus beneficio saluatoris
indiguit: si totus beneficio saluatoris indigebat, totum Christus veniendo
saluauit. Cont. Felician. ca. 13. If the whole man both body and soul were
lost, he wholly had need of a Savior: and if he wholly needed a Savior,
Christ by his coming did wholly save him: Ergo it follows, that Christ must
wholly have dyed and suffered in body and soul to redeem man (for our
redemption was wrought by his death) that was lost in body and soul.

17 The Anthropomorphits did imagine, that God was in shape and Haeres. 50. Do
not our Rhemistes savor strongly of this heresy, which allow the Image of
God to be pictured in their Churches like an old man with gray hairs? Annot.
Act. 17. ver. 29.

18 The heretics Seleuciani, or Hermiani, denied that Christ did sit at
Haeres. 59. The papists now, though in words they affirm not this, yet by a
necessary sequel of opinion, they must leave Christ without his flesh in
heaven, as often, as they would have it present in the mass: for it seemed an
absurd thing even to those gross heretics, that the body of Christ should be
in many places at once: for if they had known the shifts, which papists now
have found out, to establish their Real presence, who doubt not to say, that
the body of Christ may be in many places: to place Christ's flesh in the
Sun, they needed not to have removed it out of heaven: They might have said
he was in both places at once. Yet here in the Seleuciani seem to be more
reasonable then papists, that they have provided so glorious a place for the
body of Christ, even the beautiful tabernacle of the Sun: but the other
thrust the flesh of Christ into a narrow room, and bring him within the
compass of a thin cake, or put him into a box, and housse him in their
bellies, yea send his body to a viler place then so, even to the draught,
where their bellies are purged, as some of them have been driven to grant:
But that the flesh of Christ cannot be in many places at once, Augustine
shows, writing thus upon those words in the Gospel, What if you see the
Son of man ascending where he was before? Illi put abant eum erogaturum
corpus suum, ille autem se dixit ascensurum in coelum, vtique integrum. They
imagined that Christ would have bestowed his body amongst them, but he faith,
he will ascend into heaven, that is to say, whole and found. tract in Johan.
27. If so be then Christ does now bestow his body in earth, in Augustines
judgment he cannot be whole in heaven.

19 The heretics called Abeliani, thought it not lawful for their sect
Haeres. 87. Do not the papists come near them, which hold that their
priests, which were married before orders, ought not afterward to have access
to their wives, yet are they their wives still? Rhemist. act. 21. sect. 1.

20 The Pelagian heretics did hold three pernicious opinions. First that
Haeres. 88. So the Rhemistes say, it is possible to keep Gods commandments.
Annot. John. 4. sect. 1. Secondly, the Pelagians say, that grace is given
only unto men to this end, that they may do more easily those things, which
they are commanded to do, by their own free will. Haeres. 88. So the
Rhemistes say, that man was never without free will, but having the grace of
Christ, it is truly made free. Annot. John. 8. sect. 2. What is this else, but
that his free will is made more free, and that grace helps him not wholly to
work, but more easily only? Thirdly the Pelagians hold: Gratiam Dei non ad
singulos actus dari: That the grace of God is not needful to be given at
every assay, but that their free will in most things is sufficient: August.
Epistol. 106. So the Rhemistes say, that though the Gentiles believed specially
by Gods grace, yet they believed also of their own free will. Acts. 13. sect.
2. What say they now else, but that a man may believe by his own free will
without grace?

21 The Manichees condemned the eating of flesh as being unclean Haeres. 46.
So the papists at certain times forbid the eating of flesh. And herein
perhaps they differ from the Manichees, They held that flesh was unclean by
creation, the papists by reason of the curse: for God cursed the earth, and
not the waters, say they: and therefore upon fasting days fish is preferred
before flesh. Durand. lib. 6. cap. de alijs ieiunijs. So they both agree in
this, that flesh is a thing unclean and impure: for if they had not so
thought, why did not the popish Bishop of London Stokesly rather suffer the
pigge to be eaten, which was found in one Frebornes house in Lent time, his
wife great with child longing for a piece thereof, then command it as an
unclean thing to be buried in Finsburie fields, and so the good creature of
God to be spilled and lost? Fox page 1585.

22 There was also another most blasphemous opinion of the Manichees for they
held, that the parts and members of Christ were dispersed every where, and
that in their meats and drinks, they did deliver the members of Christ, which
were tied and bound in the creatures: August in Psalm. 104.
Tales, says Augustine, sunt electi eorum, vt non sint saluandi a Deo, sed
saluatores Dei, liberant enim membra Christi, cum manducant: The elect amongst
them (for so they call their principals and ringleaders) are such, that they
look not themselves to be saved of God, but profess rather to be the saviors
and redeemers of God: for they do set at liberty, as they imagine, the
members of Christ in their daily eating. Compare now the opinion of the
papists with these heretics: see if they be not cosen germans: for as they
made them selves, Saluatores Christi: The saviors of Christ: so is it a saying
among papists, that, Sacerdos est creator creatoris sui: That the priest does
make his maker, by five words speaking in the mass. But herein the papists
go beyond the Manichees: for they delivered the body and members of Christ
from the prison of the creatures, and sent them up to heaven: but the papists
bring them down from heaven, and close them in the creature under the shape of
bread and wine.

23 Lastly there was a notable heretic one Rhetorius, who affirmed, that Recte
ambulare: Walk the right way, and hold the truth. Haeres. 72. But this
seems so absurd a thing to Augustine, that he does not give credit unto it:
Who if he were now alive, would not think it so incredible a thing: for
excepting those heresies, which have been raised concerning the natures of
Christ, and his person (where notwithstanding the papists are not free from
error) what heresy has there been held about the officies of Christ, his
kingdom, priesthood and prophetical office, which is not this day, either in
whole or in part, maintained by the Church of Rome? as it may partly appear by
that which we have said already.

And thus, I think, we have in some measure recompensed our adversaries
courteous dealing, who so kindly vpbraid us with heresy: Let all the world now
judge who are nearest cosens to heretics, they or we. We may say unto them as
Augustine sometime to the Donatistes: Videsne, quemadmodum ista non sententia
sua sed vesica, non solum inani sono, verumetia^ in capite vestro crepuerit?
Do ye not see, how this their vain sentence and puff of a bladder, has
given a crack, and is broken upon their own head? cont. Petilian. lib. 2.
cap. 101. So this stormy blast of heresy, which they have puffed at us, is
blown upon their own faces: and they only are found to be the heretics. If
they speed no better in other matters, the worst end of the staff is like to
be theirs. And this shall suffice for this part.

Of the gross absurdities and inconveniences of Popish Religion.
We will now (the Lord assisting us) lay together some of those absurd and
unreasonable positions, which are boldly without shame affirmed by our
adversaries, having already sufficiently detected and discovered their
blasphemies, opinions contrary to scripture, together with their heresies. And
herein the papists do bewray such ignorance and blindness, that we need
not doubt to say, as it is alleged by the holy Apostle, That God has given
them the spirit of slumber; eyes, that they should not see* and ears, that
they should not hear to this day, Romans 11. 8: And as in an other place the
same Apostle prophesies: God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe lies. 2 Thessalonians 2. 11. But now to the matter in hand.

They affirm that no general council is of sufficient authority without 1
Absurd
the allowance of the pope: And that he is in such sort above al councels, that
he cannot though he would, submit him self to their sentence. Bellar. de
concilijs lib. 2. cap. 11. and 14. But the scripture says, he that refuses to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, or publicane. Math.
18. 17. Therefore if the pope shall refuse the sentence of the Church assembled
in general councels, he is no better, by the voice of Christ, then an heathen.
The papists being further urged, that if the pope were above councels, there
should be no way to resist a wicked pope. Bellarmine answers like a
Clerk, that there is no other remedy left in such a case, but to pray to God,
who will either convert or confound such a pope. Lib. 2. de Council. cap. 19.
An answer as absurd, as the opinion is: for by this means the Church shall
run into ruin and decay, when it is in men's power to help it, which is
nothing else but to tempt God, then to depend of his extraordinary work, when
he has appointed an ordinary mean of redress.

That to have been twice married, is a greater let and impediment to the
Bellarm. de clericis. lib. 1. cap. 24. Whereas these are every where prohibited
in scripture, but not one place can be showed, where second marriage is
forbidden.

That a man may attain unto a greater measure and higher degree of Thou shall
love the Lord thy Godwith all thy soul, with all thy strength, Bellarm. de
Monach. lib. 2. cap. 6. respons. ad Melancthon. Whereas it is certain that it
is not possible for us to love God in such perfection as we ought, and are
commanded* much less can we do more, then is our duty to do. Luke 17. 10.

That it is not lawful for a votarie to marry, though he were sure by Bellar.
de monachis lib. 2. cap. 32. resp. ad. 4. rationem. Yet S. Paul counsaileth
Timothy to drink wine, whereas his manner was to drink water, not for any
mortal disease he had, but because of his infirmity and weakness only. 1.
Timoth. 5. 23. And all such vows, as are made rashy to the hurt and hinderance
of our selves or others, may better be broken, then kept, because they offend
against the law of charity. Leuitic. 5. 4. 1. Samuel. 25. 22. David breaks
the oath or vow, which he had rasblie made in his anger.

That Christ was, Veremendicus: A mere beggar, and wanted both the Bellarm. de
monach. lib. 2. cap. 45. But Augustine according to the scriptures says: Nisi
putetis, quia dominus petebat and indigebat* cuiseruiebant angeli, qui de
quinque panibus tot millia pauit: Unless ye think (says he) that Christ
begged, and was in want, unto whom the Angels ministered, and who was able of
five loaves to feed so many thousand: in Psalm. 146.

This opinion, which the Jesuit holds, that Christ was a beggar, was
condemned by Pope Paulus. 2. for heresy. Ann. 1465. ex histor. sca. mundi.
How dare he then control his Pope holy fathers determinate sentence?

Diabolus odit imagines: The devil himself hates and cannot abide an
Bellarm. de imaginibus sanctor. lib. 2. cap. 12. yet S. Paul says, what is
offered or sacrificed to Idols, is sacrificed to devils. 1. Corinthians. 10. 20. He
does so abhor an image that who so worshippeth them, does the devil great
service.

Whenever we see either a maunger to be painted or graven to represent Non
carent veneratione sua: There is some religious reverence to be done unto them:
Bellarm. de sanctor. imaginibus. lib. 2. cap. 30. So in the Jesuits judgment
every Alehouse painted cloth, showing any such picture, must be adored and
worshipped.

That the sacrament does confer grace: Ex opere operato, by the very Bellarm.
lib. 2. de effect sacrament. cap. 1. not. 4. These are foul absurdities: as to
think, that any action of it self pleases or is acceptable unto God without
faith, contrary to the scripture, Hebr. 11. 6. And to make the sacraments to
be more principal then faith, whereof they are but seals. Romans 4. 11. And
faith being the very life of a righteous man. Romans 1. 17.

Thata Pagane or Infidel may baptize in a case of necessity or extremity,
Bellarm. de Baptism. lib. 1. cap. 7. A very absurd thing that one by Baptism
may be received into the Church and made a member of Christ, by him that is not
in the Church nor of the body of Christ nor ever was: Whereas Christ said
only to his Apostles; Go and teach al nations, baptizing them, etc. Math. 28.
19.

That it is very probable that John Baptist used no form of words at Bellarm.
de sacram. Baptis. lib. 1. cap. 20. Which is an absurd saying, and contrary to
S. Paul, who testifies of John, that he baptized the people, saying unto them,
That they should believe in him, which should come after him, that is, in
Jesus Christ, Act. 19. 4.

That the Apostles were first made priests in the institution of the Lords
Bellarm. de sacram. Confirmat. cap. 12. resp. ad. 2. argum. But what need they
be ordained priests or Bishops, who already were called to be Apostles, which
is the first and chiefest office in the Church? Ephesians. 4. 11. And includes
other inferior functions: for the Apostles together with their Apostleship were
made pastors, and doctors and Bishops to, if you will, of the Church, so that
they needed not any new inuesting to these functions.

That the Bishop is the only pastor of his diocese, and that inferior
ministers Bellar. de Council. lib. 1. cap. 15. Yet S. Peter makes Elders,
Presbyteri, (as they translate,) priests, to be the proper pastors of their
several charges: Feed the flock of God, which depends on you. 1. Pet. 5.
3. But if a particular flock or congregation depend on their teacher and
instructor, then is he properly their pastor.

The regiment of the Church is easier then the government of the common
Facilior est gubernatio ecclesiastica, quam politica: Bellarm. de Roman.
pontif. lib. 1. cap. 9. respons. ad object. 4. Here the Jesuit bewraieth his
great ignorance, seeing there is no greater charge, the^ that which concerns
the souls of men: the care whereof Bellarmine confesses not at al to belong to
the political or civil magistrate. And therefore S. Paul cries out in
admiration of this weighty and wonderful calling: Who is sufficient for these
things* 2. Corinthians. 2. 16. And therefore calls the care, which he had of the
Churches, a trouble and a cumbrance. 2. Corinthians. 11. 28. It is not therefore so
light and easy an office, as the Jesuit thinks, to have charge of men's
souls.

Tantum abest (says Bellarmine) vt negatio Petri obsit primatui, vt potius eum
confirmet: Peter's denial of Christ was so far from hindering his primacie,
that it did rather further it. De Roman. pontific. lib. 1. cap. 28. A great
absurdity: for it was so sarre from being any help or furtherance to Peter,
that it had been sufficient without the great mercy of God, to have hindered
his salvation. And if Peter received such a benefit by his denial of Christ,
he might have spared some tears, and not have wept so bitterly for his fault.

Whereas we allege against our adversaries, that it is like that Peter Paul
wrote his Epistle to the Romans, because he is not remembered amongst so many,
in the Apostles salutation, cap. 16 They shape us these and the like aunsweres:
It might be that Peter at that time was out of the town, or that there were
special leters sent to Peter beside, or this epistle might be sent enclosed to
S. Peter by his means to be delivered to the Church, Rhemist. annot. Romans 16.
sect. 4. Who sees not the absurdity and insufficiency of these aunsweres?

That Peter failed in charity, when he denied Christ, and not in faith, and
Bellarm. de Roman. pontif. lib. 4. cap. 3. But how I pray you can a man fail
in charity and not in faith, seeing a lively faith always works by love?
Galath. 5. 6. and can not be separated or divided from it. And it is as absurd
a thing to say, a man may loose the confession of his faith, and yet keep his
faith sound: for these two are the principal fruits of faith, to Believe with
the heart, and confess with the mouth, Romans 10. 10. And where either of these
is wanting, there cannot be a right and perfect faith.

That the pope as he is pope can not err: And yet whether he may err Est ab
omnibus fidelibus obedienter audiendus: He is obediently to be heard and
followed of all the faithful, Bellarm. de Romans pontific. lib. 4. cap. 2. What
an absurd thing is this, to bind the Church absolutely to obey a man, as well
when he erreth, as when he erreth not: S. Paul durst require no more of the
Corinthians but to follow him as he followed Christ. 1. Co. 11. 1.

In the late devised doctrine of their imagined Antichrist, our adversaries Dan,
Rhemist. 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 8. Whereas it is certain that the tribes of the
Jews are now shufled together, and the distinction of their kinreds and
families is not kept: for if in Ezra his time after the captivity their
genealogies were not perfitly known, and therefore some were put from the
priesthood, Ezra. 2. 62. how much more now, the Jews having been dispersed in
the world almost 16. hundred years, is it like, that their petigree and
descent from their fathers is not observed?

2 Antichrist, say they, shall have his imperial seat at Jerusalem, and
Bellarm. lib. 3. de pontif. cap. 13. This is a great absurdity contradicting
the truth of scripture: for Haggai the prophet calls the temple builded by
Zorobabel the last house, 2. 10. But if it shall be the third time erected, how
was that the last?

3 That Antichrist shall reign but 3. years and an half: and yet in Lybia,
Egypt, Aethiopia, and persecute the Christians through the whole world,
Bellarm. cap. 16. But let any man say: how is it possible that in so short a
time Antichrist should conquer and subdue the whole world? In the which space
a man can hardly compass, or go through the world.

The popish religion prefers the rich before the poor, even in spiritual
Ideo in hoc solo casu melior est conditio diuitis, quam pauperis, quia habet
vnde suffragia fiant pro ipso. In this case only the estate of the rich is
better then the poor, because he has, where with all suffrages should be
made for him: that is, he is able to give largely for Masses. Albert. Mag. de
offic. missal. tract. 3. But the scripture bids otherwise, that we should
not have respect unto the rich, that has a gold ring, or wears gay
apparel. Iam. 2. 2.

The sign of the cross even by the very act and making of the sign, Bellarm.
de imaginib sanct. cap. 30. Yea, but carnal weapons, such as the sign of the
Cross is, profit not good Christians against their spiritual enemies. 2. Cor.
10. 4. how much less Paganes or Infidels.

The Jesuit makes two representations of the death of Christ: there is
simplex repraesentatio, a simple and plain representation, and that is in the
sacrament of the Eucharist: and there is repraesentatio ad viuum, a full and
lively representation of Christ, and that is upon good Friday, when Christ's
death is set forth by diverse gestures, actions, instruments, copes and
vestmentes. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Miss. cap. 1. But how absurd a thing this is,
every man may see: that the representation of Christ's death in the Sacrament,
instituted of the Lord himself to be a showing forth of his death, should be
but a plain and simple representation: and the other devised by man, being
done without a Sacrament, should be called a lively representation: What is
this else, but to set the spirit of God to school, as though a more lively
showing forth of Christ's death could be devised by man, then was ordained by
Christ?

It is not necessary (they say) in every Sacrament to have a visible sign,
Bellarm. lib. 1. de poenitent. cap. 11. See what an absurd saying this is: for
by this reason the preaching of the word may be a sacrament, because there is
an audible sound.

Likewise in the Popish Sacrament of matrimony, the Jesuit makes I take thee
etc. Bellarm. de matrim. cap. 6. Here are two great absurdities: for first the
preachers and Ministers of the word only are the dispensers of the mysteries
and sacraments of the Church, 1. Cor. 4. 1. therefore the parties themselves
cannot be the ministers of matrimony, which they say is a sacrament. Secondly
it is not every word that sanctifies but the word of God. 1. Timoth. 4. 5. but
these words, I take thee, etc. are no part of the word, therefore they have no
power to sanctify.

The Rhemistes hold opinion, that Henoch and Elias do yet live in Apocal. 11.
sect. 4. But paradise is now no other place but heaven, 1. Corinthians. 12. 2. 4.
But there (they say) Henoch and Elias are not, for they shall come again in
their own persons (as they hold) and resist Antichrist, and in the end be
stayne of him: but bodies once glorified in heaven, can no more die, neither
are subject to violence: If then they be not in heaven, they are not in
paradise, which is no other place but heaven. Let now any indifferent man
judge, how handsomely these things agree together.

That the Angels shall be are the sign of the Cross before Christ coming
Bellarm. de sanctis, lib. 2. ca. 28. This also is a fantastical conceit of
theirs, without any ground of Scripture, or any good reason.

But of all other popish absurdities, these are most gross and palpable, which
they are driven to confess about their devise of transubstantiation in the
Eucharist.

First, they do grant, that the body of Christ may be and is in many
Bellarm. de sacram. Eucharist. lib. 3. cap. 4. Yet the Angel says contrary,
He is risen, for he is not here. Math. 28. 6. Which had been no good
argument, if Christ's body be in many places at once.

Secondly, they further affirm, that Christ's body in heaven, and at the
Bellarm. ibid. Thus they make Christ a monstrous body, that can fill heaven,
and earth, and indeed they in so saying, destroy his humanity.

Thirdly, they grant that the body of Christ is in the Sacrament with Bellarm.
lib. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 7. But what an absurd and impossible thing is this,
that the body of a man, as of three cubits in height, and having other
dimensions answearable to the proportion and stature of an humane body, should
be enclosed in a thin wafer cake, such as they use in their Eucharist, not a
spanne in breadth, without destruction of the parts and dimensions of the
body?

Fourthly, that one and the same body of Christ, in the same instant, may
Sursum, deorsum, Above and below, Remotum, propinquu^, Near unto the earth,
and far distant from it, that it may be in motion in one place, and yet rest
and be at quiet in an other, as the soul in the body, as it is in the feet,
is near to the earth, as in the head, it is further off, Bellarm. de sacram.
Eucharist. lib. 3. cap. 4. These are absurdities contrary to the rule of
reason, that contradictorie speeches should in one instant be true of the same
body or subject. And what is heresy, if this be not, to resemble and compare
the flesh of Christ to a soul or spirit, that as the soul is in the body in
no certain place, but euery-where, so the flesh of Christ should be in the
world? for this follows of the Jesuits comparison between the soul of man,
and the flesh of Christ.

5 Corpus Christi incipit esse in altari, (says Bellarmine) per conuersionem
panis in ipsum, The body of Christ begins to be in the altar by the
conversion or turning of the bread into his body, Lib. 3. de sacram. cap. 4.
What great blasphemy is this, to affirm that Christ's flesh is made of
bread? for these are their own words, that the bread is not annihilate, that
is, turned into nothing, but into the body of Christ. And Bellarmine also
confesses, that Christ's body in the Eucharist is made of bread, as the wine
was of water by our Savior Christ, John 2. But in that miracle it is certain
the water was the matter whereof the wine was made, for otherwise Christ would
not have bid the servants fill the water-pottes with water, if he had
purposed to create wine of nothing rather then to change water into wine.
Bellarm. de sacram. Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 24. Thus Christ by popish divinity
shall have a breaden body.

6 That after the words of consecration, there remain only the accidents
Harding defens. apolog. 305. page And it is the general opinion of all
papists: So in their opinion there may be the whiteness, roundnesse and
taste of bread, and yet no bread: the redness, tartness and other properties
of wine, and yet no wine. If a man then should ask, what round or white or red
thing is this? they can not say bread or wine, for there is none left: Neither
will they say, that the body of Christ is either white or red, and thus are
they driven to their shifts. Whereupon some of their schoolmen have said,
Accidentia illa sunt in ae^re, tanquam in subiecto: The accidents are in the
air as in their subject, De consecrat. distinct. 2. Species, in glossa.

7 They are the accidents of bread and wine, which are eaten, and chawen,
Bellarm. lib. 1. de sacram. Eucharist. cap. 11. respons. ad argum. 5. And which
go down into the belly, and nourish and feed the body, Harding defens.
apolog. page 305. Thus by popish philosophy, the accidents of wine make a man
drunk, the accidents of bread may feed a man and make him fat, without
either bread or wine.

8 That Christ would not have the external figures and shapes of the elements
changed, but remain still, because man would abhor to eat humane flesh in
the proper shape, Bellarm. lib. 3. de sacram. Eucharist. cap. 22. But what an
absurd thing is this? as though Christ would command any unseemly thing, or
contrary to humanity. And how could the Apostles command the Gentiles to
abstain from strangled, and from blood: Acts 15. when as by their doctrine
they did cate daily in their assemblies the raw flesh and blood of Christ?

9 If the consecrate host, as they call it, chance to putrisie and corrupt,
Bellarm. lib. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 24. ad argum. 6. Or else it returns into
the nature and substance of bread again, as other papists affirm, Fox p. 496.
So there is no less miracle wrought by occasion of the priests negligence,
then was before by the words of consecration. And it is not enough for God to
work miracles for men, but even for Mise also: yet Bellarmine tells us very
soberly, that all this is done, Sine miraculo, without a miracle: But how I
pray you, can bread be turned into flesh, and flesh again into bread without a
miracle?

10 Yea some of them are not ashamed to write thus, Si Canis vel porcus
deglutiret hostiam consecratam integram, non video quare corpus domini, no^
simul traijceretur in ventrem canis vel porci: If a Dog or a Hog should
devour a whole consecrated host, I see no thing to the contrary but the body
of Christ may pass withal into the belly of the dog or hog, Alexander
Halens. part. 4. quaest. 25. memb. 1. And the allowed Gloss says: Corpus
Christi potest euomi, The body of Christ may be spued or vomited up again:
De consecr. distinct. 2. Si quis in Gloss.

11 They suffer not the lay people to be partakers of the Cup, but Bellarm.
lib. 4. de Eucharist. cap. 24. Fox* page 1150. Are not these (think you)
matters of great moment and importance, to frustrate, and make void the
institution of Christ?

Unto these and such like absurdities of pope-catholike Religion, we may
adioyne also the profound and weighty questions, and deep discourses of
popish Divines: as to begin with their captains and ringleaders, and first
fathers of superstition: Austine the Monk, that was sent into England by
Gregory the first, sent unto his master to know his judgment and resolution,
in these, and such like weighty matters.

First, whether a woman great with child ought to be baptized. Secondly,

Thirdly, if she be in her monthly course, after the disease of women, whether
then she may enter into the church, and receive the communion.

4 Whether it be lawful for the man* after company had with his wife, Plura
apud Fox* page 117.

The like stuff a monkish letter sent to king Naiton king of Pictes, by
Colfride, contains: In the which entreating of the shauing of priests, he
exhorts the king to reform his country, and to imitate the shauing of S.
Peter, rather then the shauing of Simon Magus: Which at the first appearance
(says he) has a show of a shaven crown, but if you mark his neck, you
shall find it curtailed in such wise, as you will say, it is rather meet to
be used of the Simonistes, then of Christians. The blind superstitious king
having read this letter, kneeled on the ground, and gave God thanks that he
had deserved to receive such a present out of England: ex Beda, lib. 5. cap.
22. Is not this deep divinity, and fit matter for the king and states of a
land to busy their heads about? And had the country no need to be reformed
touching the doctrine of faith or manners, but all must be laid aside, and care
only taken for shauing of crowns? He speaks much of S. Peter's shauing, how
Peter was shaued one way, Simon Magus an other: but where finds he in
scripture, or any approved writer, either this or that? But such was the
divinity, that Monks spent their time in, in those days.

Such an other great and difficult question much troubled and busied John. But
hereupon sprang a more doubtful matter, that Albertus Magnus does help at a
pinch, and tells us plainly, her confession was this: That she had received
that great grace to be the mother of Christ, not exco^digno, of any dignity of
her own: but yet notwithstanding of congruitie, Albert. cap. 74. super Euan.
Miss^s est.

Ann. 1509. There was a fierce contention renewed between the Franciscane
Mary. The Franciscans held this most blasphemous opinion, that she was not only
void of actual sin, but even free from Original sin, unto the which she
was not subject, no not one moment of her Conception. The Dominikes affirmed
more agreeable to the scriptures, that Christ only had this privilege to be
conceived and borne without Original sin, notwithstanding they granted that
the blessed virgin was also sanctified and purged in her mothers womb from
Original sin.

Yet the Franciscanes prevailed, and the poor Dominikes with the truth, were
crushed to the walls, the Pope himself who was then Sixtus the fourth
determining against them. Plura Fox. page 800. Were not these deep divines and
profound doctors, that would trouble them selves with this question, which was
long before decided by the Apostle, who doubts not to say, That al have
sinned: Romans 3. 23. and 5. 12. Yea and Mary her self acknowledges that she
had need of a Savior, Luk 1. 47. And therefore was a sinner as well as
others. Such were the matters which in those times of ignorance and darkness the
popish clergy did occupy them selves in: Magis puerilibus ineptijs, quam
sacerdotum and cordatorum virorum prudentiae conuenientia: Matters fitter for
children to toie withal, then beseeming the gravity of priests and stayed
men, as Constantine says writing to Alexander and Arrius, Eusebius. de vit.
Constantin. lib. 2.

Thus far also concerning the absurd and frivolous positions, maintained by
our adversaries: I profess not (as I have often said) in this treatise to make
a collection of all, but every where, taking what came next to hand, to give
the reader a taste, referring the rest to him self, for I trust, by these few
examples, which I have set down, we may easily judge and discern of popish
religion: for it fares with them, as Augustine said of some other heretics
in his days: Qu^madmodum solet accidere, vt quando transeuntes nubes per
obscura noctis intuemur, earum caligine sic acies nostra turbetur, vt in
contrarium nobis sydera currere videantur: sic isti, quia in erroris sui nubilo
pacem non inueniunt, etc. As it happens, when we see the clouds move in a
dark night, our sight is so dimmed, that we imagine the stars to go another
way: So these fellows not finding any end or stablenes in the clouds of
their error, are not able rightly to judge of the truth, but think that the
scripture and all goes awrie: De diverse. ser. 15. Even thus our adversaries
being besotted with their own imaginations, and their eye of judgment
obscured with the thick clouds of wilful ignorance, do run as it were in
a maze, taking error for truth, and absurd and strange positions, for catholic
and sound doctrine. Now to the next Pillar.

The third Pillar of Popish doctrine consisting of 3. parts, loose arguments,
weak solutions, and subtle and sophistical distinctions.
The first part setting forth the loose and light arguments, whereby papistrie
is vpholden.
FIrstlet us see how pithily our adversaries dispute, and how lustely they lay
about them for the supremacy, and peerlesse authority of the pope.

Peter did excommunicate Ananias and Sapphira: He healed the sick by his
shadow: Ergo he was head of the Church, Rhemist, annot. act. 5. 8. Peter's
person was guarded with 4. quaternions of soldiers. Act. 12. 4. the Church
prays for him, ibid. sect. 4. Paul names him Cophas 1. Corinthians. 9. 5. Ergo
he was chief of the Apostles, and consequently the pope his successor is head
of the Church.

Christ said unto Peter, I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom Math.
16. 19. And Christ again bid Peter feed his sheep, John. 21. Ergo Peter and
his successors the popes, are the judges of the true sense of the scripture,
Bellarm. de verb. interpret. lib. 3. cap. 5.

Christ says John 10. 16. There shall be one shepherd, and one sheepefolde^
Ergo there ought to be one chief pastor of the universal Church, and that is
Peter and his successors, Bellarm. lib. 1. de pontisi^. 'Roman. cap. 9. Whereas
Christ in that place speaks of the calling of the Gentiles: Other sheep I
have also, which are not of this fold: That they together with the Jews shall
make but one sheepefold under Christ.

Christ said to Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith should not fail:
Ergo the pope cannot fail, nor err in faith, Bellarm. de Roman pontif. lib.
4. cap. 3. So Christ prays for all the faithful. John. 17. 20. Therefore by
this reason all believers should be privileged from error.

Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them, Math. 18. 20. Ergo it belongs to the Pope to call and
congregate councils: for to be assembled in the name of Christ, is nothing else
but to be gathered together by the popes authority, which he has received
from Christ, Bellarm. de council* lib. 1. cap. 12.

So by this reason if two or three of the faithful meet together in the fear
of God, Christ will not be present, unless they have the popes leave to come
together.

Christ said to Peter, Put up thy sword into the scabberd: Ergo the pope
Harding ex Iuel. page 579. A simple argument, Peter was rather rebuked for
striking with the sword, then commanded to use it.

The Church that is at Babylon saluteth you, 1. Pet. 5. 13. Ergo Peter was at
Bellarm. lib. 2. de pontif. cap. 2. A silly argument to prove Peter's being at
Rome: he was at Babylon, Ergo at Rome: yet by their own confession Rome is
Babylon, which is the seat of Antichrist.

Your faith is published through the whole world, Romans 1. 5. Ergo the Church
Rhemist. ibid. So S. Paul says of the Church of the Thessalonians, Your faith
is spread abroad into all quarters, 1. Epist. 1. 8. Ergo neither could their
Church err in faith.

God took of the spirit that was in Moses, and gave it among the 70. Elders,
Number. 11. 16. Ergo Bishops have their authority from the pope, Bellarm. Ans.
The pope might rather challenge to be Aarons successor, who was the high priest,
then Moses. And has the pope then such abundance of the spirit of God, that he
can afoord a portion thereof to all the Bishops in the world, and yet keep
enough for himself?

Melchisedech was both King and Priest, Ergo the pope is also a temporal
Bellarm. lib. 5. de Romans pontif. cap. 9. This argument beside that it has no
sequel at al, contains blasphemic: for Melchisedech was only a type and
figure of the spiritual kingdom and priesthood of Christ, as the Apostle makes
the application. Hebr. 7.

Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord, Genesis 4. 26. Ergo Bellar.
de Monach. lib. 1. cap. 5.

Suffer little children to come unto me, Math. 19. Ergo young men and children
Bellarm. de Mon^ch. lib. 2. cap. 35.

God said to Abraham, Go out from thy kindred and from thy fathers house, Genesis
12. 1. forget thine own people and thy fathers house. Psalm. 25. 10. Ergo it is
lawful for children without their parents consent to enter into profession of
Monkerie, Bellarm. ibid. cap. 36.

Now for purgatory, which they imagine to be a place of temporal David
says: Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, nor chastise me in thy wrath* Psalm.
38. 1. We went through fire and water. Psalm. 66. 12. Who shall abide the day
of his coming? for he is like a purging fire, and as fullers soap. Malach. 3.
2. Ergo there is a purgatory fire after this life. These arguments are too
vain for children: As though where the Scripture speaks of fire, it must
needs be understood of purgatory fire, whereas the prophet David by water and
fire understands the afflictions of the Church: and the Pophet Malachie, the
day of the Lords visitation.

The like pithie arguments they ground out of the new Testament, Math. 5. 22.
He that is angry with his brother is culpable of judgment, he that says
Racha, shall be judged by a Council. Luke 23. the thief upon the cross
said to Christ, Remember me, when thou come into thy kingdom. Act. 2. 24.
whom God has raised up, and loosed the sorrows of ( hell as they read) for it
was impossible for him to be holden of it. Ergo, there is a purgatory after
this life, Bellarm. de purgator. lib. 1. cap. 4. loc. 5. 7. 8. These be their
goodly arguments, which if they prove any thing, do insinuate thus much, that
Christ's kingdom is purgatory, as in the second place, and that Christ
himself was in purgatory, as it follows by their collection out of the
third place alleged: And that a man for a rash word speaking shall be
tormented in purgatory, which they say exceeds all the pains and
punishments of this life, as out of the first place.

The like arguments they have for purgatory drawn from profane Turks
Alcaron, out of Plato in Gorgia, out of Cicero in somnio Scip^onis, and Uirgils
Aeneads, and last of all, flames of fire do break forth from the great hill
Aetna, and out of other places: ergo there must needs be a purgatory, Bellarm.
cap. 7. and 11. Are not these substantial arguments to ground a man's faith
upon? for Bellarmine says, it is an article of faith to believe purgatory,
and that he which believes it not, is sure to go to hell, Lib. 1. de purgat.
cap. 11. Thus the unbelieving Turks, the heathen philosophers and poets, are
become masters of Christian men's faith.

Christ raised Lazarus from the dead. Ioh. 11. the rulers daughter. Mat. Luke
7. Ergo, We ought also to pray for the dead, Bellarm. lib. 2. de purgat. cap.
15.

Romans 2. 7. To them, which continue in weldoing, glory, honor, and
immortality. Ergo Saints are to be worshipped. Bellarm. de Sanctor.
beatitud. lib. 1. cap. 13. argum. 7. Moses prays thus, Remember O Lord,
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servants, Exodus 32. Job says, have pity upon
me, O my friends, Job. 19. 21. Ergo, we may and ought make our prayers unto
Saints, Bellar. ibid. cap. 19. these arguments do rather move laughter,
then minister any matter worthy of confutation.

The Israelites were commanded to strike the blood of the Paschal Exodus 12. 7.
Jacob laying his hands a cross did bless Joseph's sons, Genesis 48. Apocalypse
14. 1. having his fathers name written in their foreheades: this is the sign
of the cross: Ergo it is an holy and venerable sign, Bellarm. de imaginib.
Sanctor. lib. 2. cap. 29. Is not this well reasoned for the cross?

The Israelites were commanded thrice a year to go up to Jerusalem, Deuteron.
16. Christ went up with his mother and Iosepth to Jerusalem, Luke 2. Paul
made have to go up to Jerusalem to keep the feast of Penticost, Act. 20. Ergo
now also Christians may go in pilgrimage to Jerusalem and to the holy Land,
Bellarm. de cult. sanctor. lib. 3. cap. 8. Thus we learn a new point of popish
divinity, that our savior Christ and the Apostles went in pilgrimage: Whereas
Christ him self says the contrary: The time comes, when ye shall neither
in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem worship the father, John. 4. 23. This
agrees with an other popish tale, that Christ came in pilgrims weed to S.
Gregory's table of hospitality, Rhemist. annot. Heb. 13. sect. 2.

Swear not by heaven, it is the Lords seat, nor by the earth, it is the
Lords footestoote. Math. 5. The place where thou stand is holy ground.
Exodus 3. Thou have known the holy scriptures of a child. 2. Timoth. 3. 15.
The very letters of scripture are called holy, because of the holy contents.
Ergo also Images of Saints, because they are signs of holy things are to be
reverenced and worshipped, Bellarm. de imaginib. sanctor. lib. 2. cap. 12. And
these, with the like are their stout arguments, for the adoration of Images.

The prophet commanded Naaman to wash him himself 7. times, King. 4. The
Altar must be cleansed 7. days, Exodus 29. 37. Job offered 7. Bullocks and 7.
Rams for his friends, Job 42. So in the Apocalips, 7. Churches, 7. Angels,
7. Stars, 7. Candlestickes, 7. Thunders, and the like. Ergo there are 7.
Sacraments, Bellarm. de sacrament. lib. 2. cap. 26. Rhemist. an^ot. Apocal. 1.
sect. 3.

Act. 8. 17. They did lay their hands upon them, and they received the holy
ghost. Ergo confirmation which is done by laying on of hands is a sacrament,
Act. 19. 6. Paul laid his hands upon them, and the holy ghost came upon
them, and they spoke with tongues. Ergo a sacrament of confirmation, Bellarm.
de sacram. confirmat. lib. 2. cap. 2.

God is able to bring a Camel through the eye of a needle, Math. 20. 26. Ergo
he may as well, and is present bodily in the Eucharist. Rhemist. Math. 26.
sect. 11. Bellarm. lib. 3. de sacram. cap 6. Christ trans^igured his body in
the Mount, Math. 17. he turned water into wine, John. 2. Appeared to Saul out
of heaven. Act. 9. Ergo he may as well be present in the sacrament, and
consequently is, Rhemist. John. 2. sect. 2. Act. 9. sect. 1.

For the sacrifice of the mass they reason thus: Prou. 9. 1. wisdom has
built her an house, s^^ine her victuales and drawn her wine: Melchisedech
brought forth bread and wine to Abraham, Genesis 14. The Priests and Levites
shall not want a man, to offer burnt offeringes continually, Ierom. 33. 18.
Ergo there is a sacrificing priesthood under the Gospel, and the mass is
properly a sacrifice: Bellarm. lib. 1. de missa. cap. 6. 9. But here they have
proved nothing, unless they say, that the mass is a burnt offering, or that
therein there is an oblation of bread and wine, which they will not grant.

Likewise they reason out of the new testament: as John 4. Christ says, The
hour comes, when the true worshippers shall worship my father in spirit and
truth. Acts. 13. 2. As they ministered and fasted, the holy Ghost said,
Separate me Paul and Barnabas. Christ also said, Hoc facite, Do this in
remembrance of me. In all these places by worshipping, ministering, doing, we
must understand sacrificing, Ergo the mass is truly and properly a sacrifice,
Bellarm. cap. 11. 12. 13.

Job offered sacrifice unto God for his friends, Job. 42. Ergo the Mass a
Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 2.

Timoth, 1. epist. 2. 1. I exhort (says the Apostle) that first of al
supplications, prayers, and giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings,
and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet, and a godly
life. Ergo the Mass is a sacrifice auailable for the obtaining of temporal
blessings, for these are the supplications which are made in the Mass,
Bellarm, lib. 2. de Miss. cap. 3.

Christ hanging upon the Cross uttered but seven short sentences in Ergo, the
priest at mass is not bound to utter all the canon with a loud and audible
voice, lib. 2. cap. 12.

The prophet David says, Let my prayer be directed before thee as incense,
Psalm. 141. 1. Ergo censing and burning of incense is to be used in the mass,
Bellarm. lib. 2. de Missa. cap. 15.

For Auricular confession, they bring these and such like arguments* Adam and
Eua confessed their sins unto God, Genes. 3. and Cain also, Genes. 4. At the
voice of Christ Lazarus came forth of the grave, and was loosed by his Apostles
from his grave clothes, John, 11. So men confessing their sins to the
priests, by them receive absolution. Ergo Auricular confession necessary with
particular enumeration of sins.

It were too long to heap together, either all, or most of those childish and
wanton arguments, wereby our adversaries do rather dally then dispute with us,
ministering rather matter of sport and laughter, then enforcing any sound
persuasion of their cause: But by these, which we have seen we may guess of
the rest. Let indifferent men now judge, whether we may not justly say unto
them (their proofs and arguments being so weak, and hanging so evil
together, as Irenaeus objected to the heretics, that they make a rope of
sand. All the world begins to see their nakedness and beggerie, what
slight arguments, what loose conjectures, what poor shifts they use: and how
in most of their chief questions, they are feign to beg some help of the
Jews, and run to their beggarly ceremonies, as S. Paul calls them, for
succor. It shall not be a miss to see a few examples of this matter.

To prove their traditions beside scripture, they allege the unwritten
Bellarmine de verb. lib. 4. cap. 8. And yet we read of no such authentical
traditions which they had, but those which were unlawful and superstitious,
condemned by our Savior Christ, Mark. 7. 9. Ye reject the commandments of
God, to observe your own traditions.

They ground the usurped Monarchy of the Pope over the whole Heb. 4. 15. and
9. 24. Bellarmine, de Roman. Pontif. lib. 1. cap. 9.

The name of Clerks or Clergy men Bellarmine deriueth from the Numb. 18.
Bellarm. li. 1. de Clericis. ca. 2. And thus he would bring in a legal and
Judicial difference between the Ministers of the Gospel and the people, as
there was between the Levites and the other tribes: Whereas before the Lord
there is no difference between them in that respect: for they are al, both
people and pastors, the Lords inheritance and lot, 1. Pet. 5. 3.

The single life of the Clergy he would prove, by the example of the Bellarm.
de Cleric. li. 1. ca. 19. But who sees not, that this was a legal sanctity
only, representing the integrity and purity of the true and perfect priest
Christ Jesus? for otherwise by the same reason, they may exact the like
abstinence of all Christian people, because all Israel was commanded to keep
from their wives 3 days, before the Lord appeared in Sinai, Exodus 19.

Vows and Monkerie proved by the example of the Nazarites and Rechabites, 35. 5
amongst the Israelites, Bellar. de Monach. lib. 1. cap. 5.

Their lenten fast waranted by Moses and Elias forty days fast, Rhemist.
Math. 4. Sect. 2.

They say, the Temples of Christians ought to be built, ad similitudinem templi
Salomonis, after the similitude and pattern of Salomons Temple, Bellarm. lib.
3. de cultu Sanctor. cap. 3.

Their consecrated oil, salt, water, ashes and such trumperie, they would Number.
5. the water mingled with ashes, Number. 19. Bellarm. de cultu Sanctor. li. 3. ca.
7.

Their Chrisme, which is used in the Popish Church in Confirmation, brought in
by superstitious imitation of the holy ointment, whereby the Priests and the
tabernacle were anointed in the law, Bellarmine, de sacram. Confirm. lib. 2.
cap. 8.

The Mass, a sacrifice propitiatory, because the Jews had sacrifices 10 40
for sin, Leuit. 4. 5. Bellarmine, de Missa. lib. 2. cap. 2. As though all
those sacrifices were not types and figures of one only propitiatory
sacrifice of Christ upon the cross.

Their private Masses, wherein the Priest receives alone, the people
Bellarmine, ibid. cap. 9. As though the veil of the temple was not rent
asunder in the passion of Christ, which before kept the people from the sight
of the holy things: and now the Papists would draw the curtain before their
eyes still.

Popish Massing garments invented to resemble the costly attire of Bellarm. de
Missa* lib. 2. cap. 1 5. Whose rich ornaments, and beautiful attire, were
evident types and figures of the spiritual beauty and excellency of the
kingdom and Priesthood of Christ, Psalm. 45. 9. 13. 14.

The superstitious dedication of their Churches they borrow from the Salomons
time, in Esra his days, 2. Chronicor. 7. Esra. 6. And by the Machabees. 1.
Macchab. cap. 4. And therefore Christian Churches ought to be dedicated in like
sort, Bellarmine, de cultu sanctor. lib. 3. cap. 5. Whereas it is certain,
that the solemn dedication of the Jewish temple, was a lively resemblance of
the dedication of the true tabernacle, which was the body of Christ, Heb. 8.
2. And of the new and living way, dedicated unto us by the veil, that is his
flesh, Heb. 10. 20. And yet never did the Jews use half of those ceremonies
(but such toys none at all) in dedicating the temple, as papists do in
hallowing of theirs: Such are the burning of tapers, picturing of Crosses upon
the walls, sprinkling of water, and of ashes upon the pauiment, making of
characters* The Jews themselves would blush to behold such things, Bellarm.
ibid.

The adorning of their Churches, with Images, crosses, vestements, of silver,
gold, silk, precious stone, their gorgious and sumptuous buildings, warranted
by the example of Salomons temple, which was beautiful both within and
without, Bellarm. ibid. cap. 6. yet they might have known this, that the
beauty and glory of the first house did shadow forth unto the Jews the
spiritual comeliness and excellency of the last house, that is, the Church
of God under Christ. Haggeus. 2. 10. And so says the Prophet Esaias, speaking
of the spiritual Temple: I will lay thy stones with the Carbuncle, and thy
foundations with Saphirs. Chapter 54. 11.

Yet we deny not, but that the external Churches also of Christians, ought to
be built, and adorned, with moderate cost after a decent and comely sort.

The priests in the law, were to judge of leprous persons, and to discern
Leuitic. 13. 14. Therefore Christians are now also bound to make particular
confession and enumeration of their sins in the ears of the priests, Bellarm.
de poenitent. lib. 3. cap. 3. Yet the priests were not to take knowledge of
every infirmity or disease, but of this contagious and infectious kind: how
then can they hence conclude, that the knowledge of all sins both great and
small belongs to the priest? And who knows not, that herein the priesthood
of the law, did decypher the priesthood of Christ, by whom our spiritual
leprosies are discerned and cured?

Nay they do not content themselves with an apish imitation of Jewish 2.
Machab. 12. 44. It seems to be put into the story by the author (whosoever
he was) of his own: for Josephus, who writ five books of those matters,
and out of whose works this story seems to be abridged, entreating of this
place, makes no mention at all of prayer for the dead. Lib. 3. cap. 19. And
again, in this place prayer is made for open Idolaters, which is contrary to
the practice of the popish Church, who deny prayer to be made for those which
die in deadly sin.

In like manner they burden the Jews with authentical unwritten traditions
besides scripture: Such they had none as we have showed before. Loc. 1.

Lastly, the papists do far exceed the Church of the Jews, in number of
ceremonies, but in lightness and vanity of such childish toies, the Jews
never came near them, or were once like unto them. We will ^7 47
give one instance of the ceremonies used in baptism: First they touch the
ears and the nostrels with spittle of the party baptized, that his ears may
be opened to hear the word, and his nostrels to discern between the smell
of good and evil. Secondly, the priest signeth his eyes, ears, mouth, breast,
forehead with the sign of the cross, that all his senses thereby may be
defended. Thirdly, hallowed salt is put into his mouth, that he may be
seasoned with wisdom, and keept from putrefying in sin. Fourthly, the
party is anointed with oil in his breast, that he may be safe from evil
suggestions; and between the shoulders, which signifies the receiving of
spiritual strength. Fifthly, he is anointed with the Chrisme in the top of
the head, and thereby is become a Christian: Sixthly, a white garment is put upon
him to be token his regeneration. Seventhly, a veil is put upon his head, in
token that he is now crowned with a royal diadem* Eighthly, A burning taper is
put into his hand, to fulfill that saying in the Gospel, Let your light shine
before men, Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Baptism. cap. 26. 27. I report me now to the
Jews, if ever they used such toys, or do to this day in any of their rites
and ceremonies. So that we may justly say with Augustine, Ipsam religionem
oneribus premunt, vt tolerabilior Epist. 119. cap. 19.
sit conditio Iudaeorum, qui legalib. sarcinis, non humanis praesumptionibus
subijciuntur: They cumber religion with their burdensome inventions: so that
the Jews case was more tolerable, (than theirs that live under Popery) who
were subject only to legal ceremonies, not to the inventions of men. And thus
we see the weakness of Popish religion, and feebleness of their cause, who
through very beggerie are constrained to patch up their tattered garments with
Jews rags. Thus much for the first part. Now to the next.

The second part of this Pillar, containing the insufficient answers and
solutions of our adversaries.
AS most of the arguments, which our adversaries use against the common cause
of the Gospel and the truth, do very feebly and weakly conclude any thing
against us: so their aunswers likewise which they shape unto such arguments, as
they are pressed withal, are very simple, and do bewraie the weakness of
their cause. Some particulars for examples fake we will see.

Being urged concerning prayers in an unknown tongue, with that Paul: If I
pray in a strange tongue, my spirit prays, but mine understanding is without
fruit, 1. Corinthians. 14. 14. That is, such prayers are unprofitable to the
Church which it understands not. They answer, that public prayer is made
unto God, not to the people: and it is enough, if God understand, though the
people understand not, Bellarmine, de verbo Dei, lib. 2. cap. 16. object. 2. A
very absurd answer: for if it were sufficient, that God understands
public prayers, they need not be uttered with the voice, but conceived only
in the heart, the thoughts whereof are as well understood of God, as the
words of the mouth. And the Apostle reasons clean contrary, showing that
the unlearned cannot say Amen to prayer not understood, v. 16. Ergo, the
understanding also of the people is necessary.

Whereas we allege that place, Apocal. 22. 18. If any man shall add unto
these things, God shall add, etc. To prove the Scriptures to be sufficient,
and to contain all necessary matter to salvation, and that nothing ought to
be added to them to supply their wants. Their answer is, that John does only
forbid any addition to be made to that book, Bellarmine de verb. *Dei, lib. 4.
cap. 10. resp* ad secund. object. whereas notwithstanding the same sentence is
pronounced else where, generally of the whole word of God, that nothing must be
added to it, Deuteronom. 4. 2. 12. 32. Proverb. 30. 6.

We again reason thus, The whole Scripture is profitable to teach, to improve,
etc. as S. Paul says, 2. Timoth. 3. 16. therefore the Scriptures contain all
things necessary to salvation, we need no other helps. Their answer is,
that S. Paul says not the Scriptures only are sufficient to these purposes,
but that they do, ad haec omnia prodesse and iuuare, they do profit and help
toward these purposes, Bellarmine ibid. As though it follows not in the same
place, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect to all good
works, v. 17. If the Scriptures then work an absolute perfection in men
touching the former duties, then are they not only profitable, but sufficient.

To prove, that although Christ, in the very first moment of his conception,
Luke: And Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, cap. 2. 52. They answer,
he did increase opinione hominum, only in the opinion of men: whereas it
follows in plain and direct words in the text, He increased in the
forenamed graces, both with God and men, Bellarm. de Christi anima, lib. 4.
cap. 5. resp. ad 3. loc.

To that place, Mark. 13. 32. of that day and hour knows no man, no not the
Angels which are in heaven, neither the son himself save the father: which
words plainly show, that Christ as man only, knows not the time of his
coming to judgment: They frame this answer, Non scit addicendum alijs: The
son of man is said not to know it, that is, to declare it to others, but to
keep it secret to himself, Bellarm. ibid. This answer is very insufficient:
for as the son knows it not, so neither do the Angels: if the son be
said, not to know it to tell others, and yet knows it in himself: so likewise
the Angels should know it to themselves, though not for others: but I think,
they will not say, that the hour of Christ's coming is revealed to the
Angels. Again, as the son is said not to know it, so the Father is said to
know it, if the Son only know it not, to reveal it to others, then the
Father knows it, to the intent he should declare it to others: but never yet
was it declared to any creature nor ever shall, till Christ suddenly appear in
the clouds.

Whereas S. Peter says, whom God raised up, loosing the sorrows of hell (as the
Rhemists translate) Christ, they say, loosed other men from those dolours of
Act. 2* 29.
hell: Rhemist in eum locum, Bellarm. de Christ. lib. 4. cap. 8. yet it
follows, because it was impossible for him to be holden of it: these sorrows
therefore were loosed, which Christ was in for awhile, but could not be long
kept there; namely, the sorrows of death, as we do read agreeable to the
Greek text, not the sorrows of hell: It is therefore but a childish shift
which they use, and contrary to the sense and words of the text.

Being urged, with that escape that Peter made, Galath. 2. for the which Paul,
they shoot out these words, Sine dubiopeccatum illud aut veniale, ac
leuissimum fuit, Either it was a venial and most light offense, or he offended
only materially: that is, erratum quoddam fuit, sed absque Petri culpa: an
error was committed, but without any fault at all of Peter's, Bellarm, de
Pontif. lib. 1. 28. A most gross and absurd answer. First, Saint Paul says,
he withstoode Peter to the face, that is, openly and plainly rebuked him, and
not without just cause, for he was to be blamed, Galath. 2. 11. Secondly,
Peter's fault was, that he constrained the Gentiles to doc like the Jews, v.
14. And by his example he caused the Jews and Barnabas to dissemble: Is
dissimulation then so small an offense? or was it so light a fault, to
constrain the Gentiles Iudaizare, to play the Jews? or was Paul so
indiscreet, so sharply to reprove so worthy an Apostle for so small a fault?
Thirdly, And what doctrine is this, that a man may sin, and not be guilty of
sin? may do a fault, and not be faulty? as though sins committed
ignorantly and un wittingly, do not bring a guilt with them; albeit not so
great and heinous, as sins willingly done: For to what end else were
sacrifices appointed in the law for sins of ignorance? Leuitic. 4.

Where we allege the example of Saint Paul, that appealed unto Caesar saying
thus, I stand at Caesar's judgment seat, where I ought to be judged, Act. 25.
10. to prove that as Paul, so Peter and his successors were subject to the
terrene and secular power of the Emperors. Their answer is, that there is
not the like reason of Heathen and Christian gouours: for unto them, even the
chief Bishop was subject in civil causes: But when Princes became Christians,
they then were to submit themselves to the Pope, as sheep to the shepherd,
Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 29. A worthy answer: as though the
Gospel did abridge the lawful authority of Princes: for if it were the right
of heathen Emperors to be supreme Judges of all persons: (otherwise the
Apostle would not voluntarily have appealed to an unlawful and usurped power:)
Much more may Christian Princes challenge the same right. They cannot answer,
that Caesar had this power by usurpation: for the Apostle was not compelled
thereunto, but made free choice of Caesar to be his Judge.

To prove that it is not lawful nor convenient for one and the same man It is
not meet we should leave the word of God and serve tables, Act. 6. 2. No man
that goes a warfare, entangleth himself with secular business, 2. Timoth. 2.
They answer us, that it is not meet an Ecclesiastical person should attend
upon base offices, as to be a Cator or prouider of victuals, to be occupied in
buying and selling, and such like, Bellarm* de pontif. lib. 5. cap. 10. But
they have said just nothing: for who sees not that these secular affairs are
forbidden, not so much because of their baseness or vileness, as because they are
lettes and impediments unto the pastoral function? Now it is most plain and
evident, that the charge and care of civil government, are as great, nay a
greater distraction of the mind, than the executing of smaller and baser
offices, and require greater study and industry, and therefore do as well,
nay much rather hinder and let the progress of spiritual matters. And yet
further to show what a frivolous and feeble answer they have made, our
Savior Christ says, to put all out of doubt, Who made me a judge, or deuider
over you? Luke 12. 14. They will not say (I trow) that these are base and vile
offices, to be a Judge of controversies, and a deuider of lands and
hereditaments, and to give unto every man his own: yet even these principal
prerogatives of civil government our Savior does refuse, as unfit to be
matched with the preaching of the Gospel.

Whereas we infer upon Peter's example, Act. 10. 26. who forbad Cornelius to
worship him, that Saints and holy men are not therefore to be adored with any
religious worship: It is answered, that Cornelius did well, and as he ought,
in worshipping Peter: but Peter of modesty refused to take it at his hands,
Bellarmine, de sanct. lib. 1. cap. 14. Yea, but Peter rendereth a reason: For I
am also a man, v. 26. insinuating, that such religious worship belonged unto
God, not unto man. If it be then a point of modesty only for the creature to
refuse that homage which is due to the creator, then was this modesty in Peter.

That there was and is, one and the self same substance both of the sacraments
Paul's words, They all did eat of the same spiritual meat, and did all
drink the same spiritual drink, 1. Corinthians. 10. 4. Answer is made, that they
did eat and drink the same spiritual meat and drink amongst themselves,
not the same with us, Bellarmine de Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 17. which is but a
vain shift: for the Apostle adds, They drank of the spiritual rock that
followed them, and the rock was Christ, v. 4. Now Christ is the same
spiritual rock both unto us, and unto them: not unto them only among
themselves, or to us only, but both unto them and unto us.

That the baptism of John, and the baptism of Christ, was one and the John's
baptism was the baptism of repentance for remission of sins: Luke 3. 3. So
also was the baptism of Christ: repent and be baptized every one of you, in
the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins: Act. 2. 38, Ergo, there
was the same fruit and effect of each baptism. They do answer us thus, No
says the Jesuit, there is not the like reason of both, for repentance went
before Christ's baptism as a necessary preparation thereunto, but it followed
John's Baptism, as an effect thereof: Bellarm. de baptis. lib. 1. cap. 23. This
answer is too vain and frivolous, for in repentance are two things, the
purpose of heart, Act. 11. 23. and the amendment of life, which consists in
being buried and dead unto sin, and rising up to the newness of life, Romans
6. 4. This purpose and vow of heart with confession of sins, went as well
before John's baptism as Christ's: for the people first came and confessed
their sins, and then were baptized of John: Math. 3. 6. Luke 3. 12. And as for
amendment of life, which is the accomplishment and fruits of repentance, it
neither went before John's baptism, nor Christ's: not John's by their own
confession, not Christ's: for in the same instant, that the Apostle said, Repent
and be baptized: Act. 2. They were baptized, so that the time served them not
to show the fruits of repentance, and by baptism we are buried unto sin,
and raised up to newness of life, Romans 6. 4. But the fruits and efficacy of
baptism goes not before, but follows after, thus the vanity of their
answer is vanished and blown away.

Whereas we object that saying of Christ, Except ye eat my flesh, and
drink my blood, ye have no life in you, John 6. 53. That it can not be
understood of the Eucharist, as our adversaries do expound all such places in
that chapter, for then no man could be saved without this sacrament, which were
an absurd and hard saying: And so both infantes, which are not fit to receive
it, and all such, as are prevented by some remediless necessity, should be
cut off from the hope of salvation. They answer thus: first, that the place is
to be understood only of those that are Adulti, of years of discretion, not
of infantes. And again, all men are bound evther to communicate, reipsa, aut
desiderio, either in very dead, or else in vow and desire, Bellarm* de
sacram. Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 7. resp. ad argum. 3. This answer is like unto
the rest, very insufficient, and may be turned upon themselves, for whereas
they urge the necessity of baptism out of these words of our Savior, Except
a man be borne of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven, John 3. 5. May it not as well be answered that children also are
excluded here, as in the other place? for the words are in both places
generally spoken without exception. Again, Christ says, except ye eat: if
this may be done in vow and defire, that is spiritually, which we affirm and
grant, then is it not meant of the sacramental eating only, as the Papists
bear us in hand, and so they are contrary to themselves: Lastly, if it be
necessary to receive the Eucharist either actually and indeed, or in vow and
desire (which is most true) There is the like necessity thereof, as of
baptism: For the Rhemistes confess as much, that they before God are accepted
as baptized that depart this life with vow and desire to have this sacrament,
but by some remediles necessity could not obtain it, Annot. John. 3. Sect. 2.
Thus baptism by their own confession is proved to be no more necessary than
the other Sacrament: and so are they taken with their own wiles.

Against the real presence in the Eucharist, amongst other arguments, Paul in
diverse places calls the Sacrament bread after consecration: as 1. Corinthians.
10. 16. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? And chap. 11. 26. As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this
cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. The Apostle calls it bread, Ergo
it is bread, not the body, flesh or blood of Christ. To this argument, they
make us this answer: The Apostle calls it bread, because it was bread
before, or because it appears to be bread, not that it is bread, Bellarm. de
Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 14. res. ad loc. 13. Yea, but the Apostle makes
mention together both of the bread and cup: If it be called bread, because of
the appearance only; then by the like reason so is the cup: and as there is no
bread in deed, so there shall be no cup. Again, says he, The bread which we
break; but the shape or form of bread cannot be broken, but the substance.
Neither will they say, that Christ's body is divided or broken: therefore it
is true bread which the Apostle so calls. Lastly, if they like this speech of
the Apostle, that he should call it bread after consecration, how comes it
to pass, that they are afraid to call it bread in the Canon of the Mass, but
the body of Christ only? It should seem therefore by their practice, that they
mislike the apostles phrase and manner of speech.

That the Eucharist ought to be ministered in both kinds, we confirm John. 6.
53. Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you: which our adversaries expound of the Eucharist. Their answer
is this: that here the conjunction or particle, and, and, must be taken after
the phrase of Scripture, for the Distinctiue, vel, either: as if the sense were
this: except you either eat or drink, Bellarm. de Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 25.
By this reason, they make it a thing indifferent, either to eat or to drink,
to do any one of them: and so, as the people do only eat in the Sacrament
amongst them, and not drink; the contrary custom also may be brought in, for
the people to drink only, and not to eat, which I think they will be loath
to grant.

Again, where they press us for the necessity of baptism with that place,
John. 3. 5. Except a man be borne of water and the Spirit: we can answer
them with their own words: And in this place, and, is taken for either, vel,
as if it were said, Every man must be borne either of water or of the spirit.
Although we have better answer, and are not driven to use any such shift: yet
thus they do make rods for themselves to be whipped withal.

Whereas we thus reason, that the Eucharist ought to be ministered in Bellarm.
de Sacramen. Eucharist. lib. 4 cap. 27. clean contrary to Saint Paul, who
says: As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come, 1. Corin. 11. 26. To remember and show forth the
death of Christ, he requires receiving in both kinds.

That the marriage of Ministers, is authorized by the word of God, we Paul. 1.
Timoth. 3. 11. who having first described the office of Bishops and Pastors of
the Church, and what manner of men they ought to be, comes afterward to set
forth the qualities and conditions that should be in their wives: That they
should be honest, sober, and faithful. The Jesuit here celleth us, that the
Apostle means such, as had been their wives before they were ordained, lib.
1. de Clericis. cap. 20. Ans. I will ask them then one question: Their former
wives married before, did they renounce them afterward, or retain the^? If they
renounced them, what need had the Apostle to be so careful in setting down
rules and precepts for their wives? for it was no more to them, how they
demeaned themselves than other women. If they retained them in the name of
their wives, they either lived together, or apart: not apart, for the Apostle
prescribes an order for the Ministers house and children, v. 4. But there is
no reason that the mother should want the comfort of her children, though she
enjoyed not the company of her husband: It is therefore most like the mother
lived with her children, and the children with their father: and where else then
should their mother live, but with their father? If then they lived in one
house together, how then is she not now his wife as freely, and for all honest
purposes and ends of marriage, as before? Who sees not now, how weakly these
things hang together?

And that it is as lawful for the Ministers of Gods word to marry after Have
we not power to lead about a sister awife? 1. Cor. 9. 5. Their answer is, that
it must be read thus, a sister a woman: for certain devout women followed the
Apostles, which ministered unto them of their substance, Rhemist. Annot. in hunc
locum. Ans. But this were a superfluous speech, to say, a sister a woman,
whereas it had been enough to say, sister, which word also expresses the sex.
And seeing the Apostles had wives of their own, it is an absurd thing to
imagine, that they would choose rather to go in the company of strange women,
their own wives being more necessary to attend on them, and more fit for
avoiding of offense.

That the hearing and preaching of the word of God is a necessary note John.
10. My sheep hear my voice. Bellarmine answers, it is a note whereby a man
may guess of his election, to hear the word of God, but not a visible note to
know the Church by, Bellarm. de notis eccle. lib. 4. cap. 2. A gross answer,
as though whereby a man is known to be a true member of the Church, the Church
it self also is not known to be a true Church. If one man be known to be of
the Church, because he obeys the voice of Christ, why shall not a
congregation of many men be known to be the Church of God likewise by
embracing the word of God?

Again, our Savior Christ says, Wheresoever two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst, Math. 18. Hence we conclude
that to assemble together in the name Christ, that is, to hear his word, and
receive the sacraments, is a most manifest note of the true Church. Bellarmine
answers: this place shows not where the Church is, but where Christis,
Bellarm. ibid. A most ridiculous and unskillful answer: as though where Christ
is known to be present, there is not necessarily the church: for where else is
he to be found, but in his Church?

Christ said to Peter, dic Ecclesiae, Tell it to the Church, an obstinate sinner
Ergo, Peter and his successors are not the supreme judges: for here he is
referred to the Church. Bellar. So the Pope does, dicere Ecclesiae, tell it to
the Church, id est, sibi ipsi, that is, he tells it to himself, lib. de
Council. 2. ca. 19. Ans. Is not here good stuff? the Pope is now become the
whole Church: contrary to the sense of this place: for in censuring of
offenders we must proceed by degrees: first one must rebuke him that sins,
the 2 or 3. last of all it must be declared to the Church: so then, as two or
three are more than one, so the Church is more than 2 or 3. But the Pope is not
2 nor 3, much less can he stand for the whole Church.

That the Apostles were al equal in authority, we show it out of Saint Paul,
Ephesians. 2. 20. where the Church is said to be built upon the foundation of the
Apostles indifferently. Bellarmine answers: that they had all Bellarm. de
Pontif. l^. 1. cap. 11
chief authority committed unto them as Apostles, but Peter as ordinary
Pastor. Ans. But the Apostleship was the highest office in the Church. A pastor
or Bishop was inferior to an Apostle: first Apostles, faith S. Paul, 1. Corinthians. 12. 28. If then they were equal as Apostles, there could be no
superiority amongst them: but such are their fond and childish aunswers.

Whereas we reason thus against relics: that therefore the Lord buried Moses,
lest the Israelites should have worshipped his body, and so committed
Idolatry. Bellarm. tells us, that men are not so prone to Idolatry now as
the Israelites were, and therefore may more safely be admitted to worship
relics, de Reliqu. Sanctorum, lib. 2. cap. 4. Whereas daily experience of
Popish idolatry shows the contrary: for there was never, no not in the most
corrupt times of that Church, such gross idolatry and superstition, and with
such boldness committed, and so usually, as is now among Papists.

And these with such like are their aunswers to such places of scripture, as we
bring against them. The like aunswers also they give us in other matters.

Whereas we tell them, that this name Latinus in Greek letters thus, Lateinus
with e. i. makes that number, not with single i. lib. 3. de Pontif. cap. 10.
Ans. Herein first he shows his ignorance, as though the Greek dipthong, ei,
be not usually expressed by a single i. in Latin. And what if e. be left out?
we want but 5 of the number. But what a poor shift is this, we have found
out the name of Antichrist in Latinus, saving one small letter.

Where we tell them, that Rome is the city built upon seven hills: in Campo
Martio. Sander. A silly shift. But it is certain at that time, when Saint
John wrote the Apocalypse, that it stood upon seven hills, and to this day,
there are ancient monuments, and goodly buildings, Churches, chapels,
Abbeyes, or such like upon every one of those hills.

It were too long particularly to set down all their absurd, and aunswerlesse
Gregory makes one Scholasticus author of the Canon of the Mass, they
answer, S. Petrus Scholasticus dicipotest, that S. Peter may well be termed a
schooleman, Bellar. de Miss. li. ^. ca. 19. which is in deed to set the
spirit of God to school; to say, that the Apostles were brought up in
schools.

Thus in another place he is constrained to grant, that marriage between
Bellarm. de Matrim. li. 1. 5. as though they had lived in adultery before: for
if the first contract were firm, what need a second? and if the first
contract be dissolved by baptism, then are the parties free to marry where
they will. See what an absurd answer this is.

Whereas we tell them that Syl^ester the second, was a great coni^rer and
Bellarm. de Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 13.

So another tells us, whereas we worthily* vpbraid them with that Ioane,
that sat 2 years in the Papacy: that the Pope might be an Hermaphrodite, or
Herkinalson, that is both a man and a woman: or being first a man might
afterward be turned into a woman: Corpus, dialog. 1. p. 47. And all this might
be more likely in their opinion, than that a woman should step into the Popes
chair. What now will these men be ashamed to speak or write, that dare utter
such follies?

It were too long to declare all their shifts of descant, as we say: as
Sozomene, upon what occasion Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople abolished the
custom of auricular confession: Bellarmine steppeth in boldly and says, Non
ignoramus Sozomenum in historia multa esse mentitu^: We are not ignorant, that
Sozomene has told many lies in his history, de poenitent. lib. 3. cap. 14.

Likewise in another place the Jesuit refuses Platina, non publica
authoritate vitas illas Pontificum scripsit, He was not by public authority
allowed, to write the lives of the Popes, de poenitent. lib. 3. cap. 13.

Benno a Cardinal refused, that wrote the story of Gregory the 7. And Luther.
Bellarm. de sum. Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 13.

But thus they deal not only with these latter writers, but even with
Tertullian be alleged against them not to their liking, they cry out, that
he was an heretic, and wrote this or that in defense of heresy, Harding,
detect. 238. In deed Tertullian had his errors, but yet all that he wrote
contrary to them, is not heresy.

Where we cite that saying of Cyprian: If the truth faint or fail in any
point, we ought to return to the original of our Lord, and to the
traditions of the Gospel. We receive this answer: S. Cyprian used that
saying in an evil case: and therefore he defending a falsehood, was driven to
the very same shifts, whereunto all heretics are driven, Defens. Apolog.
page 172. Harding. See the boldness of this man: The counsel and commandment
of Christ, Search the Scriptures, is no better with him, than an heretical
shift.

When we affirm by Saint Hieromes testimony, that Pope Liberius Arrians, we
are sent away with this scornful answer: that Hierome was deceived by a
rumor dwelling in the East. Harding. page 661.

But that famous learned father Augustine, is most discourteously used Rhemistes
refuse Augustines exposition of these words in the Gospel: upon this rock,
etc. Math. 16. which he expounds not of Peter's person, but of Peter's faith,
Annot. Math. 16. Sect. ^.

They likewise refuse his reading, Hebr. 11. Jacob worshipped leaning upon his
staff: but they will needs have it, Jacob worshipped the top of his staff: as
though Jacob made an idol of his staff, Annot. Heb. 11. v. 21.

Bellarmine also takes the same liberty to reject Augustines judgment: as
where Augustine interprets that place of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 3. He shall be saved
as through fire, of the afflictions or tribulations of this life. But the
Jesuit wresteth the words to signify Purgatory, de Purgator. lib. 1. ca. 4.

And in another place he does not only refuse, but confute at large Augustines
interpretation of that place of Peter, epist. 1. cap. 3. of the spirits now in
prison, which were sometime disobedient, de Christo, lib. 4. cap. 13.

Yea, he does not only reject this learned father, and by argument confute
him, but he proceeds yet further to father a lie upon him, thus writing:
Augustinus absurdissimum censuit, quod haeresis Donatistarum post annum Domini
300 ex Carthagine esset propaganda in omnem terram: Augustine thought most
absurdly, that the Donatistes heresy, three hundred years expired after
Christ, should out of Carthage spring forth, and be propagated or spread
abroad into all the earth. And the Jesuit quoteth the place in Augustine, lib.
de vnitat. Eccles. cap. 14. 15. Bellarm. de notis Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 7. But
in Augustine, read the place who will, there is no such matter to be found.
The Donatistes assertion was this, that the Church was perished from the whole
world, and only remained in Africa. Augustine thus confuteth them: How can
the faith be perished from the world, when the faith of the Gentiles is not
yet fulfilled? how can it be lost, which they have not yet received? Nisi forte
dicatis earum reparationem ex Africa per partem Donati expectandam, Unless you
will say, that the faith of the Nations being decayed, is like to be by the
Donatistes sect repaired: and then it follows: Puto, quod ipsi etiam rideant
cum hoc audiunt, and tamen nisi hoc dicunt, quod erubescant si dicant, non
habent omnino, quod dicant: I think that they themselves will laugh, when they
hear this, and yet unless they affirm this, which they may be ashamed to
affirm, they have nothing at all to say. See then Augustine is so far from
saying or thinking, as the Jesuit charge him, that he takes it rather to be
folly to be laughed at, or an absurdity to be blushed at. Who will not rather
judge the Jesuit most absurd, in blemishing so falsely Augustines name, with
such an absurdity? By this we may conjecture, that the Jesuit both in this
place, and in many other, trusted to other men's readings, rather than to his
own.

Does not also Albertus Pigghius most irreverently say of Augustine, that he
erred and lied, and used false Logique, in affirming matrimony after a vow
made to be perfect, and not to be undone again? Distinct. 27. Quidam.

And as they deal with the ancient writers, so they spare not their Harding
says, We take not upon us all that the Canonists or Schoolmen say or write:
Defens. apol. page 385. The like they say of others: We bind not our selves
to maintain whatsoever Albertus Pigghins has written, Cardinal Caietanus
has his errors: Erasmus and Agrippa be men of small credit, Alphonsus de
castro, Beatus Rhenanus, Platina, appendix Concilij Basiliens. are stuff
little worth. Harding detection. 307. b. a.

Bellarmine also is so bold as to check Aeneas Sylvius, who afterward was
Pope of Rome called Pius 2. for whereas we allege that saying of his, Ante
Nicenum Concilium ad Romanam Ecclesiam paruus habebatur respectus, Before the
first Nicene Council there was small regard had to the Church of Rome. The
Jesuit aunsweareth: Quae sententia Aenea Syluij partim est vera, partem non
est vera, which sentence of Aeneas Syluius is partly true, partly false,
Bellar. de Romans pontif. lib. 2. cap. 17. Thus in their mood, they neither spare
old nor new writer, neither Cardinal nor Pope, friend or foe: And no marvel,
for as Augustine well says, Si diuina l^x persuadere non possit, humana
authoritas ad veritatem reuocare nequit, If the word of God cannot persuade
them, it is not strange, that they are not moved with humane authority,
Cont. Crescon. lib. 1. cap. 3. and indeed, they make as bold with the holy.
Scriptures, as with the writings of men, wresting and mangling them, altering
and changing the text at their pleasures.

As Bellarmine citing a text out of S. Luke. 22. 19. adds these words of
C^nantibus eis, While they supped, he took bread: whereas the text is, And
when he had taken bread: because he would prove (very fondly) that the bread
was distributed in supper while, and the cup after supper, not both together,
Bellarm. desacram. Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 24.

In an other place he quoteth Apocal. 14. v. 1. For the sign of the cross:
and whereas the original only has, Having his fathers name written in their
foreheads, they put in this clause, Having his name, and his fathers name,
after the vulgar latin. So in the canon of the mass, they add these words
unto the Gospel: Mandueate ex hoc omnes, Eat ye all of this: whereas Christ
said only, after the cup, Bibite ex hoc omnes, drink ye all of this.
Bellarmine faith it is supplied by ^adition, de sacram. Eucharist. lib. 4. ca.
25.

So 1. Ioh. 4. 3. where the authentical Greek has, Every spirit which
confesses not Jesus, they read after their corrupt latin text, Every spirit
which dissolueth Jesus: Without any senso, whereas the text approves the
former reading, for the 2. verse speaks of spirits confessing Jesus, so that
consequently this verse must treat ofspirits not confessing Jesus. Unto this
place may be added all the corruptions of the vulgar latin translation, which
are maintained by the Church of Rome, disagreeing from the true original in
Greek.

Lastly, they do not only alter and chaung scripture, but make scripture
Dommus reru^ temporalium, Lord ofall worldly goods, por illud dictum Patri,
dabo tibi omnia regna mundi, by those words of Peter, I will give thee all the
kingdoms of the world. These words notwithstanding Peter never spoke, but they
were spoken by the devil: a fit text sure to ground the popes Lordlike
dominion upon, Archidiacon. Florentin. ex citation. Iuel. page 615. defens.
apolog.

More who list to see of our adversaries manner of corrupting scripture: I
refer them to that which has been before said of this matter: 1. Pillar
part. 3. a loc. 46. ad 5^. I say unto them now, as Augustine to certain
heretics in his time: Mortuus fine sensuiacet, and valent verba ipsius: sedet
Christus in coelo and contradicitur testamento eius: A man lies deed without
sense and his will remains in force: Christ sits in heaven, and dies not,
yet his testament is gainsaid: in Psalm. 21. Thus we see the weak answers,
and beggarly shifts, which our adversaries through the weakness of their
cause, are driven unto. Who may fitly be compared, to use Augustines
comparison, unto subtle and crafty foxes: Vulpes solent habere tales foueas, vt
ex vnaparte intrent, ex alia exeant: Foxes are wont to have such holes, that
they may go in one way, and go out another: Even so do our adversaries seek
starting holes, playing fast and loose with us, sometime denying the fathers,
sometime affirming with them, sometime appealing to scripture, otherwhile
running from scripture to tradition: and so going in and out at their pleasure.
Sed ad vtrung foramen, as Augustine says, captor vulpium retia posuit: But the
fox-taker (seeing their craft) has laid his nets in both holes, that coming
in and going out they are sure to be taken, in Psalm. 80. So God be thanked our
Savior Christ this wise taker of foxes, has so armed the defenders of his
truth, that whether these wilely foxes go in or go out, pretend scriptures,
fathers, or go against them, we doubt not buttheir feet shall be caught with
the snare of truth.

Sophistical distinctions and cunning sleightes devised for the maintenance of
popery. Part. 3.
VEe are now come (by the grace of God) to shake one of the principal pillars
of papistrie: for herein lies the very strength of their cause, and the very
pith of popish schoolediuinitie, in devising and inuenting subtle and
sophistical distinctions: thinking thereby to obscure the light of the truth,
and to shift off most evident places of scripture. The chief of their
distinctions, though not all, yet some, and the better part of them, we will
set down in their order, and weigh them in the balance of Gods word, that their
lightness may appear.

Distinct. 1. I will begin with that distinction concerning the authority
secundumse, of it self the scripture and in it self is of sufficient
authority, but Quoad nos, in respect of us, it depends of the approbation of
the Church: and that we can not know, neither are boundto believe the
scriptures, but because of the testimony and allowance of the Church, Bellarm.
de council. lib. 2. cap. 12. Rhem. annot. Galath. 2. sect. 6. Ans. This is but a
subtle slight to steal away the credit of the word of God: for the
scriptures were wholly written for us and our use, and all the authority they
have is for the benefit of men, and in respect of us: If then they have no
authority with us, nor we bound to believe them, unless the Church does
approve them, then they receive their authority from the Church: for scripture
was written for men, not for God himself, or Angels: So this distinction is
contrary to the word of God: I receive (says Christ) no witness of me^, Ioh. 5.
34. But the scripture is the voice of Christ, therefore it needs not the
approbation of men: The spirit bears witness that the spirit is the truth,
1, Ioh. 5. 6. That is, the scriptures are discerned and known by the same
spirit, the which they were written withal. The Church in deed is to testify of
the truth, but the truth is to be believed for the truths sake, although it
have no testimony of men: for my sheep (says our Savior) hear my voice,
Ioh. 10.

2. Distinct. They distinguish of the word of God: there is Verbu^ Dei
scriptu^, Verbu^ Dei non scriptu^, the word of God not written, that is, their
traditions, Bellarm. de scriptur. lib. 4. cap. 2. Ans. This is a vain
distinction: for the whole word of God revealed, is contained in scripture, as
outof scripture we prove it thus: The word written, that is, the holy
scriptures, are able to make a man perfect to every good work, 2. Timoth. 3.
17. and so unto salvation: But whatsoever is over and beside that which is
perfect, is superfluous: But no part of Gods word is superfluous, therefore no
part of the word beside scripture.

3 Distinct. The Church is built (say they) upon Peter and Peter's faith: Peter's
person: But faith generally and absolutely respected is not the foundation of
the Church, but as it was in Peter, Bellarm. de Roman. pontif. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Rhemist. annot. Math. 16. sect. 1. Ans. That Peter's faith, which was in Peter,
and by Peter confessed, as a portion and Indiuiduu^ of the general saving faith
of the Church, is the foundation of the same Church, we deny not. But Peter's
personal faith cannot be this foundation: forthen when Peter died, his faith
being a particular accide^t to his person, going away with him, the Church
should have wanted a foundation. Again, in Peter these two things are
respected, his person and faith: whatsoever was in Peter beside faith, was
flesh and blood: but that could not be the foundation, Ergo Peter's faith only
was the foundation, his person had therein no part at all.

4. Distinct. There is a principal and sovereign head of the Church, and that
is only Christ: there is a ministerial head beside of that part of the
Church which is upon the earth, and so is the pope head of the Church, Rhemist.
annot. Ephesians. 2. sect. 5. This distinction by their own confession may be
overthrown, for if the pope in any sense may be the head of the whole Church,
the Church also in the same sense may be called his body: but the Church (say
the Rhemistes) is not called the body mystical either of Peter, or of pope, or
any prelate whatsoever: Ergo, he is not the head. Again, one family has but
one head, the Church in heaven and in earth makes but one family, Ephesians. 3.
15. The pope in no sense can be said to be head of the triumphant Church. Ergo,
neither of that part that is in earth.

Distinct. 5. The pope as a private person, or as a man, and in matters of
Bellarm. lib. 4. de pontif. cap. 13. Harding defens. apolog. 660. Ans. Peter,
when he was reproved of Paul, Galath. 2. erred not only in example and
conversation, as Bellarmine answers: but it was an error concerning the
faith: S. Paul says, they went not the right way to the truth of the Gospel:
they erred then from the truth of the Gospel, Ergo in faith: If Peter might
fall into an error of faith, much more the pope. So is their distinction proved
but vain.

Distinct. 6. Non est idem, aliquid esse de fide, and de iure dinino: It is not
al one Paul had a cloak is not a point of faith, yet it is, De iure diuino:
It belongs to the word of God: So to believe that the pope is Peter's
successor, belongs to the faith, though it be not by the word, Bellar. de
Romans pontif. lib. 2. cap. 12. Ans. This distinction is easily overthrown:
whatsoever is by the word of God, is De iure dinino: Of the divine right, or of
Gods law: but whatsoever is of faith, is grounded upon the word, for faith it
self comes by hearing the word preached, Romans 10. 17. Ergo whatsoever is of
faith, is also, Deiure diuino. Concerning the example alleged, that Paul
should have a cloak, it was not necessary neither by the word, nor by faith
simply: but by a consequent, because it is expressed in the word, and it is a
point of faith to believe all things therein contained to be true, to believe
this also, is of or belonging to says.

Distinct. 7. There is a proper succeeding of the Apostles, and an improper*
Peter's successor, whom he succeeds, as an ordinary pastor of the Church: But
other Bishops do succeed the Apostles improperly, in respect of their pastoral,
and episcopal calling, Bellar. de Romans pontif. lib. 4. cap. 24. Ans. If to
succeed in place be a proper kind of succession, as the Jesuit seems to
grant, as one king succeeds another, and one bishop another, then had other
Apostles their proper successors, as S. James at Ieru sale^, S. Andrew at
Constantinople, S. John at Ephesus, S. Mark at Alexandria, as well as Peter had
at Rome: If a proper succession require a succession of gifts and calling,
then neither the Bishop of Rome nor any other do properly succeed the
Apostles, having not the calling of Apostles, but of Bishops and pastors of the
Church. And the Jesuit him self grants, that the pope succeeds Peter not
as an Apostle, but as a pastor. But Apostles properly succeed Apostles, a
pastor improperly is said to succeed an Apostle.

Distinct. 8. The pope directly has not any temporal jurisdiction over
Bellarm. de pontif. lib. 5. cap. 6. Ans. The places, which the Jesuit him
self brings against the direct power of the pope, do also overthrow his
indirect power: As how Christ refused to be a king, John. 6. and to be a judge,
Luke 12. 13. he did execute neither of these offices either directly or
indirectly, Ergo no more should the pope. And S. Paul makes every soul
directly subject to the higher powers, that bear the sword, Rom, 13. 1. 4.
How then can any soul directly subject unto them, indirectly command and
control them? In deed an indirect power it is which the pope chalengeth,
that is, usurped and unlawful, and they do well so to call it.

Distinct. 9. In general councels there are two kinds of voices or suffragies:
suffragium decisiuum, a deciding or determining voice, which only belongs to
Bishops, and suffragium consultatiuum, a consulting or discussing voice, and so
other pastors and ministers may assemble to consult and give their advise,
Bellarm. lib. 1. de Council. cap. 15. Ans. In the council held by the Apostles
and Elders Act. 15. there was no such difference of voices: the Apostles and
Elders did indifferently both consult, and decide the matter in doubt, verse. 6.
the Apostles and Elders came together to look to this matter, as well to
provide some remedy, and to determine and conclude, as to examine and advise
upon the matter: so verse. 28. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and unto us: The
decree goes out in the name of the Apostles and Elders. As therefore the
Elders did decide and conclude with the Apostles, so ought pastors and
ministers together with Bishops.

Distinct. 10. As by this distinction next before they would exclude the Ego
definiens subscripsi: By giving my definitive voice I have subscribed: The lay
Magistrate thus: Ego consentiens subscripsi* I by giving my consent have
subscribed, Harding page 748. defens. apolog. B. Jewel in the same place
shows the vanity and untruth of this distinction, and proves that these two
forms were indifferently used: sometime the Bishop said, I have consented and
subscribed: sometime the magistrate is also said in council to determine, as
it is there alleged of Constantinus out of Sozomene.

Distinct. 11. One may be said to be the son or child of God truly,
veritate essentiae seu formae: if he have the true form and essence of a
member of Christ and child of God, as if he have love, and live inwardly by
the spirit of Christ: Secondly, Veritate finis sieve permanentiae: If he
continue, and attain unto the end. The first way, men not predestinate may be
said truly to be the members of Christ, Bellarm. de Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Ans. 1. Charity is not the essence or form of the child of God, but faith
and belief, John. 1. 12. 2. It is absurd, that he which has the form and
essence of a thing should not obtain the thing it self. 3. Though such in
respect of their present state may after a sort be called the sons of God,
yet they are not, Vere filij Dei: Truly and properly his sons. 4. For in
this sense none are truly the sons of God, but they which shall be heirs of
salvation: If we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and
heirs annexed with Christ, Romans 8. 17.

Distinct. 12. Bellarmine disputing of the true notes of the Church (in
Efficere euidentiam veritatis simpliciter: Yet they do, Efficere euidentiam
credibilitatis: Though they work not the evidence of truth, that is, do not
certainly demonstrate the Church, yet they work the evidence of belief or
likelihood: they show great probability of the Church, Bellarm. lib. 4. de
notis eccles. cap. 3. Ans. How can there be Euidentia, the evidence of any
thing, which is but gessed at, not certainly known? for that is said to be
evident, which is put out of doubt. 2. How can these be said to be verae notae,
true notes of the Church, if by these notes a man cannot certainly find out the
Church? 3. Therefore the true notes do bring Euidentia^ veritatis: An evidence
of truth, showing and demonstrating the Church without doubt: My sheep (says
Christ) hear my voice John. 10. Where the voice of Christ, that is, the word
of God, is heard and obeyed, there certainly are the sheep and sheepfold of
Christ: and where two or three are assembled in my name, there am I in the
midst, Math. 18. to assemble in the name of Christ to hear his word and duly
receive the sacraments, is an infallible note of Christ's presence, and so
also of his Church: These therefore are the true notes, the word and
sacraments, rightly taught and administered.

Distinct. 13. They make a difference between Evangelical precepts, of
perfection are these and such like; to give al to the poor, to vow chastity
and such like, Bellar. de Monach. cap. 7. Rhem. ann. Mat. 9. sect. 9. Ans. We
acknowledge no such difference between precepts and counsels, for whatsoever
is to the glory of God, we are bound to do, Math. 5. 48. Ye shall be perfect,
therefore al counsels tending to perfection are commandments. And that a man
can do no more, when he has done al, then is his duty to do, our Savior
Christ shows in plain words, Luke 17. 10. It is therefore a vain distinction.

Distinct. 14. A vow is twofold: Simplex votum, A simple or single vow, Votum
duplex vel solenne: A double or solemn vow made in the presence of the Bishop
or Abbate: Marriage made after a single or simple vow stands in force, but it
cannot make void a solemn vow made before, Harding page 547. defens. apolog.
Ans. A single vow binds as streitly before God as a solemn vow, neither is
it any thing to the Lord, whether we vow in the hearing of others, or before
witness: therefore the scripture knowing no such distinction, generally
bids men, that have vowed unto God, to pay their vows, Number. 30. 3. Eccles.
5. 3. And as for the other point, neither a single nor a solemn vow is a
sufficient cause to deny marriage to him that cannot contain, as the Apostle
says: to avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, 1. Cor. 7. 2.

Distinct. 15. Whereas the Apostle says, perfect love expels fear, Belmine
Timor poenae, and Timor culpae propter poenam: Fear of punishment, and fear
of sin, for the punishment sake: Love expels not the first kind of fear,
but the second, Bellar. de purgator. lib. 2. cap. 3. Ans. I pray you what
difference is there between fear of punishment, and fear of sin because of
the punishment? or how can these two be separated? for he that is afraid to be
damned, will be afraid to sin, which causes damnation: Love therefore
expels these servile kinds of fear, which have painfulnes, as the Apostle
says: but it retains the reverence or fear of children, which brings
comfort rather, and boldness in the day of judgment, Ibid. verse. 17.

Distinct. 16. A mediator may be understood two ways. First, he is mediator
that pays the debt unto the creditor for the debtor: so Christ only is our
mediator, who has paid the ransom for us: Secondly, he that entreats the
creditor to forgive the debtor, so the Saints may be and are mediators in
praying for us: Christ is the mediator of Redemption, they of intercession,
Bellarm. lib. 1. de Sanct. cap. 20. It is a very blasphemous distinction, and
contrary to scripture: for our mediator between God and man, must be both God
and man, 1. Timoth. 2. 5. Therefore no creature can be our mediator. Again, to
make intercession to God for us, belongs to the priesthood of Christ, who,
as the high priest was wont to go into the most holy place to pray for the
people, is now entered into the heavens to appear in the sight of God for us,
Hebr. 9. 24. But Christ only is our priest in heaven, neither Angel nor Saint.
Ergo he only is our mediator and intercessor.

Distinct. 17. The question arising between us, whether Christ be our Ratione
suppositi, no^ ratione formalis principij, in respect of the suppositum or
hypostasis of the Mediator, not in respect of the formal beginning: to speak
this more plainly: The mediator must of necessity be both God and man, but
the form of his mediation, or that whereby he works his mediation, is his
humane nature, Bellarm. de Christo lib. 5. cap. 3. Answ. The scripture
attributes the mediation of Christo to both his natures: God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself: here God is a reconciler, and Christ a
reconciler, that is, Christ reconcileth us both as God and man, 2. Corinthians. 5.
19.

Distinct. 18. The saints are our intercessors, not as authors themselves
Bellarm. de Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 17.

Answ. First, their own practice is contrary, for they make their saints their
mediators by their own merits and worthiness, as in those blasphemous verses
made of Thomas Becket, is to be seen,

Tuper Thomae sanguinem, quem pro nobis impendit,
Fac nos Christ scandere, quo Thomas ascendit.
By the blood of Thomas, which for thee he did spend,
Grant us Christ, whither he did to ascend.
Secondly, the scripture bids us pray in the name of Christ unto God, and we
shall receive what we ask, which is a more compendious way, then to pray to
Saints, and they by Christ unto God, for if praying in our own persons in the
name of Christ, our prayers be heard, John 16. 24. invocation of Saints is
superfluous.

Distinct. 19. They make two kinds of religious worship: one called Bellarm.
lib. 3. de sanctis cap. 12. Answ. All religious worship is only to be yielded
unto God: as the angel would not suffer John to worship him, but said, Worship
God. Apocal. 22. verse 9. because all worship is due unto him: he forbids
not John some special kind of worship, but generally all, as acknowledging,
that no kind of worship was due unto him. And concerning the word (...), it
is taken also in scripture for the proper service of God: as Galathians 4. 8.
Ye did service to them, that by nature were no Gods: There this word is used.

Distinct. 20. They distinguish between Idolum, an Idol, and Imago, an Idol^,
(...), does represent a vain thing that is not* such were the Idols of the
heathen: Images, they say, they have, but no Idols. Bellarm. lib. de Sanct.
cap. 5. Aunsw. 1. As concerning the word, the Idols in scripture are also
called images, Romans 1. 13. there the word (...), is used. The papists then in
worshipping of Images, are proved also to be idolaters, worshippers of Idols:
This frivolous distinction helps them not.

Distinct. 21. They make this difference between the Idols of the heathen,
Rhemist. Philipp. 2. sect. 2. Ans. The Jews also, which were plagued of God
for their idolatry, had a relation in their golden Calfe to that God, that
brought them out of Egypt, Exodus 32. 4. 5. So Judge. 17. 3. Micah his mother
says, that she had consecrated the shekels of silver to the Lord Jehovah, to
make a molten Image: yet for all this they were idolaters, and so are the
Papists: this shift of theirs helps them not a whit.

Distinct. 22. A thing may be hon^ured, or is said to receive or be capable
Per se, vel per accidens, of it self, as the person of the king is honored,
or accidentally, as the kings robes are honored because of the king.
Secondly, a thing may be honored, propter se, velpropter ^liud, for it self
sake, or for and because of some other thing, whereon the cause of the honor
depends. Thirdly, a thing may be honored proprie, improprie, properly, which
in respect of it self is honored: improprie, which instead and place of an
other thing is honored, as the Ambassador is for the king. Now the Images of
Saints are to be worshipped, not only improperly or accidentally, but
properly, and of themselves: yea improperly, and by an accident are capable of
the highest kind of worship, as the Image of God or Christ of the same
honor that is due unto them, Bellarm. lib. ^. de Sanct. cap. 20. 21. 23. Answ.
I pray you how fa^re are these blasphemous Papists from the highest kind of
idolatry, and from making their stocks and stones their gods? For the heathen
in like sort used such distinctions: Non ego illum lapidem colo, adoro, quem
video, sed seruio ei, quem non video: I do not worship this stone, I adore that
I see, but I serve him whom I see not: August. in psalm. 96. Thus properly they
gave adoration to their Images, but service, which is the english of ((...))
Rhemist. Math. 4. sect. 3. they referued unto that God whose image it was, yet
for all this they were most monstrous idolaters, and so are the Papists.
Again, no religious worship, properly or improperly, accidentally or otherwise
is due to any, but only to the Lord, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve: Math. 4. 10. Which text is alleged by our Savior
against Satan, who had tempted him to fall down and adore him: wherefore by
this text all falling down and prostrating of our selves before any creature
to adore it, is forbidden, without which submisse gesture, not the meanest
kind of religious worship can be exhibited to any.

Distinct. 23. There are then three kinds of religious worship due unto
Simpliciter, vel secundum quid, simply or absolutely, or in part only and
respect: and every one of these kinds of worship, is either Cultus perfectus,
or imperfectus, a perfect or imperfect worship. The perfect and simple kind of
Latre^a, is proper to God only, the imperfect and inferior or respective kind
may be given, and is due to the image of God: so the perfect kind of (...) is
for the Saint himself, the imperfect for his image: the perfect kind of
Hyperdouleia is for the Virgin Marie only, the imperfect for her Image, Bellar.
li. 2. de Sanct. ca. 25. Contr. First, thus have we six kinds of religious
worshipe forged and devised by papists, more by five the^ the word of God
either knows or acknowledges. 2 Where have they learned that the Virgin Mary
is worthy of an higher kind of adoration, then either Saint or angel? The
scripture only says, that they shall be as angels, not above or superior to
angels: Mat. 22. 30. 3 By this distinction of theirs it comes to pass that
the image of God, of Christ, yea of our Lady, shall have an higher kind of
worship, not then the Images of saints, but then the saints themselves, then
either prophet or apostle, for these have but their Douleia, their simple
adoration: but the Images of God and of Christ, have their kind of Latreia:
the Image of Mary, a kind of Hyperdouleia. But this is very gross and absurd,
that a dead thing, that has no life, should be more honored, then a reasonable
and understanding, yea an holy creature: Augustine says, Artifex melior est
eis, the Image maker is better then the Image, in Psalm. 113. but a prophet or
apostle is far to be preferred before every artificer or craft^sma^, and one
would think that the lively Image of God, which is man, that walks and
breaths, should be worthy of greater honor, then the dead and senseles Image
of God. Fourthly, by the places alleged before, Apocal. 22. 9. Matthew. 4. 10.
It is evident, that no kind of religious worship is due to any creature, but
only unto God.

Distinct. 24. Sacrae aedes, Churches or holy houses have a double relation
Templa, Temples or Churches, and so properly they are built only to the honor
of God: or as they are, Basilicae, or Memoriae, sumptuous buildings and
monumentes of remembrance, and so also they may be dedicated to Saints:
Bellarm. lib. 3. de Sanct. cap. 4. Contr. First, if the same place in a diverse
respect may be consecrate to the honor of God and Saints together: great
reason, that God should be the more principal: but now it is not so, for they
are called by the names of Saints: if God were the chief, he should give the
name to the place: And indeed the places of prayer are Gods houses: My house
shall be called the house of prayer. Esaias 56. 7. That Churches are called by
saints names amongst us, it is not for their honor, but only for a civil
difference and distinction of places: and in their sense Churches are not
dedicate unto God neither, for any holiness that is in the place; for in that
sort, Christ says, his father will not be worshipped, neither in that mount
Garizim, nor at Jerusalem, John 4. 27. not in one place more than in another:
but they are holy places and for the honor of God in respect of the use, which
is for prayer, My house, an house of prayer, says the Lord, and for hearing
the word of God, Act. 13. 15.

Distinct. 25. Saints some are Canonized, that is publicly allowed to be
Canonized and received into the calendar: the difference is this, Canonized
Saints, either generally by the Pope so canonized, for the whole Church, or
more specially by a bishop for his province or Diocese, may be publicly
prayed unto, Temples built in their names, and their holy days yearly
remembered, their Relics preserved in Churches to be adored: But none of
these things publicly may be exhibited to not Canonized Saints, unless
prinately only, Bellarm. de sanct. lib. 1. cap. 10. Contr. First that neither
Canonized, nor vncanonized Saints are in any such sort to be worshipped, we
have showed before. Secondly, what an absurd thing is this, it is lawful to
pray to some Saint privately, and yet unlawful to do it publicly? so men
shall have house saints and Church saints: they shall serve one God at home,
and another at the Church: such were the toys of the heathen: such kind of
stuff we read of, Ezech. 8. 10. where the princes of Israel were gotten into
a corner, and there worshipped the similitude of creeping things, and
abominable beasts, which they were ashamed to do publicly: so belike, popish
house-saintes are such goodly things, that they dare not be seen. Thirdly, if
they be all saints, why are they not al Canonized? if they be all saints with
God, why are they not with men? Fourthly, but who gave them such power to
Canonize some saints, and not othersome? Christ says, To sit at his right
hand, or his left, is not his to give, Math. 20. 23. how then dare the Pope,
or any Prelate, presume to do that which Christ assumeth not, as he is man?

Distinct. 26. The hearts of men, their thoughts and cogitations are ordinary
and proper power, and so our hearts are known only to God: or by an
extraordinary grace and gift, and so both the angels and saints do know our
inward repentance, and desires, Rhemist. 1. Corinthians. 2. sect. 1. Contr. It is
one thing by revelation to understand the secrets of men's hearts, as the
Prophets some time did, and as Peter discryed the fraud of Ananias and
Sapphira: An other thing to receive a gift and power themselves, when they
will, to look into men's hearts, as they affir me of their Saints, that
always they are able to understand as the vocal voice, so our inward
repentance: For if at any time they want this power, then prayers made unto
them are sometime in vain, which I think they will not grant. But this is
contrary to the scripture, which says, that God only knows the hearts of
men, 1. Kin. 8. 39. It is not said he chiefly or properly knows them, but he
only: And a reason is there given: Reward every man according to his ways, as
thou know his heart: God therefore only knows the heart, because he only
rewards men after their ways.

Distinct. 27. The papists divide hell into 4. parts or members, according
Duplex poena, damni and sensus: A double punishment beside, either of loss
without smart, or of loss and damage, with smart and punishment together: The
place of temporal loss only was Limbus patrum, the dungeon of darkness, where
the fathers remained till the coming of Christ: the place of eternal loss
without smart, is Limbus infantum, the dungeon, to the which children dying
without baptism are sent: the place of temperall loss and punishment withal,
is Purgatory: the place of eternal loss and punishment is Hell, Bellarm. de
purgator. lib. 2. cap. 6. Contra. These are fantastical and superstitious
devises of men: for the scripture makes but one place of darkness and
punishment, as there is but one place of joy and light, namely heaven, Luke
16. The rich glutton went to hell, Lazarus into Abraham's bosom, which Augustine
denies could be a member of hell, because it was foelicitatis sinus, a place or
bosom of bliss, Epist. 19* Again, they make all these infernal regions to
be places of darkness: but the scripture makes no other place of darkness but
hell, into the which the devils were thrown down: So S. Peter takes that hell
and the chains of darkness for all one: And what place else is that which the
same Apostle calls a prison, 2. (...). 2. 4.
1. Pet. 3. 19. (which the papists notwithstanding understand of their Limbus
patrum) but where the chains of darkness are? for chains and a prison house,
have a mutual reference one to the other. 2* In hell there is not, neither can
be a punishment of loss or damage only, without sense and smart of torment:
for they which are in darkness excluded from the presence of God, do not only
sustain the loss of that benefit, but they must needs also be in pain and
sorrow: for as the Psalm prono^ceth of other creatures: If thou hidest thy
face, they are troubled, Psalm. 104 29. so is it also true of men, that the
hiding of Gods face, the absence of his spirit brings sorrow and trouble
withal: So our Savior says, They shall be cast into vitter or exterior
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Math. 8. 12. darkness
then is accompanied with weeping and extreme horror: It is called the utter or
exterior darkness, because without the kingdom of heaven there is nothing
but darkness: But if they will have it so called, in respect of hell it self,
as though some darkness were Exterior or outward, some interior or inward, the
darkness of Limbus patrum, which, they say, is in the brimme of hell, must be
this exterior darkness, because hell the place of the damned is lower and more
inward, and that must be the Interior darkness. Thus we see how easily
their vanities are blown away.

Distinct. 28. The Jesuit makes two kinds of voluntary worship: properly
called, Cultus voluntarius, Voluntary worship, Qui sine ratione suscipitur:
Which is taken in hand without any reason or ground: There is an other kind
of worship or service: Qui exhibetur Deo per actus virtutum: Which is performed
unto God, by some act of virtue, and this is not properly a voluntary worship
or Religion, though it be not commanded: of this sort, they say, their
pilgrimages are, and such like, Bellar. de sanct. lib. 2. cap. 8. Contra. 1.
Saint Paul forbids all voluntary worship, Coloss. 2. 23. the word is
(...): wherefore al things brought into the worship of God without his
commandment, by the will of man, what reason or cause soever is pretended, is
but will worship. 2. The Apostle speaks not of such a will worship, as is
fondly enterprised without any cause, as if a man should vow not to sit down
at the table, till he have twice washed, as the Jesuit puts the example:
but even of such worship, as is commended by the Jesuit, which is not rashly
begun, but with advise, and performed by some virtuous act: for the Apostle
says, that even will worship has a show of wisdom: it is not, sine ratione,
but, habet rationem sapientiae: Again, there is submission and humbleness of
the mind, and not sparing, or not satisfying the flesh; al these our
adversaries cannot deny to be virtuous acts: for such are their fastinges,
and other works of penance: Wherefore even such things do make but a
will-worshippe. The Jesuit then has said just nothing.

Distinct. 29. Bellarmine grants, that vows may be made properly Bellarm.
lib. 3. de sanct. cap. 9. Contra. Thus they are not ashamed to rob God of his
honor. The scripture reaches us, that vows only are to be made to God,
Esaias. 19. 21. In that day the Egyptians shall know the Lord, and shall do
sacrifices, and vow vows unto God. Here vows and sacrifices are joined
together, but sacrifices no manner of way are due to Saints, therefore neither
vows. Again, the scripture makes this a reason, why we should vow unto God,
and pay our vows: For the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, Deuteronomy.
23. 21. But God only is able to require and exact a vow at our hands and to
call us to accounte for it: Ergo, we must vow only unto him.

Distinct. 30. Days among Christians are partly Equal, partly unequal:
Unequal they are by reason of the precept and determination of the Church, and
for the mystical signification which they have: Equal they are: Quoad
essentialia festi, In respect of the essential matters of an holy day: As a
man privately by him self may upon any day receive the communion, hear the
word, and keep the memory of Christ's resurrection, Bellarm. de c^lt.
Sanctor. lib. 1. cap. 10. Contra. The difference and distinction of days for
signification, and in respect of more holiness is mere Judicial, as the
Apostle testifies: This man esteems one day above another day, another man
counts every day alike, Romans 14. 5. Wherefore days are all equal and alike
unto Christians, not in respect only of those essentials: (for so were they
also equal to the Jews, they might by them selves upon any day, if they
would, read the law, remember Gods benefits and such like,) but they are equal
in nature, holiness and goodness: so that difference of days among Christians
is rather for Christian order and policy sake, for the people to meet
together to hear the word and serve God, then as setting apart some days for
greater holiness in themselves.

Distinct. 31. Whereas we object that place of the Gospel: The poor ye have
always: but me ye shall not have always, Math. 26. against the Real and
bodily presence of Christ in the Eucharist* They answer by this distinction:
that Christ is not now present in body, Uisibili and corporali praesentia: By
his visible, or corporal presence: or, Secundum humanam conuersationem, After
his conversation, or as he was conversant among men: but invisibly he may be
present, and after another manner, Bellarm. de Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 14. resp.
ad loc. 4. Contra. This distinction is thus by scripture overthrown: S. Peter
says, The heavens must contain or receive Christ, till his coming again,
Act. 3. 21. He cannot in his body be absent from heaven till that time,
therefore he can not any way be present in earth. If they answer, as they
do, that he may be in Heaven and in the Eucharist all at one time, we confute
them by an other place of scripture: He is not here (says the Angel) for he
is risen, Math. 28. 6. which had been no good argument, if the body of Christ
were likely to be in two places at once.

Distinct. 32. Some things are properly attributed to the body of Bellarm. de
Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 3. Contra. We grant in deed that Christ's body is
not now subject to heat or cold, nor any such thing, and therefore we deny
that his body is present in the Eucharist, because the Elements do receive
these alterations: Let them tell us then, when the bread mouldeth, and the
wine sowreth, what it is that is mouldie, or sower; bread and wine after
consecration there is none; the accidents, as the whiteness, roundnesse,
sweetness, cannot receive other accidents; we cannot say, that they are
mouldie, or sower: are they not then driven to confess that the body of
Christ is subject to mould, and sowernesse? If they say Christ's body
departs, and a new matter is supplied as before there was transubstantiation
by the turning of the bread into Christ's body, so now there must be a
retransubstantiation (which is a new point of popish learning) by the
returning of the bread again.

Distinct. 33. Whereas they affirm, that the whole quantity and Partem extra
partem: One part distinct from an other, the head can not be where the feet,
nor the feet, etc. But if Christ's body in his proper quantity were in the
host, his parts can not be distinct in so small a room, but shuffed and
confo inded together, Beltarmine here coyneth a most frivolous and
sophistical distinction: Corpus quantum (says he) habet partem extra partem,
si illudextra dicat habitudinem ad subiectum, non autem, si dicat habitudinem
ad locum: That a body of due quantity has parts distinct one from another
in respect of the subject, or body it self, but not in respect of the place:
so there may be Extensis and distinctio partium* in subiecto, sed non in loco:
There may be an extension of the parts, and a distinction in the subject,
though not in the place, Bellarm. de sacram. Eucharist. lib. 3. cap. 7. This of
all other is the most absurd and witless distinction, for how can there be a
distinction real of the parts in the body, if there be not in the place? for
every part has his proper place answeareable thereunto, and as the body is
less or more, so the proper place there of is dilated, or contracted: If then
we take a body of two cubits and thrust it into a room of one cubite or
less, there cannot be the like extension of the parts, as in a place of two
cubits. All the sophistry in the world (let the devil put to his wit and
all) will not help them here, that Christ's body full and whole should be
enclosed in a thin wafer cake, and yet all his parts keep their due place
and proportion still. Alas, poor men, these restless toys will cause them
sooner to run mad, then help them at a pinch.

Distinct. 34. They tell us of three kinds of conversion of things: Conuersio
productiua, A conversion productiue, when a thing is produced which was not
before, as when Christ changed water into wine: Conuersio conseruatiua: A
conversion conseruatiue, when one thing is corrupted or perished, and an other
thing is generated or preserved: Conuersio adductiua, A couuersion adductiue,
when a thing is not produced that was before, but is only brought to a place
where it was not: and so is the bread adductiuely changed into the body of
Christ in the sacrament, Bellarm. de sacram. lib. 3. cap. 18. Contra. 1. These
species, or kinds of conversion are confounded, for the productiue and
conseruatiue are all one, as that example shows of turning the water into
wine: for the water was changed, and wine conserved, and the wine was produced
by the power of Christ, out of the substance of water: The creation was
properly productiue, when things were made and produced, that were not: but
there is no creation now, and therefore no productiue conversion. 2. Yet to
keep their distinction, we will easily prove, that the being of Christ's
body in the Eucharist, is by a productiue or conseruatiue change, not an
adductiue: For either the bread is there together with Christ's body, as the
Lutherans hold, and that is their consubstantiation, which papists deny; or
the bread is annihilate, and turned to nothing, which I think they will not
grant: or it must needs be turned into Christ's body, and so a thing is
produced that was not, namely the breaden body of Christ. They have nothing to
answer but this, that the bread is turned into, Materia prima, the first
matter, whereof things are made, as the water was when Christ made the wine,
Bellarm. ibid. cap. 24. Contra. 1. Thus if Aristotle had not helped them with
his fantastical devise of Materia prima, they had been put to their trumpes.
2. And so notwithstanding they are: for Aristotle's devise can not stand
against scripture, which says concerning that miracle of Christ's: Aquam vinum
factam: As their own text has: the water made wine: the water did not vanish
into Materia prima, or I wot not what, but it was made wine, namely water: and
if after the same manner the bread be converted in the Eucharist, the bread
is made the body of Christ, and the body of Christ is made of it. Be ashamed
at length ye papists of such fooleries, and glorify God, in confessing your
error, and acknowledging the truth.

Distinct. 35. Where we urge that place of the Apostle, Hebr. 10. 14. Christ
with once offering, has made perfect for ever them that are sanctified. And
therefore he is not offered or sacrificed in the Mass. They have found out this
quaint distinction: the oblation of Christ is, Cruenta vel incruenta: Bloody,
or unbloody: the bloody sacrifice was offered but once, the unbloody may be
offered often, Bellarm. lib. 1. de missa. cap. 6. resp. ad 8. argum. Contr.
This is a vain distinction, void of learning and truth: For Christ can not be
offered up, but by dying, Hebr. 9. 27. 28. And without sheading of blood, there
is no remission of sins: verse. 22. But by the sacrifice of Christ, so often as
it is offered, there is remission of sins: Ergo also sheading of blood: there
is then no such unbloody sacrifice or oblation of Christ.

Distinct. 36. In other sacraments the priest is the minister of Christ, yet
This is my body, as the Angels sometime spoke in the person of God, Bellarm.
de sacram. Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 14. Contr. 1 When ministers have such
warrant to speak in the person of God, as the Angels had, they may do as they
did. 2. The Rhemistes confess that the priest in penance gives absolution in
the person of Christ, Annot. 2. Corinthians. 2. 6. Therefore in the Eucharist
only, as Bellarmine says, he assumeth not the person of Christ, but at other
times also, by their own confession. 3. If to do any thing in the person of
Christ, be no more but in the name and power, or in the stead and place of
Christ, we mislike not the phrase nor sense, for the scripture allows that
speech: We are messengers for Christ, and for Christ, or in Christ's steed,
we beseech you: 2. Corinthians. 5. 20. 21. He says not, as Christ, but for Christ:
and the highest dignity that the pastors of the Church have, is to be
ministers only of reconciliation, 2. Corinthians. 5. 18. and to be dispensers or
disposers of the mysteries of God, 1. Corinthians. 4. 1. See then what is become of
this distinction.

Distinct. 37. There is an action in the Church, which is both a sacrifice,
Bellarm. lib. 1* de missa. cap* 1. Contr. 1. The Eucharist also is a sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving, as the word signifies: for other sacrifice
external in the Church we acknowledge none but these spiritual ones, Hebr.
13. 15. 16. 2. Such distinction of a sacrifice representing, and a representing
without a sacrifice, they learn not out of the word, nay it is contrary to it,
for all that Christ commands vsis, to do this in his remembrance, and this
doing, is nothing else* but eating and drinking according to his institution in
the sacrament, 1. Corinthians. 11. 26. and verse. 2^. This do as often as ye drink
it: This doing is communicating by drinking, not sacrificing, as they fondly
imagine.

Distinct. 38. There is, Duplex diuortium: a double kind of divorce in quoad
thorum and cohabitationem, and quoad vinculum: A divorce from bed and bourd
only, the marriage knot or bond remaining still, as in case of adultery: and
an other kind, when the knotte or bond it self is dissolved, and loosed.
Bellar. de matrim. lib. 1. cap. 14. Contr. This distinction is contrary to the
Apostle: as we shall show: marriage cannot be dissolved in respect of bedding
and bourding together, but the bond* Vinculum, must needs be untied: What the
Vinculum or bond of marriage is, Saint Paul shows, The wife has not power
over her own body, but her husband, and so likewise the husband, etc. 1. Corinthians. 7. 4. and that this is the bond, it is gathered out of the 15. verse,
where speaking of the departure of infidels, he says, that a brother or
sister is not in subjection, that is, is no longer bound to perform these
duties and debtes of marriage: and verse 27. Art thou bound to a wife? secke not
to be loosed: Ergo, the bond may be loosed: the word here used is, (...), of
the which word comes, (...), or (...) Vinculum, ^ bond: Therefore by not
being in subjection or under power one of an other, is to be freed, and to be
no longer bound. If the marriage knot or bond could not be untied among
christians, the apostle needed not to have said, Seek not to be loosed: for
who will seek for an impossible thing?

Distinct. 39. Some virtues are Morales, moral, some Theologica, theological:
Moral, says the Jesuit: faith a virtue Theological, Bellarm. lib. 1. de
poenitent. cap. 29. Contr. First, this distinction is not current: for if you
understand by Theological, that which is divine, for so we english
Theologia, Divinity, then are all the virtues of christians Theological, that
is Divine, both in respect of the author, for they are all the gifts of God,
Iam. 1. 17. as also in respect of their operation and effect, Ye are partakers
(says S. Peter) of the divine nature, if ye fly the corruption of worldly
lusts, 2. Epist. 1. 4. Lo the flying of worldly lusts, which is with them a
Moral virtue, is now become a theological or divine virtue, because thereby
we are made divine, or like to the divine nature. Secondly, if they be moral
virtues, which consist in manners and practice, they theological, that consist
in knowledge and speculation, Faith in that sense is not theological, but
moral, Faith working by love: Gallath. 6. 5. Thirdly, what needs such
distinction and separation of virtues, seeing the apostle joins them all
together, Join unto your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge
temperance, 2. Peter 1. ver. 6. 7. Therefore it is no good argument which the
Jesuit makes, ^ayth belongs not to repentance, because one is of this kind,
and another of that* seeing the apostle, both in nature and practice joins
the^ together?

Distinct. 40. In contrition, Propositum non peccandi duplex, there is a double
Virtuale sieve implicitum, and formale seu explicitum an inward and vertuall
purpose, and a formal and explicate purpose, the first is not sufficient; but
it is necessary, that he which is justified from his sin, should make a
formal and express purpose not to sin any more, beside the detestation which
he has of sin, Bellarm. lib. 2. de poenitent. cap. 6. Contr. First, the Lord
says by his prophet, If the wicked will return from all his sins, and keep
my statutes, he shall surely live: Ezech. 18. 21. Here is nothing required but
a forsaking of sin, and doing of righteousness, which may be done, without any
such formal or express purpose: yet a purpose of heart is necessary, Act. 11.
23. which must needs accompany the detestation of sin, and amendment of
life. Secondly, I pray you where was this formal and express vow or purpose
in the these upon the cross, unto who^ Christ notwithstanding promised
paradise? Luke 23. verse 42. 43.

Distinct. 41. They distinguish thus of merits: There is Meritum de congruo,
Ex debito iustitiae* by the due debt of justice, yet they deserve of
congruitie: Meritum de condigno, merit of condignitie follows justification,
whereby a man by his meritorious works, is worthy by justice of the kingdom of
heaven, Rhemist. annot. To. 2. sect. 3. Bellarm. lib. 2. de poenitent. cap. 12.
Contr. First, that there is no merit at all of condignitie; S. Paul shows,
saying, The afflictions of this life are not worthy, or (as they read)
Condign, of the glory to come, Romans 8. ver. 1. 8. The Rhemistes distinction
upon that place of condign to, and condign of, is but a Jesuitical toye, and
not worth the answer. Secondly, that there is no merit of congruitie before
justification, it is thus proved: Without faith there is no merit, for without
faith it is impossible to please God, Hebr. 11. 6. and says is not before
justification, Romans 5. 1. Ergo.

Distinct. 42. Works of the law or of nature done without or before Romans 3.
28. We hold that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law,
Rhemist in hunc locum. Contr. The Apostle himself takes away this
distinction, Ephesians. 2. By grace are ye saved through faith not of works: then
it follows, ver. 10. for we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, which God has or deyned, that we should walk in. Here the
apostle excludes even works of grace prepared, and or dayned of God, from
being any cause of our justification.

Distinct. 43. Some things do justify, Ex opere operantis: by the work Id
est, fide and deuotione suscipientis, That is by the says and devotion of the
recevuer, so the sacraments of the old law did justify: Some things do
justify. Ex opere operato, by the very work wrought, as the Sacraments of the
New Testament, Bellarm. de effect. sacr. lib. 2. cap. 13. Contra. First, there
is one and the same efficacy, substance, and operation in general of the
Sacraments, both of the old and new Testament: For they did eat the same
spiritual nieate, and drink the same spiritual drink, 1. Cor. 10. 2. 3.
Secondly, Yet neither of them do confer grace, or are causes of our
justification before God, but are only seals of the justice or righteousness
that comes by faith, Romans 4. 41. Yet we grant, that in the Sacraments of
the Gospel, there is a more lively resemblance and more full representation of
spiritual things, than there was in the other: in which respect they are
preferred before them. Thirdly, We are not justified before God in part or in
whole by any work, either operantis, or ex operato, of the doer, or of the
thing done: But we are justified only by faith: all works, even such as are
wrought in us by grace, are excluded from being any cause of our justification
before God, Ephesians. 2. 10. 11. Fourthly, And so far is it off, that any
justification can be had ex opere operato, by the work wrought, without
respect to the faith of the doer, that no such work is at all acceptable to
God, much less able to justify: for without faith it is impossible to please
God, Heb. 11. 6. And thus this Iesuitic all distinction is nipped in the head.

Distinct. 44. To extenuate and eneruate the force and efficacy of the death

First, there is a kind of satisfaction, Pro amicitia restauranda, for
restoring us to the friendship of God: there is another, Pro iustitiae
restauranda, for restoring of justice lost and decayed in us: the first
satisfaction is only wrought by the death of Christ; the other must be wrought
by us, Bellar. de poenitent. lib. 4. cap. 1. Contra. Christ has satisfied for
us, in paying the ransom for our sins, and has reconciled us to God, in
imparting to us of his righteousness: He has made him to be sin for us, which
knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him* 2. Cor.
5. 21. therefore Christ has by his death not only redeemed us, and reconciled
us to the favor of God, but has also clothed us with his righteousness: who is
made of God unto us, our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, redemption, 1.
Cor. 1. 30. Not only our redemption, but our righteousness: hec has therefore
satisfied the wrath of God, in restoring his friendship, and has repaired
justice decayed in us, by his justice and righteousness.

Distinct. 45 There is a satisfaction pro ^c^^^a, for (...): another pro poena,
for the punishment. The first was (...) by Christ (...) the other is our
satisfaction to be (...) mine, ibidem. So there is duplex (...): (...) double
or twofold remission of sins, the first in baptism, both (...) poena, from
fault and punishment: the second from the fault, but we our selves must
satisfy for the punishment, Bellarm. depoenitent. lib. 4. cap. 14. Contra. If
our sins be for given us, the punishment likewise together with the sin is
removed: for sin causes death, and all other punishments: It should not
therefore stand with the justice of God, to lay punishment upon men, having
forgiven them their sins: for this were to say, that their sins are not
truly forgiven. Christ has set us at peace with God by the blood of his
cross, Coloss. 1. 20. Ergo, he has satisfied both for the offense and
punishment: For if God punish still, then were we not at perfect peace with him,
his anger yet abiding: And whereas they make the first remission of sins to
be auailable both for the sin and punishment: the second but for the sin:
the Apostle reasons clean contrary: If while we were yet sinners and
enemies, Christ dyed for us, much more being justified by his blood, and
reconciled by his death, we shall be saved from wrath through him, To. 5. 10.
11. Much more says the Apostle: if then in the first reconciliation to God, we
had remission of both, being now reconciled we shall much more. Hence also it
is manifest, that Christ works all both before our reconciliation, and after.

Distinct. 46. Men also may satisfy for the fault, but ex congruo, non ex
condigno, It is a satisfaction of congruitie, not of condignitie, Bellarm. li.
4. de poenitent. cap. 1. Contra. There is no satisfaction wrought by man for
his sins, no not of congruitie: First, it is repugnant to the nature and
property of satisfaction: for that, which is of congruitie, is accepted of
favor, but satisfaction is an exact compensation in respect of justice: by
this God is justly satisfied: by the other, he is but inclined to favor, as
they teach. Secondly, there is no satisfaction for sin ex congruo: for when
we were enemies (says S. Paul) we were reconciled to God, Romans 5. 10. But
nothing that enemies can do, is acceptable unto God, therefore God cannot any
ways, no not ex congruo, by our satisfaction be appeased, before our
reconciliation, nor yet afterward, for our sin in the purchasing of our
reconciliation was already satisfied for by Christ.

Distinct. 47. Man can not satisfy God for the eternal punishment Bellarm.
lib. 4. de poenitent. cap. 1. Contr. Seeing our Savior Christ has fully
redeemed us by his most precious blood, he has not only satisfied for our
sin, but for our punishment both eternal and temporal due unto sin, Heb.
10. 14. with one offering has he made persite, or (as the Rhemistes read)
consummated for ever them that are sanctified. If then he have consummated us
by our redemption, he has satisfied for all: for if any thing were left to be
done by us, we should not be consummated by him. And as for the punishments
and chastenings of this life, S. Paul shows the end of them, not to make
satisfaction, but we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the world, 1. Corinthians. 11. 32.

Distinct. 48. There is actualis satisfactio, an actual satisfaction: and Alia
est satisfactio virtualis, a virtuall satisfaction: (This name Bellarmine has
not, but the sense:) Such is the satisfaction of Christ, Per quam habemus
gratiam, vt satisfaciamus, by the which we have grace and power to satisfy,
Bellarmine de Purgator. lib. 1. cap. 10.

Distinct. 49. Christ has immediate, immediately satisfied and paid the
mediate, mediately, only for the temporal punishment, Bellarm. de poenitent.
lib. 4. cap. 15. Contra. Both these distinctions tend to one end, and
therefore one answer shall suffice them both. First, If Christ has both
actually and immediately satisfied for the greater, that is our sin, and
everlasting punishment due to the same; much more has he for the less, that
is temporal punishment. Secondly, All punishment and recompense of sin, is
caused by the curse of the law: Cursed is he that continues not in all things
written in the law, etc. Galath. 3. 10. But Christ has actually and
immediately redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us,
ibid. 13. which curse we are not able to bear, neither in whole, nor in part:
Ergo, actually and immediately he has redeemed us from all punishment both
spiritual and temporal due unto sin.

Distinct. 50. Christ is a Savior in a double respect, either for saving
Marie, who was preserved only from sin by Christ, not saved from her sins,
which she had not, Franciscant, Fox. p. 801. col. 1. Contra. Christ is called
Jesus, a Savior in this sense only, Because he should save his people from
their sins, Math. 1. 21. He was then either in this sense a Savior unto
Marie, or not at all. But her Savior he was, as she her self confesses,
Luke. 1. 47. Ergo, he saved her from her sins. In the other sense, if Christ
be a Savior at all, for preserving from sin, he is so unto Angels, not unto
men, as Bernard says: Qui hominibus subuenit in tali necessitate, angelos
seruauit a tali necessitate: He that helped men out of their necessity,
preserved Angels from such necessity, lib. de Diligend. Deo.

Distinct. 51. When we object that place of S. Paul against the Popish We are
justified freely by grace, Romans 3. 24. They answer by a distinction: There
are two iustifications: the first, which is only of grace: and the second,
wherein we proceed daily by good works, Rhemist. Annot. Romans 2. Sect. 3.
Contra. The Scripture speaks but of one justification, which glorification
follows, Romans 8. 30. whom he justified, them also he glorified: If then this
one justification do bring us to glorification, what need a second? Again,
their second justification is nothing else, but that which the Scripture calls
sanctification, which issues out from justification, as the fruits thereof:
But Christ is both our righteousness, and sanctification, 1. Cor. 1. 30. Ergo,
he is both our first and second justification, and so both are of grace.

Distinct. 52. There is iustitia imputatiua, iustitia inhaerens, justice
imputative, inhaerent, is that justice that actually abides in us: by this we
are justified and truly made just, not by the other, Rhemist. annot. Romans 2.
Sect. 4. Contra. A justice inherent we grant to be in faithful men, but
imperfect; it is not able to justify them before God: But the righteousness
only of Christ imputed to us by faith, is our justice before God. The Apostle
says, Christ was made sin for us, that we should be made the righteousness of
God in him, 2. Corinthians. 5. 21. Look how Christ was made sin for us, so are
we made righteousness in him: but our sins were imputed to him, him self
knew no sin: Ergo, our righteousness before God, is none other but his
righteousness imputed to us by faith.

Distinct. 53. Whereas they hold, that the law may be perfitly fulfilled
perfection among men, a perfection among Angels: one kind in earth, another in
heaven: the perfection in this life may be attained unto, though the other
cannot, Harding. Defens. Apolog. 368. page Contra. First, this is an absurd
distinction, and nothing to the purpose: The question is of the perfection of
obedience to the law: and he tells us of the perfection of Angels: as
though the law were given to Angels: as if God had said to them: Thou shall
not steal, thou shall not commit adultery, etc. Secondly, Such a perfection,
as God has appointed in this life, we deny not but that it is possible by
Gods grace to attain unto: But full and perfect obedience to the law in this
life cannot be had, no otherwise, than Christ has fulfilled it for us. Saint
Paul says, They that are of the works of the Law, are under the curse: but
they which are of faith, are blessed, Galath. 3 9. 10. The law therefore unto
us is no otherwise perfitly fulfilled in this life, so that we by such
fulfilling may escape the curse thereof, than by faith, and belief in Christ,
who has done it for us.

Distinct. 54. There is an habitual, and an actual faith: the faith in habit,
potentiall faith: The actual faith is to be found in such as are of years of
discretion, Bellarm. de Baptism, lib. 1. cap. 11. Contra. There is no habitual
or potentiall faith, that pleases God: The lively justifying faith is always
actual, working by love, Galathians. 5. 6.

Distinct. 55. Sins, some are venial, that is, pardonable of their mortal,
because all that do them, are worthy of damnation, Rhemist. Romans 1. Sect. 11.
Contra. That all sins by grace are pardonable thorough Christ to all
believers, (blasphemy only against the Holy Ghost excepted, which is
irremissible, and which the faithful are sure to be preserved from) we
grant. But no sin of it own nature is pardonable: For all transgression of
the law, is subject to the curse, Galath. 3. 10. But all sin is the
transgression of the law, 1. John. 3. 10. Ergo.

Distinct. 56. A man may sin two ways, materialiter, formaliter, materially,
sine culpa, without his fault: as Peter did, failing somewhat in his example,
Galath. 2. Erratum fuit absque vlla Petri culpa: it was a small error without
any fault of Peter's, Bellarm. de Pontif. lib. 1. cap. 28. Contra. All sin in
deed is not a like heinous: for trespasses committed willingly, are greater
than faults done of simplicity or ignorance: yet are they all sins, and
make the offender guilty much or little: Otherwise, there should not have
needed any sacrifices to be provided in the law for sins done of ignorance,
Leuit. 4. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23. He says not,
whatsoever is done of malice or wilfulnes: but whatsoever is not of faith, that
is, of a sure ground, done with certain knowledge and persuasion, and
according to a good conscience: as Bernard expounds the place, De fide vera
non falsaputo dixisse Apostolum, omne quod non ex fide peccatum, quia fides
falsa, fides non est. Non autem ex fide vera bonum creditur, quod malum est. I
think the Apostle spoke of a true, not a false faith in that place: Whatsoever
is not of faith is sin; because a false faith is no faith: and by a true
faith, a man can not believe that to be good, which is evil, lib. de
Dispensat. Therefore all sins done ignorantly, and simply, though the intent
be never so good, do make the party that sins guilty and faulty.

Distinct. 57. There is a double certainty of salvation: Certitudo
infallibilis, certitudo humana and moralis, a moral and humane certitude; and
this is sufficient for a man to rest himself upon, Bellarm. de Sacram. lib. 1.
cap. 28. Contra. First, they speak contraries: for how can there be a
certitude not infallible? for that that is certain is infallible, and what is
fallible is uncertain. Secondly, The Apostle says otherwise, Give diligence
to make your calling and election sure ((...), sure without staggering, or
wavering,) For, if ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 2. Peter. 1. 10. Is
not this an infallible certitude, whereby a man shall be assured never to fall?
If this might not be attained unto in this life; S. Peter would not exhort unto
it.

Distinct. 58. I let pass here their idle fancies, and fond school would be
counted grave divines: As how, there are causae morales iustificationis, aliae
causae Physicae, Moral causes of our justification, and Physical or natural
causes, Bellarm. de effect. sacram. lib. 2. cap. 11. Contra. This distinction
is repugnant to the Jesuits own doctrine: for faith is no Moral but a
Theological virtue, as he distinguishes them: but it is faith that
justifies, Romans 5. 1. Ergo, no moral virtue. Themselves also exclude the
works of nature from being any cause of justification: how then can there be
any Physical causes? for in deed our justification is no Physical or
natural, but a metaphysicall and supernatural work.

Distinct. 59. Not much unlike to this, is that distinction of dolor summus
intensiue, and appretiatiue: Our sorrow is greatest intensiuely, when it is in
the highest degree: It is the greatest appretiatiuely, or in estimation, when
as we sorrow not for a thing, as much as we can: yet we had rather loose
other things, than loose that: As a godly man may mourn intensiuelie for the
death of his children, more than for his sins: yet he had rather loose his
children than the favor of God. True contrition then requires sorrow in the
highest degree, appretiatiue, but not intensiue, Bellarm. lib. 1. de poenitent.
cap. 11. Contra. It is not possible that a man should weep more for that,
which he less esteems: And if a man mourn more for a temporal loss, than
for his sins, he mourns not a right: Therefore sorrow for our sins ought
to be the greatest in the highest degree, intensiue. And thus true sorrow is
described in the Scriptures: We roar like Bears, and mourn like Doves,
Esaias. 59. 10. Behold O Lord how I am troubled: my bowels swell, my Liver is
powered out upon the earth. Ierem. Lament. 1. 20. O that my head were as the
waters, and mine eyes as fountains of tears, Ierem. 9. 1. Cut off thine
hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a complaint, Ierem. 7. 29.
They shall mourn like Doves, smiting upon their breasts, Nahum. 2. 7. In that
day shall there be great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon,
in the valley of Megiddo, Zachar. 12. 11. Thus the Prophets did use to describe
true sorrow for sin, than the which none could be greater: as Moses says,
Seek the Lord with all thine heart, and all thy soul, Deuteronomy. 4. 29. Wherefore,
sorrow for sin ought to be the greatest and chiefest of all other, even
intensiue, as we have said.

Distinct. 60. Many such goodly distinctions they have: as to show duplex
diuisio, extrinseca respectu locs; intrinseca ratione subiecti: There are two
kinds of division of one thing from another: the external division in respect
of place: the internal in respect of the subject: And so when two bodies are
in one place, they are internallie distinct from themselves, though they be not
distinct and divided in place: the first division is taken away, not the
second, Bellarm. lib. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 3.

See what iugling here is, and all to breed an impossible conclusion: for
seeing every body has his proper place: yea, spirits have their proper
definite places, much more bodies: two bodies then must have two places,
unless they be mingled and incorporate together, and so make but one body.
Thus they distinguish of the being and subsistence of the accidents of bread
and wine in the Eucharist without their subjects: sunt in se negative, non
positive, they have a being in themselves negatiuely, not positiuely, Bellarm.
lib. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 24. Is not this good stuff? I pray you, what is
esse negative, to be with a negative? that is, put the negative ( non) to (
esse) and so ( non esse) by this skillful Philosophy shall be (esse) not to
be, is all one, with (to be.) Such toys these vain men do train up their
scholars in, and think by them to deceive the world. I will trouble the
Reader at this time with no more of their stuff: by these examples already
set forth, we may give our judgment of the rest.

That their distinctions are lewd, sophistical, and vain inventions, to
obscure the truth withal, and not worth a rush: all distinctions we condemn
not, we know they have their profitable use, for the finding out of truth,
and discovering of falsehood: but such distinctions, as serve to countenance
error and superstition, against the manifest truth of Gods word: such as are
these Popish distinctions, we utterly abhor and condemn. Of such
distinctions we may say, as one of their own fellows said of that distinction
of Simonie: There were Simoniaca de sui natura: there were Simoniacall things
by nature, forbidden by the word of God, as to buy or sell Sacraments.
Simoniaca iure positiuo: Simoniacall things, by the positive law and
constitutions of the Church, as to sell Bishoprics and Ecclesiastical
livings; these the Pope might dispense withal.

O Petre (says he) quantam animarum multitudinem cateruatim transmisit, and
transmittit ad Infernum haec superstitialis and damnanda distinctio: O Peter,
Peter, how many souls has this superstitious and damnable distinction sent by
heaps, and yet does daily send to hell: Aureum speculum. ex citation. Iuell.
page 614. So the Papists by their blasphemous distinctions of merits,
satisfactions, iustifications, adoration, and such like, do subvert the truth,
pervert the souls of many, euert and overthrow the course of religion, and
tread them a high way and a beaten path to Hell and damnation.

The fourth Pillar of Papistrie, consisting of Papists contradictions amongst
themselves.
IT is an usual accusation of the popish sort against the professors of the
Gospel, that we are at variance and dissension amongst our selves, and cannot
agree of the points of our religion: Harding says with a stinking and
unclean mouth: that the puddle of Lutherans runs down by many sinkes: that
we agree not within our selves: and that each one often times disagreeth with
himself: Defeus. Apolog. page 289. The Rhemistes falsely object, that we would
every year have a new faith, 2. Cor. 2. v. 18. Bellar. says, that we have 200
several expositions of these words of our Savior ( This is my body) with lie
and all, de Sacram. li. 2. ca. 1. Now then, to clear and purge our selves of
this false occusation, we will consider who they are that cast us in the teeth
with our dissensions: who, for one dissension that is among us, have ten
among themselves: yea, if I said for one an hundred, I think the saying might
be justified. This Pillar of Papistrie has four parts: First, we will show
the dissensions of the later and new Papists with the old. Secondly, of the
contradictions of the new among themselves. Thirdly, because they say, that
amongst us, one disagreeth many times with himself: we will lay open the
nakedness of their stoutest champion Bellarmine, how shamefully he forgets
himself, saying, and unsaying, now of one opinion, by and by of another.
Fourthly, We will show the repugnances, inconveniences, and inconsequent
opinions, which popish religion has in it self,

The contradictions and diverse opinions of old Papists and new.
BEcause our adversaries would bear us in hand, that their dissentions are not
in material points, but lighter matters, which concern not the faith: We will
make choice of such opinions of theirs (leaving the rest) wherein they dissent,
as shall easily appear to be no triuiall or common matters, but of great weight
and moment.

Lyranus, Hugo Cardinalis, Caietanus, do hold the books of Tobie, Judith,
Macchabees, Ecclesiasticus, the wisdom of Solomon to be Apocryphal books,
and no part of Canonical Scripture: Arius Montanus also holds all the books
of the old Testament, not found in the Hebrew Canon, to be Apocryphal, ex
Whitacher. controu. qu. 1. cap. 6. The contrary is now maintained by
Papists, that all the aforesaid books are Canonical, and part of the
Scriptures.

Canus affirms, that the Scriptures in the Hebrew text are wholly corrupt
Bellarm. confesses some corruption in them, yet not concerning the doctrine of
faith and manners. And that those corruptions and defaults came rather by reason
of some faulty Libraries, and imperfect copies, than by the malicious
deprauation of the Jews, Bellar. de Verb. Dei. li. 2. cap. 2.

They differ much in many points concerning Antichrist. Some of them Apocal.
13. does describe the time of Antichrists coming, as Lyranus. Some, that it
shows the name (...), which they think shall be the name of Antichrist,
Anselmus, Richardus. Bellarm. thinks his name shall not be known, til he be
come, de Romans Pont. li. 3. c. 11

Some, that he shall be borne of a woman of fornication. Some, of the Dan, as
Anselmus, Richardus: Bellarm. holds neither, ibid. cap. 12.

Dominicus a Soto is of opinion, that the Christian faith shall utterly be
extinguished Antichrist. Bellarmine thinks no, ibid. cap. 17.

Their Canon law says, that no mortal man must here presume to reprove Part.
1. distinct. 4. Cap. Si Papa. Yet the Rhemistes affirm the contrary, that
Popes may be reprehended, and are justly admonished of their faults, and ought
to take it in good part, if it proceed of zeal and love, Annot. 2. Galath.
Sect. 8.

Some of them do think, that the Pope, even as he is Pope, may fall into
Gerson, Alphons. de Castro, Adrianus 6. Papa. Some affirm the clean
contrary, that the Pope cannot possibly fall into heresy, nor define any
heretical point, no not by himself alone, Albert. Pighius. Others do teach,
that whether the Pope may be an heretic or not, he cannot determine any thing
that is heretical, sic Driedo. Caietanus, Hosius, Eckius: and to this
subscribeth Bellarmine, lib. 4. de Roman. Pontif. cap. 2.

That place of the Gospel, where Christ says, I have prayed for thee Peter,
Paris understand generally of the whole Church, that Christ prayed that the
Catholic faith should not fail: But Bellarmine and the rest, take these words
as meant of Peter only and his successors, that they should not err at any
time in faith, Bellarm. ibid. cap. 3.

Durandus a popish author confesses, that Gregory. 1. was found in an
Bellarmine charge him rather with error in so writing, ibid. cap. 10.

Melchior Canus affirms, that Honorius. 1. was an heretic: Bellarmine de
Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 11.

Celestinus 3. an heretic: so says Alphons de Castro. Bellarmine is of the
ibid. cap. 14.

John. 22. was in a great error, who held, that the souls of the righteous
should not see God before the day of the resurrection, Guilielmus Oek^^.
Adrianus. Bellar. notwithstanding takes upon him to excuse him of heresy,
Bellarm. cap. 14.

Benedictus 13. condemned for an heretic in the Council of Constance,
Eugenius. 4. in the Council of Basile. Bellar. denies notwithstanding that
they were heretics, but the Councels to have erted rather in condemning them,
ibid.

Some of the Papists think, the Bishops, as the Apostles before them,
Franciscus Victoria: Alphons. de Castro. Others, that the Apostles received
their jurisdiction not from Christ, but from Peter, and Bishops from Peter's
successor: so Johan. de Turre cremat. Dominicus Iacobatius. A third sort hold,
that the Apostles immediately received power from Christ, but Bishops must look
for it at the Popes hands, sic Caietanus, Dominicus a Soto, Bonauenture,
Durand. so also Bellar. ca. 22.

They are much troubled about this question, whether the Pope may be Albert.
Pighius holds, that the Pope cannot be an heretic, and therefore not for any
cause to be deposed: Johannes de Turre cremat. is of opinion, that the Pope for
secret heresy, is actually deposed of God, and may be by the Church declared
to be so deposed. Others held, that the Pope neither for manifest, nor secret
heresy, either is actually or may be deposed. Caietanus, that the Pope for
manifest heresy is not actually deposed, but may be deposed by the Church.
There is a fifth opinion, that the Pope being a manifest heretic, does cease
of himself to be pope, and that he may be judged by the Church, and yet they
judge not the Pope, for he is now no Pope, Johan. Driedo, Melchior Canus, and
Bellarmine consents, lib. 2. de Pontif. cap. 30.

Concerning the popes temporal jurisdiction, some of them teach, that Augustine.
Triumphus: Hostiensis. Others, that he has not directly and immediately any
temporal authority, but only spiritual: yet indirectly and imediatly by reason
of his spiritual power, he has chief authority also in temporal matters. Sic
Johan. Driedo, Johan. de Turre cremat. Pighius, Caietanus, and Bellar. lib. 5.
de Pontif. ca. 1.

They are much busied about the Council of the Jews that condemned de facto,
non de iure, not by what right Christ should be put to death, but they
consulted only of the fact, to put him to death, and therefore in a matter of
fact might err. Others think that they erred in their own mind and affection
toward Christ, not in the sentence: for Christ was worthy of death bearing our
sins. But Bellar. is of an opinion by himself; that the Council did err: for
they were priuileged only from error before Christ's coming, not afterward, li.
2. de Council. ca. 8. Thus they weary themselves in their own foolish conceits.

Some think that general Councels cannot err, though they have not Paris.
Others hold the clean contrary, that they may, as Caietanus, Turrecremat.
Bellar. li. 2. de council. c. 11.

Some hold opinion, that a general Council is above the Pope, Nichol. Cusanus,
Panormitanus, Abulensis. So also it was concluded in the Councels of Constance
and Basile. The Canonists teach, that the Pope by right is above the Church and
Councels, but he may, if he please, submit himself to their judgment, and give
them authority over him. But others think, that he has such an absolute
authority, that he cannot submit himself to the sentence or censure of
Councels though he would. So Antoninus. Johan. de Turre cremat. Caietanus,
Pigghius, with others: unto this Bellarm. subscribeth, the Popes waged champion
to fight for his triple crown.

Alphons. de Castro is of opinion, that heretics are members of the Bellarm.
bestows some labor to confute his opinion. Thus one Papist makes work for
another, Bellarm. de Eccl. li. 3. ca. 4.

Johan. de Turre cremat. requires faith as necessary to make a true member
Bellarm. who holds faith in this case to be needless, li. 3. de Eccl. ca. 10.

Johannes de Turre cremat. says, it is against the Catholic faith to affirm,
Marie in the passion of Christ: Bellar. thinks that faith was preserved as
well in the Apostles, as in Marie, that theirs failed no more than hers, li. 3.
de Eccles. ca. 17. And herein the Jesuit comes nearest the truth: The
Apostles faith was not lost, but greatly shaken, at the death of Christ, and
they remained wavering and doubtful, til they were by Christ (risen again)
confirmed.

Some affirm, that the vow of continency or single life is annexed to Johan.
Mayor, Clictouaeus. Others, that it is not grounded upon the divine law, but
only brought in by the constitution and decree of the Church, and may be
dispensed withal, Tho. Aquinas, Caietanus: so thinks also Bellarm. de
clericis, lib. 1. ca. 18.

The Canonistes hold, that the constitution of tithes, even in respect of
Bellarm. calls it an error of the Canonists, and confuteth it, determining
the matter thus: that the payment of tithes is De iure diuino, quoad
substantiam, non quoad quantitatem, is by the word warranted, in respect of the
substance or equity, not in regard of the precise quantity, de Clericis, lib.
1. cap. 25.

The Canonists hold, that clergy men are exempt from the power of secular
Franciscus Victoria, Dominicus a Soto: and Bellarm. de Clericis, lib. 1. cap.
28.

Scotus did hold, that venial sins were remitted in the very instant of per
merita pr^cedentia, by virtue of the merits, which went before in the life.
Tho. Aquinas held the contrary, that they were not remitted then, but
afterward in Purgatory. To this agrees Bellarmine and the rest, Bellar. lib^^
de Purg. ca. 10.

Some Papists hold, that the souls in Purgatory are uncertain of Dyo^is.
Carthusianus, Michael Baij: but the general opinion of the Papists now is, that
they are certain of their salvation, Bellarm. de Purg. lib. 2. ca. 4.

Some of them think, that venial sins by nature deserve eternal Romans 6.
25. so Michael Baij, Gerson, Johan Roffens. But now the Jesuits generally hold
the contrary, that venial sins are pardonable of their own nature, Bellarm.
ibid.

Some are of opinion, that prayers may be made for souls that are in
Bellarmine, and generally all that rabble hold it only to be lawful to pray
for souls in Purgatory. But the truth is, the dead are not to be prayed for
at all, Bellarm. de Purg. lib. 2. ca. 5.

The papists generally hold, that the souls which need no ^lensing in
Bellarmine has a trick by himself, and thinks it not improbable, that there
should be another place, not so full of joy as heaven is, nor in pain equal to
purgatory. li. 2. de Purg. ca. 7. But we acknowledge neither the one nor the
other: for Scripture no where makes mention of more places than heaven and hell.

Th. Aquinas holds, that the least punishment in purgatory exceeds
Bonauenture denies that, and says that the greatest pain of purgatory only
exceeds the greatest of this life. And so thinks Bellar. lib. 2. ca. 15.
But this is a needelesse question to dispute of the pains of purgatory, for
there is no such place, as we have elsewhere showed.

That the Saints know our prayers, though it be not agreeable to scripture,
Bellarmine takes to be the more probable opinion, ca. 20. yet it is but a
profane speculation: for God himself only knows the heart, neither will he
give his honor to another.

Caietanus Cardinal confounds images and idols, taking them for all Bellar.
and the rest make great difference between them. Images, they say, they have,
but no Idols, Bellarm. de imaginib. sanctor. lib. 2. cap. 7.

Some papists hold opinion, that the Images of the Trinity ought not Abulens.
Durand. Peresius, Caranza, who beside allows not the Image of Christ to be
made: Others hold the contrary, that they may safely be made, and adored:
Caietanus, Catharinus, Sanderus; and Bellarmine, who for the most part holds
with the worst opinion.

Concerning the worship of Images, it is agreed amongst papists Sic
Durandus: Alphonsus de castro: Others that the Image is to be worshipped, and
adored with the same kind of worship that the exemplar is, whose Image it is,
and so the Image of Christ to be worshipped as Christ himself, Sic Caietanus,
Bonauentur. Capreolus, and others. There is a third opinion, that Images
properly in themselves may be worshipped, yet with an inferior kind of
worship, then that which is due to the Saint resembled by the Image, Peresius,
Catharinus, Sanderus, to these consents Bellarmine de Imaginib. sanctor. lib.
2. cap. 20.

The Papists make two kinds of Religious worship, the higher and Sic
Bellarminus. Yet Martinus Peresius, a learned papist, says, that (...) cannot
signify the worship of Saints: for the word, is translated, ser^itude, or
service: but we are not servants to the Saints, but their fellow-seruants,
Bellarm. lib. 1. de beatitud. Sanctor. cap. 12

Now concerning the sacraments. Some of them think that the same Sic Magister
sententiar. Albertus, Bonauenture. Others think, that this definition of a
sacrament, est sacrae rei signum, It is a sign of an holy thing, may properly
comprehend both the old and new sacrament, because it is not of the essence
of a sacrament to be a cause of sanctification, but a sign only. Sic. Thom.
Dominicus a Soto, Martinus Ledesinius, and this is the truer opinion: But
Bellarmine fully likes neither, lib. 1. de sacram. cap. 12.

Now whether the sacraments do consist, ex verbis and rebus, of the Sic
Dominicus a Soto, Caietanus. Others think that all Sacraments consiste not of
the word and elements, but some only: Sic Durandus. A third opinion is,
that the sacraments only of the New Testament do consist of these parts, not
the sacraments of the old, Sic alexand. Alensis: and others think, that al
sacraments do consist of these parts, either in themselves, or some what
instead, or place of them: Sic dominicus a Soto. Bellarmine takes somewhat
from all these opinions, Lib. 1. de sacram. cap. 1 8. But to put the matter out
of doubt, there must be in every sacrament, both the word and element, the word
sanctifies, 1. Timoth. 4. 5. and therefore must needs be there, nothing can
serve instead of it: there must be also an eleme^t beside the word, to be
sanctified, and therefore the word cannot be the element.

The Jesuits do hold, that the intention of the minister is necessary to
Faciendi, quod facit ecclesia, to do that which the Church does: that is to
make a sacrament, Sic Bellar. cum alijs: Catharinus a papist says, it is not
necessary to have such an intention, but that a sacrament may be without it:
wherein he thinks aright, for the sacrament no more depends of the
ministers intention, the^ the preaching of the word does.

Concerning the efficacy of the sacraments, they do all hold, that they Sic
Caietanus, Sotus Ledesinius. Some contrariwise, that the sacrament is the
efficient cause, the Minister but the instrument: Ita Tho. Aquinas, ex Bellarm.
lib. 1. c. 27. and of these there are two sorts, some think that the
sacraments are but causes, Sine quibus non: without the which we are not
justified, Sic Bonauentur. Scotus, Durandus. Others think that there is verily
an effectual power given to the sacraments to justify, Sic Bellarm. lib. 2.
cap. 11. What ado is here about nothing, the sacraments are no isntrumental
or efficient causes of our justification, but seals only of the righteousness
of faith, Romans 4. 11. And it is faith, whereby we are justified, Romans 5. 1.

As touching the sacraments of the law: some deny that they did justify ex
opere operantis, that is by the faith, and devotion of the receiver: Sic
Magister: others thought they did. And for Circumcision, some held it did
justify ex opere operato, by the very work wrought: Sic Alexander,
Bonauenture, Scotus, Gabriel. Others were of opinion, that it did not justify
of it self, but as it was a protestation and application of faith: Sic Tho.
Capreolus, Scotus, to this Bellarmine enclineth, lib. 2. ca. 13. But if these
fellows would have contented themselves with justification by faith, as the
scriptures teach us, they needed not to have made so many doubts.

Concerning the Indeleble character, which they say is imprinted in the
Durandus says, it is no real thing distinct from the soul, or any absolute
quality, but a certain respect, and relation only: Scotus says, it can not
be proved by scripture: Gabriell doubts, whether the Church has determined
it: Yet Bellarmine holds his own still, that there is such an indeleble
character: which is but a mere devise, and has no ground out of scripture as
Scotus says, ex Bellarm. lib. 2. de sacram. cap. 20.

Some papists have held opinion, that in baptism it is sufficient to baptize
Sic Hugo de S. Victor. Nicholaus papa. Bellarmine holds, as the truth is,
that baptism must be celebrated in the name of the whole Trinity.

Some hold, that Martyrdom does not give grace, Nisi ex opere operantis, Sic
Dominicus a Soto, Martinus Ledesinius. Others that it was auailable ex opere
operato, by the very work wrought: Ita Thom. Gabriell. Johan. Mayor, and
Bellarm. lib. 1. de baptis. cap. 6. The first is the truer opinion, for without
love if a man give his body to be burned, it is nothing, 1. Corinthians. 13. And
yet neither martyrdom, nor any work else, can be the cause of grace.

Some hold that John's baptism was a sacrament of the new law, and that Sic
Petr. Lombardus. Others thought it was a kind of sacrament, such as were the
sacraments of the law, It a Magister. Thomas. But Bellarmine will have it
neither sacrament of the old nor new, de sacram Baptis. lib. 1. 19. The
scripture puts all out of doubt that says, John baptized unto repentance
for remission of sins, Luke 3. and so was in substance and effect one, and
the same with the baptism of Christ.

That Christ in the 6. of John treats not of the Eucharist: it is the opinion
Gabriel, Cusanus, Caietanus, Tapper, Iausenius: wherein they say, as the truth
is. But Bellarm. and generally the papists now a days do apply it to the
Eucharist: though indeed, it makes more against them, then for them, Lib. 1.
de Eucharist. cap. 5. ex Bellarm.

As touching the Real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, Durandus thinks,
Sic Okam. But Bellarmine and the rest do think that the body of Christ is in
the sacrament, in his due quantity, and distinction and order of parts, Lib.
3. de sacram. Eucharist. cap. 5. of all these the first two opinions are more
reasonable, for how is it possible for the body of Christ, in his due
proportion and bigness to be contained in a thin wafer cake? But none of al
these opinions are true: for the body of Christ, is no where else but in
heaven, til his second coming, as S. Peter says, Act. 3.

Some did hold, that all the bread and wine in the Eucharist was not
transubstantiate, Sic Durandus. Some contrariwise, that the matter was changed
not the form: Others, that the bread is assumed hypostatically unto the word,
as the humane nature is, sic Repertus. Bellarmine with the rest, that after the
words of consecration, the bread and wine is transubstantiate wholly into the
body of Christ, the accidents only remaining, Lab. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 11.

It is the general opinion of papists, that there arises no more spiritual
fruit Alexander. Alens. Gaspar Cassalius, Ruardus. And by a general decree in
the council of Basile the use of the cup was granted to the Bohemians,
Bellarm. lib. 4. de Eucharist. cap. 23. for if so the receiving in one kind
were all out as full of comfort, and as profitable, as to do it in both, then
were one superfluous, and so they take upon them to control our Sauicur
Christ, who instituted both; and used them at his last supper.

About the popish sacrament of extreme unction arise these differences: Mark.
6. and James. 5. About the former place they much disagree: Some holding that
when the Apostles anointed the sick with oil, it was not the sacramental
unction, but an adumbration of it and a preparation thereunto, Sic Ruardus.
Iausenius. Dominicus a Soto. Others, that it is one and the self same kind of
unction, which is treated of in both places, Sic. Thom. Waldens. Alphons. de
Castro: Bellarmine enclineth to the first opinion, for no other reason, but be
cause the protestants hold, the vnctio^ spoken of in both places to be the
same, Bellarm. de extrem. unction. lib. 1. cap. 2.

Some think that the corporal health of the body is the absolute and
infallible Sic Dominic. a Soto. Others that it is but a conditional effect, if
it be profitable for the souls health, and that this ceremony is not
principally applied for the health of the body, but for the health of the
soul, Council. Tridentin. Sic. Bellarm. cap. 6.

Some hold, that in time of necessity a layman may be the minister of
extreme Sic Thom. Waldens. Others, that a layman may anoint with holy
consecrate oil, but without a sacrament, Sic Dominicus a Soto. A third fort
thinks, that it is not lawful for the lay sort to do the one or the other,
Sic Iausenius. Bellar. cap. 9. Now who will give credit to these men, that
there is such a sacrament of extreme unction: when they cannot agree amongst
them selves, nor one believe another?

Some also think, that to anoint the five senses together with the reins
Sic. Thom. Aquin. Bellarm. ibid. cap. ^0.

The Rhemistes hold the mixture of water and wine in the Eucharist to be
necessary, Annot. 1. Corinthians. (...). sect. 10. yet the Canonistes affirm that
it is De honestate tantum, non de necessitate: Of decency only not of
necessity, De consecrat. distinct. 2 in gloss. Scotus. 4. sententiar.
distinct. 11. quaest. 6.

Some deny that Episcopalis ordinatio, the ordaining of Bishops to be a
sacrament, Dominicus a Soto. Petrus a Soto, Caietanus, Durandus with others:
Bellarmine with the rest of the Jesuits hold the contrary, that it is a
sacrament, De sacram. ordinis. lib. 1. cap. 4.

Durandus denies matrimony to be a sacrament, unless Equiuoce, Equiuocallie
Bellarmine and generally the papists hold it properly to be a sacrament, Lib.
1. de Matrimon. cap. 1.

Some of them again do think, that matrimony is not a proper sacrament Sic
Alphons. castro, Petrus a Soto, Bonauentur. cum alijs. But that it was cofirmed
rather, then instituted of Christ: Bellarmine with the rest, hold the
contrary, Lib. 1. de Matrim. cap. 5.

Some hold that matrimony, which they affirm to be a sacrament, gives no Sic
Magister sententiar. lib. 4. distinct. 2. Bellarmine with the rest hold the
contrary, ibid.

Some affirm, that they which being married are afterward converted to Sic
Paludanus, Capreolus, Eckius. Others think, that there need no new contract,
but that matrimony by the very act of baptism is confirmed, Sic Thom. de
Argentin. Bellarmine that a new contract is not necessary, but that the
parties after baptism by some sign should express their consent, Bellarm.
lib. 1. de sacram. cap. 5.

Melchior Canus affirms, that the parties themselves cannot be the ministers
Bellarmine with the rest teach the contrary, that the parties them selves are
the ministers of the sacrament. Some again say, that the mutual consent of the
parties contracted in due form of words expressed, are the matter and form
of the sacrament of matrimony. Others, that the persons themselves are the
matter: Bellarmine thinks, both that in the contract while, the words are
the matter expressing their consent, and afterward the parties themselves,
Bellarm. cap. 6.

The times prohibited and interdict for marriage were in times past, three
Septuagesima, to the octaues of Easter: from three days before the assension,
to the octaues of Penticost, Ruard Tapp^r. The practice among them now is
otherwise: for with the interdict time at Pentecost, they have dispensed: and
the prohibited time at Easter is butte shorter, to begin not from
^eptuagesima, but from Ash weddensday. So was it decreed in the late chapter of
Trent sess. 24. cap. 10.

Concerning the popish sacrament of penance, there arise many doubts ex
Bellar. de poenitent. lib. 1. cap. 16.

Some, that the whole sacrament does not confer grace, but absolution Sic
Thom. Aqum. Bonauent. Vega, Franciscus Ferrariens. Others that absolution did
not give grace alone, but the action of the penitent person was joined and did
concur with it, in that case, Bellarmine enclineth to the first opinion,
Depoenitent. lib. 1. cap. 16.

Some think that the act of penance, is but a disposition only unto remission
Sic Johan, Capreolus, Dominicus a Soto. Others, that it is not a disposition
only unto justification, but a meriting cause thereof of congruitie, sic
Albertus, Bonauent. Scotus, Durandus, Gabriel: to this also Bellarmine
subscribeth, lib. 2. de poenitent. cap. 12. But the Jesuit is here grossly
deceived, for before justification it is impossible to please God without
faith: therefore there is no place for merit.

Some, that perfect contrition is not sufficient to attain remission of
sins, sic Bellar. cu^ alijs lib. 2. cap. 13. But the truth is, that true
repentance before God is sufficient with satisfaction to the Church in public
offenses, without either sacramental penance, or the vow thereof, for such
sacrament we acknowledge none.

Some hold, that men may satisfy God by their penal works, both for the Sic
Ruard, Tapper, Andreas, Vega. Others, that they can satisfy God for neither of
these, but only for temporal punishment, Sic Bellarm. cum Iesuitis. lib. 4.
cap. 1. But the truth is, that Christ has satisfied fully and wholly in our
behalf, both for sin and whatsoever punishment due, as we have showed
before: so that no part or kind of satisfaction remains to be done by us.

Some hold, that Auricular confession is necessary to salvation, and that
Harding. page 186. Others hold that confession is not necessary for secret
sins, but that they may be forgiven without, Sic Gratian. Holcott. Thom.
Aquin. ex Jewel. defens. apol. page 190.

Some hold that the virgin Mary was conceived without Original sin:
Franciscane: Others that she was conceived as all other children of Adam be, Do
minike friars. And Bernard thinks it unlawful therefore to keep a festival
day of her conception, Fox page 800.

The most part of them hold, that it is not meet or convenient, that the
Bartholomaeus Latomus confesses that our request is reasonable to have the
holy sacrament administered in both kinds, Gerardus Lorichius calls them
Pseudocathol^co^, false catholics, that hinder the reformation of the Church
in that point. And he calls the wilful maintaining of receiving in one
kind, Haeresis and blasphemia pestilens and execrabilis: An heresy, and
blasphemy cursed and pestilent, Ex Iuel. defens. Apolog. 28. page

Lastly (because it were infinite to show all their contradictions) they do
Deus nouit, says he: after much discussing of the matter, he resolves it
thus: Godknoweth says he, what is become of it, Ex citation. Iuel. page 289.
Thus much shall suffice concerning the contradictions of the papists of former
times, with our new vpstart pope-catholike doctors: And I hope by this it may
appear that their domestical dissensions are not, as they bear us in hand, in
the smaller points only, but in the very ground and substance of popish
Religion, as about the sacraments the Real presence, justification, authority
of the scriptures, of the pope, of general councels, and such like. Now let us
see how well our new masters of popery, which are principally the Jesuits,
agree among them selves.

The disagreement and difference of opinion of the Jesuits among themselves.
Part. 2.
I Will here especially match our Rhemistes and Bellarmine, and compare their
doctrine and opinions together, that the unity whereof they make such boast
and bragges may be made known to the world.

1 Bellarmine holds, that wicked men living in the external Veraepartes, and
membra Ecclesiae, Are true parts and members of the Church, De Eccles. lib. 3.
cap. 10. The Rhemistes say that they are rather as ill humors, and superfluous
excrementes, then true and lively parts of the body, Annot. 1. John. 2. sect.
10.

2 That place Math. 24. 15. of the standing of the abomination of desolation
Bellarmine understands of the destruction of Jerusalem, Lib. 3. cap. 16.
resp. ad^. ration. The Rhemistes affirm it shall be especially accomplished in
Antichrists time, when as the sacrifice of the mass (as they imagine) shall be
utterly abolished, Annot. Math. 24. verse. 15.

3 Concerning the defection and Apostasy, which S. Paul speaks of 2 Thessalonians.
2. 3. Bellarmine says it shall be a defectio^ from the Roman Empire. Rhemist.
it shall be a defection from most points of Christian Religion: Secondly
Bellarmine says, that though it be a defection from the Roman faith, yet it
shall not be general, but particular, Ibid. cap. 16. resp. ad 5. argum. The
Rhemistes grant it shall be a reuoult of kingdoms, peoples, provinces, so that
the public intercourse of the faithful with the Church of Rome shall cease:
they shall only communicate with it in heart, Annot. 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 6.

4 The Rhemistes hold, that Antichrist shall be borne of the tribe of Dan. Annot.
Thessal. 2. 8. Bellarmine does not only vary from them, but opposes him
self against them, and confuteth their arguments, Lib. 3. de pontif. cap. 12.

5 Bellarmine, by that place. 1. Ioh. 2. 22. he is Antichrist that denies the
father Lib. 3. de pontif. cap. 14. The Rhemistes say this was a mark, serving
only for those times to describe an heretic by, Annot. 1. John. 4. sect. 2.
And therefore it cannot be applied to Antichrist.

6 Bellarmine says, that one of the wonders or miracles, that Antichrist must
Ibid. cap. 15. The Rhemistes, whereas the text says, an other beast shall rise
out of the earth, and shall cause fire to come from heaven, and the image of
the beast to speak, Apocal. 13. They expound it not of Antichrist, but of an
other false prophet inferior to Antichrist, Annot. Apocal. 13. sect. 3.

7 Bellarmine says: Soli episcopi pastores sunt: That Bishops only are
pastors Lib. 1. de Council. cap. 15. The Rhemistes doubt not to say, that many,
which have no gift to preach, yet for their wisdom and government are not
unmeet to be pastors and bishops, Annot. 1. Timoth. 5. sect. 13. If such in
their opinion may be made Bishops, then are they not most properly pastors, as
Bellarmine says: for he is most properly a pastor, that has gifts to preach,
which is spiritual feeding.

8 The Rhemistes affirm that Christ in plain terms most amply imparted
Annot. John, 20. sect. 3. Bellarmine notwithstanding denies, that the pope may
do as much, as Christ could as he was man: For Christ did institute
sacraments, and could remitte sins without sacraments, so cannot the pope,
De pontif. l. b. 5. cap. 4.

9 The day of the Lord shall reveal it. 1. Cor. 3. 13. that is, says
Bellarmine, Lib. de purgator. 1. cap. 4. the Rhemistes understand the
particular day of every man's death, Annot. 1. Corinthians. 3. sect. 3.

10 Whereas John is forbidden by the Angel to worship him, Apocal. 19. verse.
10. The Rhemistes say it was because John being deceived in the error of his
person, and so taking the Angel for Christ, gave him divine honor, Annot. in
^um locum. But Bellarmine says, he did but give the Angel the worship due unto
him, and did well in adoring the Angel: and that the Angel did well in refusing
adoration, for reverence to the humanity of Christ* The Rhemistes say, it was
refused for reverence to the excellency of John's person, Bellar. lib. 1. de
sanctis. cap. 14. Thus these Jesuits agree, as they say, as harp and harrow.

11 The Rhemistes affirm, that Images are not to be adored with Godly or
Annot. act. 17. sect. 5. Bellar. yet grants, that improprie, improperly
notwithstanding they may be adored with divine worship, lib. 2. de sanct. c. 23.

12 Bellarmine denies that the body of Christ being eaten goes any further
li. 1. de Euch. c. 14. The Rhemists go further, they say we are made a piece of
his body and blood: 1. Cornith. 10. sect. 5. as though his body were converted
into the substance of their bodies.

13 The Rhemists commend the reserving of water in baptism, and carrying
Annot. Iam. 5. sect. 5. But Bellarmin allows the reservation only of the
Eucharist, which only, says he, remains a sacrament after the use, Lib. 4.
de Eucharist. cap. 3.

14 The Rhemistes say, we do improperly name the whole sacrament, and
ministration Communion, Annot. 1. Cor. 11. sect. 14. yet Bellarmine deals
more liberally, for he franckly and freely uses the name of Communion, as lib.
4. de Euchar. cap. 24. tot. capit. and in many other places.

15 The Rhemistes upon those words of the Apostle, Heb. 13. 10. We have an
altar, do ground the having of their material altars for the sacrifice of the
body of Christ: and would prove by this place, that Christians have altars
properly so called, Annot. in hunc locum. Bellarmine of purpose resrayneth to
urge this place against us, because, says he, diverse Catholic writers do
understand it either of the Cross, or of Christ himself, Lib. 1. de miss.
cap. 14.

16 Bellarmine says, that in the Eucharist only, the priest does Induere
personam Christi, take upon him the person of Christ when he says, This is my
body: In other sacraments he is but the minister of Christ, he does not take
his person upon him, Li. 4. de Euch. c. 14. Yet the Rhemists affirm, that the
priest in other popish sacraments also does take upon him the person of Christ,
as in penance he absolueth in the person of Christ, Annot. 2. Cor. 2. sect. 6.
Bellarmine also varieth from other papists of these days, as well, as from
the Rhemistes, and they vary from him.

17 Heskius a papist affirms, that the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross
was Aaron* Li. 1. c. 13. Bellar. says plainly, that it was not properly either
after Aarons order, or Melchisedecks, Lib. 1. de miss. c. 6. resp ad 5. arg.

18 The council of Trent concluded thus concerning the adoration of Images,
Honor, qui eis debetur, refertur ad prototypa, quae illae repraesenta^t. The
honor due unto the^ is to be referred to those things which they represent,
Sess. 25. But Bellarmine holds, that there is a religious worship properly
due unto them, Et non solum vt vicem gerunt exemplaris, and not only as they
represent another thing, De imaginib. Sanctor. lib. 2. cap. 22.

19 Bellarmine denies, that Augustine understood those words of our Savior
This is my body, when his words are most plain, writing thus, Non dubit auit
dominui dicere, hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui, The Lord
doubted not to say, this is my body, when he gave a sign of his body: yet
Bellarmine laboreth by subtle and fraudulent distinctions to shift of and
obscure the evidence of these words, Lib. 2. de Euch. cap. 24. By other papists
notwithstanding, of no mean account it is confessed, that Augustine did expound
those words figuratively, Fox p. 1428. col. 1. Secret. Bourne. Fecknam.

Concerning the story of Pope Ioane, and the circumstances thereof, it is
Harding denies, that whereas the story says, upon that occasion, in the
election of the Popes they used a chair with an hole to try the Popes
humanity, he flatly denies that there was any such thing: Or that the Popes
do refrain to go that way in procession, where Pope Ioane traveled with
child: Or that there is any Image representing such a thing, he counts all
these fables. But Bellarm. which is better acquainted with Rome, then it
should seem Harding was, does some what more cunningly excuse the matter, to
the first, he says, there is indeed a porphyrie Chair, but to show the Popes
humility, not to try his humanity: to the next, he confesses the pope
refrayneth to go that way, but not upon any such occasion, but only because
it is a streite way, and not fit for his train: to the third, he grants
there is an Image, not without fashion or shape, as Harding says, who
compares it to some of the ragged stones at Stonage, but it rather resembles,
says he, a heathenish priest going to sacrifice, then a woman, Harding defens.
apolog. page 428. Bellarm. lib. 3. de pontif. cap. 24. Thus we see that neither
the old papists agree with the new, nor the new among themselves. Now to the
third part.

Bellarmine at variance with himself. Part. 3.
1 BEllarmine, for expounding of scripture, refers us to the Lib. 3. de
script. cap. 3. but other where, he makes the pope the chief Judge of al
controversies above general councels, who cannot err in decreeing concerning
faith, no nor concerning manners: yea it is probable he can not err as a
particular person, Lib. 4. de pontif. cap. 3. 5. 6. What need he then join
the Cardinals here in commission with the Pope?

2 Bellarmine in one place denies, that faith is necessatie or requisite to
Lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 10. And yet else where forgetting himself, says, Fide
firmissima ac certissima credimus, we by a most certain and infallible faith
believe, which is the Church: Ibid. cap. 16. If by faith only the Church is
known, and so who are the true members thereof: much more do the members
themselves stand by faith: and if by faith they are believed of others to be
of the Church, much more by faith ought they to be assured of it themselves:
These things therefore hang not currantly together.

3 Bellarm. out of that text, Pasce oues meas, Feed my sheep, would prove Lib.
1. de Conc. ca. 15. But cap. 19. he by th^^ text proves the pope to be
universal pastor, and so to be president i^ councels, so soon has he
forgotten himself.

4 Bellarmine in one place maintains this point, Romani Pontificis
ecclesiasticu^ principatum, authore Christo principium accepisse, that the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Pope took beginning of Christ, li. 2. de
Pontif. cap. 12. But else where he says, that the Pope is not Peter's successor
iure divine, by any divine right: neither is it, ex prim^ institutione
Pontificatus, quae in euangelio legitur, of the first institution of that
chief pastorship, whereof we read in the Gospel, cap. 17. In any man's care I
think these speeches will make a contrary sound.

5 Bellarmine confesses that the Church of Rome cannot err personally, Rome
is the cause, as they say, of the not erring of that Church: and therefore he
holds, that the Church of Rome is sure no longer to be preserved from error,
than the popes Apostolic Sea rema(...) there. If the pope then be the cause of
their not erring, he is much more free from error himself: for how then is
the Church free from personal error, and not the Pope?

6 Bellarm. in one place says, that the pope only succeeds Peter non
proprie, not properly, de Pontif. li. 4. 25. But in another place he writes
thus, Episcopi proprie succedunt Apostolis: Bishops properly succeed the
Apostles, li. 1. de Clericis. ca. 13. proprie, non proprie, properly, not
properly to succeed, I trow, they be contradictorie speeches.

7 Bellarm. confesses that the marriage of Ministers is not forbidden Timoth.
2. 3. No man that warreth, entangleth him self, etc. lib. de Clericis. 19.

8 Bellarmine says, that the care of children and household, are a great ibid.
19. and forbidden under the name of secular affairs in that place to Timothy:
And yet elsewhere he affirms, that regimen politicum, political government,
is no hinderance to the Ecclesiastical calling: but that the same man may
very well be both an Ecclesiastical, and political Prince, de To. Pontif.
lib. 5. cap. 10. ad object. 5. If then the care and charge of a whole city or
country, may stand very well with the Ecclesiastical function, much more the
care of one family may: The Jesuit is not well advised, so soon to forget
himself.

9 That place in Zachary, Thou have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit, where
there was no water, Zachar. 9. 11. Bellarmine in one place expounds of Limbus
patrum, The dungeon of darkness, from whence the Patriarchs were delivered, lib.
4. de Christi anima, cap. (...). In another place he alleges it to prove
purgatory, lib. 1. de Purgator. cap. 3. But Limbus patrum and purgatory, are
places among Papists much different.

10 Bellarmine in expou^ding of that place, 1. Cor. 3. 13. The fire shall try
every man's work, and verse. 15. He shall be saved, yet as it were by the fire, is
put to such trouble and business, that within the compass of one Chapter he
admits contrary senses of the same place: in the first place, by fire
understanding the judgment of God: in the second, the flames of purgatory,
de Purgator. lib. 1. cap. 4.

11 Bellarmine in one place writes thus, In extremo iudicio duo tantum loca
remanebunt, Paradisus and Gehenna: At the last judgment, two places only
shall remain, Paradise and Gehenna, heaven and hell, lib. 1. (...)g. cap. 8.
respons. ad 5. object. And yet not long after, he confesses that there are two
places of eternal punishment, Limbus infantum, pro poena solius damni aeterna:
the dungeon of infants for eternal punishment of loss without smart, and
inf^rnus pro poena damni and sensus: Hell for the eternal punishment both of
loss and smart. These then are two places that shall last for ever, and Heaven
is the third: how then are there but two? lib. 2. de Purg. ca. 6.

12 Bellarmine otherwhile bears us in hand, that there are but two
Hyperdoulei^, a higher kind of inferior service or worship proper to the
virgin Marie and the humanity of Christ: so he makes three kinds in all,
lib. ^. de Sanct. cap. 12. But in another place he doubleth the number, and
makes six several sorts, Latreia simpliciter, and, secundum quid: the first
due unto God, the second unto his image: Hyperdulia simpliciter, and secundum
quid: and so likewise Dul^a simpliciter, and secundum quid, the first proper
unto the virgin Marie, and other Saints, the other to their images, lib. 2.
cap. 25.

13 Bellarmine, to prove amongst other reasons, that those words of This is my
body, are taken properly, not figuratively; alledg^^h this for one, verba
legum perspicua and propria esse debent: the words of laws and statutes
should be perspicuous and proper. And again* Dogmata praecipua non nisi
proprijs verbis tradi solent in diui^is literis: principal precepts, are wont
in the Scriptures to be expressed in proper words: therefore it is not like,
that Christ being now to prescribe a perpetual law and form of this
sacrament, would speak obscurely, lib. 1. de Eucharist. cap. 9. yet elsewhere,
he says, Necessario fatendum est scripturas esse obscurissimas: It must
necessarily be granted, that the Scriptures are most obscure, de Verb. lib. 3.
cap. 1. And finds great (...) with us, for saying, that the precepts of faith
are euldently expressed in Scripture, which is no more than he himself
affirms.

14 Sometime Bellarmine tells us, that Corpus Domini solo corpore (...) fide
acceptum, nihil prodest. That the body of Christ being only received with the
body profits not, de Eucharist. lib. 3. cap. 9. Wherein he faith right.
Sometime again he would make us believe, that the Sacraments are auailable,
ex opere operato, by the very work wrought, non ex merito agentis, vel
suscipientis, not for the worthiness either of the receiver or Minister. And
again, Fides and poenitentia non dant efficaciam sacramenti: Faith and
repentance do not give efficacy to the Sacrament, lib. 2. de Sacrament. cap.
1. How these things agree together* I can not see: that the Sacrament should
not profit without the faith of the receiver. And again, that it should
avail, ex opere operato, without any respect had to the receiver.

15 Bellarmine says, opera bona sine fide non prosunt: good works de
Sacrament. Eucharist. lib. 3. cap. 9. And yet els-where confesses, that there
may be Meritum de congruo, a merit of congruitie before justification. If then
works may merit, then they are auailable, and that without faith, which
cannot be had before justification, Bellarmine lib. 2. de Poenitent. cap. 12.

16 Bellarmine in one place says, Non solum res, sed etiam verba in
Sacramentis nouae legis a Deo determinata sunt, vt non liceat quidpiam
immutare: The words and matter in the Sacraments of the new law, are so
determined of God, that it is not lawful to change one iotte, de Sacrament.
lib. 1. cap. 21. yet they have presumed, contrary to their own rule, to
change both. As for the matter of the Eucharist they have taken away the one
half, depriving the people of the cup. And concerning the words, they do
show no less boldness in altering them: They have put in ( enim) into the
words of consecration, saying, hoc enim est corpus meum: and in consecrating
the cup, they add these words, mysterium fidei, The mystery of faith: and
all this Bellarmine says is well done, and that these words which are not
found in the Gospel, are supplied by tradition from Saint Peter, de Sacram.
Eucharist* lib. 4. cap. 14. Thus they offend against their own rules: for they
add unto the words determined of God in his holy word, which is contained
in the Scriptures.

17 Bellarmine sometime grants, that the body of Christ is vt ex aqua
factum est vinum, as of water Christ made wine, lib. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 24.
But in another place, he flatly denies it: for that was a productiue
conversion of the water into wine, which is, when that begins to be, which
was not before: but the changing of bread into Christ's body is no productiue
conversion, but only adductiue, not making a thing to be which was not before:
but only bringing it to a place where it was not before, De Eucharist. lib. 3.
cap. 18.

18 To say, that the Jews did not eat the same spiritual meat Paul, 1. Corinthians. 10. 1. 2. and yet to grant, that they which were then just or
righteous, were so just ob participationem sacrifici^ crucis, by the
participation of the sacrifice upon the cross, I think are plain contraries:
to say they were not partakers of the same spiritual meat with us, namely
Christ, and yet again that they were: yet Bellarmine affirms both; the
first, lib. 2 de Sacram. cap. 17. resp. ad argument. 3. The latter, lib. 1. de
Miss. ca. 20.

19 To say, that faith goes before repentance, or, as they term it, Penance:
for by faith are we justified, Ro^. 5. 1. As soon as faith comes,
justification does accompany it: If faith go before, so does justification:
and if justification follow repentance, so does faith: yet are they both
affirmed by Bellarmine, de Poenitent. lib. 1. cap. 19.

20 Many such contradictorie and repugnant sayings are easily to Bellarmines
volumes, and in the writings of other papists: so that they neither agree with
others, nor with themselves: as the Rhemists sometime say, that the meritorious
works of the Saints, the very ground of popish indulgences, are to be
disposed by the Pastors of the Church, 2. Corinthians. 2. Sect. 5. Sometime, that
they are applicable by the sufferers intention, Annot. 1. Coloss. 1. Sect. 4.
Harding Sometime calls their Legend story an old moth-^aten book, and
confesses, that among many true stories, it may have some fables, Defens.
Apolog. page 166. And yet forgetting himself, he stoutly affirms, that
there are no fables, nor lies in that book, page 750.

Thus much of the personal contradictions among the papists, both old and
new. Now we will set down for a taste and trial, the repugnances and
contrarieties, which their religion has within it self.

Popish Religion contrary within it self. Part. 4.
1 IT is generally taught and believed in the popish John 3. 5. That unless a
man be borne of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven: yet they themselves also affirm, that baptism was not necessary
before the passion of Christ, but began in the day of Pentecost after to be
necessary, Bellarm. lib. 1. de baptis. cap. 5. Yea and now also they make two
exceptions, of Martyrs, and penitent persons, who without baptism may be
saved, Bellarm. cap. 6. The Rhemistes add unto these a third exempt case, of
those that depart this life with vow and desire of the sacrament of baptism,
Annot. John 3. sect. 2. But, if they ground the necessity of baptism upon
those words of our Savior, it began to be necessary when those words were
uttered, and therefore was necessary before the passion of Christ. Secondly the
words are general, in so much, that there is no privilege granted to Martyrs
or penitent persons, if they stand strictly upon that place: In this point
therefore, papistrie is not at unity in it self.

2 Bellarmine with the rest do affirm that Christ gave the cup only Bellarm.
de sacram. Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 25.

3 Again in their private masses, the priest says: Quotquot ex hac altaris
participatione sumpserimus: As many of us as have been partakers of this
altar: When as there be no communicantes, beside the priest himself, how can
this hang together? ex canon. missae.

4 The priest also being at mass, says, command these to be carried

5 The papists generally make but seven degrees of ecclesiastical Bellarm. de
Cleric. cap. 11. And yet Bellarmine the mouth of the rest, affirms, that
Ordinatio episcopalis, the ordaining of Bishops is a sacrament, as the other
ministerial orders be: Ergo it is also a distinct degree from the rest, and so
there are eight in all, Bellarm. de sacram. Ordinis. cap. 5. Further if there be
eight distinct Orders, and every one by it self is a sacrament, as Bellarmine
teaches, then have we eight sacraments of Order, beside the other six, for all
these several orders cannot make one sacrament, seeing they differ one from
another both in form of words, and in the external signs or ceremonies that
are used, Consul. Bellarm. lib. de Ordin. cap. 5. 6. 7. 8.

6 In words and outward profession they affirm, that matrimony Gregor.
Martin. And that the marriage of ministers is the worst sort of incontinencie
and fornication, Rhemist. 1. Cor. 7. sect. 8. Have not these men now a very
reverent opinion of their sacraments?

7 Again, they prefer continency before matrimony, as a state far

8 Bellarmine says: Bonum est a Deo petere, tum vt sanctos pro nobis orare
faciat, tum vt illos pro nobis orantes exaudiat: It is good for us to crave of
God, that he would cause the Saints to pray for us* and that then he would
hear them entreating for us: De Miss. lib. 2. cap. 8. Thus they make God a
mediator between the Saints, and us. And what an absurd thing is this to pray
to God, that the Saints may pray for us, whereas in thus saying, they confess
that we have access unto God our selves without their mediation?

9 It is the opinion of the schoolmen approved by Bellarmine, that Hebr^is
autem per solam fidem: But unto the Hebrews by only faith, Bellarm. de sacram.
lib. 2. cap. 13. I pray you now, if they were justified by faith only, who
lived under the law, which is contrary to faith: The law is not of faith, says
the Apostle, Galath. 3. 12. shall not we much more under the Gospel, which is by
S. Paul called the word of faith? Romans 10. 8. Who sees not now the packing
and iugling of papists?

10 Now concerning the pope, they every where bear us in hand, that Rhemist.
Annot. Ephesians. ^. sect. 6. He is not then head of the universal Church, neither
has he any thing to do in purgatory, as other of the popish sort have written.

11 Bellarmine confesses, that the pope is not Peter's successor, Iure 12^*
diuino, By divine right, neither by Christ's institution in the Gospel, Lib.
2. de pontif. cap. 17. How then comes it to pass, that they have made it an
article of their faith, To believe the pope to be the head of Christ's Church?
Seeing Bellarmine him self confesses in these words: Nihil est de fide, nisi
quod Deus per Apostolos aut Prophetas reuelauit, aut quod euidenter inde
deducitur: Nothing is of faith, but that which God has revealed by his
Apostles or prophets, or that which is evidently deduced from thence, Bellarm.
de verb. Dei non scripto. lib. 4. cap. 9. But that the pope is Peter's
successor, it is neither expressed nor evidently deduced out of scripture:
therefore it is no point of faith.

12 Bellarmine, and likewise the rest, make the perpetual succession 1^^
of the Bishops of Rome to be a manifest argument of the Church: he calls it
insolubile and euidentissimum argumentum: and yet afterward being pressed with
the example of the patriarchicall sea of Constantinople, which has had always
a perpetual succession, he answers, that succession is an argument of the
Church, Negatiuely, that is, where there is no succession, there is no Church;
not affirmatively, that where there is succession, there is straightway a
Church, lib. 4. de notis Eccl. c. 8. Thus we see, what is become of their
euidentissimum argumentum, of this their most evident argument.

13 It is confessed by our adversaries, that the Church of Rome was 123*
founded both by Peter, and Paul, Rhemist. annot. Galath. 2. sect. 6. And that
they are both patrones of that sea. How then comes it about, that the pope
chalengeth rather to be Saint Peter's successor then Saint Paul's?

14 In the popish Church, they do divide the cup from the other element 124*
in the Eucharist, ministering the sacrament in one kind only to the
lay-sorte: Clean contrary to the Canon of Gelasius, which is to be found
among the popes own decrees, in these words: We understand, that there are
some, which receiving only the portion of the Lords body, do abstain from
the cup of his sacred blood, to whom we inioyne, that either they receive the
whole sacrament in both kinds, or else that they receive neither: for the
dividing of that whole and one sacrament cannot be done without great
sacrilege, Canon. Gelas. de consecrat. Who sees not now, that their practice
is contrary to their own decrees?

15 Now unto these repugnant and contrary points in popish Religion, 12^*
we may add also their uncertainties and undetermined articles: As first it is
not yet known at what time Peter came to Rome, Orosius ^aith* he came thither
in the beginning of Claudius reign, Ierom^ says, the second year of his
reign: other say, the fourth year: other, the thirteenth year: Damasus would
have him come thither in Nero his reign. This dissentio^ of writers shows,
that the matter may be doubted of, whether Peter were ever at Rome or not.
Again, they can show no certain succession from Peter, of the which they
brag so much: Tertullia^ makes Clement the next to Peter: Optatus first
names Linus, then Clement: Irenaeus after Peter places Linus, and Cletus, and
Clement in the fourth. Thus also their succession is made uncertain and
doubtful.

16 They hold Lent to be an Apostolical tradition and warranted by Irenaeus
witnesses, that some fasted one day, some two days, some forty hours day
and night. Epiphanius says, the wednesdaies fast also was an Apostolic
tradition, and to fast the six days of Esther, with bread and water, and salt,
which the papists them selves observe. One therefore is as like to be an
apostolic tradition as the other: But it is certain neither of them was, for
then they would have been kept more uniformly of the Church: and not every
man left to his own choice.

17 It is a matter yet undetermined and not concluded upon of all

18 As also it is uncertain among papists, whether the Virgin Marie Bellarm.
decultu sanctor. lib. 3. cap. 16. Likewise they leave it as uncertain, whether
Mary were assumed and taken up into heaven in body, Ex Fulk. annot. 1. Act.
verse. 14.

19 About and concerning purgatory, they have many doubts, Bellarm. lib. 2.
depurgator. cap. 12. 5. It is doubted, whether the devils or Angels are
ministers of the torments in purgatory. 6. Whether the pain of purgatory be
at all time alike, or by little and little slaked toward the end, and whether it
exceed all the pains and sorrows of this life, Bellarm. cap. 14. All these
points remain yet undetermined among them: and yet for all this the Jesuit
tells us sadly, that it is an article of faith to believe purgatory, and
that he which believes it not, is sure to go to hell, Bellarm. lib. 1. cap.
11.

20 Lastly, that we may see at once the frail and brittle foundation
Rhemistes boldly affirm, that justice is reputed to men, or that they are
justified by believing only the articles of Christ's death and resurrection,
and this they call the Catholic faith, Annot. Romans 4. Sect. 9.

If this be Catholic faith, to believe only the articles of faith to be true:
then reprobates, yea and the devil himself may be true Catholics, for the
devils believe and tremble, James 2. 19: yea, they confess Jesus to be the
son of God, Math. 8. 29. Mark. 5. 7. Is not this a proper faith for
Christians to save themselves by? It is not then a bare knowledge or general
belief of the articles of faith, or giving assent or credit unto them only,
that is sufficient to justify us, as the Rhemistes affirm: but such a belief
of these articles, as is joined with an assured trust and confidence in God,
and undoubted persuasion, that all the promises of God, and whatsoever Christ
wrought in his flesh, are not only true, but even do belong and appertain to
us.

Thus, I think, I have requited Bellarmines kindness toward us, who
charge us with no less than an hundred several dissensions in opinion
amongst our selves: I have here repayed him for his bare hundred, six score to
the hundred: and if that be not interest sufficient, he may have more
hereafter. And here again is some odds between us: Bellarmines hundred is in
word only, but our large hundred we have proved, by particular induction.
Now then, if we will compare the first and the last, and lay altogether, their
railings, slanders, forgeries, lying and untruths: Again, their blasphemies,
opinions contrary to Scripture, heresies, and absurdities: Thirdly, their
weak and feeble arguments, insufficient aunswers, subtle and vain
distinctions: Lastly, their contradictions among themselves, the new with the
old: the new one with another: the same men many times with themselves: yea,
their religion fights and iarreth with it self: If those things be well
weighed and considered, it will easily appear, whether their house be built
upon a sandy or a rockie foundation: Beggarly, paltrie, wicked, yea,
devilish is that religion, which is uen to use such lewd, dishonest, and
unchristian devises and shifts.

Now, to the Reader of this book, thus much first I say, as tou(...) himself:
If he has been at any time doubtful or wavering in(...) faith of the
Gospel, I trust by this here set down, he may partly be confirmed to cleave
unto the Gospel with a resolute mind, and to think of Popery as it
deserves, and to follow the Apostles counsel, To try all things, and
having tried, to keep that which is best, 1. Thessal. 5. 21. And as Augustine
very well advises in these words: Si iactatus curru inanium quaesti^iu^
cadis in fluctus vanae contentionis, etc. Reuertere and sede in portu fidei
Catholicae, vbite nulla possit fluctuosae curiosit^^tis tempestas turbare vel
mergere: If at any time having been carried away, as with a chariot of vain
questions, thou have fallen into light and unnecessary contentions, and as a
ship forsaken of the governor, been tossed and cast upon unknown coasts,
return and rest thy self in the haven of the Catholic faith, where no
tempest of troublesome curiosity, can either molest or drench thee, Hypognost.
articul. 6.

And as concerning my self, this I have to save, that I do not take upon me
to be a champion, or professed propugnor of our faith, We have other, upon
whom that care and charge lies, namely those two excellent men, the public
Readers of both universities. But I say with Augustine, aunswering the
Donatistes in the like case: who spoke it modestly of himself, but I more
truly, Absit, vt mihi apud Catholicos arrogem, quod (Bellarminus) sibi (apud
Pontificios) arrogat: vnus sum e multis qui profanas vestras nouitates, vt
possumus, refutamus, sicut vnicuique nostrum Deus partitus est mensuram fidei:
Far be it from me to challenge that place among true Catholics and
Gospellers, that Bellarmine does among the Popish sort. I am one amongst many,
which labor to my skill and power to confute your profane Novelties, as God
has given to every of us a measure of faith, Contra Julian. lib. 6. cap. 4.

And now to conclude, to thee (Christian Reader) I direct my speech, In his
quae tibi displicebunt, ego conspicior, in his quae per donum Spiritus sancti
August. ad Pauli number epist. 34.
tibi placent, ille amandus, ille predicandus. Wherein any thing in this book
shall justly displease or offend thee, it is my fault, the blame is mine: but
what so by the gift and grace of the Spirit of God is well said, and approved
by thee: he is to be loved: he is to be praised for it. Now to God the Father,
and his Son Jesus Christ, with the same Holy Spirit, be all praise, honor
and glory for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

